Chapter Page
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER V
Applied Psychology: Making Your Own World, by
Warren Hilton This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
Title: Applied Psychology: Making Your Own World Being the Second of a Series of Twelve Volumes on the
Applications of Psychology to the Problems of Personal and Business Efficiency
Author: Warren Hilton
Release Date: March 19, 2009 [EBook #28359]
Language: English
Character set encoding: ASCII
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK APPLIED PSYCHOLOGY ***
Produced by Bryan Ness, C. St. Charleskindt, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned images of public domain material from the
Google Print project.)
Applied Psychology: Making Your Own World, by
1

Applied Psychology
MAKING YOUR OWN WORLD
Being the Second of a Series of Twelve Volumes on the Applications of Psychology to the Problems of
Personal and Business Efficiency
BY WARREN HILTON, A.B., L.L.B. FOUNDER OF THE SOCIETY OF APPLIED PSYCHOLOGY
ISSUED UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE LITERARY DIGEST FOR The Society of Applied Psychology
NEW YORK AND LONDON 1920
COPYRIGHT 1914 BY THE APPLIED PSYCHOLOGY PRESS SAN FRANCISCO
CONTENTS
Applied Psychology: Making Your Own World, by
2

Chapter Page
I. THE TWO FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES OF MIND
MIND AS A MEANS TO ATTAINMENT 3 THREE POSTULATES FOR THIS COURSE 4 EXPERIENCE
AND ABSTRACTIONS 5 PRIMARY MENTAL OPERATIONS 6
II. SENSATIONS AND OUR PERCEPTION OF THEM
MIND'S SOURCE OF SUPPLIES 9 DOES MATTER EXIST? 10 FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE 11
SECOND-HAND KNOWLEDGE 12 ETHERIC VIBRATIONS AS CAUSING SENSATIONS 13 THE
ROAD TO PERCEPTION 14 THE PLACE WHERE SENSATION OCCURS 15 LABORATORY PROOF
OF SENSE-PERCEPTIVE PROCESS 16 REACTION-TIME 17 THE HUMAN TELEPHONE 18 THE
LIVING TELEGRAPH 19 THE SIX STEPS TO REACTION 20 UNOPENED MENTAL MAIL 21
SELECTIVE PROCESS THAT DETERMINES CONDUCT 22 IN TUNE WITH LIFE-INTEREST 23
PRACTICAL ASPECTS OF PERCEPTION PROCESS 24
III. SENSORY ILLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR THEIR USE
UNRELIABILITY OF SENSE-ORGANS 27 BEING AND SEEMING 29 USE OF ILLUSIONS IN
BUSINESS 31 MAKING AN ARTICLE LOOK BIG 32 TESTING THE CONFIDENTIAL MAN 33 TESTS
FOR CREDULITY 34 WHAT COLORS LOOK NEAREST 35 TESTING THE RANGE OF ATTENTION
36 A GUIDE TO OCCUPATIONAL SELECTION 37 TEST FOR ATTENTION TO DETAILS 38 OTHER
BUSINESS APPLICATIONS 39
IV. INWARDNESS OF ENVIRONMENT
FACTORS OF SUCCESS OR FAILURE 43 SHOULD SEEING BE BELIEVING? 44 HEARING THE
LIGHTNING 46 IMPORTANCE OF THE MENTAL MAKE-UP 47 UNREALITY OF "THE REAL" 48
"THINGS" AND THEIR MENTAL DUPLICATES 49 EFFECT OF CLOSING ONE'S EYES 50 IF
MATTER WERE ANNIHILATED 51 IF MIND WERE ANNIHILATED 52 AS MANY WORLDS AS
MINDS 53
V. ESSENTIAL LAW OF PRACTICAL SELF-MASTERY
OPTION AND OPPORTUNITY 57 PRE-ARRANGING YOUR CONSCIOUSNESS 58 HOW TO
DEFINITELY SELECT ITS ELEMENTS 59 AN INFALLIBLE RECIPE FOR SELF-POSSESSION 60
USING "UNSEEN EAR PROTECTORS" 61 HOW TO AVOID WORRY, MELANCHOLY 62 PUTTING
CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER FOOT 63 RUNNING YOUR MENTAL FACTORY 64 ACQUIRING
MENTAL BALANCE 65 DISSIPATING MENTAL SPECTERS 66 HOW TO CONTROL YOUR
DESTINY 67
Chapter Page
3

CHAPTER I
THE TWO FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES OF MIND
[Sidenote: Mind as a Means to Achievement]
In the preceding book, "Psychology and Achievement," we established the truth of two propositions:
I. All human achievement comes about through bodily activity.
II. All bodily activity is caused, controlled and directed by the mind.
To these two fundamental propositions we now append a third, which needs no proof, but follows as a natural
and logical conclusion from the other two:
III. The Mind is the instrument you must employ for the accomplishment of any purpose.
[Sidenote: Three Postulates for this Course]
With these three fundamental propositions as postulates, it will be the end and aim of this Course of Reading
to develop plain, simple and specific methods and directions for the most efficient use of the mind in the
attainment of practical ends.
To comprehend these mental methods and to make use of them in business affairs you must thoroughly
understand the two fundamental processes of the mind.
These two fundamental processes are the Sense-Perceptive Process and the Judicial Process.
The Sense-Perceptive Process is the process by which knowledge is acquired through the senses. Knowledge
is the result of experience and all human experience is made up of sense-perceptions.
[Sidenote: Experience and Abstractions]
The Judicial Process is the reasoning and reflective process. It is the purely "intellectual" type of mental
operation. It deals wholly in abstractions. Abstractions are constructed out of past experiences.
Consequently, the Sense-Perceptive Process furnishes the raw material, sense-perceptions or experience, for
the machinery of the Judicial Process to work with.
[Sidenote: Primary Mental Operations]
In this book we shall give you a clear idea of the Sense-Perceptive Process and show you some of the ways in
which an understanding of this process will be useful to you in everyday affairs. The succeeding book will
explain the Judicial Process.
CHAPTER I
4

CHAPTER II
SENSATIONS AND OUR PERCEPTION OF THEM
[Sidenote: Mind's Source of Supplies]
Whatever you know or think you know, of the external world comes to you through some one of your five
primary senses, sight, hearing, touch, taste and smell, or some one of the secondary senses, such as the
muscular sense and the sense of heat and cold.
The impressions you receive in this way may be true or they may be false. They may constitute absolute
knowledge or they may be merely mistaken impressions. Yet, such as they are, they constitute all the
information you have or can have concerning the world about you.
[Sidenote: Does Matter Exist?]
Philosophers have been wrangling for some thousands of years as to whether we have any real and absolute
knowledge, as to whether matter actually does or does not exist, as to the reliability or unreliability of the
impressions we receive through the senses. But there is one thing that all scientific men are agreed upon, and
that is that such knowledge as we do possess comes to us by way of perception through the organs of sense.
If you have never given much thought to this subject, you have naturally assumed that you have direct
knowledge of all the material things that you seem to perceive about you. It has never occurred to you that
there are intervening physical agencies that you ought to take into account.
[Sidenote: First-Hand Knowledge]
When you look up at the clock, you instinctively feel that there is nothing interposed between it and your
mind that is conscious of it. You seem to feel that your mind reaches out and envelops it.
As a matter of fact, your sense impression of that bit of furniture must filter through a great number of
intervening physical agencies before you can become conscious of it.
Direct perception of an outside reality is impossible.
[Sidenote: Second-Hand Knowledge]
Before you can become aware of any object there must first arise between it and your mind a chain of
countless distinct physical events.
Modern science tells us that light is due to undulations or wave-like vibrations of the ether, sound to those of
the air, etc. These vibrations are transmitted from one particle of ether or air to another, and so from the thing
perceived to the body of man.
Think, then, what crisscross of air currents and confusion of ether vibrations, what myriad of physical events,
must intervene between any distant object and your own body before sensations come and bring a
consciousness of that object's existence!
Nor can you be sure, even after any particular vibration has reached the surface of your body, that it will reach
your mind unaltered and intact!
[Sidenote: Etheric Vibrations as Causing Sensations]
CHAPTER II
5

What goes on in the body itself is made clear by your knowledge of the cellular structure of man.
You know that you have a system of nerves centering in the brain and with countless ramifications throughout
the structural tissues of the body.
You know that part of these nerves are sensory nerves and part of them are motor nerves. You know that the
sensory nerves convey to the brain the impressions received from the outer world and that the motor nerves
relay this information to the rest of the body coupled with commands for appropriate muscular action.
[Illustration: DIAGRAM SHOWING THE FOUR CHIEF ASSOCIATION CENTERS OF THE HUMAN
BRAIN]
[Sidenote: The Road to Perception]
The outer end of every sensory nerve exposes a sensitive bit of gray matter. These sensitive,
impression-receiving ends constitute together what is called the "sensorium" of the body.
When vibrations of light or sound impinge upon the sensorium, they are relayed from nerve cell to nerve cell
until they reach the central brain. Then it is, and not until then, that sensations and perceptions occur.
Consider, now, the infinitesimal size of a nerve cell and you will have some conception of the number of
hands through which the message must pass before it is received by the central office.
Many of our sensations, especially those of touch, seem to occur on the periphery of the body--that is to say,
at that part of the exposed surface of the body which is apparently affected. If your finger is crushed in a door,
the sensation of the blow and the pain all seem to occur in the finger itself.
[Sidenote: The Place Where Sensation Occurs]
As a matter of fact, this is not the case, for if one of your arms should be amputated, you would still feel a
tingling in the fingers of the amputated arm. Thus has arisen a superstition that leads many people to bury any
part of the body lost in this way, thinking that they will never be entirely relieved of pain until the absent
member is finally at rest.
Of course, the fact is that you would only seem to have feeling in the amputated arm. The sensation would
really occur in the central brain tissue as the organ of the governing intelligence, the organ of consciousness.
[Sidenote: Laboratory Proof of Sense-Perceptive Process]
And you may set it down as an established principle that all states of consciousness, whether seemingly
localized on the surface of the body or not, are connected with the brain as the dominant center.
The facts we have been recounting have been established by the experiments of physiological psychology.
Thus, the work of the laboratory has shown that between the moment when a sense vibration reaches the body
and the moment when sensation occurs a measurable interval of time intervenes.
If your eyes were to be blindfolded and your hand unexpectedly pricked with a white-hot needle, the time that
would elapse before you could jerk your hand away could be readily measured in fractions of a second with
appropriate instruments.
[Sidenote: Reaction Time]
CHAPTER II
6

This interval is known as reaction-time. It varies greatly with different persons. During this reaction-time, the
cell or cells attacked upon the surface of the hand have conveyed news of the assault through numberless
intermediate sensory nerve cells to the brain. The brain in turn has sent out its mandate through the
appropriate motor nerve cells to all the muscle and other cells surrounding the injured cell, commanding them
to remove it from the point of danger.
The work of the nervous system in dealing with the ether vibrations that are constantly impinging upon the
surface of the body has been likened to that of the transmitter, connecting wire and receiver of a telephone.
Air-waves striking against the transmitter of the telephone awaken a similar vibratory movement in the
transmitter itself. This movement is passed along the wire to the receiver, which vibrates responsively and
imparts a corresponding wave-like motion to the air.
[Sidenote: The Human Telephone]
These air-waves when heard are what we call sound.
In the same way, air-waves striking the ear are communicated by the auditory nerve to the brain, where they
awaken a corresponding sensation of sound. But these waves must be vibrating at between 30 and 20,000
times a second. If they are vibrating so slowly or so rapidly as not to come within this range, we cannot hear
them.
[Sidenote: The Living Telegraph]
This process is by no means a mechanical affair. On the contrary, it is a series of mental acts. Every cell in the
living telegraph must receive the message and transmit it. Every cell must exercise a form of intelligence,
from the auditory cell reporting a sound-wave or the skin cell reporting an injury to the muscle cells that
ultimately receive and understand a message directing them to remove the part from danger.
Reaction-time, so called, is thus occupied by cellular action in the form of mental processes intervening
between the nerve-ends and the brain center, in much the same way that light and sound vibrations intervene
between the object perceived and the surface of the body.
[Sidenote: The Six Steps to Reaction]
For even the simplest of sense-perceptions we have, then, this sequence of events: first, the object perceived;
second, the series of vibrations of ether particles intervening between the object and the body; third, the
impression upon the surface of the body; fourth, the series of mental processes, cell after cell, in the nerve
filaments leading to the brain; fifth, when these impressions or messages have reached the brain, a
determination of what is to be done; and, sixth, a transmission by cellular action of a new message that will
awaken some response in the muscular tissues.
[Sidenote: Unopened Mental Mail]
This process is completely carried out, however, in only comparatively few instances. The vast majority of
sense-impressions awaken no reaction. They are registered in the mind, but they are not perceived. We are not
conscious of them. They form a part, not of consciousness, but of subconsciousness. They are messages that
reach the mind but are laid aside like unopened mail because they possess no present interest.
Wherever and however you may be placed, you are always and everywhere immersed in a flood of etheric
vibrations. Light, sound and tactual vibrations press upon you from every side. At a busy corner of a city
street these vibrations rise to a tumultuous fortissimo; in the hush of a night upon the plains they sink to
pianissimo. Yet at every moment of your day or night they are there in greater or less degree, titillating the
CHAPTER II
7

unsleeping nerve-ends of the sensorium.
[Sidenote: Selective Process that Determines Conduct]
Your mind cannot take time to make all these sense-impressions the subject of conscious thought. It can
trouble itself only with those that bear in some way upon your interests in life.
Your mind is like the receiving apparatus of the wireless telegraph which picks from the air those particular
vibrations to which it is attuned. Your mind is selective. It is discriminating. It seizes upon those few sensory
images that are related to your interests in life and thrusts them forward to be consciously perceived and
acted upon. All others it diverts into a subconscious reservoir of temporary oblivion.
[Sidenote: In Tune with Life-Interest]
You will have a clearer understanding of the sense-perceptive processes and a more vital realization of the
practical significance of these facts when you consider how they affect your knowledge of material things and
your conception of the external world.
This subject possesses two distinct aspects.
One aspect has to do with the inability of the sense-organs to record the facts of the outer world with perfect
precision. These organs are the result of untold ages of evolution, and, generally speaking, have become
wonderfully efficient, but they display surprising inaccuracies. These inaccuracies are called Sensory
Illusions.
[Sidenote: Practical Aspects of Perception Process]
The other aspect of the Sense-Perceptive Process has to do with the mental interpretation of environment.
Both these aspects are distinctly practical.
You should know something of the weaknesses and deficiencies of the sense-perceptive organs, because all
your efforts at influencing other men are directed at their organs of sense.
You should understand the relationship between your mind and your environment, since they are the two
principal factors in your working life.
CHAPTER II
8

CHAPTER III
SENSORY ILLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR THEIR USE
[Sidenote: Unreliability of Sense-Organs]
Figure 1 shows two lines of equal length, yet the vertical line will to most persons seem longer than the
horizontal one.
[Illustration: FIG. 1.]
In Figure 2 the lines A and B are of the same length, yet the lower seems much longer.
[Illustration: FIG. 2.]
Those things look smallest over which the eye moves with least resistance.
In Figure 3, the distance from A to B looks longer than the distance from B to C because of the time we
involuntarily take to notice each dot, yet the distances are equal.
[Illustration: FIG. 3.]
[Sidenote: Being and Seeming]
For the same reason, the hatchet line (A-B) appears longer than the unbroken line (C-D) in Figure 4, and the
lines E and F appear longer than the space (G) between them, although all are of equal length.
[Illustration: FIG. 4.]
Filled spaces look larger than empty ones because the eye unconsciously stops to look over the different parts
of the filled area, and we base our estimate upon the extent of the eye movements necessary to take in the
whole field. Thus the filled square in Figure 5 looks larger than the empty one, though they are of equal size.
[Illustration: FIG. 5.]
White objects appear much larger than black ones. A white square looks larger than a black one. It is said that
cattle buyers who are sometimes compelled to guess at the weight of animals have learned to discount their
estimate on white animals and increase it on black ones to make allowances for the optical illusion.
[Illustration: THIS MAN AND THIS BOY ARE OF EQUAL HEIGHT, BUT ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS
MAKES THE MAN LOOK MUCH THE LARGER]
[Sidenote: Use of Illusions in Business]
The dressmaker and tailor are careful not to array stout persons in checks and plaids, but try to convey an
impression of sylph-like slenderness through the use of vertical lines. On the other hand, you have doubtless
noticed in recent years the checkerboard and plaid-covered boxes used by certain manufacturers of food
products and others to make their packages look larger than they really are.
The advertiser who understands sensory illusions gives an impression of bigness to the picture of an article by
the artful use of lines and contrasting figures. If his advertisement shows a picture of a building to which he
wishes to give the impression of bigness, he adds contrasting figures such as those of tiny men and women so
CHAPTER III
9

that the unknown may be measured by the known. If he shows a picture of a cigar, he places the cigar
vertically, because he knows that it will look longer that way than if placed horizontally.
[Sidenote: Making an Article Look Big]
A subtle method of conveying an idea of bigness is by placing numbers on odd-shaped cards or blocks, or on
any blank white space. The object or space containing the figures always appears larger than the
corresponding space without the figures.
This fact has been made the basis of a psychological experiment to determine the extent to which a subject's
judgment is influenced by suggestion. To perform this experiment cut bits of pasteboard into pairs of squares,
circles, stars and octagons and write numbers of two figures each, say 25, 50, 34, 87, etc., upon the different
pieces. Tell the subject to be tested to pick out the forms that are largest. The susceptible person who is not
trained to discriminate closely will pick out of each pair the card that has the largest number upon it.
[Sidenote: Testing the Confidential Man]
This test can be made one of a series used in examining applicants for commercial positions. It can also be
used to discover the weakness of certain employees, such as buyers, secretaries and others who are entrusted
with secrets and commissions requiring discretion, and who must be proof against the deceptions practiced by
salesmen, promoters and others with seductive propositions.
[Sidenote: Tests for Credulity]
This examination can be carried still further to test the subject's credulity or power of discrimination. What is
known as the "force card" test was originally devised by a magician, but has been adopted in experimental
psychology. Take a pack of cards and shuffle them loosely in the two hands, making some one card, say the
ace of spades, especially prominent. The subject is told to "take a card." The suggestive influence of the
proffered card will cause nine persons out of ten to pick out that particular card.
Turning from illusions of suggestion, shape and size, another field of peculiar sensory illusions is found in
color aberration. Some colors look closer than others. For instance, paint an object red and it seems nearer
than it would if painted green.
[Sidenote: What Colors Look Nearest]
Aside from the obvious uses to which these sense-illusions can be put, they form the basis for a number of
psychological experiments to test the abilities of persons in many ways. Here is a test which deals with the
range of attention. If you desire to discover the capacity of any person to pay attention to unfamiliar questions
or subjects which might at some future time have great importance, try this test. Have a piece of pasteboard
cut into squares, circles, triangles, halfmoons, stars and other forms. Then write upon each piece some such
word as hat, coat, ball or bat. The objects are then placed under a cloth cover and the subject to be examined is
told to concentrate his attention on the shapes alone, paying no attention to the words. The cloth is lifted for
five seconds and then replaced. The subject is then told to draw with a pencil the different shapes and such
words as he may chance to remember. The experiment should then be repeated, with the injunction to pay no
attention to the shapes but to remember as many words as possible, and write them down on such forms as he
may happen to recall.
[Sidenote: Testing the Range of Attention]
Of course, the real object is to determine whether the subject will see more than he is told, or whether he is a
mere automaton. The result will tell whether his attention is of the narrow or broad type. If it be narrow, he
CHAPTER III
10

will see only the forms in the first case and no words, and in the second case he will remember the words but
be unable to recall the shape of the pieces of cardboard.
[Sidenote: A Guide to Occupational Selection]
His breadth of attention will be shown by the number of correct forms and words combined which he is able
to remember in both cases. In other words, this will measure his ability to pay attention to more than one thing
at a time.
Other things being equal, the narrow type of attention belongs to a man fitted for work as a bookkeeper or
mechanic, while the broad type of attention fits one for work as a foreman or superintendent or, lacking
executive ability, for work requiring the supervision of mechanical operations widely separated in space.
[Sidenote: Test for Attention to Details]
The ordinary man sees but one thing at a time, while the exceptional man sees many things at every glance
and is prepared to remember and act upon them in emergency.
Having determined a person's scope of attention, you may want to test his accuracy in details as compared
with other men. To conduct such an experiment dictate a statement which will form one typewritten letterhead
sheet. This statement should comprise facts and figures about your business of which the subjects to be tested
are supposed to have accurate knowledge. After this original page is written, have your typist write out
another set of sheets in which there are a large number of errors both in spelling and figures. Then have each
of the persons to be examined go through one of these sheets and cross out all the wrong letters or figures.
Time this operation. The man who does it in the quickest time and overlooks the fewest errors, naturally ranks
highest in speed and accuracy of work.
[Sidenote: Other Business Applications]
Look into your own business and you will undoubtedly find some department, whether it be store decoration,
office furnishing, window dressing, advertising, landscape work or architecture, in which a systematic
application of a knowledge of sensory illusions will produce good results.
CHAPTER III
11

CHAPTER IV
INWARDNESS OF ENVIRONMENT
[Sidenote: Factors of Success or Failure]
The aspect of the sense-perceptive process that deals with the relation of mind to environment is of greatest
practical value.
Look at this subject for a moment and you will see that the world in which you live and work is a world of
your own making. All the factors of success or failure are factors of your own choosing and creation.
If there is anything in the world you feel sure of, it is that you can depend upon the "evidence of your own
senses," eyes, ears, nose, etc. You rest serene in the conviction that your senses picture the world to you
exactly as it is. It is a common saying that "Seeing is believing."
[Sidenote: Should Seeing Be Believing?]
Yet how can you be sure that any object in the external world is actually what your sense-perceptions report it
to be?
You have learned that a countless number of physical agencies must intervene before your mind can receive
an impression or message through any of the senses.
Under these conditions you cannot be sure that your impression of a green lamp-shade, for instance, comes
through the same sort of etheric and cellular activities that convey a picture of the same lamp-shade to the
brain of another. If the physical agencies through which your sense-impressions of the lamp-shade filter are
not identical with the agencies through which they pass to the other person's brain, then your mental picture
and his mental picture cannot be the same. You can never be sure that what both you and another may
describe as green may not create an entirely different impression in your mind from the impression it creates
in his.
Other facts add to your uncertainty. Thus, the same stimulus acting on different organs of sense will produce
different sensations. A blow upon the eye will cause you to "see stars"; a similar blow upon the ear will cause
you to hear an explosive sound. In other words, the vibratory effect of a touch on eye or ear is the same as that
of light or sound vibrations.
[Sidenote: Hearing the Lightning]
The notion you may form of any object in the outer world depends solely upon what part of your brain
happens to be connected with that particular nerve-end that receives an impression from the object.
You see the sun without being able to hear it because the only nerve-ends tuned to vibrate in harmony with
the ether-waves set in action by the sun are nerve-ends that are connected with the brain center devoted to
sight. "If," says Professor James, "we could splice the outer extremities of our optic nerves to our ears, and
those of our auditory nerves to our eyes, we should hear the lightning and see the thunder, see the symphony
and hear the conductor's movements."
[Sidenote: Importance of the Mental Make-Up]
In other words, the kind of impressions we receive from the world about us, the sort of mental pictures we
form concerning it, in fact the character of the outer world, the nature of the environment in which our lives
CHAPTER IV
12

are cast--all these things depend for each one of us simply upon how he happens to be put together, simply
upon his individual mental make-up.
There is another way of examining into the intervening agencies that influence our mental conception of the
material world about us.
[Sidenote: Unreality of "The Real"]
Look at the table or any other familiar object in the room in which you are sitting. Has it ever occurred to you
that this object may have no existence apart from your mental impression of it? Have you ever realized that no
object ever has been or ever could be known to exist unless there was an individual mind present to note its
existence?
If you have never given much thought to questions of this kind, you will be tempted to answer boldly that the
table is obviously a reality, that you have a direct intuitive knowledge of it, and that you can at once assure
yourself of its existence by looking at it or touching it. You will conceive your perception of the table as a sort
of projection of your mind comfortably enfolding the table within itself.
[Sidenote: "Things" and their Mental Duplicates]
But perception is obviously only a state of mind. Can it, then, go outside of the mind to meet the table or even
"hover in midair like a bridge between the two"? If you perceive the table, must not your perception of it exist
wholly within your own mind? If, then, the table has any existence outside of and apart from your perception
of it, then the table and your mental image of the table are two separate and distinct things.
In other words, you are on the horns of a dilemma. If you insist that the table exists outside of your mind, you
must admit that your knowledge of it is not direct, immediate and intuitive, but indirect and representative,
because of intervening physical agencies, and that the only thing directly known is the mental impression of
the table. On the other hand, if you insist that your knowledge of the table is direct, immediate and intuitive
you must admit that the table is only a mental image, a mental reality, if it is any sort of reality at all, and that
it has no existence outside of the mind.
[Sidenote: Effect of Closing One's Eyes]
You may easily convince yourself that the table you directly perceive can be nothing other than a mental
picture. How? Simply close your eyes. It has now ceased to exist. What has ceased to exist? The external table
of wood and glue and bolts? By no means. Simply its mental duplicate. And by alternately opening and
closing your eyes, you can successively create and destroy this mental duplicate.
[Sidenote: If Matter Were Annihilated]
Clearly, then, the table of which you are directly and immediately conscious when your eyes are open is
always this mental duplicate, this aggregate of color, form, size and touch impressions; while the real table,
the physical table, may be something other than the one of which you are directly aware. This other thing, this
physical table, whatever it is, can never be directly known, if indeed it has any existence, a fact that many
distinguished philosophers have had the courage to deny.
Imagine, then, for a moment that everything except mind should suddenly cease to exist, but that your
sense-perceptions--that is to say, your perception of sensory impressions--were to continue to follow one
another as before. Would not the physical world be for you just exactly what it is today, and would you not
have the same reasons for believing in its existence that you now have?
CHAPTER IV
13

[Sidenote: If Mind Were Annihilated]
And, conversely, if the world of matter were to go on, but all mental images, all perception of
sense-impressions, were to come to an end, would not all matter be annihilated for you when your perceptions
ceased?
It is obvious that the world is not the same for all of us; but that it is for each one of us simply the world of his
individual perceptions.
[Sidenote: As Many Worlds as Minds]
The whole subject of sense-impressions, sensation and perception may, therefore, be looked at from the
standpoint of the mind as an active influence, as well as from the standpoint of outside objects as the exciting
causes of sense-impressions.
CHAPTER IV
14

CHAPTER V
ESSENTIAL LAW OF PRACTICAL SELF-MASTERY
[Sidenote: Option and Opportunity]
External objects excite sensory impressions, but the perception of them is purely at the option of the mind.
This is of the greatest practical importance. Consider its consequences. It means that sense-impressions and
your perception of them are two very different things. It means that sense-impressions may throng in upon
you as they will. They are the work of external stimuli impressing themselves upon the sensorium as upon a
mechanical register. You are helpless to discriminate among them. You cannot accept some and exclude
others. You are a perambulating dry plate upon which outside objects produce their images.
[Sidenote: Prearranging Your Consciousness]
But, and this is a vital distinction, perception is an act of the mind. It is initiated from within. It permits you to
discriminate among sensations in the sense that you may dwell upon some and ignore others. It enables you to
definitely select, if you will, the elements that shall make up the content of your consciousness.
Perception as an independent mental process thus enables you to predetermine what elements of passing
sensory experience may be made the basis of your conscious judgments and of your feelings and emotions.
[Sidenote: How to Definitely Selects its Elements]
Bear this in mind when you think of your environment and its supposed influence upon your life. Remember
that your environment is no hard-and-fast thing, an aggregate of physical realities. Your environment, so far
as it affects your judgment and your conduct, is made up, not of physical realities, but of mental pictures.
Your environment is within you. Get this conclusion clearly in your mind.
Hold fast to the point of view that, Environment, the environment that influences your conduct and your life,
is not a chance massing of outward circumstances, but is the product of your own mind.
[Sidenote: An Infallible Recipe for Self-Possession]
Think what this means to you. It means that by deliberately selecting for attention only those
sense-impressions, those elements of consciousness, that can serve your purpose, you can free yourself from
all distractions and make peaceful progress in the midst of turmoil.
[Sidenote: Using "Unseen Ear Protectors"]
"In the busiest part of New York, a broker occupied a desk in a room with six other men who had many
visitors constantly moving about and talking. The gentleman was at first so sensitive to disturbances that he
accomplished almost nothing during business hours, and returned home every evening with a severe
headache. One day a man of impressive personality and extremely calm demeanor entered the office, and
noticing the agitated broker, smilingly said: 'I see that you are disturbed by the noise made by your neighbors
in the conduct of their affairs; pardon me if I leave with you an infallible recipe for peace in the midst of
commotion: Hear only what you will to hear.' With this terse counsel he quietly bade the astonished listener
adieu. After his visitor had departed, the nervous man felt unaccountably calm, and was constrained to
meditate upon his friend's advice, and no sooner did he seek to put it into practical use than he learned for the
first time that it was his rightful prerogative to use unseen ear protectors as well as to employ his ears. Six or
CHAPTER V
15

seven weeks elapsed before he saw his mysterious visitor again, and by that time he had so successfully
practiced the simple though forceful injunction, that he had reached a point in self-control where the Babel of
tongues about him no longer reached his consciousness."
[Sidenote: How to Avoid Worry, Melancholy]
Herein lies a remedy for worry, with its sleepless nights and kindred torments; for melancholy and despair,
with their train of physical and financial disaster.
How? Simply by shutting off the flow of disagreeable thoughts and substituting others that are pleasant and
refreshing.
You are master. You can change the setting of your mental stage from portentous gloom to sun-lit assurance.
You can concentrate your thought upon the useful, the helpful and the cheerful, ignore the useless and
annoying, and make your life a life of hope and joy, of promise and fulfilment.
[Sidenote: Putting Circumstances Under Foot]
You will not question the statement that what you do with your life is the combined result of heredity and
environment. At the same time you doubtless possess a more or less hazy belief in the freedom of your own
will.
The chances are that in any previous reflections on this subject you have magnified the influence of outside
agencies and wondered just how a man could make himself the master rather than the victim of circumstances.
You now realize that your environment is an environment of thought, that your material universe is a thing
your own making, and that you can mold it as you will simply by the intelligent control of your own thinking.
[Sidenote: Running Your Mental Factory]
In Book I. you learned that--
I. All human achievement comes about through bodily activity.
II. All bodily activity is caused, controlled and directed by the mind.
In this volume you have added to these propositions a third, namely:
III. The mind is the instrument you must employ for the accomplishment of any purpose.
Acting on this third postulate, you have begun the consideration of primary mental operations with a view to
evolving methods and devices for the scientific and systematic employment of the mind in the attainment of
success. You have concluded your study of the first of the two fundamental processes of the mind, the
Sense-Perceptive Process, and have learned to distinguish between seeing or hearing or feeling on the one
hand and perceiving on the other.
[Sidenote: Acquiring Mental Balance]
Realizing this distinction and applying it to your daily life, you can at once set to work to acquire mental poise
and practical self-mastery, the essence of personal efficiency.
There never has been a moment in all your life when sense-impressions were not pouring in upon you from
CHAPTER V
16

every side, tending to disturb and annoy you and interfere with your concentration and progress. Heretofore
you have struggled blindly with these distracting influences, not knowing the elements with which you had to
deal nor how to deal with them.
[Sidenote: Dissipating Mental Specters]
But the mask has been torn from the specter of distraction, and hereafter when irrelevant sights, sounds and
other sensations threaten to interrupt your work, just stop a moment and consider. So far as you and your
actual knowledge are concerned, nothing exists in substance and reality outside your mental picture of it. So
far as you and your actual knowledge are concerned, all matter is simply thought, and you have never doubted
your ability to dismiss a thought. It is for you, then, here and now, to decide whether you will harbor sensory
pictures that impede your progress and allow them to harass and dominate you and interfere with the
achievement of your ambition, or whether you will ignore these intruders and thereby annihilate them.
[Sidenote: How to Control Your Destiny]
Success is a variable term. In the last analysis, it means simply getting the thing that you want to have.
Whether you succeed or fail depends altogether upon your own attitude toward the external facts of life.
You have within you a living Force against which all the world is powerless. You have only to know it and to
learn how to use it.
Learn the lesson of your own powers, the secret of controlling the selective and creative energy within you,
and you can bring any project to the goal of accomplishment.
In the closing volumes of this Course we shall instruct you in practical methods by which the selection of
those elements of experience that are helpful may be made absolutely automatic.
Transcriber's Note:
Some illustrations have been moved from their original positions, so as to be nearer to their corresponding
text, or for ease of navigation around paragraphs.
Duplicate chapter headers have been removed from the text version of this ebook and hidden in the HTML
version.
The word 'prearranging' appears both with and without a hyphen. This variance matches the original text.
End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Applied Psychology: Making Your Own World, by Warren Hilton
*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK APPLIED PSYCHOLOGY ***
***** This file should be named 28359.txt or 28359.zip ***** This and all associated files of various formats
will be found in: http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/3/5/28359/
Produced by Bryan Ness, C. St. Charleskindt, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned images of public domain material from the
Google Print project.)
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be renamed.
CHAPTER V
17

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one owns a United States copyright in
these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this
license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT
GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used
if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies
of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as
creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
*** START: FULL LICENSE ***
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR
USE THIS WORK
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using
or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"), you
agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online
at http://gutenberg.org/license).
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work, you indicate that you have
read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must
cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. If
you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom
you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an
electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that
you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works even without complying with the full terms of
this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation
copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is in the public domain in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to
Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with
the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full
Project Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work.
Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying,
CHAPTER V
18

performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg-tm
work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country
outside the United States.
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project
Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any
work on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" is
associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may
copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at www.gutenberg.org
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived from the public domain (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or
providing access to a work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use
of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright
holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License
for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm License terms from this work, or any
files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this
electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or
immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg-tm License.
1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or
proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format
used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), you
must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a
means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any
alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project
Gutenberg-tm works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided that
- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works
calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the owner
of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following
CHAPTER V
19

each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at
the address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation."
- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30
days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm License. You must
require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and
discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any money paid for a work or a
replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on
different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright
research on, transcribe and proofread public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored,
may contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors,
a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right of Replacement or
Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work
under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU
AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF
WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU
AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER
THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT,
CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic
work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending
a written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical
medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work
electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive
the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in
writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided
to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
CHAPTER V
20

BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of
certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation
permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6. INDEMNITY
- You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the
Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance with this
agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise
directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the
widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need, are critical to reaching
Project Gutenberg-tm's goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will remain freely
available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to
provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations. To learn more about
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections
3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation
organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is
posted at http://pglaf.org/fundraising. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are
tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers
and employees are scattered throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500
West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page at http://pglaf.org
For additional contact information: Dr. Gregory B. Newby Chief Executive and Director gbnewby@pglaf.org
Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread public support and donations to
carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely
distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated
equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status
CHAPTER V
21

with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all
50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort,
much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in
locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit http://pglaf.org
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation
requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states
who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment
of donations received from outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are
accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate,
please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic
works that could be freely shared with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as
Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in
compliance with any particular paper edition.
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
http://www.gutenberg.org
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm, including how to make donations to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe
to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
Applied Psychology: Making Your Own World, by
A free ebook from http://manybooks.net/
CHAPTER V
22

