 
APPLE PRODUCTS WITHOUT CALL-
INS 
This guide requires no call in's 
All of this can be done without carding  
you won’t get your iPhone or any other apple Product 
straight away  
This Works World Wide 
  
 I have done it several times since the launch of the original iPhone. This 
method involves no credit card and just requires a small amount of social 
engineering. The turnaround time is around 6 weeks(Maximum) however this 
can be more or less(Done it in 2 weeks before). I have done this to the same 
drop a few times, however I wouldn’t recommend it. This method involves a 
posting stuff hence the long turnaround time. 
Around half the time, apple will refund you. 
The other half of the time, they will tell you to speak to Royal Mail/ other 
couriers in your country 
  
  
Ok to get this done first thing you will need is an apple serial with a warranty, 
There are many methods of getting these, I personally just use the 
gumtree.co.uk or ebay.co.uk etc and send sellers a questions something along 
the lines of;  

 
“Hi, Very interested in the Iphone4 you have advertised on XXSITE however I 
have been stung in the past with scams and alike, Can I have the serial number on 
the back to check it is legit and not reported stolen?” 
It really is that simple, and can be done for most products, Just set up a shitty 
temp email account and go to town, and you’ll have a shit load. There are many 
other ways of blagging the information you need. However I personally have 
found this to be the best method. 
Now, you have your serials, Smashing, What the fuck do you do with them? 
  
Get on down at https://selfsolve.apple.com/GetWarranty.do then enter your 
serial and select United Kingdom like so; 
 
  
Once you have entered your info, you will get taken to this page, to show you 
what product its for; 

 
 
 
  
Oh delightful it appears I have an Iphone4 :) Well that’s good news, Now go 
ahead and click on the “See your service and support coverage” and you’ll get 
taken to a page that looks like this hopefully; 
 
 
  
  
Great my serial is within its repair warranty! That’s good news to hear. Now just 
click on the “Set up a Repair” button and Make a new apple account at your 
drops address and complete the form and make a new apple.com account in the 
drops name also, I’m sure you don’t need screen shots for that bit ;) 
  

 
What happens now? 
The lovely folk at apple will send you a very nice protective box to return your 
iphone in, How thoughtful the bag is prepaid and insured, Insured I hear you 
say, Brilliant! There are several boxes inside boxes from apple :/ fuck knows why 
but anyhow get the prepaid package plastic envelope pop it in seal it. 
  
Now, Rip that fucker open on the back, and take out the very insides smallest 
box that has an “imaginary” iphone inside. Don’t make the hole too big. Now 
use a tiny bit of cello tape (Yeah I can’t spell it) and seal that bad-boy. 
Take it to your local lazy arse always on strike Royal Fail post office. Ask the 
hideously old woman behind the counter who clearly smokes 40 Richmond 
super kings’ daily to post it and get your proof of postage. 
  
And then, Wait for the magic email/phone call from apple saying something 
about your Iphone missing or whatever. Basically all you do after this is wait 
about a week and go online, Check the status of your repair, hopefully it will say 
“Repair box sent” this means apple have not got your iphone! Sweet, ring up and 
speak to cutomer services, they want a scan of your Proof Of Postage, send them 
that and wait for a UPS tracking number. They are shit slow to respond however 
after 3-4 weeks they tell you the score and refund you the cost of your lovely 
iphone. You can follow its “Repair” status online and in your email, If nothings 
happens don’t ring them up straight away! Wait around 2-3 weeks.  
Last time I did this someone actually did steal my empty Iphone box at 
RoyalMail! 
That made things alot easier ;) 
That’s it. I think the guide is pretty easy to follow and wish you the best of luck 
in wasting Apples resources and time, and getting some of your money back 
from Royal Mail 
  

 
 Cyber-Forums From HF!!! 
 

