
This is a stone.

Digital
Mindﬁeld
When choosing MINDFIELD DIGITAL™ and our DBMD™ 
Program for your development services, you can be sure 
you will receive an app that will save you money and 
resources using the most advanced design and interface 
concepts.
We follow an Application Development Cycle where every 
We follow an Application Development Cycle where every 
step is carried out to maximum perfection. Our application 
developers are experienced and knowledgeable, and are 
skilled at delivering top high tech Apps. 
Our team is constantly looking for promising partners in 
Our team is constantly looking for promising partners in 
order to improve our quality, broaden our experience and 
create a global range of Apps with the most impressive 
conceptual designs, 3D Graphics and Sound FX.
This is a stone.



iOS 11: 
INDISPENSABLE 
NEW TIPS & TRICKS
APPLE PAY CASH: 
REVOLUTIONIZING 
MONEY
2018 SET TO BE 
ANOTHER REVOLUTIONARY 
YEAR FOR APPLE
60
152
26
78
iPHONE X: 
UNBOXING, 
HANDS-ON & SETUP

TOP 10 APPS  194
TOP 10 SONGS   198
TOP 10 ALBUMS   200
TOP 10 MUSIC VIDEOS   202
TOP 10 TV SHOWS   204
TOP 10 BOOKS   206
DEEP LEARNING: HOW MACHINES ARE TAKING OVER  08
APPLEMAGAZINE: CELEBRATING 300 ISSUES  42
THE NEW iMACS: LITERAL GAME-CHANGERS  98
HOW TO SURVIVE DIGITAL ERA OF LOVE  120
APPLE PARK: A MASTERPIECE OF ARCHITECTURE  136
WATCH SERIES 3: LTE CONNECTION, FITTER & HEALTHIER THAN EVER  166
AUGMENTED REALITY: A NEW GOAL FOR APPLE  182
HOMEKIT: TECHNOLOGY FOR THE REAL WORLD  208
iPHONE CAMERA: PROFESSIONAL RESULTS IN YOUR HANDS  230
APPLE MUSIC LAYING THE GROUND FOR FUTURE HIT TV  246

8

9

10

In last week’s issue, we saw just how deep 
learning could be beneficial in a whole range of 
uses. Deep learning, the idea that a machine will 
think for itself when given access to data, rather 
than having to be fed information, enables a 
machine to learn from its mistakes and grow. 
It’s not a new concept, but in recent years, some 
of the world’s biggest companies, including 
Google and Apple, have begun to exploit the 
technology to improve their operations.
Elements of deep learning are already being 
used by Apple, with its personal assistant Siri 
learning from your actions and questions to 
develop an idea of who you are and what you 
like. Further afield, deep learning could be 
used for things like medicine and healthcare, 
potentially saving billions of dollars on 
expensive treatments and ensuring that patients 
are cared for correctly.
11

Her - Official Trailer (HD)
Joaquin Phoenix, Amy Adams
Image: Warner Bros. Pictures
12

DEEP LEARNING: BIG BROTHER IS 
WATCHING YOUR EVERY MOVE
Although there are some significant benefits 
to deep learning, it does bring with it privacy 
concerns, with many suggesting that there 
is little limit on what companies such as 
Apple and Google can find out about their 
users. Google, in particular, keeps hold of an 
unlimited amount of data from its users, with 
the company even scanning boarding passes 
to give users reminders, with seemingly little 
warning or permission.
It seems everything we do online can be traced 
back to us.  Search for some shoes you want 
on Google, an advert for them will appear on 
Facebook. It’s the new world we live in, and it’s 
part of deep learning and artificial intelligence – 
but just how far will it go?
HOW FAR WILL IT GO?
Could deep learning be the beginning of 
something more sinister? The movie HER 
(2013) explores the possibilities of artificial 
intelligence  and follows the story of a lonely 
man in the middle of a divorce, who purchases 
the new OS1, the first artificially intelligent 
operating system. However, this system is more 
than just a computer chip – it’s supposedly 
conscious. The film explores the relationship 
between machine and man and the extent to 
which machine consciousness is possible, and 
is the first signs that deep learning and artificial 
intelligence is taking over.
Fast Company explored the extent one 
individual went to escape online tracking.  To 
do so, he had to create an entirely fabricated, 
13

new identity.  He did not intend to assume this 
identity but experimented the length to which 
you must go to have an untraceable identity.  
Curtis Wallen entirely created Aaron Brown for 
what he refers to as an art project.  He used the 
cryptocurrency Bitcoin, as this does not need to 
be linked to a real person in the way that PayPal 
does.  He finally resorted to creating a new 
identity each time he contacted a new person.  
The lengths he had to go to prove just how hard 
it is to escape online tracking and demonstrated 
that nobody can escape the data collection from 
companies such as Google, Amazon, and Apple. 
WHAT IS DIFFERENTIAL 
PRIVACY TECHNOLOGY?
In recent times, Apple has recognized the 
frightening reality of deep learning and is now 
striving to protect its users. With the release of 
iOS 10 last year, Apple achieved the seemingly 
impossible, finding a way to use customer data 
without compromising on personal security.
By utilizing differential privacy technology on 
its iOS, macOS, watchOS, and tvOS operating 
systems, the company aims to keep data 
“completely private,” writing in a press release: 
“We believe you should have great features and 
great privacy. Differential privacy is a research 
topic in the areas of statistics and data analytics 
that uses hashing, subsampling, and noise 
injection to enable…crowdsourced learning 
while keeping the data of individual users 
completely private.”
In simpler terms, differential privacy is 
essentially a system that allows Apple to learn 
as much as it can about the data its users 
14

15

provide while learning as little as possible 
about the individuals who produce this data. 
Essentially, personal information is stored on 
personal devices rather than the wider Apple 
infrastructure. The technology is mathematically 
proven, which does a lot more than just remove 
names from data. It’s been described as a future-
proofed system by some.
iOS 10 was the perfect time for Apple to 
implement this new system, as the new release 
also brought with it predictive software such 
as QuickType and a more advanced spotlight 
search where personal information like contact 
details, emails, and photographs were to 
be used. For companies like Apple, it is not 
considered an option not to analyze and 
utilize their user’s data, as it is crucial for the 
expansion of their company and for producing 
effective and user-friendly software.  Instead, 
the Cupertino firm has created a solution that 
protects the privacy of their customers, while 
allowing them to exploit this data on a device-
to-device basis for the benefit of the end user.
DEEP LEARNING IN THE WIDER 
TECHNOLOGY WORLD
Apple is not alone in using deep learning and 
providing innovative solutions that will protect 
the data of their customers, however. Some 
of the world’s biggest technology companies, 
such as Uber and Microsoft, are beginning 
to see the advantages and are using the 
technology to power their operating systems 
and smartphone apps.  Uber has ensured that 
they are not exploiting customer data while 
making sure they can offer the best possible 
16

17

services.  Similarly, Microsoft has said that they 
will make their data available to researchers 
and government agencies while ensuring that 
personal information cannot be traced back 
to individuals.
TOO GOOD TO BE TRUE?
Although Apple’s solution to deep learning and 
data protection has been praised by the majority 
of technology critics and security analysts, 
Matthew Green, cryptography professor at 
John Hopkins University, was not convinced. 
“Most people go from theory to practice, then 
to widespread deployment. With Differential 
Privacy it seems Apple cut out the middle step,” 
he tweeted.
Matthew went on to say that he believed 
that Apple’s data protection software was a 
“nice idea” but “it ends up being a tradeoff 
between accuracy of the data you are collecting 
and privacy.”  He argued that the accuracy 
decreases as privacy increases. In his eyes, 
differential privacy is relatively untested and 
even possibly dangerous.
And Green is not alone, with others are 
beginning to take issue with the technology. 
An article by iDownloadBlog states that: 
“Differential Privacy can be a double-edged sword 
and many folks were quick to point out that 
Apple’s refusal to collect huge amounts of data on 
users, like Google is doing, is hurting its ability to 
compete in the AI space.”
Only time will tell exactly how beneficial 
differential privacy can be.
18

Image: Tony Avelar
19

20

THE START OF SOMETHING BIG
In the face of privacy issues, cryptocurrency 
is on the rise.  Originally, Apple was entirely 
skeptical about cryptocurrency and still 
has an extensive approval process for iOS 
applications.  If Apple does not deem a 
cryptocurrency fit, then it does not grant app 
developers with the means to develop apps 
around it.  Apple does now accept Zcash, and 
it is now available for iOS.
At WWDC Apple announced a new feature for 
iOS 11 which allows users to easily send and 
receive money via iMessage, free of charge.  
However, this is thought to be the start of 
something bigger. The Apple Wallet will soon 
feature a new card called Apple PayCash.  
According to an article by The Mission:  “Some 
people thought of it as a gift card because you 
can use this money to pay through ApplePay in a 
cab, at the grocery store, or on the web.”
However, The Mission states that they believe 
this is, in fact, the beginning of Apple’s own 
cryptocurrency.  This is because it is described 
as a digital currency that stores value, which is 
exactly how people describe Bitcoin, the first 
and most famous cryptocurrency.
According to The Mission’s article, people are 
afraid to trust cryptocurrency because you just 
can’t trust them in the same way you can your 
bank. However, “with AppleCash, you would 
gain the benefit of an increasing user base, 
Apple’s stock price, and continued R&D, the 
cash and real assets on their balance sheet,” so 
only time will tell whether the currency will be 
adopted by users.
21

APPLE REMAINS ON THE RISE
Despite doubts over Apple’s deep learning 
and differential privacy solutions, there’s little 
doubt that it is a company on the rise. With the 
release of iPhone 8 this September alongside 
iOS 11 and an array of software releases for 
watchOS, macOS, and tvOS, it’s believed Apple 
will become a trillion-dollar company within 
the next twelve months. According to Wall 
Street analyst, Brian White, Apple has “the most 
underappreciated stocks in the world,”, and 
it’s clear that, as the firm looks at new ways of 
keeping customers within its ecosystem (this 
time with a new cryptocurrency), the giant will 
continue to dominate the technology market 
and keep customers, and dollars, on its side.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
22

23



26

27

Since September 19, iOS 11 has been publicly 
available - both as a free download for many 
in-use iOS devices and preinstalled on the 
recently-released iPhone 8 and iPhone 8 Plus. 
Furthermore, even if you haven’t yet got up and 
running with iOS 11, you are probably aware 
of many of its headline features - including the 
new iPad multitasking functions and support for 
augmented reality apps that use Apple’s ARKit 
framework. However, many other neat additions 
to iOS 11 are more concealed.
Typically, you probably wouldn’t even uncover 
many of those fresh functions unless you spent 
a lot of time looking through various screens of 
the Settings app or experimenting with touch 
gestures. However, we think it would be tragic 
if you spent many more months with iOS 11 
without even knowing about the most exciting 
little tweaks that Apple has made to its phone 
and tablet operating system. Here are some that 
we reckon could dramatically change your iOS 
experience for the better.
28

Image: Justin Sullivan
29

30

GROUND CONTROL CENTER 
TO MAJOR... CHANGES
If you still haven’t made the move to iOS but 
plan to do so soon, how exactly will you be 
doing it? If you intend to jump on board by 
purchasing a new iPhone 8 or iPhone 8 Plus to 
replace an older model, then resist trading in 
that model just yet. Once your new device is 
with you, it will be possible to - during the setup 
process - hold it near the old one to quickly 
transfer the old settings. This can further ease 
the already straightforward task of transitioning 
from one iPhone to another.
Shortly after you start using iOS 11, you might 
notice just how different the Control Center 
looks. It’s now all on one page, rather than 
several cards through which you would need 
to swipe. The various buttons on the Control 
Center may initially look confusing, like a 
rather elaborate piece of pop art; however, 
you can make it all easier to visually digest by 
customizing what is there. Go into Settings, the 
Control Center, and finally Customize Controls 
to get started. 
Once you do, you could quickly grow to 
appreciate the new Control Center much more 
than the old one, given how you can limit its 
functions to those that you actually regularly 
use. There are certain links, such as to the 
Camera app, that you are likely to want to keep 
in there. You can, however, opt to make various 
other apps, such as the Calculator and Notes 
apps, easy to reach from Control Center. You 
could even make the Apple TV Remote app 
more accessible from here.
31

PICTURE THIS: 
AN EVEN BETTER CAMERA APP
With every new generation of iOS, Apple 
lavishes a lot of attention on the camera 
functionality; it’s hardly surprising that the 
iPhone has developed an amazing reputation 
for its camera alone. Furthermore, you don’t 
need to have one of the latest iPhones 
to enjoy many of the best additions and 
changes to the iOS Camera app. For example, 
it now lets you capture photos and videos 
in the more storage-efficient formats of - 
respectively - HEIF and HEVC. 
Sadly, you might find that not all pieces 
of software let you use photos and videos 
captured in these formats. Perhaps that 
software could include your favorite image-
editing app? If you can indeed foresee 
compatibility headaches with the new formats, 
you can still go into Settings, Camera, and then 
Formats to select the “Most Compatible” option 
for image and video formats. This feature will 
enable the files to be automatically saved as 
JPGs and h.264 .mov files instead.
Whichever of the app’s built-in filters you 
would like to add to something you have 
captured, you can now flick through those 
filters by using a slider view format. This 
prevents you having to leave the standard 
camera mode - and, on the subject of that 
mode, you can use it to scan QR codes for the 
first time. Here, Apple has been late to a party 
which many third-party apps have already 
joined; however, the functionality lets you 
scan QR codes to access Wi-Fi, add contacts, 
and do even more.
32

33

34

LIVE PHOTOS FOR THE MOMENT
The ability to take Live Photos debuted with 
the iPhone 6s series in 2015 and has been 
included with every new iPhone model released 
since then. If you have long overlooked Live 
Photos out of a belief that they are essentially a 
gimmick, iOS 11 could sway you into thinking 
otherwise. You can now edit Live Photos, which 
bring more animation to what would otherwise 
be a static image, in fresh ways.
Those ways include Loop, which enables a Live 
Photo to be repeatedly played; Bounce, which 
lets a Live Photo be played either forward or 
backward from especially suitable start and end 
points; and Long Exposure, with which all of a 
Live Photo’s frames are blended together. Those 
three features are available in an “Effects” menu 
that you can access by upward swiping on a Live 
Photo. You can also scroll through Live Photo 
frames to choose the default one or make one 
the preview photo.
HAS iOS 11 HIT YOUR BATTERY LIFE? 
TRY THESE TIPS
Since iOS 11’s public release, many Apple 
users have taken to Twitter to complain that 
the update has adversely affected the battery 
life they are getting out of their devices. If 
you are in the same boat, rest assured that 
the problem might solve itself in a few days, 
if not even sooner. Your device needs time 
to entirely re-index and cache its contents in 
the wake of a software update - and all of that 
added work can eat up battery life. If the issue 
still lingers, however, then try this...
35

36

Head into the Battery part of Settings to see 
which apps have been most draining the battery 
life recently. Tapping any app’s entry in this 
list will show the amount of time the software 
has been active in the background. If certain 
apps seem overly heavy with their background 
activity, then go over to the Settings app’s 
General section and then Background App 
Refresh. Here, you can disable background 
activity for particular apps that seem to be 
wreaking particular havoc on the battery.
Some battery-draining features you might 
deem fluff that you don’t genuinely need. 
These include the Home screen’s parallax effect 
which makes app icons appear as though 
they are floating above the wallpaper. You can 
deactivate this by switching off Reduce Motion 
in the Accessibility section under General in the 
Settings app. If your device supports “Raise to 
Wake”, you can also disable that - under Display 
& Brightness in Settings - and so prevent the 
display inadvertently switching on.
37

38

39

ENJOYED YOUR WARM-UP? 
THERE’S EVEN MORE...
iOS 11 is effectively a treasure trove of new 
additions, many of which we haven’t had space 
to detail above. For example, you can now drag 
and drop content between apps on iPad, choose 
to send questions to Siri with text instead of your 
voice, and compress the onscreen keyboard 
towards the screen’s left or right to enable easier 
one-handed typing. Fortunately, various sites, 
including TechRadar, BGR and Business Insider, 
have dug more deeply into what iOS 11 offers.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
Image: James Bareham / The Verge
40

41

42

43

300 ISSUES OF APPLEMAGAZINE
This week, we’re publishing the 300th issue of 
AppleMagazine. Over the past six years, we’ve 
kept our readers up-to-date on the latest 
technology news and offered our insights 
into the latest blockbuster films and software 
packages with reviews and features. We have 
also followed Apple’s every move, whether it’s 
the launch of a new product, a software update 
or a company acquisition, and published in-
depth features on their journey in our magazine.
Today, we look back at some of the biggest 
Apple stories over the past six years – including 
the death of Steve Jobs, the launch of the Apple 
44

HomePod and the $3 billion takeover of Beats 
– and we give a behind-the-scenes insight into 
how AppleMagazine is produced.
THE BIGGEST APPLE STORIES IN THE 
PAST SIX YEARS
Since the launch of AppleMagazine back in 
2011, we’ve covered some of the biggest 
stories in the world of Apple and the greater 
technology world. Indeed, many of our cover 
stories have focused on big cinematic releases, 
the world of augmented reality and emerging 
technology, but our main focus has, and always 
will, continue to be around Apple Inc. Here 
are some of the biggest Apple stories and 
developments we have covered over the years.
45

Image: Justin Sullivan
46

STEVE JOBS’ DEATH ON OCTOBER 5, 2011
Just one day after Apple introduced its 
innovative iPhone 4S and personal assistant 
Siri, it was announced that the co-founder, 
chief executive and chairman of Apple, Steve 
Jobs, had passed. Apple celebrated his life 
through a series of special films, articles, and 
digital content, while the general public and 
technology world mourned his loss. As Forbes 
writes, Apple products were designed to make 
users feel “more connected to other people”, and 
so the outpouring of grief for Jobs’ death was 
not only in memory of his talent and innovations 
but the values that he upheld as the founder 
of one of the most innovative technology 
companies in the world.
47

48

APPLE ACQUIRES BEATS FOR $3 BILLION 
ON MAY 29, 2014
After a year of speculation and rumors from the 
wider media, Apple confirmed in May of 2014 
that it would acquire Beats for $3 billion. It was 
a deal that shocked the world, not only because 
of the hefty price tag but the change in direction 
for the Cupertino firm, which had struggled to 
innovative significantly since the death of Jobs. 
Fast forward one year and Apple shuttered 
Beats Music,  but today maintains the Beats 
brand through its headphone sales and the 
Beats Radio station, part of Apple Music.
Image: David Ebener
49

INTRODUCTION OF APPLE PAY ON 
OCTOBER 20, 2014
Arguably one of the most innovative features of 
the iPhone in recent years, the introduction of 
TouchID and Apple Pay has changed the way in 
which we shop. No longer do we need to get out 
our wallets and present a credit card every time 
we wish to make a payment – now, we simply 
press our finger against our smartphones and 
pay using NFC technology. After a limited launch 
in the United States, the payment method is 
now available in countries such as Ireland, Italy, 
Russia, Japan, Australia, Canada and the United 
Kingdom, with more rollouts expected in the 
coming years as deals with banks and financial 
institutions continue. And, with iOS 11, which is 
expected to be released this September, Apple 
will introduce Apple Pay Cash, which will 
allow you to pay your friends and family using 
iMessage and store cash on your iPhone without 
relying on your bank account. It’s the latest 
innovation that will, undoubtedly, improve the 
way in which we manage our finances.
50

51

52

LAUNCH OF APPLE WATCH ON 
APRIL 24, 2015
Apple had been rumored to get into the 
smartwatch market for some years, with 
competitors such as Fitbit and Pebble offering 
innovative ways to monitor your fitness and 
keep track of your health. In 2015, it finally 
joined the rat race, bringing with it the 
Apple Watch and the $17,000 Apple Watch 
Edition. Although the company has yet to 
release sales figures for the smartwatch for 
competitive reasons, Apple this year outsold 
Rolex by around $1.5 billion, making it the 
most successful smartwatch brand in the world. 
Despite negative reviews and cries that the Watch 
would be labeled as a ‘flop,’ it’s clear that the firm 
is on to a winner with its wearable technology.
53

APPLE HOMEPOD ANNOUNCEMENT ON 
JUNE 5, 2017
The world of technology has changed 
significantly in the past half-decade. Indeed, 
who would have thought that bookseller 
Amazon would dominate an innovative 
technology market and outsell Microsoft 
and Google in its path? Apple, earlier this 
year, finally saw the potential of the smart 
home assistant market, and earlier this year 
announced that it would be bringing its 
HomePod to the market before Christmas. 
That’s right – you’ll soon be able to control 
your iTunes, light bulbs, alarm systems, and 
door bells by using a smart home device that’s 
powered by Siri – it’s a recipe for success.
54

55

WHERE WE ARE TODAY
Just like at Apple, at lot has changed at 
AppleMagazine in the past six years. Now, 
our magazine is distributed to more than 
197 countries around the world, featured on 
some of the world’s most renowned digital 
newsstands. As well as our own newsstand 
through the AppleMagazine iOS app, where you 
can buy and manage your weekly subscription, 
the magazine is also available through Zinio, 
Recorded Books and EBSCO (for use in schools, 
libraries and universities) as well as Scoop, which 
serves the Indonesian, Indian, Singaporean and 
South Korean markets. AppleMagazine is a true 
worldwide technology news outlet.
And just because the magazine has gone on to 
enjoy success, it does not mean that we rest on 
our laurels. Our editorial team is stronger than 
ever, following all major media channels, news 
agencies and direct contacts in the technology 
industry, while our trained journalists have 
a genuine passion and enthusiasm for the 
56

industry and work hard to produce only the 
most informative and entertaining content for 
the weekly AppleMagazine audience.
The weekly schedule for the production of 
AppleMagazine has changed very little since 
the launch of the business – it still requires 
teamwork and the exceptional skills of 
our content and design teams. On Sunday 
evenings, we choose the cover articles, begin 
the production and sourcing of content for the 
magazine, and produce the designs based on 
the content and biggest news stories of the 
week. By Wednesday, the magazine will have 
been completed, with designs and sources 
finalized before global distribution on Thursdays.
Producing AppleMagazine is a round-the-clock 
job, and as our editorial and content team 
expands through the growth and expansion of 
the official AppleMagazine.com website, our 
magazine continues to evolve and improve with 
even greater journalistic prowess.
57

Image: Thomas Trutschel
58

THE FUTURE OF APPLE
The future of AppleMagazine, just like the future 
of Apple itself, is hard to predict. Six years ago, 
who would have thought that Apple would 
be closing in as a trillion-dollar company or 
that its product line-up would be wider and 
more diverse than ever before? Who could have 
expected that more than 25 billion apps would 
be downloaded in the App Store,  or that Apple 
would be entering the music and television 
markets to rival Spotify and Netflix? It’s clear that 
the future of Apple cannot be predicted – indeed, 
knowing exactly what the Cupertino firm was 
planning would ruin all of the fun!
Whatever Apple has planned, you can follow 
its progress in AppleMagazine. Subscribe and 
check for the latest issue every Friday, and 
remember to check out our website for more.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
59

60

61

Apple’s quantum leap of an iPhone, the iPhone 
X, has been officially released to retail... though 
whether you are able to get your own hands on 
it is a very different matter. In fact, pre-orders 
sold out within minutes of becoming available 
on Friday, October 27 - and, while Apple had 
indicated that there would be supply at its 
retail stores from November 3, that supply 
could very easily have gone by the time you 
read this. Still, the iPhone X has already been 
tested by many YouTubers. 
A TANTALISING - IF ALSO ILLICIT - VIDEO 
You’ve probably already seen quite a few of 
the iPhone X “hands-on” videos that appeared 
shortly after the September launch event, at 
which invited members of the press were able 
to put the handset through its paces. This is, 
of course, a standard arrangement at iPhone 
launch events, where Apple tends to set aside 
demonstration units for attendees to test and 
film. However, late October saw the emergence 
of various other videos in which the device was 
shown off.
The most notorious of those videos was one in 
which vlogger Brooke Amelia Peterson filmed 
herself visiting Apple’s campus, where her 
father worked as an engineer. Her father was 
seen at the on-site eatery Caffè Macs, where 
he used the iPhone X’s new facial recognition 
system Face ID to make a purchase using 
Apple Pay. Without him needing to even put a 
fingertip on a sensor, the transaction seemed 
to go through even more effortlessly than it 
would have done with Touch ID.
Peterson herself was later seen experimenting 
with the iPhone X while at a table in the cafe, 
62

MY iPHONE X VIDEO WENT VIRAL
63

First look at the Apple iPhone X
64

where she commented on the large size of 
the screen - integrated tightly into a casing 
only slightly bigger than that of the iPhone 
8 - and showed how the Calendar app could 
be exited with just an upward swipe. She also 
enthused about the camera, before her father 
brought up the subject of the Animojis; on the 
device’s screen, his voice could be heard from an 
animated alien emoji. 
However, there were signs that the video, which 
was quickly removed apparently on Apple’s 
request but has been re-uploaded elsewhere 
on YouTube, was not Apple-approved.  
9to5Mac observes that the clip seemingly 
showed QR codes for Apple’s internal use, 
while internal code names were apparently 
visible in the Notes app.  Petersen later posted 
a follow-up video in which she explained that 
Apple had sacked her father for filming in this 
way without permission.
NEW YORK, NEW iPHONE
However, it was only days after Petersen’s 
original video that Apple officially let various 
YouTubers give their verdicts of the device. 
According to MacRumors, Apple recently 
invited numerous YouTube reviewers to test the 
iPhone X at a New York City venue.  Fortunately, 
these videos have been even more insightful 
than the Petersen video, despite not always 
revealing a lot of information that has been 
reported elsewhere. 
A good case in point is a video recently posted 
by Popular Science, which runs through many 
of the X’s best-known features - including the 
A11 Bionic chip, Face ID system, and Animojis. 
However, it does - albeit briefly - refer to the new 
65

J’ai pris en main l’iPhone X en exclusivité!
66

Image: Justin Sullivan
67

touch gestures intended to help users overcome 
the Home button’s absence. Meanwhile, the 
video shared by French YouTube channel 
TheiCollection is only slightly more useful if you 
aren’t well-versed in the French language.
A FACE ID LIKE THUNDER
However, we get a much closer at those new 
touch gestures in a comprehensive hands-
on review presented by Thunder E of 
Booredatwork.com. For example, bringing up 
the multitasking view requires the user to swipe 
up from the bottom but stop halfway - rather 
than continue upwards, as would be the case 
when returning to the Home screen. It’s also 
possible to scroll through already-open apps - 
while keeping each app full-screen - by swiping 
along the bottom of the display.
Thunder E did, however, express concern that 
these new gestures felt “a little bit counter-
intuitive”, adding that “it’s going to get difficult 
for some people”. Things get even more 
complicated when you want to reach your 
Action Center, which is accessible with a swipe 
down from the top-right corner. Meanwhile, 
swiping down from the left will lead to the 
Notification Center. Still, he acknowledged that 
the Home button’s familiarity was a factor in the 
initially awkward feel of navigation on the X.
He also detailed the functionality of Face ID, 
though he did mistakenly say that, if a user 
grows a beard, they might have to go through 
the Face ID setup process again. It was during 
Apple’s September keynote that executive 
Phil Schiller indicated the technology’s ability 
to still recognise a face even once a beard has 
formed there. On the subject of that setup 
68

iPhone X Hands-on Experience!
69

How to Setup FaceID on the iPhone X!
70

process, it looks like you might find it even 
more straightforward to use than the Touch 
ID equivalent...
In a separate and much shorter video, 
Thunder E showed how the process works. 
Face ID can be activated in the Settings app, 
through which you can bring up a camera 
prompt where a view of your face appears in 
a circle. You then just have to rotate your face 
within the circle, as the prompt asks. There are 
green indicators that will let you know if the 
scan has been sufficiently thorough. Repeated 
rotating in the right way will eventually see 
your face digitally mapped out.
Thunder E went on to demonstrate how Face 
ID is actually used for unlocking after the setup 
procedure is complete. You just have to look at 
the device, and an on-screen padlock symbol 
will change to show that the unlocking has been 
successful. Then, you simply need to swipe up 
to see the Home screen and those app icons. 
You can also go back into the Settings app to 
have your face remapped - though Face ID’s 
recognition reliability hints that this may not 
often be necessary.
71

WHAT IS THE iPHONE X’S MOST 
REVOLUTIONARY FEATURE?
While Thunder E’s videos are probably the 
best of the bunch, Mark Watson, who runs the 
YouTube channel Soldier Knows Best, gave a 
video verdict of comparable intricacy.  His 
video is particularly worth watching for its close-
up look at the sleek white back of the silver 
iPhone X and the Animojis, which he jokingly 
called a “new revolutionary feature that I think 
everyone across the world is going to be using, 
it’s really going to change the cellphone game”. 
Clearly not a man for hyperbole... 
Another video that is rather lighter on detail 
and insight, but still a lot of fun to watch, is the 
video presented by the Canadian FASHION 
Magazine’s Sam Beckerman.  She gives a run-
down of her ten favourite iPhone X features - 
including, unsurprisingly given her eye for style, 
the Portrait mode for selfies.
72

Exclusive iPhone X Experience with Apple!
73

74

iPhone X FIRST LOOK: TOP 10 BEST FEATURES
75

A GOOD JOBS WITH THE iPHONE X
Despite evident concerns about the potential 
difficulty of using the touch gestures, it’s clear 
that there remains much feverish excitement 
about the iPhone X. It’s not hard to see why, 
in their own video for Highsnobiety, Brian 
Farmer and Noah Thomas are impressed.  In 
reaction to the smooth performance of the 
augmented reality framework ARKit on the 
iPhone X, Thomas gushes that “Steve Jobs is 
looking down and he’s proud of the team.” We 
certainly wouldn’t disagree.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
76

Apple’s iPhone X: Here’s Your First Look at it In Action
77

78

79

2017 was undoubtedly a groundbreaking 
year for Apple. In our last edition, we reflected 
on Apple’s success this year, and now we are 
looking ahead to how Apple might revolutionize 
the technology industry even more in 2018. 
Only time will tell if 2018 will be a trillion dollar 
year for Apple.
According to TechRadar, the PC market will 
continue to decline in 2018 as more and more 
people switch to using smart phones. It is 
likely Apple’s sales will reflect this as they focus 
more and more on their most popular product, 
the iPhone. While tech spending dropped by 
2% in 2016, it is likely to rise by around 4% in 
2018 and Microsoft and Apple, in particular, 
has the to potential to have especially good 
year in 2018. Apple has a massive influence 
on the technology industry, and it continues 
to pave the way for new improvements and 
breakthroughs in technology.
Image: Regis Duvignau
80

81

FACE ID
There are a number of contradictory opinions 
about whether Apple will incorporate both 
Touch ID and Face ID into new models, or 
whether the tech giant will focus solely on Face 
ID. Macworld believes Apple could bring back 
Touch ID by incorporating a fingerprint scanner 
under the glass screen, while Apple Insider 
disagrees. Apple Insider argues that Apple will 
be going all out on Face ID with their new 2018 
iPhone line up. This would be a big move for 
Apple who has used Touch ID on its new iPhones 
since the iPhone 5s, four years ago. It would 
allow Apple to use the full-screen design across 
all new iPhones and would place Apple further 
ahead of its competitors as no one outside of 
Apple has used the TrueDepth camera to the 
extent Apple has. 
If Apple does choose to focus on Face ID, it 
is possible it will feature throughout their 
other products not just their iPhones. Touch 
ID could begin dominating all products and 
come to iPads and Macs. According to Apple, 
82

Touch ID should recognize your face even if 
you are wearing a hat, glasses, a scarf or grew 
a beard. It can even recognize your face at 
night or with the lights turned off using the 
Flood Illuminator located in the TrueDepth 
camera. Apple claims there is a 1 in 1,000,000 
chance someone would be able to open your 
phone using Face ID, unless you are a twin of 
course, whereas there is a 1 in 50,000 chance 
someone has the same fingerprint as you. 
This extra level of security could sway Apple 
towards focusing solely on Face ID.
It is possible that Apple will be bringing out 
the iPad Pro Mini in 2018,  which could include 
Face ID. The iPad mini last had a minor update 
in March 2017 which offered more capacity for 
the same price, 128GB Wi-Fi model for £419. 
However, the iPad mini was last updated in 
September 2015, suggesting Apple is more 
focused on its larger tablets. After all, Apple has 
claimed it’s most popular model is the 9.7-inch 
tablet. If 2018 does bring the iPad Pro, the real 
question is, will it feature Face ID?
83

84

APPLE WATCH iOS UPDATE
The Apple Watch Series 3 was released around 
the same time as the iPhone X and has been 
rebranded as a fitness tracker with lots of 
exciting new features. The most raved about 
feature is its built-in cellular connectivity which 
enables it to be used independently of the 
iPhone. The WatchOS 5 is likely to be unveiled 
in the summer of 2018 and could be launched 
to the public in autumn. This update probably 
won’t run on all watch models, but it could bring 
even more great new features to the Watch. 
Image: Stephen Lam
85

MAC PRO
First orders of the iMac Pro will arrive the 
week after Christmas, and it’s been a long 
time coming after Apple’s teaser video was 
released back in June this year. A new Mac Pro 
is also on the horizon, and we could be released 
before the end of 2018. Reports suggest Apple 
is working on a radical redesign of its Mac Pro 
line and while the current Pro range has been 
tweaked recently, in 2018 we could see a major 
update and redesign. It is possible the Mac Pro 
will be announced at WWDC 2018 in June and 
released in September 2018.
Not only did Apple release the iMac Pro in 2017, 
but the macOS High Sierra also launched on 25 
September, and it is possible 2018 will bring the 
macOS 10.14.
Introducing iMac Pro — Apple
86

Image: Justin Sullivan
87

iPHONE
2017 was a big year for Apple, and possibly the 
biggest product they released was the highly 
anticipated iPhone X. Will 2018 be the year of 
the iPhone XI? We can’t be sure, but reports 
suggest Apple could release this new phone in 
Autumn 2018. However, it is equally plausible 
that Apple could instead release an iPhone 
X plus in 2018. Fortune believes Apple will 
introduce three new iPhones in 2018, however, 
at present, this is all speculation, and it is unlikely 
we will know for sure until WWDC 2018.
88

89

APPLE PAY CASH
In 2017, Apple introduced Apple Pay Cash,  
revolutionizing our relationship with money. The 
new service allows Apple users to not just pay in 
stores using their mobile phones, but they can 
now send and receive money from friends using 
the Messages app or by asking Siri. 
Could 2018 be the year that America becomes 
a cashless society? It does seem unlikely that 
such a revolutionary step would happen so 
Apple Pay Cash Demo in iOS 11.2
90

quickly, but it is not impossible. Currently, 
Sweden is on track to become the world’s first 
cashless society as the Swedish now use bank 
cards for even the smallest purchases, meaning 
there are less than 80 billion Swedish crowns in 
circulation and only 40-60% of this is actually in 
regular circulation. Just six years ago the total 
circulation was around 106 billion. Sweden is on 
track to become a completely cashless society, 
and America could soon follow suit, with new 
technology developed by Apple making online 
payments easier than ever.
91

APPLE CAR
Back in 2016, rumors all suggested Apple was 
developing its very own car, however, in 2017 
it seemed Apple had scaled back its ambitions. 
Apple is now thought to be working on an 
automotive software solution, not hardware. 
According to Macworld, Apple supposedly has 
1,000 developers currently working on Project 
Titan, and while we can’t wait to see what Apple 
is working on, it is more likely that Project Titan 
will be revealed in 2020.
92

93

94

iTUNES COULD BE CLOSING DOWN
Apple Music, Apple’s own streaming service, 
continues to rival Spotify. It features 40 million 
songs, and although Spotify remains the leader 
in streaming music, Apple Music offers some 
unique albums. However, as a result of the 
success of streaming sites in 2017, rumors 
suggest Apple could be shutting down iTunes 
within the next two years, to focus solely on 
Apple Music. This is not a new rumor. However, 
it is starting to seem plausible as, according to 
Financial Times, streaming sites have saved 
the music industry. At the start of 2017, music 
streaming passed the milestone of 100m paying 
subscribers worldwide, and the number has only 
continued to expand.
95

Introducing HomePod — Apple
96

APPLE HOMEPOD
Finally, Apple HomePod will be hitting stores 
early 2018. The home speaker was announced 
back in June 2017, and it was expected it would 
be ready for Christmas, but the official release has 
been delayed until the new year. This speaker 
will have some work to do to compete with 
the likes of Amazon Echo and Google Home, 
however, it does offer some unique features. 
It will be able to adapt to what is playing, and 
it will have spatial awareness, meaning it can 
analyze acoustics and adjust the sound it emits 
according to its location in a room.
While Apple is keeping us in the dark about 
their plans for 2018, rest assured it will be 
another groundbreaking, trillion dollar year 
for Apple with a whole host of exciting new 
developments. Only time will tell if 2018 will be 
the year of the iPhone XI, the Apple Car and the 
end of iTunes. 
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
97

98

99

100

Apple has made a lot of impressive 
announcements relating to sweeping changes 
of its iMac line. At its Worldwide Developers 
Conference in June, the company revealed that 
Valve’s Steam VR platform was set to hit Apple’s 
desktop computers. It even showed, running 
on one of the recently-released new iMacs, a VR 
demo of an official Star Wars experience where, 
with HTC Vive accessories, TIE fighters were 
controlled and Darth Vader was summoned.
It’s fair to say that, historically, Macs have tended 
to fall behind the Windows competition for 
gaming in general, let alone VR experiences. 
Last year, Palmer Luckey, who founded the 
Facebook-owned VR headset purveyor Oculus 
Rift, complained that Macs of the time weren’t 
powerful enough to support Oculus Rift VR 
experiences.  However, Apple has packed a 
staggering amount of power into the new iMacs 
that it recently unveiled on the WWDC stage.
Those new computers include the iMac Pro - 
which will start in price at $4,999 and, when it is 
released this December, be the most powerful 
Mac available. It will feature AMD’s fresh Radeon 
Vega graphics and a CPU the cores of which can 
number as many as 18. Apple also refreshed the 
standard iMac for the first time since October 
2015 - though, of the new models, only those 
integrating the most advanced AMD Radeon 
Pro 580 graphics chip will support VR.
101

Radeon pro 580 iMac 2017 Gaming DOOM
102

103

THE MAC HAS ALREADY GONE FROM 
STRENGTH TO STRENGTH
All of this begs the question: are we seeing the 
opening of a new chapter in the story of Mac 
gaming? There is plenty to be optimistic about. 
Other Mac-related announcements at WWDC 
concerned an improved version of Apple’s Metal 
graphics API and, on newer Macs, external 
GPU enclosures meaning that the machines 
should be easier to upgrade than previously. 
These changes could particularly excite games 
developers - who, during the 2000s, benefitted 
as Apple swapped out its Macs’ PowerPC 
104

architecture for Intel alternatives commonly 
used in Windows PCs.
That move brought Macs closer to parity with 
Windows regarding the software engineering 
possibilities. A further attraction to developers 
would have been the major growth in Mac 
sales around that time. Ars Technica notes, 
citing figures gathered by Statista, that while 
global Mac sales tallied 3.29 million in 2004, 
this number had risen to surpass 20 million by 
2015.  Meanwhile, the rise of digital distribution 
through such services as Steam smoothed the 
accessibility of Mac games.
105

106

Radeon pro 580 iMac Gaming
Battlefield 1 Multiplayer
107

IS THE MAC NOW LEAVING GAMES 
CONSOLES BEHIND?
It was also during the lengthy tenure - lasting 
almost a decade - of the Xbox 360 and 
PlayStation 3 as major hardware standards in 
gaming that the Mac was able to catch up in 
graphics hardware. This leads us nicely onto 
the interesting subject of whether, in the here 
and now, the Mac has actually become a more 
palatable gaming platform than the currently 
available flagship consoles. There is much to 
be said in favor of this, as a detailed Business 
Insider article has made clear.
108

109

110

One plus point that the site mentions is that of 
graphics capability, in which a high-end desktop 
computer can easily outperform the PlayStation 
or Xbox One. This means that, on something like 
the iMac Pro, you could enjoy higher graphics 
settings and smoother frame rates than are 
possible on consoles. Of course, you can pick up 
a current-generation console for just $250 - far 
less than what the base iMac Pro would cost. 
Still, the latter’s replacement cycle could be 
much longer anyway.
Meanwhile, it’s now clear that Steve Jobs was 
ahead of the curve when, as Apple CEO, he 
decided that physical media drives would 
get the chop on Macs. Edwin Smith, head of 
production at veteran Mac developer Feral 
Interactive, told Ars Technica that such digital 
marketplaces as the Mac App Store and 
Steam “made it much easier for us to get our 
games to end users,” with the result that “our 
customer base has grown.” The upcoming 
arrival of Steam’s VR platform is a great 
boon, then.
Of course, the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One 
have their own digital distribution channels 
as well. However, Business Insider reports that 
they still trail Steam in the value-for-money of 
the older games that they offer. This is largely 
due to Steam’s better discounts. Furthermore, 
with Apple now loosening the Mac’s previously 
locked-down architecture, it will be possible for 
you to occasionally tinker with a Mac’s parts to 
prevent new games becoming more powerful 
than the computer can handle. Console parts, 
on the other hand, can start feeling outdated 
much more quickly.
111

112

2017 iMac Radeon pro 570 Gaming GTA 5 2K
113

114

THE FURTHER QUESTION 
OF THE MOBILE MARKET 
Nonetheless, as the iMac Pro won’t be reaching 
retail channels until December, you should be 
able to get your hands on one of this year’s new 
iPhones before then. There’s a big question 
mark over whether you will be able to pick 
up an “iPhone 8” specifically, given rumors 
of constrained availability later this year.  
However, whether you grab that, one of the 
expected “iPhone 7s” or “iPhone 7s Plus” models, 
or even stick with your current iPhone, great 
gaming experiences could still await...
That is, of course, largely because the mobile 
gaming market is already in impressively 
blooming health. iPhone Life reports that, 
in 2016, this market amassed global revenue 
totaling $40.5 billion dollars. This edged past the 
year’s worldwide movie box office takings of $38 
billion and far exceeded the $15.1 billion that the 
music industry made in the same period. Also, 
in the United States, there were more gamers on 
iOS than rival mobile operating system Android.
It should additionally be considered that 
mobile gaming still has amazingly strong 
potential for growth. The premium gaming 
experiences to which PC and console gamers 
have become accustomed remain scarce on 
mobile. Those experiences tend to come with 
much higher price tags, too; so, when they 
finally arrive in high numbers on handheld 
devices, revenue could significantly grow. 
Could virtual reality and augmented reality be 
keys that help unlock this potential?
115

116

Radeon RX 560 Test in 7 Games (Ryzen 1400)
117

118

HOW iPHONES COULD HELP LEAD A 
NEW GAMING CHARGE 
Apple has already been very open about its 
embracing of augmented reality. The very 
promising-looking AR framework ARKit was, 
at WWDC, announced as one of the major 
inclusions of iOS 11, which will be arriving on 
hundreds of millions of iPhones and iPads in 
the fall. Apple executive Greg Joswiak recently 
commented on developers’ “unbelievable” 
response to ARKit, enthusing: “They’ve built 
everything from virtual tape measures (to) 
ballerinas made out of wood dancing on floors.”
Those developers could be just warming up for 
the arrival of the iPhone 8, which looks like it 
might be built especially for AR. In July, it was 
reported that Apple could be set to give the 
device’s rear camera a sophisticated 3D laser 
system with which better depth detection could 
be drawn upon by AR apps. Ultimately, this 
could make iPhone-based augmented reality 
more lifelike.
We reckon that developers have probably barely 
scratched the surface of what is possible for AR 
games on iOS. Throw in the already available 
VR possibilities on the platform, thanks to the 
likes of Google Cardboard and possibly set 
for improvement with the iPhone 8, and 
we think that there’s a potent concoction for 
a gaming revolution. In our view, computers 
and smartphones could, in the next few years, 
ultimately triumph over consoles in the quality 
of their gaming experiences.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
119

120

121

While it’s true that the prevalence of dating apps 
in today’s society is helping to make dating more 
efficient, does this mean that there has been an 
influx of successful, long-lasting relationships or 
simply more people who’ve grown dissatisfied 
with their current situation?
THE TECHNOSEXUAL ERA
Right now, we are in a Technosexual Era. 
The term technosexual is used to define 
someone who prefers technology over an 
actual human relationship and is often put 
in place to demean an individual who places 
an interest in technology but does not have a 
romantic partner. These people, who are usually 
men, often face stereotypes such as social 
awkwardness, unattractiveness, and loneliness. 
However, modern sex technology that allows 
the user to customize their experience has 
begun to combat the stereotype that it is single, 
lonely men who are the main users of certain 
devices. Artificial intelligence found in software 
such as dating apps like Tinder, for example, has 
become hugely popular with both men and 
women worldwide to establish a connection. 
Elsewhere, a combination of hardware, software, 
virtual reality and artificial intelligence has led 
to the production of technologies such as VR 
Tenga and RealDoll, which create a virtual 
sexual experience for their users.
However, as well as having some positive 
attributes, technosexuality also presents a range 
of concerns and interesting questions. Questions 
such as “what will happen if humans become 
attracted to robots?” lead us to consider a truly 
dystopian realm of science fiction.
Image: Peter Yang
122

Sex Robots | Kate Devlin | TEDxWarwick
123

THE MOST POPULAR DATING APPS
As members of today’s generation begin 
their search for a soul mate, they have more 
opportunities than ever to find them thanks 
largely to the $2.4 billion online dating industry 
which has expanded over the past few years 
with mobile dating apps. These days, 38% of 
single Americans have used an online dating 
site  and almost a quarter of these find a long-
term partner in this way. It’s not hard to see why 
this craze has taken off. If you’re walking around 
with a dating app in your pocket, you have an 
almost endless supply of single people who are 
looking to date. The only question is: how many 
of them want to date you?
124

Image: Leon Neal
125

TINDER
Launched in 2012, Tinder now has an estimated 
50 million users worldwide with 10 million of 
them using the app every day. Essentially, it is a 
modern game of ‘hot or not’ where users must 
judge pictures from others nearby using left 
and right swipes to say whether or not they find 
them appealing, albeit mostly in a visual sense. 
Tinder is perceived more as a hook-up app than 
a relationship app, but a recent upgrade does 
let you play matchmaker for your friends.
OKCUPID
Great for those looking for either a casual fling 
or something more serious, OkCupid provides 
a complex array of questions that are more 
likely to foster the latter. On this app, you can 
broadcast your date suggestions and rate other 
people’s profiles which for some might seem a 
little daunting. Nevertheless, OKCupid was the 
fourth most popular online dating service in 
2015, and over one million people install the 
app every week.
126

MY FRIENDS HIJACK MY TINDER
(they got me a date!)
#01 – Tinder
By Tinder Inc.
Category: Lifestyle
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, 
iPad, and iPod touch.
#02 – OkCupid Dating
By OkCupid.com
Category: Social Networking
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, 
iPad, and iPod touch.
127

Image: Andrew Harrer
128

MATCH.COM
Everyone knows that Match.com was in the 
online dating game long before anyone else. 
Each day, users are provided with personalized 
matches that take your interests and preferences 
into consideration, and you can search through 
the database to find someone that catches your 
eye before you send them a virtual ‘wink’ to grab 
their attention. In 2016, 38% of Match.com users 
said that they began a relationship on the site 
that lasted up to one month, which is the highest 
for any dating service involved in the same study.
COFFEE MEETS BAGEL
The lesser known app Coffee Meets Bagel sends 
you one “bagel” (the profile of a potential match) 
per day then you have 24-hours to decide 
whether to like or pass. If you like, and they have 
liked you, you’ll connect and be able to begin 
a private chat. This service has more specific 
preference options meaning you can narrow 
your searches to things like religious beliefs.
TASTEBUDS
If you’re an iOS user who doesn’t want to be 
matched with an Android user, then Tastebuds 
is for you. This is an app that highlights your 
music preferences to match you with someone 
who is deemed compatible and can be matched 
to your Facebook profile if you wish. Much like 
Tinder, if you’re interested in a person you can 
“like” them and if not, simply “skip,” but unlike 
Tinder, Tastebuds allows you to send a song 
or a message to users even if they haven’t yet 
matched with you.
#03 – Match™ - #1 Dating App
By Match.com, LLC
Category: Social Networking
Requires iOS 10.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, 
iPad, and iPod touch.
#04 – Coffee Meets Bagel Dating App
By Coffee Meets Bagel, Inc
Category: Lifestyle
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, 
iPad, and iPod touch.
#05 – Tastebuds - Music Chat and Dating
By Tastebuds Media Ltd.
Category: Lifestyle
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, 
iPad, and iPod touch.
129

130

Apps like this prove that in this era, the process 
of dating has become “gamified” by technology, 
so we then begin to question – what does this 
mean for the overall influence of the digital 
world on real romance and real relationships? 
HOW HAS THE DIGITAL WORLD IMPACT 
ON ‘REAL ROMANCE’?
Sign up and create a profile on an app like Tinder 
and in the space of a few hours you could end 
up with a date or, in the worst case, a case of 
low self-esteem. A recent study about the 
psychological effects of this particular dating 
app found that those who used the app had 
lower feelings of self-worth, stating that they 
were less satisfied with their looks and more 
ashamed of their bodies. They were also more 
likely to view themselves as sexual objects, 
internalize society’s ideals about beauty and 
compare their appearance to others.
These results were true for both men and 
women. Although dating apps have regained 
a sense of trustworthiness via the connection 
of pictures and basic information from social 
networking sites such as Facebook, they have 
also increased the average level of ‘real-world 
attractiveness.’ A user could spend hours 
curating their profile, uploading a well thought 
out bio and filtered selfies from Instagram to the 
extent that a potential match may wonder how 
he/she is single, to begin with.
This idea that digital eligibility exceeds 
physical eligibility is something that has not 
only advanced the issue of low self-esteem 
among dating app users but also led to the 
dangerous game of ‘catfishing’ – a relatively 
recent word which identifies the creation of 
131

a fictional online persona to lure someone 
into a relationship.
This term was made popular by the 2010 
documentary film of the same name in which 
the online relationship between the filmmaker 
Nev Schulman and a young woman named 
Megan who he “met” after receiving a painting 
from Megan’s younger sister Abby.
Nev connected with Abby and her family over 
Facebook, email, and phone and eventually, 
his relationship with Megan grew. After certain 
questions were avoided by Megan, Nev started 
to have discrepancies with the situation and 
eventually traveled to her home to discover the 
truth. Nev learned that it was actually Abby’s 
mother who was playing the part of Megan by 
fabricating an entire fake persona she had created 
using strangers’ pictures and their information.
On the internet, anonymity is permitted, 
but social networking sites and now dating 
sites/apps encourage a greater degree of 
transparency. When creating a profile, users 
are establishing their online identity, painting 
a picture of what they are without anyone 
questioning their information. Someone with 
the intention of catfishing will shape his/her 
profile to something that they believe another 
will want to see to lure that person into an 
online relationship. Understandably, this can be 
dangerous and leads to much speculation about 
just how beneficial online dating really is.
At the same time, though, dating apps allow 
their users to fulfill a basic evolutionary and 
social need. Much like social networking, dating 
apps allow people to get along (albeit in a sexual 
and superficial way), massaging our competitive 
132

133

instincts, satisfying our curiosity and maximizing 
our dating potential. Critics might not want 
to admit it, but dating apps do mimic modern 
real-world courtship scenarios because just 
like social dynamics, they allow us to assess an 
image and gauge our interest accordingly. Just 
as psychologists have imagined, we really are a 
superficial species, one that would rather spend 
two minutes judging 50 profile pictures than 50 
minutes assessing one potential match.
If anything, dating apps can be an eye-opening 
experience into the modern world and allow 
you to meet like-minded people with similar 
interests and opinions, even if your intentions 
are not romantic at all. The more recent surge 
in friend-finding apps has taken off, too with 
apps such as Bumble BFF, Squad and Meet My 
Dog paving the way for social interactions that 
can remain platonic.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
134

135

Image: Dan Winters/Wired
136

137

Steve Jobs might have passed away nearly six 
years ago, but his influence on Apple - and, by 
extension, the tech industry - has long lingered. 
A fantastic case in point is Apple Park - the 
Cupertino firm’s new “spaceship” corporate 
headquarters at which the “iPhone 8” - or 
“iPhone Edition,” as it could be called - is expected 
to be officially announced.  Jobs was heavily 
influential on its design, which ties together many 
of the company’s firmly-held values.
PREPARATIONS FOR 
A SPACESHIP’S ARRIVAL 
Jobs’ last public appearance before his death 
was in July 2011 - when, at a meeting with 
Cupertino City Council, he argued a case for 
the new headquarters. While construction of 
the premises did not start until 2013, Jobs had 
worked on the concept years before his death. 
He cited a need to consolidate his employees 
in a company that had “grown like a weed,” but 
also enthused about creating a landscape where 
nature and man-made structures would blur 
into each other.
Campuses used by other companies, he felt, 
were “pretty boring”; this one, however, would 
primarily feature a circular structure intended 
to hold 12,000 workers. “It’s a pretty amazing 
building,” he told the council, adding: “It’s a 
little like a spaceship landed.” Even more than 
that, like many of the products that he would 
regularly unveil with his trademark confidence 
at keynotes, it was also pitched as standard-
bearing; potentially “the best office building in 
the world.”
Image: Justin Sullivan
138

139

Image: Nigel Young/Foster+Partners
140

NO STONE - OR WOOD - LEFT UNTURNED
One quality of Jobs’ that stayed to the end was 
his diligent attention to detail. We’ve all seen it 
in Apple products that we have cradled in our 
hands every day - and he certainly wasn’t going 
to leave it out of Apple Park. The company’s 
long-time design guru Jony Ive recalls, in an 
interview with WIRED, that - inspired by 
London parks - he and Jobs “began talking 
about a campus where your primary sense was 
that you were in parkland.” 
Many of us will probably already have a good 
idea of what he means, having experienced 
such places for ourselves. Indeed, Ive said that 
the conversation focused on a campus “where 
the connection between what was built and 
a parkland was immediate, no matter where 
you were.” Apple went on to acquire a 75-
acre site close to Infinite Loop, the company’s 
headquarters since 1993 and tasked renowned 
architect Norman Foster with assisting in 
forming the design.
Foster, whose work has included Berlin’s 
Reichstag building and London’s “Gherkin” 
tower, met up with Jobs in September 2009. 
The then Apple CEO certainly didn’t skimp on 
detail when talking to Foster. One associate of 
Foster and an Apple Park project lead, Stefan 
Behling, recalled Jobs discussing the office 
walls he sought: “He knew exactly what timber 
he wanted... He knew it had to be quarter-cut. 
It had to be cut in winter ... to have the least 
amount of sap and sugar content.”
141

Image: Dan Winters/Wired
142

Image: Dan Winters/Wired
143

Image: Dan Winters/Wired
144

HOW APPLE WILL FURTHER ITS 
GREEN CREDENTIALS 
It’s understandable, then, that the gray-haired 
architects at that meeting were more than a 
little daunted. Jobs also wanted trees covering 
the majority of the site; fruit trees from the 
Northern California orchards of his youth were 
particularly insisted upon. Apple is set to plant a 
total of nearly 9,000 trees, though it was decided 
that these should be drought-tolerant varieties 
capable of withstanding a climate crisis. These 
trees should bode well for the productivity of 
Apple employees.
“When I really need to think about something 
I’m struggling with, I get out in nature,” current 
Apple CEO Tim Cook has observed. “We can 
do that now! It won’t feel like Silicon Valley at 
all.” It certainly shouldn’t hurt that the circle-
shaped centerpiece allows for clear views of 
the site, enabling workers to contemplate the 
beautiful landscape and take inspiration from 
it. The campus buildings will also run strictly on 
sustainable power, most of which to be sourced 
from roof-based solar arrays. 
A TANTALIZING LOOK INSIDE THE 
STEVE JOBS THEATER
So, there are clearly rich benefits for the 
employees whose day-to-day work will be at 
Apple Park. However, there remains much for 
us mere mortals outside the company to be 
excited about, too. At the end of August, Apple 
sent out invites for its first-ever press event 
at the Steve Jobs Theater.  A major part of the 
campus, it had been openly pledged - at the 
iPhone SE launch event in March 2016 - to serve 
145

as a space for future product launches... but 
what exactly is it?
It is a theater space located outside the 
physical ring of the campus but also 
underground; from the outside, just a ground 
level lobby, consisting of a carbon fiber roof 
and 20-foot glass walls, can be seen. However, 
as reported by 9to5Mac, the Brazilian 
website MacMagazine has recently shared 
photos - previously user-posted on Google 
Maps - that show the inside of the auditorium.  
This space was still under construction when 
the images were taken, but there remain 
intriguing details...
For example, what looks like many natural 
wood finishes can be seen; it is unclear 
whether, by September 12, these would be 
left bare or given any additional layers or 
coatings. In any case, the seating capacity is 
1,000 - several thousand smaller than what 
other venues used for previous Apple product 
launches have been able to accommodate. 
This suggests that future launch events will be 
more exclusive affairs - rather befitting a firm as 
secretive as Apple.  
Meanwhile, Above Avalon writer Neil Cybart 
has shared some diagrams of the theater, 
revealing more about its layout. He observes 
that, while Apple tends to have its exhibit space 
concealed before an event starts, it is unclear 
how, with the Steve Jobs Theater, attendees 
would be prevented from passing through 
this space before they reach their seats. It 
seems likely that we will get answers to many 
questions about the Steve Jobs Theater come 
September 12. 
146

147

A VERY SPECIAL EVENT FOR THE 
iPHONE’S TENTH ANNIVERSARY
The Steve Jobs Theater has become available 
for use just ahead of the announcement of what 
could be the most exciting and groundbreaking 
iPhone since the very first model back in 
2007. New features we can expect to see 
with that handset include an edge-to-edge 
display, wireless charging capability, and facial 
recognition that might completely replace the 
familiar Touch ID functionality. How apt in what 
is the tenth anniversary of the iPhone!
That this will all be shown at “the first-ever event 
at the Steve Jobs Theater,” to quote directly 
from Apple’s invitation graphic, seems just 
a very fortunate coincidence - and one that 
we don’t doubt is generating a lot of feverish 
excitement both in and outside Apple Park. We 
also shouldn’t forget that the event is rumored 
to include the announcements of various other 
products - including more standard successors 
to the iPhone 7 and iPhone 7 Plus, a new Apple 
Watch with built-in LTE connectivity, and a fifth-
generation Apple TV with which 4K-resolution 
content can be watched. 
All of those details suggest that the event’s 
schedule could, on September 12, be utterly 
packed - as could, obviously, the theater itself. 
On the subject of the theater, that could spring a 
few surprises in itself, given that the previously-
mentioned photos of its interior were originally 
uploaded at the end of June. It’s an amazingly 
exciting time to be an Apple follower.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
148

Image: Dan Winters/Wired
149

150

Image: Dan Winters/Wired
151

152

153

A BRIEF HISTORY OF APPLE PAY
iPhone and Apple Watch users have had access 
to Apple Pay,  Apple’s mobile payments service, 
since October 2014. The feature allows users to 
buy lunch in a café or buy Christmas presents 
in a retail store and you can even make one-tap 
purchases within apps. The Cupertino firm’s 
latest venture, however, is Apple Pay Cash, 
which allows users to send and receive money 
from peers through the Messages app, making 
the process of transferring money even easier.
“Send money for books to your son in 
college. Split a bill. Pay a babysitter. Send 
and receive from across the table — or 
across the country. Instantly.”
No longer are iPhone users just able to pay 
businesses; with Apple Pay Cash, you can now 
send and receive money from friends. You can 
do so using the Messages app, or simply by 
asking Siri; it really is that simple. The best part 
is, you are not required to download an app, and 
instead can use the cards you already have set 
up in your Wallet. With this new technology, it’s 
never been easier to send money, so your most 
unreliable friend no longer has the excuse of 
leaving their wallet at home!
iOS 11.2 BRINGS APPLE PAY CASH
To access Apple Pay Cash, you’ll need to be over 
the age of 18, live in the United States and update 
your iPhone to the latest version of iOS, 11.2. 
Two-factor authentication will need to be set up 
for your Apple ID, and you’ll need to be signed 
in to iCloud. Once you’ve completed these steps, 
you just need to ensure you have a card added to 
your Apple Wallet and you’re ready to go.
Image: JOSH EDELSON/AFP/Getty Images
154

Inside iOS 11: Messages app gains 
Person-to-Person Payments
155

When using Apple Pay Cash on an iPhone, the 
process is simple.  First, open the Messages app 
and start a conversation with the person you’d 
like to send money to. Then, simply tap the small 
Apple Store icon, followed by the Apple Pay 
icon. You will be prompted to enter the account 
you want to send, and once you have verified 
the transfer with Touch ID or Face ID, the money 
will be on its way to your friend. It really is as 
simple as that.
You can also request a payment from a friend 
or family member using the same process, 
however, instead of tapping ‘pay’ after you 
have entered the amount, you instead click the 
‘request’ button. It is important to remember 
that you can only send to another Apple device 
user and you can only cancel a payment if the 
recipient hasn’t yet accepted it.
INSTANT MONEY WITH A VIRTUAL 
BANK CARD
When you receive payment from a friend or 
family member, the money will not go into your 
bank account, but instead will be transferred 
to your Apple Pay Cash Card. This card can be 
found in your Apple Wallet app and is created 
automatically. Think of it as a virtual bank 
account, where you’ll be able to access your 
new money instantly. No longer do you have to 
wait for the transfer to go through before you 
can buy an outfit for tonight’s party; as soon as 
the payment has been sent, you have access to 
the money straight away. You’ll be able to make 
payments via Apple Pay, or through the App 
Store. You can also transfer the funds to your 
bank account, should you wish to do so.
156

157

158

You can add money to your Apple Pay Cash 
Card using the cards you already have set up in 
the Apple Pay wallet. Apple has a very useful 
guide  on how to add money when using both 
an iPhone and an Apple Watch. 
A SECURE PAYMENT TRANSFER SERVICE
Apple Pay Cash has led to some security 
concerns, however, rest assured that before 
sending the first payments you have to agree 
to the terms and conditions and confirm your 
identity, and you can only send payments using 
Touch ID or Face ID.
There are also no fees when you use a debit card 
through the service, but you will have to pay the 
standard 3% fee when using a credit card. The 
service does not affect your credit, but there are 
limits in place on the amount you can transfer. 
Per message, you can receive a minimum of $1 
and a maximum of $3,000, and you the maximum 
you can receive over a 7-day period is $10,000.
You also don’t have to worry about your account 
if your phone is stolen or lost as the payments 
for the Apple Pay Cash Card are saved-off device 
and not stored solely in the Apple Wallet.
THE FUTURE FOR APPLE PAY 
CASH ABROAD
The question on everyone’s lips is when Apple 
Pay Cash will be available outside the United 
States. At present, Apple is giving no clues, 
although Apple Pay’s original rollout suggests 
that the UK will be next to receive the new Cash 
feature, especially when you take into account 
Facebook Messenger’s rival, which launched in 
the United Kingdom.
Image: Jason Cipriani/CNET
159

160

Image: Justin Sullivan
Apple Pay Cash
161

162

THE END OF PAYPAL COULD BE CLOSE
Although Apple Pay Cash may seem a 
revolutionary feature for your smartphone, it 
is not the first service of its kind. Venmo first 
introduced peer-to-peer payments, bringing 
them to PayPal in 2013 during its acquisition. 
Square also added the feature to its Square Cash 
application, while Google Wallet also allows 
users to send cash to one another. However, 
Apple Pay Cash now poses a real threat to these 
services that are also available in the United 
States, as it is a baked-in feature.
The real main competition Apple Pay Cash 
faces is with PayPal. PayPal not only offers P2P 
payments through Venmo but ahead of the 
launch of Apple Pay Cash, PayPal teamed up 
with Facebook to offer a similar peer-to-peer 
payment service. This allows users to send or 
request money using their PayPal account. 
ANDROID AND APPLE PAY CASH
Perhaps one of biggest drawbacks of Apple Pay 
Cash is that it can only be accessed from iOS 
devices – if one user has an iPhone and the other 
an Android, it won’t work. For the immediate 
future, Android users won’t have access to Apple 
Pay Cash, however, just like it did with its Apple 
Music service in 2015, Apple could introduce a 
standalone Apple Pay Cash application to the 
Google Play Store in due course.
APPLE REVOLUTIONIZES OUR 
RELATIONSHIP WITH MONEY 
The way money changes hands has been 
evolving for hundreds of years. In recent years, 
new payment currencies such as Bitcoin have 
163

revolutionized our relationship with money; and 
the introduction of Apple Pay Cash is another 
step up the ladder.
According to Virgin, Sweden could be 
the first completely cashless society, as it 
continued to crack down on organized crime. 
In Sweden, digital payments are accepted 
almost everywhere, including on buses and to 
buy magazines on the streets. This is a result 
of collaboration between major Swedish and 
Danish banks to create a direct payment app.
Cashless societies could entirely change the 
way our children learn about money, with 
Forbes suggesting that e-currency, such as the 
potential e-Korona in Sweden, could be sensitive 
to shocks and could make society vulnerable. 
At the moment, we can only speculate about 
the future of Apple Pay Cash. However, there is 
a potential that the US will follow in Sweden’s 
footsteps, as users begin to see the benefits of 
becoming a cashless society.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
164

165

166

167

While most publicity about Apple’s September 
12 event might have unsurprisingly focused 
on the upcoming iPhone X, among the various 
other new products announced at the keynote 
was the Apple Watch Series 3. The original Apple 
Watch was announced over three years ago now, 
and the timepiece has gone through various 
iterations since then. However, the Series 3 has 
a headline feature which could be particularly 
game-changing: built-in cellular connectivity.
168

This has enabled Apple to completely untether 
the Watch from the iPhone at long last. So, does 
the Series 3 finally take the dreams we had 
about the first Apple Watch and turn them into 
reality? To find out for ourselves, we decided 
to thoroughly test the Series 3, which is now 
available to purchase in LTE and non-cellular 
versions. Should you Watch out for this device, 
or ought you to hold off purchasing an Apple 
wearable for another time? 
169

HANDS-FREE CALLING AND 
OTHER IMPROVEMENTS 
This is the first Apple Watch with which you can 
make phone calls and load and send online data 
without any need to have an iPhone at close 
hand. However, while the cellular connectivity 
is, indeed, the most immediately exciting 
new feature with the Series 3, there is another 
powerful draw quite literally under the hood. 
Apple has included a dual-core S3 processor; 
this is 70% speedier than the S2 inside last year’s 
Series 2 model, the company has claimed. 
Smaller but appreciable enhancements besides 
these include a barometric altimeter capable of 
tracking flights that the user climbs - a feature 
that many users of recent iPhones will have 
become accustomed to. The new timepiece also 
supports Bluetooth 4.2 - that’s a bump-up from 
the Bluetooth 4.0 support in the Series 2 - and 
has 768MB of DRAM, up from 512MB in the 
older model.
Image: Veanne Cao/ TechCrunch
170

171

A RUNDOWN OF THE AVAILABLE APPLE 
WATCH OPTIONS
With the Series 2, Apple refashioned the Watch 
as something close to a comprehensive fitness 
tracker. Naturally, the Series 3 preserves the 
water resistance - expect to be able to safely 
submerge it in water as deep as 50 metres 
- that debuted in last year’s model, making 
it well-suited to swimmers. Apple has since 
discontinued the Series 2, leaving the non-
cellular version of the Series 3 to take its place as 
the mid-range choice in an Apple Watch line-up 
that keeps the Series 1 as the entry model. That’s 
priced from $249; the Series 3 starts at $399 with 
LTE or $329 without.
There are also Series 3 versions of the Apple 
Watch Nike+, which is marketed at runners and 
will be available from October 5; Apple Watch 
Hermès, a tie-in with the French fashion brand; 
and Apple Watch Edition, which comes in two 
gorgeous ceramic finishes. The Nike+ pricing 
matches that of the standard Series 3, while 
the Hermès offerings begin at $1,149 and the 
Edition models at $1,299.
172

173

174

175

Image: TechCrunch
176

A WATCH THAT COULD OFTEN REPLACE 
YOUR iPHONE
At the September 12 keynote, Apple’s Chief 
Operating Officer Jeff Williams showed how 
the Series 3 could be used to phone another 
member of the Watch team who, through their 
own Watch, could chat to him while paddle-
boarding in a distant, watery location. The call 
recipient’s voice could be heard clearly, thus 
demonstrating the amazing potential of the 
Series 3 as a phone replacement. Our own 
testing has borne out this effectiveness, with 
voices coming through clearly. 
Hence, it is now perfectly possible for you to 
leave your iPhone when certain scenarios make 
the Series 3’s use in its place desirable. These 
could include going for a run, during which 
you might otherwise be concerned about 
the iPhone moving around erratically in your 
pocket. Alternatively, you might want to head 
down to the beach and swim in the ocean 
without fretting about what to do with the 
phone and how you should prevent it getting 
stolen or lost.  
It’s clear, then, that the built-in LTE has 
practical uses - mainly relating to fitness 
and notifications. You can rest assured that, 
wherever your fitness pursuits take you, 
people you know can still readily contact you 
- provided that you always have that Series 3 
on your wrist. You might expect the device’s 
reliance on LTE to significantly hit battery 
life. However, the effect isn’t as adverse as 
you might expect, as the Watch intelligently 
switches to non-LTE connections when they 
are available.
177

SERIES 3 AND watchOS 4 - AN 
UNDOUBTEDLY HEALTHY PAIR
The Apple Watch Series 3 comes with watchOS 
4 preinstalled. This is available for all Apple 
Watch models, not simply the Series 3, and 
includes various little changes that make the 
device easier to use - particularly for keen 
fitness buffs. The merely cosmetic changes 
include a new Toy Story watchface, while 
among the more practical alterations are a 
redesigned app dock where, by pressing the 
flat button on the device’s side, you can see 
app shortcuts aligned vertically. 
If you are convinced that you have to get more 
active but still struggle to find the necessary 
motivation, then you are likely to appreciate 
new notifications that the Watch sends daily 
and weekly. These are intended to keep 
nudging you to prevent your exercise efforts 
faltering; for example, the notifications can 
remind you to work towards the activity levels 
you managed the day earlier or highlight what 
other progress you have made recently and 
inspire you to greater heights.
The new feature with the greatest practicality, 
however, is the improved functionality for 
tracking heart rates. With any Apple Watch 
except the original model from 2015, you 
can now record different forms of heart rate 
including resting, average walking, and recovery 
heart rates. The timepiece can also pick up - 
though you need to opt into this particular 
feature first - heart rate spikes that happen when 
the device deems you not to be working out.
This feature could theoretically save lives - as, 
if there are heart rate irregularities, these could 
Image: Sarah Tew/CNET
178

179

hint at a larger issue. Nonetheless, Apple has 
stopped short of specifying that the Apple 
Watch could, by itself, be used to diagnose 
any heart conditions. Through studies to be 
carried out alongside Stanford University and 
telemedicine firm American Well, Apple will 
endeavour to see if the Apple Watch is capable 
of accurately detecting cardiac arrhythmias. 
This suggests that there remains further 
scope for improvement in the Apple Watch’s 
health-monitoring functionality - and that 
improvement could be realised in future 
software updates. If you don’t currently own 
an Apple Watch, this could give you yet 
another reason to invest in a Series 3 model 
rather than buy an older, perhaps refurbished, 
model. There’s no doubt that the sophisticated 
technology in the Series 3 can better futureproof 
it for such software updates. 
YOU’RE NOT STRAPPED FOR CHOICE 
WITH THE WATCH
The Apple Watch Series 3 is available to buy 
right now - and, if you have long been reluctant 
to join the Apple Watch party, then the biggest 
improvements brought by the Series 3 could 
tip you into finally purchasing. To us, it certainly 
feels like the most complete Apple Watch yet, 
largely bereft of the UI lag and clear functionality 
holes that hampered its predecessors. There’s 
also more choice in the overall Apple Watch line-
up than ever before.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
180

181

182

Image: David Paul Morris/Bloomberg
183

184

It has long been rumored that Apple is 
developing either a virtual reality (VR) or an 
augmented reality (AR) device, and these 
rumors were somewhat confirmed at the 
Worldwide Developers Conference (WWDC) in 
San Jose earlier this month.  At the conference, 
Apple announced the ARKit, a new kit allowing 
developers to create augmented reality apps.
The ARKit, deemed a “game changer” by 
the CEO of Marxent, who for six years have 
been developing AR apps for Apple, will 
run on the new Apple iOS 11 software and 
is due to launch in the fall on the iPhone 8, 
and on all iOS devices dating back to the 
iPhone 5.  Apple CEO Tim Cook said in an 
interview  augmented reality is “Something 
[Apple] is doing a lot of things on” and it is 
likely to be developed for iPhone first, but it 
has been rumored that Apple is also creating 
smart glasses, similar to Google Glass. As 
demonstrated in the first 40 seconds of the 
video and explained throughout, AR allows 
apps to go beyond the screen and become 
more embedded in the real world in ways 
never seen before.
Tuong Nguyen claims AR marks the beginning 
of a new phase for technology and believes 
it will “eclipse virtual reality” in sales “because 
we deal with the real world all the time.”  
Augmented reality works in ways virtual reality 
cannot by immersing users into the real world 
by overlaying data and images onto a screen 
and interacting with the physical world.  Tim 
Cook labels it as a “core technology, “ and it 
is thought it to be as big as the smartphone, 
something we will soon begin to wonder how 
we ever lived without.
Image: Stephen Lam
185

APPLE RE-ESTABLISHING ITSELF AS A 
GAMING PLATFORM
Developing the use of AG through the iPhone 
camera is likely to be Apple’s focus. Apps are 
already using AG successfully, and Apple’s 
introduction of ARKit will only increase the 
number of apps.
Bloomberg describes how AG has been 
developed for the camera writing that “one 
of the features Apple is exploring is the ability to 
take a picture and then change the depth of the 
photograph or the depth of specific objects in 
the picture later; another would isolate an object 
in the image, such as a person’s head, and allow 
it to be tilted 180 degrees. A different feature in 
development would use augmented reality to 
place virtual effects and objects on a person, 
much the way Snapchat works.”
The question has been raised about how 
Apple will use this new technology to shake 
up the gaming industry.  The precedent has 
been somewhat set by ‘Pokemon Go,’ which 
was downloaded more than 100 million 
times in its first month,  a game which 
works by overlaying animated Pokemon 
onto your screen, so they appear alive in 
the physical world.  During the presentation 
at the Worldwide Developers Conference, 
Apple demonstrated an improved version of 
‘Pokemon Go,’ that will be available exclusively 
on iPhone, as well as demonstrating a new 
‘The Lord of the Rings’ game. It appears 
Apple wants to re-establish itself as a gaming 
platform and will aim do so through this 
new generation of apps as well as revamping 
the App Store.
Image: Stephen Lam
186

187

188

With the increase in popularity for apps of this 
nature, it is unsurprising that Apple appears 
to have chosen to focus on augmented reality 
rather than virtual reality.  One successful app 
is Inkhunter, which uses the simple idea of 
projecting tattoo designs onto the camera, 
allowing the user to see how the tattoo will 
look before they commit. Companies such 
as Lego are already using AR in their stores, 
where televisions demonstrate an animated 
representation of the final product you can 
create from the kit inside the box you are 
holding when you step in front of it.
PRODUCTIVITY INCREASE WITH AR
However, it is not only the gaming world which 
is likely to revolutionize as a result of this new 
technology.  Already, companies such as 
General Electric are using smart glasses in 
their factories to boost productivity.  Previously, 
workers were forced to stop working, spending 
time consulting manuals or experts when 
installing new parts, for example.  But with 
the new smart glasses, they can see the 
instructions in front of them or access training 
videos.  They are even able to live stream 
their point of view, allowing an expert to 
give specific advice.
Workers can receive new orders straight to their 
glasses and the glasses help guide workers 
to the correct storage area in order to quickly 
locate each item in the order.  As a result, an 
initial study by General Electric showed a 34% 
increase in productivity after the glasses were 
introduced in the workplace.
189

MEDICAL ADVANCES USING AR
Similar uses can be applied to the medical 
profession, and AR could advance healthcare 
considerably.  The study of medicine is 
looking to be improved by companies such as 
ARnatomy, who are developing an app that 
will match a bone, for example, with visuals 
and information.  This will make learning more 
informative, and information will be more 
readily available.  Shafi Ahmed has even used 
AR to perform live operations for around 14,000 
students in 32 countries.
Every day procedures are looking to be 
improved by the introduction of apps such as 
AccuVein.  Accuvein is a handheld scanner that 
190

projects over skin to show nurses and doctors 
exactly where veins and their valves are in 
patients’ bodies.  Having blood taken is never 
pleasant, but Accuvein makes finding the vein 
on the first attempt 3.5 times more likely.
An app has been developed measuring a child’s 
ability to stay still for long periods of time.  
This app developed by Current Studios will 
enable doctors to determine if a child would 
need general anesthetics before an MRI scan, 
for which they are required to remain still for 
extended periods of time.  This will reduce the 
chance of a child being sedated unnecessarily 
and prevent time wastage.
191

AR IN OUR EVERYDAY LIVES
AR will certainly affect both the gaming, 
engineering and medical industries. However, 
speculation has already begun about how AR 
could become immersed into our everyday lives. 
Cook sees it as something that will become “a 
significant part of the population, of developed 
companies, and eventually, all countries will 
have AR experiences every day.”
An article by Forbes Magazine also describes 
how augmented reality will become embedded 
in our everyday lives.  The article uses the 
example of shopping where AR can be used to 
retrieve data and images of goods customers 
want to buy.  Facial recognition could also be 
developed to inform users of the name and 
important information about an approaching 
old acquaintance.
Social barriers have also been a concern for 
some, where Nguyen comments that “it’s okay 
to use a tablet or smartphone in public, but 
many people don’t want to be that guy wearing 
a Google Glass headset in public.”  The question 
remains, how long will it be before we are as 
attached to AR as we are to our smartphones?
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
192

193

#01 – Rules of Survival
By NetEase Games
Category: Games / Free
Requires iOS 7.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#02 – YouTube
By Google, Inc.
Category: Photo & Video / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#03 – Snapchat
By Snap, Inc.
Category: Photo & Video / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#04 – Messenger
By Facebook, Inc.
Category: Social Networking / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#05 – Dune!
By Voodoo
Category: Games / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#06 – Instagram
By Instagram, Inc.
Category: Photo & Video / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#07 – Facebook
By Facebook, Inc.
Category: Social Networking / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#08 – Words With Friends 2-Word Game
By Zynga Inc.
Category: Games / Free
Requires iOS 10.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#10 – Netflix
By Netflix, Inc.
Category: Entertainment / Free
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#09 – Bitmoji - Your Personal Emoji
By Bitstrips
Category: Utilities / Free
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
194

#01 – GarageBand
By Apple
Category: Music / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later
#02 – WhatsApp Desktop
By WhatsApp Inc.
Category: Social Networking / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.9.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#04 – 1Doc: Word Processor for Writer
ByChengyu Huang
Category: Business / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#03 – Open Any File
By Rocky Sand Studio Ltd.
Category: Utilities / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#05 – PDF Reader Pro Free
By PDF Technologies, Inc.
Category: Business / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.8 or later, 64-bit processor
#09 – The Unarchiver
By Dag Agren
Category: Utilities / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.6.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#06– OneDrive
By Microsoft Corporation
Category: Productivity / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.9.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#08 – Kindle
By AMZN Mobile LLC
Category:  Reference / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.9 or later
#10 – Xcode
By Apple
Category: Developer Tools / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.11.5 or later
#07– Microsoft OneNote
By Microsoft Corporation
Category: Productivity / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
195

#01 – Heads Up!
By Warner Bros.
Category: Games / Price: $0.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#02 – Minecraft
By Mojang
Category: Games / Price: $6.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#03 – kirakira+
By Kentaro Yama
Category: Photo & Video / Price: $0.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#04 – Plague Inc
By Ndemic Creations
Category: Games / Price: $0.99
Requires iOS 6.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#05 – Bloons TD 5
By Ninja Kiwi
Category: Games / Price: $2.99
Requires iOS 6.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#06 – NBA 2K18
By 2K
Category: Games / Price: $7.99
Requires iOS 9.0 or later.
#07 – The Game of Life
By Marmalade Game Studio
Category: Games / Price: $2.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#08 – Facetune
By Lightricks Ltd.
Category: Photo & Video / Price: $3.99
Requires iOS 7.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#10 – Geometry Dash
By RobTop Games AB
Category: Games / Price: $1.99
Requires iOS 5.1.1 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#09 – MONOPOLY Game
By Electronic Arts
Category: Games / Price: $0.99
Requires iOS 8.1 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
196

#01 – The Sims™ 2: Super Collection
By Aspyr Media, Inc.
Category: Games / Price: $39.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.9.2 or later
#07 – Mirror for Samsung TV
By AirBeamTV BV
Category: Video / Price: $13.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#08 – Home Design 3D
By Anuman
Category: Graphics & Design / Price: $8.49
Compatibility: OS X 10.8 or later, 64-bit processor
#09 – PomTimer
By Bech LLC
Category: Productivity / Price: $1.39
Compatibility: OS X 10.9 or later, 64-bit processor
#02 – Magnet
By CrowdCafé
Category: Productivity / Price: $1.39
Compatibility: OS X 10.9 or later, 64-bit processor
#10 – Adobe Photoshop Elements 2018
By Adobe
Category: Photography / Price: $84.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#04 – Dr. Cleaner Pro
By Trend Micro, Incorporated
Category: Utilities / Price: $20.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#03 – Duplicate Photos Fixer Pro
By Systweak Software
Category: Photography / Price: $1.39
Compatibility: OS X 10.7 or later
#05 – Logic Pro X
By Apple
Category: Music / Price: $279.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#06 – RollerCoaster Tycoon 3 Platinum
By Aspyr Media, Inc.
Category: Games / Price: $20.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.8.5 or later
197

198

TENNESSEE RAIN
(THE VOICE PERFORMANCE)
Addison Agen
WISH I DIDN’T LOVE YOU
(THE VOICE PERFORMANCE)
Chloe KohAnsKi
PERFECT
ed sheerAn
RIVER (FEAT. ED SHEERAN) 
eminem
I PRAY (THE VOICE PERFORMANCE)
red mArlow
PERFECT SYMPHONY
ed sheerAn & AndreA BoCelli
O HOLY NIGHT (THE VOICE PERFORMANCE)
BrooKe simpson
ROCKSTAR (FEAT. 21 SAVAGE)
post mAlone
HUMBLE AND KIND
(THE VOICE PERFORMANCE)
Addison Agen
HAVANA (FEAT. YOUNG THUG)
CAmilA CABello
199

200

REVIVAL
eminem
÷ (DELUXE)
ed sheerAn
THE BEAUTIFUL & DAMNED
g-eAzy
THE GREATEST SHOWMAN
(ORIGINAL MOTION PICTURE SOUNDTRACK)
VArious Artists
REPUTATION
tAylor swift
A PENTATONIX CHRISTMAS DELUXE
pentAtonix
STAR WARS: THE LAST JEDI
(ORIGINAL MOTION PICTURE SOUNDTRACK)
John williAms
THE COMPLETE SEASON 13 COLLECTION
(THE VOICE PERFORMANCE)
Chloe KohAnsKi
FROM A ROOM: VOLUME 2
Chris stApleton
THE ESSENTIAL NOW THAT’S
WHAT I CALL CHRISTMAS
VArious Artists
201

202

PERFECT SYMPHONY (WITH ANDREA
BOCELLI) [FEAT. ANDREA BOCELLI]
ed sheerAn
PERFECT
ed sheerAn
MIC DROP (STEVE AOKI REMIX)
Bts
MARRY ME
thomAs rhett
LITTLE DRUMMER BOY
for King & Country
HAVANA (FEAT. YOUNG THUG)
CAmilA CABello
MOTORSPORT
migos, niCKi minAJ & CArdi B
LEMON (VIDEO)
n.e.r.d & rihAnnA
DESPACITO (FEAT. DADDY YANKEE) 
luis fonsi
HALLELUJAH
pentAtonix
203

204

STRONGER THAN EVER
the reAl housewiVes of BeVerly hills, seAson 8
BACK IN THE SADDLE
VAnderpump rules, seAson 6
PRESS PASS
Keeping up with the KArdAshiAns, seAson 14
HIGH HOPES
teen mom, Vol. 19
WOMEN TRANSFORM THE WORLD
mAdAm seCretAry, seAson 4
ROCK THE BOAT
the reAl housewiVes of AtlAntA, seAson 10
CHAPTER FOURTEEN:
 “A KISS BEFORE DYING”
riVerdAle, seAson 2
HOW IT’S GOTTA BE
the wAlKing deAd, seAson 8
SHEPARD WIVES CLUB
relAtionshep, seAson 1
CHAPTER FIFTEEN: “NIGHTHAWKS”
riVerdAle, seAson 2
205

206

SINFUL EMPIRE
meghAn mArCh
MISTLETOE MYSTERIES
ChArlotte mACleod
DARKER
e l JAmes
THE HOOKUP
Kristen Ashley
ORIGIN
dAn Brown
SWEET LITTLE LIES
ABBi glines
LITTLE FIRES EVERYWHERE
Celeste ng
THE ROOSTER BAR
John grishAm
END GAME
dAVid BAldACCi
SWEET LITTLE MEMORIES
ABBi glines
207

208

209

HOMEKIT HAS CHANGED THE GAME
In 2014, with the release of iOS 8, Apple 
announced HomeKit, a new software 
framework that allowed developers to 
connect smart home technology to users’ 
smartphones. Users could design their rooms 
and integrate smart-home appliances as and 
when they wanted them and then enable 
automatic actions using Siri and through taps 
within apps.
Quickly, HomeKit (known as Apple Home on 
iOS) became a hit, and today, despite criticism 
from some technology bloggers, it has 
dominated the smart home market. With vast 
competition from the likes of Google Home 
and Amazon Echo, there’s never been a better 
time for Apple to up its smart home game 
and make it easier for users to connect their 
devices. But how does it work, and how can 
you make the most out of HomeKit without 
spending thousands of dollars on expensive 
light bulbs and thermostats that replace your 
cheaper legacy alternatives?
HOW HOMEKIT WORKS
If you’ve purchased your first HomeKit 
compatible product, the chances are that 
you’re curious as to how it works. Every 
product that features the certification has 
been tested by Apple for both its security and 
functionality – and every product will connect 
with devices like your Apple Watch and 
iPhone so that you can control it using your 
voice, Siri or a tap.
210

211

212

Home App — Welcome Home
213

Image: Justin Sullivan
214

LEGACY APPLIANCES VS. 
SMART HOME TECHNOLOGY
Investing in smart technology can be expensive. 
Indeed, you only have to visit the dedicated 
HomeKit section of the Apple website to 
see how pricey the technology can be. Add a 
thermostat, a couple of ambiance bulbs and a 
lock to your basket, and you can easily spend 
a thousand dollars on making your home 
easier to manage – without installation or 
maintenance. Because of this, many people see 
the technology as “something for the future” 
and that, just like LCD and LED televisions, it 
will one day be cheaper and more accessible. 
For fans and enthusiasts, on the other hand, it’s 
an expensive opportunity to become an “early 
adopter” and pay for the privilege of accessibility 
and innovation.
However, new technology is beginning to 
enter the market which will make it easier than 
ever to make your home smarter – without 
spending a small fortune. The new Leviton 
light controls system, for example, allows you 
to control your existing lamps and lights from 
the same place – and integrates HomeKit in an 
invisible and easy-to-manage way. The device 
removes the need to purchase separate smart 
bulbs and install each one on your smartphone 
– instead, it serves as a “middle man” between 
legacy and new technologies.
Apple’s HomeKit has made it easier than 
ever for developers to create these new 
hybrid technologies and switchboards, which 
effectively save you hundreds of dollars and 
allow you to enjoy the same benefits of smart 
technology without investing in new products 
215

for every room of your property. You can still 
automate and control your home from your 
smartphone – like monitor your temperature, 
CO2, humidity, and smoke – but instead do 
so without separate integrations. The Eve 
Degree takes this one step further, and view 
your temperature and humidity through a 
screen, meaning that you won’t need to reach 
for your iPhone every time you get too warm. 
It works as a hybrid between smart and legacy 
home technology.
216

Elgato Eve Degree - Temperature
& Humidity Monitor
217

218

Elgato Eve - Know your Home
219

THE INTRODUCTION OF HOMEPOD
With competitors like Amazon and Google 
already establishing their smart home hubs 
Echo and Home, Apple was late to the game 
when it announced the HomePod earlier this 
year – but it proved that you don’t always 
have to be first to be the best. Apple’s new 
hub, which is expected to hit the market in 
December, offers unmatched high-fidelity 
sound, which is powered through seven 
tweeters and a high-excursion woofer to 
play a wide depth of deep, rich bass. It’s 
this technology that sets the HomePod apart 
from its competitors – but it, of course, offers 
the same smart assistant and links with smart 
home appliances as the Amazon Echo and 
Google Home.
220

221

When the hub launches, you’ll be able to ask 
Siri to turn off your speaker or open your door, 
and, although Apple hasn’t made any HomeKit 
accessories of its own, there are thousands 
of appliances that you’ll be able to pair it 
with. Earlier this year, the firm introduced a 
new ‘works with Apple HomeKit’ scheme, 
allowing developers to use and test the 
222

technology before they invest in a license. Of 
course, when developers want to send their 
technology to market, they’ll need to submit 
it to Apple for approval as part of their MFi 
(Made for iPhone) licensing, but the changes 
reduce the barrier to entry and make it easier 
than ever for developers to invest in the Apple 
Home platform.
223

224

225

THE FUTURE OF HOMES
With the smart home hub market growing faster 
than ever (the global market is expected to 
clock in at $327 million by 2022), it’s clear that 
the future of our homes is in technology. We can 
already control our temperatures, music, and 
lighting using our smartphones, watches, and 
voices – but what will come next?
Humanoid robots are one of the latest 
developments. Of course, you can already 
purchase robot vacuum cleaners to keep 
your home clean, and Germany has developed 
a fully-robotic bartender named Carl, who’ll 
serve you drinks as and when you request 
them. But what if robots could do more – keep 
your home clean, prepare your food, babysit 
your children and walk your dog? The future 
of robotics is exciting and opens an array of 
opportunities. You only need to check out the 
hit AMC show Humans to see just how much of 
an impact robotic technology could have on our 
everyday lives - but not all of that impact would 
be positive, with many claiming that a human-
robot hybrid could blur the lines between 
technology and human life.
Nowadays, we have more smart appliances 
than ever before – refrigerators, washers, dryers, 
and sensors all allow us to control what we do 
with ease – and they make technology more 
convenient. But the more devices we connect 
to the internet, the more questions we have to 
ask about our privacy and security. Do we really 
want our refrigerator manufacturer to know 
what we’re eating, when we’re eating it and how 
often we restock? It may seem as though there’s 
no harm in letting companies access such data, 
Image: Fabrizio Bensch 
226

227

but giving them control over your shopping 
habits and everyday choices, a la Amazon’s 
smart ‘internet of things’ dash buttons, could 
change the way we live and shop.
There are, of course, benefits to smart home 
technology. Not only does the technology offer 
convenience and time- and cost-savings, but 
increased safety, too. Facial recognition software, 
which is expected to be featured in the new 
iPhone 8, could allow you keyless entry into 
your home or workplace, and make it a safer 
place for all involved.
Whatever the future holds for homes, it’s 
clear that Apple’s HomeKit will play a role. As 
brands invent new, more complex appliances, 
they’ll look to players like Amazon and Apple 
to integrate their technology. It’s obvious 
that Apple is onto yet another winner with its 
HomeKit and HomePod ecosystems – even if 
they come a couple of years late to the party!
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
228

229

230

Image: Halide
231

232

Have you recently lifted your new iPhone X 
out of its box and started excitedly snapping 
selfies with it, only to be... put off by the results? 
No, not because the photos are too bad, but 
because they are too good. The iPhone X has 
made it easier to take visually authentic selfies 
with little fuss - and that’s made iPhone X users 
more self-conscious about their looks.  The 
phone can excel better than its predecessors 
in capturing scenery photos, too; might we be 
looking at the best camera system ever?
A SHORT HISTORY OF iPHONE 
CAMERA TECHNOLOGY
iPhones have long been renowned for the 
quality of their cameras - to the extent that 
much professional video has been captured 
to impressive effect with iPhones much older 
than the X. However, this reputation did 
develop gradually; you might recall that the 
very first iPhone back in 2007 featured just one 
camera, a 2-megapixel shooter on the back. It 
wasn’t until the iPhone 4 in 2010 that Apple 
added a front-facing camera and the selfie 
generation beckoned...
Unsurprisingly given its age, the iPhone 4’s selfie 
camera doesn’t quite stand up to its successors’ 
today, producing a comparatively murky-
looking image taken indoors by Mashable in 
a recent test.  Low-light scenes are particularly 
taxing for iPhone cameras to capture accurately. 
To demonstrate, Mashable has posted side-
by-side shots showing how successive iPhone 
cameras have become gradually more capable 
of dissipating graininess in evening photos of 
the Empire State Building.
233

THE iPHONE X PASSES THE TEST WITH 
FLYING - AND ACCURATE - COLORS 
Whether you have recently snaffled the iPhone 
X or one of its slightly cheaper siblings - the 
iPhone 8 and iPhone 8 Plus - also released this 
year, Apple hasn’t relented in enhancing the 
iPhone cameras. The iPhone X and 8 Plus each 
feature a dual-lens, 12-megapixel camera with 
a f/1.8 wide lens and optical image stabilization 
(OIS) intended to reduce blurriness in photos. 
That camera’s telephoto lens is a slightly faster 
f/2.4 than the f/2.8 on the 8 Plus, which also 
lacks OIS for its telephoto lens.
Nonetheless, both cameras can be used to 
capture “bokeh” effects made possible by the 
stock Camera app’s Portrait mode that debuted 
with last year’s iPhone 7 Plus. As this mode 
requires a dual-lens camera, it remains absent 
on the smaller iPhone 8, which still gets a single 
12-megapixel rear snapper. The X, 8 and 8 Plus 
all have a 7-megapixel front camera; however, 
the X’s shooter is the more versatile due to its 
inclusion in the sophisticated, depth-sensing 
TrueDepth camera system. 
Given the vast array of improvements, it is 
unlikely to seriously surprise that DxOMark, 
which thoroughly assesses the image quality 
possible with many different cameras, has 
dubbed the iPhone X the best smartphone 
camera for capturing stills.  In this area, it 
picked up a score of 101, one point ahead 
of the Samsung Galaxy Note 8 and Huawei 
Mate 10 Pro. Image exposure, color and 
texture were better than with the 8 Plus, 
while the X’s bokeh effect looked natural, 
observed DxOMark.
234

235

The X was also rated relatively accomplished 
at capturing video; accurate color rendering, 
speedy and accurate autofocus, and reliable 
image stabilization all helped the X attain a 
score of 89. The 8 Plus was deemed to reach 
very close to the same standard with its video-
shooting. The overall quality of the X’s camera 
systems was handed a score of 97, putting the 
X a sole point behind the leader in DxOMark’s 
Mobile overall rankings, the Google Pixel 2, 
which amassed 98 points.
DOES A TWICE-AS-EXPENSIVE CAMERA 
REALLY BETTER THE iPHONE X? 
There is, however, an even bigger question 
surrounding the iPhone X as a camera; how does 
it compare to a standalone professional video 
camera? It’s tempting to scoff at this subject; 
after all, as photography blog Fstoppers noted 
in a recent video, many people insist that a 
phone is no substitute for an independent 
camera when shooting professional video.  
However, as also noted in that video, old iPhones 
have proved adept at capturing professional-
standard footage.
That’s a fair point, but the true test of the X’s 
camera would surely be how it compares 
in quality to the blog’s “most favorite video 
camera currently”, the Panasonic GH5. Being a 
20-megapixel micro four thirds camera that - bar 
a lens - sells for roughly twice the X’s starting 
price, you might expect the GH5 to be the 
runaway winner in Fstopper’s comprehensive 
tests. However, the actual contest turned out to 
be tantalizingly close; did the X even better the 
GH5 overall?
236

237

iPhone X 4k Video VS Professional Video Camera
238

Image: Charles Rex Arbogast
239

Image: VentiVanillaBean
240

Really, in quality alone, the X was only just 
fought off. In numerous environments, the 
X achieved a color vibrancy that almost 
matched - or even exceeded - those of the 
GH5. The latter camera did, however, evidently 
remain more capable in low-light situations, 
while the GH5 could preserve discernibly 
more detail when zooming in, as the X 
eventually resorted to digital zoom. Still, 
the blog opined that, in many instances 
of professional work, video quality would 
appear identical. 
PRODUCE LIKE A PROFESSIONAL WITH 
JUST AN iPHONE X 
Let’s assume that you are out and about and 
occasionally see a scene that you would love to 
capture to professional quality, but you don’t 
have an independent digital camera at hand. 
Instead, you have just an iPhone X. What should 
you do to make sure that the resulting photos 
are as close to professional standard as possible? 
Fortunately, the iPhone will do a lot of the work 
for you; still, there remain a few pitfalls to heed if 
you are eager to nitpick. 
With bright sunlight enabling recent iPhones 
to take excellent photographs easily, 9to5Mac 
writer Ben Lovejoy opted to test the iPhone 
X strictly in low-light environments.  Lovejoy 
remarks how, even when photographing a city 
scene from behind glass, the resulting image 
- after being cropped and slightly improved in 
saturation with stock iPhone software - had “no 
visible grain at all”. A similar image taken when 
dark had fully arrived did, however, look rather 
fuzzy when 100% cropped.
241

Image: The Verge
242

As we can see from this and the Fstopper test, 
a high-quality standalone camera is a better 
option than an iPhone if you intend to zoom in 
on a photo. However, Lovejoy declares that, with 
the iPhone X, “the hardware noise reduction 
does a stunning job. I’m completely blown away 
by the lack of noise” - a word used for noticeable 
graininess in photos. He was also impressed with 
the X’s Portrait mode, which gave “a pretty good 
simulation of shallow depth of field”.
The iPhone X also extends the Portrait mode 
to the front camera, allowing the effects to 
be brought to selfies as well. This utilises the 
TrueDepth camera system’s 3D mapping and 
depth-sensing capabilities. To take a Portrait 
selfie, access the front-facing camera view in 
the Camera app, tap Portrait, select a Portrait 
Lighting effect - the options include studio light 
and stage light - and then take the photo. The 
background and lighting condition can hugely 
influence the resulting selfie’s quality, Digital 
Trends notes - but the Photos app lets you edit 
the image with various lighting filters.
SOFTWARE FOR GETTING APP-SOLUTELY 
BRILLIANT SHOTS
However, with Lovejoy having undertaken his 
tests just with the preinstalled Camera and 
Photos app, there is much greater scope for 
visual tweaking with third-party apps. Halide, 
for example, brings features including focus 
peaking, full manual controls and live histogram 
to take an iPhone even closer to a DSLR in 
functionality.  It’s certainly worth the $4.99 
asking price, while Camera+ is a similar app 
that, for just $2.99, gives the device something 
akin to a high-standard SLR lens.
243

Meanwhile, for when adverse lighting conditions 
are seriously hindering your efforts to produce a 
good photo, the innovative Hydra app can help.  
Once you have downloaded it and paid the 
$4.99 necessary to do so, you can choose from 5 
different capture modes: HDR, Video-HDR, Lo-
light, Zoom, and Hi-res. Which mode you should 
choose can depend on the conditions in which 
you shoot. It all sheds light on the true versatility 
of an iPhone camera - now one of the iPhone’s 
leading assets.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
Image: Halide
244

Hydra - Amazing Photography
By Creaceed SPRL
Category: Photo & Video
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, 
and iPod touch.
Halide - RAW Manual Camera
By Chroma Noir LLC
Category: Photo & Video
Requires iOS 10.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, 
and iPod touch.
Camera+
By LateNite Apps
Category: Photo & Video
Requires iOS 10.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, 
and iPod touch.
245

246

247

If you’ve long been enjoying listening to the 
streaming service Apple Music, you are in very 
good company. Last month, Apple revealed 
to Billboard that it has amassed “well over 
30 million paying subscribers”.  That’s a 
noticeable increase from the 27 million figure 
that Apple reported at WWDC in June - and, 
unlike arch-rival Spotify, Apple Music is on solid 
financial ground. However, there has been 
growing evidence of Apple’s belief that there 
remains much room for improvement.
Apple Music head Jimmy Iovine told Billboard: 
“I don’t believe that what exists right now is 
enough.” He added: “Just because we’re adding 
millions of subscribers and the old catalog 
numbers are going up, that’s not the trick. That’s 
just not going to hold.” He is clearly setting 
his sights high - especially considering an 
August report by Goldman Sachs that, due 
to subscription streaming, the global record 
business will grow by nearly thrice as, by 2030, it 
reaches $41 billion.
Iovine admitted: “I believe we’re in the right 
place, we have the right people and the right 
attitude to not settle for what exists right now.” 
Those people surely include the former Sony 
Pictures Television executives Jamie Ehrlicht 
and Zack Van Amburg, who are reportedly in 
the market for dramas along the lines of the 
huge international hit Game of Thrones.  
Apple Music has already been an exclusive 
outlet for much original content; could more 
such content propel Apple Music even further?
248

249

250

APPLE PLANNING VIDEO CONTENT OF 
“UNPARALLELED QUALITY”
The signs are certainly looking good. In the 
press release that announced the hires of 
Ehrlicht and Amburg, the former insisted: “We 
want to bring to video what Apple has been 
so successful with in their other services and 
consumer products - unparalleled quality.”  He 
and Amburg obviously know a thing or two 
about quality; during their 12-year stint in the 
presidency of Sony Pictures Television, they 
created such publicly acclaimed series as Better 
Call Saul, Breaking Bad and The Crown.
It seems that Eddy Cue, Apple’s senior vice 
president of Internet Software and Services, 
wasn’t overstating the case when he declared: 
“Jamie and Zack are two of the most talented 
TV executives in the world and have been 
instrumental in making this the golden age 
of television”. They could spark a golden age 
for Apple’s own television efforts, Cue having 
enthused that Apple has “exciting plans in store 
for customers” and “there is much more to come.”
Apple could proceed to confidently back up 
those words, as the company has reportedly 
penned a deal with legendary director 
Steven Spielberg to revive his 1980s sci-fi 
series Amazing Stories.  Apple is also said to 
be intent on leasing an 85,000-square-foot 
office development near the Los Angeles 
settlement of Culver City, where Beats is 
headquartered.  The expenditure on this new 
space could come from the $1 billion that 
Apple has reportedly set aside for investing in 
original content.
251

252

AN “AMAZING” DEAL WITH 
STEVEN SPIELBERG
Of course, Apple has already made quite a few 
moves in the original content space. Its first ever 
attempt, a reality show called Planet of the Apps, 
debuted earlier this year on Apple Music and 
saw stars including Jessica Alba and Gwyneth 
Paltrow assessing the quality of various ideas 
for apps. That show has since been followed by 
Carpool Karaoke, a spin-off from the popular 
segment of the same name on The Late Late 
Show with James Corden.
Various behind-the-scenes music documentaries 
have been pegged for exclusive releases on 
Apple Music. Those have included On the 
Record: P!nk - Beautiful Trauma, in which 
interviews and footage provide insight into 
how the artist put together her new album 
Beautiful Trauma.  There’s also On the Record: 
Flicker, which takes a similar look at former One 
Direction member Niall Horan’s making of his 
first solo album, Flicker.  However, has Apple just 
been getting warmed up so far?
Perhaps the most exciting project currently 
on Apple’s original content calendar is the 
aforementioned revival of Amazing Stories. 
Having signed a deal with Amblin Television 
and Comcast Corp’s NBCUniversal television 
production unit, Apple and Spielberg will 
reportedly be responsible for 10 episodes of a 
new Amazing Stories series. At least $5 million 
will be spent on each episode - so, we can 
anticipate high production values and hopefully 
solid scripting for this new series.
However, it might not necessarily be Apple 
Music to which the series is released. The Wall 
Image: Doane Gregory / Disney
253

Image: Ryan Aylsworth
On the Record: P!nk -
Beautiful Trauma Trailer
254

255

Street Journal has reported that Ehrlicht and 
Amburg are “building out a video strategy 
that is expected to include a streaming 
service that rivals Netflix Inc., Amazon.com 
Inc. and others.”  Apple has previously failed in 
negotiations with content providers to form 
a video streaming service, but the company’s 
recently-acquired Hollywood veterans could 
help break that deadlock.
HOW APPLE MUSIC COMPARES TO THE 
MAJOR COMPETITION
Nonetheless, with no specific timeframe yet 
suggested for the debut of a service that could 
plausibly be named “Apple Video”, the more 
immediate focus is, for now, on Apple Music. 
While the music streaming market has become 
crowded with service providers, Apple Music 
compares well to its major rivals. It trails only 
Spotify in its number of paid subscribers - and, 
like that service, offers over 30 million songs for 
streaming. Unlike Spotify, it also integrates with 
Siri on various Apple devices.
Apple Music also charges the same 
$9.99-a-month fee as Spotify’s premium tier. 
Though Apple Music does offer a three-month 
free trial, it departs from Spotify practice in not 
offering any permanently free service that is 
funded by regular advertisements. Both Apple 
Music and Spotify are available on the iOS, Mac, 
Windows and Android platforms; the same can 
be said of Google Play Music and Deezer Music, 
though Spotify also supports Linux and Deezer 
is on Windows Phone.
One music streaming service that has attracted 
a much greater amount of negative publicity 
256

257

258

259

260

than any of the above is Tidal. Despite the strong 
support it has had from leading artists including 
Jay-Z and his wife Beyoncé, Tidal has been mired 
by poor music discovery features, occasional 
bugs, and a series of album release cock-ups. 
At least one respect in which it differs for the 
better is its offering of a $19.99 lossless quality 
high fidelity - or “HiFi” - service on top of the 
standard $9.99 tier.
MUSIC REMAINS A KEY PART 
OF APPLE’S STRATEGY
The recent announcements and reports 
surrounding Apple’s original content plans leave 
us in no doubt that music and culture remain 
strong parts of the company’s identity. Apple 
even recently streamlined its iTunes desktop 
software to bring the focus more firmly onto 
music. That meant abandoning the availability 
of the iOS App Store and ringtones with iTunes 
12.7, though Apple recently restored this 
availability with iTunes 12.6.3, which iTunes 
12.7 users can still install.
Furthermore, with Iovine, Ehrlicht and Amburg 
all now among Apple’s executive ranks, we 
can expect Apple to follow through on its 
ambitious original content plans. Could the 
next TV drama to reach the popularity of Game 
of Thrones debut on an Apple service - whether 
that be the iTunes Store, Apple Music or “Apple 
Video”? We see no reason to rule out the 
possibility - especially if Apple further steps up 
its efforts and investment with original content 
over the next few years.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
Image: Josh Miller/CNET
261

ads@applemagazine.com
Digital
Mindﬁeld

AppleMagazine © Copyright 2017-2011. All Rights Reserved.
No part of the document may be circulated, quoted, or reproduced for distribution without prior written approval.
Proper Trademark Notice and Attribution iPhone™, iPad™, HomePod™, Apple Watch™, iPod™, Mac™, iMac™, Macbook™, AppleTV™, Siri™, iOS™, OS X™, watchOS™, and others
are trademarks of Apple Inc., registered in the US and other countries. Please contact support for additional trademark ownership rights information.
The following is a list of Apple’s trademarks and service marks http://www.apple.com/legal/ trademark/appletmlist.html.
All other trademarks are the properties of their owners.
AppleMagazine is an independent publication and has not been authorized, sponsored, or otherwise approved by Apple Inc.
Authorized Publisher
WRITERS
 
Precise English Inc.
 
Benjamin Kerry  (UK)
 
Gavin Lenaghan  (UK)
 
Craig Lenaghan  (UK)
 
Elena Lusk  (US)
COLUMNS
COLUMNS
 
iTUNES REVIEW
 
Gavin Lenaghan
 
FINANCE NEWS
 
Associated Press / Bloomberg
REVISION
 
Gavin Lenaghan
  
Jack Crute
PRODUCTION SUPPORT / COLLABORATORS
 
Rui da Costa  
 
 
 
Icy Ventura
 
Segolene Vincent 
 
 
Pilar Bescos
 
Fabian Groenhof  
 
 
Candice Liu
 
Lise Berda
 
James Jarvis
  
Richard Sawyer
 
Lauren Brown
 
Matthew Coburn
 
Jeﬀrey Milks
 
Susan Kiesling
 
Raquel Serrano
 
Robert Fluellen
  
Lisa Swiniarski
 
Roger Gayalkar
PRIVACY POLICY
 
applemagazine.com/privacy-policy/
TERMS OF USE
 
applemagazine.com/terms-of-use/
SOCIAL NETWORKS
 
 
 
 
Twitter
 
 
@apple_magazine
 
 
twitter.com/#!/Apple_Magazine
 
 
Facebook
 
 
facebook.com/applemagazineinternational
SUBSCRIPTIONS
 
AppleMagazine Oﬃcial Website
 
applemagazine.com
 
Zinio LLC.
 
zino.com
 
Readr Newsstand
  
readrapp.com
 
Magzter Newsstand
 
magzter.com
 
Amazon Newsstand
 
amazon.com
 
Ebsco/Flipster
 
ebsco.com
 
Scoop Newsstand (Singapore)
 
getscoop.com
CONTACTS
 
Suport & CRM - contact@applemagazine.com 
 
Magazine and Website Editor - editor@applemagazine.com 
 
Executive Director - ceo@applemagazine.com
 
Advertise - ads@applemagazine.com  
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
 
Ivan Castilho
 
Chief Executive Oﬃcer / Design Conception
MINDFIELD DIGITAL ART & GRAPHIC DESIGN
 
Glauco Ribeiro
 
Chief Design Oﬃcer / Art & Graphic Design Director
 
Michael Danglen
  
Art & Graphic Design Producer
 
Anderson Oliveira
 
Art & Graphic Design Producer
MAGAZINE EDITORIAL CONTENT
 
Benjamin Kerry
 
Chief Editor
OFFICIAL WEBSITE
  
Benjamin Kerry
 
Production Director
 
Jack Crute
 
WordPress Production & Website Support
MASTHEAD
APPLEMAGAZINE INTERNATIONAL
applemagazine.com


