www.allitebooks.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For your convenience Apress has placed some of the front 
matter material after the index. Please use the Bookmarks 
and Contents at a Glance links to access them. 
 
 
 
 
 
www.allitebooks.com

v
Contents at a 
Glance
About the Author.............................................................................. xi
Introduction.................................................................................... xiii
Chapter 1: Staring at the Bottom and Rising to the Top
■
■
................. 1
Chapter 2: Choosing the Right Development Option
■
■
....................... 7
Chapter 3: Don’t Compete in a Market, Create It
■
■
.......................... 19
Chapter 4: Generating Revenue from Various Business Models
■
■
..... 27
Chapter 5: Managing Users Today for Success Tomorrow
■
■
........... 31
Chapter 6: What’s Hot and What’s Not
■
■
.......................................... 37
Chapter 7: Making the Most of Your Advertising Money
■
■
.............. 41
Chapter 8: Plan to Scale, or Your App Will Fail
■
■
............................. 49
Chapter 9: The Life Cycles of Apps
■
■
............................................... 55
Chapter 10: Selling the Rights and Cashing Out
■
■
........................... 59
www.allitebooks.com

Contents at a Glance
vi
Chapter 11: Keeping Piracy to a Minimum
■
■
................................... 65
Chapter 12: Evolving with the App Store
■
■
...................................... 67
Index................................................................................................ 71
www.allitebooks.com

xiii
Introduction
You are interested in making an app. You have read all the stories of successful 
developers and appreneurs. You are determined to get a piece of the pie. 
Welcome to the app era. The world of apps is the fastest-growing market in 
the world today, and it is here to stay. The best part is, you can get in on it! 
Now, what if I told you that without the information provided in this book, the 
odds of your making a profit would be slim to none? What if I also told you 
that you probably wouldn’t break even? There is more to apps than you might 
think. Most people assume that if they make an app, they will instantly become 
a millionaire. The truth is, without the knowledge garnered from years of 
successes and failures, you simply won’t know where to begin.
This book contains tips, tricks, secrets, and stories from top developers, 
appreneurs, and companies from around the globe. The experiences 
presented here are those of real-life professionals, ranging from single-team 
developers to the big boys in the Fortune 500. After reading this book, you 
will be equipped to bring your idea to life, market it, promote it, and sell it. 
You will know exactly what to do to make sure your app stands out from 
among the more than one million apps available. Before now, a book that 
revealed the secrets of success in the App Store was nonexistent. With this 
book, you have the wisdom of some of the best appreneurs in the country 
right in the palm of your hand.
www.allitebooks.com

1
Chapter 1
Staring at the Bottom 
and Rising to the Top
The year was 2009; I was just finishing my freshman year at the University 
of Texas at Austin. I sat in my room, proud of my year. I had decided to pay 
for my own college education in order to take the burden off of my parents’ 
shoulders. I took a look at my banking information and nearly had a heart 
attack. I had less than $100 in my account and a loan of nearly $25,000 
staring me right in the face. Keep in mind that this was only my first year of 
college. At the rate at which college tuition was increasing, I was sure to be 
six figures in debt by the time I graduated. I thought to myself, “I may have 
bitten off a little more than I can chew.”
Mentally exhausted by the financial pit I was digging, I decided to play video 
games with some of my friends to relieve the stress. What happened  
next changed my life. One of my gaming friends turned to me and said,  
“How cool would be if you could track your in-game stats via an app?”  
The basic idea was to know how well you were doing without having to log 
in to your computer after each game. I literally sat the controller down and 
opened up my laptop. I was majoring in computer science at the time, and 
I remembered seeing news of developers who were creating applications 
(apps) and making a considerable sum doing it. My friend’s random 
comment motivated me to immerse myself into the world of development 
possibilities. That summer, I spent almost every waking moment learning 
Objective-C and the iPhone software development kit (SDK). In the fall I 
released my first app. It was an interactive guide for one of my favorite 
video games, Halo 3. The app was an overnight sensation. It began to 
receive tons of recognition in the gaming world. I was getting e-mails from 
professional players who were using my app at events. I had companies 
blowing up my e-mail, wishing to advertise in the app. Although I was 
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 1: Staring at the Bottom and Rising to the Top
2
ecstatic with my success, I wasted no time before moving on to my next 
project. I knew that I had only scratched the surface of the app market.
By 2010 I was earning enough money from my app to reduce my student 
loan by half. Finally, I could enjoy my college career; I was even able to 
upgrade from my student diet of ramen noodles. I was by no means a 
millionaire, but I had found the App Store gold mine, and I was virtually 
mining away!
For my next venture I began to create different types of apps for many 
specialized niches. As I tracked the progress of my new apps, I noticed that 
the apps I made for hobbies that I lacked personal interest in didn’t do as 
well as I had anticipated. It was then that I learned the most important thing 
about the App Store: if you are passionate about something and know a lot 
about it, then you can create a high-quality app for it that users will enjoy.
By 2012 being an App Store expert was my career. I was financially secure 
and living my dream. I opened a studio called the Idea 2 App Store  
(www.idea2appstore.com) because I wanted to create a way for people with 
no development skills to be able to sell apps and make money. If I could 
go from living in a 400-square-foot apartment and driving the same truck 
I had owned since I was 16 to living in my dream home and driving my 
dream car, I figured anyone could. I wanted to provide other people with the 
opportunity to make their dreams come true.
Unfortunately, my “dream” assumption was incorrect. I had forgotten how 
much I had learned in those three years. I had acquired a great deal of 
wisdom from my successes and failures. I decided to branch out and add 
consulting to the studio’s list of services. Before too long, many major 
companies and other lucrative clients were seeking my counsel. During a 
three- to four-hour consulting session, I could take a client without even 
a basic idea of how the App Store works and mold that person into a pro. 
Such clients were able to take the skills I taught them and the secrets I 
shared with them and integrate these into their apps. It made me feel good 
getting phone calls from them a few months later, explaining how well they 
were doing. That feeling of helping others achieve dreams motivated me 
to share the information I use when consulting with clients with a wider 
audience and create the book you are about to read.
Some of you might be reluctant to believe that my success can be your 
success. You might even be thinking, “I am not a computer programmer. 
How can I create apps?” The answer is surprisingly simple. The swift advent 
of technological advancements in our society has created a surge in the 
number of quality developers available. No matter your location, you can 
find a developer or studio that fits your needs and budget.
Without a doubt, creating apps can be expensive; expect to spend between 
$50 and $150 an hour for quality app development. If hiring a developer is 
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 1: Staring at the Bottom and Rising to the Top
3
your only option, consider this plan: start small, and expand. Most people 
do not understand that apps are software and that quality apps will take 
time. There is no way of accurately predicting what your app will make prior 
to checking your sales once the app is live in the App Store. Some apps 
blow up immediately, generating huge profits; some apps tank, without any 
profit. Such is the nature of the App Store. If you keep your first app small in 
the terms of price and time, you will reduce your chances of loss. If the app 
begins to generate steady revenue, then you can add features and update 
the app. This is the ideal business model for one reason: users love updates. 
I cannot stress this enough. There have been apps I have made and have 
almost given up on; however, after an update with a few extra features, 
these apps sprang back to life. Quality apps are never complete. If you think 
your app is done, then you will soon begin to see its sales drop.
So, you have an idea. What’s next? First and foremost, do your research. 
Check the App Store and see who, if anyone, has made something similar. 
If you find something that resembles your idea, you need to do three things 
to compete: download, dissect, and do it better. Do not think, just because 
there is an app out there like yours, that your idea is a bust. Sometimes, 
it can be the just the opposite. The first thing you need to do is download 
the competitor’s app. Dissect it; find out what is good and what could have 
been done better. Next, read each one of the app’s reviews. This is a secret 
that not many developers/appreneurs know. You have access to crucial 
customer feedback. Focus on the negative reviews. Ask yourself, “Is this a 
valid point? Is this something I can do, and do better?” Finally, if applicable, 
search for the app’s ranking. If you can find ranking data, you can get a 
general idea of the amount of revenue the app is producing. This is another 
secret many appreneurs do now know.
Another common misconception about app creation is that you have to be  
a technology genius in order to create a profitable app. On the contrary,  
a fellow appreneur, Benny Hsu, had his app 100 percent outsourced and 
still turned a profit, and a hefty one at that. His app, Photo 365, is very well 
done. Although you don’t often read about developers’ making money from 
outsourcing apps, Benny’s story exemplifies how success is possible if you 
know the market. I asked Benny to share his experiences so that you could 
see that app success is not only for the computer literate. Here is Benny 
Hsu’s story:
A long time ago, I wanted to create an iPhone app. As a user 
and fan of the iPhone since the first version, I had two reasons 
to create an iPhone app. First, I thought it would be cool to 
be able to say, “Here is my iPhone app.” Second, I wanted to 
start a business on the side. I wanted to become my own boss 
and stop working for someone else.
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 1: Staring at the Bottom and Rising to the Top
4
My only problem was that I had no idea how to code! I thought 
that was the only way to create an app. One night, I was on 
the Internet and just happened to come across a blog about 
creating income online. This blogger had an iPhone app 
company, with a partner, that was earning thousands a month. 
The blogger didn’t know how to code, either. He outsourced 
all the work. At that time, I knew about outsourcing but 
didn’t know the possibilities. He recommended an e-book 
to learn about outsourcing app development. That’s exactly 
what I needed. I bought that book and another small e-book. 
Developers who were able to create a business from apps 
wrote both books, much like what you are reading now, all 
without any coding experience.
I didn’t let thoughts of failure stop me. I was determined 
to learn all I could and do the best I could. The app was 
supposed to take one-and-a-half months, but it ended up 
taking approximately seven months. The delay didn’t frustrate 
me. I was really pleased with the prototypes my programmers 
were sending to me. I didn’t want to rush things just to get it 
out. I wanted the app to be done well.
The app was released on August 10, 2011. At that time, I 
would have been happy just to make my investment back. It 
cost me $1,119.46 to develop Photo 365. That was a lot of 
money to me, but an amount I was willing to risk. Little did I 
know what was about to happen to my app.
Within the first seven days, I had earned back my $1,119.46. 
This completely blew my mind. This was beyond my wildest 
dreams. Things only got better. The following week, I saw 
Photo 365 featured under “New and Noteworthy.” (“New and 
Noteworthy” is a category of apps selected by Apple. If your 
app is featured in this category, you are going to see a large 
influx of sales.) Not only did the app get featured, but it was 
in the second spot as well. I was still enjoying the feelingof 
accomplishment when, six days later, I got an e-mail from 
Apple’s marketing department, requesting art assets. I read 
the e-mail many times just to be clear about what Apple 
wanted. I had a feeling what this was for but didn’t want to get 
overly excited yet. There was a lot of work to do to meet the 
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 1: Staring at the Bottom and Rising to the Top
5
24-hour deadline. Luckily, my brother is a Photoshop wizard 
and helped create the art assets needed. The contact person 
was really helpful in answering all my questions quickly. The 
next morning, I sent off the e-mail and waited.
That same week, I was working at my restaurant job. During 
a break I decided to check my app’s progress. I knew that 
Apple updated the App Store in the afternoon, but I didn’t 
know exactly when, so I was not expecting much of a change. 
I logged in to a forum and saw a private message telling me, 
“Congrats.” What? I quickly went to the App Store and saw 
Photo 365 featured as “App of the Week”! I jumped and 
screamed like I had hit the lottery. My heart was racing. I went 
to Facebook and Twitter and shared my excitement. That 
whole night at work I couldn’t stand still. It was a moment 
that I’ll never forget. The sales that week were phenomenal.  
I couldn’t sleep because I couldn’t wait to get up in the morning 
to check sales. I felt like a kid waking up early on Christmas 
Day. I had become “App of the Week” in just my third week. 
Even as I type this, I find it hard to believe it happened to me.
After the first 30 days, I had earned $32,865.91. Not only did I 
make my investment back, but I was able to start my own app 
company as well. How quickly life can change in just 30 days.
You might be wondering how I marketed my app. You might 
assume that I spent a lot of money. I’ll be honest with you, 
and it may surprise you. I didn’t do any marketing. I didn’t 
spend a single penny. I had some review blogs contact me 
that first week to ask for a promotion code to do a review.  
I was just happy anyone wanted to review the app, so I always 
said yes. The biggest web site to do a review at the time was 
AppAdvice. The same day that I got the e-mail from Apple’s 
marketing department, a review appeared on Gizmodo.  
I hadn’t been contacted by this site. That was a great surprise.
I’m proof that you don’t need to have a huge marketing budget 
to create an app that gets seen by users and Apple. If you 
create a polished app that your target customers love, they 
will find it, and they will tell others about it.
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 1: Staring at the Bottom and Rising to the Top
6
I would counsel anyone who wants to develop an iPhone 
app through outsourcing that it’s not as hard as you think. At 
the beginning, it might seem overwhelming because you’re 
unfamiliar with the process. But, if you don’t take a chance 
now, when will you? If I hadn’t risked failure, I would have 
never experienced the success I did.
If you wish to download one of Benny’s apps or check out his blog, the 
details are as follows:
Photo 365: http://photo365app.com
Gratitude 365: http://gratitude365app.com
Get Busy Living: http://getbusylivingblog.com
Benny Hsu’s inspirational story represents all that can go right when you 
make smart development choices.
The next chapter outlines how to effectively develop your app to maximize 
results.

7
Chapter 2
Choosing the Right 
Development Option
I contacted Benny to share his story because it is both inspirational and 
relevant to this book. Also, I wanted to prove the power of both developing 
and outsourcing quality apps. He found a good target market, created 
an app that market would enjoy, managed his users, and, consequently, 
achieved great success. To see for yourself what a professional-quality 
outsourced app looks like, be sure to download Photo 365.
Developing Quality Apps 
When it comes to app development, you have two basic options: developing 
the app yourself or outsourcing the development. There are pros and cons to 
both options. If you are a tech-savvy programmer with some experience, then 
learning the language and SDK is a great idea and probably will not give you 
much trouble. You will certainly have lower overhead costs and thus a greater 
profit margin if you can develop the app yourself. However, the downside is 
that learning the SDK takes time, sometimes more than you can spare.
For example, just learning the basics of the SDK took me approximately five 
months, even with a good background in programming. The SDK is always 
expanding; I have been doing this for four years, and I still learn new things 
every day. While you are learning the SDK, someone could be developing 
your idea! I am not saying that developing your own idea is always a race 
against competitors, but it is possible that while you are preparing, another 
developer may cross the finish line with a similar concept. Therefore,  
I suggest that if you have an idea for the next big app, or an idea that is very 
time sensitive, then by all means, have a studio or developer create the app.

CHAPTER 2: Choosing the Right Development Option
8
Having a developer create the app comes with its share of responsibilities and 
potential issues as well. FMost important, have anyone you are discussing 
an idea with sign a nondisclosure agreement (NDA). This document will 
protect your idea and your intellectual property. Recently, a client came to the 
studio with an idea for an app that I thought was very original. He came to us 
because we offer a unique service whereby we develop a client’s app free of 
charge if the idea is something we really like; in turn, the client receives a cut 
of the profits. This is a good way for people with great ideas and a low budget 
to have apps developed. In this particular case, we were a bit busy and were 
not going to be able to start on the app for at least another month. The client 
decided he couldn’t wait and went to another studio. A few months later,  
I noticed that his app was in the App Store. I e-mailed him my congratulations. 
He didn’t e-mail me back but rather called me immediately. The situation he 
described was that he still had not developed his app idea; furthermore, the 
new studio had not signed an NDA. Regrettably, someone was selling his app 
idea, and he had no way of proving it was his. Unfortunately, this is just one of 
many times in which the inexperienced have been taken advantage of through 
unethical business practices.
Moreover, choosing the right developer or development studio is crucial. 
This is by far the most complicated part of outsourcing the development 
process. Because I own a development studio the Idea 2 App Store  
(www.idea2appstore.com), I am familiar with the information most potential 
clients will require. The first question you should ask is whether the 
development studio or developer is local. Basically, developers are divided 
into two categories: local (which I will define as your country of residence) 
and overseas (which I will define as Indian, Chinese, or Russian). Both 
types have positive and negative aspects. Generally, local development will 
require more financially; however, you will likely get a much better product. 
A local developer will afford you much greater control over the development 
process. Most studios with local clientele have a more intimate connection 
with clients. Frequent face-to-face meetings are ideal for development 
because you will be able to communicate openly with the developer as 
you become more comfortable, allowing you to share your vision more 
completely. Generally, the greater personal handling of the local studios 
costs more than the services of a freelance developer, but the results are 
well worth the expense. In fact, the intimacy of a local studio will allow you 
to see a demonstration of your app before production, meaning that you 
will be able to correct any errors and greatly reduce the number of revisions 
needed in the end, a benefit that will likely save you precious time and 
money. Most local development studios will charge between $75 and $125 
an hour for development; this usually includes all the necessary graphics.
Another option is remote development. Overseas developers typically 
work inexpensively but may deliver subpar apps. This is usually due to the 
language barrier and the education and experience of the developers.  

CHAPTER 2: Choosing the Right Development Option
9
I have outsourced a few apps when I have been too busy. Of the five I have 
outsourced, only one came back usable. Needless to say, I don’t have 
entire apps outsourced. Although there are exceptions, historically, local 
developers/studios create superior apps.
At times, overseas outsourcing can be used without causing the final 
product to suffer. When my studio becomes overwhelmed with client 
requests, I choose to outsource some of the development. My method 
of outsourcing allows me to meet client expectations while still delivering 
a quality product. If I am forced to outsource development, I make sure 
that it is only the backbone and basic features of the app. Because doing 
these is fairly straightforward, it would be difficult for any developer to 
get it wrong. After the basic features are completed, my team will then 
develop the more advanced feature set. Experience has taught me that 
this strategy—outsourcing the easy jobs while keeping the major features 
local—saves the client money and ensures production of a high-quality 
app in a timely fashion.
Outsourcing the beginning design and easy features is generally the most 
mundane part of the development process and can be handled by a relative 
amateur. There really isn’t a need to spend top dollar when having the base 
features implemented. For the select few with unlimited means, you could 
certainly keep all the app development local, but for those who need to 
economize, the hybrid development plan works well. Once you have a good 
base app built from outsourcing, find a quality local studio or developer. This 
is when having someone that is experienced matters. That person will be in 
charge of handling the more difficult features and overall user interface (UI), 
or, basically, what the user sees: buttons, images, animations, icons. By 
handling the development process in this manner, you will save time, money 
and headaches.
After you have found your developer, what should you do next? First, 
get a sound contract written. Fortunately, you do not necessarily need 
an expensive lawyer to make this happen. Search the Internet; there are 
hundreds of template contracts you can use. Make sure the contract grants 
you the rights to the source code of the app. If a developer will not grant you 
the rights to the source code, do not work with that person! Web sites such 
as Elance (www.elance.com) are useful for finding developers but are plagued 
with the issues discussed previously.
Before taking your idea to the developer, design the concept on paper. 
When a client comes to my studio with an app idea but no paper or 
Photoshop model, I almost instantly turn the client down. If you take the 
time to design the app, you will save yourself expense and frustration. 
Remember, you know in your head what the app needs to look like and do; 
nevertheless, developers cannot read minds! The more prepared you are, 
the better chance you have of your app’s being a success.

CHAPTER 2: Choosing the Right Development Option
10
It is no longer 2009; the App Store is a very crowded and competitive 
marketplace. If you are looking simply to create the next goofy fart app and 
retire, you should probably think again. Since the launch of the App Store 
redesign in iOS 6, it has become even harder for apps to get noticed, and 
things aren’t going to change with iOS 7. You are going to need a great 
title, awesome keywords, a killer description, a superb app with beautiful 
graphics, and a near genius marketing plan. I am not trying to intimidate 
you; I am just letting you know the facts. Lucky for you, you have this 
handy-dandy book.
Picking the Right Title
When app lovers are searching for new apps to download, they first see 
look at the app’s title. The App Store loads the title of the app first and then 
loads the images asynchronously (in the background). Therefore, in order to 
sell, your title must be catchy and enticing. A user needs to be able to read 
the title and instantly think, “I have to buy this” or “Hmm, this is interesting, 
better open it and check out the details.”
There are two types of titles: plain and description. A plain title is just that: 
the title of the app. This is common with popular games,such as  
Angry Birds, Cut the Rope, and Tiny Wings. There are both advantages 
and disadvantages to this type of descriptor:
Pros: These short names build great brand recognition and 
are easy to remember.
Cons: Without a description following the title, these apps 
will not get as many hits for keywords (keep in mind that 
words in the title count as keywords). For instance, if your 
app were called Photo Caption—Create Pictures with 
Captions, each word in the title—“photo,” “caption,” 
“create,” and so on—would get a keyword hit, whereas 
if the title were simply Photo Caption, only “photo” and 
“caption” would get hits.
Description titles, conversely, are popular with appreneurs wanting to get  
a few extra hits for their keywords. Searchable keywords are divided into 
three categories:
Publisher name: The publisher for the app’s display name, 
such as Rovio for Angry Birds. If you search for “Rovio,” 
you will see Angry Birds right at the top.
App title: The title of your app; this can be either the plain 
title or the description title.
Keywords: Keywords are hidden from the public and are 
submitted with the app to the App Store.

CHAPTER 2: Choosing the Right Development Option
11
Publisher name is the strongest keyword and will yield the highest 
ranking, followed by app title and then keywords. Also built into the 
search algorithm are the number of total downloads, downloads per day, 
and ratings and reviews. No one knows for sure the exact formula for the 
search algorithm, but there are a few educated guesses among seasoned 
developers. I assign each category a point value to get an idea as to how 
my app will rank for a searched term. The more points, the higher the 
keyword ranking. For example:
Publisher name: Five points
App title: Three points
Downloads per day: Two points
Total downloads: One point
Keywords: One point
Reviews: One point
To demonstrate, let’s say our App Store publishing company (or individual 
name) is Great App Publisher; our app’s name is Great App—Awesome 
Fun App; and our keywords are “great,” “app,” “multiplayer,” and “game.”
If you were to search for “great app,” chances are we would come up at the 
top because “great app” is in the publisher name, title, and set of keywords. 
There is some speculation that if a word is in your title, then it doesn’t 
matter if it is one of the keywords. This was true until only recently. Now, 
if you searched for a term, for example, “great multiplayer” (for our game), 
and “great” and “multiplayer” weren’t in our set of keywords, then our app 
wouldn’t have shown up. For this reason, I like to include my app’s title in 
my set of keywords. For the search “great app,” we would have gotten ten 
points for the searched terms, regardless of downloads or reviews. That is a 
very good result, and it would be easy to keep a high search result for that 
ranking. Understand that this hypothetical scenario is an ideal case. Usually, 
publisher name is not something you can get a hit on; sadly, that’s just the 
nature of the beast.
Although you cannot control all aspects of the keyword process, there are 
still ways to show up very high in the search algorithm. Initially, rank is easy 

CHAPTER 2: Choosing the Right Development Option
12
to escalate with new apps, but it is much harder to achieve a high position 
by climbing the ladder over time. Follow these three steps to ensure you are 
ranked high when your app is released:
1.	 Make sure your app has a few good keywords in 
the title and be certain they are used as description 
to avoid rejection by Apple. Technically, Apple does 
forbid having keywords in the title, but if they are 
used as a description of your app, Apple does not 
care. Take, for example, the app name Gun Range—
Fun Exciting Super Awesome Gun Range. Apple will 
reject this instantly because you are using keywords 
blatantly in the title. Now, let’s say we change the 
app name to Gun Range—Virtual Shooting Range 
45+ Guns. Apple would likely allow this because 
it is a description of what the app does. This is a 
fantastic way to get a few extra keyword hits.
2.	 Check that you have a good set of keywords, 
including your app’s title name. Recently, Apple 
changed the search algorithm, such that you cannot 
search for a word in the title plus a keyword and 
see a result. Therefore, always include your app’s 
title as a keyword. There are rumors that Apple 
will be reverting to the old search algorithm, but 
be forewarned that minor things such as this are 
changed quite often.
3.	 Look to see that you are getting a lot of downloads 
in the first 72 hours of your app’s going live. This is 
the crucial time for determining where you show up 
in the search term’s ranking. The first three days can 
make or break your app. Don’t worry; there is a ton 
of information later in the book about how to get the 
downloads you’ll need.
Choosing Quality Keywords
Once your app is in development, there is still work to be done. This is 
the time to do research on the most important part of the app: keywords. 
Keywords, as mentioned earlier, are words or phrases that users will search 
for to find your app. No matter how great your app is, if users cannot find it, 
then it will not sell. Regrettably, a defined set of keywords that will guarantee 

CHAPTER 2: Choosing the Right Development Option
13
your app is found and downloaded does not exist. However, the web 
site AppCodes (www.appcod.es) is a hidden gem, a resource for keyword 
help. This site is incredibly useful for optimizing search terms. Its value 
lies in allowing you to see your competitor’s keywords. This is huge! Most 
people do not understand the power of keywords and how they are used 
to increase your app’s visibility in the App Store. Quality keywords will put 
your app in front of the most users, and because of the vast number of apps 
available to consumers, you will need all the exposure possible. There are 
no set keywords that produce perfect results. Each app is different and, as 
such, requires specialized keywords.
Many developers will attempt to benefit from successful apps by including 
app names in their set of keywords. The purpose of this ploy is to gain traffic 
generated from popular apps. Although on the surface this may seem like 
a logical plan, it is not a good idea for one reason: in general, people don’t 
search for apps by name. Users will usually enter a search term such as  
“fun game” or “free shooting game.”
So, once you have done your research and have your keywords ready, what 
can you do next to ensure success?
Designing a Quality App Icon
Besides the title, an app’s icon is probably the most important factor in 
determining whether the app is downloaded. Consumer research attests 
that people like visually appealing icons. Case in point, we had an app that 
was really entertaining in terms of content but that had a really ugly icon. 
Sales were disappointing, to say the least. In an effort to improve sales, 
I decided to have the icon redone from the ground up. The icon looked 
substantially better; the makeover gave it that visually appealing “wow” 
factor. Overnight, sales quadrupled and continued to rise. The app went 
from being ranked 157 to 24 in games in one day. Remember when I said 
that users love updates? When updates address the issues and concerns 
users have, they are ecstatic to see the changes; happy users often tell 
other people about the apps they enjoy.
Because visual appeal is subjective, there is no set standard for designing 
an icon. Often, the graphic design process is the greatest struggle for 
appreneurs, but there are some guidelines that can make the process less 
painful. First, look at what kinds of icons your competitors have. What do you 
like about them? What do you dislike? Have the users said anything about 
the icon in the reviews? Once you have an idea for an icon, jot it down, and 
find a quality graphic designer. Do not pinch pennies when it comes to the 
graphic designer. Graphic designers abound, but quality graphic designers 
are much more rare. Finding a designer is much like finding a developer. You 

CHAPTER 2: Choosing the Right Development Option
14
need to look into the person’s past work and check the quality. Remember, 
the icon can make or break the app. I have seen apps that had the potential 
to go viral, but because the icon was so unappealing, users simply didn’t 
download the app. To consumers, their phone is a prized possession; no one 
wants ugly icons on their home screen.
When you have what you think is a good icon designed, share it with your 
friends. Ask for their honest opinion. Listen very closely to any constructive 
criticism they may have. I would also post the icon on any forums that 
may be specific to your app and ask for opinions there. Two forums, 
iPhoneDevSDK (www.iphonedevsdk.com) and MacRumours  
(www.macrumors.com), are both generally good for this type of thing. 
Feedback is always important, and it is imperative to your app’s success 
that you learn to receive it. Just because you like an icon doesn’t mean 
everyone else will. Do not get so invested in your personal opinions and 
tastes that you discount valuable information. Ultimately, your goal is to 
make an appealing app for a user, not yourself.
Writing an Engaging App Description
At this point, you have developed your app, chosen keywords, and designed 
a beautiful icon. You should be finished, right? Almost. At last, you are in the 
final stages of the development process. To complete the process, you need 
to write a great description of your app’s purpose and function. Think of the 
app’s description as a summary of what the app will do. Grab your favorite 
book or DVD, and flip it over to the back for inspiration. Imagine you are the 
app consumer. What could you read that would compel you to download 
the app? If the consumer is reading your description, that person is already 
intrigued; either your icon or your app title has piqued the consumer’s 
interest. Now, it is time to close the deal! As an attention grabber, I like 
to start off my descriptions with any awards or great reviews my app has 
received. If a popular app review web site reviews one of my apps favorably, 
I will copy and paste the short review into my description and cite it. Users 
like to see this; it shows them they are downloading an excellent app. 
Even if you don’t have a popular web review, you can also benefit from 
posting a specific user’s review from the app’s “Reviews” section. Although 
anonymous reviews are not as prestigious, they are still worthwhile, 
especially if your app is new. After positive reviews, I then like to put a few of 
the app’s highest-achieved rankings in the app’s description.
When users open my app, the first things they see about the app are 
positive. They see it has a good ranking and that it has earned favorable 
reviews. Oftentimes, this alone can be enough to get you that download. 
Yet, although you want to present your app in the best possible terms, it 
not advisable to invent good reviews or rankings if your app has not yet 

CHAPTER 2: Choosing the Right Development Option
15
earned them. Give it some time; if, after a few months, you don’t have a 
good review or high ranking, it is time to make some changes to your app, 
because something is not right.
Once you have a good description written down, take it to an editor, or 
a friend who is grammatically gifted, and have him or her proofread it. 
Chances are by this point you’re very excited about your app, and this 
can cause you to overlook a typo or other error. Trust me, I know from 
personal experience how embarrassing proofing errors can be. Granted, 
this metadata can be changed even after an app is live, but it still makes 
you look bad. You want your description to be engaging, informative, and 
accurate. Despite the description’s importance in terms of appeal to app 
users, do not be misled by appreneurs who tell you that you can get search 
hits for words in your description. This is not true. Your description has one 
main purpose: to tell the user what your app will do.
Creating Enticing Screenshots
Last, but certainly not least, is the app’s display screenshots. In iOS 7, apps 
are displayed via tiles. These tiles show one app at a time, but they offer 
much more information about the app than previous displays. The biggest 
addition is that your screenshots show up on searches. Screenshots are 
now make-or-break for your app. Take a look at Ironhide Game Studio’s 
Kingdom Rush Frontiers:
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 2: Choosing the Right Development Option
16
Screenshots are usually the first and last image users see before buying the 
app, so you need to impress them. Weary buyers are often convinced to buy 
an app because the screenshot sealed the deal. Screenshots are generally 
of two varieties in the App Store: plain (essentially, an exact replica of the 
app’s screens) and designed. Designed screenshots can either enhance 
or degrade an app, depending on the quality. Most use an iPhone template 
and add cool colors and text over the plain screenshot that really make the 

CHAPTER 2: Choosing the Right Development Option
17
image come to life. For ideas on how to do these well, take a look at the top 
25 apps. These are usually done by companies with large budgets and have 
amazing graphics. But, bear in mind that whereas you cannot go wrong with 
a simple screenshot, a poorly designed screenshot can have devastating 
results. Recently, I tested my theory. We had a funny picture-captioning app 
that was ranked number 12 in its category. The app had plain screenshots, 
so I decided to make some rather poorly designed screenshots and see 
what happened. (Testing a theory on a top app is not generally a good idea, 
but I was willing to risk it in the interest of gathering the most accurate data 
for this book.) Almost overnight, the app’s ranking fell by nearly a hundred 
spots. To test the positive effects of superb work, I had my designer create 
some professional screenshots. My theory was proven to be accurate. With 
the new, graphically pleasing screenshots, the app surged in the rankings to 
number 7, even higher than its earlier position!
An effective strategy I like to use when making designed screenshots is 
to try to tell a story. If you can do this successfully, potential buyers will 
be attracted. Make the screenshots colorful and fun. Users are buying 
apps to have a good time; make them entertaining! Here are the example 
screenshots from our photo-captioning app Meme Creator Pro. They are 
very simple, but much more entertaining than plain screenshots.
Do you see how these screenshots tell the story of the app—what it is and 
does? Well-designed screenshots such as these are also more amusing and 
visually appealing than ordinary, straight-from-the-phone screenshots. If you 
have been researching apps, you probably noticed that most of the top-selling 
apps include well-designed screenshots. Why do you think that is? Simply put, 
good-looking screenshots drive downloads. The possibilities for screenshot 
design are endless and vary with each unique app. If you find a good designer 
for your screenshots, stay with that person. As discussed previously, finding a 
reliable, capable designer is not an easy task, and you may have to work with a 
few different people before finding one that meets your needs.

CHAPTER 2: Choosing the Right Development Option
18
Finally, you have your first app ready to be uploaded to Apple for review. 
Keep this in mind: Apple has become much stricter on the content it will 
and won’t allow in the App Store. To avoid rejection, be sure to review the 
Apple IOS Human Interface Guidelines before submitting an app. If your 
app requires any type of login or registration, provide Apple a test, or demo 
account, in the “Review Notes” section of the metadata. If you have any 
concerns as to whether your app may get rejected, I recommend signing up 
for any developer forum and posing your questions there first. My personal 
favorite is iPhoneDevSDK (www.iphonedevsdk.com). Quality developers and 
appreneurs have formed a professional learning community via this site, in 
which developers will help solve your most troubling content issues. It is 
likely you’ll see me posting on there as well. If your app gets rejected, don’t 
panic and start to wave the white flag. I have had more apps rejected than I 
can count. My first reaction was usually worry over the months I had spent 
working in vain. Usually, you will get a message from the reviewer explaining 
why your app was rejected. Simply make any requested changes and 
reupload. If you reupload a rejected app, the same reviewer will review it the 
second time. If it gets rejected the second time, the odds are that particular 
reviewer will never accept it.
To circumvent the same reviewer, change the app’s title, using, for example, 
a string of random letters, so that you can use the app’s title again when 
you reupload the app. Then, start the upload process again from scratch, 
reuploading the app. This time, you will get a new reviewer, and maybe your 
luck will be different. At this point, you will need to create all new metadata, 
keywords, and screenshots. My rule of thumb is that if I get rejected from 
three different reviewers, then I throw in the towel. I draw the conclusion that 
my app contains content that Apple will not allow. If you can find an app in 
the App Store that is similar to yours, but you are getting rejected, just hang 
in there, and keep uploading. It may take some time, but if the other app 
was approved, so, too, can yours be. Once your app is live and in the App 
Store, you can finally relax, right? Wrong. Relaxation of concern is the most 
crucial mistake amateur appreneurs make.
How to create considerable profits and long-term revenue are considered 
next, in Chapter 3.

19
Chapter 3
Don’t Compete in  
a Market, Create It
A lesson I have learned from the App Store is that apps in specialized 
markets can do very well. Specialty, or niche, apps are apps for very specific 
hobbies or types of people. The possibilities are endless: video games, 
sports, dogs, bird-watching, fishing, astronomy, and so on. Even though 
these hobby-targeted apps seem to appeal only to a small segment of the 
population, they can easily bring in six figures. Unfortunately, the success of 
niche apps is overshadowed by the more widely touted news of someone’s 
creating the next game sensation. Realistically, the odds are stacked against 
you in terms of creating the next viral game craze. Among the stories that 
generally go unpublished are those of apps in specialized categories that 
generate tons of long-term revenue and that have much less competition.  
I reached out to a fellow appreneur, Brass Monkeigh, when writing this book. 
His unique series of apps not only transformed the app market, but also 
literally created a new genre of apps. Brass Monkeigh shares his chronicle of 
how business acumen can be born of personal passions and interests:
The story of Brass Monkeigh Apps begins with a familiar set 
of circumstances: a college dorm, too much free time, and 
an idea. In 2009 I was a college student taking introductory 
programming courses. In my spare time I, like most of my 
roommates and peers, spent far too many hours playing video 
games. Having the engineering mind that I do, I always kept 
a calculator next to me while I played. The purpose of this 
was to keep track of my kill-to-death ratio, which is commonly 
considered the primary statistic for determining the skill of a 

CHAPTER 3: Don’t Compete in a Market, Create It 
20
player. After every few games played, I would bust out the 
calculator and figure out how many more kills I needed to 
add to the numerator of the equation before my ratio would 
tick up. Streamlining this simple math equation became the 
springboard on which my company was launched.
Around the same time, I purchased my first iPhone. The 
device’s ease of use and ability to support custom software 
amazed and intrigued me. I made it a personal goal to learn the 
necessary programming language and design a specialized 
calculator for the iPhone that would calculate and track my 
kill-to-death ratio for me and then provide me with different 
statistics about it. After a month or so of saving tips from my 
food delivery job, I managed to scrape together $250. I then 
asked my parents for a loan for the remaining $200 needed 
to purchase a used MacBook on eBay. This first MacBook 
wasn’t pretty, but it did the job. With only a 13-inch screen 
there was barely enough room to fit the iPhone simulator, but 
it was enough for me to design my first app.
After I had a working model of what I called the Kill Death 
Ratio Improvement Tool, the question arose as to whether 
to publish the app  in the App Store. This question did not 
have a straightforward answer. I had already spent $450 on 
this project, nearly half of which was borrowed money that 
I would have to pay back, and to publish my little calculator 
in the App Store meant signing up for the iTunes developer 
program, which would set me back yet another $100. “One 
hundred dollars buys a lot of ramen noodles” was all I could 
think of. According to my logic at the time, after I convinced 
five or six friends to download my app, I would still be out 
more than $90 in the long run. Thankfully, I could not have 
been more wrong.
January 2010 rolled around, and by that time I had repaid my 
parents and even had a little holiday money burning a hole in 
my pocket. I decided to sign up for the developer program 
and publish my app. By the end of the month, the Kill Death 
Ratio Improvement Tool by Brass Monkeigh Apps had been 
published in the iTunes App Store. What happened next would 
change my life forever. My first day I had three sales. I couldn’t 
believe that three totally random people had paid to download 

CHAPTER 3: Don’t Compete in a Market, Create It 
21
the app I made. The following day, three turned into five. 
Before long I was making nearly $10 a day, which meant that 
I would be able to recover the cost of the developer program 
in only a number of days, compared with the year I thought it 
would take.
The excitement consumed me. Literally overnight I went from 
a college student sleeping until noon to a motivated individual 
waking up at 7:00 am every morning to check my download 
report from iTunes. Shortly thereafter, I started receiving e-mail 
requests from users of my app asking me to include more 
features. I spent more long hours working to oblige those 
requests. Soon, I was devoting as many hours to programming 
as I was to my delivery job.
The process of listening to customer feedback and updating 
my app accordingly turned into a continuous cycle. The days 
turned into months, and before long, I had what could be 
considered a small business. Over the course of two years, 
I’ve learned a lot about the app market, and I was honored 
when Taylor asked me to share some of that knowledge in 
his new book. There are many lessons that I’ve learned, but I 
feel that my friend Brian, of Web Pyro, summed it up best. He 
told me, “Some of the complex issues that you run into when 
designing software are so crazy that they probably only have 
one-in-a-million odds of ever occurring. The problem is that 
there are millions of them, so statistically you’re bound to run 
into a few.” He could not have been more right.
Although I feel that my career as a programmer is still just 
beginning and that the experiences I have to draw on are 
limited, I have found several lessons to be near universal truths. 
The first of these truths is that working as an independent 
software developer provides you incredible freedom. You have 
the freedom to set your own hours and work how and when 
you please. Yet, although it may feel like you are your own 
boss, you’re not. Your customers are your boss and should 
always be treated that way.
The next word of advice I would pass along is that you can 
never expect to make everyone happy. It is an unachievable 
goal that you must always strive for, but no matter how vast 
of a resource pool you devote to your products and customer 

CHAPTER 3: Don’t Compete in a Market, Create It 
22
satisfaction, you will never please all your customers. Handling 
these seemingly illogical consumers will be what defines your 
company’s reputation, its character and integrity.
Finally, competition is not warfare. I carved out a niche for my business, 
and it has since become a crowded one. Although I strive to make the 
best products I can, I must acknowledge that there will always be others 
out there who come along and make similar (and, admittedly, sometimes 
better) features for their products. This is, in fact, how I met Taylor. We both 
designed similar products but managed to learn from one another rather 
than undermine each other’s efforts.
Competition, success, and failure are all part of the natural 
cycle of business and life. I am very thankful for the success 
that the App Store has given me, but it is important to know 
that success can depart as quickly as it arrives. For this reason, 
it is important to act with the understanding that nothing lasts 
forever and to enjoy any success you experience while it lasts, 
because only time will tell how enduring any given market truly is.
Brass Monkeigh makes some major points I want to emphasize. I am sure 
you have heard the saying “The customer is always right.” This is beyond 
true for users. If you fail to keep your users happy, your apps will not do well. 
Brass Monkeigh saw a market opportunity and was able take advantage of 
this knowledge. He customized his apps to meet the needs of a particular 
segment. He is very humble, but let me tell you, his latest line of apps is 
very well done and incorporates any possible feature a user could imagine. 
Because of Brass Monkeigh’s willingness to optimize features and content 
based on his customer base’s requests, his apps have consistently ranked 
among the top 100 in the reference category for more than two years.
Let’s apply this concept to your app. If you already have an app in the  
App Store, you probably woke up to download your sales, expecting to  
be a millionaire; odds are this didn’t happen. Maybe your lack of success  
is what has motivated you to read this book. If success has eluded you,  
it is not time to give up. Rather, it is time to analyze your app and come up 
with a good business model. The reason I have dedicated an entire chapter 
to niche and specialty apps is because of the competitiveness of the App 
Store today. The days of creating fart apps and fake fingerprint scanners 
that make millions are over. Truthfully, I am glad about this because I would 
get infuriated when I would see these stupid apps making tons of money. 
People now expect quality, complex apps that focus on special interests 
and hobbies. If you’re able create apps that enhance or integrate into a 
consumer’s hobbies, you have struck gold.

CHAPTER 3: Don’t Compete in a Market, Create It 
23
Picking the Right App to Develop
I cannot tell you how many clients come into my office each day and 
have this “amazing” idea for a game that is going to make billions. 
Usually I just shake my head. The gaming category of the App Store is 
beyond competitive. If you create a game, your competitors, who are not 
independent developers, but multimillion dollar companies, will have a 
significant advantage. I get this e-mail approximately once a day: “I want to 
create a game like Angry Birds.” Really, you want to compete against an 
app that is so popular and branded that it now has shirts, toys, candy, and 
even headphones? Yeah, that will go well. Can you sense my sarcasm here?
Most novice appreneurs do not fully fathom the complexity involved in 
creating popular games. To compete alongside the games of this quality will 
require an investment of hundreds of thousands of dollars. For this reason,  
I deliver the same forewarning to all clients who want to develop a game app: 
you will make a dollar or millions, but there isn’t much room in between.  
I know scores of developers and appreneurs; many have made millions on 
apps, but none have made millions on games. I never shoot someone’s 
dream down, but I try to let clients know that they are taking a huge gamble 
and that the odds are stacked greatly against them. So, to minimize risk,  
I try to convince them that their first project should be smaller—a niche app. 
You need experience before taking on such a major project.
Perfection without practice is an unreasonable expectation with any 
endeavor, and creating apps is no different. Therefore, I begin questioning 
my clients about hobbies and passions to help them with the app 
development process. Usually, by the end of this conversation they have 
nixed the idea of a game in favor of a niche app that will yield them more 
money and cost a fraction to develop. Whereas the gaming market has a 
small potential to be lucrative, the niche market shows promise for  
long-term financial gain. The simple economics of supply and demand 
explains this phenomenon. The games market is flooded with choices; 
however, the niche market has fewer offerings for the target population. 
Needless to say, when consumers search for apps relevant to their particular 
hobby, the scarcity of choices will influence them to download those apps 
that appeal to their interests. It is a little known fact among experienced 
appreneurs that the specialized market is extremely popular and powerful. 
I am not a fortune teller, but I could probably take your phone, look at the 
apps, and tell you what your hobbies are.

CHAPTER 3: Don’t Compete in a Market, Create It 
24
The Power of Niche and Specialty Apps
Advertising and marketing niche apps is not difficult. For instance, maybe 
you have created an app for bicyclists because you’re an avid cyclist. 
Initially, you want to make sure when you market the app that only 
cyclists are exposed to the ad. There is no point in doing broad-spectrum 
advertising, for example, using Facebook or Google, because not everyone 
cares about cycling. Free advertising is always the best, so begin accessing 
some forums for cyclists. Then, post about the app to let people know about 
it. It is likely the cycling groups will be excited to see what you have created. 
Next, look on YouTube for some popular cyclists. Remember, you have a 
new app, so don’t approach Lance Armstrong or Dave Mirra. Instead, find 
popular but lesser-known cyclists. Reach out to them, and see if they are 
willing to back and promote the app. You should expect to offer the cyclist 
sponsor something in return for the endorsement, either money or exposure. 
My experience has shown that having some popular YouTubers backing 
your app will be worth the aggravation; popularity sells.
After you have recruited popular cyclists to back your app, people on the 
forums will be talking about it. Now, it is time to approach some cycling 
companies for affiliate programs. Affiliate programs are set up to offer 
you money for selling a company’s products. Companies providing these 
programs are also willing to advertise your app for you; of course, while 
they are advertising your interests, they are simultaneously advertising the 
company’s products. By the completion of the affiliation process, your app 
is selling, and you are making steady revenue. Consequently, people are 
buying your affiliate’s products from the app, and you are making even more 
revenue. Affiliate programs are a well-kept secret in the app world that you 
now know about! The cycling example serves as a model for successful app 
marketing. Even though you may not be creating a bicycling app, changing 
this template to fit your app’s needs is very simple.
In the world of niche apps, customer relations is paramount. People will 
want to contact you about your app. This may be in the form of a bug 
report or just someone saying that he or she enjoys the app. Be sure to 
include a simple e-mail form in your app for these inquiries. Getting back 
to your customers in a timely fashion will benefit you significantly in the 
long run. You can build a great relationship with a user just by taking a few 
seconds to e-mail that person back. If your app is for users between the 
ages of 12 and 18, this is even more important. Young consumers think 
it is cool when the developer e-mails them back and often will look up to 
you. Also, if your particular app is conducive to community interaction, 
take advantage of this. For instance, Brass Monkeigh makes guides for 
popular video games; he has one of the best customer relations models of 
anyone I know. He personally writes responses to the majority of his users’ 

CHAPTER 3: Don’t Compete in a Market, Create It 
25
e-mails and interacts with his users via Facebook and Twitter. His best 
form of customer interaction, however, is community games. He invites 
his users to play the video games with him. By making a connection with 
his consumers, he ensures that these people will download each app he 
makes, and believe me, they do. People also share and retweet his apps 
constantly on the various social networks. So, Brass Monkeigh has created 
a virtual relationship with his consumers, resulting in repeat business and 
free advertising!
By taking the time to build a relationship with your users, you are 
guaranteeing they will buy your future apps. These actions will make them 
feel like your friend; as a friend, they will likely advertise your apps to others. 
Remember to respect your customers. They paid money for your app, so 
keep them happy, and add the features they want. The appreneurs that 
listen to their customers are always successful.
Now it is time to further your app education by learning about the various 
business models for apps. This topic is covered in Chapter 4.
www.allitebooks.com

27
Chapter 4
Generating Revenue from 
Various Business Models
As you learn more about the world of apps, you begin to understand that 
different types of apps require different business models. Most amateur 
appreneurs think that the only way an application can generate revenue is 
with the paid model (pay a flat, one-time fee to download the application; 
$0.99, $1.99, $2.99, and so on). This is the simplest strategy, but it doesn’t 
always produce the results you desire. Recently, I have noticed that free 
apps with in-app purchases, or “freemiums,” have dominated the market. 
Here is why: people do not hesitate to download free apps. You will 
generally get between 50 and 100 free downloads per paid download.  
That means (at the high end), if fifty people downloaded your app for  
free, one would have paid outright for it. Now, if this sounds like a very  
low number, that’s because it is. The freemium model changes this up in 
your favor substantially. Please note, however, for the freemium model to  
work, you need to have an application that is enticing and entertaining.  
If your application is not something of value, why would a user buy premium 
upgrades? Let’s go on a quick tangent to illustrate this point. When you 
think of the apps that generate the most money, which ones come to mind? 
Possibly, you thought of Angry Birds, Words with Friends, or Cut the 
Rope? You might be surprised to learn that of the top-5-grossing apps, all 
are freemiums.
One of my freemium favorites, Zynga Poker, serves as an excellent case 
study. This app is free for anyone to download. As you begin to play, you 
are given a limited number of chips (virtual currency) with which to bet. Each 
day you play, you are awarded a few more chips. But, if you lose your entire 
daily chip allowance, how can you continue to play? In “App Purchases” the 
game allows you to buy chips and keep playing. The game designers draw 

CHAPTER 4: Generating Revenue from Various Business Models
28
players in with the free app. This allows you to play and get hooked. When 
you run out of chips, you have two choices: wait until the next day to play 
or pay a small fee to continue playing. Two personality traits that seem to be 
shared among app users are impulsivity and impatience; users hate waiting! 
A wise appreneur can use this knowledge to his or her business advantage. 
Surely, you are wondering who would pay for virtual currency that has no 
real value. I’ll answer that for you: millions of people! Don’t just take my 
word for it. Research the top-25-grossing apps (top-grossing apps are the 
apps that produce the most revenue, not downloads), and see how many 
are freemiums with virtual currency or upgrades.
Another example, Temple Run, also took the App Store by storm.  
I downloaded it and played for a while, all the time wondering, “How does 
this app make any money?” My first couple of exposures only showed it 
as a freemium. Then, I saw it; as you progress through the levels, you earn 
coins to use on upgrades and unlocks. The game’s design includes an  
in-app purchase to acquire more coins. Once again, I thought to myself, 
“Who would buy this? It has no purpose.” By the next day, I could answer 
my own question because I was hooked on the game and wanted to 
upgrade my character. My decision was a simple one: I could play for a few 
hours and earn the coins or spend a buck and buy them. I bought them and 
was actually quite happy with my purchase.
Making Money from Free Apps
Just because an app is free doesn’t mean it cannot make any money. The 
preceding case studies, Temple Run and Zynga Poker, serve as excellent 
examples for disproving the notion that free apps are not profitable. 
Freemium apps are still one of the best ways to generate a large number of 
downloads and then translate those downloads into good, stable revenue. 
Remember, you will likely get between a 1to 50 and a 1 to 100 paid-to-free  
download ratio. By being able to convert this massive number of free 
downloads into sales, you will likely make more money than with a paid-only 
version. When I am creating a freemium app, I like to include ads and in-app 
purchases. If you have a paid version of the game, do not feel guilty about 
adding ad banners to it. Ideally, you want to annoy users with the ads in the 
hopes that they will buy the paid version to remove them. Furthermore,  
I also try to provide an array of in-app purchases. The more you can think  
of, the better. You can have in-app purchases to add features, upgrade  
in-app features, remove ads, and much more. As mentioned earlier, you will 
be surprised by the things people will buy. Just because you find the idea 
of purchasing virtual items ridiculous does not mean a user will share your 
perspective.

CHAPTER 4: Generating Revenue from Various Business Models
29
We have discussed both paid versions and freemium versions, so what is 
left? Free with ads is a business model that I would suggest only if there are 
no applicable inapp purchases and if a paid version doesn’t make sense. 
This model allows you to have a completely free application, with ads. These 
ads are your sole source of revenue.The more users you have, the more 
money you will make on ads. In reality, appreneurs will not likely become 
millionaires from only ad revenue, but there is still money to be had.
The final business model is known as user base. A user base is essentially a 
collection of users who are engaged with the app. Most user bases contain 
a database with e-mail addresses. In today’s online world, user bases 
are worth their weight in gold. I am sure you have heard of the free app 
Instagram. It seems unbelievable but true that Instagram has made more 
than one billion dollars without offering a single ad or in-app purchase.  
In a famous business transaction, Facebook purchased Instagram, primarily 
for its user base. This has happened more times than you would think in the 
App Store. Apps that require users to register will give appreneurs access to 
users’ names and e-mail addresses. This can be an invaluable business tool. 
If you build a good e-mail list of your app’s users, you can then market to 
them directly, via e-mail, when you release a new app.
Choosing the Right Business Model
After considering all the business model possibilities, which one will you 
choose for your apps? That answer should be fairly straightforward: all of 
them. Many of the top apps have both a paid version and a free version 
with ads and in-app purchases. For what business reasons would they 
offer two choices? Exposure. Offering two versions doubles the chances 
that a user will find the app. The free with ads and in-app-purchase-backed 
versions typically generate a greater number of downloads. Moreover, the 
more downloads you have, the more users you have; the more users you 
have, the more people are talking; the more people are talking, the more 
downloads you will get. See the cycle here? To generate revenue, your app 
has to be downloaded. Your goal is to get users who downloaded the free 
version to upgrade to the paid version. Unfortunately, there is no guarantee 
that this transfer from free to paid will happen. Keep in mind that there are 
users who will never pay for an app; you will probably not influence their 
mind-set, regardless of what your app is or does. So, how do you reach the 
users who are willing to pay? How do you convince them to download the 
paid version? If your app is a free game, I would use the following model: 
After each turn, show users a full-screen ad asking them to buy the full 
version. If they click the ad, it should take them directly to the App Store 
to make the purchase. It will likely require multiple exposures to the adt to 
generate a sale, but if they play the game often, soon it will annoy them 
enough to purchase it. This method of advertisement is a tactic commonly 

CHAPTER 4: Generating Revenue from Various Business Models
30
used by large companies. I actually saw this work with my girlfriend. She 
was playing one of the online games such as Scrabble, and she was getting 
annoyed seeing the ad appear after each turn. Finally, I saw her digging 
in her purse for her credit card. I highly doubt she stopped playing to pay 
some bills.
Briefly, I want to cover how users in niche markets will pay more for apps. 
For this example, I will use an app I made that I will call App X (I leave 
my apps out of this book because I am not selling you a product; I am 
teaching you to make one). App X was a paid app ($2.99) that included 
premium features. I had thought long and hard about what model I should 
use. The paid-only version was generating good revenue. The users who 
bought the app absolutely loved it. I added the new premium features as a 
nonconsumable in-app purchase (nonconsumables, in app purchases, are 
bought one time and unlock new features or content). I really didn’t expect 
the results I saw the next morning, when I downloaded my sales report.  
I had a 78 percent conversion rate. That meant that 78 percent of the people 
who bought the app also bought the in-app purchase. The lesson learned 
from this scenario is not to underestimate the power of premium features 
in a niche market. Just because users have already purchased your paid 
version, that does not mean they are unwilling to pay again. The opposite is 
actually true, for one simple reason: people who are willing to pay for apps 
are exactly that, willing to pay! Make sure you take advantage of this,  
or you will be passing up a ton of potential revenue.
Now that you have gained insight into the variety of business models 
available, let’s consider the importance of managing your users. This is the 
focus of Chapter 5.

31
Chapter 5
Managing Users Today 
for Success Tomorrow
In the summer of 2011, I created a new app that I hoped would be a real 
success. After a few months of low sales, I decided to make the app 
freemium. With this new model, the app saw thousands of downloads 
each day. Server costs began to get pretty expensive, and the app was 
taking up a lot of my time. Server costs are generally calculated based on 
the amount of data your app’s database uses. If you have an app that has 
a lot of database interactions and a lot of users, your server costs can be 
hundreds of dollars a month. I wanted to move on to a new project, so I 
decided to sell the app. Although the app did not generate much revenue, 
it had a massive user base. I listed the app’s rights for sale; the app sold 
within 48 hours. What was interesting about this was that the buyer didn’t 
purchase the app because he liked it or because he saw it as a million dollar 
investment. He purchased it for the user base.
Another little-known fact among the majority of appreneurs is the worth 
of a good user base. Some of my success can be attributed to my early 
realization of this truth. If you fail to capture your user base, you have a 
bunch of random users and no data to track. I advise clients to capture, or 
try to capture, a user’s name and e-mail. Collecting this data is relatively 
easy and can be done via a registration screen and a simple database. 
It is beneficial to gather as much data as possible. In my apps, I capture 
information using the following fields:
E-mail
Username
Version number

CHAPTER 5: Managing Users Today for Success Tomorrow
32
Paid or free
Number of in-app purchases
Online or offline
Number of e-mails (either to the developer or telling friends)
Number of in-app tweets or Facebook posts
To the inexperienced this may appear to be too much information, but skilled 
appreneurs realize that information is power. That database interactions 
are fairly inexpensive makes the data retrieved through them all the more 
valuable. If you are able to capture a ton of user data, you are going to be 
an expert about how your app is used. For instance, knowing how many 
people are online at a particular moment is valuable because it tells you if a 
new update or added feature was a hit or a miss. Moreover, in the event that 
the time comes for you to sell the rights to the app (see Chapter 10), you will 
have all the data at hand. As a result, you will have no problem selling the 
app. Investors love when apps have a good user base. Investors will want to 
know trends, daily active users, and if there is an e-mail list associated with 
the app. Ready access to this information will increase the likelihood that the 
investors will work out a great offer for you. They will view you as a business 
professional who deserves respect. In contrast, if you don’t have data, you 
will appear unprepared and unworthy of a fair offer—if they decide to make 
any offer at all.
Capturing the Right Data for the Right Results
Capturing your users’ information is just part of a successful data retrieval 
plan. You need to keep your users happy. Most important, you need to keep 
them using the app! I encourage clients to create a simple e-mail address for 
their app. With an e-mail address, users can contact you without ever leaving 
the application. I provide a few different options for e-mailing in my apps:
Feature request: This allows users to e-mail you their 
ideas for making the app better. Remember the saying “The 
customer is always right”? As mentioned earlier, this golden 
rule of business is true for your app’s users as well. The best 
part of the feature request is that sometimes the greatest 
ideas are the result of input from your customers.
Bug report: With this option, users can tell you about any 
bugs and crashes they may experience. Generally, in your 
first version of the app there will be bugs. Taking heed 
of users’ descriptions of glitches will help you and your 
developer improve the overall quality of your application. 
Adding this is a must.

CHAPTER 5: Managing Users Today for Success Tomorrow
33
Tell a friend: By far, this is one of my favorite e-mail 
features. Not many appreneurs include it, and why, I will 
never know. I can only assume they think people will not 
actually use it. This couldn’t be further from the truth. 
One of our games generates more than 100 “tell a friend” 
e-mails a day! I have a few suggestions on how to get 
similar results. First, prepopulate the body of the e-mail 
with text such as this: “I have been using [App name], 
and it is a ton of fun. You need to check it out: [HTML 
download link].” You can also copy yourself in the e-mail 
so that you get a copy each time this is sent. With this 
data feature, the user e-mails someone he or she knows, 
using this e-mail template. The recipient opens the e-mail 
(you will have close to a 100 percent open rate because 
the e-mail is from someone the person knows well) and 
sees that it talks about an awesome app. Immediately, 
the  recipient notices the “Click to download” button and 
taps it. The link directs the recipient to the App Store to 
buy or download the app. Again, you have generated free 
advertising!
This feature is illustrated in the following example, the “Tell a friend” 
template for my Draw with Me app:

CHAPTER 5: Managing Users Today for Success Tomorrow
34
As you can see, the template contains a prepopulated subject and body. 
The body has the user’s name so that the person the user is inviting can play 
with him or her. I also include the download URL, in addition to the app’s 
title and how to search for it. The more information you can give on how to 
find the app, the better.
Rate the app: This isn’t exactly an e-mail, but it takes the 
user to the App Store to review the app. Reviews are more 
important than some appreneurs realize. Understanding 
the importance of reviews is one of my most treasured App 
Store secrets. Reviews count toward your App Store search 
number, the ranking for your app for a searched term (for 
more details, see Chapter 8); the more reviews you have 
(they do not necessarily need to be good reviews), the 
higher you will rank for a searched term. For example, let’s 
say you have an app with the name App Title—Fun App. 
Also, you have a competitor with the very similar title  
App Title—Awesome App. Both of you have App Title 
as the app’s name, followed by a subtitle. Furthermore, 
you and your competitor have keywords that are similar or 
the same. You even have the same number of downloads. 
Which app shows up first in the search? The deciding factor 
is the number of reviews. Knowing that reviews can give you 
an edge is a trade secret. Take advantage of your newfound 
knowledge.
Social Network Dos and Don’ts
No instructions on how to manage users would be complete without 
considering the proper integration of social networks. Although social 
networks might seem to be the ideal method for obtaining user data, 
my advice is, do not ever require a user to sign in via a social network 
to use an app. There are apps that have lost more than half their user 
base because of imposing this requirement. Following are some reviews 
after a top 25 game made Facebook registration mandatory. The reviews 
displayed are not modified or staged; this is a screenshot right from the 
game’s “Reviews” section.

CHAPTER 5: Managing Users Today for Success Tomorrow
35
Let users choose whether or not they want to use social networks. If you 
are able to successfully integrate a social network, then you will be able to 
market to an exponential number of users. If you neglect to use a social 
network, your users are limited to the linear form of communication when 
they want to share your app. The constraints of this form permit users to 
communicate with only a few people at once, and most users won’t even do 
that. Integrating a social network allows hundreds of people to see your app 
for each person that posts to the social network, resulting in app exposure 

CHAPTER 5: Managing Users Today for Success Tomorrow
36
to an exponential number of potential users. Each post a user makes to the 
social network referring to you app will be seen by most of his or her friends 
on the newsfeed or timeline.
To illustrate the social network’s capability, let’s say you have a photo-sharing 
app. A user of your app wants to share a picture via a social network. 
You need to do this in a way that advertises the app but that isn’t blatant. 
Instagram, for example, has implemented this subtle technique. For each 
picture shared on Facebook, Instagram places a small image of its icon 
in the corner. The icon doesn’t affect the quality of the picture and builds 
great brand recognition. Instagram also adds unique albums for the photos 
users upload from the app. To clarify how this exposure can help your app, 
let’s look at what happens with each shared post. Our user has just posted 
the photo to a social network. The user has 300 friends, most of whom saw the  
picture and the icon. A few of them were so intrigued, they downloaded 
the app. Now, the new users have posted a picture, a few more friends 
download, and so on. This is how apps go viral. Exponential growth is 
very powerful; you need to take advantage of it and the free advertising it 
affords. Ignoring the possibilities social networking sites offer is forfeiting 
the chance that your app will go viral. Plain and simple, the more people 
that see your app, the better chances you have of its being successful. 
Social networks are all about fads. If something is viewed as the latest hot 
toy, people will not hesitate to download it.
Keeping your users happy is crucial for long-term app success. Maintaining 
user satisfaction will encourage your users to continue purchasing your 
apps, in addition to advertising your apps to their friends. Incorporate these 
tips into your application development, and I believe there is a good chance 
I will be reading about your app one day.
The next chapter provides a guide for determining which apps are hot and 
which apps are not.
www.allitebooks.com

37
Chapter 6
What’s Hot and What’s Not
One trait that has allowed me to become a successful appreneur is my 
ability to generate ideas for apps. Granted, I am a very creative individual, 
but there is more to it than that. I have learned how to quickly and effectively 
find out which apps are selling and which apps are not. Researching the 
latest apps isn’t as complicated as some people make it out to be. In fact, 
the only tool you need is a smartphone or tablet. I have discovered that the 
best way to come up with apps is to get out of your office and focus on  
your hobby. I am a car enthusiast, so when I need to generate ideas or get 
away from it all, I go for a drive. A good half of the apps I have brainstormed  
have originated while taking my car out for a spin on my favorite road.  
My experience has been that once the appreneur bug bites, it is hard to stop 
thinking about app possibilities.
Using the App Store to Make Apps
Even the most creative minds become blocked occasionally. So, when you 
are struggling to invent new ideas, what can you look to for inspiration? 
Because the best new ideas are often inspired by old ideas, the answer 
is simple: the App Store. With the App Store’s structure, you can literally 
see which apps are selling and which apps are not. To ensure long-term 
success, make reading the App Store’s top-selling apps part of your daily 
routine, much like traditional businesspeople faithfully read the stock 
reports. Wake up, and first check your app sales. Next, browse each 
category’s top 100 apps. Here, you will see the best-selling apps, an 
invaluable tool overlooked by novice appreneurs. I have clients come in 
daily asking, “Do you think this app will do well?” I pick up my phone and 
find something similar (if applicable). By using the rankings of a similar app, 
I can give them a rough estimate of how much the app is making per day. 

CHAPTER 6: What’s Hot and What’s Not
38
After browsing these categories, take a look at the top 200 overall paid 
apps. Most of these are large companies that are hard for independent 
developers to compete against. Keep an eye out for developer names you 
don’t recognize. If you see a new app that has broken the top 200 and that 
is not produced by a major company, you are looking at a hot new market. 
Your diligence in recognizing new markets will provide you with guidance 
about which markets are doing well. With this information, you can consider 
making an app that is better than or similar to this popular app. Do not 
hesitate long if you hope to capitalize on the success of a hot new market. 
These types of markets are time sensitive; you need to get an app out to the 
App Store. Having a good developer is a key component in terms of speed. 
True, good developers may cost more, but they are generally much faster.
Steve Jobs once said, “Good artists copy, great artists steal” If you want 
to compete with these hot, or fad), market apps, you have to be able to 
not only clone the successful parts of the new app, but also expand on the 
app’s capabilities. To do this, you need to download the app and use it. 
Also, you need to do your research (see Chapter 1). Investigate what makes 
this app popular; what are the users saying in reviews? Then, ask yourself 
the big question: “What can I do better?” If the answer is nothing, do not 
waste your time and money! Conversely, if you know there is something you 
can do better, it is time to hit the ground running. You need to implement the 
improved features and get the app out to the App Store very quickly. Each 
day you wait is a day your competitor further captures the market. At times, 
these replicated apps can be a gamble, but they can pay off. Compared with 
other app markets, these apps will not provide years of long-term, stable 
revenue, but you can make a lot of money fast by finding creative inspiration 
in existing apps. Don’t forget to see if AppCodes (www.appcod.es) has your 
competitor’s app’s keywords so that you can know what the competitor is 
using and employ this knowledge to put yourself even further ahead.
’Tis the Season to Make Apps
Seasonal apps, such as the hot apps discussed in the previous section,  
are time sensitive. Although these apps have a limited sales period, some 
have been popular enough to rank among the top 100 sellers overall and  
can produce quick revenue. Examples of seasonal apps range from 
countdowns to important dates, to holiday cartoons for kids, to Santa 
trackers—the possibilities are as endless as your creativity and your ability 
to market for the appropriate season.
The season I like to focus on is Christmas. The Christmas season is the 
golden time of the year for an appreneur. My first Christmas in the App 
Store, I made $1,211 in sales on Christmas Day alone. Keep in mind that the 

CHAPTER 6: What’s Hot and What’s Not
39
week prior, I was only averaging approximately $80 a day. Those Christmas 
sales were during my first year in the App Store, and I was fortunate to 
benefit from the valuable insights they afforded so early in my developing 
career. Here is why Christmas is such a powerful sales season for us 
appreneurs. You have kids receiving iPhones/iPads/iPods as gifts These 
“giftees” will usually get an iTunes card for the device as well, and they will 
be committed to spending every dime on this card in a matter of seconds. 
The ideal demographic for Christmas sales is children between the ages 
of 10 and 18. Because the age demographic is so broad, appreneurs have 
creative freedom in appealing to the diverse interests represented by this 
wide spectrum of ages.
One app that really did well in 2012 was a virtual Santa tracker. Hats off to 
the guy who made this; he is a marketing genius. I had been tracking his 
sales for the week prior to Christmas. He was ranked approximately 198 
overall, which is amazing for any appreneur. When Christmas Eve arrived,  
he had managed to leap to number 21! I am certain this phenomenal jump in 
sales allowed him to buy a really nice present for himself. Seasonal apps are 
all about being in the right market at the right time. Finding popular seasonal 
apps can be done in the same fashion as outlined for other existing apps. 
A word of forewarning, though, about seasonal apps: give yourself at least 
a month before the peak holiday season to generate sales. In other words, 
if you have a cool Christmas app, you need to have it in the App Store by 
Thanksgiving. Do not plan on submitting the app on Christmas Eve.
A New Idea for a New Market
A possible, but increasingly unlikely, scenario is that your app idea is not 
represented at all in the App Store. What does this mean? Some ideas are 
good, and some are bad. The first thing you need to do in this situation is 
talk with an experienced developer (make sure you have an NDA signed). 
Check to be certain your idea is a technical possibility and something your 
respective App Store will allow. If your app checks out in both of these 
areas, then you are in a gambling position. The app may do either really well 
or really poorly. How popular is the community for this app? If the answer 
is small, then the app may not do well. In contrast, if the community is fairly 
large, you could very well be sitting on a gold mine.
Just because there are hundreds of thousands of apps in the App Store 
doesn’t mean all the good ideas are taken. New breakthrough apps hit the 
store every day, and this will continue for years to come. The more creative 
you are, the better. I have created a few apps for clients for which I sat in 
my office thinking to myself, “Is there even remotely a market for this?” 
The answer was yes. One of these surprisingly successful apps was an 

CHAPTER 6: What’s Hot and What’s Not
40
interactive wildlife guide. Basically, this app provides information on anything 
you would need to know to identify a bug, plant, or animal in the wild. This 
kind of app sounds like something the majority of people would never 
download, and that is a reasonable assertion; however, there are enough 
enthusiasts to keep these apps in the top 25 of the reference category.
By keeping an eye on app trends and fads, you’ll be able to understand and 
predict the app market. Once this happens, you will see your sales begin  
to climb. In time, you will even be able to accurately estimate what an app 
may make.

41
Chapter 7
Making the Most of Your 
Advertising Money
Experience has been my teacher concerning advertising of apps. I wish  
I could say that I nailed it on my first try, or second, or even third. Thankfully, 
I learn from my mistakes, because I made every advertising mistake one 
could before I became adept at using advertising effectively. One seemingly 
sound source of advertisement advice is ad agencies. They will likely 
contact you, pitching ad campaigns that are too good to be true. I fell for 
this a few times. I ran a massive campaign with one of these agencies and 
saw no increase in sales. I wasted thousands of dollars; I can tell you that 
something like that leaves a really bad taste in your mouth. After hearing 
over the years from all the fellow developers and appreneurs who have 
made the same mistakes, I am a little less embarrassed. By reading this 
book, I hope you can profit from our blunders and not have to go down 
the same path;I hope you can gain insight from my experiences and run 
successful advertising for your app on the first try!
Before we discuss what works for advertising, I want to tell you about the 
failures that I, along with other appreneurs, have had. One of the campaigns 
I quickly learned doesn’t work for the app market is Facebook sidebar 
ads. These are very inexpensive ads, but the truth is, no one clicks them. 
I imagine most people just tune them out. Morever, because the majority 
of Facebook users use the mobile app, which doesn’t serve any ads, app 
advertisement is missed by the largest segment of Facebook’s audience. 
Recently, however, Facebook has started showing suggested apps on its 
mobile app. This is where you want to advertise your app, not as a sidebar 
on the web site. I have yet to meet a developer who has had success with 
the Facebook sidebar ad model, and I highly doubt I ever will. Another 
issue with cost-per-click ads and apps is that when a user clicks your app’s 

CHAPTER 7: Making the Most of Your Advertising Money
42
ad—and remember, this can only happen from the desktop version of the 
site—that person will likely be directed to your app’s web site or App Store 
URL. Then, the user must grab his or her phone and search for the app 
name to download. I can assure you, this rarely happens. This business 
model works well with web sites whose goal is to gain more traffic but is just 
horrible for apps. If you use an impression model with Facebook, you will be 
dealing with the same problems. Unless your app’s ad literally screams at 
users, they will probably never see it. If they do click it, we are back at where 
we started, facing the issues discussed here.
What I do recommend for social networks is to use them to interact with 
your users and talk about your app. Take my app Secret Happy Hour.  
We started building the Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram pages months 
before the app was even out. Why would I do this? The answer is simple:  
I am making a nice little teaser for the app, and I now have a few thousand 
people ready to download the app the day it goes live. The key to building 
followers quickly is to focus on posting quality content and engaging with 
your users. Don’t just make your social page a huge billboard for your 
app; people will get tired of that. Ask your followers questions, mention 
features you are implementing, and request input; make users feel involved. 
Be certain your page reflects your app’s design look and feel so that you 
can really brand the entire app. The Twitter for Secret Happy Hour is a 
perfect example of how to do this. In only a few months we gathered a few 
thousand followers and have more and more people asking about the app 
each day.

CHAPTER 7: Making the Most of Your Advertising Money
43
Building followers for your app on social networks isn’t as hard as one might 
think. Most important, you need to make sure you are targeting your specific 
demographic; there is no point in gathering tons of followers who will never 
download your app. Let’s look at how I handled social networks for our app 
Secret Happy Hour. Secret Happy Hour is an app that allows users to get 
discounts at their favorite bars and restaurants. The discounts are served 
as happy hours that are available only to app users. The demographic here 
is people who like to go out to eat and drink, specifically people who want 
to get discounts while doing so. I quickly began following a lot of the hot 
bars and restaurants around the United States. Then, I started to follow and 
“favorite” users, based on specific hashtags. Hashtags are used on Twitter, 
Facebook, and Instagram to tag a work that users can search. I would follow 
and favorite users who frequenly hashtag “happyhour,” “drinks,” “food,” 
“discounts,” and “coupons.” Next, I began posting once every few days 
about what the app will do. Keep in mind that this is months before the app 
was released. I would then ask users what kinds of features they would like 
to see. To fill in the gaps between these posts, I posted interesting articles 

CHAPTER 7: Making the Most of Your Advertising Money
44
and stories about happy hours and restaurants. When you post or tweet,  
be sure to use the hashtags you are targeting in your post. By so doing,  
we were able to get approximately 2,000 followers in a month.
Recall the discussion in Chapter 4 of integration of social networks within 
apps. hashtag This is the most effective method of advertising on Facebook; 
best of all, it is free and works on mobile devices. I am a big fan of free 
advertising, as you will soon learn, and have found ways to market apps 
without spending a fortune.
The next advertising failure is banner ads. Granted, they are more productive 
than Facebook ads, yet they still will produce minimal results, and it is 
unlikely you will break even. I have tried advertising apps on a wide array 
of web sites. In one of my many failed banner ad ventures, I ran an ad on 
a popular app review web site, hoping to get great results. To my chagrin, 
even the popularity and content of the site did not increase my sales.  
Take a look at my numbers:
255,862 impressions
117 clicks
0.05 percent click-through rate
I paid almost $400 for the ad and saw no increase in sales. Obviously, 
banner ads were not worth the expense. This type of ad was also one 
recommended by a “big” ad agency. The issue with these agencies is that 
they are made up of salespeople. These people are not trying to make your 
app do better; they are trying to sell you something.

CHAPTER 7: Making the Most of Your Advertising Money
45
Advertising Methods That Work
The failures would not be so easy to share if I couldn’t also share the good 
advertising moves I have made. This may sound a bit unconventional, but 
Twitter blasts are becoming a good, direct form of advertising. I ran a few 
of these and had some great results. Best of all, these ads are super cheap! 
Here are some statistics from an ad I ran at the same time as the banner  
ad mentioned earlier.
Now, the number of impressions is a little harder to gauge with tweets.  
For this, I am going to assume that all 9,000 followers saw the tweet,  
which isn’t the case, but just humor me.
9,000 impressions
161 clicks
1.8 percent click-through ratio
From an advertising standpoint, the percentage shown is a low click-through 
ratio. I am fairly sure not all the followers saw the tweet. I did, however, 
see approximately 80 more downloads that day. At a mere cost of $30, the 
tweet was a beneficial advertising choice. The Twitter ad was considerably 
cheaper than Facebook ads or banner ads and yielded far superior results. 
These packages can be found on various advertising web sites or can be 
purchased directly through the Twitter holder’s account.
Targeted tweets/Facebook blasts are especially useful advertising tools 
with specialty apps. If you have a niche app (see Chapter 1), focusing on its 
market population will allow for more effective advertising. I would stay away 

CHAPTER 7: Making the Most of Your Advertising Money
46
from the mass tweets mentioned earlier and try to enlist a niche celebrity to 
create the tweets. This may cost more, but you will see substantially better 
results. With this method your market is targeted; the majority of the people 
that follow your niche celebrity belong to the same niche population your 
app targets. Is the power of niche apps beginning to sink in? By working 
directly with popular people in your niche, you will be able to work out new 
and innovative approaches to advertising that can help your app sales reach 
their full potential.
The Power of YouTube
YouTube is a very influential form of advertising that many appreneurs 
simply refuse to use. I am not talking about the ads before a video or the 
ads that appear in the corner of the screen; instead, I propose using videos 
as ads. The more video ads you have, the better. I have yet to see a video 
on YouTube with zero views. In fact, I cannot find a video, as I am writing 
this, with fewer than 500 views. Because I love free advertising, I find it 
wasteful not to capitalize on the free YouTube advertising market. If you do 
not have one, create a YouTube account. Create an account for your app, 
your development studio, even your cat; it doesn’t matter. YouTube lets 
you have as many accounts as you want. If you choose to make multiple 
videos of your app, be sure to use a different title and different keywords for 
each video. You don’t want to appear to be someone who is just spamming 
YouTube with videos. Change them up a bit, and you will be fine. Next, 
contact a few of the big YouTube app review channels. CrazyMikesApps, 
UniqueApps, AppStoreReviewer, TechTechManTV, Appolicious, and AppVee 
are all good ones to reach out to. They will likely take a while to get back 
to you, but if they do, try to get a video review. This may cost you between 
$150 and $500, but it is money well spent. These channels have hundreds  
of thousands of subscribers, and their subscribers look up to the reviewers 
like gods. If they review the app favorably, their subscribers will buy it. 
Finally, try to enlist a few people who are popular in the niche, and have  
a video done (for tips on how to do this, see Chapter 1).
Although I have not had success with large advertising agencies in general, 
there are a few marketing firms out there that can produce successful 
results. These places do not come cheap, however. You aren’t paying for 
their time; you are paying for their contacts, and believe me, they have  
some good ones. One company I recently used was APPSPIRE.me  
(http://appspire.me). These guys really know their business, and they have 
some amazing promotional contacts. What they do is make sure your app 
gets visibility and in the ways I have mentioned here. They will send press 
releases to the media, review web sites, and YouTube reviewers. They will 
also do Facebook and Twitter blasts for you. They specialize in advertising 
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 7: Making the Most of Your Advertising Money
47
your app during the different life cycles, which is a huge plus; they can 
handle everything from prelaunch to postlaunch. If you have an app that you 
think has the potential to be the next big thing, I would highly recommend 
trying a marketing firm.
App-to-App Advertising
App-to-app advertising is a unique form of advertising that is very effective. 
With app-to-app advertising, you show a list of your other applications in 
your app. The reason this method works so well is that you have already 
proven the quality of your apps to the consumer. For example, let’s say a 
user has downloaded one of your apps; it would be reasonable to assume 
that if the user likes it, he or she will have no problem downloading other 
apps you have created. There are two styles you can use to implement this 
function: simple and designed. Simple is a line of code that, when tapped, 
directs the user to the App Store with a predefined search for your publisher 
name. The simple plan works well if you don’t have anyone “squatting” on 
your name (using the components of your publisher name as keywords in 
an app to gain publicity). For this reason, I like to design my own “My Apps 
Screen.” You can either mimic the look and feel of the App Store or create 
something completely different; it all boils down to how creative you can be. 
As with screenshot design, you should remember that creative ideas need 
to be executed professionally. The last thing you want is for someone not to 
check out your other apps because your page is poorly designed or hard  
to navigate. If you are ever unsure of the execution of a design choice,  
stick to the plain style.
Advertising Your App in Other Apps
There are basically two methods of using other apps for advertising 
purposes. The first option is to contact the developer of a popular app who 
is willing to run your app ad in his or her app. This type of arrangement will 
likely cost a fair sum of money, but it can achieve fantastic results. A second 
option is a service called Tap for Tap (www.tapfortap.com). Tap for Tap 
employs a unique form of advertising. Essentially, you install the company’s 
SDK in your app, and it will create an ad banner for other developers’ apps 
in your app. Each time this is done, you earn credits; these credits allow you 
to advertise your app in the same manner in other developers’ apps. Using 
this service is an excellent way to garner exposure for your app without 
excessive expense.

CHAPTER 7: Making the Most of Your Advertising Money
48
Cross Promoting User Bases
Cross promoting user bases essentially involves using networking 
contacts. Through your adventures as an appreneur, you will likely meet 
other appreneurs who have great apps that do not compete directly with 
yours. You can approach these appreneurs and propose an advertising 
trade agreement: you can advertise to their user base and, in return, you 
will advertise them to yours. Again, cross promoting provides another free 
advertising opportunity that typically yields excellent results. I have done 
this a few times over the years and found it to be one of the better forms of 
advertising. To foster a mutually beneficial advertising relationship, you must 
choose the right person or app for cross promotion. I am a firm believer in 
the motto “It’s not what you know, it’s who you know.” Consequently,  
if I find an app that I like, I try to reach out to the appreneur and let that 
person know that I, as an appreneur, enjoyed his or her app. To me, it is 
the highest form of compliment when another professional within the craft 
expresses appreciation for your work. Generally, I’ll then proceed to talk 
about one of my apps or anything that might start a good conversation.  
By the end of the e-mail exchange, I usually have a new appreneur friend. 
In fact, this is how I met most of the people whose stories you have read in 
this book. Branch out; don’t be shy and sheltered. Most appreneurs are just 
like you and love meeting new people. You also have something in common: 
you both sell apps! No matter how much you think you know, there is always 
someone who knows more. Find the experts, cross promote your apps with 
them, and learn from them.
To maximize your app’s popularity, exhaust the recommended advertising 
markets: social networks (as integrated into your app, not Facebook sidebar 
ads), promoted tweets, and videos on YouTube. Then, wait a few days, 
and run a Google search for your app’s name. Because of your advertising 
diligence, you will probably have more results than just the standard App 
Store URL. This is what you want to see. The more results that appear in 
your search, the more web traffic your app is generating. Ideally, this data 
will also reflect an increase in sales, so now you can pat yourself on the 
back. You have just successfully advertised and marketed an app, with low 
risk and expense.

49
Chapter 8
Plan to Scale, or Your 
App Will Fail
The first big success I had with an app was an interactive guide for the 
popular video game Halo 3. Because I was a fairly amateur appreneur and 
developer, I needed app content that was relatively simple. Also, The app 
market was already stocked with guide apps, so I needed to make mine 
better. I partnered with one of the top professional gaming teams, OpTic 
Gaming and KontrolFreek, and had them advertise the app in a lot of 
different ways: run ads on their YouTube channels, post on their Facebook 
and Twitter, talk about the apps at events, and e-mail their followers. This 
was a fantastic way for me to maximize my exposure with absolutely no 
out-of-pocket costs. Of course, not every app will allow for this scenario, 
but if you think outside the box, you can always come up with unique 
marketing techniques. The app reaped great results: number 2 in reference 
and number 188 overall! I had tens of thousands of users, and for an app in 
a market this specific, it was about as viral as it could be. I did everything 
in my power to keep my users happy and engaged. I was able to keep this 
app at the top for almost a year. Of the scores of lessons I learned from 
this app’s success, how to handle the viral potential of an app would be the 
most crucial.
Going viral is when something becomes immensely popular at an 
exceedingly fast rate. In the app world viral apps are a developer’s dream 
because of the huge profit margins gained. However, as an amateur 
appreneur, if you do not know what to expect and how to prepare for this 
good fortune, you may not reap all the benefits possible. You will need to 
plan for this in the beginning by devising strategies to handle the potential 
immense amount of downloads. I neglected to do this  for one of my games, 
and this oversight sure came back to bite me. In the spring of 2012,  

CHAPTER 8: Plan to Scale, or Your App Will Fail
50
Draw Something took the App Store by storm; you literally couldn’t open a 
blog or e-news article without reading about it. I decided to have my team 
at the Idea 2 App Store (www.idea2appstore.com) develop a spin-off of the 
game. Everything went smoothly, and in approximately two months we had 
a nice working version. Recall my warning in Chapter 5 against requiring 
your users to login via Facebook. Zynga purchased Draw Something, and, 
within a few weeks, I saw that Facebook login was now required in order to 
play. I was amped! Normally, my development team doesn’t bother going 
up against the big companies, but this opportunity was huge. I took a look 
at the reviews for Draw Something in the App Store. Just as I had expected, 
the game was getting slammed with one-star reviews by annoyed users. 
This was our opportunity, something I had dreamed about for years. Before 
I continue, I want to underline a difficult lesson I learned from this adventure: 
if you have an app that uses a database, buy quality hosting. Sadly, I did 
not do this, and because I don’t want to be accused of libeling anyone, I will 
leave the guilty party unnamed. Basically, the company offered dirt-cheap 
hosting, which was something we initially saw as a good move, as the game 
we made sends and receives tons of data. Assuming we only had a few 
hundred users, our hosting choice would have been a nonissue; instead,  
we had tens of thousands of daily active users within a few hours. I was  
very excited—until I played the game. Everything was timing out;essentially, 
the puny virtual servers couldn’t handle the load. I was beyond upset.  
In retrospect, I should have planned for the possibility of going viral instead 
of trying to save a few bucks. The game is now hosted on a dedicated 
server and has no issues; unfortunately, it was too little, too late. Our chance 
to take down a big name had passed. A positive aspect of this missed 
opportunity is that I am able to pass on the valuable lesson I learned to  
you today.
Tracking Trends and Producing Results
You need to keep an eye on your trends. As you start to see a rise in 
downloads, you have to prepare yourself. Not all apps have servers and 
databases, but that is just a minor part of the overall scheme. Before you 
get too excited about the prospect of low-maintenance apps’ equaling 
no responsibility, let me correct your thinking. With a large influx of users, 
you are going to be bombarded with e-mails, Twitter and Facebook posts, 
and publicity. To the inexperienced, this may sound like no big deal, but it 
is super stressful and, at times, overwhelming. The added responsibilities 
will test your time management skills. In addition to dealing with the 
publicity and inquiries from reviewers, you will still need to interact with 
your community in whatever way you can. Be sure to continue your 
communications with any users asking questions via e-mail. If you neglect 
this commitment to users, your app will not be popular for long. A key 

CHAPTER 8: Plan to Scale, or Your App Will Fail
51
component of business longevity still applies: if you are able to keep your 
users happy, your application will continue to trend upward. Once users feel 
neglected, interest will wane, and your app will inevitably trend down.
Tracking trends is a requirement for any successful appreneur. Fortunately, 
there are a variety of tools available for tracking necessary app data. Expect 
a short-lived appreneur career if you think tracking trends consists only of 
logging in and downloading sales. These are some of the categories you 
need to track as an appreneur:
Downloads/Sales: This is fairly self-explanatory. You need 
to know how many people either purchased or downloaded 
your app.
Ranking: This is the rank of your app in its respective 
category. Rank is determined by the number of sales, or 
downloads. These numbers will fluctuate daily. Keeping a 
close eye on rank will help you know if any new changes 
you have made are working in your favor.
Reviews: The review system is a bit flawed. Typically, happy 
users don’t leave reviews as often as unhappy users. If you  
are getting bad reviews, take note of what the users are 
saying. You will always have users who leave one-star 
reviews saying, “bad app” or “stupid app.” Generally, these 
are comments generated by competitors. You can always 
submit these reviews to your respective App Store and 
have them removed. To do this, simply contact Apple with 
your app’s name and app ID and ask that the review be 
taken down. Apple is usually pretty good about dealing with 
this issue. You should pay attention if you see a few one-star 
reviews pointing out the same problem, and quickly address it.
Keyword search ranking: This is similar to download 
ranking; however, it is purely based on how your app 
stacks up for searched terms. The majority of the users 
who download your app will have searched for a particular 
term to find it. Knowing what number you come up for a 
search term is valuable information (for information on how 
to effectively track this data, see the next section, “Tools for 
Tracking Keyword Rankings”).
Featured in the App Store: If your app is doing well, there 
is a chance it will come up in the “What’s Hot” or “New 
and Noteworthy” section of the App Store. This is a major 
accomplishment, so if your app gets one of these mentions, 
take a second to congratulate yourself. Usually, you will only 
be able to track this manually for your country of residence. 

CHAPTER 8: Plan to Scale, or Your App Will Fail
52
Remember, the App Store reaches more than 150 countries, 
each of which has its own rankings and featured sections.
Featured on the web: Many web sites feature and review 
apps. In the event that, fortuitously, your app becomes 
featured on one of these sites, you will see a sizable jump 
in downloads. You need to know if and when your app has 
been featured on these sites. From what I have seen, there 
is not a better tool for this than a simple Google search. 
Search your app’s name, and run through approximately 
four pages of results. If your app is not listed, then you know 
it has not yet been featured.
The sheer magnitude of app data available makes tracking it all manually 
impossible. Lucky for you, my appreneur experiences have led me to 
discover some awesome tools to help you do this. Best of all, most of them 
are free, and the ones that are not are well worth the investment.
Tools for Tracking Downloads
Here is a listing of some of the best tools available for tracking downloads.
AppViz (www.ideaswarm.com/AppViz2.html)
AppViz is a tool I have been using since I first started selling apps. It is a 
powerhouse for collecting data, providing you with the following results:
Rankings
Downloads/Sales
Reviews
AppViz keeps all your data in one place and allows you to create graphs. 
Especially helpful for tax purposes, it quickly figures out weekly, monthly, or 
yearly sales. Moreover, this app can track your rankings in any country that has 
the App Store and even translates your out-of-country reviews. At the time of 
this books printing, AppViz will cost $49, but, like I said, it is worth every penny.
Distimo (www.distimo.com)
Distimo is an easy-to-use tool for tracking your daily, weekly, and monthly 
sales. All you have to do is register for an account on its web site, and you 
will receive an e-mail each morning containing your sales numbers. The 
interface is also really approachable. I highly recommendthis tool, which, 
unlike some, is completely free and takes no time to set up and use.

CHAPTER 8: Plan to Scale, or Your App Will Fail
53
AppSales Mobile (github.com/omz/AppSales-Mobile)
AppSales-Mobile is an open-source app that you can download and install 
on your device. You will need the most recent copy of Xcode to make this 
work. Most developers will handle installation if you request it. This app is 
probably one of my favorites. It is super easy to use and lightning fast. You 
can track downloads/sales by country or app. Furthermore, just like AppViz, 
AppSales-Mobile collects all your reviews and translates them and allows 
you to view daily, weekly, and monthly sales. Another cool feature is the data 
display: color-coded bar graphs for each individual app (again, like AppViz). 
Color coding provides you with a clear visual of which of your apps are 
selling well and which are not. AppSales-Mobile is also free!
Tools for Tracking App Store Ranking
Next are tools you can use to track App Store ranking.
App Annie (www.appannie.com)
App Annie is one of my favorite tools for tracking app ranking. This app 
offers a wealth of useful data. One of the many powers of App Annie is 
the ability to track competitors’ rankings. The site is very simple to use; 
just search by app or publisher name, and you can see current and past 
rankings. With its valuable data and ease of navigation, it is hard to believe 
this app is free!
MajicRank (majicjungle.com/majicrank.html) 
MajicRank is a unique app, as it is the only one that allows you to track 
real-time current ranking. Most sites, such as App Annie, have a lag time of 
appproximately 24 hours. You can also track competitors, but you have to 
have their app ID. To obtain the app ID, simply run a Google search for the 
app’s name, and copy the ID from the App Store URL. For example, here is 
the URL for one of my apps:
 
http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/caption-me/id528817199?mt=8
 
The highlighted portion is the app ID. Plug this into MajicRank, and you now 
have the real-time ranking for my app. An added bonus is that MajicRank is 
free to download and use!
Tools for Tracking Keyword Rankings
Following are great tools for tracking your keyword rankings.

CHAPTER 8: Plan to Scale, or Your App Will Fail
54
AppCodes (http://www.appcod.es)
A recent discovery, AppCodes has definitely shown to be a helpful  
data-tracking source. This web site offers some of the best search engine 
optimization available for apps. AppCodes lets you track your competitors’ 
keywords, which is very important information to have. The site also has 
some unique features for keyword optimizing, allowing you to test keywords 
for your app’s ranking. Because keywords are so integral to app sales, this 
feature gives you invaluable information, which could be a deciding factor in 
your app’s success. AppCodes was only $14.95 a month in mid-2013, and 
for the services it provides, it is a bargain.
Search Man SEO (www.searchman.com)
Another valuable tool is Search Man SEO. If you use it in combination 
withAppCodes, you will be able to dominate the keyword market.  
Search Man tracks all the keyword rankings for you and any competitors 
you choose. As you will discover, keyword rankings are similar to download 
rankings, in that they fluctuate greatly. Knowing where you stand each 
day is crucial, from a marketing standpoint. You will receive a user-friendly 
e-mail from Search Man each day around lunchtime. The e-mail update will 
contain detailed information regarding your app’s keywords. Preemptively, 
Search Man also tracks new, potential competitors for you, based on 
keywords. At the time of this writing, Search Man SEO costs $20 a month 
per app. To ensure your satisfaction, a trial version is also  offered so that 
you can become comfortable with the product before buying.
Parting Thoughts
Of all the data responsibilities, tracking keywords is probably the most tedious. 
It doesn’t help that Apple is notorious for changing the search algorithm, with 
no advance warning. Consequently, I try to check my keywords daily to make 
sure nothing has happened that could cause my apps not to show up in the 
rankings. The moment I notice an app’s drop in rankings, I respond by either 
advertising more to push it back up or choosing a new keyword. Remember,  
if users cannot find your app, they cannot download it.
The sheer number of tools available for data tracking might seem 
overwhelming. You will probably ask yourself, “Which should I use?”  
The answer is all of them. There is no one tool that does everything.  
Each one  discussed here provides something of use that the others do not. 
Use them all in harmony, and you will be satisfied with the results.
The next topic of interest to a successful appreneur is the life cycle of apps. 
This is discussed in Chapter 9.

55
Chapter 9
The Life Cycles of Apps
Much like a living entity, apps have an expiration date for success, or what I 
like to refer to as a life cycle. No two apps have the same life cycle. With all 
the information presented to this point, it should be easy for you to predict 
where you app is in terms of its life cycle. A flawed assumption some people 
make is that if you create a popular app, it will sell at the top forever. This is 
not true even with the top-selling games. Angry Birds serves as an excellent 
example. When this app is trending downward, the experienced developers 
make a new iteration of the game or launch a major update to counteract 
the downward trend. If they did not make these changes, in all likelihood, 
the game wouldn’t even be in the top 200 today. Not all apps have the same 
time frame when it comes to cycles, but they all generally trend the same. 
Understanding trends requires that you be aware of the App Store’s three 
distinct seasons: pre–holiday (September–November); holiday, or peak 
(December-February); and slow (March–August). An unwise appreneur will 
only look at sales numbers (the amount of money he or she is making) to 
determine trends and cycles, but it is imperative that you consider all the 
information at hand to make the best decisions for your app.
Tracking the Right Data
The only effective way to track your app’s trends and life cycle is by App 
Store ranking. The reason is that during the different app seasons, the 
volume of apps varies greatly. For example, if you have a top 200 app 
during the holiday season, you will see approximately 750 paid downloads. 
Conversely, during the slow season this number can be as low as 500. If you 
were tracking your app purely on revenue, you might logically assume your 
app is trending down; however, it is not. Keeping a close eye on ranking 
provides the most accurate data when tracking an app’s cycles.

CHAPTER 9: The Life Cycles of Apps
56
App Launch Life Cycle
When you first release your app, you will likely trend upward that entire 
week. Your app is automatically featured in the App Store’s “New” category 
for the first few days. In addition, many third-party sites will scrape (pull 
data) from the App Store for apps to showcase; therefore, your app will 
likely show up in some Google searches as well. Statistically, your new 
release trend will reach an apex four to five days after your app has been 
released. What you do next will determine if you continue to stay at the top 
or plummet to the bottom.
Postlaunch Life Cycle
If you have applied all the strategies covered thus far, your app is doing well. 
You are reading your reviews and tracking rankings and other important 
data. To remain viable in the app market, it is now time to start thinking 
about how you can add or improve features. Leonardo da Vinci said, “Art is 
never finished, only abandoned.” This is my favorite quote for underlining 
the mistake amateur appreneurs habitually make with their first few apps: 
they abandon them. They think that just because the app is launched in the 
App Store and is doing well, they can rest on their proverbial laurels, getting 
paid forever. Unfortunately, the notion of the App Store as an easy,  
get-rich-quick road to riches is a misconception that has been perpetuated 
by many authors and bloggers. The truth is quite the opposite; being an 
appreneur is a job like any other. If you start a successful soft drink company 
and never go to work after the first day, how long do you think the company 
will keep making a profit? I tested this theory with an app not long ago. 
A few days after the app ranked among the App Store’s top 200 overall, 
I decided to see how long I could ride the wave. In January 2012 the app 
was generating more than $1,000 a day. I didn’t maintain contact with my 
community of users or add any updates. Not surprisingly, I was correct in 
my hypothesis. After only two months, sales plummeted. In the summer 
of 2012, the app, which is still in version one, made a paltry $8. Simply 
put, if you do not continue to work with your apps and customers, you will 
eventually trend down into the dirt. To avoid this scenario, take note of the 
secrets and tips I have learned.
Updating Apps to Keep Users Engaged
Users love updates (this should be imprinted into your brain by now). 
Updates are the single-best way of keeping your application from trending 
downward. Types of updates can vary from huge new features to simple bug 
fixes. As long as you are doing your best to keep your users happy, they will 
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 9: The Life Cycles of Apps
57
continue to download and use the app. If you let your app become stagnant 
and boring, your users will leave and never come back. Usually, when users 
become bored with an app, they delete it. To avoid deletion disaster, you 
must keep your current users using the app. There are a few ways to do this:
Push notifications: Push notifications are messages sent 
to your users from the app. The cool thing about push 
notifications is that they have close to a 100 percent open 
rate. Because they pop up on the main screen of a user’s 
phone, they are difficult to ignore. Use these sparingly; the 
last thing you want to do is spam your users. I generally 
send these notifications when I add a new update.
E-mail notifications: If you have a good e-mail list for your 
users, you can send the same types of notifications via 
e-mail. Unlike push notifications, e-mails are not opened 
as often; in addition, you may anger some users, who view 
these notifications as junk mail. I only use this method if  
I don’t have an app with push notifications.
Social network pages: Make sure to chime in on your 
social network pages. Let your users know you are listening 
and working on the app. Feel free to use your own app 
and post some of your own content. Users love to see the 
developer using the app.
Facebook/Twitter posts: Be sure to use the social media 
outlets associated with your app. These are fantastic ways 
to interact with your users. I usually make posts when a new 
feature has gone into development, when it is submitted to 
the App Store, and when the update is live for download. 
This will keep your users up-to-date and, in a sense, include 
them in the development process.
Generating New Sales
In addition to maintaining your current user base, any wise business plan 
will also include new customer generation. To generate new sales, you 
should continue to advertise (see Chapter 6). Advertising is not a one-time 
deal; to keep your app business fresh, make sure you always have ads, 
videos, and promotions going live. Most of these ads will run for an allotted 
time, so make sure you don’t let them all expire at once. Inexperienced 
appreneurs typically make the mistake of only running one ad campaign. 
Can you imagine what would happen if major companies did this? My guess 
is that they wouldn’t be major companies for long. Continue to find new and 

CHAPTER 9: The Life Cycles of Apps
58
innovative ways to advertise your application, and you will always be ahead 
of your competition. As the App Store continues to grow, those who can 
effectively advertise and market will come out on top.
Seasonal iterations of apps can be a huge sales boost. Observe the App 
Store around Christmastime; often, the most popular apps have a Christmas 
version. Typically, only the big companies do this, but more independent 
appreneurs need to be informed. Adding a new version of your app with a 
Christmas or Halloween theme to it can drive up your sales exponentially. 
Angry Birds did this with its Angry Birds seasonal game. It is the same 
game, with a few new levels and a Christmas theme. The seasonal version 
also turned a considerable profit; users did not mind paying again for 
basically the same app.
Partnering with affiliates can also be a good way to make a new version 
of the app. Imangi Studios, the creators of Temple Run, provides an 
excellent example to follow. Imagini created a similar version of the game 
that featured characters from the movie Brave. The original game had been 
trending down for the past few months; however, as soon as the Brave 
movie version hit the store, Temple Run was back at the top.
Sometimes, you need to think creatively to prevent your apps from trending 
down. There is no one way to accomplish this, but by using all these tricks, 
you will have made a great effort. Remember, if you abandon your app,  
your users will abandon you.

59
Chapter 10
Selling the Rights  
and Cashing Out
You have undoubtedly heard of people selling successful businesses, 
making millions, and instantly retiring. Apps are no different. With the market 
growing the way it is, investors are always looking for new apps to buy. 
Because the app market is so young, buyers will pay top dollar for rights. 
The times I have sold the rights to apps have been fortunate circumstances 
that netted me lucrative profits. When I have wanted to take on a new 
project or adventure, selling a particular app’s rights has provided me with 
both the capital and the freedom to pursue other options. No matter the 
app, there is always a buyer out there. I know some appreneurs who have 
retired at a very young age simply by selling the rights to their app at the 
perfect time.
Because of this emergence of a new market from the buying and selling of 
the app rights, it is important that you know the process and expectations. 
In the event that a buyer wants to procure the rights to your app, these will 
include, but are not limited to, source code, user base, future revenues, and 
development team. Think of someone’s purchasing the rights to your app 
like buying a web site domain. Basically, once the transaction is complete, 
the app is no longer yours. You may wonder why you would ever want to 
give up your creative work, but you will learn that once the app bug bites, 
it is hard to limit your app creation. Likely, you will start with one app and 
then quickly make another. The creative process will continue, and before 
you know it, you will have a plethora of apps. Having multiple apps is a great 
business model for sustained revenue, but it is also very time-consuming 
and stressful. The purpose of this book is to guide you in making an app 
successful. So, can you imagine carrying out all of the steps I’ve outlined for 
you for all your apps? Hopefully, your answer was yes, but once you reach 

CHAPTER 10: Selling the Rights and Cashing Out 
60
10 to 15 apps, this is simply unfeasible. Hence, selling the rights to an app 
is a wise business move that will free up some time and make some quick 
cash. Until recently, only large companies sold app rights, but thanks to the 
appearance of some very good web sites that act as brokers, this is now a 
possibility for all appreneurs. I have sold a few individual apps as well as my 
entire game guide company.
You should set a goal and then proceed accordingly when trying to sell 
rights. Decide whether you want to sell one app, an entire series, or a 
developer account. If you are trying to sell individual apps, your best option 
is the web site Sellmyapplication (www.sellmyapplication.com). I have had 
some great results with Sellmyapplication, which charges a very reasonable 
fee to post an ad for your app on its site. One of the key benefits of the site 
is the size of its community. I have listed quite a few apps on the site, and 
I usually received inquiries within a day. Furthermore, the seller also gets 
to interact directly with the buyer, eliminating the need for a go-between 
and saving you money. This direct buy system works well because no one 
knows his or her app better than the person selling it. I have not found a 
better platform for selling an app. Sellmyapplication also has a great market 
for buying preexisting apps and code snippets. I have purchased, for an 
extremely reasonable price, some awesome code snippets that I was able to 
use in my own apps.
Selling the Rights at the Right Time
If you do decide to sell your app or app company, you need to make sure 
it is a decision you will not regret. Usually, appreneurs who sell their rights 
do so when they want to move on to a new series or project and do not 
have time to maintain their current apps as well. Finding buyers on your 
own is almost impossible and is more of a headache than it is worth. When 
selling my first company, I initially tried to take on the task of finding buyers 
singlehandedly. It was a daunting and frustrating process that could have 
been made easier had I known about the team at AppBusinessBrokers 
(www.appbusinessbrokers.com). I have found this group to be knowledgeable 
and professional. What they do is gather all the information a potential buyer 
of your app/app company will ask and serve as a broker. They have a wide 
client base and can help you sell your apps to investors in a timely manner. 
In addition to their large client base and extensive knowledge of the market, 
they are also accessible; they even take the time to talk to you on the phone 
before beginning the process. This is the kind of customer service that 
makes selling apps less of a hassle.

CHAPTER 10: Selling the Rights and Cashing Out 
61
Buying Preestablished Apps
As an appreneur, you may also be approached to buy an app. Buying apps 
is generally a business risk, as the majority of apps for sale are those that 
are trending down despite the efforts of the seller. For the appreneur with a 
knack for generating sales, what would otherwise be a business risk may be 
a business opportunity. Before buying, or even considering buying, an app, 
ask yourself a few simple questions:
How well established is this app?
If the app has been around for a while, has been ranked fairly consistently, 
and shows up high in search results, then buying the app may be a 
great investment. If the app’s ranking is way down from its initial release 
(remember to use AppAnnie to track this data), then you are taking a huge 
risk. Buying the latter type of app is equivalent to salvaging a leaky boat 
while it is in the water. Sure, you could try to plug the holes and do repairs, 
but it may be sinking so fast that any patch efforts are in vain. The most 
important factor to consider when buying an app is how well its keywords 
rank. If an app has established keywords and shows up high in the rankings, 
then buying the app could be a great move.
How much is the app selling for?
Price will determine if buying the app is more logical than developing,  
or having someone develop, something similar. Most studios can give 
very accurate quotes on what it would cost to build an app like one that is 
already in the App Store. Remember, the only thing you cannot buy when 
having an app developed is rankings. If the app is ranked well, then do not 
bother trying to compete and develop your own version.
Do the users like the app?
A cause for concern is if the application is flooded with bad reviews. In that 
case, you need to be very wary. Recently, some appreneurs developed fake 
fingerprint scanners, ghost finders, and lie detectors. These apps are just 
scams, and some poor person downloaded the app, thinking it did these 
things. Do not buy these—ever! Apple is cracking down on fraudulent apps 
and removing them from the App Store; likewise, the company is blocking 
new ones. You will be disappointed when you spend thousands for this  
app, only to have it taken down by Apple or not approved at all. If a seller  
is willing to scam users, then that person will have no quams about 
scamming you.

CHAPTER 10: Selling the Rights and Cashing Out 
62
Selling Apps That Have Never Been Listed in 
the App Store
In addition to buying and selling preexisting apps, another app opportunity 
may present itself: flipping apps. Flipping is a term that originated in the 
dot-com era and denotes the buying or building of a web site in order to 
immediately sell it. Although flipping has not yet gained popularity in the 
app world, it is an inevitable eventuality. Already there are a few appreneurs 
who make apps similar to ones that are popular in the App Store and who 
sell them without ever uploading them to the store. This is a huge gamble; 
you will not know how well the app has done. You won’t be able to know 
if Apple will accept the app or if it will sell as you anticipate. Flipped apps 
are generally less expensive than preestablished apps because of the risk 
involved. I personally have never flipped an app. It is too much of a risk for 
me. I have bought and sold plenty of apps, but only when I know what to 
expect. If flipping catches on, then I will adjust my business model, but until 
then I will stay away from this practice.
Now, I will reveal with hesitancy a well-kept secret of mine. Because  
I decided to hold back nothing in this book, I will tell you how I maximize 
profit by selling an app’s rights at the perfect time. If you are able to 
successfully follow the trends of your apps and anticipate what will happen 
well before it does, you can make a considerable profit by selling the rights 
before an app begins to trend down. One consideration of buyers is how the 
app is trending. They will usually only be interested in the app if it is trending 
up or flat. If your app is trending down, and you sell it, you will receive fewer 
offers and less profit. The previous chapters painstakingly described the 
importance of trend data. To be a successful appreneur, it is imperative 
that you learn how to read this information. Once you become adept at 
data analysis, you can make serious money in markets people didn’t even 
know existed. When I foresee that an app is about to trend down, I put it up 
for sale at a high price. Ideally, you will have a few very interested buyers 
soon after, because the app is doing well. By using this strategy, you are 
maximizing two things: time and money. If you do not have to worry about 
remarketing, repromoting, and readvertising an app, then you will have more 
time to devote in other places. I have found that the best time to sell the 
rights to an app is in late February, when holiday season sales begin to slow. 
Typically, your app will trend up during the holiday season; it will likely come 
down in the spring. If you are able to sell your apps before they trend down, 
you will make money, and fast. This template, of course, will not work with 
every app, but it is a good starting point.

CHAPTER 10: Selling the Rights and Cashing Out 
63
This chapter is probably one of the most complicated in the book. There are 
many risks associated with buying and selling apps, risks not advisable for 
the amateur appreneur. I would highly recommend getting some experience 
under your belt before attempting buying or selling. The app buying and 
selling world is comparable to the stock market. Do it right, and you can 
make a fortune. Do it wrong, and you will lose your fortune—fast.

65
Chapter 11
Keeping Piracy to  
a Minimum
Over the last few years, piracy has become a major problem in the App 
Store. In 2011, for instance, I had twice as many apps pirated as sold. You 
will hear a lot of naive appreneurs say, “Piracy is not a big deal; people who 
pirate would not have bought your app anyway.” This is just flat-out wrong. 
Consider the following illustration. A user pirates the paid version of your 
app. You are making nothing from the user. Following the logic that this 
person would never have paid for the app allows him or her to download 
your free, ad-backed, version. You will now generate revenue from the user 
by serving him or her ads. Users who pirate apps are much less likely to 
buy them; however, there are plenty of users who will download a free app 
with ads. If you have an application that has server costs, make sure you 
do something to prevent piracy, or pirates will eat up a ton of those costs. 
Believe me, it is a dismal feeling when you search for your app’s name, 
followed by dot-ipa, only to see it all over the Internet in every cracked app 
store. You basically have two options: manually send each cracked app 
store and hosting site Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) notificaton, 
instructing that the app be taken down, or prevent piracy from occurring 
in the first place. My first reaction was to serve DMCA paperwork to each 
offender. This was the most time-consuming and tedious task I have ever 
taken on. In the end, I  gave up on trying to prevent piracy on my own. I was 
approached by the company AntiPi (www.antipi.net), which claimed it could 
prevent piracy. I was skeptical, to say the least. I decided it would be worth 
a try, though, and I was very happy with the results. This company literally 
takes down all your pirated apps from the cracked app stores. The AntiPi 
software inserts within the pirated versions of the apps a legal message, 
followed by only one, clickable button: “Buy the app in the App Store.”  

CHAPTER 11: Keeping Piracy to a Minimum 
66
This was exactly what I was looking for—a way of converting pirated apps 
to sales. Obviously, not every person who pirated the app is going to buy it;  
however, I have noticed that approximately 1 in 50 does. Although this 
may sound like a relatively low conversion rate, these numbers can add up 
drastically when you consider the thousands of copies being downloaded  
a day.
Some people tend to minimize the issue and contend that pirating actually 
serves as a form of free advertisement. I disagree wholeheartedly with that 
notion. First, any time your app is pirated, someone has gotten it for free. 
Second, people who pirate apps are proud of what they do and will often 
brag about it in your app to other users. I had an app that had a lobby chat 
room that allowed users to chat interactively. I noticed that once my app 
became readily available in the cracked app stores, hundreds of people in 
my chat room were boasting about how they got the app for free. As you 
can imagine, the users who paid for my app were quite upset with this. 
Third, the people who were using the pirated version of my app were also 
using features that required server calls, which cost money. Finally, the 
increasing ease with which pirates are able to jailbreak is worrying. Recently, 
jailbroken devices have been enabled to download in-app purchases for 
free. Many developers took the route of adding in-app purchases in their 
apps as a way of preventing piracy. This no longer is a viable option. The 
only in-app purchases that cannot be cracked are those that are server 
validated, so if you decide to use in-app purchases to fend off piracy, make 
sure they have this feature.
No matter how big or small your app, piracy will always be a problem, and 
that is why you should do your best to prevent it. Again, I highly recommend 
AntiPi for this. The company charges very reasonable rates and takes care 
of all of the grunt work. You also will get a monthly report showing how 
many copies of your app were kept from the pirates. My first month,  more 
than 150,000 copies were prevented from being pirated. Prevention did not 
result in 150,000 extra sales, but that is still a lot of people who won’t be 
using my app for free and costing me money and headaches.
Piracy has the ability to crush industries (look at what Napster did to the 
music industry). Whatever the size of your app, it is only a matter of time 
until it gets cracked. Heed my advice, and take action to circumvent this.

67
Chapter 12
Evolving with the  
App Store
Here, Randal Higgins, the founder of Touchmint (www.touchmint.com), shares 
his story, highlighting, among many things, the importance of adaptability for 
an appreneur:
My path to developing started approximately a year after 
college. I graduated with degrees in computer information 
systems and computer network administration. During college 
I took a few programming classes, such as Java and Flash, but 
I was far from good at them. During school I always wanted to 
develop iPhone apps, but I did not have a Mac and could not 
justify the cost at the time. Not long after I graduated, I moved 
to Arizona, sold some electronics and online game items on 
Ebay and Craigslist, and, finally, bought a MacBook Pro.
Being a Windows person for most of my life, it was a little 
hard to figure out the file system and a few other things on 
the Mac operating system. I began learning Objective-C by 
reading Programming in Objective-C, by Stephen G. Kochan, 
through Safari Books Online. The book was a great starter, 
and the Safari Books membership is a must; the site has 
every programming book you can think of. After reading 
Programming in Objective-C, I started Head First iPhone 
and iPad Development. Head First is a great hands-on book.  
It made Xcode very easy to understand.
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 12: Evolving with the App Store 
68
As I worked through the Head First book, I was thinking about 
an app I wanted to develop. I have always been a huge fan 
of playing sports, especially enjoying the statistics involved. 
I play quite a bit of softball and had been trying to keep my 
stats, but all the programs out there were lacking. I decided 
that my first app would be a baseball/softball stat-tracking 
app. Because I had already downloaded all the baseball stat 
apps in the App Store, I knew what worked and didn’t work. 
I analyzed user reviews and learned what others liked and 
didn’t like. I cannot stress enough how important it is to know 
your market and competition. Not everyone’s goal is to make 
money, but if you do plan on earning some cash, you had 
better know the market and your competition.
Nowadays, I see so many talented people pouring time into 
an app that is likely to fail because the app market is flooded 
with similar apps. Like I said, I am nowhere near to being a 
good programmer, but I would argue that it’s more important 
to know the market.
When I built my first app, Baseball Stats Tracker Touch,  
I created it as a framework for other apps. Although it took me 
approximately five to seven months to learn Xcode and to build 
that first app, it was worth the investment of time. I have built 
seven other apps on that framework in just four months. All 
but two have reached at least the top 200 in sports. Baseball 
Stats Tracker Touch reached number 10 overall in sports and 
grossed more than $6,000 in its first six months.
Approximately halfway through development, I found a site, 
iPhoneDevSDK (www.iphonedevsdk.com), that really helped 
out a ton. To this day, my favorite online forum is its “Business 
and Marketing Forums.” The community is great, and if you 
want to learn the ins and outs of the App Store, that is the 
place to go.
Just because your app is released does not mean it is done. 
A web site is a must, something that I learned the hard way. 
I originally built my web site, Touchmint (www.touchmint.com), 
on Google Sites, which was great because it is free, but my 
site lacked customization, causing me to look unprofessional. 
I recently moved to Namecheap, where I have a Wordpress 
theme; it is just as easy as Google but looks a lot better. 

CHAPTER 12: Evolving with the App Store 
69
Ongoing communication is another key to being successful. 
I make a habit of responding to questions and complaints 
within an hour, if possible. It blew my mind that users had 
never heard back from developers, and the users could not 
believe that I was writing to them, and so quickly. If you really 
want to keep good reviews, put a support button in your app 
so that people can get support right from it. I also like to give 
out promotions to my other available apps when someone 
takes the time to report a bug.
Updating and design are very important factors as well. When 
your app is targeted at kids, it had better look appealing, and 
the icon had better be cool. Updates are also great, not only 
for adding new features, but also for reminding your users that 
they own your app. When they are reminded, they will spread 
the word.
Overall, I don’t think there is a clearly defined path to success. 
Rather, success results from a combination of many factors. 
There is a reason why people who know Objective-C and 
Xcode inside and out have never had a successful app to 
date. To be successful in the App Store, you need to know 
a little of everything. Also important is the ability to adjust to 
App Store changes very fast. Apple will change its system, 
and it is your job as a developer to figure out how to adjust 
better than others do.
The App Store is evolving every day. It is your job as an appreneur to 
evolve with it, as Randal explains in his testimonial. Keeping up with the 
App Store’s changes will prepare you for navigating the app market and 
making informed appreneur decisions. I have found that the best way to 
keep updated is by having a good community. As an active member of the 
forums on iPhoneDevSDK (www.iphonedevsdk.com), I connect with talented 
developers and appreneurs, including several of the people whose stories 
I share in this book. Appreneurs who are willing to learn are going to be 
much more successful than those who are inflexible. In this profession, 
I have found that if you ask for help, people will be happy to assist you. 
In particular, the iPhoneDevSDK forums have given me information on 
everything App Store–related. There are thousands of threads available that 
can answer any type of app-related question. My primary use for the forums 
is to gather other developers’ opinions about my ideas. If you are unsure as 
to why your app isn’t meeting your expectations, simply ask the community. 
They are fairly blunt, but criticism is what you may need to improve your app.

CHAPTER 12: Evolving with the App Store 
70
As you are nearing the conclusion of this book, you should now be equipped 
to successfully handle every aspect of creating and selling an app. Once 
you have mastered the tips and techniques I have provided, you will have 
no trouble adapting to the ever-changing App Store. Evolving with the 
App Store can be as simple as switching your keywords to optimize a new 
algorithm the App Store deploys (as with the drastic changes in 2012) or 
as complex as completely changing your application line to better suit new 
users. One year, photography apps may be hot, whereas the next year 
they may not be. You need to be able to transform products as new market 
trends emerge. Among the many lessons I have learned from the App 
Storeis not to bank on one app forever. If you examine closely how the top 
independent developers have made money, it becomes apparent that they 
have a wide array of apps, not just one. Going with one app is a gamble, a 
risky business move. If a competitor makes a better app than the one you 
have on offer, you are in a very bad position.
Technology is always changing, and you must constantly be thinking of new 
and innovative ways to incorporate these changes in your app. One story 
that represents innovation is that of MobGen’s Alert Tone Creator. MobGen 
expertly timed his super simple app, which came out with the release of iOS 5.  
This appreneur did his research and knew that Apple would be allowing 
custom text tones in iOS 5. Therefore, he integrated this new technology 
into an easy-to-use app, which became wildly popular. In another example, 
a few appreneurs made apps that optimized photos for Facebook’s timeline 
feature. Once again, these appreneurs knew of a new technology and were 
able to integrate it at the right time and achieve outstanding results.
Timing is everything when it comes to adding new technologies to apps. 
Generally, if you’re not one of the first to do it, then you will not make much 
money. I like to keep up with current events just for this reason. You don’t 
have to survey technology companies in order to invent new and innovative 
apps. If you know of something that is hot, or popular, make an app for it. 
Apple’s App Store slogan is “There’s an app for that.” My favorite part of 
being an appreneur is the personal and creative freedom I have. Not many 
jobs afford such freedom. As an appreneur, I am able to work doing what  
I want, when I want.
I am thankful every day I have the opportunity to be an appreneur. You will 
come to find out how truly awesome the job is. You are on the frontlines 
of the most cutting-edge technology our age has seen. Mobile software 
is not a fad; it is a new market. Since the invention of the smartphone and 
tablet, software has been moving from computers to mobile devices, a 
transition that will only continue through the years. Are you ready to seize 
the opportunity?

A■
■
Advertising
ad agencies, 41
advertising methods, 45
app-to-app advertising, 47
banner ads, 44
cost-per-click ads, 41
cross promoting user bases, 48
Facebook sidebar ad model, 41
hashtags, 43
keyword rankings tracking, 53
popular app review  
web site, 44
social networks, 42–43
using other apps, 47
YouTube, 46
Angry Birds, 10
AppAdvice, 5
App Annie tool, 53
AppCodes, 38, 54
Apple’s App Store slogan, 70
AppSales-Mobile, 53
Apps development
contracts, 9
description writing, 14
development studio, 8
face-to-face meetings, 8
icon designing, 13
keywords, 12
local developers, 8
local studios, 8
NDA, 8
outsourcing, 9
overseas developers, 8
pros and cons, 7
remote development, 8
screenshots, 15
SDK, 7
title, 10
App Store
AppAdvice, 5
Apple, 4–5
app reviews, 3
best-selling apps, 37
breakthrough apps, 39
competitors app, 3
improved features 
implementation, 38
interactive wildlife guide, 40
iPhone app, 3, 6
nature, 3
Photo 365, 3–5
piracy, 65
rankings, 37, 53
seasonal apps, 38
structure, 37
top-selling apps, 37
App-to-app advertising, 47
AppViz tool, 52
B, C
■
■
Baseball/softball stat-tracking  
app, 68
Brass Monkeigh apps
customer feedback and 
updation, 21
customer satisfaction, 22
Kill Death Ratio Improvement 
Tool, 20
kill-to-death ratio, 19–20
market opportunity, 22
Broad-spectrum advertising, 24
Index
71

D■
■
Distimo tool, 52
Downloads tracking tool, 52
E■
■
e-book, 4
F■
■
Freemiums, 27
G■
■
Great App—Awesome  
Fun App, 11
Gun Range app, 12
H■
■
Halo 1, 3
I, J
■
■
Idea 2 App Store, 2, 8
Instagram app, 29, 36
iPhone app, 3, 6
iPhoneDevSDK, 68–69
iTunes App Store, 20
K■
■
Kill Death Ratio Improvement  
Tool, 20
L■
■
Life cycle
app launch life cycle, 56
e-mail notifications, 57
Facebook/Twitter posts, 57
new sales generation, 57
postlaunch life cycle, 56
push notifications, 57
right data tracking, 55
social network pages, 57
M
■
■
MacBook, 20
MajicRank tool, 53
Managing users
Bug report option, 32
data collection, 31
Feature request option, 32
Rate the app option, 34
social network, 34
Tell a friend option, 33
user base, 31
MobGen’s Alert Tone Creator, 70
N, O
■
■
“New and Noteworthy” apps, 4
Niche app, 23
Nondisclosure agreement (NDA), 8
P, Q
■
■
Photo 365, 3–5
Photo Caption, 10
Photography apps, 70
R■
■
Revenue generation
ads and in-app-purchase-backed 
versions, 29
app purchases, 27
from free apps, 28
full-screen ad, 29
niche markets, 30
paid-only version, 30
paid version upgrade, 29
premium features, 30
Rights, selling
best time, 62
brokers, 60
buying preestablished apps, 61
data analysis, 62
development team, 59
flipping apps, 62
Index
72

future revenues, 59
goal setting, 60
individual apps, 60
right time, 60
Sellmyapplication, 60
source code, 59
trending, 62
user base, 59
S■
■
Search Man SEO, 54
Seasonal apps, 38
Secret Happy Hour app, 42
T, U
■
■
Temple Run app, 28
Touchmint, 68
Trends tracking, 50
V, W, X, Y
■
■
Viral apps, 49
Z■
■
Zynga Poker app, 27
Index 
73

Appreneur
Secrets to Success in the  
App Store
Taylor Pierce

Appreneur: Secrets to Success in the App Store
Copyright © 2013 by Taylor Pierce
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole 
or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, ­reprinting, reuse of 
­illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, 
and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic ­adaptation, computer software, 
or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed. ­Exempted from 
this legal reservation are brief excerpts in ­connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or  
material supplied specifically for the purpose of being entered and executed on a computer 
system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. Duplication of this publication or parts 
thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the Publisher's location,  
in its current ­version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer. 
­Permissions for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center. 
Violations are liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4302-6475-0
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4302-6476-7
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a ­trademark 
symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we use the names, logos, 
and images only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the ­trademark owner, with no 
intention of infringement of the trademark.
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even 
if they are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or 
not they are subject to proprietary rights.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the  
date of publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal 
responsibility for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, 
express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein.
President and Publisher: Paul Manning
Lead Editor: James Markham
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Mark Beckner, Ewan Buckingham, Gary Cornell,  
Louise Corrigan, Morgan Ertel, Jonathan Gennick, Jonathan Hassell,  
Robert Hutchinson, Michelle Lowman, James Markham, Matthew Moodie,  
Jeff Olson, Jeffrey Pepper, Douglas Pundick, Ben Renow-Clarke,  
Dominic Shakeshaft, Gwenan Spearing, Matt Wade, Tom Welsh
Coordinating Editor: Katie Sullivan
Copy Editor: Lisa Vecchione
Compositor: SPi Global
Indexer: SPi Global
Artist: SPi Global
Cover Designer: Anna Ishchenko
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media New York,  
233 Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 348-4505,  
e-mail orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit www.springeronline.com. Apress Media, LLC is 
a California LLC and the sole member (owner) is Springer Science + Business Media Finance 
Inc (SSBM Finance Inc). SSBM Finance Inc is a Delaware corporation.
For information on translations, please e-mail rights@apress.com, or visit www.apress.com. 
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or promotional 
use. eBook versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For more information, reference 
our Special Bulk Sales–eBook Licensing web page at www.apress.com/bulk-sales.
Any source code or other supplementary materials referenced by the author in this text are 
available to readers at www.apress.com. For detailed information about how to locate your 
book’s source code, go to www.apress.com/source-code/.

iii
I dedicate this book to my parents, Bobby and Gina Pierce. From a very 
young age, you taught me that hard work and dedication would take me  
far in life. You have ­supported me through all the ups and downs  
I have had. I also want to dedicate this book to my girlfriend,  
Jennifer Henley. You have helped me further myself in  
more ways than I can name; without you, I would have  
never written this book.

vii
Contents
About the Author.............................................................................. xi
Introduction.................................................................................... xiii
Chapter 1: Staring at the Bottom and Rising to the Top
■
■
................. 1
Chapter 2: Choosing the Right Development Option
■
■
....................... 7
Developing Quality Apps ......................................................................... 7
Picking the Right Title........................................................................... 10
Choosing Quality Keywords................................................................... 12
Designing a Quality App Icon................................................................. 14
Writing an Engaging App Description.................................................... 15
Creating Enticing Screenshots.............................................................. 16
Chapter 3: Don’t Compete in a Market, Create It
■
■
.......................... 19
Picking the Right App to Develop.......................................................... 23
The Power of Niche and Specialty Apps................................................ 24
Chapter 4: Generating Revenue from Various Business Models
■
■
... 27
Making Money from Free Apps............................................................. 28
Choosing the Right Business Model...................................................... 29

Contents
viii
Chapter 5: Managing Users Today for Success Tomorrow
■
■
........... 31
Capturing the Right Data for the Right Results..................................... 32
Social Network Dos and Don’ts............................................................. 34
Chapter 6: What’s Hot and What’s Not
■
■
.......................................... 37
Using the App Store to Make Apps........................................................ 37
’Tis the Season to Make Apps............................................................... 38
A New Idea for a New Market............................................................... 39
Chapter 7: Making the Most of Your Advertising Money
■
■
.............. 41
Advertising Methods That Work............................................................. 45
The Power of YouTube........................................................................... 46
App-to-App Advertising......................................................................... 47
Advertising Your App in Other Apps....................................................... 47
Cross Promoting User Bases................................................................. 48
Chapter 8: Plan to Scale, or Your App Will Fail
■
■
............................. 49
Tracking Trends and Producing Results................................................ 50
Tools for Tracking Downloads................................................................ 52
AppViz (www.ideaswarm.com/AppViz2.html)........................................................52
Distimo (www.distimo.com)...................................................................................52
AppSales Mobile (github.com/omz/AppSales-Mobile)............................................53
Tools for Tracking App Store Ranking.................................................... 53
App Annie (www.appannie.com).............................................................................53
MajicRank (majicjungle.com/majicrank.html) .......................................................53
Tools for Tracking Keyword Rankings.................................................... 53
AppCodes (http://www.appcod.es).........................................................................54
Search Man SEO (www.searchman.com)...............................................................54
Parting Thoughts....................................................................................................54

Contents
ix
Chapter 9: The Life Cycles of Apps
■
■
............................................... 55
Tracking the Right Data......................................................................... 55
App Launch Life Cycle........................................................................... 56
Postlaunch Life Cycle............................................................................ 56
Updating Apps to Keep Users Engaged................................................. 56
Generating New Sales........................................................................... 57
Chapter 10: Selling the Rights and Cashing Out
■
■
........................... 59
Selling the Rights at the Right Time...................................................... 60
Buying Preestablished Apps.................................................................. 61
Selling Apps That Have Never Been Listed in the App Store................. 62
Chapter 11: Keeping Piracy to a Minimum
■
■
................................... 65
Chapter 12: Evolving with the App Store
■
■
...................................... 67
Index................................................................................................ 71

xi
About the Author
Taylor Pierce has been developing apps for 
the Apple App Store since 2009. In the summer 
of 2010, Taylor was awarded an internship at 
Apple’s headquarters, in Cupertino, California. 
He has developed more than 60 apps, many of 
which have ranked consistently among Apple’s 
top 200. As the CEO and founder of the mobile 
development studio Taylor Pierce Apps and 
of Secret Happy Hour, Taylor has firsthand 
knowledge of what makes apps marketable 
and profitable. His studio deals with a wide 
array of clients, from individuals to Fortune 500 companies. Taylor’s 
understanding of clients’ needs, the specifics of app design, and the ever-
changing app market has allowed him to create a valuable reference tool 
for the appreneur. The book was inspired by a desire to offer exceptional 
consultation services; a wish to help his clientele obtain the knowledge 
necessary to maximize their apps’ profitability. After noticing the vast 
improvement in his clients’ capabilities, Taylor decided to share his secrets 
to success in the App Store with the world at large.
www.taylorpierceapps.com
www.secrethappyhour.com
www.idea2appstore.com

