ARTEX AND PLASTER 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Proper plastering is not easy. But DIY plasters are designed 
with ease of use in mind, and ArtexTM is no more difficult to 
apply than thick paint. 
  
 
 
It is best to wear gloves when mixing up dry plaster-based 
products - disposable plastic gloves are fine. Wear a face 
mask when mixing up fine powder.  
  
 
 
Being able to use Artex and plaster can help keep the walls 
and ceilings in your home looking good. 
  
A professional plasterer will normally use gypsum-based 
Carlite plaster applied in two layers, undercoat and finish. 
The skill to do this properly takes years to acquire and the 
amateur should start with DIY plasters. 
  
"ArtexTM" is the best known make of textured coating, used 
on internal walls and ceilings to cover up cracks and uneven 
surfaces or fashioned into patterns. Some people may want 
to remove the patterned effect. 
 
2  - Choosing the right product 
Consider what you want the plaster and/or textured coating 
to do. If a wall or ceiling is basically in good condition, but 
has a few holes or hairline cracks, there are many different 
wall fillers that you can use to make the surface smooth for 
decorating.  
 
 
 
Where an area of plaster is seriously damaged or has come 
away from the wall ('blown'), you can use a 'repair' plaster 
(a DIY plaster undercoat) once all the old loose plaster has 
been removed. This has a good enough finish for papering or
tiling, but if you want to paint it, apply a DIY plaster finish 
(also known as plaster skim) first.  
 
 
 
DIY plasters are ideal for repairing the damage to walls 
created by holes made for electric wiring and plumbing 
waste pipes.  
 
 
 
If you have rough or uneven walls, and using a wall filler will 
not be good enough, the whole wall can be given a coat of 
DIY plaster finish (it can be applied up to 3mm or 1/8in 
thick). Alternatively, you could apply a textured coating, 
with or without a patterned finish.  
 
 
 
A new masonry wall can either be covered with plasterboard 
(often the best choice for a DIYer) or can be plastered using 

DIY plaster undercoat followed by DIY plaster finish. Only 
when you have had success with the DIY products should 
you attempt to use the professional products, though the 
technique is basically the same.  
 
 
 
Any wall can be covered with textured coating to provide a 
patterned decorative finish. It has the advantage that it 
covers up damaged and unsightly walls, but can equally well 
be used on a wall in good condition if you want the 
decorative effect. Textured coatings are available in smooth, 
fine-textured and coarse-textured finishes.  
 
3  - Using DIY plaster undercoat 
The most likely time you will use a DIY plaster undercoat 
(repair plaster) is to repair damage to existing plaster - 
either damage you have created (perhaps by installing pipes 
or electric cables) or damage that has happened through 
accident or old age. It is also ideal for finishing off where 
you have bricked up a fireplace or a door opening.  
 
 
 
The first thing to do (especially with blown plaster) is to lay 
a dust sheet on the floor and cut back all existing loose 
plaster until you have a sound surface with solid edges. Use 
a club hammer and bolster chisel to do this (1) and remove 
all loose dust and debris with a stiff brush (2).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unless the plaster undercoat comes ready mixed, use a large
clean bucket to mix up the powder with water. Use a clean 
wooden stick to do the mixing. It is easier if you add the 
powder to the water rather than the other way round. The 
plaster should have a thick creamy consistency.  

 
 
 
If the repair (or new 
plasterwork) includes a 
corner, fit metal angle bead 
to this first. Not only will it 
give a neat corner, but the 
bead will provide a guide for 
your levelling board. Cut the 
bead to length (with a 
hacksaw) and prime the cut 
ends. Fix it to the corner w
dabs of plaster (3). Check
is vertical and leave the 
plaster to dry.  
ith 
 it 
 
 
 
Before you apply the plaster, dampen the wall surface, using
a large paint brush - this will help adhesion and make it easy
to 'work' the plaster. On very absorbent surfaces (aerated 
concrete blocks, for example), add one part PVA adhesive to 
five parts water.  
 
 
 
Transfer an amount of plaster to a hawk - a flat board about 
30cm (1ft) square. You can buy a ready-made hawk or 
make your own from a piece of plywood nailed to a block of 
wood with a short handle (a bit of broom handle, for 
example) attached to it.  
 
 
 
Carry the hawk to the wall 
and hold it in front of the 
area you want to plaster. In 
one movement, tip the hawk 
towards you, lift off an 
amount of plaster with the 
edge of a steel plasterer's 
trowel and press the plaster 
against the wall with an 
upwards sweep of the trowel 
(4).  
 
 
 
The method of application is crucial - you start with the 
trowel at quite an angle to the wall and gradually reduce this
angle as you move it up the wall. Do not allow the trowel to 
get flat against the wall or you will pull off the plaster you 
are trying to apply.  
 
 
 
Carry on adding plaster until the whole area to be repaired is
covered. Remember always to keep the trowel at an angle to
the wall and leave the plaster slightly proud of the 

surrounding surface.  
 
 
 
To get the surface level, use 
a piece of straight-edged 
timber held at an angle (or if 
you have one, a metal rule) 
moving it up the wall with a 
side-to-side action, holding it 
firmly against the existing 
sound plaster as a guide (5). 
When plastering a whole w
timber screeds are attach
to the wall (and levelled) 
before plastering to act as 
the guides for this straight
edge.  
all, 
ed 
-
 
 
 
Take care removing the straight-edge or rule from the 
surface together with the plaster you have scraped off. You 
should now be able to see any hollows which can be filled 
with more plaster before ruling off again.  
 
 
 
Keep a bucket of cold water handy at all times, so that you 
can keep tools clean - especially the plasterer's trowel.  
 
 
 
Allow the plaster surface to 
harden (but not completely 
dry) before dampening it and 
smoothing it flat with the 
trowel (still held at a slight 
angle) (6). If you are 
applying a finishing coat, 
scratch the surface of the 
undercoat with the edge of 
the trowel to provide a 'key'.  
 
 
 
 
4  - Using DIY plaster finish 
A DIY finishing plaster should be applied to the undercoat 
before the latter is completely dry. It can also be applied 
directly to plasterboard and to an existing plaster surface, 
provided this is roughened slightly (all paint and paper 
should be removed). Mix up the plaster finish if necessary 
with clean water as for undercoat.  
 
 
 
Application methods vary for DIY finishing plasters. Some 
are applied in the same way as DIY plaster undercoat (with 
a plasterer's trowel) in two layers (1mm followed by 2mm), 
whilst others are applied with a paint brush (7) and then 

smoothed with the plastic spreader supplied (8). Check the 
instructions for your plaster.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If you have used a plasterer's trowel to apply the plaster, 
give it a final smoothing with the trowel after it has started 
to harden. Dampen the surface with water as you do this - a 
simple spray bottle will help to apply this.  
 
 
 
 
5  - Applying a textured coating 
A textured coating will level up uneven surfaces and cover 
cracks up to around 3mm (1/8in) wide - the coating is 
flexible, unlike normal paint, and reduces the possibility of 
cracks reopening. Textured coatings can be used to provide 
a number of different finishes which, if required, can be 
painted in a colour of your choice.  
 
 
As with all decoration, proper surface preparation is vital. 
Wallpaper (including painted wallpaper) must be removed 
and the surfaces thoroughly cleaned (in particular, getting 
rid of grease and nicotine stains). Sound paint can be left in 
place, but all loose and flaking paint (and all distemper) 
must be removed before you start. Remove any tiles from a 
ceiling along with their adhesive.  
 
 
Porous surfaces should be treated with special sealer and 
cracks larger than 3mm (1/8in) should be filled with wall 

filler: a special caulking tool is available to make this job 
easier. Filled cracks and joints between new plasterboard 
should be taped over with joint tape (tape should also be 
used on the edges of filled areas). If any parts of the wall
are powdery or 'chalky'
 
, use a stabilising solution before 
 coating.  
 
 
d exposed plumbing 
s. Lay a dustsheet on the floor.  
her 
pattern, do this before applying 
next band of coating.  
once 
 
ring tools you can use to provide the pattern:  
 
• 
ing diamond, diagonal, 
• 
ers for creating a wide range of 
• 
 designs as well as 
• 
he 
• 
red 
• 
te a 
stipple effect or your own swirl design.  
s 
 
applying the
 
 
Mix up powder, following the manufacturer's instructions. To
speed up this process, whisk attachments are available for 
both hand and powered drills. Ready-mixed products can be
applied straight from the tub. Use masking tape to protect 
electrical fittings, timber paintwork an
pipe
 
 
Textured coatings can be applied with a large paint brush 
(wall brush) or roller. The application method is different to 
paint as the coating is applied more or less in one go rat
then being 'worked' once it is on the surface. Apply the 
coating to the wall or ceiling in bands around 60cm (2ft) 
wide; if you are applying a 
the 
 
 
A brush or roller will leave a relatively flat surface (its 
texture depending on the type of coating being used), but if 
you want to provide a decorative pattern, this is done 
the coating is on the wall. There are several different
textu
 
patterned rollers for produc
bark and stipple patterns.  
brushes and stippl
textured effects.  
combs for creating artistic combed textures 
(including flower and rose
standard linear ones).  
lacers (triangular plastic hand-held blades) for 
smoothing tips of heavier random textures (broken 
leather, bark and swirls, for example) to reduce t
sharpness of the peaks; a standard set includes 
medium and small sizes. The tool is kept damp with 
water and is used before the texture has gone firm. 
margin brush for creating borders around textu
patterns and also for painting around fittings.  
You could also use a damp sponge to crea
 
6 - Unwanted textured coating?  
 
If you have moved into a different house and want to 
remove at least some of the patterned textured coating from
the walls and ceilings, there are two choices: cover or strip. 
Covering is the easiest choice. You can get specific product
designed for doing this and all you do is to apply them on
top of the existing patterned coating (with a plasterer's 

float) so that the surface is restored to a smooth flat surface 
which you can then paper or paint. Remember, though, t
you will now have quite a thick coating. Stripping is the 
alternative. There are specific products made for stripping 
textured coatings, though they may not work on all types.
the chemical stripper does not work, you can try a steam 
wallpaper stripper to soften the coating so that you can strip 
it off by hand. A large hired type will work better than a DIY 
wallpaper stripper, but the job is messy and jolly hard work! 
Some old textured finishes may contain a small propo
asbestos. For further details
hat 
 If 
rtion of
, consult the appropriate 
pplier or manufacturer.  
 
su

