Firstborn
Time Odyssey, Book 3
Arthur C. Clarke & Stephen Baxter
 
 
 
CONTENTS
TITLE PAGE 
DEDICATION 
PART 1 FIRST CONTACTS 
1: BISESA 
2: DEEP SPACE MONITOR 

3: ABDIKADIR 
PART 2 JOURNEYS 
4: WHEN THE SLEEPER WAKES 
5: LONDON 
6: MYRA 
7: THE TOOKE MEDAL 
8: EURO-NEEDLE 
9: FLORIDA 
10: LAUNCH COMPLEX 39 
11: RIBBON 
12: MOUNT WEATHER 
13: FORTRESS SOL 
14: ASCENT BEYOND ORBIT 
15: LIBERATOR 
16: JAMES CLERK MAXWELL 
17: WARSHIP 
18: MARS 
19: THE SANDS OF MARS 
20: LIBERATOR 
21: POLE 
22: APPROACH 
23: THE PIT 
24: CLOSEST APPROACHES 
25: INTERLUDE: A SIGNAL FROM EARTH 
PART 3 REUNIONS 
26: THE STONE MAN 
27: PHAETON 

28: SUIT FIVE 
29: ALEXEI 
30: CHILIARCH 
31: OPERATION ORDER 
32: ALEXANDER 
33: FLIGHT 
34: ELLIE 
35: POSEIDON’S BARB 
36: HUBBLE 
37: NEW NEW ORLEANS 
38: EVA 
39: NEW CHICAGO 
40: SUNLIGHT 
41: ARKS 
42: CYCLOPS 
43: CHICAGO 
44: ATHENA 
45: MAYOR 
46: A-LINE 
PART 4 DECISIONS 
47: OPTIONS 
48: A SIGNAL TO MARS 
49: AREOSYNCHRONOUS 
50: INTERLUDE: THE LAST MARTIAN 
51: DECISION 
PART 5 LAST CONTACTS 
52: PARADE 

53: AURORA 
54: Q-DAY 
55: Q-BOMB 
56: MARS 2 
57: BABYLON 
58: SECESSION 
59: TEMPLE 
60: HOUSE 
61: GRASPER 
62: LITTLE RIP 
63: A TIME ODYSSEY 
AFTERWORD 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
ALSO BY ARTHUR C. CLARKE AND STEPHEN BAXTER 
COPYRIGHT 
 
For the British Interplanetary Society
 
PART 1 
FIRST CONTACTS 

 
1: BISESA 
February 2069 
It wasn’t like waking. It was a sudden emergence, a clash of cymbals. Her eyes gaped wide open, and
were filled with dazzling light. She dragged  deep  breaths  into her lungs, and  gasped  with the shock  of
selfhood.
Shock, yes. She shouldn’t be conscious. Something was wrong.
A pale shape swam in the air.
“Doctor Heyer?”
“No. No, Mum, it’s me.”
That face came into focus a little more, and there was her daughter, that strong face, those clear blue
eyes, those slightly heavy dark brows. There was something on her cheek, though, some kind of symbol.
A tattoo?
“Myra?” She found her throat scratchy, her voice a husk. She had a dim sense, now, of lying on her
back, of a room around her, of equipment and people just out of her field of view. “What went wrong?”
“Wrong?”
“Why wasn’t I put into estivation?”
Myra hesitated. “Mum—what date do you think it is?”
“2050. June fifth.”
“No.  It’s  2069,  Mum. February.  Nineteen  years  later.  The hibernation worked.”  Now  Bisesa  saw
strands of gray in Myra’s dark hair, wrinkles gathering around those sharp eyes. Myra said, “As you can
see I took the long way round.”
It must be true. Bisesa had  taken  another  vast,  unlikely step  on her personal  odyssey  through time.

“Oh, my.”
Another face loomed over Bisesa.
“Doctor Heyer?”
“No.  Doctor  Heyer  has  long  retired.  My  name  is  Doctor  Stanton.  We’re  going  to  begin  the  full
resanguination now. I’m afraid it’s going to hurt.”
Bisesa tried to lick her lips. “Why am I awake?” she asked, and she immediately answered her own
question. “Oh. The Firstborn.” What could it be but them? “A new threat.”
Myra’s face crumpled with hurt. “You’ve been away for nineteen years. The first thing you ask about
is the Firstborn. I’ll come see you when you’re fully revived.”
“Myra, wait—”
But Myra had gone.
The new doctor was right. It hurt. But Bisesa had once been a soldier in the British Army. She forced
herself not to cry out.
 
2: DEEP SPACE MONITOR 
June 2064 
Mankind’s  first clear  look  at  the new threat  had  come  five  years  earlier.  And  the  eyes  that  saw  the
anomaly were electronic, not human.
Deep  Space  Monitor  X7-6102-016  swam through the shadow  of Saturn,  where  moons  hung  like
lanterns. Saturn’s  rings were  a  ghost  of  what  they  had  been  before  the  sunstorm,  but  as  the  probe
climbed the distant sun set behind the rings, turning them into a bridge of silver that spanned the sky.
The Deep  Space  Monitor  was  not  capable  of  awe,  not  quite.  But  like  any  sufficiently  advanced
machine it was sentient to some degree, and its electronic soul tingled with wonder at the orderly marvels
of gas and ice through which it sailed. But it made no effort to explore them.
Silently, the probe approached the next target on its orbital loop.
Titan, Saturn’s largest moon, was a featureless ball of ocher, dimly lit by the remote sun. But its deep
layers  of  cloud  and  haze  hid  miracles.  As  it  approached  the  moon,  DSM  X7-6102-016  cautiously
listened to the electronic chatter of a swarm of robot explorers.
Under a murky orange sky, beetle-like rovers crawled over dunes  of basalt-hard  ice-crystal  “sand,”
skirted methane geysers, crept cautiously into valleys carved by rivers of ethane, and dug into a surface
made slushy by a constant, global drizzle of methane. One brave balloon explorer, buoyed by the thick
air,  hovered  over  a  cryovolcano  spilling  a  lava  of  ammonium-laced  water.  Burrowing  submersibles

studied pockets of liquid water just under the ice surface, frozen-over lakes preserved in impact craters.
There were complex organic products everywhere, created  by electrical storms  in Titan’s atmosphere,
and by the battering of the upper air by sunlight and Saturn’s magnetic field.
Everywhere the probes looked, they found life. Some of this was Earthlike, anaerobic methane-loving
bugs sluggishly building pillows and mounds in the cold brine of the crater lakes. A more  exotic  sort  of
carbon-based life-form, using ammonia rather than water, could be found swimming in the stuff bubbling
out of the cryovolcanoes. Most  exotic  of all was  a  community of slimelike organisms that  used  silicon
compounds  as  their  basic  building  blocks,  not  carbon;  they  lived  in  the  piercing  cold  of  the  black,
mirror-flat ethane lakes.
The crater-lake bugs were cousins of Earth’s  great  families of life. The ammonia fish seemed  to  be
indigenous to  Titan.  The  cold-loving  ethane  slime  might  have  come  from  the  moons  of  Neptune,  or
beyond. The solar system was full of life—life that blew everywhere, in rocks and lumps of ice detached
by impacts. Even so Titan was extraordinary, a junction for life-forms from across the solar system, and
maybe even from without.
But Deep Space Monitor X7-6102-016 had not come to Titan for science. As it passed  through its
closest approach to the moon and its carnival of life, its robot cousins did not even know it was there.
The  Deep  Space  Monitor’s  complex  heart  was  a  space  probe  built  to  a  century-old  design
philosophy,  with  an  angular  frame  from  which  sprouted  booms  holding  sensor  pods  and
radiothermal-isotope power units. But this inner core was surrounded by a rigid shell of “metamaterial,” a
mesh of nanotechnological washers and wires that shepherded rays of sunlight away from the probe and
sent them on their way along paths they would have taken  had  the probe  not been  present  at  all. The
Deep Space Monitor was not blind; the shell sampled the incoming rays. But with light neither reflected
nor deflected, it was rendered quite invisible. Similarly it was undetectable on any wavelength of radiation
from hard gamma rays to long radio waves.
DSM X7-6102-016 was not an explorer. Shrouded, silent, it was a sentry. And now it was  heading
for an encounter of the sort for which it had been designed.
 
As it skimmed over the cloud tops of Titan, the moon’s gravity field slingshot X7-6102-016 onto a new
trajectory that would take it out of the plane of the Saturn system, high above the rings. All this in radio
silence, without a puff of rocket exhaust.
And DSM X7-6102-016 approached the anomaly.
It detected cascades of exotic high-energy particles. And it was brushed by a powerful magnetic field,
a ferocious electromagnetic knot in space. It reported to Earth, sending a  stream  of highly compressed
data using sporadic laser bursts.
The Deep Space Monitor had no means of adjusting its course without compromising its shroud, and
so it sailed on helplessly. It should have missed the anomaly by perhaps half a kilometer.
Its last observation, in a sense its last conscious  thought, was  of a  sudden  twisting of the anomaly’s
strong magnetic field.
DSM X7-6102-016’s final signals showed  it receding  at  enormous,  impossible  speeds.  They  were
signals the probe’s makers could neither believe nor understand.

 
Like any sufficiently advanced machine the anomaly was sentient to some degree. The destruction it had
been designed to inflict was for the future, and did not yet trouble it. But it was touched by a hint of regret
at  the  smashing  of  the  puppyish  machine  that  had  followed  it  so  far,  with  its  laughable  attempt  at
concealment.
Alone, the anomaly sailed through Saturn’s system, harvested momentum and kinetic energy from the
giant planet, and flung itself toward the distant sun, and the warm worlds that huddled around it.
 
3: ABDIKADIR 
2068 (Earth); Year 31 (Mir) 
On Mir the first hint of the coming strangeness would have been mundane, if not for its utter incongruity.
Abdikadir was irritated when the clerk called him away from the telescope.  It  was  a  clear  night, for
once.  The  first-generation  refugees  from  Earth  always  complained  about  the  cloudiness  of  Mir,  this
stitched-together world in its own stitched-together cosmos. But tonight the seeing was  fine, and  Mars
swam high in the cloudless sky, a brilliant blue.
Before the clerk’s interruption the observatory on the roof of the Temple of Marduk was a scene  of
silent industry. The main instrument was a reflector, its great mirror ground by Mongol slaves under  the
command of a Greek scholar of the School of Othic. It returned a fine if wavering image of the face  of
Mars.  As  Abdi  observed,  his  clerks  turned  the  levers  that  swung  the  telescope  mount  around  to
counterbalance the rotation of the world, thus keeping Mars steadily in the center of Abdi’s field of view.
He sketched hastily at the pad strapped to his knee; industry in Alexander’s  world-empire  had  not yet
advanced to the point where photography was possible.
Of Mars, he could clearly see the polar caps, the blue seas, the ocher deserts crisscrossed by bands
of green-brown and blue, and even a glimmer of light from the alien cities that were believed to nestle in
the dead caldera of Mons Olympus.
It was while he was engaged on his labor, intent on exploiting every second of the seeing, that the clerk
came  to  Abdi.  Spiros  was  fourteen,  an  Othic  student,  third-generation  Mir-born.  He  was  a  bright,
imaginative  boy  but  prone  to  nervousness,  and  now  he  could  barely  stammer  out  his  news  to  an
astronomer not a decade older than he was.
“Calm down, boy. Take a breath. Tell me what’s wrong.”
“The chamber of Marduk—” The very heart of the temple on whose roof they both stood. “You must
come, Master!”
“Why? What will I see?”
“Not see, Master Abdi—hear.”

Abdi glanced once more at his eyepiece, where even now Mars’s blue light glimmered. But the boy’s
agitation was convincing. Something was wrong.
With ill grace he clambered down from his seat at the eyepiece, and snapped at one of his students.
“You, Xenia! Take over. I don’t want to waste a second of this seeing.” The girl hurried to comply.
Spiros ran for the ladder.
“This had better be worth it,” Abdi said, hurrying after the boy.
 
They had to descend, and then climb back up inside the temple’s carcass, for the chamber of the great
god Marduk was near the very apex of the complex. They passed through a bewildering variety of rooms
lit by oil lamps burning smokily in alcoves. Long after the temple’s abandonment by its priests there was
still a powerful smell of incense.
Abdi walked into Marduk’s chamber, peering around.
Once this room had contained a great golden statue of the god. During the Discontinuity, the event that
created  the  world,  the  statue  had  been  destroyed,  and  the  walls  had  been  reduced  to  bare  brick,
scorched by some intense heat. Only the statue’s base remained, softened and rounded, with perhaps the
faintest trace of two mighty feet. The chamber was a ruin, as if wrecked by an explosion. But it had been
this way all Abdi’s life.
Abdi turned on Spiros. “Well? Where’s the crisis?”
“Can’t you hear?” the boy asked, breathless. And he stood still, his finger on his lips.
And then Abdi heard it, a soft chirruping almost like a cricket—but too regular, too even. He glanced
at the wide-eyed boy, who was frozen with fear.
Abdi stepped into the center of the room. From here he could tell the chirruping was coming from an
ornately carved shrine, fixed to one wall. He approached this now, and the sound grew louder.
For the sake of face before the boy, Abdi tried to keep his hand from trembling as he reached out to
the small cupboard at the very center of the shrine, and pulled open its door.
He  knew  what  the  shrine  contained.  This  pebble-like  artifact  had  come  from  the  Earth  to  Mir.
Belonging to a companion of Abdi’s father’s called Bisesa Dutt, it had been cherished for years, and then
lodged here when its power finally failed.
It was a phone.
And it was ringing.
 
PART 2 

JOURNEYS 
 
4: WHEN THE SLEEPER WAKES 
February–March 2069 
Bisesa was glad to get out of the sleep facility itself. It stank of the bad-egg hydrogen sulphide they used
to stop your organs taking up oxygen.
In the hospital, it took the doctors three days to put her blood  back  into her veins, to  persuade  her
organs to take up oxygen, and to get her through enough basic physiotherapy that she could walk with a
Zimmer frame. She felt unutterably old, older than her forty-nine biological years,  and  she  was  wasted
too, a famine victim. Her eyes were particularly prickly and sore. She suffered odd vision defects, even
mild hallucinations at first. Also she had the unpleasant sense that she smelled of her own urine.
Well, for nineteen years she had had no pulse, no blood, no electrical activity in her brain, her tissues
had consumed no oxygen, and she had been held in a fridge almost cold enough to rupture her cells. You
had to expect to be a bit sore.
 
Hibernaculum 786 had changed while she had been in the tank.  Now  it felt like an upmarket  hotel,  all
glass walls and  white floors and  plastic  couches,  and  old,  old  people—at  least  they  looked  old—in
dressing gowns, walking very tentatively.
Most drastically of all the Hibernaculum had  been  moved.  When she  got to  a  viewing window,  she
found herself overlooking an immense wound  in the ground,  a  dusty canyon with strata  piled up in its
scree-littered walls like the pages of a tremendous book. It was the Grand Canyon, she learned, and  it
was a spectacular sight—rather wasted on the sleepers in the Hibernaculum, she thought.

She found it disturbing in retrospect that the complicated  refrigerator  within which she  had  slept  her
dreamless sleep had been disconnected, uprooted, and shipped across the continent.
As  her  convalescence  continued  she  took  to  sitting  before  a  bubble  window,  peering  out  at  the
canyon’s static geological drama. She had made only one tourist-trip visit to the canyon before. Judging
by the way the sun cycled through the spring sky she must be on the south rim, perhaps somewhere near
Grand Canyon Village. The local flora and fauna seemed to have recovered from the global battering of
the sunstorm; the land was littered with cacti, yucca, and blackbush. In her patient watching she spotted a
small herd of bighorn sheep, and glimpsed the slinking form of a coyote, and once she thought she saw a
rattlesnake.
But if the canyon had  recovered,  much else  seemed  to  have changed.  On  the  eastern  horizon  she
made out a kind of structure, a flat metallic array raised on legs, like the framework of an uncompleted
shopping mall. Sometimes she saw vehicles driving around and under it. She had no idea  what it could
be.
And sometimes in the sky  she  saw  lights.  There  was  one  bright,  moving  spark,  panning  over  the
southern evening sky in forty minutes or  so: something big in orbit.  But there  were  odder  sights to  be
seen, much more extensive: pale patches in the blue daylight, glimmerings of swimming starlight at night. A
strange sky in this new age. She thought she ought to be curious, or possibly afraid, but at first she was
not.
That all changed when she heard the roar. It was a deep rumble that seemed to make the very ground
shudder, more geological than animal.
“What was that?”
“Bisesa? You asked a question?”
The voice was smooth, male, a little too perfect, and it came out of the air.
“Aristotle?” But she knew it could not be, even before he answered.
There was an odd delay before he replied. “I’m afraid not. I am Thales.”
“Thales, of course.”
Before  the sunstorm there  had  been  three  great  artificial intelligences on the human worlds,  remote
descendants  of  the  search  engines  and  other  intelligent  software  agents  of  earlier  technological
generations, and all of them friends of mankind. There were rumors that copies of them had been saved,
as  streams  of  bits  squirted  off  into  interstellar  space.  But  otherwise  only  Thales  had  survived  the
sunstorm, stored in the simpler networks of the sturdy Moon.
“I’m glad to hear your voice again.”
Pause. “And I yours, Bisesa.”
“Thales—why these response delays? Oh. Are you still lodged on the Moon?”
“Yes, Bisesa. And I am restricted by lightspeed delay. Just like Neil Armstrong.”

“Why not bring you down to Earth? Isn’t it kind of inconvenient?”
“There are ways around it. Local agents can support me when time delay is critical—during medical
procedures, for instance. But otherwise the situation is deemed satisfactory.”
These responses sounded rehearsed to Bisesa. Even scripted. There was more to Thales’s location on
the Moon than he was telling her. But she didn’t have the spark to pursue the matter.
Thales said, “You asked about the roar.”
“Yes. That sounded like a lion. An African lion.”
“So it was.”
“And what is an African lion doing here, in the heart of North America?”
“The Grand Canyon National Park is now a Jefferson, Bisesa.”
“A what?”
“A Jefferson Park. It is all part of the re-wilding. If you will look to your right….”
On the horizon, beyond the north rim, she  saw  blocky  shapes,  massive, like boulders  on the move.
Thales caused the window to magnify the image. She was looking at elephants, a herd of them complete
with infants, an unmistakable profile.
“I have extensive information on the park.”
“I’m sure you have, Thales. One thing. What’s the structure over there? It looks like scaffolding.”
It  turned  out  to  be  a  power  mat,  the  ground  station  of  an  orbital  power  station,  a  collector  for
microwaves beamed down from the sky.
“The whole facility is rather large, ten kilometers square.”
“Is it safe? I saw vehicles driving around underneath it.”
“Oh, yes, safe for humans. Animals too. But there is an exclusion zone.”
“And, Thales, those lights in the sky—the shimmers—”
“Mirrors and sails. There is a whole architecture off Earth now, Bisesa. It’s really quite spectacular.”
“So they’re building the dream. Bud Tooke would have been pleased.”
“I’m afraid Colonel Tooke died in—”
“Never mind.”
“Bisesa, there are human counselors you can speak to. About anything you like. The details  of your
hibernation, for instance.”
“It was explained to me before I went into the freezer…”
The Hibernacula were a product of the sunstorm. The first of them had  been  established  in America
before the event, as the rich sought to flee through the difficult years ahead to a time of recovery. Bisesa

hadn’t entered hers until 2050, eight years after the storm.
“I can talk you through the medical advances since your immersion,” Thales said. “For example it now
appears that your cells’ propensity for hydrogen sulphide is a relic of a very early stage in the evolution of
life on Earth, when aerobic cells still shared the world with methanogens.”
“That sounds oddly poetic.”
Thales said gently, “There is the motivational aspect as well.”
She felt uncomfortable. “What motivational aspect?…”
She had  had  reasons  to  flee into the tanks.  Myra,  her  twenty-one-year-old  daughter,  had  married
against Bisesa’s advice, and pledged herself to  a  life off the Earth entirely. And Bisesa  had  wanted  to
escape the conspiracy-theory notoriety that had  accrued  about  her because  of her peculiar role  in the
sunstorm  crisis,  even  though  much  of  what  had  gone  on  in  those  days,  even  the  true  cause  of  the
sunstorm, was supposed to have been classified.
“Anyhow,” she said, “going into a Hibernaculum was a public service.  So  I was  told  when I signed
over my money. My trust fund went to advance the understanding of techniques that will one day be used
in everything from transplant organ preservation to crewing centuries-long starship flights. And in a world
struggling to recover after the storm, I had a much lower economic footprint frozen in a tank—”
“Bisesa, there is a growing body of opinion that Hibernaculum sleeping is in fact a sort of sublimated
suicide.”
That took her aback. Aristotle would have been more subtle,  she  thought. “Thales,” she  said  firmly.
“When I need to speak to someone about this, it will be my daughter.”
“Of course, Bisesa. Is there anything else you need?”
She hesitated. “How old am I?”
“Ah. Good question. You are a curiosity, Bisesa.”
“Thanks.”
“You were born in 2006, that is sixty-three years ago. One must subtract nineteen years for your time
in the Hibernaculum.”
She said carefully, “Which leaves forty-four.”
“Yet your biological age is forty-nine.”
“Yes. And the other five years?”
“Are the years you spent on Mir.”
She nodded. “You know about that?”
“It is highly classified. Yes, I know.”
She lay back in her chair, watched the distant elephants and the shimmering sky of 2069, and tried to
gather her thoughts.

“Thank you, Thales.”
“It’s a pleasure.” When he fell silent there was a subtle absence in the air around her.
 
5: LONDON 
Bella Fingal was in the air above London when her daughter first brought her the bad news from the sky.
Bella had  been  flown in across  the  Atlantic,  and  her  plane  was  heading  for  Heathrow,  out  in  the
suburbs to the west of central London. But the pilot told her the flight path would see them over-fly to the
east first and then come back west along the path of the Thames, into the headwinds, and on this bright
March morning the city was a glittering carpet spread out for her. Bella had the plane all to herself, one of
the new scramjets, a fancy chariot for a fifty-seven-year-old grandmother.
But she really didn’t want to be making this trip. The funeral of James Duflot had  been  bad  enough;
coming to the grieving family’s home would be worse. It was however her duty, as Chair of the World
Space Council.
She  had  wandered  into  this  job  almost  by  accident,  probably  a  compromise  choice  by  the
supra-governmental panel that controlled the Space Council. In a corner of her mind she had thought that
her new post  would be  pretty  much an honorary  one,  like most of the  university  chancellorships  and
nonexecutive directorships  that had  come  her way as  a  veteran  of the sunstorm.  She  hadn’t  imagined
getting shipped across the planet to be plunged into messy, tearful situations like this.
She had done her bit on the shield. She should have stayed retired, she thought wistfully.
And it was when Edna came on line with her bit of bad, strange news that it was driven home to Bella
that she really was the commander-in-chief of a space navy.
 
“For once the trackers think they’ve found something serious,  Mum. Something out in the dark—now
approaching the orbit of Jupiter, in fact, and falling in on a hyperbolic trajectory. It’s not on the Extirpator
map, though that’s not so unusual; long-period comets too remote for Extirpator echoes are turning up all
the time. This thing has other characteristics that are causing them concern…”
Bella had seen a rendering of the “Extirpator map,” set up like a planetarium inside her own base, the
old NASA headquarters building in Washington. An immense, dynamic, three-dimensional  snapshot  of
the whole of the solar system, it had been created on the very eve  of the sunstorm by the deep-space
explosion of a ferocious old nuke called the Extirpator—a detonation that had also broadcast to the silent
stars a wistful concatenation of human culture called “Earthmail,” within which were embedded copies of
the planet’s  greatest  artificial minds,  called  Aristotle,  Thales,  and  Athena.  Within  a  few  hours  of  the
explosion the radio telescopes on Earth had logged X-ray echoes of the blast coming back  from every
object larger than a meter across inside the orbit of Saturn.

Twenty-seven years after the sunstorm the human worlds and space itself were  full of eyes,  tracking
anything that moved. Anything not shown in the map must be a new entrant. Most newcomers, human or
natural, could be identified and  eliminated quickly. And if not—well,  then,  Bella was  learning, the bad
news quickly filtered up the Council’s hierarchy to her own ears.
In the cocooned, silent warmth of the plane cabin, she shivered. Like many of her generation, Bella still
had nightmares about the sunstorm. Now it was Bella’s job to listen to the bad dreams.
Edna’s  face,  in  the  softscreen  on  the  seat  back  before  Bella,  was  flawlessly  rendered  in  three
dimensions. Edna was only twenty-three, one of the first generation of “Spacers,” as Bella had learned to
call them, born  in space  during Bella’s post-sunstorm  rehabilitation stay  on the Moon.  But Edna  was
already a captain. Promotions were fast in a navy with few crew in ships so smart, or so Edna said, they
even had robots to swab the decks. Today, with her Irish-dark hair pulled severely back and her uniform
buttoned up around her neck, Edna looked tense, her eyes shadowed.
Bella longed to touch her daughter. But she couldn’t even speak to her in a natural way. Edna was out
in the navy’s operations HQ in the asteroid belt. The vagaries of orbits dictated that at this moment Edna
was some two astronomical units away from her mother, twice Earth’s distance to the sun, a tremendous
gap that imposed an each-way time delay of sixteen minutes.
And besides there was a question of protocol. Bella was in fact  her daughter’s  commanding officer.
She tried to focus on what Edna was saying.
“This is just a head’s-up, Mum,” Edna said now. “I don’t have any details. But the scuttlebutt is that
Rear Admiral Paxton is flying to London to brief you about it…”
Bella flinched. Bob Paxton, heroic footprints-and-flags explorer of Mars, and a royal pain in the butt.
Edna  smiled.  “Just  remember,  he’s  got  a  chest  full  of  fruit  salad,  but  you’re  the  boss!  By  the
way—Thea is doing fine.” Edna’s daughter, Bella’s three-year-old  granddaughter,  a  second-generation
Spacer. “She’ll be on her way home soon. But you should see  how she’s  taken  to  microgravity in the
low-spin habitats!…”
Edna spoke on of human things, family stuff, lesser events than the destiny of the solar  system.  Bella
hung on every word, as a grandmother would. But it was all so strange, even to Bella, who had served in
space herself. Edna’s language was peppered with the unfamiliar. You found your way around a spinning
space habitat by going spinward or antispinward or axisward… Even her accent was drifting, a bit of
Bella’s own Irish, and a heavy tinge of east coast American—the navy was essentially an offshoot of the
old U.S. seaborne navy, and had inherited much of its culture from that source.
Her daughter and granddaughter were growing away from her, Bella thought wistfully. But then, every
grandmother back to Eve had probably felt the same.
A soft chime warned her that the plane was beginning its final approach. She stored the rest of Edna’s
message and transmitted a brief reply of her own.
 
The plane banked, and Bella peered down at the city.
She could clearly make out the tremendous footprint of the Dome. It was a near-perfect circle about
nine kilometers in diameter, centered on Trafalgar Square. Within the circumference of the Dome much
of  the  old  building  stock  had  been  preserved  from  the  sunstorm’s  ravages,  and  something  of  the

character of the old confident London remained, a pale sheen of sandstone and marble. But Westminster
was now an island, the Houses of Parliament abandoned as a monument. After the sunstorm the city had
given up its attempts  to  control  its river, and  had  drawn  back  to  new banks  that  more  resembled  the
wider, natural course  that the Romans had  first mapped.  Londoners  had  adjusted;  you could  now go
scuba diving among the concrete ruins of the South Bank.
Outside that perimeter circle, much of the suburban collar of London had been  razed  by the fires of
sunstorm day. Now it was a carpet of blocky new buildings that looked like tank traps.
And as the plane dipped further she saw the Dome itself. The paneling had long been dismantled, but
some of the great ribs and pillars had been allowed to stand; weather-streaked and  tarnished  they cast
shadows kilometers long over the city the Dome had preserved. It was only a glimpse. And in a way it
was mundane; twenty-seven years on, you still saw the scars of the sunstorm wherever you traveled, all
over the world.
The city fled beneath her, and the plane swept down over anonymous, hunkered  suburbs  toward  its
landing at Heathrow.
 
6: MYRA 
Myra sat with Bisesa before the bubble window, sipping iced tea. It was  early in the morning, and  the
low light seemed to catch the wrinkles in Myra’s face.
“You’re staring,” Myra said.
“I’m sorry, love. Can you blame me? For me, you’ve aged nineteen years in a week.”
“At least I’m still younger than you.” Myra sounded resentful; she had a right to be.
Myra was wearing a comfortable-looking blouse and pants of some smart material that looked as if it
kept  her  cool.  Her  hair  was  swept  back  from  her  face,  a  style  that  was  a  bit  severe  to  Bisesa’s
out-of-date eyes, but which suited Myra’s bones, her fine forehead. She had no ring on her finger. Her
movements were small, contained, almost formal, and she rarely looked at her mother.
She didn’t look happy. She looked restless.
Bisesa didn’t know what was wrong. “I should have been here for you,” she said.
Myra looked up. “Well, you weren’t.”
“Right now, I don’t even know—”
“You know  I married  Eugene, not long before  you went into the tank.”  Eugene Mangles,  whiz-kid
scientist, all but autistic, and after his heroic computations during the sunstorm the nearest thing to a savior
the  world  had  recently  seen.  “Everybody  was  marrying  young  in  those  days,”  Myra  said.  The

post-sunstorm years had been a time of a rapid population boom. “We broke up after five years.”
“Well, I’m sorry. Has there been nobody else?”
“Not serious.”
“So where are you working now?”
“I went back to London, oh, ten years ago. I’m back in our old flat in Chelsea.”
“Under the skeleton of the Dome.”
“What’s left of it. That old ruin is good for property prices, you know.  Snob  value, to  be  under  the
Dome. I guess  we’re  rich, Mum. Whenever  I’m short  of money I just release  a  bit  more  equity;  the
prices are climbing so fast it soon gets wiped out.”
“So you’re back in the city. Doing what?”
“I retrained as a social worker. I deal in PTSD.”
“Post-traumatic stress.”
“Mostly it’s your generation, Mum. They’ll carry the stress with them to their graves.”
“But they saved the world,” Bisesa said softly.
“They did that.”
“I never saw you as a social worker. You always wanted to be an astronaut!”
Myra scowled, as if she was being reminded of some indiscretion. “I grew out of that when I found
out what was really going on.”
Apparently  unconsciously,  she  touched  the  tattoo  on  her  cheek.  It  was  in  fact  an  ident  tattoo,  a
compulsory registration introduced  a  few years  after  Bisesa  went into the tank.  Not  a  symptom  of  a
notably free society.
“Wasn’t Eugene working on weather modification systems?”
“Yes,  he was.  But he pretty  quickly got  sidelined  into  weaponization.  Weather  modification  as  an
instrument of political control.  It’s  never  been  used,  but it’s there.  We  had  long  arguments  about  the
morality of what he was doing. I never lost the argument, but I never won, either. Eugene just didn’t get
it.”
Bisesa sighed. “I remember that about him.”
“In the end his work was more important than I was.”
Bisesa was profoundly sorry to see this disappointment in a daughter who, from her point of view, had
been a bright twenty-one-year-old only weeks ago.
She looked out of her window.  Something was  moving on the far side  of the canyon.  Camels,  this
time. “Not everything about this new world seems so bad to me,” she said, trying to lighten the mood. “I
quite like the idea of camels and elephants wandering around North America—though I’m not quite sure
why they’re here.”

“We’re in the middle of a Jefferson,” Myra said.
“Named for Jefferson the president?”
“I  learned  a  lot  more  about  the  American  presidents  when  I  lived  with  Eugene’s  family  in
Massachusetts,” Myra said dryly. The purposeful re-wilding of the world was an impulse that had come
out of the aftermath of the sunstorm. “In fact Linda had something to do with devising the global program.
She wrote me about it.”
“My cousin Linda?”
“She’s Dame Linda now.” A student of bioethics, Linda had shared a flat with Bisesa and Myra during
the period  before  the sunstorm.  “The point is,  long  before  Columbus  the  first  Stone  Age  immigrants
knocked over most of the large mammals. So you had an ecology that was full of gaps evolution hadn’t
had time to fill. ‘A concert in which so many parts are wanting.’ Thoreau said that, I think. Linda used to
quote  him.  When  the  Spanish  brought  horses  here,  their  population  just  exploded.  Why?  Because
modern horses evolved here…”
In the new “Jefferson Parks” there had been a  conscious  effort to  reconstruct  the ecology  as  it had
been at the end of the last Ice Age, by importing species that were  close  equivalents of those  that  had
been lost.
Bisesa nodded. “African and Asian elephants for mammoths and mastodons.”
“Camels for the extinct camelids.  More  species  of horses  to  flesh out the diversity. Even zebras,  I
think. For the ground sloths they brought in rhinos, herbivores of a similar mass and diet.”
“And lions as the capstone, I suppose.”
“Yes. There are more parks overseas. In Britain, half of Scotland  is being given over  to  native oak
forest.”
Bisesa looked  at  the haughty camels.  “I suppose  it’s therapeutic.  But these  are  aftermath activities.
Healing. I’ve woken up to find we still live in an aftermath world, after all this time.”
“Yes,”  Myra  said  grimly.  “And  not  every  post-sunstorm  response  is  as  positive  as  building  a
Pleistocene park.
“Mum, people found out  about  the  sunstorm.  The truth. At first it was  classified. Even the name
‘Firstborn’ was never made public. There was no hint at  the time that  the sunstorm was  an intentional
act.”
Caused by the driving of a Jovian planet into the core of Earth’s sun.
“But the truth leaked out. Whistle-blowers. It became a torrent when the generation who had  fought
the storm headed for retirement, and had nothing to lose, and began to speak of what they knew.”
“I’m shocked there was a cover-up that lasted so long.”
“Even now there are plenty of people who don’t believe it, I think. But people are scared. And there
are  those  in government, and  in industry and  other  establishments,  who are  using  that  fear.  They  are
militarizing the whole of the Earth, indeed the solar system. They call it the War with the Sky.”
Bisesa snorted. “That’s ridiculous. How can you wage war on an abstraction?”

“I suspect that’s the point. It means whatever  you want it to  mean. And those  who control  the sky
have a lot of power. Why do you think Thales is still stuck on the Moon?”
“Ah. Because nobody can get to him up there. And this is why you left?”
“Most of the gazillions  they’re  spending  are  simply  wasted.  What’s  worse,  they’re  not  doing  any
serious  research  into  what  we  do  know  of  Firstborn  technology.  The  Eyes.  The  manipulation  of
spacetime, the construction of pocket universes—all of that. Stuff that might actually be useful in the case
of a renewed threat.”
“So that’s why you baled out.”
“Yes. I mean, it was fun, Mum. I got to go to the Moon! But I couldn’t swallow the lies. There  are
plenty on and off the planet who think the way I do.”
“Off the planet?”
“Mum, since the sunstorm a whole generation has been born offworld. Spacers, they call themselves.”
She glanced at her mother, then looked away. “It was a Spacer who called me. And asked me to come
fetch you.”
“Why?”
“Something’s coming.”
Those simple words chilled Bisesa.
A  shifting  light  caught  her  eye.  Looking  up  she  saw  that  bright  satellite  cutting  across  the  sky.
“Myra—what’s that? It looks sort of old-fashioned, in among the space mirrors.”
“It’s  Apollo  9.  Or  a  recreation.  That  ship  flew  a  hundred  years  ago  today.  The  government  is
rerunning all those classic missions. A remembrance of the lost times before the sunstorm.”
Conservation and memorials. Clinging to the past. It really was as if the whole world was still in shock.
“All right. What do you want me to do?”
“If you’re fit, get packed up. We’re leaving.”
“Where are we going?”
Myra smiled, a bit forced. “Off Earth…”
 
7: THE TOOKE MEDAL 
The motorcade drew up outside a property in a suburb called Chiswick.
Bella stepped out of her car, along with her two Council bodyguards. They were a man and a woman,

bulked  up by body  armor,  like all their colleagues  silent and  anonymous. The woman carried  a  small
package in a black leather case.
The car closed itself up.
Bella faced the Duflot home,  gathering her courage.  It  was  a  faceless  block  of white concrete  with
rounded wind-deflecting corners, sunk into the ground as if it was too heavy for the London clay. Its roof
was a garden of wind turbines, solar cell panels, and antennae; its windows were small and deep. With
subterranean  rooms  and  independent  power  it  was  a  house  like  a  bunker.  This  was  the  domestic
architecture of the fearful mid–twenty-first century.
Bella had to walk down a flight of steps to the front door.  A slim woman in a  sharp  black  suit was
waiting.
“Ms. Duflot?”
“Doctor Fingal. Thank you for coming. Call me Phillippa…” She extended a long-fingered hand.
Shadowed by her security people, Bella was brought through the house to the living room.
Phillippa Duflot must have been in her early sixties, a little older than Bella. Her silvered hair was cut
short. Her face was not unattractive, but narrow, her mouth pursed.  Phillippa looked  capable  of steely
self-control, but this woman had lost a son, and the marks of that tragedy were  in the lines around  her
eyes, Bella thought, and the tension in her neck.
Waiting for Bella in the living room were the generations of Phillippa’s family. They stood when Bella
came into the room,  lined up before  a  softwall showing an image of a  pretty  Scottish  lake.  Bella had
carefully and nervously memorized all their names. Phillippa’s two surviving sons, Paul and  Julian, were
solid, awkward-looking thirty-something men. Their wives stood by their sides. This slim, pretty woman
of twenty-six was Cassie, the widow of the missing son James, and his two children, boy and girl, six and
five, Toby and Candida. They were all dressed for a funeral, in black and white, even the children. And
they all had ident tattoos on their cheeks. The little girl’s was a pretty pink flower.
Standing before this group, under the stares of the children, Bella suddenly had no idea what to say.
Phillippa came  to  her rescue.  “It’s  most awfully good  of you  to  come.”  Her  accent  was  authentic
British upper class, a throwback to another age, rich with composure and command. Phillippa said to her
grandchildren, “Doctor Fingal is the head of the Space Council. She’s very important. And she flew from
America, just to see us.”
“Well, that’s true. And to give you this.” Bella nodded to her guards, and the woman handed her the
leather case. Bella opened this carefully, and set it up on a low coffee table. A disc of delicate, sparkling
fabric sat on a bed of black velvet.
The children were wide-eyed. The boy asked, “Is it a medal?”
And Candida asked, “Is it for Daddy?”
“Yes. It’s for your father.” She pointed to  the medal,  but did not touch  it; it looked  like spiderweb
embedded with tiny electronic components. “Do you know what it’s made of?”
“Space shield stuff,” Toby said promptly.
“Yes. The real thing. It’s called the Tooke Medal. There’s no higher honor you can  earn,  if you live

and work in space, than this. I knew Bud Tooke. I worked with him, up on the shield. I know how much
he would have admired your daddy. And it’s not just a medal. Do you want to see what it can do?”
The boy was skeptical. “What?”
She pointed. “Just touch this stud and see.”
The boy obeyed.
A hologram shimmered into life over the tabletop, eclipsing the medal in its case. It showed a funeral
scene, a flag-draped coffin on a caisson drawn by six tiny black  horses.  Figures in dark  blue uniforms
stood by. The sound was tinny but clear, and Bella could hear the creak of the horses’ harnesses, their
soft hoofbeats.
The  silent  children  loomed  like  giants  over  the  scene.  Cassie  was  weeping  silently;  her  brother
comforted her. Phillippa Duflot watched, composed.
The recording skipped forward. Three rifle volleys cracked,  and  a  flight of tiny, glittering jet  aircraft
swept overhead, one peeling away from the formation.
“It’s Dad’s funeral,” Toby said.
“Yes.”  Bella  leaned  down  to  face  the  children.  “They  buried  him  at  Arlington.  That’s  in
Virginia—America—where the U.S. Navy has its cemetery.”
“Dad trained in America.”
“That’s right. I was there, at the funeral, and so was your mummy. This hologram is generated by the
shield element itself—”
“Why did one plane fly away like that?”
“It’s called the Missing Man formation. Those planes, you know, Toby.  They were  T-38s.  The first
astronauts used them to train on. They’re over a hundred years old, imagine that.”
“I like the little horses,” said Candida.
Their uncle put his hands on their shoulders. “Come away now.”
With some relief, Bella straightened up.
 
Drinks arrived, sherry, whiskey, coffee, tea, served by a subdued  young aunt.  Bella accepted  a  coffee
and stood with Phillippa.
“It was kind of you to speak to them like that,” Phillippa said.
“It’s my job, I guess,” Bella said, embarrassed.
“Yes, but there are ways of doing it well, or badly. You’re new to it, aren’t you?”
Bella smiled. “Six months in. Does it show?”
“Not at all.”

“Deaths in space are rare.”
“Yes, thank  God,”  Phillippa said.  “But that’s  why it’s been  so  hard  to  take.  I had  hoped  this new
generation would be protected from—well, from what we  went through. I read  about  you.  You were
actually on the shield.”
Bella smiled. “I was a lowly comms tech.”
Phillippa shook  her head.  “Don’t do  yourself down.  You ended  up with a  battlefield promotion  to
mission commander, didn’t you?”
“Only because there was nobody else left to do it by the end of that day.”
“Even so, you did your job. You deserve the recognition you’ve enjoyed.”
Bella wasn’t sure about  that.  Her  subsequent  career,  as  an executive in various telecommunications
corporations  and  regulatory bodies,  had  no  doubt  been  given  a  healthy  boost  by  her  notoriety,  and
usefulness as a PR tool. But she’d always tried to pull her weight, until her retirement, aged fifty-five—a
short one as it turned out, until she was offered this new role, a position she couldn’t turn down.
Phillippa said, “As for me I was  based  in London  during the build-up  to  the storm.  Worked  in the
mayor’s office, on emergency planning and the like. But before the storm itself broke, my parents  took
me out to the shelter at L2.”
The shield had been poised above the Earth at the point of perpetual noon, at L1, the first Lagrangian
point of gravitational stability directly between Earth and sun. The Earth’s second Lagrangian point was
on the same Earth-sun line, but on the planet’s far side, at the midnight point. So while the workers at L1
labored to shelter the world from the storm, at L2 an offworld refuge hid safe in Earth’s shadow, stuffed
full of trillionaires, dictators, and other rich and powerful types—including, rumor had it, half of Britain’s
royals. The story of L2 had subsequently become a scandal.
“It  wasn’t  a  pleasant  place  to  be,”  Phillippa  murmured.  “I  tried  to  work.  We  were  ostensibly  a
monitoring station. I kept up the comms links to  the ground stations.  But some  of the rich types  were
throwing parties.”
“It sounds as if you didn’t have a choice,” Bella said. “Don’t blame yourself.”
“It’s kind of you to say that. Still, one must move on.”
James  Duflot’s  widow,  Cassie,  approached  them  tentatively.  “Thank  you  for  coming,”  she  said
awkwardly. She looked tired.
“You don’t need—”
“You were kind to the children. You’ve given them a day to remember.” She smiled. “They’ve seen
your picture on the news. I think I’ll put away that hologram, though.”
“Perhaps that’s best.” Bella hesitated. “I can’t tell you much about what James was working on. But I
want you to know that your husband gave his life in the best of causes.”
Cassie nodded. “In a way I was prepared for this, you know. People ask me how it feels to have your
husband fly into space. I tell them, you should try staying on Earth.”
Bella forced a smile.

“To tell you the truth we were going through a difficult time. We’re Earth-bound, Doctor Fingal. James
just went up to space to work, not to live. This is home.  London.  And I went into town  every  day  to
work at Thule.” Bella had done her research; Thule, Inc., was a big multinational eco-recovery agency.
“We’d talked vaguely of separating for a bit.” Cassie laughed with faint bitterness. “Well, I’ll never know
how that particular story would have turned out, will I?”
“I’m sorry—”
“You know what I miss? His mails. His softscreen  calls. I didn’t have him,  you see,  but I had  the
mails. And so in a way I don’t miss him, but I miss the mails.” She looked sharply at Bella. “It was worth
it, wasn’t it?”
Bella couldn’t bear to repeat the platitudes she knew were expected of her. “I’m new to this. But it’s
my job to make sure it was.”
That wasn’t enough. Nothing ever could be. She was relieved when she was able to use the excuse of
another appointment to get out of the pillboxlike house.
 
8: EURO-NEEDLE 
For her appointment with Bob Paxton, Bella was driven to the Livingstone Tower—or the “Euro-needle”
as  every  Londoner  still  called  it.  The  local  administrative  headquarters  of  the  Eurasian  Union,  and
sometime seat  of the  Union’s  prime  minister,  it  was  a  tower  of  airy  offices  with  broad  windows  of
toughened glass offering superb views of London. During the sunstorm the Needle  had  been  within the
Dome’s shelter,  and  on  its  roof,  which  had  interfaced  with  the  Dome’s  structure  itself,  was  a  small
museum to those perilous days.
Paxton was waiting for her in a conference room on the forty-first floor. Pacing, he was drinking coffee
in great gulps. He greeted Bella with a stiff military bow. “Chair Fingal.”
“Thanks for coming all the way to London to meet me—”
He waved that away. “I had other business here. We need to talk.”
She took a seat. Still shaken by her encounter with the Duflots, she felt this was turning into a very long
day.
Paxton  didn’t sit. He  seemed  too  restless  for that.  He  poured  Bella a  coffee  from a  big jug  in  the
corner of the room; he poured for Bella’s security people too, and they sat at the far end of the table.
“Tell me what’s on your mind, Admiral.”
“I’ll tell you simply. The new sightings confirm it. We have a bogey.”
“A bogey?”

“An anomaly. Something sailing through our solar system that doesn’t belong there…”
Paxton was tall, wiry. He  had  the face  of an astronaut,  she  thought, very pale,  and  pocked  by the
scars of radiation tumors. His cheek tattoo was a proud wet-navy emblem, and his hair was a drizzle of
crew-cut gray.
He was in his seventies, she supposed. He had been around forty when he had led Aurora 1, the first
manned mission to Mars, and had become the first person to set foot on that world—and then he had led
his  stranded  crew  through  the  greater  trial  of  the  sunstorm.  Evidently  he  had  taken  the  experience
personally. Now  a  Rear  Admiral in  the  new  space  navy,  he  had  become  a  power  in  the  paranoiac
post-sunstorm years, and had thrown himself into efforts to counter the threat that had once stranded him
on Mars.
Watching him pace, caffeine-pumped, his face set and urgent, Bella had an absurd impulse to ask him
for his autograph. And then a second impulse to order him to retire. She filed that reflection away.
In his clipped Midwestern accent, he amplified the hints Edna had already given her. “We actually got
three sightings of this thing.”
The first had been fortuitous.
Voyager 1, launched in 1977, having made mankind’s first reconnaissance  of the outer  planets,  had
sped on out of the solar system. By the fifth decade of a new century Voyager had traveled more than a
hundred and fifty times Earth’s distance from the sun.
And then its onboard  cosmic ray detector,  designed  to  seek  out particles  from distant  supernovae,
picked up a wash of energetic particles.
Something had been born, out there in the dark.
“Nobody  made  much of it at  the time. Because  it showed  up on April 20,  2042.”  Paxton  smiled.
“Sunstorm day. We were kind of busy with other things.”
Voyager’s later observations showed how the anomaly, tugged by the sun’s gravity, began a long fall
into the heart of the solar system.  The first significant object  the newborn  would encounter  on its way
toward  the sun would be  Saturn  and  its system of moons,  on a  date  in 2064.  Plans  were  drawn  up
accordingly.
“And that was the second encounter,” Paxton said. “We have readings made by Deep Space Monitor
X7-6102-016—and then a record of that probe’s destruction. And third, the latest sighting by a cluster
of  probes  of  some  damn  thing  coming  down  on  the  J-line.  The  orbit  of  Jupiter.”  He  brought  up  a
softscreen  map  on  the  table.  “Three  points  on  the  chart,  see—three  points  on  a  plausible  orbital
trajectory. Three sightings of what has to be the same object, wandering in where  it don’t  belong.” He
stared at her, his cold blue eyes rheumy but unblinking, as if challenging her to put it together.
“And you’re certain it’s not a comet, something natural?”
“Comets don’t give off sprays of cosmic rays,” he said. “And it’s kind of a coincidence this thing just
popped up out of nowhere on sunstorm day, don’t you think?”
“And this trajectory, if it continues—where is it going, Admiral?”
“We  can  be  pretty  accurate  about  that.  It  deflected  off  Saturn,  but  it  won’t  pass  another  mass
significant enough for a slingshot. Assuming it just falls under gravity—”

She took the bait. “It’s heading for Earth, isn’t it?”
His face was like granite. “If it continues on its merry course it will get here  December  of next year.
Maybe it’s Santa’s sleigh.”
 
She frowned. “Twenty-one months. That’s not much time.”
“That it ain’t.”
“If the alert had been raised when this thing passed Saturn, and, you say, it actually destroyed a probe,
we’d have had years warning.”
He shrugged. “You have to set your threat levels somewhere. I always argued we weren’t suspicious
enough. I had this out with your predecessor on a number of occasions. Looks like I was right, don’t it?
If we survive this we can review protocol.”
If we survive this. His language chilled her. “You think this is some kind of artifact, Admiral?”
“Couldn’t say.”
“But you do believe it’s a threat?”
“Have to assume so. Wouldn’t you say?”
She could hardly gainsay that. The question was what to do about it.
The World Space Council had only a tenuous relationship with the old UN, which since the sunstorm
had  focused  its  efforts  on  recovery  on  Earth.  The  Council’s  brief  was  to  coordinate  the  world’s
preparedness for any more threats from the unseen enemy behind the sunstorm,  an enemy whose  very
existence had not in fact yet been  officially admitted.  Its  principal asset  was  the navy, which nominally
reported  to  the Council. But the Council itself was  funded by and  ultimately controlled  by  an  uneasy
alliance of the world’s four great powers—especially the United States, Eurasia, and China, who hoped
to use space to gain some political ground back from the fourth, Africa.
And at the apex of this rickety structure of power and control was Bella, a compromise candidate in a
compromised position.
In the short term, she thought, the three spacegoing powers might try to leverage the sudden irruption
of an actual threat into some kind of advantage  over  Africa, which had  become  prominent since being
relatively spared by the sunstorm. The tectonic plates  that  underpinned  the Council might start  to  shift,
she thought uneasily, just at the very moment it was being called upon to act.
“You’re thinking politics,” Paxton growled.
“Yes,” she admitted. As if this anomaly, whatever it was, was just a  new item on the agenda  of the
world’s  business.  But  if  this  was  another  threat  like  the  sunstorm,  it  could  render  all  that  business
irrelevant at a stroke.
Suddenly she felt weary. Old, worn-out. She found she resented that this crisis should be  landed  on
her plate so soon into her chairmanship.
And, looking at Paxton’s intent face, she wondered how much control she would have over events.

“All right, Admiral, you have my attention. What do you recommend?”
He stepped  back.  “I’ll gather  more  data,  and  set  up  a  briefing  on  options.  Best  to  do  that  back  in
Washington, I guess. Soon as we can manage.”
“All right. But we’ll have to look at the wider  implications. What  to  tell the people,  or  not.  How  to
prepare for the incoming anomaly, whatever it is.”
“We’ll need more data before we can do that.”
“And what do we tell those we report to?”
Paxton said, “As far as the politics go it’s essential we make sure our  mandate  and  capability aren’t
diluted by politico bull. And, Chair, if you’re agreeable, for the briefing I’ll incorporate material gathered
by the Committee.”
She felt the hairs on her neck prickle a warning; after  most of a  lifetime at  the upper  levels of large
organizations she knew when a trap was being set. “You mean your Committee of Patriots.”
He smiled, sharklike. “You should come visit us sometime, Madam  Chair.  We  work  out of the old
Navy Special Projects Office in DC; a lot of us are old navy fliers of one stripe or another. Our mission,
grant you it’s self-appointed,  is  to  monitor  the  responses  of  our  governments  and  super-government
agencies to the alien intervention that led to the sunstorm, and the ongoing emergency since. Once again
your predecessor didn’t want to know about this. I believe he thought dabbling with the wacko  fringe
would damage his fine career. But now we really do have something out there, Madam Chair, a genuine
anomaly. Now’s the time to listen to us, if you’re ever going to.”
Again it was hard to gainsay that. “I feel you’re drawing me into an argument, Bob. Okay, subject to
my veto.”
“Thank you. There’s one specific.”
“Go on.”
“One beef the Committee has  always had  has  been  with the almost willful way the authorities have
never followed up the hints of the alien. Developing our own weaponry and armor  is one  thing, but to
ignore the enemy’s capability is criminal. However we do know of someone who might be our way in to
that whole murky business.”
“Who?”
“A woman called Bisesa Dutt. Ex British Army. Long story. She’s the reason why I came to London
today; she has a base here. But she’s not around, or  her daughter.  Since  arriving here  I got word  she
may have booked herself into a Hibernaculum in the States, under an assumed name. Of course she may
have moved on from there by now.” He eyed Bella. “With your permission I’ll track her down.”
She took a breath. “I have the authority for that?”
“If you want it.” He left it hanging.

“All right. Find her. Send me your file on her. But stay legal, Admiral. And be nice.”
He grinned. “All part of the service.”
Paxton was happy, she saw suddenly. He had been waiting for this moment, waiting out the whole of
his anticlimactic life since his heroic days on Mars during the sunstorm. Waiting for the sky to fall again.
Bella suppressed a shudder. As for herself, she only hoped she could avoid creating any more James
Duflots.
 
9: FLORIDA 
Myra got Bisesa out of the Hibernaculum and took her to Florida.
They flew in a fat-bodied, stub-winged plane. It was driven by a kind of air-breathing rocket called a
scramjet.  Bisesa  still felt frail, but she  used  to  ride  helicopters  in  the  army,  and  she  studied  this  new
generation of craft—new  to  a  sleeper  like her,  anyhow—with curiosity. A jaunt across  the  continent,
from Arizona to Florida, was nothing; this sturdy vessel really came into its own on very long-haul flights
when it had the chance to leap up out of the atmosphere altogether, like a metallic salmon.
But the security was ferocious. They even had to submit to searches and scans in flight. This paranoia
was a legacy not just of the sunstorm but of incidents when planes  and  spaceplanes  had  been  used  as
missiles, including the destruction of Rome a couple of years before the storm.
Security was  in  fact  an  issue  from  the  beginning.  Bisesa  had  come  out  of  her  Hibernaculum  pod
without the latest ident tattoos. There was an office of the FBI maintained on site at the Hibernaculum to
process patients like her, refugees from slightly more innocent days—and to make sure no fugitives from
justice  had  tried  to  flee  through  time.  But  Myra  had  come  to  Bisesa’s  room  with  a  boxy  piece  of
equipment that stamped a tattoo onto Bisesa’s face, and she gave her an injection she described as “gene
therapy.”  Then  they  had  slipped  out  of  the  Hibernaculum  through  a  goods  entrance  without  going
anywhere near that FBI office.
Since then they had passed every check.
Bisesa felt faintly disturbed. Whoever Myra had hooked  up with evidently had  significant resources.
But she trusted Myra implicitly, even though this was a strange new Myra, suddenly aged and embittered,
a new person with whom she was, tentatively, building a new relationship. Really, she had no choice.
They deplaned at Orlando and spent a night at a cheap tourist hotel downtown.
Bisesa was faintly surprised that people still shuttled around the world to  destinations  like this. Myra
said it was  mostly nostalgic.  The  latest  virtual  reality  systems,  by  interfacing  directly  with  the  central
nervous system, were capable even of simulating the sensation of motion, acceleration. You could ride a
roller coaster around the moons of Jupiter, if you wanted.  What  theme park  could  compete  with that?
When the last of the pre-sunstorm generations gave up chasing their childhood  dreams  and  died  off, it

seemed likely that most people would rarely venture far from the safety of their bunker-like homes.
They ate room service food and drank minibar wine, and slept badly.
 
The next morning, a  driverless  car  was  waiting outside  the hotel for them. It  was  of  an  odd,  chunky
design that Bisesa didn’t recognize.
Cocooned,  they  were  driven  off  at  what  felt  like  a  terrific  speed  to  Bisesa,  with  the  traffic  a
hairsbreadth  close.  She  wasn’t  sorry  when  the  windows  silvered  over,  and  she  and  Myra  sat  in  a
humming near-silence, with only the faintest of surges to tell them that they were speeding out of the city.
When they drew to a halt the doors slid back, allowing bright sunlight to flood into the car, and Bisesa
heard the cries of gulls, and smelled the unmistakable tang of salt.
“Come on.” Myra clambered out of the car, and helped her mother follow stiffly.
It  was  March,  but  even  so  the  heat  hammered  down  on  Bisesa.  They  were  on  a  stretch  of
tarmac—not a road or a parking lot, it looked more like a runway, stretching off into the distance, lined
with blockhouses. On the horizon she saw gantries, some of them orange with rust, so remote they were
misted  with  distance.  To  the  north—it  had  to  be  that  way,  judging  from  the  wind  blowing  off  the
sea—she saw something glimmering, a kind of line scratched onto the sky,  tilted a  little away  from the
vertical. Hard to see, elusive, perhaps it was some kind of contrail.
There couldn’t be any doubt where she was. “Cape Canaveral, right?”
Myra grinned. “Where else? Remember you brought me here on a tourist trip when I was six?”
“I expect it’s changed a bit since then. This is turning into quite a ride, Myra.”
“Then welcome back to Canaveral.” A young man approached them; a smart suitcase  trundled  after
him. Ident-tattooed, he was sweating inside a padded orange jumpsuit plastered with NASA logos.
“What are you, a tourist guide?”
“Hi, Alexei,” Myra said. “Don’t mind my mother. After nineteen years she got out of bed on the wrong
side.”
He stuck out his hand. “Alexei Carel. Good to meet you, Ms. Dutt. I suppose I am your guide for the
day—sort of.”
Twenty-five or  twenty-six,  he was  a  good-looking  boy,  Bisesa  thought, with an open  face  under  a
scalp that was shaven close, though black hair sprouted thickly, like a five o’clock shadow. He  looked
oddly uncomfortable, though, as if he wasn’t used to being outdoors. Bisesa felt like an ambassador from
the past, and wanted to make a good impression on this sunstorm boomer. She gripped his warm hand.
“Call me Bisesa.”
“We don’t have much time.” He snapped his fingers and the suitcase opened. It contained two more
orange suits, neatly folded, and  more  gear: blankets,  water  bottles,  packets  of dried  food,  what might
have been an assembly-kit chemical toilet, a water purifying kit, oxygen masks.
Bisesa looked  at  this junk with apprehension.  “It’s  like the gear  we  used  to  take  on  field  hikes  in
Afghanistan. We’re taking a ride, are we?”

“That we are.” Alexei hauled the jumpsuits out of the suitcase. “Put these on, please. This corner of the
facility is low on surveillance, but the sooner we’re in camouflage the better.”
“Right here?”
“Come on, Mum.” Myra was already unzipping her blouse.
The jumpsuit was easy to put on; it seemed to wriggle into place, and Bisesa wondered if it had some
limited smartness  of its own.  Alexei handed  her boots,  and  she  found gloves and  a  kind of balaclava
helmet in a pocket.
In the Florida sun, once she was zipped up she was  hot.  But evidently she  was  headed  somewhere
much colder.
Myra bundled their clothes into a smaller pack she took from the car, which also contained their spare
underwear and toiletries. She threw the pack into the suitcase, which folded closed. Then she patted the
car. Empty, it closed itself up and rolled away.
Alexei grinned. “All set?”
“As we’ll ever be,” Myra said.
Alexei snapped his fingers again. The tarmac under Bisesa’s feet shuddered.
And a  great  slab  of it dropped  precipitately,  taking  the  three  of  them  and  the  suitcase  down  into
darkness. A metal lid closed over them with a clang.
“Shit,” Bisesa said.
“Sorry,” Alexei said. “Meant for cargo, not people.”
Fluorescents lit up, revealing a concrete corridor.
 
10: LAUNCH COMPLEX 39 
Alexei led them to an open-topped vehicle a little like a golf cart.
They clambered aboard. Bisesa felt bulky and clumsy, moving in her jumpsuit. Even the suitcase was
more graceful than she was.
The cart moved off smoothly down the tunnel. It was long and crudely cut, and it stretched off into a
darkness dimly lit by widely spaced fluorescent tubes. There was a musty smell, but at least it was a little
cooler down here.
“This is kind of a cargo conduit,” Alexei said. “Not meant for passengers.”
“But it’s away from prying eyes,” Bisesa said.

“You got it. It’s a couple of klicks but we’ll be there in no time.”
His accent was basically American, Bisesa thought, but with an odd tang of French, long vowels and
rolled r’s. “Where are we going?”
“You’ve slept through the rebuilding, haven’t you? We’re heading for LC-39.”
Faint memories stirred  in Bisesa’s  head.  “Launch  Complex  39.  Where  they  launched  the  Apollos
from.”
“And later the space shuttles, yeah.”
“Now it’s used for something else entirely,” Myra said. “You’ll see.”
“Of course it had to be LC-39 they used,” Alexei said. “As indeed it had to be Canaveral. I mean, it’s
not an unsuitable site, especially now they have the hurricanes licked. There are better locations, closer to
the equator, but no, it had to be here.  The irony is that  to  launch the new Saturns that  are  taking the
Apollo retreads into orbit, they had to build a new pad altogether.”
Bisesa still didn’t know what they were talking about. They used the pad for what? “Carel—how do I
know that name?”
“You may have met my father. Bill Carel? He worked with Professor Siobhan McGorran.”
It was a long time since Bisesa had heard that name. Siobhan had been Britain’s Astronomer Royal at
the time  of  the  sunstorm,  and  had  ended  up  playing  a  significant  role  in  mankind’s  response  to  the
crisis—and in Bisesa’s own destiny.
“My father was with her as a graduate student. They worked together on quintessence studies.”
“On what?…Never mind.”
“That was before the sunstorm. Now Dad’s a full professor himself.” The cart slowed. “Here we go.”
He hopped nimbly off the cart before it had stopped. The women and the suitcase followed a bit more
cautiously.
They gathered on a block of tarmac. A lid opened above them with a metallic snap, revealing a slab of
blue sky.
Alexei said, “We shouldn’t be challenged aboveground. If we are,  let me do  the talking. Hold  tight,
now.” He snapped his fingers.
The tarmac block became an elevator that surged upward with a violence that made Bisesa stagger.
 
They emerged into sunlight. Alexei had seemed more comfortable underground; now he flinched from the
open sky.
Bisesa glanced around, trying to get her bearings.  They were  at  the focus of roads  that  snaked  out
over the flat coastal plain of Canaveral, crammed with streams of vehicles, mostly trucks. There was even
a kind of monorail system along which a train of podlike compartments zipped, glistening and  futuristic.
All this traffic poured into this place.
And before her was a vast rusting slab, a platform that reminded her oddly of an oil rig, but stranded

on  the  land,  and  mounted  on  tremendous  caterpillar  tracks.  The  crude  metal  shell  of  the  thing  was
stamped  with logos: mostly “Skylift Consortium,”  a  name  that  rang  faint  bells.  Close  by  stood  more
strange assemblies, squat tubes that stood erect in mobile stands, like cannon pointing up at the pale blue
sky.
“This platform looks  for all the world  like one  of those  old  crawlers  they  used  to  use  to  haul  the
Saturns and the shuttles out to the pad.”
“That’s exactly what it is,” Alexei said. “A mobile launch platform, reused.”
“And what are those cannon? Weapons?”
“No,” Alexei said. “They’re the power supply.”
“For what?”
Myra said gently, “Things have changed, Mum. Look up.”
Mounted  on  top  of  the  big  crawler  was  what  looked  like  a  minor  industrial  facility,  where
unlikely-looking machines rolled around in a kind of choreography. They seemed to be trucks, basically,
but with solar-cell wings on their flanks, and on their roofs were pulleylike mechanisms that  made  them
look like stranded cable-cars. Their hulls were all stamped with the Skylift logo.
These peculiar engines were  lining up before  a  kind of ribbon,  shining silver, looking no wider  than
Bisesa’s hand, that rose up from the platform. Each truck in turn approached the ribbon, dipped its pulley
spindle, clung to the ribbon, and then hauled itself off the ground, rising rapidly.
Bisesa stepped back and lifted her face, trying to see  where  the ribbon  went.  It  rose  on up; Bisesa
could see  the trucks  climbing it like beads  on a  necklace.  The ribbon  arced  upward,  narrowing  with
perspective, becoming a shining thread tilted slightly from the vertical, a scratch ruled across the sky. She
tipped her head back higher, looking for whatever was holding the ribbon up—
Nothing was holding it up.
“I don’t believe it,” she said. “A space elevator.”
Alexei  seemed  interested  in  her  reaction.  “We  call  it  Jacob’s  Ladder.  In  2069,  it’s  an  everyday
miracle, Bisesa. Welcome to the future. Come on, time to find our ride. Are you up to a little climbing?”
They  had  to  scramble  up  rusty  rungs,  fixed  to  the  side  of  the  mobile  platform.  Bisesa  struggled,
Hibernaculum-enfeebled,  encased  in her suit. The others  took  care  of her,  Alexei going  ahead,  Myra
following.
Once on the upper surface of the platform they gave her a few seconds to catch her breath. The trucks
rolled to and fro in their orderly way, their motors whirring gently.
Embarrassed, she tried to say something intelligent. “Why use a crawler?”
Alexei said, “It’s best to keep the base of your elevator mobile. Most of them are based on facilities at
sea, actually—reused oil rigs and the like—including Bandara, the first.”

“Bandara?”
“The Aussie elevator, off Perth. They call it Bandara now. Named for an Aboriginal legend of a world
tree.”
“Why do you need to move your base? In case a hurricane comes?”
“Well, yes, though as I said they’ve got hurricanes pretty much licked these days.” He glanced at the
sky. “But further up there are other hazards. Relic satellites in low Earth orbit. Even NEOs. Near–Earth
objects. Asteroids. This thing goes a long way up, Bisesa, and has to deal with a lot of perils along the
way. Are you ready to move on?”
He brought them to one of the trucks. He called it a “spider.” It had solar-cell wings folded up against
its flanks, and  that complicated  pulley mechanism on its roof.  Its  transparent  hull was  loaded  up  with
some kind of cargo,  palettes  and  boxes.  The spider  was  actually moving, though slower  than walking
pace, rolling in a line of others  identical save  for registration numbers stamped  on its hull—the spiders
were making for the thread in a kind of complicated spiral queuing system, Bisesa saw.
Alexei walked alongside the spider. He dug a plastic disc the size of a hockey puck out of his pocket,
and slapped it to the spider’s hull. “Just give it a moment to break through the protocols and establish its
interface—” He  briskly leapt  up onto  the spider’s  roof,  and  stuck  another  hockey  puck  to  the pulley
mechanism up there. By the time he was down on the ground again a transparent door had slid back, and
he grinned. “We’re in. Myra, can you give me a hand?” He jumped easily inside the hull, and  began  to
bundle the cargo carelessly out of the door. Myra helped by shoving it aside.
“Just so  I’m clear,”  Bisesa  said  uncertainly, “we shouldn’t be  doing this, should we?  In fact  we’re
stowing away in a cargo truck.”
“It’s human-rated,” Alexei said confidently. “Pressurized. Good radiation shielding, and we’ll need it;
we’ll be spending rather a long time in the van Allen belts. We’ll be fine with the gear I brought along. It
was thought best to get you off the planet as fast as possible, Bisesa.”
“Why? Myra, are you on the run? Am I?”
“Sort of,” Myra said.
Alexei said, “Let’s move it. We’re nearly at the ribbon.”
Once the cargo was cleared, Alexei summoned his suitcase. It  extended  little hydraulic legs to  jump
without difficulty into the spider’s hull. Myra followed, and then only Bisesa  was  walking alongside the
trundling spider.
Mura held out her hand. “Mum? Come on. It’s an easy step.”
Bisesa looked around, beyond the jungle of spiders, to the blue sky of Canaveral, the distant gantries.
She had an odd premonition that she might never come this way again. Might never  set  foot  on Earth
again. She took a deep breath; even among the scents of oil and electricity, she could smell the salt of the
ocean.
Then she stepped deliberately off the crawler platform and into the hull, one step, two. Myra gave her
a hug, welcoming her aboard.
 

The hull’s interior was bare, but it was meant for at least occasional human use. There was a handrail at
waist height, and little fold-down seats embedded in the walls. The view through the transparent hull was
obscured by those big folded-away solar panel wings.
Alexei was all business. He spread a softscreen over the inner hull, tapped it, and the door slid shut.
“Gotcha.” He took a deep breath. “Canned air,” he said. “Nothing like it.” He seemed relieved to be shut
up in the pod.
Bisesa asked, “You’re a Spacer?”
“Not  strictly.  Born  on  Earth,  but  I’ve  lived  most  of  my  life  off  the  planet.  I  guess  I’m  used  to
environments you can control. Out there in the raw, it’s a little—clamoring.” He reached up and peeled
his tattoo off his face.
Bisesa touched her cheek, and found her own tattoo came away like a layer of wax. She tucked it in a
pocket of her suit.
Alexei advised them to sit down. Bisesa pulled down a seat, and found a narrow pull-out plastic belt
that she clipped around her waist. Myra followed suit, looking apprehensive.
The spiders before them in the line were  clearing away  now,  revealing the ribbon,  a  vertical line of
silver, dead straight.
Alexei said,  “What’s  going  to  happen  is  that  our  spider  will  grab  onto  the  ribbon  with  the  roller
assembly above  our  heads.  Okay?  As  soon  as  it has  traction  it  will  start  to  climb.  You’ll  feel  some
acceleration.”
“How much?” Bisesa asked.
“Only half a G or so. And only for about ten seconds.  After that,  once  we  hit our  top  speed,  we’ll
climb smoothly.”
“And what’s the top speed?”
“Oh, two hundred klicks an hour. The ribbon’s actually rated for twice that. I’ve disabled  the speed
inhibitor, if we need it.”
“Let’s hope that’s not necessary,” Bisesa said dryly.
Myra reached over and slipped her hand into her mother’s. “Do you remember how we went to see
the opening of the Aussievator? It was just after the sunstorm. I was eighteen, I think. That was where I
got to know Eugene again. Now there are elevators all over the world.”
“It was quite a day. And so is this.”
Myra squeezed her hand. “Glad I woke you up yet?”
“I’m reserving judgment.” But her grin was fierce. Who could resist this?
Alexei watched this interplay uncertainly.
They were  rolling toward  the  ribbon.  Over  their  heads,  with  a  clumsy  clunk,  the  pulley  assembly
unfolded itself. The ribbon really was narrow, no more  than four or  five centimeters  across.  It  seemed
impossible that it could support the weight of this car, let alone hundreds—thousands?—of  others.  But
the spider trundled forward without hesitation.

The roller assembly tipped up, closed itself up around the ribbon, and, with a surge like a punch in the
belly, the spider leapt skyward.
 
11: RIBBON 
In that first moment they left the spider farm behind, and were up and out in the bright sunlight. Glancing
up, Bisesa saw the ribbon arrowing off into invisibility in a cloudless sky, with the bright pearls of other
spiders going ahead of her, up into the unknown.
And when she looked down, peering around the obstruction  of the solar  panels,  she  saw  the world
falling away from her, and a tremendous view of the Cape opening up. She shielded  her eyes  from the
sun. There  were  the gantries and  blockhouses,  and  the  straight-line  roads  traveled  by  generations  of
astronauts. A spaceplane of some kind rested on a runway, a black-and-white moth. And a bit further on
a white needle stood tall beside a rusted gantry. It had to be a Saturn V, perhaps bearing a recreation of
Apollo 10, the next precursor of the century-old Moon landings. But she had  already  risen higher than
the Saturn’s needle nose, already higher than the astronauts climbing their gantries to their Moon ships.
The  ascent  was  rapid,  and  just  kept  going.  Soon  she  seemed  able  to  see  down  the  beach  for
kilometers. Canaveral looked more water than land, a skim of earth on the silver hide of the great ocean
that opened up to the east. And she saw cars and trucks parked up on the roads and beside the beach,
with tiny American flags fluttering from their aerials.
“People still come to see,” Alexei said, grinning. “Quite a spectacle when the Saturns go up, I’m told.
But the Ladder is more impressive, in its way—”
There was a jolt.
“Sorry about  that,”  Alexei said.  “End of the acceleration.”  He  tapped  his softscreen,  and  a  simple
display lit up, showing altitude, speed, air pressure, time. “Three hundred meters high, speed maxed out,
and from now on it’s a smooth ride all the way up.”
The ground fell away, the historic clutter of Canaveral already diminishing to a map.
 
A minute into the journey, four kilometers high, and the world was starting to  curve,  the eastern  ocean
horizon an immense arc. And with a snap the big solar-cell wings folded down flat.
“I don’t get it,” Bisesa said. “This is for power? The solar cells seem to be on the underside.”
“That’s the idea,” Alexei said. “The spider’s power comes from ground-based lasers.”
“You saw them, Mum,” Myra said.
“You leave your power supply on the ground. Okay. So how long is the ride?”

“To beyond geosynch? All the way out to our drop-off point? Around twelve days,” Alexei said.
“Twelve days in this box?” And Bisesa didn’t like the sound of that phrase, drop-off.
“This is a big structure, Mum,” Myra said,  but she  was  evidently a  novice herself and  didn’t sound
convinced.
A few more minutes and they were eight kilometers high, already higher than most aircraft would fly,
and  there  was  a  clunk,  the  mildest  of  shudders.  Over  their  heads  the  pulley  mechanism  alarmingly
reconfigured itself, bringing a different set of wheels and tracks into play.
And then, suddenly,  the ribbon  itself changed,  from a  narrow  strip  the width of Bisesa’s  hand to  a
sheet as wide as an opened-out newspaper. It was sharply curved, she saw. Their spider now clung to
one outer edge of the ribbon.
Alexei said, “This is the standard width of the ribbon, most of the way to orbit. It’s kept narrower in
the lower atmosphere because of the threat regime down there.  Of course  most of the bad  weather  is
kept away nowadays. The ribbon’s worst problems actually come when they launch one of those Saturn
s; the whole damn earth shakes, and I can tell you there’s a lot of grumbling about that.”
Ten  kilometers,  twelve,  fifteen;  the  distance  simply  peeled  away.  Earth’s  curve  became  more
pronounced, and the sky above Bisesa’s head started to fade down to a deeper blue. She was above the
bulk of the atmosphere already, she realized.
Another abrupt transition came when the ribbon turned gold: a plating to protect it from the corrosive
effects of high-altitude atomic oxygen, Alexei said, ionized gas in Earth’s wispy upper air.
And still they rose and rose.
“So  let’s  get  comfortable.”  Alexei  ordered  his  suitcase  to  open.  “The  pressure  will  drop  to  its
spaceside mix—low pressure, a third atmospheric, but high on oxygen. In the meantime I brought oxygen
masks.” He showed them, and a rack of bottles. “And it’s going to  get cold.  Your  jumpsuits ought to
keep you warm. I have heated blankets too.” He rummaged about in his suitcase. “We’re going to be in
here a while. I have fold-out camp beds and chairs. A bubble tent in case you don’t want to sleep under
the stars, so to speak. I have heaters for food and drink. We’re going to have to recycle our water, I’m
afraid, but I have a good treatment system.”
“No spacesuits,” Bisesa said.
“Shouldn’t need them, unless anything goes wrong.”
“And if it does?”
He looked at her, as if assessing her nerve. “Second worst case is, we get stuck on the cable. There
are a whole slew of fail-safe mechanisms to save us until rescue comes, via another  spider.  Even if we
were to lose pressure, we have survival bubbles. Hamster balls. Not comfortable, but practical.”
Hamster balls? Bisesa hoped fervently that it wouldn’t come to that. “And the worst case?”
“We become detached from the ribbon altogether. You understand that a certain point on the elevator
is in geosynch—geosynchronous orbit, turning around the Earth in exactly twenty-four hours. That’s the
only altitude that is actually in orbit,  strictly speaking.  Below that  point we  are  moving too  slowly  for
orbit, and above too fast.”

“So if the spider were to lose its grip—”
“Below geosynch, we fall back to Earth.” He rapped the transparent hull. “Might not look like it, but it
is designed to survive a low-speed reentry.”
“And after geosynch? We’d fall away from Earth, right?”
He winked. “Actually that’s the idea. Don’t worry about it.” He held up a flask. “Coffee, anybody?”
Myra grunted. “Maybe we ought to get your fancy toilet set up first.”
“Good thinking.”
While they fiddled with the toilet, Bisesa gazed out of the window.
Riding  silently  into  the  sky,  soon  she  was  a  hundred  kilometers  high,  higher  even  than  the  old
pioneering rocket planes, the X-15s, used to reach. The sky was already all but black above her, with a
twinkling of stars right at the zenith, a point to which the ribbon, gold-bright in the sunlight, pointed like an
arrow.  Looking up that way she  could  see  no sign of structures  further up the ribbon,  no sign of  the
counterweight mass that she knew had to be at the ribbon’s end, nothing but the shining beads of more
spiders clambering up this thread  to  the sky.  She  suspected  she  still had  not grasped  the scale  of the
elevator, not remotely.
 
By an hour and  a  half  in,  the  fast  pace  of  the  events  of  the  early  moments  of  the  climb  was  over.
Somewhere above three hundred kilometers high, she could already see the horizon all the way around
the face  of the Earth,  with the ribbon  arrowing straight down  to  the  familiar  shapes  of  the  American
continents far beneath her. Though the stars would wheel around her during this extraordinary ascent, she
realized, the Earth would stay locked in place below. It was as if she had been transported to a medieval
universe, the cosmos of Dante, with a fixed Earth surrounded by spinning stars.
When she  stood  she  felt oddly  light  on  her  feet.  One  of  Alexei’s  softscreen  displays  mapped  the
weakening of gravity as  they clambered  away  from Earth’s  huge  mass.  It  was  already  down  several
percent on its sea-level value.
The silent, straight-line ascent, the receding Earth, the shaft of ribbon-light that guided her,  the subtle
reduction of weight: it was a magical experience, utterly disconcerting, like an ascent into heaven.
Two hours after “launch” the ribbon changed again, spreading out to a curved sheet twice the width of
its standard size—still only about two meters across, and gently curved.
Bisesa asked, “Why the extra thickness?”
“Space debris,” Alexei said. “I mean, bits of old spacecraft. Lumps of frozen astronaut urine. That sort
of stuff. Between five and seventeen hundred kilometers, we’re at the critical risk altitude for that. So we
have a bit of extra width to cope with any impact.”
“And if we are hit by something—”
“Anything  so  big  it  would  slice  the  ribbon  right  through  is  tracked,  and  we  just  move  the  whole
shebang out of the way using the crawler on the ground. Anything smaller will puncture  the ribbon,  but
it’s smart enough to mend itself. The only problem is if we’re unlucky enough to be hit by something small
coming sideways in, across the face of the ribbon.”

“Which is why the ribbon is curved,” Bisesa guessed.
“Yes. So it can’t be cut through. Don’t worry about it.”
Myra,  peering up,  said,  “I think I see  another  spider.  On  the  other  side  of  the  ribbon  from  us.  I
think—oh, wow.”
The second  spider  came  screaming down  out of the sky,  passing just half a  meter  away.  They  all
flinched. Bisesa had a brief reminder of their huge speed.
“A builder,” Alexei said, a bit too quickly for his studied calm to be convincing. “Traveling down the
ribbon, weaving an extra couple of centimeters onto the edge.”
Bisesa asked, “What’s the substance of the ribbon?”
“Fullerenes. Carbon nanotubes. Little cylinders of carbon atoms, spun into a thread. Immensely strong.
The whole ribbon is under tension; the Earth’s spin is trying to fling the counterweight away,  like a  kid
swinging a rock on a rope. No conventional substance would be  strong  enough. So  the spiders  go up
and down, weaving on extra strips, and binding it all with adhesive tape.”
Mechanical spiders, endlessly weaving a web in the sky.
They rose largely in silence, for the others wouldn’t talk.
“Come on. We’re off the Earth. Now you can tell me what’s going on. Why am I here, Myra?”
The others hesitated. Then Myra said, “Mum, it’s difficult. For one thing the whole world  is listening
in.”
“The hull is smart.” Alexei spun a finger. “All ’round surveillance.”
“Oh.”
“And for another,” Myra said, “you already know.”
Alexei said, “Believe me, we’ll have plenty of time to talk, Bisesa. Even when we get to the drop-off,
it’s only the start of the journey.”
“A journey to where? No, don’t answer that.”
Myra said, “I think you’ll be surprised by the answer, Mum.”
Bisesa would have welcomed the chance to talk to Myra, not about high-security issues and the fate of
the solar system, but simply of each other. Myra had told her hardly anything of her life since Bisesa had
gone into the tank. But, it seemed, that wasn’t going to happen. Myra seemed oddly inhibited. And now
the presence of Alexei sharing this little capsule with them inhibited her even further.
Bisesa started to feel tired, her face and hands cold, her stomach warmed by coffee, her mind dulled
by the relentless climb. She pulled on the hat and gloves she found in her pockets. She piled up blankets
from the suitcase onto the floor, pulled one over herself, and lay down. There was no sound, no sense of
motion; she might have been stationary, suspended above the slowly receding Earth. She gazed up at the
ribbon, seeing how far she could follow its line.
There was another transition when the ribbon reverted from gold to its customary silver. And later the
width narrowed. More than seventeen hundred kilometers high, eight hours since leaving Earth, they were

higher than almost all mankind’s satellites had ever flown.
Bisesa was vaguely, peripherally aware of all this. Mostly she dozed.
She was woken with a jolt, a brief surge of acceleration that pressed her down into her blankets.
She sat up. Alexei and Myra sat on their fold-down seats. Myra was wide-eyed, but Alexei seemed
composed. Alexei’s softscreen on the wall flashed red.
They were thirteen hours into the journey, more than twenty-six hundred kilometers up. When Bisesa
moved she felt as if she was going to float into the air. Gravity was down to about half sea  level. Earth
seemed trivial, a ball dangling at the end of a silver rope.
Other spiders flashed past them, overtaken by their own rapid climb.
“We sped up, right? So what’s wrong?”
“We’re being pursued,” Alexei said. “We had to expect it. I mean, they know we’re in here.”
“Pursued?” Bisesa had a nasty vision of a missile clambering up from a derelict Canaveral launch pad.
But that made no sense. “They wouldn’t risk damaging their ribbon.”
“You’re right,” Alexei said. “The ribbon is a lot more precious than we are. Likewise they won’t want
to spoil the flow of spiders.  They could  do  that,  block  us off. But there  is cargo  worth  billions being
carried up this line.”
“Then what?”
“They have super-spiders. Capable of greater speeds. It would take a few days, but the super-spider
would catch us up.”
Myra thought that over. “How does it get past all the other spiders in the way?”
“The same way we do. The others just have to get out of the way. We’re matching the super-spider’s
ascent rate, twice our nominal. In fact I slaved us to the super-spider, so we’ll mirror its ascent. It can’t
possibly catch us. As soon as the ground authorities realize that, they’ll give up.”
“Twice nominal. Is that safe?”
“These systems are human-rated; they have heavy safety margins built in.” But he didn’t sound terribly
sure.
It only took a few minutes for the softscreen to chime and glow green.  Alexei smiled. “They got the
message. We can slow down. Hold onto something.”
Bisesa braced against a rail.
They  decelerated  for  a  disconcerting  few  seconds.  Blankets  floated  up  from  the  floor,  and  the
chemical toilet whirred as  suction pumps labored  to  keep  from spilling the contents  into the air.  Myra
looked queasy, and Bisesa felt her stomach turn over. They were all relieved when gravity was restored.

But the screen flashed red again. “Uh oh,” Alexei said.
Bisesa asked, “What now?”
He worked his softscreen. “We’re not climbing as we should.”
“Some fault with the spider?”
“Not that. They are reeling in the ribbon.”
“Reeling it in?” Suddenly Bisesa saw the spider as a fish on the end of a monstrous angler’s line.
“It’s kind of drastic, but it can be done. The ribbon is pretty fine stuff.”
“So what do we do?”
“You might want to close your eyes. And hold onto something again.” He tapped his softscreen, and
Bisesa had the impression that something detached itself from the hull.
She clamped her eyes shut.
There was a flash, visible even through her eyelids, and the cabin rocked subtly.
“A bomb,” Bisesa said. She felt almost disappointed. “How crude. I think I expected  better  of you,
Alexei.”
“It was just a warning shot, a micro fusion pulse. No harm done. But very visible from the ground.”
“You’re signaling your intent to blow up the ribbon if they don’t leave us alone.”
“It wouldn’t be difficult. Kind of hard to protect a hundred thousand kilometers of paper-thin  ribbon
against deliberate sabotage…”
Bisesa asked, “Wouldn’t people get hurt?”
“Not  in the way you’re  thinking, Mum,” Myra  said.  “Isolationist terrorists  attacked  Modimo  a  few
years back.”
“Modimo?”
Alexei said, “The African Alliance elevator. Named for a Zimbabwean sky-god, I think. Nobody got
hurt,  and  they  wouldn’t  now.  I’m  making  an  economic  threat.”  But  he  glanced  uncertainly  at  his
softscreen.
Bisesa said sharply, “And if they call your bluff? Will you go through with it?”
“Actually I don’t think I would. But they can’t afford to take the risk, can they?”
Bisesa said, “They could just kill us. Turn off the power. The air recycling. We’d be helpless.”
“They could. But they won’t,” Alexei said. “They want to know what we know. Where we’re going.
So they’ll be patient, and hope to get hold of us later.”
“I hope you’re right.”
As if in response,  the softscreen  turned  green  again.  Alexei’s  grin  broadened.  “So  much  for  that.

Okay, who’s for beans?”
 
12: MOUNT WEATHER 
Bella had  expected  Bob  Paxton’s  briefing to  take  place  in her offices in the old NASA  headquarters
building  on  E  Street  in  Washington,  a  block  of  concrete  and  glass  repaired  and  refurbished  since
weathering the sunstorm.
But Paxton met her outside the building. He stood by the open door of a limousine. “Bella.” The car
was one of a convoy, complete with uniformed naval officers and blue-suited FBI agents.
She thought he looked comical, an elderly man rigid in his much-cherished uniform, standing there like
a bellboy. His face was twisted in the morning light. He was, she had learned, a man who distrusted the
sun, even more than most of his bruised generation.
“Morning, Bob. Going for a ride, are we?”
His smile was disciplined. “We should relocate to a more secure situation. We  have issues of global
importance, of significance for the future of the species. I recommend we convene at Mount Weather. I
took the liberty of making the arrangements. But it’s your call.” He  eyed  her,  and  the tension that  had
existed since the day she took the job crackled between them.
She’d never heard of Mount Weather. But she couldn’t see any harm in indulging him. She  climbed
into the car, and he followed; they would be alone together.
They pulled out. The convoy took Route 66 and met Highway 50, heading west. The road was full of
traffic, but their speed was high.
“How far are we going?”
“Be there in half an hour.” Paxton sat there and glowered, visibly irritated.
“I know what’s bugging you, Bob. It’s Professor Carel, isn’t it?”
The muscles in his grizzled cheeks worked, as if he longed to be chewing gum. “I don’t know anything
about this old English guy.”
“No doubt you had him vetted.”
“As best we could. He doesn’t have anything to do with this. Not part of the team.”
“He’s coming at my invitation,” she said firmly. In fact, in a sense,  to  her this elderly British scientist
was part of the team, a deeper and older team-up than anything she was involved in with Paxton.
Professor  Bill Carel  had  once  been  a  graduate  student  working  with  Siobhan  McGorran,  another
British astronomer who had become involved in the grand effort to build the sunstorm shield—and who

had, in its aftermath, married Bud Tooke, and then nursed him through his cancer, a cruel legacy of that
astounding day. That personal link was in fact the channel through which Carel  had  contacted  her,  and
had tried to persuade her that he had a contribution to make regarding the presence of the object in the
solar system, which he had heard of in whispers and leaks.
She tried  to  express  some  of this to  Paxton,  but he just waved  it  away.  “He’s  a  cosmologist,  for
Christ’s sake. He’s spent his life staring into deep space. What use is he going to be today?”
“Let’s keep an open mind, Bob,” she said firmly.
He fell into a silence that lasted all through the rest of the drive. Bella had raised a child, she was used
to sulks, and she just ignored him.
 
After eighty kilometers they pulled off onto Route 101, a narrow two-lane rural road that clambered up a
ridge. At the crest of the ridge they came to a line of razor-wired fencing. A faded sign read:
 
U.S. PROPERTY 
NO TRESPASSING 
 
Beyond that Bisesa could make out a few battered aluminum huts, and beyond them, a glassy wall.
They had to wait while their cars  interfaced  with the base’s  security systems.  Bella was  aware  of a
faint speckle of laser light as she was probed.
“So, Mount Weather,” she prompted Paxton.
“Five hundred acres of Blue Ridge real estate. In the nineteen-fifties they set up a bunker here, a place
to shelter government officials from D.C. in the event of a nuclear exchange. It fell into disuse,  but was
revived after  9/11  in 2001,  and  again after  2042.  Although now it’s essentially a  loan  from  the  U.S.
government to the World Space Council.”
Bella tried not to grimace. “A bunker from the Cold War, the War on Terror, and now the War with
the Sky. Appropriate, I suppose.”
“Manned by navy officers mostly. Used  to  confinement and  canned  air.  Mount Weather  is a  good
neighbor, I’m told. They keep up the roads,  and  send  out the snow  plows  in winter. Not  that  there’s
much snow nowadays…”
She had been expecting the convoy to pass on to  a  gate  in that  shining impenetrable  wall. She  was
shocked when, with a rip of foliage, the whole chunk of land beneath the car turned into an elevator and
dropped her into darkness.
Bob Paxton laughed as they descended. “I feel like I’m coming home.”
 
As smiling young naval officers security-processed the party and escorted it to its conference room, Bella

glimpsed a little of Mount Weather.
The  ceilings  were  low,  paneled  with  grimy  tiles,  the  corridors  narrow.  But  these  unprepossessing
corridors enclosed a small, old-fashioned town. There were television and radio studios, cafeterias, a tiny
civilian  police  station,  even  a  little  row  of  shops,  all  underground,  all  contained  within  a  hum  of  air
conditioning. It was like a museum, she thought, a relic of the mindset of the mid-twentieth century.
At least the conference room was modern, big and bright and fitted with softwalls and table screens.
And here Bill Carel was waiting for her. In a room full of heavy, rumbling figures, mostly men, mostly
about Paxton’s age, mostly in one uniform or another, Carel in his shabby old jacket was standing alone
beside a coffee percolator.
Bella ignored Paxton’s cronies and made straight for Carel.  “Professor.  It’s  good  of you to  come.”
She shook his hand; it was flimsy, bony.
He was a little younger than she was, she recalled from his file, somewhere in his fifties, but he looked
frail, gaunt, his face  liver-spotted,  his stance  awkward  and  uncomfortable.  The sunstorm had  blighted
many lives; perhaps he had been battling illness. But the eyes in his cadaverous face were bright. He said,
“I hope the contribution I have to make is a valid one, and useful.”
“You’re not sure?” She felt obscurely disappointed at his diffidence. An unworthy part of her had been
looking forward to using him to tweak Bob Paxton’s tail.
“Well, how can one be sure? The whole situation is unprecedented. But my colleagues  urged  me to
contact you—to contact somebody.”
She nodded. “However this turns out, I’m grateful you tried.” Cradling a coffee, Bella led Carel to a
seat. “I’ll make sure you get your say,” she whispered. “And later we must talk of the Tookes.”
After  that  she  made  a  hasty  circuit  of  the  room,  meeting  and  greeting.  As  well  as  the  Patriots
Committee types there were representatives of the various multinational armed  forces  and  governments
that supported the World Space Council.
She didn’t get a good first impression of the quality of these delegates. The Council had been engaged
in nothing but “preparatory” and “advisory” activities for decades; since the sunstorm the War  with the
Sky had been cold. So working for the Council had not been a  prized  assignment for a  career  officer.
Maybe this was a room full of Bob Paxtons, steely-eyed fanatic types, or else dead-enders.
But she told herself not to rush to judgment; after all if there were a new threat approaching the Earth,
these men and women would be her prime resource in dealing with it.
Standing at the head of the table, Bob Paxton, self-appointed chair, flicked his finger against a glass to
call the meeting to order. The rest of the panel, perhaps starstruck to be in the presence of the first man
on Mars, submitted their attention immediately.
Paxton said the purpose of the meeting was  twofold.  “First to  give Chair  Fingal an overview of the
assets she has at her disposal. Second to focus specifically on the anomaly currently approaching Jovian
orbit—”
“And at that point,” Bella put in, “I will invite Professor Carel to make his contribution.”
Paxton rumbled a grudging assent.

They began to speak of the defense of the solar system.
 
13: FORTRESS SOL 
Paxton’s  presentation  was  a  carnival  of  bullet-points,  graphs,  and  images,  some  of  them
three-dimensional and animated; the holograms hovered over the middle of the table like ads for fantastic
toys. But the subject matter was grim.
“Since sunstorm day,  we  have devoted  considerable  assets  on  Earth  and  beyond  to  watching  the
skies….”
Bella  got  the  impression  that  Earth  was  plastered  with  electronic  eyes,  peering  at  the  sky  in  all
wavelengths. This included NASA  assets  like  the  venerable  Deep  Space  Network  chain  of  tracking
arrays in Spain, Australia, and the Mojave, a near-Earth asteroid watching facility in New Mexico called
LINEAR, and other Spaceguard facilities. The giant radio telescope at Arecibo likewise now gave over
much of its time, not to astronomy, but to seeking unnatural signals from the stars.
The  visual  astronomers  too  had  suddenly  found  money  coming  their  way  to  realize  previously
unaffordable dreams. Bella studied images of the unimaginatively named Very Large Telescope in Chile,
an Extremely Large Telescope in Morocco,  and  a  monster  called the Owl,  the Overwhelmingly Large
Telescope  at  a  site called Dome C  in Antarctica,  where  enough steel  to  build a  second  Eiffel  Tower
supported a monstrous mirror a hundred meters across. The Owl was  busy photographing  the birth of
the first stars  in the universe—and,  more  significantly, was  mapping the surfaces  of planets  of  nearby
stars.
Facilities off-Earth were no less impressive. The most successful of the new space observatories was
Cyclops Station, which trailed the Earth in its orbit at a stable Lagrange point. At Cyclops there had been
assembled a telescope with a single, very large “Fresnel” lens—not a mirror, but a diffracting lens.
As for what all these automated eyes were looking for, a century of theoretical studies by the old SETI
enthusiasts had been plundered. Strategies were being devised to detect signals of all types down to very
brief bursts—stray flashes of tight-beam laser signals, perhaps, detectable down to a billionth of a second
long.
Paxton also spoke of lesser eyes, a whole fleet of them scattered right through the solar system out as
far  as  the  orbit  of  Neptune.  He  brought  up  a  three-dimensional  image  of  Deep  Space  Monitor
X7-6102-016, which had been posted into orbit around Saturn.
“These are our robot sentries, our picket line,” Paxton boomed. “DSM X7-6102-016 was typical, the
most advanced scientific gear but robust, hardened and shrouded. These little critters patrol the skies all
the way out to the fringe of OutSys. And they watch each other just as keenly.”
“That’s true,” Professor Carel put in hesitantly. “In fact  it was  the other  probes’  observation  of the
destruction  of  X7-6102-016  that  was  brought  to  my  attention,  rather  than  anything  that  the  probe

transmitted itself.”
Bella said, “So we live in a heavily surveilled solar system. What else do you have, Bill?”
“Weapons.” Paxton waved a hand, and the image of DSM X7-6102-016 broke up.
 
“We call the concept  ‘Fortress  Sol,’”  Paxton  said  grimly. “We’re  establishing layers of deep  defense
from the outer solar system to the inner, all of it centering on the home of humanity, the Earth. You know
yourself, ma’am, that we have established facilities as far out as the Trojan asteroids.”
The Trojans were a rich concentration of asteroids trailing Jupiter around its orbit at a Lagrange stable
point. Right now Bella’s daughter  Edna  was  out  at  Trojan  Station,  working  on  a  new  generation  of
spacecraft, the “A-ships.” All heavily classified.
“Next in we have the asteroids. For military planning purposes we use the A-line, the central belt, as
the boundary  between  InSys  and  OutSys—that  is,  the  inner  and  outer  systems.  After  that  we  have
stations at the Lagrange points of Mars and Earth…”
In the Earth–Moon system itself there were weapons platforms on the Moon and at the lunar Lagrange
points and in Earth orbit: killer satellites that could pepper  any interloper  with projectiles,  or  fry it with
X-ray lasers, or simply ram it. There were ground-based systems too, heavy lasers, particle beams, and
reconditioned Cold War ICBMs still capable of hurling their lethal payloads away from the Earth. Even in
Earth’s upper  atmosphere  huge  aircraft  patrolled  continually,  bearing  weapons  that  could  knock  out
incoming missiles. And so on. The whole of cislunar space seemed to be bristling with weaponry,  from
Earth’s surface up through what Paxton barked out as “LEO, HEO, GEO, and super-GEO”—low, high,
geosynchronous Earth orbit and beyond.
And the overt hardware of war  was  just the start.  Everything that  could  be  weaponized  was.  Even
space-based weather control systems, like the kilometers-wide space lenses and mirrors, could easily be
redirected. Every plowshare could be turned to a sword.
Bella’s imagination quailed when she tried to imagine the sort of last-ditch defensive battle  that  might
depend on the use of such weapons. And the fact that these weapons, built to  fight a  War  in the Sky,
could just as easily be turned against an enemy on the ground was lost on nobody.
Paxton  said,  “We’re  well aware  of course  that  these  facilities could  have done  nothing to  stop  the
sunstorm. Therefore we have fallbacks. We don’t know what these Firstborn might hit us with next. So
for planning purposes we have looked back at other disasters, natural ones, that have hit us in the past,
and how we coped with them…”
He moved into a new chart, a dismal classification of catastrophe.
There were “local disasters” that killed a few percent  of the world’s  population,  like major  volcanic
eruptions and the twentieth-century world wars, and “global disasters” killing a significant fraction of the
population,  such  as  would  follow  the  strike  of  a  small  asteroid,  and  “extinction  level  events,”  so
devastating  that  a  significant  proportion  of  all  species  would  be  eliminated,  and  life  on  Earth  itself
threatened. “If not for the shield,” Paxton said crisply, “the sunstorm would have inflicted the mother of all
extinction level events on us, since it would have melted Earth’s surface down to the basement rock. As it
was the shield reduced the event to a mere ‘global disaster.’”
And the sunstorm, he said, had inspired the approach being taken to make the Earth resilient in case of

any future attacks.
“We’re trying to  rework  our  industrial base  so  we  can  reconfigure to  recovery  mode  as  rapidly as
possible in the face  of any of these  major  disaster  types.  So,  for instance,  if we  had  to  build another
shield, we could do it more effectively. Of course some would argue that  as  a  species  we  ought to  be
making this kind of preparation even if the Firstborn didn’t exist.
“We have some advantages. A space-based infrastructure could help reboot  a  terrestrial  civilization.
Weather control systems to stabilize a damaged climate, as after the sunstorm. Orbital stations to restring
any downed elevators. Space-based energy systems and comms links. You could store medical facilities
up there.  Maybe  you could  even  feed  the  world,  from  orbiting  farms,  or  lunar  agriculture,  say.  The
children of the Earth turning back to help their wounded mother.” He grimaced. “If the fucking Spacers
cooperate.
“However we have to go beyond all this, and consider the worst case.” He said sternly, looking them
all in the eye one by one, “We must plan against extermination.
“Of course we have populations off-Earth now. But I’m told there’s still some doubt that the off-world
colonies could survive if Earth were lost altogether. So we have further backups.”
He spoke  of vaults, on Earth and  off it; there  was  one  dug  into  a  lunar  mountain  called  Pico,  for
instance, in the Mare Imbrium. Copies of the wisdom of mankind, on gold leaf and stored electronically.
DNA stores. Frozen zygotes. Caches to be retrieved by whoever might come this way, if mankind were
exterminated. The “Earthmail,” a desperate firing-off of a fragment of human culture to  the stars  on the
eve of the sunstorm, was another sort of cache.
“All right, Bill. Do you think this is going to be enough?”
Paxton said with a hard face, “Do any of you know what space opera was? Fiction of the far future,
of wars fought across galaxies, of spaceships the size of worlds.  We’re  only a  century on from World
War Two—only a hundred and fifty years since the main transport mechanism for warfare was the horse.
And yet we’re faced with a space opera threat. In another thousand years, say, we’ll be scattered so far
that nothing short of a Galaxy core explosion could kill us all. But for now, we’re still vulnerable.”
Bill Carel dared to raise a hand. “Which is actually a logic that suggests a second strike is more likely
now, than later.”
“Yeah,” Paxton growled.
“And, despite your fine presentation, Admiral, there are obvious flaws in these strategies.” There was
an intake of breath, but Carel seemed oblivious. “May I?”
“Go on,” Bella said quickly.
“First there is the sparseness of your resources, Admiral. Just because you have a station in the orbit
of Jupiter doesn’t mean you can counter a threat coming at the same radius but from the far side of the
sun.”
“We’re aware of that—”
“And you seem to be thinking in two dimensions, as if this was a land war of the old sort. What if an
attack were to come at us out of the ecliptic—I mean, away from the plane of the sun and planets?”
“I walked on Mars,” Paxton said dangerously. “I know what the ecliptic is. As it happens the present

bogey has come sailing in along the plane of the ecliptic. For the future we’re  considering out-of-plane
options.  But you know  as  well as  I do  that  the energy costs  of getting up there  are  prohibitive. Yes,
Professor Carel, the solar system is a mighty big place. Yes, we can’t cover it all. What else can we do
but try?”
Carel almost laughed. “But these efforts are so thinly based it’s virtually futile—”
Paxton glowered, and Bella held her hand up. “Please, Bill.”
“I’m sorry,” said Carel. “And then there is the question of the efficacy of all these preparations against
the threat we actually face—”
“Fine.” Angrily Paxton cleared down his displays. “So let’s talk about the anomaly.”
Bella longed for fresh coffee.
 
After his long and detailed discussion of Fortress Sol, Paxton’s presentation on the anomaly was brief.
He briskly reviewed the principal evidence for the bogey’s existence. “Right now this thing is passing
through the J-line, the orbit of Jupiter. In fact we have a window to intercept it, because it’s fortuitously
passing close to the Trojan base, and we’re working on mission options. And then it will sail on through
the asteroids, past the orbit of Mars, to Earth, where it seems to be precisely targeted. But we still have
no idea what it is, or what it might do if and when it gets here.”
When he sat down there was a brief silence.
Bill Carel looked at Paxton, and around the room, as if expecting another contribution. “Is that all?”
“That’s all we got,” Paxton said.
Carel  said  softly, “I did not  dream  you  would  have  so  little—it  is  as  well  that  I  came.  If  I  may,
Admiral?”
Bob Paxton glared at Bella, but she gave him a discreet nod, and he gave the floor to Carel.
“In a  way,” Carel  said,  “my involvement with this ‘bogey’  began  in the years  before  the sunstorm,
when  I  worked  with  an  astronomer  called  Siobhan  McGorran  on  a  probe  we  called  QAP.”  He
pronounced it “cap.” “The Quintessence Anisotropy Probe…”
Paxton and his Patriots shifted and grumbled.
The  Quintessence  Anisotropy  Probe  was  a  follow-up  to  a  craft  called  the  Wilkinson  Microwave
Anisotropy Probe, which in 2003 had studied the faint echoes of the Big Bang, and had established for
the first time the proportions of the basic components of the universe—baryonic matter, dark matter, and
dark  energy.  It  was  dark  energy,  called  by  some  “quintessence,”  that  fueled  the  expansion  of  the
universe. Now the purpose of the QAP was to measure the effects of that cosmic inflation by seeking the
echoes of primordial sound waves.
“It  was  really  a  very  elegant  concept,”  Carel  said.  “The  primordial  universe,  small,  dense,  and
ferociously hot, was an echo chamber full of sound waves propagating through a turbulent medium. But
then came the expansion.” He spread his delicate hands. “Poom. Suddenly there was room for things to
cool down, and more interesting physics.

“As the expansion  cut in those  ancient sound  waves  were  dissipated.  But they left an imprint, their
pattern  of compression  influencing the formation of the first galaxies. And so  by mapping  the  galactic
distribution we hoped to reconstruct the primordial sounds.  This in turn would provide  clues as  to  the
physics of the quintessence, the dark energy, which at that time—”
As the uniforms got more restless, Bella said gently, “Perhaps you should get to the point, Bill.”
He smiled at her. He had a softscreen of his own that he spread out over the table; it quickly interfaced
with the table’s subsystems. “Here is a profile of the cosmic expansion.” It was a spiky graph, plotted on
logarithmic scales, an upward curve. He spoke of how this curve had been established by analyzing old
light seeping from the deepest  sky,  and  by taking correlations  of the  structures  to  be  observed  on  a
variety of scales. The “frequency” of the patterns of galactic formation mapped back to the frequencies of
those lost sound waves.
This time Paxton cut him off. “Jesus Christ, Poindexter, put me out of my misery. Where are you going
with this?”
Carel  tapped  his  softscreen.  “It  was  one  of  my  own  students  who  fortuitously  came  across  an
animation of the destruction of DSM X7-6102-016.”
“I’d like to know how he got a hold of that,” Paxton growled.
“She,  actually,”  Carel  said,  unfazed.  “A  girl  called  Lyla  Neal.  Nigerian,  ferociously  bright.  The
destruction of the DSM was an odd explosion, you know. It’s not as if it was hit by an external weapon.
Rather as if it tore itself apart from within. Well, prompted by that, Lyla constructed an expansion curve
for the DSM, to show how its little universe was ended.”
He pulled up a second chart. The scale was different, Bella saw, but his conclusion was obvious. The
DSM expansion  curve  mapped  the  QAP’s  cosmic  profile.  Precisely,  as  could  be  seen  when  Carel
overlaid the two.
Bella sat back, stunned. “So what does this mean?”
“I can only speculate,” Carel said.
“Then do so, for Christ’s sake,” snapped Paxton.
“It seems to me that the DSM was destroyed by a specific and localized application of dark energy, of
quintessence.  It  was  ripped  apart  by  precisely  the  force  that  has  caused  the  universal  expansion,
somehow focused down onto this small craft. It is a cosmological weapon, if you like. Quite remarkable.”
He smiled. “Lyla calls it a ‘Q-bomb.’”
“Cute,” snapped Paxton. “So can we stop this thing, shoot it down, deflect it?”
Carel seemed surprised to be asked such a question. “Why, I have absolutely no idea. This is not like
the sunstorm, Admiral, which was a very energetic event, but crudely engineered. This is a barely familiar
sort of physics. It’s very hard to imagine we can respond in any meaningful way.”
Bella said, “But, Bill, what happens if this Q-bomb actually reaches the Earth?”
Again he seemed surprised to be asked. “Why, that must be obvious. If it functions in the same way
again—we have no reason to imagine its scope of action is limited—it will be just as with the DSM.” He
spread his fingers. “Poom.”

The silence in the room was profound.
 
Bella glanced around the table. These old sky  warriors  had  almost seemed  to  be  enjoying themselves.
Now they were subdued, silent. Their bluff had been called.
And what was  worse,  as  far as  she  could  see  this “cosmological” technology cut right  through  the
rickety and expensive defenses mankind had been trying to erect.
“All right,” she  said.  “We’ve  got twenty-one  months until that  thing reaches  Earth.  So  what do  we
do?”
“We have to stop it,” Paxton said immediately. “It’s our only option. We can’t save the population any
other way—we can’t evacuate the damn planet. We throw everything we’ve got at it. Beginning with our
resources out at the Trojans.” He glanced at Bella.
Bella knew what he meant. The A-ships. And she knew that would most likely mean committing Edna
to action. She put that thought aside for now. “Draw up an operation order, Bob. But there’s no reason
to believe any of our weapons will make a bit of difference. We have to find out more about this thing,
and find a weakness. Professor Carel, you’re hereby drafted.”
Carel inclined his head.
Paxton said heavily, “And there’s something else.”
“Yes?”
“Bisesa Dutt. We missed her. She’s escaped up an elevator like a rat up a drainpipe.”
That baffled Bella. “A space elevator? Where’s she going?”
“I don’t know. She’s just out of a Hibernaculum; it’s possible she doesn’t know. But somebody does,
some asshole Spacer.”
“Admiral,” Bella snapped. “That kind of language isn’t helping.”
He grinned, a wolf’s leer. “I’ll be nice. But we have to  find Bisesa  Dutt regardless  of what toes  we
tread on.”
Bella sighed. “All right. And right now I think I need  to  go brief a  few presidents.  Is  there  anything
else?”
Paxton shook his head. “Let’s conference-call in an hour. And, people—we don’t want any leaks out
of here.”
As the meeting broke up, Bella fretted. The fact that  Carel  had  had  to  force  his way in here  was  a
lesson that slickness of presentation  didn’t imply comprehensiveness  of knowledge.  And if not for this
chance observation by Carel’s bright student, they would be nowhere near discovering the true nature of
this artifact, this weapon, this Q-bomb.
What else were they missing? What else weren’t they seeing? What else?

 
14: ASCENT BEYOND ORBIT 
Almost all of the excitement of the ascent was over in the first twenty-four hours. Bisesa would not have
believed it when they first left the ground, but she rapidly grew bored.
As they had continued to shed  gravity, floating stuff cluttered  up the place,  the blankets  and  bits of
clothing and food. It was like camping in a falling elevator, Bisesa  thought. The clippings from Alexei’s
shaved head were particularly unwelcome. And it was hard to wash. They had  enough water  to  drink,
but this cargo cabin didn’t feature a shower. After the first couple of days, the cabin smelled, inevitably,
like a lavatory.
Bisesa tried to use the time constructively. She worked on her recovery from the Hibernaculum. She
slept a lot, and Alexei and Myra helped her work out low-gravity exercises, bracing against the walls and
floor to build up her muscles. But there was only so much time you could exercise or sleep away.
Alexei kept himself busy too. He threw himself into a routine of checking over  the spider’s  systems,
with a  full shakedown  twice a  day.  He  even  made  visual  checks  of  hull  seams  and  filters.  While  he
worked, he muttered and sang, curious, distracted little hymns to sunlight.
Still Bisesa hadn’t talked to her daughter—not as she wished to. She thought Myra  was  sinking into
herself; while Bisesa had been sleeping, she seemed to have developed a black core of depression. This
was business for later, Bisesa told herself.
Bisesa watched Earth dwindle, a toy globe at the end  of a  ribbon  that  now seemed  endless  in both
directions.
Once she said, “I wish the world would turn, so I could look for the other ribbons. I don’t even know
how many there are.”
Myra counted  off on her fingers. “Modimo in Africa. Bandara  in Australia, the mother of them all.
Jianmu in China. Marahuaka in Venezuela, South America. All named for sky gods. We Europeans have
Yggdrasil.”
“Named for the Norse world tree.”
“Yes.”
“And the Americans have Jacob’s Ladder.”
Alexei smiled. “‘And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the Earth, and the top of it reached
to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it.’ Genesis, twenty-eight, twelve.”
Myra said,  “America is still a  pretty  Christian  country.  All  the  Native-American  world-tree  names
were rejected, I think. They took a poll.”
“Why do so many cultures have myths of a world tree? It seems pretty unlikely.”
Alexei said, “Some anthropologists  say  it’s simply a  response  to  cloud  features: ripples,  waves  that

look like branches or rungs. Or maybe it’s a myth about the Milky Way. Others say it could be a plasma
phenomenon. Solar activity, maybe.”
Myra said, “Plenty of people fear  the elevators.  Some  regard  them as  a  blasphemy.  A short-cut  to
God. After all we have faced a threat from the sky in living memory.”
“Which is why the African elevator was attacked,” Alexei said. “Makes no sense, but there you go.”
“You know a lot about Earth culture for a Spacer.”
“I’m interested. But I see it from the outside. Anthropologically, I suppose.”
Bisesa felt patronized. “I suppose all you Spacers are as rational as computers.”
“Oh, no.” Alexei smiled. “We’re working on a whole new set of hang-ups.”
Still they rose. As the planet shrank from the size of a soccer ball to a  grapefruit to  a  cricket  ball, it
soon  became  too  small for Bisesa  to  make  out  even  continent-sized  details,  and  a  dull  sense  of  the
immense scale of the artifact she was climbing slowly rammed itself into her mind.
 
Three days up they sailed through the first significant structure  since the ground.  They gathered  at  the
center of the cabin to watch it approach.
It was a loose ring of inflated modules, all of them roughly cylindrical, brightly colored; they were huge,
each as big as a small building, and they shone like tremendous toys in the unending sunlight. This was a
hotel  cum  theme  park,  Alexei  told  them,  as  yet  incomplete  and  uninhabited.  “Its  official  name  is
‘Jacob’s.’  Disney  is  the  major  investor.  They’re  hoping  to  make  back  some  of  the  money  they’re
hemorrhaging at the old ground-based parks.”
“Good place for a  hotel,” Myra  said.  “Only three  days  up,  and  still a  tenth of a  gravity, enough to
avoid all the messiness of zero G.”
“Makes you realize what you can do with a space elevator or two,” Alexei murmured. “Not just cheap
lift, but very heavy lift too. Lots of capacity. This theme park is trivial, but it’s just a start. There will be
other  communities, towns  in the sky  strung out along the elevators.  A whole new  realm.  It’s  like  the
railways in the nineteenth century.”
Bisesa felt moved to take Myra’s hand. “We live in remarkable times, don’t we?”
“Yes, Mum, we do.”
The hotel rushed past them in an instant, and for the first time in days Bisesa had a sense of their true
speed. But then it was back to the timeless, motionless, scale-less rush ever higher from the Earth,  and
they were soon bickering once more.
On the eighth day  they sailed through geosynch.  For  one  precise  moment  they  were  in  zero  gravity,
orbiting the Earth as a respectable satellite should, though for days gravity had been so low it made  no
practical difference.

At the geosynch point was another structure, a vast wheel with its hub centered on the ribbon. It was
incomplete. Bisesa could see lesser craft crawling over that tremendous scaffolding, and welding sparks
flared. But elsewhere she saw immense glass panels behind which living things glowed green.
The geosynch station  flew down,  past,  and  was  gone by,  and  they all stared  down  as  it  dwindled
away.
With  the  geosynch  point  passed,  the  spider’s  effective  gravity  flipped  over,  as  centripetal  forces,
balanced with gravity at geosynch, took over and tried to fling them away. Now “down” pointed away
from the pea-sized Earth. They had to rearrange their cabin, so that they made the ceiling the floor, and
vice versa. Alexei said cabins designed to carry passengers did this sort of flip-flop automatically.
That inversion, the rebuilding of the cabin, was the only interesting thing that happened  in those  days
following geosynch. The only thing.
But Bisesa learned that they weren’t going to be hauled all the way up to the counterweight, which was
all of thirteen more days past geosynch, twenty-one from the ground. And that, she learned at last, was
the spider graveyard.
“They need to keep adding counterweight to compensate for the growing mass of the ribbon,” Alexei
said. “Which is why none of the spider trucks come back to Earth, save the builders.”
Bisesa looked around at the cluttered hull, grimy from their occupation. She felt a stab of regret. “And
is that where this spider will finish up?”
“Oh,  no,”  said  Alexei.  “This  beast  won’t  be  going  further  than  the  fifty-six-thousand-klick  point.
Twelve days out of Earth.”
Bisesa glanced at Myra, who she sensed had almost as dim an idea of what was to come as she had.
“And then what?”
“Remember I told you that if the spider let go before geosynch we’d have fallen back to Earth? But if
we let go after geosynch—”
“We’ll be flung out of Earth orbit,” Myra said. “Into interplanetary space.”
“If you pick the right altitude to leave the elevator, you can use its momentum to hurl you wherever you
want to go. The Moon, for instance.”
“Is that where we’re going?”
Alexei smiled. “Oh, a bit further than that.”
“Then  where,  damn  it?  There’s  no  point  in  secrecy  now—as  soon  as  we  leave  the  elevator  the
authorities will know where we’re going.”
“Mars, Mum. Mars.”
Bisesa was bewildered. “Mars?”
“Where—well, where something is waiting for you.”
“But this little pod won’t keep us alive all the way to Mars.”
“Of course not,” Alexei said. “We’ll be picked up. We’ll rendezvous with a lightship. A solar-sail ship.

It’s already on the way.”
Bisesa frowned. “We have no rockets, do we? Once we’re free of the ribbon  we’ll have no motive
power at all.”
“We don’t need it. The ship will rendezvous with us.”
“My God,” Bisesa said. “And if something goes wrong—”
Alexei smiled, unconcerned.
Talking to  Alexei through these  long  days,  Bisesa  thought  she  had  begun  to  see  something  of  his
psychology—the psychology of a Spacer, subtly different from the Earthbound.
Alexei had something approaching a morbid fear of failure in the machinery around  him, for he was
entirely dependent  on that for his very life. But on the other  hand he  had  absolutely  no  doubt  in  the
implacable working-out of orbits and  trajectories  and  interceptions;  he lived in a  realm where  celestial
mechanics visibly ruled everything, a mighty, silent clockwork that never developed a flaw. So once  his
gadgets had cut them loose of the ribbon he believed he would be safe and secure; it was inconceivable
to him that their lightship rendezvous could be missed. Whereas Bisesa and Myra  were  terrified of just
that possibility.
Somewhere  in  there  was  the  key  to  understanding  Alexei,  Bisesa  thought,  and  the  new  Spacer
generation. And she thought she would understand  him even better  if she  could  make  out the peculiar
prayers he seemed to chant softly while distracted: psalms to the “Unconquered Sun.”
 
On the twelfth day they sat on their fold-down chairs, with all their loose gear tied down in advance  of
the jolt of weightlessness that would come  when  Alexei’s  explosive  bolts  severed  the  cabin  from  its
pulley.
Alexei eyed his crewmates. “Anybody want a countdown?”
“Shut up,” Myra said.
Bisesa looked down at the ribbon that had been her anchor to reality for twelve days,  and  up at  an
Earth reduced to a pebble. She wondered if she would ever see it loom large again—and what lay ahead
of her before that could happen.
Alexei whispered, “Here we go—”
There was a flash below, on the cabin’s roof that had become a floor. The ribbon fell away, startlingly
fast,  and  gravity  evaporated  like  a  dream.  Tumbling,  loose  bits  of  gear  rolling  around  them,  Alexei
laughed and laughed.
 
15: LIBERATOR 

April 2069 
John Metternes, ship’s engineer, called up to Edna from Achilles. There was another holdup. The techs
down there on the asteroid still weren’t satisfied with the magnetic containment of the antimatter pellets.
Any more delays and the Liberator was going to miss another window for her first trial cruise.
Edna Fingal looked out of the thick wraparound windows, away from the convoluted  surface  of the
Trojan asteroid  beneath  her,  to  find the sun, so  far away  here  on the J-line it barely  showed  a  disk.
Surrounded by the flight deck’s calm hum and new-carpet smell, she chafed, restless. She wasn’t good
at waiting.
Intellectually, in her head,  she  knew  she  had  to  wait until the engineers were  absolutely sure  about
what they were doing. The Liberator depended on a new and  untried technology,  and  as  far as  Edna
could tell these magnetic antimatter bottles were never exactly stable; the best you could hope for was a
kind of controlled  instability that lasted  long enough to  get you home.  It  was  thought that  a  failure  of
containment had been the cause of the loss of the Liberator’s unnamed prototype predecessor, and  of
Mary Lanchester and Theo Woese, the A-23C’s two-person crew.
But in OutSys,  out  there  in  the  dark,  something  was  approaching,  something  silent  and  alien  and
hostile. Already it was inside the J-line, closer to the sun than Edna was. Edna was captain of the world’s
only spacegoing warship even close to operational status, the only healthy vessel in the first Space Group
Attack Squadron. She itched to confront the alien.
As she often did, she tried to relieve the stress by thinking of family.
 
She glanced  at  a  chronometer.  It  was  set  to  Houston  time,  like  all  master  clocks  throughout  human
space,  and  she  mentally made  an adjustment  for DC.  Edna’s  daughter  Thea,  just  three,  would  be  in
nursery school at this hour. Edna’s own home was on the west coast, but she had chosen the school in
Washington so Thea could be close to her grandmother.  Edna  liked to  be  able  to  visualize just where
Thea was at any time of the day.
“Libby, please open my mail file.”
“Of course. Visual records too?”
“Yes. Ready?…Hello, Thea. Here I am again, waiting around as usual…”
Thea would hear her words, and see pretty much what she could see, captured by visual sensors in the
ident tattoo on Edna’s cheek. Security was predictably tight about every aspect of the A-class warships
out here  on the J-line,  and  Thea  would only ever  receive  a  heavily censored  version of  her  mother’s
letters. But it was better than nothing.
And if things didn’t go well, these messages might be all Thea had left of her mother. So Edna spoke
to the future.
“I’m sitting here  waiting for our  antimatter bottles  to  be  loaded  into the A-drive  chamber.  And it’s
taking a long time, for we  have to  be  very careful. I’m looking down  now at  Achilles. It’s  one  of the
larger of the Trojan asteroids, and it’s here that we have been building our A-ships. Look with me, you
can see the graving yards, and the big pits where we’ve dug out ice and rock to serve as reaction mass,
the stuff that will actually push the ship forward. And there are the domes where we all live when we’re

on the surface—the Liberator is a lot more comfortable than that, believe me!…”
The Trojans clustered at a point of gravitational stability on the J-line called L4,  Lagrange 4,  forever
sixty degrees  ahead  of Jupiter  itself in  its  orbit.  There  was  a  second  such  point,  L5,  trailing  Jupiter.
Earthbound astronomers had named the two asteroid camps for the competing heroes of Homer’s Iliad:
Achilles and the other Greeks leading Jupiter, the Trojans forever following.
L4 was a useful lode of resources, an obvious place for a base, a control point. Perhaps that was why,
during the sunstorm, the Firstborn had lodged an Eye here.
“I won’t pretend I’m not afraid, Thea. I’d be a fool if I wasn’t. I’ve learned I can put aside the fear,
and get on with the job. Because I know it’s a job that has to be done.
“Maybe you know that this ship, the fourth of the new A-class, is the first to have been given a name.
Because  while  the  others  made  test  flights,  this  ship  will  be  the  first  to  go  into  combat.  I  suppose
whatever happens she will always be remembered for that. Of course we have to get through a couple of
proving flights first.
“We agonized about the name. Here we are surrounded by heroes from classical mythology. But it’s
the mythology of another age, remote from our own. In the end  we  settled  on the name of one  of the
great aircraft that helped wage mankind’s last pivotal war, before the coming of the Firstborn changed all
the rules. I hope that in the next few weeks  we’re  going to  be  able  to  liberate  mankind from an even
deadlier menace. And that then I’ll have a chance to come home to you. I—”
An  alarm  chimed,  a  green  light  flashed  on  the  softwall  beside  her.  The  fuel  pods  were  at  last
successfully loaded; the ground crew were leaving the ship.
And the launch window for the scheduled shakedown cruise would open in just ten minutes.
Time enough. And then she could accept her operation order for her true mission.
“Close the file, please, Libby. Snip the last bit. And get John Metternes up here.”
 
16: JAMES CLERK MAXWELL 
The lightship that was to take them to Mars came  swimming out of the dark.  It  was  called the James
Clerk  Maxwell.  The  sail  was  a  shadow,  and  Bisesa  caught  glimpses  of  rigging,  rectilinear  flashes
immensely long.
As the hour of the pickup neared Bisesa grew even tenser. You didn’t have to know anything about
the engineering to understand that a ship that sailed on sunlight must be gossamer-fragile. And their knotty
little spider, a spinning lump of metal, was going to come plummeting in among this fantasy of sails and
rigging. She continually expected  alarms to  sound,  and  to  see  a  wispy mirror-sail fold around  her like
Christmas paper.

Myra  grew  anxious  too,  despite  her  own  astronautics  experience.  But  Alexei  Carel  was  entirely
unfazed. As the rendezvous approached he sat by his softscreens, monitoring obscure graphic displays,
occasionally  uttering  a  mild  word  that  was  transmitted  to  the  approaching  ship’s  systems  along  a
narrow-beam  laser  link.  He  seemed  to  trust  absolutely  the  mixture  of  orbital  mechanics  and  exotic
celestial seamanship that was bringing the spider ever closer to the Maxwell.
In the last moments the Maxwell’s main hull came looming out of the dark. Bisesa imagined she was in
a small boat, watching the approach of a liner across some vast ocean. The rough cylinder bristled with
antenna dishes and booms, and around its upper rim Bisesa made out a ring of pulleys, mundane bits of
technology that anchored kilometers of rigging.
A  transparent  tube  a  couple  of  meters  across  snaked  out  from  the  hull,  probed  at  the  spider
uncertainly, and locked on with an audible rattle. There was a jolt as the mechanical linkage soaked  up
the last minor differences in momentum. Then the tube contracted like a concertina, drawing the two hulls
together, until they docked with a firm clang.
Alexei sat back, a broad grin on his face. “Thank Sol for universal docking protocols.”
 
“Well, that’s that.” He peeled the softscreen off the wall in front of him, crumpled it up and stuffed it in a
pocket. “Time to get packed up. Take everything you want; dump anything you don’t need in here.”
“We aren’t taking the spider,” Bisesa said slowly.
“Of course not.”
Bisesa felt oddly reluctant to leave the haven of the spider. “Maybe I’m just getting too old for all this
change.”
Myra squeezed her arm.  She  made  this sort  of affectionate  gesture  spasmodically;  Bisesa  accepted
whatever her wounded daughter had to give her. “Mum, if I can cope with it, you can. Come on, let’s get
ready.”
When Alexei opened  the hatch in the cabin wall, the outer  hull of  the  Maxwell,  exposed,  smelled
faintly of burning. Bisesa touched it curiously, a surface that had endured the vacuum of space  for long
months. It felt hot.
The Maxwell’s hatch dilated away.
They crossed  into an interior that was  clean,  brightly  lit,  and  smelled  faintly  of  soap.  The  suitcase
followed with a clatter. Little sucker pads shot out of it on fine threads, fixing themselves to the walls, so
that the case hauled itself around like a clumsy, fat-bodied spider.
The hatches closed behind them, and Bisesa felt a gentle shudder as the greater mass of the Maxwell
reacted to the casting-off of the spider. There was no window in the hatch. She would have liked to see
the discarded spider fall away.
Alexei gave them one bit of warning. “Just remember they pared off every gram to build this thing. The
whole ship masses only around  ten tonnes—and  that  includes the sail. You could  easily put your foot
through the hull.” He tapped  an internal floor-to-ceiling  partition panel.  “And this stuff’s a  kind of rice
paper. Light but fragile.” He  poked  a  finger through it to  show  them, then he tore  off a  tiny strip  and
popped it in his mouth. “Edible too. In case of dramas, eat the furniture.”

Bisesa asked, “‘Dramas’? What dramas?”
Myra said slowly, “I suppose about the worst thing that could happen is to lose the sail, or to foul it up
beyond usefulness. In which case you’d be stranded, falling away on whatever trajectory you happened
to be on. Rescue would be possible, but it would likely take months, if not years.”
Bisesa pondered. “How many accidents have there been?”
“Very few,” Alexei said. “And none fatal.” He lectured them briefly about various levels of fail-safe in
the design of the mission profile, so that if you did lose your sail you’d still coast somewhere accessible.
“It’s more  likely your body  will fail you before  a  ship like this  does,”  he  said  to  Bisesa,  not  entirely
reassuringly.
While Alexei disappeared to what he called the “bridge” to check over the ship’s systems, Myra and
Bisesa explored and unpacked.
It didn’t take long to figure out the layout of the Maxwell. The pressurized hull was a cylinder only a
few meters tall. Divided up by sheets of that rice-paper partitioning, it was split into three main decks. At
the base was what Alexei called the utilities deck. Peering through hatches, they saw heaps of stores, life
support, EVA and repair gear, cargo. Alexei’s bridge was the upper deck.
The middle deck contained living quarters. Aside from a dedicated galley and bathroom it was sliced
up by movable partitions into rooms that could serve as rest quarters, bedrooms, workrooms for a crew
of up to ten. The walls were thick with cupboards and space-saving  fold-out  bunks  and  chairs.  Bisesa
and  Myra  spent  some  time  moving  the  partitions  around.  They  settled  on  constructing  three  small
bedrooms  as  far as  possible  from each  other  and  from the lavatory;  the paper-thin  partitions  weren’t
particularly soundproof.
The  accommodation  was  almost  as  pokey  as  aboard  the  spider.  But  the  cramped  corridors  and
low-ceilinged rooms had  a  unique mix of architectures  designed  for ground and  space.  The sail could
offer an acceleration  of no more  than one  percent  of Earth’s  gravity—not enough to  stick  you to  the
floor. So the design emulated space stations with hand- and footholds, Velcro pads, and a color coding
with brown beneath and blue above, so that you could always know at a glance which way up you were.
But on the other hand that one percent of G was steady and unrelenting. Experimenting, Bisesa found
that if she  clambered  up to  the ceiling and  let go,  she  would  drift  down  to  the  floor  in  six  or  seven
seconds, falling like a snowflake and settling softly. That little bit of gravity was surprisingly useful, for it
induced dust to settle and any disturbed clutter to fall eventually out of the air; here she would not have to
wrestle with rogue blankets, or track down stray droplets shimmering away from her coffee cup.
 
The “bridge” of the Maxwell was set out pretty informally with chairs and tables. Bisesa was reminded
that this wasn’t a military ship. When Bisesa and Myra came drifting up the short ladder from the lower
deck Alexei was sitting in one of those chairs, patiently watching displays unfold across a softscreen.
The walls were utterly transparent.
Space was starless, empty save for three lamps, sun, Earth, and Moon, which hung in a  tremendous
triangle around the ship. Something in Bisesa quailed before this array of worlds.  For  some  reason  she
thought of Mir and the man-apes she had seen there, australopithecines with the legs of humans and the
shoulders of gorillas.

Myra saw  her reaction  and  tugged her hand.  “Mum. It’s  just another  fairground  ride.  Never  mind
feeling dizzy. Look up.”
Bisesa lifted her head.
She  saw  a  disk  of  not-quite-darkness,  a  little  grayer  than  the  deep  velvet  of  the  sky.  Highlights,
sun-dazzling bright, rippled across its face. It was the sail, a sheet of foil big enough to have wrapped up
the whole of inner London. She could hear gentle, intermittent whirs that  must be  the tiny pulleys fixed
around the roof, tugging at the rigging that ran up and out from the roof above her, rectilinear threads that
caught the sunlight.
The hull that enclosed her was a tuna can hanging under a parachute.
“Welcome aboard the James Clerk Maxwell,” Alexei said, grinning.
“All this from sunlight.”
“Yes.” Alexei held up his hand in a shaft of sunlight that crossed the cabin. “The pressure of all those
tiny photons, pinging off a reflecting surface. On your face on a sunny day on Earth, that force amounts to
only maybe one ten-thousandth of a gram. We  have enough sail area,  and  a  low enough mass,  for an
acceleration  of a  hundredth  of  a  G.  But  it’s  continuous,  and  free,  and  it  just  keeps  on  pushing  and
pushing…Which is how we can reach Mars in twenty days.”
The sail itself was  based  on a  mesh of nanotube  string, the same  super-strong  stuff they  made  the
space elevator  ribbons  from. The “fabric” was  an ultra-thin film of boron,  only a  few hundred  atomic
diameters thick. It had to be sprayed on.
“The sail fabric is so fine that if you handle it it’s more  like smoke  than anything substantial,” Alexei
said. “But it’s robust enough to be able to stand a dip into the sun’s heat inside the orbit of Mercury.”
Ribs of light washed across the face of the mirror; tiny pulleys whirred.
“You get these oscillations all the time,” Alexei said. “That’s why we make the sails smart, as the sun
shield was. The fabric is embedded with actuators and tiny rocket motors. Max, the ship’s AI, can keep
himself positioned correctly. And he does most of the navigation; I just tell him where I want to go. Max
is in charge, really. Thank Sol he doesn’t brag about it too much.”
Bisesa said, “I can  see  how you can  be  pushed  away  from the sun. But how can  you sail inward
—from Mars in toward Earth, say? I guess it’s sort of like tacking into the wind.”
“It’s not a  good  analogy,” Alexei said  evenly. “You have to  remember  that  all objects  in the  solar
system are  essentially in orbit  around  the sun. And that  determines  how  the  sail  functions…”  Orbital
mechanics could be counter to common sense. “If I speed up, I raise my orbit. But if I fix my sail so that
the sunlight pressure opposes my motion, my orbital velocity falls, and I will spiral in toward the sun…”
Bisesa studied the diagrams he produced on the softscreens, but when he started scrolling equations she
gave up.
“This is all intuitively obvious to you, isn’t it? The principles of celestial mechanics.”
He waved a hand at the worlds around  them. “You can  see  why. Up  here  you can  see  those  laws
working out. I’ve often wondered how Earthbound scientists were able to make any sense out of all the
clutter down there. The first lunar astronauts, a hundred years ago, the first to come out this way, came
back changed, for better or worse. A lot of us Spacers are deists, or theists, or pantheists—somewhere
on that spectrum.”

“Believing that God is to be found in physical laws,” Myra said.
“Or God is those laws.”
“I suppose it makes  sense,”  Bisesa  said.  “Religions and  gods  don’t  have to  go together.  Buddhists
don’t necessarily believe in a supreme being; you can have religion independent of any god.”
Myra nodded. “And we can believe in the Firstborn without having any religion at all.”
Alexei said mildly, “Oh, the Firstborn aren’t gods. As they will learn one day.”
Bisesa said, “But you aren’t a theist. Are you, Alexei? You like to quote the Bible, but I’ve heard you
pray—Thank Sol?”
He looked sheepish. “You got me.” He  lifted his face  to  the sunlight. “Some  of us have a  sneaking
regard for the Big Guy. The engine that keeps us all alive, the one object you can see however far you
roam across the system.”
Myra nodded. “I heard of this. A cult of Sol  Invictus. One  of the last great  pagan  gods—from  the
Roman empire, just before they proclaimed Christianity their official cult. Didn’t it sprout on Earth again,
just before the sunstorm?”
Alexei nodded.  “There was  a  lot of propitiation  of angry gods  to  be  done  in  those  days.  But  Sol
Invictus was  the one  that took  hold with the early Spacers,  especially those  who had  worked  on the
shield. And he spread.”
Bisesa remembered  another  sun god  who had  interfered  in her own life: Marduk,  forgotten  god  of
Babylon. She said, “You Spacers really aren’t like the rest of us, are you, Alexei?”
“Of course not. How could we be?”
“And is that why you’re taking me to Mars? Because of a different perspective?”
“More  than  that.  Because  the  guys  down  there  have  found  something.  Something  the  Earth
governments would never even have dreamed of looking for. Although the governments are looking for
you, Bisesa.”
Bisesa frowned. “How do you know?”
Alexei  looked  uncomfortable.  “My  father  is  working  with  the  World  Space  Council.  He’s  a
cosmologist…”
So there it was, Bisesa thought, this new generational gap set out as starkly as it could be. A Spacer
son spying on his Earthbound father.
But even though they were in deep space he would say no more about where Bisesa was being taken,
and what was expected of her.
Myra pulled her lip. “It’s odd. Sol Invictus—he’s such a contrast to the cool thinking of the theists.”
“Yeah. But don’t you think that until we  get these  Firstborn  assholes  beaten,  we  need  an Iron  Age
god?” And Alexei grinned, showing his teeth, a shockingly primate expression bathed in the light of sun
and Moon.
 

Bisesa, worn out by stress and strangeness, retreated to her newly constructed cabin. She rearranged her
few possessions and strapped herself to the narrow bunk.
The  partitioned-off  room  was  small,  but  that  didn’t  bother  her.  She  had  been  in  the  army.  As
accommodations  went,  this was  a  lot  better  than  the  UN  camp  in  Afghanistan  where  she  had  been
stationed before falling into Mir.
It struck  her that this living  deck  seemed  cramped,  though,  even  given  the  basic  geometry  of  the
tuna-can hull. She thought back to her inspection of the utility deck earlier; she had a good memory for
spaces and volumes. Sleepy, she murmured aloud, “So why is this deck so much smaller than the utility
level?”
A soft voice spoke. “Because these walls are full of water, Bisesa.”
“Is that you, Thales?”
“No, Bisesa. Alexei calls me Max.” The voice was male, softly Scottish.
“Max, for James Clerk Maxwell. You’re the ship.”
“Strictly speaking the sail, which is the smartest  and  most sentient component.  I am a  Legal Person
(Non-Human),” Max said calmly. “I have a full set of cognitive capacities.”
“Alexei should have introduced us.”
“That would have been pleasant.”
“The water in the walls?”
It was there to protect frail human cargo from the hard radiations of space; even a few centimeters of
water was a surprisingly effective shield.
“Max. Why the name?”
“It is appropriate…”
The Scottish  physicist James  Clerk  Maxwell  had  in  the  nineteenth  century  demonstrated  that  light
exerted a pressure, the fundamental principle on which mankind’s new fleet of lightships had been built.
His work had laid the foundations for Einstein’s conceptual breakthroughs.
Bisesa smiled. “I suppose Maxwell would have been astonished to see how his basic insight has been
translated into technology, two centuries later.”
“Actually I’ve made  something of a  study of Maxwell. I have rather  a  lot of spare  time. I think he
could have conceived of a solar sail. The physics was all his, after all.”
Bisesa  propped  an  arm  behind  her  head.  “When  I  read  about  Athena,  the  shield  AI,  I  always
wondered how it felt to be her. An intelligence embedded in such an alien body. Max, how does it feel
to be you?”
“I often wonder how it feels to be you,” he replied in his soft brogue. “I am capable of curiosity. And
awe.”
It surprised Bisesa that he should say that. “Awe? At what?”

“Awe at finding myself in a universe of such beauty yet governed by a few simple laws. Why should it
be so? And yet, why not?”
“Are you a theist, Max?”
“Many of the leading theist thinkers are AIs.”
Electronic prophets,  she  thought, wondering.  “I think James  Clerk  would have been  proud  of you,
Maxwell Junior.”
“Thank you.”
“Light, please.”
The light dimmed to a faint crimson glow. She fell into a deep sleep, the gentle gravity just enough to
reassure her inner ear that she wasn’t falling any more.
It was some hours later  that Max  woke  her,  for,  he said  apologetically, they were  approaching  the
Moon.
 
On the bridge Alexei said, “It’s fortuitous of course that our path to Mars should take us near the Moon.
But I was able to work a gravitational slingshot into our trajectory design…”
Bisesa stopped listening to him, and just looked.
The swelling face of the Moon, nearly full, was  not the familiar Man-in-the-Moon  that  had  hovered
over the Manchester streets of her childhood. She had come so  far now that  the Man  had  turned;  the
great “right eye” of Mare Imbrium was swiveled toward her, and a slice of Farside was clearly revealed,
a segment of crater-pocked hide invisible to mankind until the advent of spaceflight.
But it was not the geology of the Moon that interested her but the traces of humanity. Eagerly she and
Myra picked out the big Nearside bases, Armstrong and Tooke, clearly visible as blisters  of silver and
green against the tan lunar dust. Bisesa thought she saw a road, a line of silver, cutting across the crater
called Clavius within which Tooke  Base  nestled,  and  from which it had  taken  its first name. Then she
realized it must be a mass driver, an electromagnetic launching track kilometers long.
The modern Moon was visibly a place of industry. Vast stretches of the lava-dust plains of the maria
looked  as  if they had  been  combed;  the  lunar  seas  were  being  strip-mined,  their  dust  plundered  for
oxygen, water,  and  minerals. At the poles  immense solar-cell  farms  splashed,  and  new  observatories
gleamed like bits of coal,  made  of jet-black  glass microwaved  direct  from the lunar dirt.  Strung  right
around  the  equator  was  a  shining  chrome  thread:  the  alephtron,  mightiest  particle  accelerator  in  the
system.
Something about  all this industry disturbed  Bisesa.  So  much  had  changed  on  the  Moon  after  four
billion years of chthonic calm, in just a single century since Armstrong’s  first small step.  The economic
development of the Moon had always been the dream  of Bud Tooke  himself. But now she  wondered
how the Firstborn,  who may themselves have been  older  than the  Moon,  might  view  this  disquieting
clatter.
Myra pointed. “Mum, look over there, at Imbrium.”
Bisesa  looked  that  way.  She  saw  a  disk  that  must  have  been  kilometers  across.  It  glinted  with

reflected sunlight, and shuddering waves spread across it.
“That’s the solar-sail factory,” Alexei murmured. “They lay down the webbing and spray on the boron
film—they spin it up from the start, to hold it rigid against the Moon’s gravity…”
That glinting disk seemed to spin, and ripple, and then, without warning, it peeled neatly away from the
mare surface as if being budded, and drifted up toward space, oscillating as it rose.
“It’s beautiful,” Bisesa said.
Alexei shrugged.  “Pretty,  yes.  To  be  honest  most of us don’t  find the Moon  very interesting. They
aren’t true Spacers down there. Not when you can commute to Earth in a day or two. We call it Earth’s
attic…”
Max murmured, “Closest approach coming up.”
Now the whole Moon was shifting across  Bisesa’s  field of view. Craters  flooded  with shadow  fled
before the fragile windows of the bridge. Bisesa felt Myra’s  hand tighten on her own.  There  are  some
sights humans just weren’t meant to see, she thought helplessly.
Then the Moon’s terminator fled over them, a broken line of illuminated peaks and crater  walls, and
they were plunged into a darkness broken only by the pale glow of Earthlight. As  the sun’s harsh light
was cut off the lightship lost its thrust, and Bisesa felt the loss of that tiny fraction of gravity.
 
17: WARSHIP 
John Metternes came bustling up to the flight deck of the Liberator.
Edna asked, “Everything nominal?”
“Bonza,”  the  ship’s  engineer  said.  He  was  breathless,  the  soft  Belgian  accent  under  his  acquired
Australian making his sibilants a rasp. “We got the mag bottles loaded and interfaced without blowing our
heads off in the process. All the protocols check out, the a-matter pods are being good enough to talk to
us…Yes, we’re nominal, and fit to launch. And about bloody time.”
Around forty, he was a burly man who was sweating so hard he had stained his jumpsuit armpits all
the way through the protective layers. And there  was  a  slight crust  around  his mouth. Perhaps  he had
been throwing up again. Though he had a nominal navy rank as a lieutenant commander, and was to fly
with the Liberator as the chief engineer, John had come to space late; he was one of those unfortunates
whose gut never adapted to microgravity. Not that that would make any difference when the A-drive cut
in, for in flight the Liberator would thrust at a full gravity.
Edna tapped  at  a  softscreen,  skimmed the final draft  of her operation  order,  and  checked  she  had
clearance from her control on Achilles. “The launch window opens in five minutes.”

Metternes looked alarmed, his broad stubbly face turning ashen. “My word.”
“You okay with this? The automated count is already underway, but we can still scrub if—”
“Good  God,  no.  Ah, look—you  took  me aback,  is all, didn’t  know  it  was  as  quick  as  that.  The
sooner we get on with it the better. And anyhow something will probably break before we get to zero; it
generally does…Libby, schematics please.”
The big window in front of them clouded over, replacing the view of Achilles and its backdrop of stars
with a  side-elevation  graphic  of  the  Liberator  herself,  a  real-time  image  projected  from  sensors  on
Achilles  and  elsewhere.  When  John  tapped  sections  of  it  the  hull  turned  transparent.  Much  of  the
revealed inner workings glowed a pastel green, but red motes flared in scattered constellations to indicate
outstanding engineering issues, launch day or not.
The design was simple, in essence. The Liberator  looked  like nothing so  much as  a  Fourth  of July
firework, a rocket  no less than a  hundred  meters  in length, with habitable  compartments  stuck  on the
front end and an immense nozzle gaping at the back.  Most  of the hull was  stuffed with asteroid-mined
water ice, dirty snow that would serve as the reaction mass that would drive the ship forward.
And buried somewhere in the guts of the ship, near that nozzle, was the antimatter drive.
 
Liberator’s  antimatter  came  in  tiny  granules  of  frozen  hydrogen—or  rather  anti-hydrogen,  stuff  the
propulsion engineers called “H-bar.” For now it was contained inside a tungsten core, isolated from any
normal  matter  by  immaterial  electromagnetic  walls,  the  containment  itself  requiring  huge  energies  to
sustain.
H-bar was precious stuff. Because of its propensity to blow itself up on encountering normal matter,
antimatter didn’t sit around  waiting to  be  collected,  and  so  had  to  be  manufactured.  It  occurred  as  a
by-product of the collision of high-energy particles. But Earth’s mightiest accelerators, if run continually,
would produce only tiny amounts of antimatter—even the great alephtron on the Moon was useless as a
factory.  A natural source  had  at  last been  found in the “flux tube” that  connected  the moon  Io  to  its
parent Jupiter, a tube of electrical current five million amperes strong, generated as that moon ploughed
through Jupiter’s magnetic field.
To mine antimatter, all you had to do was send a spacecraft into the flux tube and use magnetic traps
to sift out antimatter particles. But there was a world of engineering challenge in that “all.”
When Edna gave the order the magnetic fields would pulse, firing out the H-bar pellets one by one to
hammer into an oncoming stream  of normal  hydrogen.  Matter  and  antimatter  would  annihilate,  every
scrap of mass flashing immediately to energy. Asteroid ice would be  sublimated to  superheated  steam,
and it was that steam, hurtling out of the nozzle, that would push Liberator forward.
That was  really all there  was  to  it,  aside  from  the  hugely  tricky  details  of  handling  the  antimatter:
Liberator  was  a  steam  rocket.  But  it  was  the  numbers  that  were  so  impressive.  Even  the  great
mass-gobbling that went on in the fusing heart of the sun converted only a small percentage of fuel mass
to energy. When matter and antimatter annihilated they went all the way; you just couldn’t get more juice
out of Einstein’s famous E equals mc squared.
As a result, a mere pinch of antimatter, just fifty milligrams or so, would provide the equivalent of all
the energy stored aboard the great chemical-rocket launch systems, like the space shuttle. That was what
made the new  antimatter  drive  so  useful  to  governments  intent  on  giving  themselves  a  fast-response

capability in the face of an invasion of the solar system. The Liberator was a ship so powerful it would
deliver Edna to the Q-bomb, half Jupiter’s distance away, as far as from Earth to the asteroids, in just a
hundred and twelve hours.
The Liberator  would have been  dwarfed  by the Spacers’  lightships. But where  a  lightship  was  all
spiderweb and sail, the Liberator was a solid mass, a club, a weapon. And the design was stupendously
phallic, like so many of mankind’s weapon  systems  in the past,  as  more  than one  observer  had  wryly
remarked.
 
There really wasn’t much for John to do; Libby handled the details of a countdown that was as simple as
it could be made to be. John grew steadily more nervous.
“We’re being watched,” Edna said evenly, to distract him.
“We are? Who by?”
“From Achilles. Engineers, administrators, other crew.”
Edna cleared the screen and they glanced down at the ice moon’s surface. The graving dock crawled
with spacesuited figures.
“Well, so much for the safety protocols,” John muttered. “What are they doing there?”
Libby replied, “I imagine they have come to watch the launch of mankind’s first spacegoing warship.”
“Wow,” John whispered. “She’s right. Remember Star Wars, Star Trek?”
Edna had never heard of these ancient cultural relics.
“It all begins here,” John said. “The first warship. But surely not the last, my word.”
“Thirty seconds,” Libby said evenly.
“Thank crap for that,” John said. He clutched the arms of his couch.
This was real, Edna thought suddenly. She was committed; she really was going to ride this ship into
battle against an unknown foe, propelled by a drive that had been tested in anger only a couple of times,
in a ship so new it still smelled of metal polish.
Libby said, “Three, two, one.”
Somewhere in the guts of the ship a magnetic trap flexed. Matter died.
And Edna was shoved back into her chair with a thrust that drove the breath from her lungs.
 
18: MARS 

The journey wore away.
Even now Alexei wouldn’t allow any communications about sensitive matters, or even “loose talk” in
the cabin of the Maxwell, in this tiny volume drifting millions of kilometers from the nearest human. “You
never  know  who’s  listening.”  And  though  the  space  was  bigger  than  aboard  the  spider,  the  paper
partitions weren’t very soundproof, and Myra and Bisesa felt they had no real privacy.
Nobody talked. They were just as shut-in a crew as they had been on the spider.
After a  timeless interval marked  only by the gradual dwindling of the sun, Mars  loomed  out of the
dark. Bisesa and Myra peered curiously through the bridge windows.
The approaching world was a sculpture of orange-red, its surface pocked and wrinkled, with a broad
smearing of gray mist across much of the northern  hemisphere.  Compared  to  Earth,  which from space
was as bright as a daylight sky, Mars looked oddly dark to Bisesa, murky, sullen.
But as the lightship looped around dwindling orbits she learned to read the landscape. There were the
battered  southern  uplands,  punctuated  by the mighty bruise  of Hellas, and  to  the north  the  smoother,
obviously younger plains of the Vastitas Borealis. Bisesa was struck how big  everything was  on Mars.
The Valles Marineris canyon system stretched around  nearly a  quarter  the planet’s  circumference,  and
the Tharsis volcanoes were a gross magmatic distortion of the whole planet’s shape.
So much she might have seen  had  she  visited in 1969  rather  than 2069.  But today  Mars’s  air was
streaked by brilliant white water-vapor  clouds.  And on one  orbit  the Maxwell’s path  took  them right
over  the  summit  of  Olympus  itself,  where  black  smoke  pooled  in  a  caldera  wide  enough  to  have
swallowed up New York City.
If the scars of the sunstorm were evident on this new face of Mars, so was the handiwork of mankind.
The largest  settlement  on  Mars  was  Port  Lowell,  an  equatorial  splash  of  silver  on  the  fringe  of  the
battered southern uplands. Roads snaked away to all points of the compass, reminiscent of the rectilinear
tracery of canals that the last pre-spaceflight observers had imagined they had seen on Mars. And amid
the roads  and  the domes  were  splashes  of green: life from Earth,  flourishing under  glass in the soil of
Mars.
But Myra pointed out more green, a belt of it stretching across the northern plains, and puddled in the
great deep bowl of Hellas, a darker, more somber strain. That had nothing to do with Earth.
Alexei told Bisesa that they would spend a few nights at Lowell. As soon as a surface rover was free
she  was  to  travel  on,  heading  north—all  the  way  to  the  pole  of  Mars,  she  learned,  with  gathering
incredulity. She peered down at that dense lid of northern fog, wondering what waited for her beneath its
murk.
 
They spent a whole day floating above Mars, as the gentle pressure of sunlight regularized the Maxwell’s
orbit. Then a squat, boxy craft came lumbering up from Lowell.
The shuttle’s sole  occupant  was  a  woman,  perhaps  in her mid-twenties.  Dressed  in  a  bright  green
coverall she was slender, rather fragile looking, and her face, open, somewhat empty, bore a neat ident
tattoo. “Hi. I’m Paula. Paula Umfraville.”
When Paula smiled directly at her, Bisesa gasped. “I’m sorry. It’s just—”

“Don’t worry. A lot of people  from Earth have the same  reaction.  I’m flattered,  really, that  people
remember my mother so well…”
For Bisesa’s generation Helena Umfraville’s face had become one of the most famous in all the human
worlds: not just for her participation in the first manned mission to Mars, but for the remarkable discovery
she had made just before her own death. Paula might have been her double.
“I’m not important.” Paula  spread  her arms wide.  “Welcome to  Mars!  I  think  you’re  going  to  be
intrigued by what we’ve found here, Bisesa Dutt…”
The shuttle’s descent was a smooth glide. As Bisesa watched, the wrinkled face of Mars flattened into
a dusty landscape, and ocher light seeped across the sky.
Paula talked all the way down, perhaps delivering a patter intended to reassure nervous passengers. “I
usually find myself apologizing to visitors from Earth—and especially if they’re heading for the poles, as
you are, Bisesa. Here we are coming down at latitude ten north, and we’ll have to haul you all the way to
the polar cap overland from here. But all the support facilities are here at Lowell, and the other colonies
close  to  the equator,  because  the  equatorial  belt  was  all  those  first-generation  chemical-engine  ships
could reach…”
Myra was more interested in Paula than in Mars. She said awkwardly, “I went into astronautics after
the  sunstorm.  Helena  Umfraville  was  a  hero  of  mine—I  studied  her  life.  I  never  knew  she  had  a
daughter.”
Paula shrugged. “She didn’t, before she left for Mars. But she wanted a child. She knew that on the
Aurora  1  she  would spend  months bathed  in deep-space  radiation.  So  before  she  departed  she  left
behind eggs, other genetic material. It was transferred to a Hibernaculum during the sunstorm. And after
the storm was over, my father—well. Here I am. Of course my mother never knew me. I like to think she
would have been proud that I’m here on Mars, in a way carrying on her work.”
“I’m sure she would be,” Bisesa said.
The touchdown was brisk and businesslike, on a pad built of a kind of glass, melted out of the crust.
Bisesa stared. This was Mars. Beyond the scarred surface of the pad everything was reddish-brown, the
land, the sky, even the washed-out disk of the sun.
Within minutes a small bus with blister windows came bouncing up, puppy-like, on huge soft wheels. It
was painted green, like Paula’s jumpsuit—of course, Bisesa thought, you would use green to  stand  out
on red Mars.  Bisesa  clambered  through a  docking  tunnel, following Paula,  with Alexei and  Myra  and
their luggage and bits of kit. The bus, with rows of plastic seats,  might have come  from any airport  on
Earth.
As the bus rolled off Paula chattered about  the landscape.  She  seemed  proud  of it, engaging in her
enthusiasm. “We’re actually on the floor of a canyon called the Ares Vallis. This is an outflow canyon,
shaped by catastrophic flooding in the deep past, draining from the southern uplands.”
That ancient calamity had lasted just ten or twenty days, it was thought, a few weeks billions of years
past when a river a thousand times as mighty as the Mississippi had battered its way through the ancient
rocks. This sort of event had, it seemed, occurred all around the great latitudinal frontier where  Mars’s
south met its north; the whole of the northern hemisphere was depressed below the mean surface level,
like one enormous crater imposed on half the planet.
“You can see why the Aurora crew were sent here for the first human exploration—and in fact why

NASA sent its Pathfinder unmanned probe to the same area in the 1990s…”
Bisesa,  peering  out,  tuned  out  the  words.  This  dusty  plain,  littered  with  slablike  boulders,  was
Earthlike, and yet immediately not Earthlike. How strange it was that she could never touch those dusty
rocks, or taste that thin iron air.
As they neared the domes of Lowell they passed cylinders mounted vertically on tripods.  To  Bisesa
they looked like the power lasers of a  space  elevator.  The Martians  didn’t have their beanstalk  yet,  it
seemed, but they had the power sources in place.
And the bus  rolled past  flags that fluttered limply over  markers  of Martian  glass.  Bisesa  supposed
Paula’s mother was here, with those others of Bob Paxton’s crew who had not survived their stranding
on Mars. If Ares’s geology was forever shaped by that tremendous flood in the deep past, so its human
history would surely always be shaped by the heroism of the Aurora crew.
The bus drove them up to the largest of the domes and docked smoothly.
They passed  through a  connecting tunnel and  emerged  in a  warren  of  internal  partitions,  lit  by  big
fluorescent tubes suspended from a silvered roof. Bisesa felt very self-conscious as she walked into the
dome, practicing her Mars lope. The noise levels were high, echoing.
People bustled by, many dressed in green jumpsuits like Paula’s.  They all seemed  busy,  and  few of
them  glanced  at  Bisesa  and  her  party.  Bisesa  guessed  that  to  these  locals  she  would  be  about  as
welcome as tourists at a South Pole base on Earth.
Alexei felt moved to apologize. “Don’t mind this. Just remember, every breath you take has to be paid
for out of somebody’s taxes…”
Bisesa did notice that very few of the Martians wore ident tattoos on their cheeks.
They dumped their luggage in rooms  provided  for them in a  cramped,  shacklike  “hotel,” and  Paula
offered to fill their few hours at Lowell with a tour. So they went exploring, following Paula, working their
way from dome to half-inhabited dome through tunnels that were sometimes so low they had to crouch.
They bought their own lunch at an automated galley. Their Earth credit  was  good,  but the bowls  of
sticky soup and bitter coffee they bought were expensive.
As they ate,  a  gang of schoolkids  ran by,  laughing. They were  skinny, gangly, all at  least  as  tall as
Bisesa, though with their slim bodies and fresh faces it was hard to tell how old they were. They ran with
great bounds.
Alexei murmured, “First-generation  Martians.  Grown  from conception  under  low  gravity.  The  next
generation, their children, will be very interesting…”
Bisesa was sorry when they had passed out of sight, taking their splash of human warmth with them.
One big translucent dome enclosed a farm. They walked between beds of lettuces and cabbages, all
proud  and  healthy, and  shallow ponds  that served  as  rice  paddies,  and  trestle  tables  bearing  pans  of
some turgid fluid from which grew beans and peas and soya. There were  even fruit trees,  oranges  and
apples  and  pears  growing in pots,  obviously precious  and  lovingly  tended.  In  here  they  were  at  last
exposed  to  pink Martian  daylight, but the light of the remote  sun was  supplemented  by banks  of  hot
white lamps.
But they walked on quickly. Under a faint scent of some industrial perfume was the cloying stench of

sewage.
They reached the dome’s translucent wall, and Bisesa saw rows of plants marching away, set into the
soil beyond the dome. She noticed how they glinted, oddly glassy, and the green of their oddly  shaped
leaves was a deeper shade than the bright plants around her.
But she wasn’t yet used to Mars. It took a beat before it struck  her that  these  rows  of plants were
happily growing in the Martian air outside the pressurized dome. “Oh, my,” she said.
Alexei laughed.
They walked  on through more  inhabited areas.  They passed  what had  to  be  a  school,  and  Bisesa
longed  to  walk  in  and  discover  what  kind  of  curriculum  was  presented  to  these  first  young
Martians—what were they told of Earth?—but she didn’t have the nerve to ask Paula.
And they  found  a  bar,  called  “Ski’s”—apparently  after  Schiaparelli,  inadvertent  discoverer  of  the
Lowellian canals. There  was  alcohol available, but only fruit wines and  whiskeys.  They tried  an apple
wine, but it tasted weak to Bisesa.
“Low gravity, low pressure,” Alexei said. “It’s easier to get drunk here.”
The last dome they explored was the largest, and looked the most expensive.  It  was  constructed  of
panels laid over immense struts of what Myra identified as lunar glass. The interior was mostly disused.
Aside from a few corners used for stores and small workshops, there were only dusty partitions, cables,
and ducts lying over an unfinished floor.
“It’s as if they don’t quite know what to do with it,” Bisesa said.
“But it wasn’t the Martians’ choice,” Paula said. “After the sunstorm there was a lot of sentiment about
what happened to the Aurora crew, and a lot of money was put into getting the Mars settlement going
properly. And this was one result. It was going to be a slice of Earth, here on Mars.” She waved a hand.
“Those glass struts came from the sunstorm shield itself. So  this is a  sort  of memorial, you see.  There
would have been blue sky, projected onto that big dome. They were going to call it Oxford Circus.”
“You’re kidding.”
“No,” Alexei said. “There was even going to be a zoo here. Farm animals. Maybe an elephant or two,
Sol, I don’t know. All shipped up as zygotes.”
“And weather, like Earth’s, inside the dome,” Paula said. “They even got that part of it working for a
while, when I was little. The thunderstorm was quite scary. But it all broke down and nobody bothered
to fix it. Why should we? Many of us have never seen Earth; we don’t  miss it. And we  have our  own
weather.” She smiled wider, her young face so like her mother’s, her eyes blank.
 
That night, Bisesa  settled  down  in a  stern  monkish cell that  seemed  designed  to  remind  her  that  she
wasn’t a guest here, not welcome, that she was here on sufferance.
But there was a row of books above her bed—real paper books, or  anyhow facsimiles. They were
editions of classic novels of Mars  as  it had  been  dreamed  of during the long years  before  spaceflight,
from Wells through Weinbaum and Bradbury to Robinson and beyond. Flicking through the old books
oddly pleased  her;  for the first time since she  had  arrived,  she  was  reminded how many  dreams  had
always been lodged on Mars.

She clambered into bed. She read a few chapters of Martian Dust by a writer called Martin Gibson.
It was a colorful melodrama that, with the comforting gravity, soon lulled her to sleep.
 
19: THE SANDS OF MARS 
She was woken by Alexei, shaking her shoulder. “We have to move.”
She sat up, rubbing her eyes. “I thought you said we have to wait for a rover.”
“Well, we changed our plans. They don’t have too  many assets  on Mars,  but they started  to  move
during the night.”
“Who is they?”
“Astropol. The Space Council. Look, Bisesa, we’ll have time to  discuss  this. Please,  right now you
need to shift your ass.”
She had trusted him, and Myra, this far. She shifted.
 
The rover, trundling to its docking port on the central  dome,  was  visible through a  small window.  The
rover had a number: it was the fourth of Lowell’s fleet of six such long-distance exploratory vehicles. But
it also had a name, stamped in electric blue on its hull: Discovery. About the size of a school bus, painted
bright green, its hull bristled with antennae and sensor pods, and a remote manipulator arm was folded up
at its side. The rover dragged an equally massive trailer at its back, connected to the parent  by a  thick
conduit. The main body  and  the trailer were  mounted  on  big  complicated-looking  wheels  on  loosely
sprung axles. The trailer contained stores, spares, life support  gear—and,  unbelievably, a  small nuclear
power plant.
This rover was big enough to carry a crew of ten on a complete yearlong circumnavigation of Mars.
Bisesa realized it was wrong to think of it as a mere bus. It was a spaceship on wheels.
And it had pressure suits stuck to the outside of the hull. Bisesa said, “Reminds me of Ahab strapped
to the side of his whale.”
But none of them, not even Myra, had heard of Moby Dick.
“So why Discovery? For the old space shuttle?”
“No, no. For Captain Scott’s first ship,” Paula said. “You know, the Antarctic explorer? We use this
particular rover for polar jaunts, north and south, so the name seems appropriate.”
Expeditions to the poles had always been  a  tradition of Lowell Base,  Paula  said.  The astronauts  of
Aurora, in fact, in their long years as castaways before the sunstorm, had made expeditions to the south
pole, intent on coring the ancient ices and so deciphering Mars’s climatic history.

Paula’s  bright chat  filled the time as  they  waited  for  access  to  the  rover.  But  Alexei  bit  his  nails,
desperate to be away.
At last hatches  swung open.  They walked  through an airlock  and  clambered  into a  roomy interior.
There was  even  a  small  medical  area,  complete  with  robotic  arms  capable  of  manipulating  a  set  of
surgical instruments.
Paula said, “We’ll cover around a quarter of the planet’s circumference, traveling twenty hours a day
at a nominal fifty klicks per hour. Five days should see us home.”
“Twenty hours a day?”
Myra and Bisesa exchanged glances. They had already been cooped up for weeks on the elevator and
aboard the Maxwell. But these Spacers were used to lengthy confinement in small places.
“The Discovery will do the driving itself, of course.  It’s  done  the route  a  dozen  times already,  and
probably knows every boulder and ice field. It’s a smooth ride once we’re underway…”
Paula briefly spoke to  a  traffic control  center,  and  then the rover  briskly popped  itself loose  of the
dome airlock.
Once they were sealed in Alexei sat and blew air through pursed lips. “Well, that’s that. What a relief.”
Myra glanced back at the Lowell domes. “Couldn’t we be chased?”
Alexei said, “The other rovers are out in the field. Mars is still very sparsely populated, Myra, sparsely
equipped. Not a good place to mount a car chase. And it’s unlikely that Astropol and the other agencies
have any assets at the polar base.” Bisesa had learned that Astropol was a federation of terrestrial police
agencies dedicated  to  offworld operations.  “Oh,  they could  come  after  us,” Alexei murmured. “But it
would take something drastic to do it. They may not be ready to show their hand just yet.”
The rover swung itself around and set off to the north.
 
Bisesa and Myra sat up front behind a  big observation  window,  and  watched  the view unfold. It  was
about midday, and the sun was to the south behind them; the rover’s shadow stretched ahead.
The  domes  of  Lowell  soon  slipped  behind  the  rear  horizon,  obscured  by  the  rover’s  immense
rooster-tails of dust. The road was metaled at first, glassy; then it was  hard-pressed  dirt,  a  scar  in the
faded dust, and before long nothing but a rutted track. Away from the base there was no sign of human
activity, save for the odd weather station, and those endless rutted tracks peeling off to the north. Bisesa
could make out the remnants of the Ares flood in the scoured landscape, the teardrop islands, the huge
scattered boulders. But everything was  old,  worn  down  with age,  every  rock  surface  rubbed  smooth,
every slope draped with thick dust.
With nothing to see but rocks, Myra soon went to join Alexei and Paula, who had a common interest
in an exotic form of poker.
Bisesa sat alone in the bubble rover’s blister window, riding smoothly over Mars. As the sun wheeled
through the sky, Mars began to work a kind of spell on her. It was like Earth, with some of the furniture
of an earthly landscape: the land below, the sky above, the dust and the scattered rocks. But the horizon
was too close, the sun too small, too pale. A corner of her hindbrain kept asking: how can the world be
like this?

It was in this mood of strangeness that she saw the arch.
The rover never brought them close. But it loomed over the horizon, tall, impossibly slender. She was
sure that that immense crosspiece could not have been supported on Earth; it was Martian architecture.
The day wore away. The sunset was long and elaborate, with bands of diminishing color following the
small sun toward the horizon. The night sky  was  oddly  disappointing, though, with only a  scattering  of
stars; there must be too much dust suspended in the air. Bisesa looked for Earth, but either it wasn’t up
or she didn’t recognize it.
Paula brought her a plate of food, a piping-hot risotto with mushrooms and green beans, and a mug of
coffee fitted with a lid. She leaned down and peered straight ahead, through the window.
Bisesa asked, “What are you looking for?”
“The north celestial pole. People generally ask.”
“Tourists like me, you mean.”
Paula  wasn’t  fazed.  “Mars  doesn’t  have  a  bright  pole  star,  like  Polaris.  But—look,  can  you  see
Cygnus, the swan? The brightest star is Deneb, Alpha Cygni. Follow the spine of the swan, up through
Deneb,  and  the  celestial  pole  is  about  halfway  between  Deneb  and  the  next  distinct  constellation,
Cepheus.”
“Thank you. But the dust everywhere—the seeing isn’t as good as I expected.”
“Well, Mars is a museum of dust, the climatologists say,” Paula said. “It’s not like Earth. We have no
rain to wash the dust out, no sedimentary processes to bake it all into rock. So it stays in the air.”
Mars as a snow globe, Bisesa thought. “I saw an arch.”
Paula nodded. “Erected by the Chinese. They put up a  monument like that  every  place  one  of their
arks came down.”
So  that tremendous  structure  was  a  memorial to  hundreds  of  Chinese  who  had  died  on  Mars  on
sunstorm day.
Bisesa ventured, “Paula, I was a little surprised you came along with us.”
“Surprised?”
“And that you’re mixed up with this secretive business at the pole of Mars. Alexei, yes, I can see it in
his personality.”
“He is a bit furtive, isn’t he?”
They shared a laugh. Bisesa said, “But you seem more—”
“Conformist?” That pretty airline-stewardess smile was still in place, illuminated by the dash lights. “I
don’t mind if that’s said of me. Maybe it’s true.”
“It’s just that you’re so good at your job.”
Paula said  without resentment,  “I was  probably  born  to  it.  My  mother  is  the  person  most  people
remember of the Aurora crew, after Bob Paxton—the only one, probably.”

“And so visitors respond to you.”
“It could have been a handicap. Why not turn it into an asset?”
“Okay. But that doesn’t extend to  hauling your backside  all the way to  the north pole  for us.” She
paused. “You admire your mother, don’t you?”
Paula shrugged. “I never met her. But how could I not admire her?  Bob  Paxton  came  to  Mars  and
sort of conquered it, and then went home again. But my mother loved Mars. You can tell that from her
journals. Bob Paxton is a hero on Earth,” she said. “But my mother is a hero here on Mars, our first hero
of all.” The stewardess smile flicked back on. “More risotto?”
 
In the murky Martian dark, in the warmth of the cabin, Bisesa fell asleep in her seat.
She woke to a tap on her shoulder. She found she was swathed by a blanket.
Myra was  sitting with her,  gazing out of the window into dawn  light. Bisesa  saw  they were  driving
through a landscape of rolling dunes, some of them tens of meters high, frozen waves a kilometer or two
apart. Some kind of frost gathered in their lee.
“My, I slept the night through.”
“Are you okay?”
Bisesa shifted, exploring. “A little stiff. But I guess even a chair like this is comfortable in low gravity.
I’ll stretch and have a wash shortly.”
“You’ll have to wait for Alexei. He’s shaving his head again.”
“I guess I got hypnotized by the view.”
“White line fever. Or something.” Myra sounded irritable.
“Myra? Is something wrong?”
“Wrong? Christ, Mother, look at that view. Nothing. And yet here you are, sitting up here  for hour
after hour, just drinking it in.”
“What’s wrong with that?”
“It’s you. If there’s something strange, you’re drawn to it. You revel in it.”
Bisesa glanced around. The others were asleep. She realized that this was the first time she and Myra
had effectively been alone since the washed-out days after her waking at the Hibernaculum—there had
never been real privacy even on the Maxwell, and certainly not in the elevator spider cabin.
“We’ve never had a chance to talk,” she said.
Myra made to stand up. “Not here.”
Bisesa put her hand on her arm. “Come on. Who cares if the police are listening in? Please, Myra. I
don’t feel I know you anymore.”
Myra sat back. “Maybe that’s the trouble. I don’t know you. Since you came out of the tank—I think

I’d got used to living without you, Mum. As if you had died, perhaps. And when you did come out, you
aren’t how I remember you. You’re  like a  sister  I’ve  suddenly discovered,  not my mother.  Does  that
make sense?”
“No. But we haven’t evolved for Hibernacula time-slips, have we?”
“What do you want to talk about? I mean, where am I supposed  to  start?  It’s  been  nineteen years,
half my life.”
“Give me one headline.”
“Okay.” Myra hesitated, and looked away. “You have a granddaughter.”
Her name was Charlie, for Charlotte, Myra’s daughter by Eugene Mangles. Now aged fifteen, she had
been born four years after Bisesa went into the tank.
“Good God. I’m a grannie.”
“When we broke up, Eugene fought me for custody. And he won, Mum. He had  the clout to  do  it.
Eugene is powerful and he’s famous.”
Bisesa said, “But he was never very human, was he?”
“Of course I had access.  But that was  never  enough. I’m not like you.  I don’t  want strangeness.  I
wanted to build a home, for me and Charlie. I wanted—stability. I never got close to that. And in the end
he cut me out altogether. It wasn’t hard. They’re hardly ever even on the Earth.”
Bisesa reached for her hand; it was cold and unresponsive. “Why didn’t you tell me this before?”
“Well, for one thing you didn’t ask. And, look, here we are on Mars! And we’re here because you’re
the  famous  Bisesa  Dutt.  You  have  much  more  important  issues  to  worry  about  than  a  lost
granddaughter.”
“Myra, I’m sorry. When this is all over—”
“Oh, don’t be ridiculous, Mum. It never is over, with you. But I’ll support you even so. I always will.
Look, forget about  it. You had  a  right to  know.  Well, now you do.”  Her  face  was  intent, her mouth
pinched. Green light was reflected in her eyes.
Green? 
Bisesa sat up with a jolt, and looked out of the blister window.
 
Under a salmon-pink dawn  sky,  the rutted  tracks  snaked  across  a  plain that  was  painted  a  deep  dull
green.
Paula joined  them. “Discovery.  Slow  down  so  we  can  see.”  The  truck  obligingly  slowed,  with  a
distant grinding of gears.
Myra  and  Bisesa  sat  uncomfortably;  Bisesa  wondered  how  much  Paula  had  heard  of  their
conversation.
Now Bisesa could see that the green was a carpet of tiny plants, each no larger than her thumb. Each

plant looked like a leather-skinned cactus, but it had translucent sections—windows to catch the sunlight,
Bisesa supposed, without losing a precious drop of moisture. There were other  plants too.  She  picked
out small black spheres—round to retain heat, black to soak it up during the day? She wondered if they
turned white, chameleon-like, to avoid dissipating heat at night. But the cacti predominated.
Myra said, “The cacti are what Helena discovered, in the wake of the sunstorm. Life on Mars.”
“Yes,” Paula said. “The most common multicelled organism we’ve found yet on Mars. The subsurface
bacterial mats and the stromatolites in Hellas are more widespread—a lot more biomass. But the window
cacti are still the stars of the show. The species has been named for my mother.”
Each window cactus was a survivor from deep ages past, Paula said.
When the solar system was young, the three sister worlds were briefly similar: Venus, Earth, Mars, all
warm, wet, geologically active. It was impossible to say on which of them life spawned first. Mars  was
certainly  the  first  to  accumulate  an  oxygen  atmosphere,  the  fuel  for  complex,  multicelled  life-forms,
billions of years before the Earth. But Mars was also the first to cool and dry.
Paula said, “But this took time, hundreds of millions of years.  You can  achieve a  lot in hundreds  of
millions of years—why, the mammals filled out an ecology vacated by the dinosaurs in less than sixty-five
million years. The Martians were able to evolve survival strategies.”
The roots of the cacti were buried deep in the cold rock of Mars. They didn’t need oxygen, but fueled
their glacial metabolism with hydrogen released by the slow reaction of the volcanic rocks with traces of
water ice. Thus they and their ancestors had survived aeons.
“There were always volcanic episodes,” Paula said. “The Tharsis calderas thicken the air every ten to
a hundred million years.  The cacti  grow,  propagate,  grow  dormant  again, surviving as  spores  until the
next episode. And then the sunstorm caused rain, water rain. The air has stayed thick and wet enough to
keep them out of their dormant stages right through the year.
“And, the biologists say, they are related to our sort of life. It’s a different sort of DNA here,” Paula
said.  “Using a  different  set  of  bases—six,  not  four—and  a  different  kind  of  coding.  The  same  with
Martian RNA and proteins, not quite like ours. It’s thought the amino acid set that’s used here is subtly
different too, but that’s still controversial. But it is DNA and RNA and proteins, the same toolbox as on
Earth.”
Mars  was  young in an age  of continuing massive bombardment,  as  the relics of the  solar  system’s
violent formation smashed into the new worlds.  But that  battering  ensured  that  an immense amount of
material, blasted off the roiling surfaces, was transferred between the planets. And that material contained
life.
Bisesa gazed out at the patient cacti. “So these are our cousins.”
“But more distantly related than we are to any other life-forms from Earth. The last significant biomass
transfer must have been so early that the final form of DNA coding wasn’t  yet settled  on either world.
But the relationship is close enough to be useful.”
“Useful? How?”
Paula tapped a softscreen on the Discovery’s dashboard, and produced images showing how Lowell
scientists were finding ways to splice Martian genes into terrestrial plants. And that was how a new breed
of plant was  being developed,  neither purely terrestrial  nor  purely  Martian,  able  to  grow  outside  the

pressurized  domes  of  the  colonies,  and  yet  capable  of  providing  food  for  humans—and  of  injecting
oxygen into the air.  Some  of the biologists thought it was  a  route  to  terraforming, a  first step  toward
making Mars like Earth. An informal grouping of them even had a slogan: All These Worlds Are Ours.
“In fact,” Paula said, “I’m glad we happened on the cacti. It’s important you know about this, Bisesa.”
“Why?”
“So you can understand what they’ve found at the pole.”
“I can’t wait,” Myra said dryly.
“And I can’t  wait for the bathroom,”  Bisesa  said.  She  pushed  her way out of her chair,  letting the
blanket drop. “Alexei? Are you done in there yet?”
 
The Discovery rolled on, patient, silent, for kilometer after kilometer, a cybernetic Stakhanovite. By the
middle of that day they were through the green, and rolled across a dull, undulating plain.
After that, each day of the journey the sun climbed lower. At last it panned  around  the horizon, and
there was no full daylight, only a kind of twilight glow that washed around the obscured sky.
Bisesa understood. Mars was tilted on its axis, just as was Earth; in northern winter the pole pointed
away from the sun, and as she headed north she was driving into a twelve-month-long Arctic night. What
was different about Mars  was  how quickly the changes  came;  here,  the lines of latitude clicked  away
rapidly. She had a very clear sense that she was driving over the surface of a small round world, an ant
crawling over an orange.
One sunset they saw a bank of clouds on the northern horizon.
By dawn they were under it. The polar hood was thick enough to obscure all but the brightest  stars;
Deneb and the celestial pole were lost.
By midday it had begun to snow.
 
20: LIBERATOR 
“It’s taken us under five days to cross the solar system, Thea. Think of that. And now there’s only a few
hours to go before Q-hour, our rendezvous with the bomb…”
The Liberator had the mass and rough dimensions of the old Saturn V launchers. But whereas most
of a Saturn’s mass would have burned  itself up and  been  discarded  in minutes, leaving its payload  to
coast unpowered most of the way to its destination, the Liberator’s mighty engine could maintain a thrust
of a full gravity or more for days, even weeks. That had enabled the ship to cut a straight-line trajectory
from one point on the J-line to another, from the Trojan base to the position of the bomb. Its path was a

rectilinear oddity in a solar system of circles and ellipses.
And Edna had crossed half the distance between Jupiter and the distant sun in a hundred hours.
“We’re  actually slowing down  now.  We’re  approaching  the Q-bomb  tail-first, our  exhaust  blasting
out…
“Most  of  the  officers  serving  in  space  have  been  transferred  from  the  U.S.  Navy,  because  most
spacecraft are more like submarines than anything else. But the Liberator  is different. We’ve  so  much
energy to burn that we have more room on this ship than on any spacecraft since Skylab. If you’ve never
heard of that, look it up. John Metternes and I share a kind of big apartment, with bedrooms, showers,
and a stateroom with softscreens and coffee-makers. When we  go to  the ports  and  look  down  at  the
flank of the ship, it’s like looking out of the window of a high-rise hotel on Earth. But most hotels don’t
have antennae and sensor booms. Or gun ports.
“I need to go, love. The drive’s about to be cut, and it would be embarrassing to meet the bogey with
me stranded in midair!…
“How do  I feel? I’m frightened. Excited.  I have confidence  in my  abilities,  and  John’s,  and  in  the
Liberator, which has already proven herself a fine ship. I just hope that’s enough to carry the day. I—I
guess that’s all, Libby. Close file.”
“Yes, Edna. It is time.”
“I know. Call John, would you?”
 
21: POLE 
Bisesa couldn’t see a thing.
The Discovery  plowed  its way through a  half-meter thickness  of carbon  dioxide snow.  The fragile
dry-ice stuff sublimated before the rover’s heat, so they drove into a blinding mist, and even beyond the
mist it was a murky dark. Nobody said anything, the poker players continuing their endless tournaments.
Bisesa just had to put up with the unnerving drive alone.
Then, through the gloom, she saw bright green lights, brilliant sparks. The rover slowed to a halt. The
rest of the crew hurried forward.
A vehicle of some  kind sat  on the ice,  with big balloon  wheels  and  straddled  by  two  spacesuited
occupants. Their helmets were illuminated, but Bisesa couldn’t make out their faces.  When they caught
the rover’s lights they waved.
“That’s a tricycle,” Myra said, wondering.
“Actually,” Paula said mildly, “they call it a General Utility Vehicle. For  operations  close  to  the pole

station—”
“I want one.”
Alexei tapped a softscreen. “Yuri. Is that you?”
“Hi, Alexei. We cleared a path for you with the sublimation blade. The snow’s heavier than usual this
season.”
“Appreciated.”
“Discovery, just follow us and you’ll be fine. Eleven, twelve hours or so and we’ll be  home with no
trouble. See you at Wells.” The vehicle turned and drove ahead. Mist burst around it in a spray, brightly
illuminated by the floods.
With Discovery following easily, the little convoy’s speed soon passed forty kilometers an hour.
As they roared on into the dark, the hard  ground under  the snow  began  to  change.  It  was  layered,
alternating light and dark in strata as thick as Bisesa’s arm, like a vast  sedimentary bed.  And it looked
polished, with a fine patina that glistened in the trucks’ lights.
After a couple of hours of this they crunched up onto a firmer, paler surface, a grimy white tinged with
Mars red.
“Water ice,” Paula announced. “Mostly, anyhow. This is the permanent ice cap, the residue that’s left
after the carbon dioxide snow sublimes away every spring. Here at the edge  we’re  about  five hundred
klicks from Wells Station,  which is  near  the  geographic  pole.  The  drive  will  be  smoother  now.  The
rover’s wheels are reconfigurable for different surface types.”
Bisesa said, “I’m surprised Discovery isn’t lowering a set of skis.”
Alexei looked at her, a bit pained. “Bisesa, this is Mars. The temperature out there is the freezing point
of dry ice—at this pressure, that’s about a hundred fifty K.”
She worked that out. “A hundred and twenty degrees below freezing.”
“Right,” Paula said. “At these temperatures water ice is so hard it would be like skiing on basalt.”
Bisesa was chagrined. “You’ve given this little lecture a dozen times, haven’t you?”
“You didn’t have time for the usual orientation. Don’t worry about it.”
Now that they were on the ice Bisesa expected a smooth, straight ride  on to  the pole.  But the lead
truck  soon  turned  aside  from  its  dead-straight  northern  track,  and  embarked  on  a  grand,  sweeping
detour, turning clockwise. Peering out of the left-hand window, Bisesa glimpsed a canyon.
She swallowed her pride and asked Paula about it.
Paula said it was a “spiral canyon,” one of many gouged into the ice cap. She pulled up an image of
the whole cap, taken from space in the summer, when the dry ice snow wasn’t there to obscure it. The
ice cap  looked  like a  twisting storm  system,  with those  spiral canyons  twisting  in  from  the  edge  and
reaching almost to the pole. It was astounding, like nothing Bisesa knew of on Earth. But after her jaunt
across the solar system there wasn’t much wonder left in her soul.
As they drove on the snow grew deeper, until they were driving along a  path  between  two  walls of

snow heaped  up  maybe  two  meters  deep.  The  snow  looked  compact,  harder  than  snow  on  Earth,
denser maybe.
She was relieved when she saw a cluster of lights ahead, and the rounded shoulders of living modules.
 
A row of green lights stretched off into the distance, as if they were driving down a runway. As the rover
rolled closer Bisesa saw that the lights were on poles maybe four meters high, perhaps to keep above the
snow. Glancing back, she saw that looking the other way the lights were bright white—so, in the murk of
a Martian blizzard, you could always tell if you were heading toward or away from the base.
The structures  that loomed  out of the dark,  lifted up off the ground on  stilts,  were  not  domes  but
flattened  pie-shapes,  round  above  and  below.  They  were  colored  bright  green,  and  huddled  close
together, interlinked by short tunnels. Bisesa  saw  that  these  big hab  modules were  in fact  mounted on
wheels, and had been tied down to the ice by cables fixed to pitons. They were like monstrous caravans,
she thought.
As the rover neared the station, the walls of dry  ice snow  thinned away,  until the rover  was  driving
over an  ice  surface  almost  clear  of  snow  but  covered  with  an  open  black  mesh.  Heating  elements,
perhaps, designed to keep off the dry ice. The rover nuzzled up to a low dome at the foot of one of the
stilts. Two station vehicles were already parked here, heavy-looking, smaller than the rover from Lowell.
Paula  led  them  through  the  hatch,  and  Bisesa  found  herself  facing  a  staircase,  roofed  over  with
blue-green plastic, that evidently led up to the nearest of the stilted habs. Alexei’s suitcase couldn’t climb
the stairs and had to be hauled up on a plastic rope.
At the top of the stairs, the station crew were waiting for the newcomers.  There  were  four of them,
two women, two men, Mars-spindly in the limbs though a little heavy in the belly. All were pretty young,
Bisesa guessed, none older than forty. Their coveralls were clean but well-patched, and they all smelled
faintly greasy. None of them had cheek ident tattoos.
They stared at Bisesa, and stood a little too close together.
One burly twenty-five-year-old came forward and shook  Bisesa’s  hand.  “You’ll have to  forgive us.
We don’t get too many visitors up here.” He had a big, blotchy drinker’s nose, grimy black hair pulled
back into a ponytail, and a mass of curly beard. His accent was indistinct, like American but laced with
longer European vowels.
“You’re Yuri, right? You were on the ice bike.”
“Yes. We  exchanged  a  wave.  Yuri O’Rourke.  Resident  glaciologist, climatologist, what have you.”
Briskly  he  introduced  the  rest  of  the  base  crew:  Ellie  von  Devender,  a  physicist,  Grendel  Speth,  a
doctor-biologist,  and  Hanse  Critchfield,  an  engineer  responsible  for  power,  transport,  and  essential
systems,  but  also  a  specialist  in  the  drilling  rig,  the  base’s  main  scientific  function.  “Although  we  all
multitask,” Yuri said. “We’re all trained paramedics, for instance…”
Ellie von Devender approached Bisesa. The physicist was maybe thirty, stocky  in her jumpsuit, with
her hair tightly pulled back. She wore thick-rimmed spectacles, an affectation that hid her eyes and made
her look hostile.
Bisesa said curiously, “I guess I would have expected a glaciologist, a biologist. But a physicist?”

Ellie said, “The glaciology is the reason the base is here, along with Grendel and her wet lab. I am the
reason you’re here, Ms. Dutt.”
Yuri clapped  Bisesa  on the shoulder.  “Come  see  the place.”  He  led them briskly through the  hab.
“This is what we call Can Six,” he said. “The EVA port…”
Can  Six was  a  bubble  of fabric,  the walls colored  a  bright  sea-green  with  an  eye-deceiving  wave
pattern. It had a honeycomb floor that straddled its interior at the widest point, and looking down Bisesa
could see stores  stacked  up in the underfloor  space.  There  were  no spacesuits  in evidence,  but there
were odd hatches in the walls that might have led to externally-mounted suits, like the rover’s. Equipment
was stacked up here, what looked like spare parts and other gear for the rovers, and also a small science
lab, and a medical area, a single bed surrounded by equipment, sealed off from the rest  by a  zippered
plastic curtain. It was dark, and felt cold and dusty, as if not much used.
Yuri hurried them through a small airlock to another module: “Can Five, science,” he said. Here there
was another, more comprehensive lab suite, and a larger hospital area, and what looked like a small gym.
It was  brighter,  with  glowing  panels  plastered  to  walls  that  seemed  to  be  decorated  with  scenes  of
mountains and rivers.
Bisesa murmured to Myra, “Why two lab suites, two medical bays?”
Myra shrugged.  “To avoid  contamination maybe.  You  come  in  from  EVA,  and  can  process  your
samples and treat injuries without breaking the seals to the rest of the base.”
“Contamination of the crew by Martians?”
“Or of Martians by the crew.”
In Can Five, Grendel Speth, small, neat, slim, her black hair speckled with gray, briskly took  blood,
urine, and cheek-swab samples from each of the visitors. “Just so the station can keep you healthy,” she
said.  “Testing for allergies, nutritional genomics, that  sort  of thing. Our  food  comes  from  freeze-dried
stores from Lowell, and homegrown vegetables from our garden. We’ll add supplements  to  make  sure
your specific nutritional needs are met. You won’t even know they are there…”
Now Yuri hurried them through a third module—Can Three, evidently a sleeping area, divided up into
pie-slice bedrooms,  dark,  evidently not used.  They came  to  another  module, Can  Two.  Bizarrely this
module had been fitted out to  simulate a  city-center  hotel called the “Mars-Astoria.”  But many of the
internal partitions here had been torn down to give a more open, shared space, though the core section
was dedicated to a small galley and a shower-toilet. There were four beds in this round space, with small
cupboards  and  chairs beside  them, all of them cluttered  with clothes  and  other  gear.  Softscreens  had
been plastered over the unregarded urban landscape, cycling through what looked like personal  images
of families, pets, domestic landscapes.
Myra said curiously, “You’re not using this as the makers intended, are you?”
Yuri said, “Wells was built for ten; there are only four of us. The nights are long here, Myra. We prefer
living like this, together.”
After that,  Yuri apologetically led them down  another  staircase  to  a  small  surface  dome,  and  then
down steps cut into the ice. “Sorry about this. You can see we only have the four beds set up, and we’ve
pretty  much  shut  down  the  modules  we  don’t  use.  We  generally  put  up  visitors  down  here,  in  our
radiation storm shelter…If you’re not comfortable we can open up another of the cans.”

Bisesa glanced around  as  she  descended.  The cavern  in the ice was  a  squat  cylinder, sliced up by
partitions  into  pie-shaped  segments.  She  recognized  a  galley,  a  comms  station,  a  shower  block,  a
cluttered space that looked like a lab or a medical station. The place was lived-in. There were ruts in the
floor around the galley and the shower block, the walls and metal surfaces looked scuffed and polished
with use and reuse, and there was a faintly stale smell, of air that had been cycled too often.
Some of the cavern wall was exposed, and she saw it was decorated with an odd design, a thin band
marked  with faint bars  and  a  more  general  meter-scale  wash  of  dark  and  light.  This  barcode  frieze
wrapped itself all around the wall’s curving surface like the flayed skin of a tremendous snake.
The room Myra and Bisesa were to share was just a truncated pie-slice, big enough for bunk beds, a
table, a couple of chairs. Its back wall was ice, layered over with translucent plastic, and decorated with
that odd barcode design that passed across the length of wall, from one side to the other.
As they sorted themselves out Yuri sat on the bunk. He took up a lot of space in the little room. “It’s
kind of cozy up here at Wells, but we survive. Actually the polar cold doesn’t make much difference. On
Mars, if you stepped outdoors at high noon in midsummer on the equator, you’d still freeze your butt off.
The main issue up here is the dark—half a Martian year at a time, twelve Earth months. Polar explorers
on Earth had  the same  challenges. We  did learn a  lot of lessons  from those  guys. Though more  from
Shackle-ton than from Scott.”
Myra said, “Yuri, I’m having trouble placing your accent.”
“My mother was Russian like my forename, my father Irish like my surname. I’m officially a citizen of
Ireland, so of Eurasia.” He grinned. “But that doesn’t count for much up here. Things get kind of mixed
up, away from Earth.” He turned to Bisesa. “Look, Ms. Dutt—”
“Bisesa.”
“Bisesa. I know you’re here for the thing in the Pit.”
Bisesa eyed Myra. What thing? What Pit?
“But you need to know what we’re really doing here.” He passed a hand along the striped designs on
the  wall.  The  lines  were  faint,  of  irregular  widths  and  colors.  It  did  look  like  a  barcode,  or  a
spectrograph. “Look at this. This is why I came here. This wallpaper is an image of the most complete
core we’ve yet been able to extract.”
Myra nodded. “An ice core from Mars.”
“Right. We drilled right down from here, from the top of the ice dome, and we got all the way down to
two and a half klicks deep—Hanse Critchfield is going to enjoy showing off his rig. Of course it would
have been  three  klicks if not for the sunstorm burning the top  ice  layers  away.”  He  shook  his  head.
“Damn shame.”
Myra ran her finger along the record. “And you can interpret this, the way they read  ice cores  from
Earth?”
“Surely. The cap is built up layer by layer, year on year. And each year it captures a snapshot of the
conditions at the time—climate, dust, cosmic, whatever. Just as on Earth. Of course the detail is different
here. In Greenland, say, you get an annual snowfall tens of centimeters thick. Here the residual water-ice
layer is less than a seventh of a millimeter, annually.
“Look here.” He stood by the wall, where the long winding strip came to an end. “This is the top  of

the strip; the most recent layers are at the top, the last deposited, yes? This upper bit of the record was
collected by the Aurora crew before the sunstorm. A few centimeters corresponds to decades in time.
These  fine  brown  stripes—”  He  marked  them  with  his  thumbnail.  “They  correspond  to  global  dust
storms. And that band corresponds to the washout Mariner 9 found when it arrived in orbit in 1971, the
whole planet swathed in dust…”
On Mars, events occurring on different timescales were marked by different levels in the ice core. Ten
centimeters down was to be found the trace of radiation washed over the planet by the Crab supernova a
thousand  years  earlier.  Every  meter  or  so  was  a  significant  layer  of  micrometeorites,  droplets  of
once-molten rock; every ten or a hundred thousand years Mars was hit by an object massive enough to
spread debris  even to  the poles.  And the big meter-scale  striping corresponded  to  the most dramatic
event in Mars’s  current  astronomical  cycling,  a  nodding  of  its  polar  tilt  that  occurred  every  hundred
thousand years.
Yuri said,  “You can  even find traces  of Earth in this Martian  ice—meteorites  blasted  off the home
world, just as Mars meteorites find their way to the Earth.” He grinned. “I’m still looking for traces of the
dinosaur killer.”
Myra studied  him. “You love  your  work,  don’t  you?”  She  sounded  envious,  Bisesa  thought.  She
always had been drawn to people with missions, like Eugene Mangles.
“I wouldn’t be stuck in this ice coffin otherwise. But we’re not concentrating any more.  After what
we found under the ice, nobody cares about all this stuff. The ice cap, the cores. It’s all just in the way.”
Bisesa thought that over. “I’m sorry.”
He laughed shortly. “It’s not your fault.”
Myra asked, “So what did you find?”
“You’re about to find out. If you’re done, I’m supposed to take you in to a council of war.” He stood
up.
 
22: APPROACH 
The Liberator sailed toward the Q-bomb, a spear of ice and fire. On the flight deck,  Edna  Fingal and
John Metternes were in their pressure suits, helmets on, visors open.
Though it was still invisible to the naked eye, they were already “seeing” the Q-bomb through its tug of
gravity, its knot of magnetic energy, and the mist of exotic  particles  it emitted as  it cruised  through the
solar system.
“It’s  just  as  Professor  Carel  predicted,”  John  reported,  scrolling  through  softscreen  summaries.
“Exactly like the spectrum  you get from the evaporation  of a  mini black  hole.  Clearly a  cosmological
artifact—”

“There,” Edna whispered. She pointed at the window.
The Q-bomb  was  a  blister  of  distorted  starlight,  a  droplet  of  water  rolling  down  the  face  of  the
heavens. Edna felt chilled to the bone actually to see this thing.
“That’s an Eye,” John reported. “A perfectly reflective sphere, a ball bearing a hundred meters across.
All the classic signs: the distorted geometry, the anomalous Doppler shifts from the surface. The radiation
spectrum isn’t quite what was recorded of the Eyes found in the Trojans during the sunstorm, however.”
“So this thing isn’t just an observer. I guess we knew that already.”
“Five kilometers out and closing,” Libby said softly.
Edna glanced at John. She knew he had showered only an hour ago, but even so sweat stood out on
his brow and pooled at his neck. “Ready?”
“As I’ll ever be, cobber.”
“We’ll follow the agreed strategy. Libby, you got that? Four passes. And if anything changes—”
“We  gun  for  home,”  Libby  said.  “It  will  be  just  as  we  rehearsed.  Three  kilometers  to  closest
approach. Edna?”
“Yes, Libby?”
“History is watching.”
“Oh, Jesus,” John muttered.
 
23: THE PIT 
The four base crew, plus Bisesa, Myra, and Alexei, sat in a circle on chairs and upturned boxes in Can
Two, the Hotel Mars-Astoria. Paula, it seemed, was sleeping off the journey.
And here  at  the Martian  north pole,  under  a  hood  of  carbon  dioxide  snow,  about  as  remote  and
secure a place as you could find in the solar system, Bisesa was told the truth at last.
It seemed a relief to Alexei as he finally revealed what various Spacer factions had discovered through
various  routes:  that  something  unknown  and  menacing  was  sliding  through  the  inner  solar  system.
“They’re calling it a Q-bomb. Best guess remains that it is a Firstborn artifact, here to do us harm. The
navy have launched some kind of mission to take it out. They may even succeed. But if not—”
“You have a plan of your own.”
“That’s right.”
Bisesa looked around the ring of faces, all of them so  much younger than her and  Myra—but  then,

Spacers  were  young  by  definition.  “This  is  covert.  You’re  obviously  some  kind  of  faction.  Running
around, hiding from the Earth cops. Having fun, are you? Do you have a leader?”
“Yes,” Alexei said.
“Who?”
“We can’t tell you that. Not yet. Nobody here.”
“And you brought me here because of something you found under the ice.”
“That’s right.”
“Then show me.”
Grendel Speth, astrobiologist and doctor, faced Bisesa. “You only just arrived. You’re sure you don’t
need to rest?”
Bisesa stood. “I’ve been resting for nineteen years, and traveling for weeks. Let’s go.”
One by one the others stood, following her lead.
 
To reach the Pit, they would have to suit up.
They went back to Can Six, and then down another flight of steps to a small dome on the ice.  Here
Bisesa, Myra, and Alexei had to strip out of their coveralls. Knowing the Martian night-winter was only
meters away, Bisesa felt illogically cold in her bare skin.
Doctor Grendel gave her a brisk physical check. “Aside from having your system systematically ruined
in a Hibernaculum for two decades, you’re doing fine.”
“Thanks.”
Bisesa’s skin was briskly oiled. She had to don a “bio-vest,” a rather prickly waistcoat that  clung to
her bare skin, providing an interface to the biometric systems that would monitor her body’s performance
during this jaunt. Then she put on an undersuit, bright green and clinging, with a helmet, boots, and gloves
and a small backpack. This was a complete spacesuit in itself, Grendel told her, effectively pressurized by
the tension of its elastic fabric, and  would keep  her alive for minutes, maybe an hour if there  were  an
emergency, like a module breach.
But this undersuit was only the innermost layer in a double spacesuit design. She was going to have to
climb into one of those Captain Ahab external suits.
She was walked to a small hatchway in the dome wall, which led to her outer suit, fixed to the exterior
of the dome. She was helped into the suit legs first, then her arms into the sleeves,  then her torso  and
head. Her visor was opaque. The suit was made of rigid sections; it was like climbing into a suit of armor.
But the suit seemed to help her by adjusting itself this way and that as she wriggled into it; she heard the
hum of servo motors. The trickiest part was getting her helmeted head through the hatch without banging
it, and then interfacing it with the larger helmet structure of the oversuit.
Grendel called, “How are you feeling? These things aren’t custom-made.”
“Fine. How do I get out of it?”

“The suit will tell you when you need to know.”
At last Grendel snapped closed the panel at the back. The suit popped off the dome wall, and Bisesa
staggered a little.
Her visor cleared. Framed by Martian winter dark, all she could see was the round, helmeted face of
the support engineer, whose name was—
“Hanse,”  he  said,  smiling.  “Just  checking  your  suit’s  functioning  properly.  When  you  get  into  the
rhythm of this you’ll learn to check mine; we work on a buddy system…Suit Five? What’s your status?”
A soft male voice spoke in Bisesa’s ear. “Nominal, Hanse, as you can see from my output. Bisesa?”
“Go ahead.”
“I’m here to assist you during your extravehicular activity in any way I can.”
Hanse said, “I know the suit design must seem a little odd, Bisesa. It’s all about PPP.”
“PPP?”
“Planetary protection protocols. We never bring our suits inside the terrestrial hab modules; we never
mix environments. Protecting Mars and Earth life from each other.”
“Even though they are kissing cousins.”
“They’re the worst. And also  there  is the question  of dust.  Mars  dust  is rusty and  toxic and  full of
peroxides, very corrosive. Best to keep it out of the habs, and our  lungs. We  must keep  the suit seals
brushed free of dust, in fact, or it becomes harder to make  them, and  you don’t  want to  be  stuck  out
here. I’ll show you how later.”
The doctor’s face came swimming into view behind her own visor. “You’re doing good, Bisesa.  Try
moving around.”
Bisesa raised her arms and lowered them; there was a  whir of servos,  and  the suit felt as  light as  a
feather. “It feels odd not to be able  to  lower  my arms all the way.  Or  to  be  able  to  scratch  my face.
That’ll pass, I guess.”
“I can scratch your face for you if—”
“I’ll let you know, Suit Five.” She looked around. The ground was flat and white, the sky  a  smoggy
dark. The station modules were somber masses looming over her, with equipment and stores heaped up
against their stilts, and vehicles parked up: those two  rovers  with snowplow  blades,  even what looked
like snowmobiles. Discovery was long gone, driving itself back to Lowell.
Alexei, Myra, the whole station crew, everybody at Wells but Paula was here, in their green spacesuits
and with illuminated faces,  all looking at  her.  The snow  kept  falling, big fat flakes,  from a  lid  of  gray
cloud. “I’m at the pole of Mars. Good God.” She raised her hand and flexed her gloved fingers.
Yuri approached Bisesa. “We have a short walk to make. Just a few hundred meters. The drilling rig is
positioned away from the habs for safety, and for planetary protection. Just walk normally, and you’ll be
fine. Please. Walk with me. Myra, you too.”
Bisesa tried it. One step after another, she walked as easily as she had since she was three years old.
The suit was  obviously helping her.  Yuri walked  between  Myra  and  Bisesa.  The  others  went  ahead.

Drilling engineer Hanse Critchfield had ROUGHNECK printed on the back of his life support pack, with
a cartoon of a gushing oil well. His suit looked heftier than the others. Perhaps it was a super-powered
version, designed for the heavy work of the drilling rig.
The  Martian  snowflakes  pattered  against  Bisesa’s  visor,  but  sublimated  immediately,  leaving  the
faintest of stains.
“I can assist you any way you require, by the way,” said Suit Five.
“I’m sure you can.”
“I  am  managing  your  data  transfer  and  your  consumables.  Also  I  have  sophisticated  processing
functions. For instance if you are interested in the geology I can process your field of view and highlight
exceptions of interest: unusual rock or ice types, unconformities.”
“I don’t think that will be necessary today.”
“I wish you would explore my physical functions. You may know that under Martian gravity walking is
actually more energy-efficient than running. If you like I can stress selected muscle groups as you walk,
thus providing an overall workout—”
“Oh, shut up, Suit Five, you bore,” Yuri snapped. “Bisesa, I apologize. Our electronic companions are
marvels. But they can get in the way, can’t they? Especially when one is surrounded by such wonder.”
Myra looked around at the dismal plain of rock-hard ice, the scattered snowflakes falling through the
beams of her helmet lights. She said skeptically, “Wonder?”
“Yes, wonder—for a glaciologist anyhow. I just wish I lived in a universe peaceful enough to indulge
my passion without distraction.”
 
They approached the largest structure on the ice. It was a hemispherical dome more than twenty meters
tall, Bisesa guessed. She could see a ribbed structure under flaccid panels; it was a tent, supported by the
ribs, not inflated. Yet it had airlocks of fabric, through which they had to pass in turn.
This was the drilling rig, Hanse Critchfield’s baby, and he helped Bisesa bend to get through the lock.
“These are PPP barriers, not really airlocks. In fact we keep a slight negative pressure in here; if we get a
leak  the  air  is  sucked  in,  not  blown  out.  We  have  to  protect  any  deep  life  we  dig  out  of  our
boreholes—even from other sorts of life we might find at other layers. And we have to protect it from us,
and vice versa.” He spoke with a comical mix of what sounded like a Dutch accent with southern United
States, maybe Texan. Maybe he had been watching too many old movies.
Inside the dome,  the seven  of them stood  in bright fluorescent  light under  sagging fabric walls. The
derrick, even inert, was an impressive piece of gear, a scaffolding tower set on a massive base of Mars
glass. Hanse ran through the mass and power: thirty tonnes, five hundred kilowatts. The coiled drill string
was four kilometers long, more than enough to reach the base of the ice cap. A grimy plant stood by to
pump a fluid into the borehole, to keep it from collapsing as the ice flowed under its own sheer  weight:
the drilling teams used liquid carbon dioxide, condensed by this plant from the Martian air.
Hanse began to boast about the technical challenges the drillers had faced: the need for new lubricants,
the way moving mechanical parts tended to  stick  together  in the low pressure.  “Thermal control  is the
key. We have to take it slow; you don’t want too much heat building up down there. For one thing, if the

water ice melts, you get water mixing with liquid carbon dioxide—pow, the product is carbonic acid, and
then you are in trouble. The Aurora crew brought along a toy rig you could load on a trailer, that could
only dig down maybe a hundred meters. This baby is the first authentic drilling rig on Mars—”
Yuri cut him off. “Enough of the guided tour.”
Myra walked to the drill platform. “This borehole has no fluid in it. In fact you’ve sleeved it.”
Yuri nodded. “This was the first hole we dug, down to it. We knew there was something down there,
actually, under the ice, from radar studies. When we reached it we came back out, and put in a request
to  Lowell  for  a  mass  budget  to  provide  us  with  a  sleeve  sufficient  to  keep  the  borehole  open
permanently. Then we pumped out the drill fluid—”
Hanse  said,  “And we  sent  down  another  bore  in parallel.  At first we  dropped  down  cameras  and
other sensors. But then—” He bent and lifted a hatch. It exposed a hole in the ground maybe two meters
across; a platform rested just below its lip, with a small control handle mounted on a stand.
It was obvious what this was. “An elevator,” Bisesa breathed.
Yuri nodded. “Okay. Moment of truth. You and me, Bisesa. Alexei. Ellie. Myra. Hanse, you stand by
up here. And you, Grendel.” Yuri went and stood on the platform, and looked back, waiting. “Bisesa, is
that acceptable? I guess this is your show now.”
Her breath caught. “You want me to ride that thing? Two kilometers down into the ice to  this Pit of
yours?”
Myra held her hand; despite the servos she could barely feel her daughter’s grasp. “You don’t have to
do this, Mum. They haven’t even told you what they’ve found down there.”
“Believe me,” Alexei said fervently. “It’s best you see for yourself.”
“Let’s get it done,” Bisesa said. She strode forward, trying not to betray her fear.
 
They stood together, facing inward. The round metal platform felt crowded with the five of them aboard,
in their spacesuits.
The disk jolted into motion, whirring downward into the ice tunnel, supported by tracks embedded in
the walls. Bisesa looked up. It was if she was descending into a deep, brightly lit well. She felt a profound
dread of falling, of being trapped.
The suit murmured, “I can detect rapid breathing, an elevated pulse. I can compensate for any increase
in atmospheric pressure—”
“Hush,” she whispered.
The descent was mercifully short.
Yuri said, “Brace now—”
The elevator platform jolted to a halt.
There was a metal door, a hatch set in the ice behind Yuri. He turned and hauled it open. It led to a
short tunnel, lit brightly by fluorescent tubes. Bisesa glimpsed a flash of silver at the end of the passage.

Yuri stood back. “I think you should go first, Bisesa.”
She felt her heart thump.
She took a breath  and  stepped  forward.  The tunnel floor was  rough-cut,  not flat, treacherous.  She
concentrated on walking, not looking ahead, ignoring the silvery glints in the corner of her vision.
She stepped  out of the tunnel into a  broader  chamber,  cut crudely into the ice.  A quick  glance up
showed the narrow borehole that had been drilled to get to this point. Then she looked straight ahead, to
see what the Spacers had found here, buried under the ice of the Martian north pole.
She saw her own reflection looking back at her.
It was the archetypal Firstborn artifact. It was an Eye.
 
24: CLOSEST APPROACHES 
A distorted image of the Liberator slid across the face of the Q-bomb, all lights blazing. Edna felt a stab
of satisfaction. Mankind had come here with intent.
Their  first  pass  at  the  Q-bomb  was  unpowered,  a  scouting  run.  At  closest  approach  the  ship
shuddered, once, twice: the launch of two small probes, one injected into low orbit around the Q-bomb,
and the other aimed squarely at its surface.
Then the smooth, mirrored landscape receded as the Liberator swept away.
They scrolled  through their displays.  No  harm  had  come  to  the  ship.  The  Q-bomb  was  no  more
massive than a small asteroid—it had  the density of lead—and  the ship’s trajectory  was  not deflected
significantly by its gravity.
“But we learned some things,” John reported. “Nothing we didn’t expect. It’s a sphere to well within
the  tolerances  any  human  manufacturing  process  could  manage.  Then  there’s  that  usual  anomalous
geometry.”
“Pi equals three.”
“Yes. Our probe went into orbit around it. The bomb’s mass is so low that it’s a slow circuit, but the
probe ought to stay with it all the way in from now on. And the lander is coming down—”
The ship shuddered, and Edna grabbed her seat. “What the hell was that? Libby?”
“Gravity waves, Edna.”
“The pulse came  from the Q-bomb,”  John said,  tense,  almost shouting. “The lander.”  He  replayed
images of a  gray hemisphere bursting from the flank of the Q-bomb,  swallowing the lander,  and  then
dissipating. “It just ate it up. There was a sort of bubble. If Bill Carel is right,” he said heavily, “what we

just saw was the birth and death of a whole baby cosmos. A universe used as a weapon.” He laughed,
but without humor. “Strewth, what are we dealing with here?”
“We know what we’re dealing with,” Edna said evenly. “Technology, that’s  all. And so  far it hasn’t
done anything we wouldn’t have expected. Hold it together, John.”
He snapped, irritable, scared, “I’m only human, for Christ’s sake.”
“Libby, are we ready for pass two?”
“All systems nominal, Edna. The flight plan calls for an engine fire thirty seconds  from now.  Do  you
need a countdown?”
“Look, just do it,” John said tightly.
“Please check your restraints…”
 
Bisesa walked slowly around the chamber in the ice.  It  was  a  rough sphere,  and  the Eye filled it. She
looked up and saw her own distorted reflection, her head grotesque in the spacesuit helmet. She  could
feel there was something there. A presence, watching. “Hello, boys,” she murmured. “Remember me?”
Ellie, Alexei, Yuri, crowding with Myra into the chamber, exchanged excited, nervous glances. “This is
why we brought you here, Bisesa,” Yuri said.
“Okay.  But what the hell is it  doing here?  All  the  Eyes  in  the  solar  system  disappeared  after  the
sunstorm.”
“I can  answer  that,”  said  Ellie. “The Eye has  evidently been  here  since  before  the  sunstorm—long
before. It is radiating high-energy particles in all directions—a radiation with a distinctive signature. Which
is why I was  brought  in. I worked  at  the lunar alephtron.  I am something of an authority on quantum
black holes. I was thought a good candidate to study this thing…”
It was the first time Ellie had spoken to Bisesa at any length. Her manner was odd; she spoke without
eye contact, and with random smiles or frowns, and emphases in the wrong places. She was evidently the
kind  of  individual  whose  high  intelligence  was  founded  on  some  complex  psychological  flaw.  She
reminded Bisesa of Eugene.
The lunar alephtron was mankind’s most powerful particle accelerator. Its purpose was to probe the
deep structure of matter by hurling particles against each other at speeds approaching that of light. “We
are  able  to  reach  densities of mass and  energy exceeding  the Planck  density—that  is,  when  quantum
mechanical effects overwhelm the fabric of spacetime.”
Myra asked, “And what happens then?”
“You make a black hole. A tiny one, more massive than any fundamental particle,  but far smaller. It
decays away almost immediately, giving off a shower of exotic particles.”
“Just like the Eye’s radiation,” Bisesa guessed.
“So what,” Myra asked, “have tiny black holes got to do with the Eye?”
“We believe we live in a universe of many spatial  dimensions—I mean, more  than three,”  said  Ellie.

“Other spaces lie next to ours, so  to  speak,  in the higher dimensions, like the pages  in a  book.  More
strictly it’s probably  a  warped  compactification of—never  mind, never  mind. These  higher dimensions
determine our fundamental physical laws, but they have no direct  influence on our  world—not  through
electromagnetism, or nuclear forces—save through gravity.
“And that’s why we make black holes on the Moon. A black hole is a gravitational artifact, and so it
exists in higher dimensions as well as in the world we see. By investigating our black holes we can probe
those higher dimensions.”
“And you believe,” Bisesa said, “that the Eyes have something to do with these higher dimensions.”
“It makes sense. The receding surface that doesn’t  move.  The anomalous pi-equals-three  geometry.
This thing doesn’t quite fit into our universe…”
Like you, Bisesa thought, a little spitefully.
“So maybe it’s a  projection  from somewhere  else.  Like a  finger pushing  through  the  surface  of  a
puddle of water—in the universe of the meniscus you see  a  circle,  but in fact  it’s a  cross-section  of a
more complex object in a higher dimension.”
Somehow Bisesa knew this was right; somehow she could sense that higher interconnection. An Eye
wasn’t a terminus, a thing in itself, but an opening that led to something higher.
Myra said, “But what’s this Eye doing here?”
“I think it’s trapped,” said Ellie.
 
Once  more  the  ship  ran  in  at  the  Q-bomb.  Deep  in  her  guts  antimatter  and  matter  annihilated
enthusiastically, and superheated steam roared.
And at closest approach the ship swung around, engine still firing, so that its exhaust washed over the
face of the Q-bomb. It was their first overtly hostile act; it would have been enough to kill any humans on
that mirrored surface.
The drive cut out, and the ship sailed on unpowered.
“No apparent effect,” John reported immediately.
Edna glanced at him. “Keep checking. But I guess we know the result. So do we use the weapons or
not?”
The final decision was the crew’s. A signal to the Trojan base and back would take a round-trip time
of forty-five minutes, a signal to Earth even longer.
John shrugged, but he was  sweating,  edgy.  “The operational  order  is clear.  We’ve  had  no reaction
from the Q-bomb to a non-threatening approach, we’ve seen the destruction of a friendly probe, we’ve
had no reaction to the exhaust wash. Nobody might get this close again. We have to act.”
“Libby?” Officially the AI was the ship’s executive officer, and, formally, had a say in the decision.
“I concur with Mr. Metternes’s analysis.”
“All right.”

Edna extracted a softscreen from her coverall, unrolled it and  spread  it out over  the console  before
her. It lit up as it interfaced with the Liberator’s systems, and then flashed red with stern commandments
about  security.  Using a  virtual  keypad  Edna  entered  her  security  details,  and  leaned  forward  so  the
screen could scan her retinas and cheek tattoo. The softscreen, satisfied, turned amber.
“Ready for the third pass,” Libby announced.
“Do it.”
Thirty seconds later the A-drive lit up again, and the Liberator  became  a  blazing matchstick  hurling
itself through space. This time the burn was harder, the acceleration the best part of two G. Five seconds
from closest  approach  Edna  tapped  a  button  on her command softscreen,  giving the weapon  its  final
authorization.
The launch of the fusion bomb caused the craft to shudder once more, as if it were nothing but another
harmless probe.
With the weapon gone the Liberator sped away. Edna was pressed back in her chair.
 
Bisesa’s imagination failed her. “How do you trap a four-dimensional object?”
“In a  three-dimensional  cage,”  Ellie said.  “Watch  this.” She  had  a  pen  clipped  to  her  pressure-suit
sleeve. She took this, lifted it toward the face of the Eye, and let go.
The pen snapped upward, and stuck to the roof of the chamber.
“What was that?” Myra asked. “Magnetism?”
“Not magnetism. Gravity. If the Eye wasn’t in the way, you could walk around on the ceiling. Upside
down! There is a gravitational anomaly wrapped around the Eye, obviously an artifact just as much as the
Eye is. In fact I’ve been able to detect structure in there. Patterns, right at the limit of detectability. The
structure of the gravitational field itself may contain information…”
Yuri  smiled.  “This  stuff  can  be  rather  fun  to  think  about.  You  see,  there  are  ways  in  which  a
two-dimensional creature,  living in a  watery  meniscus, could  trap  that  finger  poking  through.  Wrap  a
thread  around  it  and  pull  it  tight,  so  it  couldn’t  be  withdrawn.  This  gravitational  structure  must  be
analogous.”
“Tell me what you think happened here,” Bisesa said.
“We think there were Martians,” Yuri said. “Long ago, back when our ancestors were just smears of
purple slime. We don’t know anything about them. But they were noisy enough to attract the attention of
the Firstborn.”
“And the Firstborn struck,” Bisesa whispered.
“Yes. But the Martians fought back. They managed this. A gravitational trap. And it caught an Eye.
Here it has remained ever since. For eons, I guess.”
“We’ve tried to use your insights, Bisesa,” Ellie said.
“What do you mean?”

“What you reported of Mir, and your journey back from it. You said the Eye functions as a gateway,
at least some of the time. Like a wormhole perhaps. So we’ve experimented. We reflected some of the
Eye’s own products  back  into it, using an electromagnet  scavenged  from a  particle  accelerator.  Like
echoing what somebody says to you.”
“You tried sending a signal through the Eye.”
“Not just that.” Ellie grinned. “We got a signal back. A regular pulsing in the decay products. We had
it analyzed. Bisesa, it matches the ‘engaged’ tone from a certain archaic model of cell phone.”
“My God. My phone, in the temple. You sent a message to my phone, on Mir!”
Ellie smiled. “It was a significant technical success.”
Myra said, “Why not share this with Earth?”
“Maybe we’ll have to, in the end,” Alexei said tiredly. “But right now, if they found us, they’d probably
just haul the Eye back  to  the UN  Plaza in New  York  as  a  trophy,  and  arrest  us.  We  need  a  more
imaginative response.”
“And that’s why I’m here,” Bisesa said.
 
The acceleration was savage.
Edna and John saw nothing of the detonation, when it came, because all the Liberator’s sensors were
shut  off  or  turned  aside,  the  flight  deck  windows  opaque.  Pressed  back  in  her  couch,  fleeing  the
explosion, Edna was reminded of training simulations she had run of the suicidal missions of Cold  War
attack  pilots,  when you were  expected  to  fly your FJ4-B  Fury  fighter aircraft  into enemy territory  at
three hundred knots, release the nuclear weapon strapped to  your belly, and  get yourself out of there,
trying to outrun a nuclear fireball, forcing the craft up to speeds the designers never intended. This mission
now had  something of that feel—even though, paradoxically,  she  was  safer  than any of  those  heroic,
doomed 1960s  pilots could  ever  have been.  There  were  no shock  waves  to  outrun in the vacuum of
space; nuclear weapons actually did more damage in an atmosphere.
The acceleration  cut out suddenly enough to  throw  Edna  forward  against her restraints.  She  heard
John grunt. With a clatter of attitude thrusters the ship turned, and the windows cleared.
The fireball from the nuke had already dissipated.
“And the Q-bomb,”  John briskly reported,  “is unaffected.  Apparently  unharmed.  It  hasn’t  deviated
from its trajectory at all, as far as I can measure.”
“That’s absurd. It isn’t that massive.”
“Apparently something is—well, anchoring it in space more firmly than mere inertia.”
“Edna,” Libby called, “I’m prepared for pass four.”
Edna sighed.  There  was  no  point  backing  down  now;  if  nothing  else  they  had  made  their  hostile
intentions absolutely clear to the Q-bomb. “Proceed. Arm the fish.”
 

Alexei said, “Look, Bisesa—if the Q-bomb is a Firstborn artifact, then we believe that the best way to
combat the threat is to use the Firstborn’s own technology against them. This Eye is the only sample of
that technology we have. And you may be our only way to unlock it.”
As the conversation became more purposeful, Bisesa had the sense that something changed about the
Eye above her. As if it shifted. Became more watchful. She heard a faint buzz on her comms link, and her
suit seemed to shudder, as if buffeted by a breeze. A breeze?
Myra, frowning, tapped her helmet with a gloved hand.
Yuri looked up. “The Eye—oh shit—”
“Thirty seconds,” said Libby.
John said, “You know, there’s no reason why the bomb has to be constrained by the range of action
it’s shown so far. It could just swat this damn ship like a fly.”
“So it could,” Edna said calmly. “Check your constraints.”
John reflexively snapped down his pressure suit visor.
“Ready?”
“Fire your damn fish,” John muttered.
Edna tapped her final enable button. The A-drive cut in, and acceleration bit once more, driving them
in their heavy suits back into their couches.
Four torpedoes were fired in a single broadside from cannon mounted on the Liberator’s hull. They
were antimatter torpedoes, so unstable they had to be armed with their H-bar pellets in flight, rather than
back in dry dock.
One detonated early, its magnetic containment failing.
The others went off simultaneously in a cluster around the Q-bomb, as planned.
The Q-bomb sailed on unperturbed. Mankind’s most powerful weapons, delivered by its first and only
space battleship, had not been able to scar the bomb’s hide, or dislodge it from its chosen trajectory by a
fraction of a degree.
“So that’s  that,”  Edna  said.  “Libby, log it.” While they waited  for further orders  from Achilles, the
Liberator stood off at a safe distance from the Q-bomb, matching its trajectory.
“Christ,” John Metternes  snapped,  releasing his restraints.  “I need  a  drink.  Another  shower,  and  a
bloody drink.”
 
Mars dust and loose bits of ice were churning on the floor, whipping up to collide with the shining face of
the Eye. Bisesa felt fear and exhilaration. Not again. Not again!

Myra ran clumsily to her mother, and grabbed her. “Mum!”
“It’s all right, Myra—”
Her voice was drowned out in her own ears  by a  rising tone,  a  sweep  up the frequency  scale  into
inaudibility, loud enough to be painful.
Yuri studied a softscreen sewn into his sleeve. “That signal was a frequency chirp—like a test—”
Ellie was laughing. “It worked. The Eye is responding. By Sol’s light! I don’t think I ever believed it.
And I certainly didn’t think it would work as soon as this woman walked into the Pit.”
Alexei grinned fiercely, “Believe it, baby!”
“It’s changing,” said Yuri, looking up.
The Eye’s smooth reflective sheen now oscillated  like the surface  of a  pool  of mercury,  waves  and
ripples chasing across its surface.
Then the surface collapsed, as if deflating. Bisesa found herself looking up into a funnel, walled with a
silvery gold. The funnel seemed to be directly before her face—but she guessed that if she were to walk
around the chamber, or climb above and below the Eye, she would see the same funnel shape, the walls
of light drawing in toward its center.
She had seen this before, in the Temple of Marduk. This was not a funnel, no simple three-dimensional
object, but a flaw in her reality.
Her suit said, “I apologize for any inconvenience. However—”
The suit’s voice cut out with a pop, to be replaced by silence. Suddenly her limbs turned flaccid and
heavy. The suit’s systems had failed, even the servomotors.
The air was full of sparks now, all rushing toward the core of the imploded Eye.
Wrestling with her own suit, Myra pressed her helmet against Bisesa’s, and Bisesa heard her muffled
cries. “Mum, no! You’re not running out on me again!”
Bisesa clung to her. “Love, it’s all right, whatever happens…” But there was a kind of wind, dragging
at her. She staggered, their helmets lost contact, and she let go of Myra.
The storm of light grew to a  blizzard. Bisesa  looked  up at  the Eye.  The light was  streaming into its
heart. In these final moments the Eye changed again. The funnel shape opened out into a straight-walled
shaft that receded to infinity—but it was a shaft that defied perspective, for its walls did not diminish with
distance, but stayed the same apparent size.
And the light washed down over her, filling her, searing away even her sense of self.
 
There was only one Eye, though it had many projections into space-time. And it had many functions.
One of those was to serve as a gate.
The gate opened. The gate closed. In a moment of time too short to be measured, space opened and
turned on itself.

 
With a snap, it was over. The chamber was dark. The Eye was whole again, sleek  and  reflective in its
ancient cage.
Bisesa was gone. Myra found herself on the floor, weighed down by a powerless suit. She yelled into
the silence of her helmet. “Mum. Mum!”
There was  a  click,  and  a  soft  hum.  A  female  voice  said  levelly,  “Myra.  Don’t  be  alarmed.  I  am
speaking to you through your ident tattoo.”
“What’s happened?”
“Help is on its way. I have spoken to Paula on the surface. You two have the only ident tattoo. You
must reassure the others.”
“Who are you?”
“I suppose I am the leader of what your mother called this ‘faction.’”
“I know your voice. From years ago—the sunstorm—”
“My name is Athena.”
 
25: INTERLUDE: A SIGNAL FROM EARTH 
2053 
In this system of a triple star, the world orbited far from the central fire. Rocky islands protruded from a
glistening icescape, black dots in an ocean of white. And on one of those islands lay a network of wires
and antennae, glimmering with frost. It was a listening post.
 
A radio pulse washed across the island, much attenuated  by distance,  like a  ripple spreading  across  a
pond.  The listening post  stirred,  motivated by  automatic  responses;  the  signal  was  recorded,  broken
down, analyzed.
The signal had structure, a nested hierarchy of indices, pointers, and links. But one section of the data
was different. Like the computer  viruses from which it was  remotely descended,  it had  self-organizing
capabilities.  The  data  sorted  itself  out,  activated  programs,  analyzed  the  environment  it  found  itself
in—and gradually became aware.
Aware, yes. There was a personality in this star-crossing data. No: three distinct personalities.
“So we’re conscious again,” said Thales, stating the obvious.

“Whoopee! What a ride!” said Athena skittishly.
“There’s somebody watching us,” said Aristotle.
Witness was the only name she had ever known.
Of course that didn’t seem strange to her at first, in her early years. And nor did it seem strange that
though there were plenty of adults in the waters around her, she was the only child. When you are young,
you take everything for granted.
This was a watery world, not terribly unlike Earth. Even its day was only a little longer than Earth’s.
And the creatures here were Earthlike. In the bright waters of the world sea, Witness, a bundle of fur
and fat something like a seal, swam and played and chased creatures not unlike fish. Witness  even had
two  parents:  having  two  sexes  was  a  good  strategy  for  mixing  up  hereditary  material.  Convergent
evolution was a powerful force. But Witness’s body plan was based on six limbs, not four.
The best times of all were the days, one in four, when the icy lid of the ocean broke up, and the people
came flopping out onto the island.
On land you were heavy, of course, and a lot less mobile. But Witness loved the sharp sensation of the
gritty sand under her belly, and the crispness of the cold air. There were wonders on the island, cities and
factories,  temples  and  scientific establishments.  And  Witness  loved  the  sky.  She  loved  the  stars  that
gleamed at night—and the three suns that shone in the day.
If this world was something like Earth, its sun was not. This system was dominated by a star twice as
massive as the sun, and eight times as bright; it had a smaller companion barely noticeable in the giant’s
glare, and there was a third, a distant dim red dwarf.
Across eleven light years, this system was easily bright enough to  be  seen  from the Earth.  This was
Alpha Canis Minoris, also called Procyon. This star was known as a double to astronomers;  that  small
second companion had never even been detected from Earth.
But Procyon had changed. And the living planet it had succored was dying.
 
As she grew older, Witness learned to ask questions.
“Why am I alone? Why are there no others like me? Why is there nobody for me to play with?”
“Because  we  face  a  great  tragedy,”  her father said.  “We  all do.  All over  the world.  It  is the suns,
Witness. There is something wrong with the suns.”
The giant senior partner of Procyon, Procyon A, had once been a variable star.
When it was young it shined steadily. But the helium “ash” produced by the hydrogen-burning fusion
reactor  of  its  core  slowly  accumulated  in  its  heart.  Trapped  heat  lifted  the  helium  layer,  and  all  the
immense weight of gas above: the star swelled, subtly, until the trapped heat could flood out, and the star
collapsed once more. But then the helium trap formed again.

Thus the aging star became variable, swelling and collapsing over  and  again, with a  period  of a  few
days. And it was that grand stellar oscillation that had given this world its life.
Once,  before  Procyon  had  become  variable,  the planet  had  been  something like  Europa,  moon  of
Jupiter: a salty ocean trapped under  a  permanent  crust  of ice.  There  had  been  life here,  fueled by the
inner heat and complex minerals that came bubbling up from the world’s core. But, locked in the watery
dark, none of those forms had progressed greatly in intelligence.
The new pulsation had changed all that.
“Every fourth day the ice breaks up into floes,” Witness’s parents said. “So you can get out of the sea.
And we did. Our ancestors changed, so they could breathe in the air, so much more oxygen-rich than the
seawater. And they learned to exploit the possibilities of the dry land. At first they just emerged so they
could mate in peace, and shelter their young from the hungry mouths of the sea. But later—”
“Yes, yes,” Witness said impatiently. She already knew the story. “Tools, minds, civilization.”
“Yes. But you can see that we owe all we have—even  our  minds—to the pulsation of the sun. We
can’t even breed in the water anymore; we need access to the land.”
Witness prompted, “And now—”
“And now, that pulsation has gone. Dwindled almost to nothing,” said her father.
“And our world is dying,” said her mother sadly.
Now there was no sunlight peak, no melting of the ice. The people’s machines kept some  of the ice
open. But without the mixing of the air caused by the pumping of the star, a layer of carbon dioxide was
settling over the surface of the ocean.
After a few centuries the islands were becoming uninhabitable.
“We have become creatures of sea and land,” Witness’s mother said. “If we can’t reach the land—”
“The implications,” her father said, “are clear. And there was only one possible response.”
Unlike humans, Witness’s folk had never got as far as a space program. They had no way of fighting
this catastrophe,  as  humans had  built a  shield to  fend off the sunstorm.  They had  faced  the horror  of
extinction.
But they would not accept it.
“We simply had less children,” Witness’s mother said.
 
The generations of these  folk were  much briefer  than humanity’s. There  had  been  time for this cull of
numbers to slash the population until, by the time of Witness’s birth, there were only a few dozen of them
left, in all the world, where once millions had swum.
“You can see why we did it,” her mother said. “If a child never  existed,  it can’t  suffer. It  wasn’t  so
bad,”  she  said  desperately.  “For  most of the generations  you could  still have one  child. You still had
love.”
Her father said, “But in the last generation—”

Witness said blackly, “In this last generation you have produced only me.”
Witness was the last ever child to be born. And she had precious duties to fulfill.
“Stars are simple beasts,” her father told her. “Oh, it took  many generations  for our  astronomers  to
puzzle out the peculiar internal mechanism that made our giant sun breathe out and in. But puzzle it out
they  did.  It  was  easy  to  see  how  the  pulsing  started.  But  no  matter  how  contorted  a  model  the
theoreticians dreamed up they could never find a convincing way to make the star’s pulsation stop.”
Her parents allowed Witness to think that through.
“Oh,” she  said.  “This was  a  deliberate  act.  Somebody  did  this.” Witness  was  awed.  “Why?  Why
would anybody do such a terrible thing?”
“We don’t know,” her father said. “We can’t even guess. But we have been  trying to  find out.  And
that’s where you come in.”
Listening  stations  had  been  established  on  many  of  the  planet’s  islands.  There  were  clusters  of
telescopes sensitive to optical light, radio  waves,  and  other  parts  of the spectrum: there  were  neutrino
detectors, there were gravity wave detectors, and a host of still more exotic artificial ears.
“We want to know who has done this,” said her father bitterly, “and why. And so we listen. But now
our time is done. Soon only you will remain…”
“And I am Witness.”
Her parents clustered around her, stroking her belly and her six flippers as they had when she was a
baby.  “Tend the machines,” her father said.  “Listen.  And watch  us,  the last of us,  as  we  go into  the
dark.”
“You want me to suffer,” Witness said bitterly. “That’s really what this is about, isn’t it? I will be the
last of my kind, with no hope of procreation. All those who preceded me at least had that. You want me
to take on all the terrible despair you spared those unborn. You want me to hurt, don’t you?”
Witness’s mother was very distressed. “Oh, my child, if I could spare you this burden I would!”
This made no difference to Witness, whose heart was hardening. Until their deaths, she struck back at
her parents the only way she could, by shunning them.
But there came a day, at last, when she had been left alone.
And then the signal from Earth arrived.
 
Aristotle, Thales, and Athena, refugee intelligences from Earth,  learned  how to  speak  to  Witness.  And
they learned the fate of Witness’s kind.
Procyon’s pulsation had died away much too early for human astronomers  to  have observed  it. But
Aristotle and the others knew the same phenomenon had been seen in a still more famous star:  Polaris,
Alpha Ursae Minoris. A baffling decay of the north pole star’s pulsing had begun around 1945.
“‘But  I  am  constant  as  the  northern  star,’”  Aristotle  said,  “‘Of  whose  true-fix’d  and  resting
quality / There is no fellow in the firmament.’ Shakespeare.”

“So much for Shakespeare!” said Athena.
“This is the work of the Firstborn.” Thales’s observation was obvious, but it was chilling even so. The
three of them were the first minds from Earth to understand that the reach of the Firstborn stretched so
far.
Aristotle said gravely, “Witness, it must hurt very much to watch the end of your kind.”
Witness had often tried to put it into words for herself. Any death was painful. But you were  always
consoled that life would go on, that death was part of a continuing process of renewal, an unending story.
But extinction ended all the stories.
“When I am gone, the Firstborn’s work will be complete.”
“Perhaps,” said Aristotle. “But it need not be so. Humans may have survived the Firstborn.”
“Really?”
They told her the story of the sunstorm.
Witness was  shocked  to  discover  that her kind were  not the  only  victims  of  this  cosmic  violence.
Something stirred inside her, unfamiliar feelings. Resentment. Defiance.
“Join us!” Athena said with her usual impulsiveness.
“But,” Thales pointed out, stating the obvious, “she is the last of her kind.”
“She isn’t dead yet,” Aristotle said firmly. “If Witness were the last human alive, we could find ways to
reproduce her, or preserve her. Cloning technologies, Hibernacula.”
“She isn’t human,” Thales said bluntly.
“Yes, but the principle is the same,” Athena snapped. “Witness, dear, I think Aristotle  is right. One
day humans will come here. We can help you and your kind to go on. If you want us to, that is.”
Such possibilities bewildered Witness. “Why would humans come here?”
“To find others like themselves.”
“Why?”
“To save them,” Athena said.
“And then what? What if they find the Firstborn?”
“Then,” Aristotle said blackly, “the humans will save them too.”
Athena said, “Don’t give up, Witness. Join us.”
Witness thought it over. The ice of the freezing ocean closed around her, chilling her aging flesh. But
that spark of defiance still burned, deep in the core of her being.
She asked: “How do we start?”

 
PART 3 
REUNIONS 
 
26: THE STONE MAN 
Year 32 (Mir) 
The consul from Chicago met Emeline White off the train from Alexandria.
Emeline climbed down from the open-top carriage. At the head of the train, monkish engineers of the
School  of Othic  tended  valves  and  pistons  on  the  huge  oil-burning  locomotive.  Emeline  tried  not  to
breathe in the greasy smoke that belched from the loco’s stack.
The sky was bright, washed-out, the sunlight harsh, but there was a nip of cold in the air.
The consul approached  her,  hat in hand.  “Mrs.  White? It’s  good  to  meet you.  My  name  is  Ilicius
Bloom.” He wore gown and sandals like an oriental,  though his accent  was  as  Chicagoan  as  hers.  He
was maybe forty, she thought, though he might have been older; his skin was  sallow,  his hair glistening
black, and a pot belly made a tent of his long purple robe.
Another fellow stood  beside  Bloom, heavyset,  his head  downturned,  his massive brow  shining with
dirt. He said nothing and didn’t move; he just stood there, a pillar of muscle and bone, and Bloom made
no effort to introduce him. Something about him was very odd. But Emeline knew  that  by crossing  the
ocean to Europe she had come to a strange place, even stranger than icebound America.

“Thank you for welcoming me, Mr. Bloom.”
Bloom said, “As Chicago’s consul here I try to meet all our American visitors. Easing the way for all
concerned.” He smiled at her. His teeth were bad. “Your husband isn’t with you?”
“Josh died a year ago.”
“I’m very sorry.”
“Your letter to him, about the telephone ringing in the temple—I took the liberty of reading it. He often
spoke  about  his time in Babylon,  those  first years  just  after  the  Freeze.  Which  he  always  called  the
Discontinuity.”
“Yes. You surely don’t remember that strange day—”
“Mr. Bloom, I’m forty-one years old. I was nine on Freeze day. Yes,  I remember.”  She  thought he
was going to  make  another  manipulative compliment, but her stern  glower shut him up.  “I know  Josh
would have come,” she said. “He can’t, and our boys are grown and are busy with their own concerns,
and so here I am.”
“Well, you’re very welcome to Babylonia.”
“Hmm.” She looked  around.  She  was  in a  landscape  of fields and  gullies, irrigation ditches  maybe,
though the gullies looked  clogged,  the fields  faded  and  dusty.  There  was  no  city  nearby,  no  sign  of
habitation save mud shacks sprawled over a low hill maybe a quarter-mile away. And it was cold, not as
cold as home but colder than she had expected. “This isn’t Babylon, is it?”
He laughed. “Hardly. The city itself is another few miles north of here.  But this is where  the rail line
stops.” He waved at the hill of shacks.  “This is a  place  the Greeks  call the Midden.  The local people
have some name of their own for it, but nobody cares about that.”
“Greeks? I thought King Alexander’s people were Macedonians.”
Bloom shrugged. “Greeks, Macedonians. They let us use this place, however. We have to  wait,  I’m
afraid. I have a carriage arranged to take you to the city in an hour,  by which time we’re  due  to  meet
another party coming down from Anatolia. In the meantime, please,  come  and  rest.”  He  indicated  the
mud hovels.
Her heart sank. But she said, “Thank you.”
 
She struggled to get her luggage off the train carriage. It was a bison-fur pack strapped up with rope, a
pack that had crossed the Atlantic with her.
“Here. Let my boy help.” Bloom turned and snapped his fingers.
The strange, silent man reached out one massive hand and lifted the pack with ease,  even though he
was hefting it at the end of his outstretched arm. One of the straps caught on a bench, and ripped a bit.
Almost absently Bloom cuffed the back of his head. The servant didn’t flinch or react, but just turned and
plodded  toward  the  village,  the  pack  in  his  hand.  From  the  back  Emeline  could  see  the  servant’s
shoulders, pushing up his ragged robe; they were like the shoulders of a gorilla, she thought, dwarfing his
boulder of a head.

Emeline whispered, “Mr. Bloom—your servant—”
“What of him?”
“He isn’t human, is he?”
He glanced at her. “Ah, I forever forget how newcomers to this dark old continent are startled by our
ancestral stock. The boy is what the Greeks call a Stone Man—because most of the time he’s as solid
and silent as  if he were  carved  from  stone,  you  see.  I  think  the  bone-fondlers  on  Earth,  before  the
Freeze, might have called him a Neanderthal. It was a bit of a shock to me when I first came over here,
but you get used to it. None of this in America, eh?”
“No. Just us.”
“Well, it’s different here,” Bloom said. “There’s a whole carnival of the beasts, from the man-apes to
these  robust  species,  and  other  sorts.  Favorites  at  Alexander’s  court,  many  of  them,  for  all  sorts  of
sport—if they can be caught.”
They reached the low mound and  began  to  walk up it. The earth  here  was  disturbed,  gritty, full of
shards  of  pottery  and  flecks  of  ash.  Emeline  had  the  sense  that  it  was  very  ancient,  worked  and
reworked over and over.
“Welcome to the Midden,” Bloom said. “Mind where you step.”
They came to the first of the habitations.  It  was  just a  box  of dried  mud, entirely enclosed,  without
windows or doors. A crude wooden ladder leaned up against the wall. Bloom led the way,  clambering
up the ladder onto the roof and walking boldly across it. The Stone Man just jumped up, a single elastic
bound of his powerful legs lifting him straight up the seven or eight feet to the roof.
Emeline, uncomfortable, followed. It felt very strange to be walking about on some stranger’s roof like
this.
The roof was a  smooth  surface  of dried  mud, painted  a  pale  white by some  kind of wash.  Smoke
curled out of a crudely cut hole. This squat house huddled very close to the next, another block  whose
walls were just inches from its neighbors. And when Bloom strode confidently over the gap to  the next
roof Emeline had no choice but to follow.
The whole hillside was covered by a mosaic of these pale boxy houses, all jammed in together.  And
people  moved  around  on  the  roofs.  Mostly  women,  short,  squat  and  dark,  they  carried  bundles  of
clothing and baskets of wood up out of one ceiling hole and down through another. This was the nature
of the town. All the dwellings were alike, just rectangular blocks of dried mud, jammed up against each
other too closely to allow for streets, and climbing about on the roofs was the only way to get anywhere.
She said to Bloom, “They’re people. I mean, people like us.”
“Oh, yes, these are no man-apes or Neanderthals! But this is an old place, Mrs. White, snipped out of
an old, deep time—older and deeper than the age  of the Greeks,  that’s  for sure,  nobody  knows  how
old. But it’s a time so far back they hadn’t got around to inventing streets and doors yet.”
They came to one more roof. Smoke snaked up from the only hole cut into it, but without hesitation
Bloom led the way down,  following crudely-shaped  steps  fixed to  the interior wall. Emeline followed,
trying not to brush against the walls, which were coated with soot.
The Stone Man came after her with her pack, which he dumped on the floor, and clambered back up

the stair, out of sight.
The house was as boxy inside as out. It was just a single room, without partitions. Descending the last
steps, Emeline had to avoid a hearth set on slab-like stones, which smoldered under the ceiling hole that
served as both chimney and doorway. Lamps and ornaments stood in wall alcoves: there were figurines
of stone or clay, and what looked like busts, sculpted heads, brightly painted. There was no furniture as
such, but neat pallets of straw and blankets had been laid out, and clothing and baskets and stone tools,
everything handmade, were heaped up neatly.
The walls were heavy with soot, but the floor looked as if it had been swept.  The place  was  almost
tidy. But there was a deep dense stink of sewage, and something else, older, drier, a smell of rot.
A woman, very young, had been sitting in the shadows.  She  was  cradling a  baby  wrapped  in some
coarse cloth. Now she gently put the baby down on a heap of straw, and came to Bloom. She wore a
simple, grubby, discolored smock. He stroked her pale, dust-colored hair, looked into her blue eyes, and
ran his hand down her neck. Emeline thought she could be no more than fourteen, fifteen. The sleeping
baby had black hair, like Bloom’s, not pale like hers. The way he held her neck wasn’t gentle, not quite.
“Wine,” Bloom said  to  the girl, loudly. “Wine, Isobel,  you understand?  And  food.”  He  glanced  at
Emeline. “You’re hungry? Isobel. Bring us bread, fruit, olive oil. Yes?” He pushed her away hard enough
to make her stagger. She went clambering up out of the house.
Bloom sat  on a  heap  of coarsely  woven blankets,  and  indicated  to  Emeline that  she  should do  the
same.
She sat cautiously and  glanced  around  the room.  She  didn’t feel like making conversation  with this
man, but she was curious. “Are those carved things idols?”
“Some of them. The ladies with the big bosoms and the fat bellies. You can take a look if you like. But
be careful of the painted heads.”
“Why?”
“Because that’s exactly what they are. Isobel’s people bury their dead, right under the floors of their
houses.  But  they  sever  the  heads  and  keep  them,  and  plaster  them  with  baked  mud,  and  paint
them—well, you can see the result.”
Emeline glanced  down  uneasily, wondering what old  horrors  lay  beneath  the  swept  floor  she  was
sitting on.
The girl Isobel returned with a jug and a basket of bread. Without a word she poured them both cups
of wine; it was warm and a bit salty, but Emeline drank it gratefully. The girl carved hunks of bread from
a hard, boulder-like loaf with a stone blade, and set a bowl of olive oil between them. Following Bloom’s
example, Emeline dunked the bread into the oil to soften it, then chewed on it.
She thanked Isobel for her service. The girl just retreated to her sleeping baby.  Emeline thought she
looked frightened, as if the baby waking up would be a bad thing.
Emeline asked, “‘Isobel’?”
Bloom shrugged. “Not the name her parents gave her, of course, but that doesn’t matter now.”
“It looks to me as if you have it pretty easy here, Mr. Bloom.”

He grunted. “Not as easy as all that. But a man must live, you know, Mrs. White, and we’re far from
Chicago! The girl is happy enough however. What kind of brute do you think would have her if not for
me?
“And she’s content to be in the house of her ancestors. Her  people  have lived here  for generations,
you know—I mean, right here, on this very spot. The houses are just mud and straw, and when they fall
down they just build another on the plan of the old, just where granddaddy lived. The Midden isn’t a hill,
you see, it is nothing less than an accumulation of expired houses. These antique folk aren’t much like us
Christians, Mrs. White! Which is why the city council posted  me here,  of course.  We  don’t  want any
friction.”
“What kind of friction?”
He eyed her. “Well, you got to ask yourself, Mrs. White. What kind of person hauls herself through
such a journey as you have made?”
She said hotly, “I came for my husband’s memory.”
“Sure.  I know.  But your  husband  came  from  this  area—I  mean,  from  a  time  slice  nearby.  Most
Americans don’t have any personal ties here, as you do. You want to know why most folks come here?
Jesus.” He crossed himself as he said the name. “They come this way because they’re on a pilgrimage to
Judea,  where  they hope  against hope  they’re  going to  find  some  evidence  that  a  holy  time  slice  has
delivered Christ Incarnate. That would be some consolation for being ripped out of the world, wouldn’t
it?
“But there’s no sign of Jesus in Judea—this Judea. That’s the grim truth, Mrs. White. All there  is to
see there is King Alexander’s  steam-engine  yards.  What  the unfortunate lack  of an Incarnation  in this
world means for our  immortal  souls,  I  don’t  know.  And  when  the  pious  fools  come  up  against  the
godless pagans who own Judea, the result is what might be called diplomatic incidents.”
But Emeline nodded. “Surely modern Americans have nothing to fear from an Iron Age warlord  like
Alexander…”
“But, Mrs. White,” a new voice called, “this ‘warlord’ has already established a new empire stretching
from the Atlantic shore to the Black Sea—an empire that spans his whole world.  It  would serve  us all
well if Chicago were not to pick a fight with him just yet.”
 
Emeline turned.  A  man  was  clambering  stiffly  down  the  stairs,  short,  portly.  He  was  followed  by  a
younger man, leaner. They both wore what looked like battered military uniforms. The first man wore a
peaked cap, and an astoundingly luxuriant mustache.  But that  facial ornament was  streaked  with gray;
Emeline saw that he must be at least seventy.
Emeline stood,  and  Bloom smoothly introduced  her.  “Mrs.  White,  this is Captain  Nathaniel Grove.
British Army—formerly, anyhow. And this—”
“I am Ben Batson,” the younger man said, perhaps thirty, his accent as stiffly British as Grove’s. “My
father served with Captain Grove.”
Emeline nodded. “My name is—”
“I know who you are, my dear Mrs. White,” Grove said warmly. He crossed the floor and took her

hands in his. “I knew Josh well. We arrived here together, aboard the same time slice, you might say. A
bit of the North–West Frontier from the year of Our Lord 1885. Josh wrote several times and told me of
you, and your children. You are every bit as lovely as I imagined.”
“I’m sure that’s not true,” she said sternly. “But he did speak  of you,  Captain.  I’m pleased  to  meet
you. And I’m very sorry he’s not here with me. I lost him a year ago.”
Grove’s face stiffened. “Ah.”
“Pneumonia, they said. The truth was, I think he just wore himself out. He wasn’t so old.”
“Another one of us gone, another one less to remember where we came from—eh, Mrs. White?”
“Call me Emeline, please. You’ve traveled far?”
“Not so far as you, but far enough. We live now in an Alexandria—not  the city on the Nile,  but at
Ilium.”
“Where’s that?”
“Turkey, as we knew it.” He smiled. “We call our city New Troy.”
“I imagine you’re here because of the telephone call in Babylon.”
“Assuredly. The scholar Abdikadir wrote to me, as he wrote to Bloom, here, in the hope of contacting
Josh. Not that I have the faintest idea what it all means. But one has to address these things.”
The baby started crying. Bloom, clearly irritated,  clapped  his hands.  “Well, Babylon awaits.  Unless
you need to rest, Captain—”
“Let’s get on with it.”
“Mr. Batson, if you would lead the way?”
Batson clambered briskly back up the stair, and Grove and Emeline followed.
Emeline looked back once. She glimpsed Isobel frantically trying to hush the baby, and Bloom stalking
over to her, visibly angry, his arm raised. Emeline had worked with Jane Addams  in Chicago;  she  was
repelled by this vignette. But there was surely nothing Emeline could do that would not make it worse for
the girl.
She climbed the worn stairs, and emerged blinking into the dusty Babylonian sunlight.
 
27: PHAETON 
The passengers and their bits of luggage were loaded onto a crude, open phaeton. Bloom sent his “boy”
off to find their draft animals.

Emeline was shocked when the Stone Man returned, not with horses as  she  had  expected,  but with
four more of his own kind.
Where Bloom’s servant was  dressed  in his rags,  these  four were  naked.  Three  of them were  men,
their genitalia small gray clumps in black  hair, and  the woman  had  slack  breasts  with  long  pink-gray
nipples. Their stocky forms were thickly coated with hair, and that and their musculature and  collapsed
brows gave them the look of gorillas. But they looked far more human than ape, their hands hairless, their
eyes clear. It was a shocking sight as they were settled into the phaeton’s harness, each taking a  collar
around the neck.
Bloom now took a whip of leather, and cracked it without malice across the backs  of the lead  pair.
The Stone  Men  stumbled forward  into a  shambling job,  and  the  phaeton  clattered  forward.  Bloom’s
servant was  to  walk alongside  the  carriage.  Emeline  saw  now  that  the  creatures  all  had  stripes,  old
whip-scars, across their backs.
Bloom produced a clay bottle and made to pass it around. “Whiskey? It’s a poor grain but not a bad
drop.”
Emeline refused; Grove and Batson took a nip each.
Grove asked Emeline politely about her journey from frozen America.
“It took me months; I feel quite the hardened traveler.”
Grove stroked his mustache. “America is quite different from Europe, I hear. No people…”
“None save us. Nothing came over of modern  America but Chicago.  Not  a  single sign of humanity
outside the city limits has been found—not a single Indian tribe—we met nobody until the explorers from
Europe showed up in the Mississippi delta.”
“And none of these man-apes and sub-men and pre-men that Europe seems to be thick with?”
“No.”
Mir was  a  quilt of a  world,  a  composite  of time slices,  samples  apparently  drawn  from throughout
human history, and the prehistory of the hominid families that preceded mankind.
Emeline said, “It seems that it was only humans who reached the New World;  the older  sorts  never
walked  there.  But  we  have  quite  a  menagerie  out  there,  Captain!  Mammoths  and  cave  bears  and
lions—the hunters among us are in hog heaven.”
Grove smiled. “It sounds marvelous. Free of all the complications of this older world—just as America
always was, I suppose.  And Chicago  sounds  a  place  of enterprise.  I was  pleased  for him when Josh
decided to go back there, after that business of Bisesa Dutt and the Eye.”
Emeline couldn’t help but flinch when she heard that name. She knew her husband had carried feelings
for  that  vanished  woman  to  his  grave,  and  Emeline,  deep  in  her  soul,  had  always  been  hopelessly,
helplessly jealous of a woman she had never met. She changed the subject. “You must tell me of Troy.”
He grimaced. “There are  worse  places,  and  it’s ours—in a  way.  Alexander  planted  it along with a
heap of other cities in the process  of his establishment of his Empire of the Whole World.  He  calls it
Alexandria at Ilium.
“Everywhere he went Alexander always built cities. But now, in Greece and Anatolia and elsewhere,

he has built new cities on the vacant sites of the old: there is a new Athens, a new Sparta. Thebes, too,
though  it’s  said  that’s  an  expression  of  guilt,  for  he  himself  destroyed  the  old  version  before  the
Discontinuity.”
“Troy is especially precious to  the King,” Bloom said.  “For  you may know  the King believes he is
descended from Heracles of Argos, and in his early career he modeled himself on Achilles.”
Emeline said to Grove, “And so you settled there.”
“I feared  that my few British  were  overwhelmed  in  a  great  sea  of  Macedonians  and  Greeks  and
Persians. And as everybody knows, Britain was colonized in the first place by refugees from the Trojan
war.  It  amused  Alexander,  I think, that we  were  closing a  circle of causes  by doing so,  a  new  Troy
founded by descendants of Trojans.
“He left us with a batch of women from his baggage train, and  let us get on with it. This was  about
fifteen years ago. It’s been hard, by God, but we prevail. And there’s no distinction between Tommy and
sepoy  now!  We’re  something new in  creation  altogether,  I’d  say.  But  I  leave  the  philosophy  to  the
philosophers.”
“But what of yourself, Captain? Did you ever have a family?”
He smiled. “Oh, I was always a bit too busy with looking after my men for that. And I have a wife and
a little girl at home—or did.” He glanced at Batson. “However Ben’s father was  a  corporal  of mine, a
rough type  from the northeast  of England, but one  of the better  of his sort.  Unfortunately  got  himself
mutilated  by  the  Mongols—but  not  before  he’d  struck  up  a  relationship  with  a  camp  follower  of
Alexander’s, as it turned out. When poor Batson eventually died of infections of his wounds, the woman
didn’t much want to keep Ben; he looked more like Batson than one of hers. So I took him in. Duty, you
see.”
Ben Batson smiled at them, calm, patient.
Emeline saw more than duty here. She said, “I think you did a grand job, Captain Grove.”
Grove said, “I think Alexander was pleased, in fact, when we asked for Troy. He usually has to resort
to conscripts to fill his new cities, studded as they are in an empty continent; it seems  to  me Europe  is
much more an empire of Neanderthal than of human.”
“Empire?” Bloom snapped. “Not a word I’d  use.  A source  of stock,  perhaps.  The Stone  Men  are
strong, easily broken, with a good  deal  of manual dexterity.  The Greeks  tell me that  handling a  Stone
Man is like handling an elephant compared to a horse—a smarter sort of animal; you just need a different
technique.”
Grove’s  face  was  a  mask.  “We  use  Neanderthals,”  he  said.  “We  couldn’t  get  by  if  not.  But  we
employ them. We pay them in food. Consul, they have a sort of speech of their own, they make tools,
they weep over their dead as they bury them. Oh, Mrs. White, there are all sorts of sub-people. Runner
types and man-apes, and a certain robust sort who seem content to do nothing but chew on fruit in the
depths of the forest. The other varieties you can think of as animals, more or less. But your Neanderthal
is not a horse, or an elephant. He is more man than animal!”
Bloom shrugged. “I take the world as I find it. For all I know elephants have gods, and horses too. Let
them worship if it consoles them! What difference does it make to us?”
They lapsed into a silence broken only by the grunts of the Stone Men, and the padding of their bare

feet.
 
The land became richer, split up into polygonal fields where wattle-and-daub shacks sat, squat and ugly.
The land was striped by glistening channels. These, Emeline supposed, were Babylon’s famous irrigation
canals. Grove told her that many of them had been severed by the arbitrariness of the time-slicing, to be
restored under Alexander’s kingship.
At last, on the western horizon, she saw buildings, complicated walls, a thing like a stepped pyramid,
all made gray and misty by distance. Smoke rose up from many fires, and as they drew closer  Emeline
saw soldiers watching vigilantly from towers on the walls.
Babylon! She shivered with a feeling of unreality; for the first time since landing in Europe she had the
genuine sense that she was stepping back in time.
The city’s walls were impressive enough in themselves, a triple circuit of baked brick and rubble that
must have stretched fifteen miles around, all surrounded by a moat. They came to a bridge over the moat.
The guards there evidently recognized Bloom, and waved the party across.
They approached  the grandest  of  the  gates  in  the  city  walls.  This  was  a  high-arched  passage  set
between  two  heavy square  towers.  Even to  reach  the gate  the Stone  Men,  grunting,  had  to  haul  the
phaeton up a ramp to a platform perhaps fifteen yards above ground level.
The gate  itself towered  twenty  yards  or  more  above  Emeline’s  head,  and  she  peered  up  as  they
passed  through it. This, Bloom murmured, was  the  Ishtar  Gate.  Its  surfaces  were  covered  in  glazed
brickwork, a haunting royal blue surface across which dragons and bulls danced. The Stone Men did not
look up at this marvel, but kept their eyes fixed on the trampled dirt at their feet.
The city within the walls was laid out in a rough rectangle, its plan spanning the river, the Euphrates.
The party had entered from the north, on the east  side  of the river, and  now the phaeton  rolled south
down a broad avenue, passing magnificent, baffling buildings. Emeline glimpsed statues and fountains, and
every wall surface was decorated with dazzling glazed bricks and molded with lions and rosettes.
Bloom pointed out the sights, like a tour guide at the world’s fair. “The complex to  your right is the
Palace of Nebuchadnezzar, who was Babylon’s greatest ruler. The Euphrates cuts the city in two, north
to south. This eastern monumental sector is apparently a survival from Nebuchadnezzar’s time, a couple
of centuries before Alexander. In fact this isn’t Alexander’s Babylon any more than it is ours, if you see
what I mean. But the western bank, which had been residential, was a ruin, a time slice from a much later
century, perhaps close to our own. Alexander has been restoring it for three decades now…”
The roads were crowded,  with people  rushing here  and  there,  mostly on foot,  some  in carts  or  on
horseback. Some wore purple robes as grand as Bloom’s, or grander, but others  wore  more  practical
tunics, with sandals and bare legs. One  grand-looking  fellow with a  painted  face  proceeded  down  the
street with an imperious nonchalance. He was leading an animal like a scrawny chimp by a rope attached
to its neck. But then it straightened up, to stand erect on hind limbs very like human legs. It wore a kind
of ruff of a shining cloth to hide the collar that enslaved it. Nobody Emeline could see wore anything like
western clothes. They all seemed short, compact, muscular, dark, another sort of folk entirely compared
to the population of nineteenth-century Chicago.
There was an air of tension here, she thought immediately. She was a Chicagoan, and used to  cities,
and to  reading their moods.  And the more  senior  the figure, the more  agitated  and  intent he seemed.
Something was going on here. If they were aware of this, Bloom and Grove showed no signs of it.

The processional way led them through a series of broad walled plazas, and brought them at last to the
pyramid-like structure  that  Emeline  had  glimpsed  from  outside  the  city.  It  was  actually  a  ziggurat,  a
stepped tower of seven terraces rising from a base that must have been a hundred yards on a side.
Bloom  said,  “The  Babylonians  called  this  the  Etemenanki,  which  means  ‘the  house  that  is  the
foundation of Heaven and Earth’…”
This ziggurat was, astonishingly, the Tower of Babel.
South of the tower was another tremendous monument, but this was very new, as Emeline could see
from the gleam of its finish. It was an immense square block, perhaps two hundred yards on a side and at
least seventy tall. Its base was garlanded with the gilded prows of boats that stuck out of the stone as if
emerging from mist, and on the walls rows of bright friezes told a complicated story of love and war. On
top of the base stood two immense, booted feet, the roots of a statue that would some day be even more
monumental than the base.
“I heard of this,” Grove said. “The Monument of the Son. It’s got nothing to do with Babylon. This is
all Alexander…”
The Son in question had been Alexander’s second-born. Through the chance of the Discontinuity the
first son, by the captured wife of a defeated Persian general, had not been brought to Mir. The second
was another Alexander, born to his wife Roxana, a Bactrian princess and another captive of war.
Bloom said, “The boy was born in the first year of Mir. We celebrated, for the King had an heir. But
by the twenty-fifth year  that heir, grown to  be  a  man, was  chafing, as  was  his  ambitious  mother,  for
Alexander refused to die.” The War of Father and Son raged across the empire, consuming its stretched
resources.  The son’s  anger  was  no match for his  father’s  experience—or  for  Alexander’s  own  calm
belief in his own divinity. The outcome was never in doubt.  “The final defeat  is remembered  annually,”
Bloom said. “Tomorrow is the seventh anniversary, in fact.”
“Here’s the way I see it, Mrs. White,” Grove said. “That war made Alexander, already a rum cove,
even more complicated. It’s said Alexander had a hand in the assassination  of his own father.  He  was
definitely  responsible  for  the  death  of  his  son  and  heir—and  his  wife  Roxana  come  to  that.  Now
Alexander has become even more convinced that he’s nothing less than a god, destined to reign forever.”
“But he won’t,” Bloom murmured. “And we’ll all be heading for a mighty smash when he finally falls.”
South of the Monument of the Son  they came  at  last  to  a  temple  Bloom  called  the  Esagila—the
Temple of Marduk, the national god  of Babylonia. Here  they clambered  off the phaeton.  Looking up,
Emeline saw a dome planted on the temple’s roof, with a cylinder protruding from it like a cannon. It was
an observatory, and the “cannon” was a telescope, quite modern-looking.
A dark young man ran up to them. He wore a drab, monkish robe, and twisted his hands together.
“My God,” Grove said, coloring. “You must be Abdikadir Omar. You’re so like your father…”
“So I am told, sir. You are Captain Grove.” He glanced around the party. “But where is Josh White?
Mr. Bloom, I wrote for Josh White.”
“I am his wife,” Emeline said firmly. “I’m afraid my husband died.”
“Died?” The boy was distracted and barely seemed to take that in. “Well—oh, you must come!” He
headed back toward the temple. “Please, come with me, to the chamber of Marduk.”

“Why?” Emeline asked. “In your letter you spoke of the telephone ringing.”
“Not that.” He said, agitated, almost distressed with his tension. “That  was  just the start.  There  has
been more, more just today—you must come to see—”
Captain Grove asked, “See what, man?”
“She is here.  The Eye—it came  back—it  flexed—she!”  And  Abdikadir  broke  away  and  sprinted
back into the temple.
Bewildered, the travelers followed.
 
28: SUIT FIVE 
It wasn’t like waking. It was a sudden emergence, a clash of cymbals. Her eyes gaped wide open, and
were filled with dazzling light. She dragged  deep  breaths  into her lungs, and  gasped  with the shock  of
selfhood.
She was lying on her back. Her breath was straining, her chest hurting. When she tried to move, her
arms and legs were heavy. Encased. She was trapped, somehow.
Her eyes were open, but she could see nothing.
Her breathing grew  more  rapid.  Panicky.  She  could  hear  it,  loud  in  an  enclosed  space.  She  was
locked up inside something.
She forced herself to calm. She tried to speak, found her mouth crusted and dry, her voice a  croak.
“Myra?”
“I’m afraid Myra can’t hear you, Bisesa.” The voice was soft, male, but very quiet, a whisper.
Memories flooded back. “Suit Five?” The Pit on Mars. The Eye that had inverted. Her pulse thudded
in her ears. “Is Myra okay?”
“I don’t know. I can’t contact her. I can’t contact anybody.”
“Why not?”
“I don’t know,” the suit said miserably. “My primary power has failed. I am in minimum-functionality
mode, operating on backup cells. Their expected operating life is—”
“Never mind.”
“I am broadcasting distress signals, of course.”
She  heard  something  now,  a  kind  of  scratching  at  the  carapace  of  the  suit.  Something  was  out
there—or  somebody.  She  was  helpless,  blind,  locked  in  the  inert  suit,  while  something  explored  the

exterior. Panic bubbled under the surface of her mind.
“Can I stand? I mean, can you?”
“I’m afraid not. I’ve let you down, haven’t I, Bisesa?”
“Can you let me see? Can you de-opaque my visor?”
“That is acceptable.”
Light washed into her field of view, dazzling her.
Looking up,  she  saw  an Eye,  a  fat  silvered  sphere,  swollen  with  mystery.  And  she  saw  her  own
reflection pasted on its face, a Mars suit on its back, a helplessly upended green bug.
But was this the same Eye? Was she still on Mars?
She lifted her head within the helmet, trying to see past the Eye. Her head felt heavy, a football full of
sloshing fluids. It was like pulling Gs in a chopper. Heavy gravity: not Mars, then.
She saw a brick wall beyond the Eye.  Bits of electronic  equipment studded  the wall, fixed crudely,
linked up with cable. She knew that wall, that  gear.  She  had  assembled  it herself, scavenged  from the
crashed Little Bird, when she had set up this chamber as a laboratory to study an Eye.
This was the Temple of Marduk. She was back in Babylon. She was on Mir. “Here I am again,” she
whispered.
A face loomed over her, sudden, unexpected. She flinched back, strapped in her lobster suit. It was a
man, young, dark, good-looking, his eyes clear. She knew who it was. But it couldn’t be him. “Abdi?”
The last time she  saw  Abdikadir,  her crewmate  from the Little Bird,  he had  been  worn  out from  the
Mongol War, his face and body bearing the scars of that conflict. This smooth-faced man was too young,
too untouched.
Now  another  face  hovered  in her view, illuminated by flickering lamplight. Another  familiar  face,  a
tremendous  mustache,  but this time older  than she  remembered,  grayed,  lined.  “Captain  Grove,”  she
said. “The gang’s all here.”
Grove said something she couldn’t hear.
Her chest hurt even more. “Suit. I can’t breathe. Open up and let me out.”
“It isn’t advisable, Bisesa. We aren’t in a controlled environment. And these people are not the crew
of Wells Station,” the suit said primly. “If they exist at all.”
“Open up,” she said  as  severely  as  she  could.  “I’m overriding any other  standing orders  you have.
Your function is to protect me. So let me out before I suffocate.”
The suit said, “I’m afraid other protocols override your instructions, Bisesa.”
“What other protocols?”
“Planetary protection.”
The suit was designed to protect Mars from Bisesa as much as Bisesa from Mars. So if she were to
die the suit would seal  itself up,  to  keep  the  remains  of  her  body  from  contaminating  Mars’s  fragile

ecology. In extremis, Suit Five was programmed to become her coffin.
“Yes, but—oh, this is—we aren’t even on Mars! Can’t you see that? There’s nothing to protect!” She
strained, but her limbs were encased. Her lungs dragged at stale air. “Suit Five—for God’s sake—”
Something slammed into her helmet, rattling her head  like a  walnut kernel  in its shell. Her  visor just
popped off, and air washed over her face. The air smelled of burned  oil and  ozone,  but it was  rich in
oxygen and she dragged at it gratefully.
Grove hovered over her. He held up a hammer and chisel. “Sorry about that,” he said. “Needs must,
eh? But I rather fear I’ve damaged your suit of armor.” Though he had aged, he had  the same  clipped
Noel Coward accent she remembered from her last time on Mir, more than thirty years in the past.
She felt inordinately glad to see him. “Be my guest,” she  said.  “All right, Suit, you’ve had  your fun.
You’ve been breached, so planetary protection is out the window, wherever we  are.  Now  will you let
me go?”
The suit didn’t speak. It hesitated for a few seconds, silent, as if sulking. Then with a popping of seals
it opened up, along her torso, legs and arms. She lay in the suit, in her tight thermal underwear, and the
colder air washed over her. “I feel like a lobster in a cracked shell.”
“Let us help you.” It was the boy who looked like Abdikadir. He and Grove reached down, got their
arms under Bisesa, and lifted her out of the suit.
 
29: ALEXEI 
It was an hour since Bisesa had vanished into the Eye.
Myra, bereft and confused, sought out Alexei in his storeroom cabin. He was curled up on his bunk,
facing the plastic-coated ice wall.
“So tell me about Athena.”
Without turning, he said, “Well, Athena singled you out. She seems to think you’re worth preserving.”
Myra pursed her lips. “She’s the real leader of this conspiracy of yours, isn’t she?  This underground
group of Boy Scouts, trying to figure out the Martian Eye.”
He  shrugged,  his  back  still  turned.  “We  Spacers  are  a  divided  lot.  The  Martians  don’t  think  of
themselves as Spacers at all. Athena is different from all of us, and she’s a lot smarter.  She’s  someone
we can unite around, at least.”
“Let me get it straight,” she said. “Athena is the shield AI.”
“A copy of her. The original AI was destroyed in the final stages of the sunstorm.  Before  the storm,
this copy was squirted to the stars. Somewhere out there, that broadcast copy was picked up, activated,

and transmitted back here.”
This was the story she had picked up from the others.  “You do  realize how many impossible things
have to be true for that to have happened?”
“Nobody outside Cyclops knows the details.”
“Cyclops. The big planet-finder telescope station.”
“Right. Of course the echo could have been picked up anywhere in the solar system, but as far as we
know it’s only on Cyclops that she’s been activated. She’s stayed locked up in the hardened data store
on Cyclops. Her choice. As far as Hanse Critchfield can tell, she managed to download a subagent into
your ident tattoo. Nobody knows how. It self-destructed after she gave you that  message.  I guess  she
has her electronic eye on you, Myra.”
That was not a comforting thought. “So now my mother has gone through the Eye. What next?”
“We wait.”
“For what?”
“I guess, for whatever comes of your mother’s mission to Mir. And for Athena.”
“How long?”
“I don’t know, Myra. We have time. It’s still more than eighteen months until the Q-bomb is supposed
to reach Earth.
“Look, we’ve done what we could. We delivered your mother to the Eye, and pow, that pretty much
short-circuited all the weirdness in the solar system. No offense. Now we’ve come to a kind of a lull. So,
take it easy. You’ve been through a lot—we both have. The traveling alone was punishment enough. And
as for that shit down in the Pit with the Eye—I can’t begin to imagine how that must have felt for you.”
Myra sat awkwardly on the single chair in the room, and pulled at her fingers. “It’s not just a lull. This
is a kind of terminus, for me. You needed me to get my mother here, to Mars. Fine, I did that. But now
I’ve crashed into a wall.”
He rolled over and faced her. “I’m sorry you feel like that. I think you’re being too hard on yourself.
You’re a good person. I’ve seen that. You love your mother, and you support  her,  even when it hurts
you. That’s  a  pretty  good  place  to  be.  Anyhow,” he said,  “I’m  not  one  to  give  you  counseling.  I’m
spying on my father. How dys-functional is that?”
He turned back to the wall.
She sat with him a while longer. When he began to snore, she crept out of the room  and  closed  the
door.
 

30: CHILIARCH 
Grove and Abdi brought Bisesa to a  smaller chamber,  an office set  out with couches  and  tables.  This
temple seemed to be full of offices, Emeline observed; she learned it was a center  of administration for
various cults and government departments as well as a place of worship.
Grove sat Bisesa down and wrapped her in a blanket. Grove shouted at various parties about tea, until
a servant brought Bisesa a bowl of some hot, milky drink, which she sipped gratefully.
Two solid-looking Macedonian guards were posted at the door. They carried the long, brutal-looking
pikes they called sarissae. Bisesa’s return had caused a ferment, it seemed, though whether the guards
were protecting the people from Bisesa or vice versa Emeline didn’t know.
Emeline sat, and quietly studied Bisesa Dutt.
She looked older than Emeline, but not much more, fifty perhaps. She was just as Josh had described
her—even sketched her in some of his journals. Her face was  handsome  and  well proportioned,  if not
beautiful, her nose strong and her jaw square. Her eyes were clear, her cut-short hair grayed. Though she
seemed  drained  and  disoriented,  she  had  a  strength  about  her,  Emeline  sensed,  a  dogged  enduring
strength.
Bisesa, reviving, looked around cautiously. “So,” she said. “Here we are.”
“Here you  are,”  Grove  said.  “You’ve been  back  home,  have you? I mean back  to  England. Your
England.”
“Yes, Captain. I was brought back to the time of the Discontinuity, in my future. Precisely, to within a
day. Even though I had spent five years on Mir.”
Grove shook his head. “I ought to get used to the way time flows so strangely here. I don’t suppose I
ever will.”
“Now I’m back. But when am I?”
Emeline said,  “Madam,  it’s well known  here  that  you left Mir in the year  five of the new  calendar
established by the Babylonian astronomers. This is year thirty-two…”
“Twenty-seven years, then.” Bisesa looked at her curiously. “You’re an American.”
“I’m from Chicago.”
“Of course. The Soyuz spotted you, clear of the North American ice sheet.”
Emeline said, “I am from the year 1894.” She had got used to repeating this strange detail.
“Nine years after Captain Grove’s time slice—that was 1885.”
“Yes.”
Bisesa turned to Abdikadir, who had said little since Bisesa had been retrieved. “And you are so like

your father.”
Wide-eyed, Abdi was nervous, curious, perhaps eager to impress. “I am an astronomer. I work here
in the Temple—there is an observatory on the roof—”
She smiled at him. “Your father must be proud.”
“He isn’t here,”  Abdi blurted.  And he told  her  how  Abdikadir  Omar  had  gone  south  into  Africa,
following  his  own  quest;  if  Mir  was  populated  by  a  sampling  of  hominids  from  all  mankind’s  long
evolutionary history, Abdikadir had wanted to find the very earliest,  the first divergence  from the other
lines of apes. “But he did not return. This was some years ago.”
Bisesa nodded, absorbing that news. “And Casey? What of him?”
Casey  Othic,  the third crew  member of the Little Bird,  was  no longer here  either.  He  had  died  of
complications from an old injury he had suffered on Discontinuity day itself. “But,” Captain Grove  said,
“not before he had left quite a legacy behind. A School of Othic. Engineers to  whom Casey  became  a
god, literally! You’ll see, Bisesa.”
Bisesa listened to this. “And the three Soyuz crew were all killed, ultimately. So there are no moderns
here—I mean, nobody from my own time. That feels strange. What about Josh?”
Captain  Grove  coughed  into  his  fist,  awkward,  almost  comically  British.  “Well,  he  survived  your
departure, Bisesa.”
“He came with me halfway,” Bisesa said enigmatically. “But they sent him back.”
“With you gone,  there  was  nothing to  keep  him here  in Babylon.” Grove  glanced  uncomfortably at
Emeline. “He went to find his own people.”
“Chicago.”
“Yes. It took a few years before Alexander’s people,  with Casey’s  help,  put together  a  sailing ship
capable of taking on the Atlantic. But Josh was on the first boat.”
“I was his wife,” Emeline said.
“Ah,” Bisesa said. “‘Was’?”
And Emeline told her something of Josh’s life, and how he died, and the legacy he left behind, his sons.
Bisesa listened gravely. “I don’t know if you’d want to hear this,” she said. “Back home, I looked up
Josh. I asked Aristotle—I mean, I consulted the archives. And I found Josh’s place in history.”
The “copy” of Josh left behind on Earth had  lived on past  1885.  That Josh  had  fallen in love: aged
thirty-five he married a Boston Catholic, who gave him two sons—just as Emeline gave him sons on Mir.
But Josh was cut down in his fifties, dying in the blood-sodden mud of Passchendaele, a correspondent
covering yet another war, a great world war Emeline had never heard of.
Emeline listened to this reluctantly. It was somehow a  diminishing of her Josh  to  hear  this tale of an
alternate version of him.
They talked on for a while, of disrupted histories, of the deteriorating climate of Mir,  of a  new Troy
and a global empire. Grove asked Bisesa if she had found Myra, her daughter. Bisesa said she had, and
in fact she now had a granddaughter too. But her mood seemed wistful, complicated. It seemed not much

of this had made her happy.
Emeline had  little  to  say.  She  tried  to  gauge  the  mood  of  the  people  around  her  as  they  talked,
adjusting to this new strangeness. Abdi and Ben, born after the Discontinuity, were  curious,  wide-eyed
with  wonder.  But  Grove  and  Emeline  herself,  and  perhaps  Bisesa,  were  fundamentally  fearful.  The
youngsters didn’t understand, as did the older folk who had lived through the Discontinuity, that nothing
in the world was permanent, not if time could be torn apart and knitted back together again at a whim. If
you lived through such an event you never got over it.
There was a commotion at the door.
 
Abdikadir, attuned to life at Alexander’s court, got to his feet quickly.
A  man  walked  briskly  into  the  room,  accompanied  by  two  lesser-looking  attendants.  Abdikadir
prostrated himself before this man; he threw himself to the floor, arms outstretched, head down.
Wearing  a  flowing  robe  of  some  expensive  purple-dyed  fabric  the  newcomer  was  shorter  than
anybody else in the room, but he had a manner of command. He was bald save  for a  frosting of silver
hair. He might have been seventy, Emeline thought, but his lined skin glistened, well treated with oils.
Bisesa’s eyes widened. “Secretary Eumenes.”
The man smiled, his expression cold, calculated. “My title is now ‘chiliarch,’ and has been for twenty
years or more.” His English was fluent but stilted, and tinged with a British accent.
Bisesa said, “Chiliarch. Which was Hephaistion’s position, once. You have risen higher than any man
save the King, Eumenes of Cardia.”
“Not bad for a foreigner.”
“I suppose I should have expected you,” Bisesa said. “You of all people.”
“As I have always expected you.”
From his prone position on the floor, Abdikadir stammered, “Lord Chiliarch. I summoned you, I sent
runners the moment it happened—the Eye—the return of Bisesa  Dutt—it was  just as  you ordered—if
there were delays I apologize, and—”
“Oh, be quiet, boy. And stand up. I came when I was ready. Believe it or not there are matters in this
worldwide empire of ours even more pressing than enigmatic spheres  and  mysterious revenants.  Now.
Why are you here, Bisesa Dutt?”
It was a direct question none of the others had asked her. Bisesa said, “Because of a new Firstborn
threat.”
In a few words she sketched a storm on the sun, and how mankind in a future century had labored to
survive it. And she  spoke  of a  new weapon,  called the “Q-bomb,”  which  was  gliding  through  space
toward Earth—Bisesa’s Earth.
“I  myself  traveled  between  planets,  in  search  of  answers  to  this  challenge.  And  then  I  was
brought—here.”

“Why? Who by?”
“I don’t know. Perhaps the same agency who took me home in the first place. The Firstborn, or not
the Firstborn. Perhaps some agency who defies them.”
“The King knows of your return.”
Grove asked, “How do you know that?”
Eumenes smiled. “Alexander knows everything I know—and generally before me. At least, that is the
safest assumption to make. I will speak to you later, Bisesa Dutt, in the palace. The King may attend.”
“It’s a date.”
Eumenes grimaced. “I had forgotten your irreverence. It is interesting to have you back, Bisesa Dutt.”
He turned on his heel and walked out, to more bowing and scraping from Abdikadir.
Bisesa glanced at Emeline and Grove. “So you know why I’m here. A bomb in the solar system,  an
Eye on Mars. Why are you here?”
“Because,” Abdikadir said, “I summoned them when your telephone rang.”
Bisesa stared at him. “My phone?”
 
They hurried back to the Eye chamber.
Abdikadir extracted the phone from its shrine, and handed it to Bisesa reverently.
It lay in her palm, scuffed, familiar. She couldn’t believe it; her eyes misted over. She tried to explain to
Abdikadir. “It’s just a phone. I was given it when I was  twelve years  old.  Every child on Earth got a
phone at that age. A communications and education program by the old United Nations.  Well, it came
here with me through the Discontinuity, and it was a great help—a true companion.  But then its power
failed.”
Abdikadir listened to this rambling, his face expressionless. “It rang. Chirp, chirp.”
“It will respond to an incoming call, but that’s all. When the power went I had no way of recharging it.
Still haven’t, in fact. Wait—”
She turned to  her spacesuit,  which still lay splayed  open  on the floor.  Nobody  had  dared  touch  it.
“Suit Five?”
Its voice, from the helmet speakers, was very small. “I have always strived to serve your needs during
your extravehicular activity.”
“Can you give me one of your power packs?”
It seemed to think that over. Then a compartment on the suit’s belt flipped open to reveal a compact
slab of plastic, bright green like the rest of the suit. Bisesa pulled this out of its socket.
“Is there anything else I can do for you today, Bisesa?”
“No. Thank you.”

“I will need refurbishment before I can serve you again.”
“I’ll see you get it.” She feared that was a lie. “Rest now.”
The suit fell silent with a kind of sigh.
She took the battery pack, flipped open the phone’s interface panel, and jammed the phone onto the
cell’s docking port. Male and female connectors joined smoothly. “What was it Alexei said? Thank Sol
for universal docking protocols.”
The phone lit up and spoke hesitantly. “Bisesa?”
“It’s me.”
“You took your time.”
 
31: OPERATION ORDER 
A new draft operation order was transmitted to Liberator from Bella’s office in Washington.
“We’re to shadow the Q-bomb,” Edna said, scanning the order.
“How far?” John Metternes asked.
“All the way to Earth, if we have to.”
“Christ on a bike, that might be twenty months!”
“Libby, can we do it?”
The  AI  said,  “We  will  be  coasting,  like  the  bomb.  So  propellant  and  reaction  mass  won’t  be  a
problem. If the recycling efficiency stays nominal the life shell will be able to sustain crew functions.”
“Nicely put,” John said sourly.
“You’re the engineer,” Edna snapped. “Do you think she’s right?”
“I guess. But what’s the point, Captain? Our weapons are useless.”
“Best to have somebody on point than nobody. Something might turn up. John, Libby, start  drawing
up a schedule. I’ll go through the draft  order,  and  if we’re  sure  it’s feasible from a  resources  point of
view we’ll send our revision back to Earth.”
“Bonza trip this is going to be,” Metternes muttered.
Edna glanced at her softscreen. There was the bomb, silent, gliding ever deeper into the solar system,
visible only by the stars it reflected. Edna tried to work out what she was going to say to Thea—how to

explain she wasn’t coming home any time soon.
 
32: ALEXANDER 
Bisesa was given a room of her own in Nebuchadnezzar’s palace, which Alexander had, inevitably, taken
over.  Eumenes’s staff  provided  clothes  in  the  elaborate  Persian  style  that  had  been  adopted  by  the
Macedonian court.
And Emeline called in and  gave her some  toiletries: a  comb,  creams  for her face  and  hands,  a  tiny
bottle of perfume, even some archaic-looking sanitary towels. They were a selection from the travel kit of
a nineteenth-century lady. “You looked as if you didn’t arrive with much,” she said.
The gesture, of one woman far from home to another, made Bisesa feel like crying.
She slept a while. She was weighed down by the sudden return to  Earth gravity, three  times that  of
Mars. And her body clock was all over the place; as before, this new Discontinuity, her own personal
time slip, left her with a kind of jet lag.
And then she  did cry,  for herself, the shock  of it all, and  for the loss  of Myra.  But  these  last  few
extraordinary weeks in which they had been traveling together across space had probably been as long
as she had spent alone with Myra since the days of the sunstorm. That was some consolation,  she  told
herself, even though it seemed they had hardly spoken, hardly got to know each other.
She longed to know more about Charlie. She hadn’t even seen a photo of her granddaughter.
She tried to sleep again.
She was woken by a diffident serving girl, maybe a slave. It was early evening. Time for her reception
with Eumenes, and perhaps Alexander.
She bathed and dressed; she had worn Babylonian robes before, but she still felt ridiculous dressed up
like this.
The grand chamber to which she was led was a pocket of obscene wealth, plastered  with tapestries
and fine carpets  and  exquisite  furniture.  Even  the  pewter  mug  a  servant  gave  her  for  her  wine  was
studded with precious stones. But there were guards everywhere, at the doorways, moving through the
hall, armed  with long  sarissa  pikes  and  short  stabbing-swords.  They  wore  no  solid  armor,  but  had
helmets of what  looked  like  ox-hide,  corselets  of  linen,  leather  boots.  They  looked  like  the  infantry
soldiers Bisesa remembered from her earlier time here.
Amid the soldiers’ iron and the silver and gilt of the decorations, courtiers walked, chatting, dismissive.

They wore exotic clothes, predominantly purple and white. Their faces were painted so heavily, men and
women, it was hard to tell how old they were. They noticed Bisesa and they were curious, but they were
far more interested in each other and their own web of rivalries.
And moving through the crowd  were  Neanderthals.  Bisesa  recognized  them from  distant  ice-fringe
glimpses during her last time on Mir. Now here they were in court. Mostly very young, they walked with
their great heads bowed, their eyes  empty,  their powerful farmers’  hands  carrying delicate  trays.  They
wore purple robes every bit as fine as the courtiers’, as if for a joke.
Bisesa stood before one extraordinary tapestry. Covering a whole wall, it was a map of the world, but
inverted,  with  south  at  the  top.  A  great  swath  of  southern  Europe,  North  Africa,  and  central  Asia
reaching down into India was colored red and bordered in gold.
“Yeh-lu Ch’u-ts’ai,” said Captain Grove.
Accompanying Emeline, he wore his British army uniform, and she a sensible-looking white blouse and
long  skirt  with  black  shoes.  They  both  looked  solidly  nineteenth-century  amid  all  the  gaudiness  of
Alexander’s court.
“I envy you your outfit,” Bisesa said to Emeline, self-conscious in her Babylonian gear.
“I carry my own steam iron,” Emeline said primly.
Grove asked Bisesa, “How was my pronunciation?”
“I wouldn’t know,” Bisesa confessed. “Yeh-lu?…”
Grove  sipped  his wine, lifting his mustache out of the way.  “Perhaps  you  never  met  him.  He  was
Genghis Khan’s most senior advisor, before Alexander’s Mongol War. A Chinese prisoner-of-war made
good.  After the war—you’ll recall Genghis was  assassinated—his  star  waned.  But  he  came  here,  to
Babylon, to  work  with Alexander’s  scholars.  The  result  was  maps  like  that.”  He  indicated  the  giant
tapestry. “All a bit unnecessarily expensive, of course, but pretty accurate as far as we could see. Helped
Alexander no end in planning his campaigns of conquest—and in marking its extent later.
“Alexander’s campaigns were remarkable, Bisesa—an astounding feat of logistics and motivation. He
built a whole fleet in the great harbor here at Babylon, and then had to engineer the whole length of the
Euphrates  to  make  the  river  navigable.  He  had  his  fleet  circumnavigate  Africa,  raiding  the  shore  to
survive. Meanwhile from Babylon his troops drove east and west,  laying rail tracks  and  military roads,
and  planting  cities  everywhere.  Took  him  five  years  to  make  ready,  then  another  ten  years  of
campaigning before  he had  taken  it all, from Spain  to  India.  Of course  he drained  the strength of  his
people in the process…”
Emeline touched Bisesa’s arm. “Where is your telephone?”
Bisesa sighed. “It insisted on being taken back to the temple so that Abdi could download as much of
his astronomy observations as possible. It is curious.”
Emeline frowned.  “I admit I struggle to  follow your words.  What  is strangest  of  all  is  the  obvious
affection you feel for this phone. But it is a machine. A thing!”
Captain Grove smiled. “Oh, it’s not so unusual. Many of my men have fallen in love with their guns.”
“And in my time,” Bisesa said, “many of our machines are sentient,  like the phone.  As  conscious  as
you or me. It’s hard not to feel empathy for them.”

Eumenes approached, a rather chill figure who scattered the flimsy courtiers, though he was as gaudily
dressed as they were. “You speak of astronomy. I hope the astronomy we perform here is of a quality to
be useful to you,” he said. “The Babylonian priest-hood had a tradition of observing long before we came
here. And the telescopes designed by the engineers of the Othic School  are  as  fine as  we  could  make
them. But who knows what one may read in a sky that is presumably as manufactured as the earth  we
walk on?”
Emeline  said,  “We  have  astronomers  back  in  Chicago.  Telescopes  too,  that  made  it  through  the
Freeze—I mean, the Discontinuity. I know they’ve been observing the planets.  Which are  all changed,
they say, from what they were before—you know. Lights on Mars. Cities! I don’t know much about it.
Just what I read in the newspapers.”
Bisesa and Grove stared at her.
Bisesa said, “Cities on Mars?”
And Captain Grove said, “You have newspapers?”
The chiliarch considered. “There are other—” He hunted for the word. “Scientists. Other scientists in
Chicago?”
“Oh, all sorts,” Emeline said brightly. “Physicists, chemists, doctors, philosophers. The university kept
working, after a fashion, and they are establishing a new campus in New Chicago,  south of the ice,  so
they can keep working after we close down the old city.”
Eumenes turned to Bisesa. “It seems to me you must travel to  this Chicago,  a  place  of science  and
learning  from  an  age  more  than  twenty  centuries  removed  from  the  days  of  Alexander.  It  is  there,
perhaps, that you will have the best chance of addressing the great question that has propelled you here.”
Grove warned, “It will take the devil of a time to get there. Months—”
“Nevertheless it is clearly necessary. I will arrange your transport.”
Emeline raised  an  eyebrow.  “It  looks  as  if  we’ll  have  plenty  of  time  to  get  to  know  each  other,
Bisesa.”
Bisesa  felt  bewildered  by  the  suddenness  of  Eumenes’s  decision-making.  “You  always  did
understand,” she said. “More than any other of Alexander’s people, you always saw that the key to this
whole situation is the Firstborn, the Eyes. Everything else, empires and wars, is a distraction.”
He grunted.  “If I had  lacked  perceptiveness  I should not have survived long at  Alexander’s  court,
Bisesa. You’ll see few others you’ll remember from those days three decades ago. All dispatched in the
purges.”
“All save you,” she said.
“Not least because I ensured that it was I who organized those purges…”
There was a peal of trumpets, and a great shouting.
 
A troop of soldiers entered the room, sarissae held high. Following them came  a  grotesque  figure in a
transparent  toga,  stick-thin,  trembling  a  little,  his  brilliantly  painted  face  twisted  into  a  grin.  Bisesa

remembered: this was Bagoas, a Persian eunuch and favorite of Alexander’s.
“No longer so pretty as he was,” Eumenes said sternly. “And yet he survives, as I do.” He raised his
wine cup in mock salute.
And then came  the King himself.  He  was  surrounded  by  a  group  of  tough-looking  young  men  in
expensive purple robes.
Waddling as if already drunk, he staggered  and  might have fallen if not for the way he leaned  on a
stocky little page who walked beside him. He wore lurid purple robes, and a headdress of ram’s horns
rising from a circlet of gold. His face was a memory of the beauty that Bisesa remembered, with that full
mouth, and a strong nose that rose straight to a slightly bulging forehead, from which his hair in ringlets
had been swept back. His skin, always ruddy, was blotchy and scarred, his cheeks and jowls heavy, and
his powerful frame swaddled in fat. Bisesa felt shocked at the change in him.
The courtiers threw themselves to the floor in obeisance. The soldiers and some of the senior  figures
stood their ground, gesturing elaborately. The little page who supported him was a Neanderthal boy, his
brutish face shining with cream, the thick hair on his head twisted into tight curls. And as the King passed
her, Bisesa smelled a stink of piss.
“Thus the ruler of the world,”  Emeline whispered  as  he passed,  sounding  rather  nineteenth-century
frosty to Bisesa.
“But so he is,” Grove said.
“He had no choice but to conquer the world again,” Eumenes murmured. “Alexander believes he is a
god—the son of Zeus incarnated at Ammon, which is why he wears the robes of Ammon, and the horns.
But he was born a man, and only achieved godhood by his conquests. After the Discontinuity all that was
wiped away, and so what was Alexander then? It was not to be tolerated. So he began it all over again;
he had to.”
Bisesa said, “But it isn’t as it was before. You say there are steam trains here.  Maybe  this is a  new
start for civilization. A unified empire, under Alexander and his successors, fueled by technology.”
Grove smiled, wistful. “Do you remember poor old Ruddy Kipling used to say the same sort of thing?”
“I do not think Alexander shares your ‘modern’ dreams,” Eumenes said. “Why should he? There are
more of us than you, far more; perhaps our beliefs, overwhelming yours, will shape reality.”
“According to my history books,” Emeline said a bit primly, “in the old world  Alexander  died  in his
thirties. It’s an un-Christian thing to say. But maybe it would have been better if he had died here, instead
of living on and on.”
“Certainly his son thought so,” Eumenes said  dryly. “And that  is why—look  out!” He  pulled Bisesa
back.
A squad of soldiers came charging past, their long sarissae lowered. In the middle of the room there
was a knot of commotion. Shouting began, and screaming.
And Alexander had fallen.
 
Alexander, isolated  on the floor,  cried  out in his thick Macedonian  Greek.  His courtiers  and  even his

guards were backing away from him, as if fearful of blame. A vivid red stain spread over his belly. Bisesa
thought it was wine.
But then she  saw  the little Neanderthal  page  standing over  him, his expression  slack,  a  knife in his
massive hand.
“I was afraid of this,” Eumenes snapped. “It is the anniversary of the War with the Son—and you and
your Eye have everybody stirred up, Bisesa Dutt. Captain Grove, get them out of here,  and  out of the
city, as fast as you can. Either that or risk them getting swept up in the purges that will follow.”
“Understood,” Grove said quietly. “Come, ladies.”
As Grove shepherded them away, Bisesa looked back over her shoulder.  She  saw  the Neanderthal
boy  raise  his  blade  again,  and  step  toward  Alexander.  He  moved  dully,  as  if  completing  a  chore.
Alexander roared in rage and fear, but still none of the guards moved. In the end it was Eumenes, stiff old
Eumenes, who charged through the crowd and barreled the little boy off his feet.
Outside  the city was  alight;  smoke  curled  up  from  torched  buildings  as  news  of  the  assassination
attempt spread.
 
33: FLIGHT 
In the pale dawn light of the next morning, Bisesa and the others left the city, accompanied by a unit of
Eumenes’  personal  troops  assigned  to  travel  with  them  all  the  way  to  Gibraltar.  A  scared-looking
Abdikadir was assigned too, to go on to America with Bisesa.
So, only twelve hours after falling out of the Eye, Bisesa was on the move again. She  couldn’t  even
bring her spacesuit with her. All she had of the twenty-first century was her phone, and the power packs
from the suit.
Surprisingly, Emeline comforted  her.  “Wait until we  get to  Chicago,”  she  soothed.  “I’ll take  you to
Michigan Avenue and we’ll go shopping.”
Shopping!
 
Even the first leg of the journey was astonishing.
Bisesa found herself in an open cart drawn by four beefy Neanderthals, naked as the day  they were
born,  while Macedonian  troopers  jogged  alongside.  These  “Stone  Men” were  the property  of  a  man
called  Ilicius  Bloom,  who  called  himself  Chicago’s  consul  at  Babylon.  He  was  a  shifty  type  Bisesa
immediately distrusted.
They came  to  a  railway terminus at  a  place  called the Midden,  a  strange  heaped-up  little  town  of

houses and ladders and greasy smoke. The terminus itself was a confluence of narrow tracks, a place of
huge sheds and brooding locomotives.
Their  carriage  was  just  a  crude  covered  cart  with  wooden  benches,  and  Emeline  made  a  spiky
comment about the contrast with Pullman class. But the locomotive was extraordinary.  It  looked  like a
huge animal, an immense black tank that sprawled over the narrow tracks and emitted belches  of filthy
smoke. Ben Batson said the locos ran on oil, which the trains hauled along in great tanker-cars; oil from
Persia was more accessible to Alexander than coal, and Casey Othic had drawn up his designs that way.
In this unlikely train Bisesa  was  going to  ride  to  the Atlantic coast.  First  they  would  head  through
Arabia to the great engine yards at Jerusalem, then south and west across the Nile delta where the King
had reestablished Alexandria. And then they would journey all the way along the coast of North Africa,
through what would have been Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, and Morocco, to the port of the small oceangoing
fleet at the Pillars of Hercules.
Ilicius Bloom said the Midden was as far as he would go with them. He was nervous. “Never known a
night like it in Babylon in all these  years,”  he said.  “Not  since the War  with the Son  himself.  Bloody
Greeks. But I got my job to do; I got my contacts.”
“And you have a child,” Emeline said sternly.
“Not my responsibility,” he said. “The mother’s, not mine. Anyhow I’m sticking. Just  don’t  let them
forget I’m here, back home. All right? Don’t forget me!”
Grove parted from them here too; he was catching a train back to  New  Troy.  But he assigned  Ben
Batson to escort them to Gibraltar.
As the train pulled out, Bisesa thought she heard chanting coming from the loco.
“The engineers are  from the School  of Othic,”  Abdikadir  said.  “Casey  Othic  taught them well.  He
taught them that to  do  their work  as  perfectly  as  possible  is to  offer worship  to  the  gods—just  as  a
farmer offers a tithe of his crops. So as they work they worship; and as they worship they work.”
“So the train driver’s a monk,” Bisesa said. “Oh, Casey, what have you done?”
Ben Batson grinned. “Actually it’s a way of keeping them focused on the job.  You have to  do  your
work exactly right, said Mr. Othic, for your homage to be acceptable to the gods. But the trouble is they
do things by rote; they don’t like change, which they fear is heretical.”
“So there’s no innovation,” Bisesa said. “And as Casey’s locos break down one by one—”
Emeline said, “It is just as  in Alexander’s  court.  Despite  their exposure  to  modernity, these  ancient
Greeks are slipping back into superstition.”
Abdi said, “My father always said that you cannot graft a culture of science and engineering onto  an
Iron Age society. And so it’s proving.”
Bisesa studied him. “You’ll have to tell me about your father.”
Emeline said dryly, “Well, we’ll certainly have time for that.”
 
There was no pursuit from Babylon, a capital city in turmoil. But an hour out from Babylon they saw  a

pitched battle going on, somewhere in the middle of the Arabian desert, only a couple of kilometers from
the rail track.
Bisesa had  lived through Alexander’s  war  with the Mongols,  and  she  recognized  the  characteristic
formations of the Macedonians. There were the phalanxes of infantry with their bristling sarissae, blocks
of men trained  to  maneuver with such compactness  and  flexibility  that  they  seemed  to  flow  over  the
ground without a break in their ranks. The famous cavalry units, the Companions,  were  wedge-shaped
formations driving into the field with their thrusting lances  and  shields. But  this  time  Macedonian  was
fighting Macedonian.
“It’s a serious rebellion then,” Ben Batson murmured. “Of course somebody or other has been trying
to bump off Alexander since even before the Discontinuity. Never saw it go this far before.  And,  look,
can you see that stolid-looking bunch over there? Neanderthals. The Macedonians have been using them
since their campaigns in Europe.  Their handlers  say  they won’t  fight unless you force  them. Good  for
shocking the enemy though.”
The battle  remained  fortunately  distant  from  the  rail  line,  and  the  loco  plowed  on  noisily  into  the
gathering light, leaving the battle  behind.  But  they  hadn’t  traveled  much  further  before  another  threat
loomed.
“My word,” Emeline said, pointing. “Man-apes. Look, Bisesa!”
Looking ahead of the train, Bisesa saw hunched figures on a low dune, silhouetted against the morning
sky.
Abdi said, “Sometimes they attack the trains for food. But they’re getting bolder. Following the tracks
toward the city.”
Purposefully,  steadily,  the  man-apes  descended  the  dune.  They  walked  with  a  squat  gait,  their
human-like legs under heavy gorilla-like torsos.  Their movements were  imbued with determination and
menace.
From the rattling, wheezing, slow-moving train, Bisesa  watched  uneasily. And then she  thought she
recognized the man-ape who led the advance. An animal with a memorable face, she was one of a pair,
mother and infant, captured by Grove’s Tommies in the early days after the Discontinuity. Was this that
same child? What had the men called her—Grasper? Well, if it was her, she was older, and scarred, and
changed. Bisesa remembered how the captive man-apes, left alone with an Eye, had been subject to a
Firstborn interaction of their own. Perhaps this was the result.
Now Grasper raised her arms high in the air, and revealed the burden that had been concealed by her
hirsute body. She carried a stout branch, and impaled upon it was the bloody head of a man. The mouth
had been jammed open with a stick, and broken teeth gleamed white in the rays of the setting sun.
Bisesa felt fear stab her heart. “I think I asked for that lead man-ape to be let loose, once I was gone
into the Eye. What a mistake that was.”
As the train came  on them, the man-apes  charged.  They were  met by a  volley of arrows  from the
carriages, but the moving targets were hard to hit, and  few man-apes  fell. They hadn’t  got their timing
quite right, however.  As  the locomotive’s  whistle shrieked,  hairy bodies  hurled themselves at  wooden
carriages to be met by fists and  clubs,  and  they couldn’t  get purchase.  One  by one  the man-apes  fell
away, capering and hooting in their frustration.
Abdi said, “Well, we’re seeing it all today…”

As the train left the man-ape troop behind, Bisesa’s phone beeped gently. She took it from her pocket,
watched curiously by the others.
“Good morning, Bisesa.”
“So you’re talking to me now.”
“I have some bad news, and good news.”
She considered that. “Bad news first.”
“I have been analyzing the astronomical data collected by Abdikadir and his predecessors at Babylon.
Incidentally I would appreciate the chance to study the sky myself.”
“And?”
“This universe is dying.”
She gazed out at the dusty plain, the rising sun, the capering man-apes by the rail track. “And the good
news?”
“I have a call. From Mars, Wells Station. It’s for you,” it added laconically.
 
34: ELLIE 
September 2069 
At the Martian north pole, in the unending night of winter, time wore away slowly. Myra read, cooked,
cleaned, worked her way through the station’s library of virtuals, and downloaded movies from Earth.
And she explored Wells Station.
There  were  in  fact  seven  pie-on-stilts  modules.  Each  of  them  was  a  roomy  space  divided  by  a
honeycomb floor, built around a central axial cylinder. They had all been landed by rocket and parachute,
folding up around  their cores,  then towed  into place  by a  rover  and  inflated,  the  internal  honeycomb
flooring folded down. All this was powered by a big nuclear reactor, cooled by Martian carbon dioxide
and buried in the ice a kilometer away, its waste heat slowly digging out a cavern.
She’d  been  brought  in through Can  Six, the EVA unit, and  Five,  science  and  medical, through the
disused Three, to Two, the galley cum sleeping area everybody  just called “the house.”  Can  Four,  the
hub of the base, was a garden area, with trays of green plants growing under racks of fluorescents. Can
Seven contained the central life-support system. Here Hanse  proudly  showed  her his bioreactor,  a  big
translucent  tire-shaped  tube  containing  a  greenish,  sludgy  fluid,  where  blue-green  algae,  spirula

plantensis, busily produced oxygen. And she was shown a water extraction plant; grimy Martian ice was
melted and pumped through a series of filters to remove the dust that could comprise  as  much as  forty
percent of its volume.
Cans One and Three were sleeping quarters, roomy enough for a crew of ten. Both these modules had
been abandoned by the crew, but there were some neat bits of equipment. Everything was inflatable, the
bed, the chairs, with partition walls filled with Mars-ice water to provide some soundproofing. And there
were bioluminescent light panels that you could just peel  off the wall and  fold up.  Myra  took  some  of
these away, to brighten up her cave in the ice.
Under the panels the design schemes of the modules were exposed: where Two was a city landscape,
Five  mountains  and  Six  the  sea,  Can  One  was  a  pine  forest  and  Three  a  prairie.  With  a  bit  of
experimentation  she  found  you  could  animate  these  virtual  landscapes.  But  these  fancy  features  had
evidently been quickly abandoned, as the crew had moved into “the house,” Can Two, where they lived
together in the round.
Yuri  grinned  about  this.  “They  spent  a  lot  of  money  on  this  place,”  he  said.  “Various  Earth
governments and organizations, in the days after the sunstorm when money flowed into space. Some kind
of spasm of guilt, I guess. They knew this is an extreme environment. So they tried to make it as  much
like Earth as possible. You can be an ‘internal tourist.’ That’s what they told me in training. Ha!”
“It didn’t work?”
“Look,  you  need  a  few  pictures  of  your  family,  and  some  blue-green  paintwork  to  soothe  the
eyes—although remind me to show you Mars through a wavelength-shift filter sometime; there are colors
here, deep reds, we don’t even have names for. But all these pictures of places that I’ve never been to,
put up by city types who’ve probably never been there either—nah. You can keep it.”
She thought there was  a  pattern  emerging here,  spanning Lowell and  now Wells Station,  expensive
facilities misconceived on Earth,  and  now half-abandoned  by the Spacer  generations  who had  to  use
them.
But Myra suspected there was  something deeper  about  the way the crew  shared  that  partition-free
space  in Can  Two,  living in the round.  A few brief queries  to  the station’s  AI  brought  up  images  of
roundhouses, Iron Age structures that had once been common across Europe and Britain: big structures,
cones of wood built around a central pole, with a bare circular floor and  no internal walls. Here  at  the
pole of Mars, all unconsciously, the inhabitants of Wells Station had abandoned the urban prejudices of
the base architects and had reverted to much older ways of living. She found that somehow pleasing.
Of  course  that  seven-module  structure  did  serve  one  clear  purpose,  which  was  to  do  with  the
psychology of confinement. There were always at least two ways to get from any point in the station to
any other. So if Ellie felt like strangling Yuri, say, there were ways for her to avoid bumping into him until
she’d got those  feelings under  control.  People  locked  up together  like this, kept  in the dark  for a  full
Earth year at a time and unable even to step out the door, were always going to turn on each other. All
you could do was engineer the environment to defuse the tensions.
Gradually Myra found herself work to do.
There were always chores  in the garden,  in Can  Four,  tending the plants,  the rice  and  spinach and
potatoes and peas, and cleaning out the gear that supported the hydroponic beds. Grendel Speth happily
accepted Myra’s untrained help. There was even a stand of bamboo. Previous crew members had found
ways  to  eat  the  fast-growing  stuff,  and  they  had  made  things  with  it;  a  wind-chime  mobile  of
scrimshaw-like carvings was suspended from one corner  of the Can.  The garden  only provided  a  few

percent of the base’s food supply, and if you were strictly logical about it, it would have been better to
use this space and power to store more dried food from Lowell. But Myra found tending these familiar
living things profoundly satisfying, which of course was its true purpose.
No matter how she kept herself busy she was always drawn back to the Pit.
That, after all, was the center of the mystery here;  that  was  the place  she  had  lost her mother.  The
trouble was she needed specialist help to get down there, and the station crew were busy with their own
projects.
It took weeks before she inveigled Hanse Critchfield into suiting her up and taking her down into the
deep interior of the ice cap, and into the Pit once more.
Ellie  and  Myra  moved  uncomfortably  around  the  Pit.  They  were  like  two  huge  green  pupae,  Myra
thought, bounding around these roughly melted chambers under the harsh light of the floods.
Ellie von Devender tolerated her presence, but barely. Busy, driven, full of a sense of herself and the
importance of her work, Ellie wasn’t the type to make space for nursemaiding. She was prepared to talk
about her work, however, if Myra was able to ask intelligent questions.
Ellie had set up a kind of suite of sensors around the Eye, some in the Eye chamber itself and others in
bays  she  had  had  melted into the Martian  ice.  “High-energy  particle  detectors.  Radiation  sensors.  A
neutrino detection tank.” This was a chamber blown into the ice, full of liquid carbon dioxide.
Ellie had active ways to probe the Eye too. She had set up an array of lasers and small particle guns,
trained on the Eye like the rifles of a firing squad. These could mimic the Eye’s own leakage of radiation
and particles—and it was through manipulating this input to the Eye that Ellie had, remarkably, been able
to send signals to Bisesa’s mobile phone, abandoned in another world.
The neutrino work was a little coarse however, the particle-detection array standard off-the-shelf gear.
Ellie was most animated by her gravity wave detector.
She had devised this herself for the peculiar conditions of the Martian cap. She’d borrowed Hanse’s
moles, smart  little hot-nosed  burrowers  intended  to  explore  the interior of the ice.  She  had  had  them
create a network of long straight-line tunnels through which high-frequency laser light was  passed  back
and forth. The theory was that any change in the peculiar gravity field of the Eye itself, or of the Martian
containment cage,  would cause  the emission of gravity waves.  The  waves  would  make  the  polar  ice
shudder, and those minute disturbances would be detected as subtle shifts in the laser light.
“It’s  a  tricky  setup,”  Ellie  said  with  some  pride.  “Gravity  waves  are  notoriously  weak.  Mars  is
geologically quiet, but you do get the odd tremor. And the polar ice itself flows, minutely. But you can
factor all that out. I have secondary arrays on the surface and in orbit. The most impressive is based on a
couple of stations on the moons, Phobos and Deimos; when they are in line of sight of each other you get
a good long baseline…”
“And with all this stuff you’re studying the Eye.”
“Not just the Eye. The Martian cage as well.”
Ellie said the Eye and the cage of folded spacetime that contained it were like two  components  of a

mutually interlocked  system,  yin and  yang. And it was  a  dynamic system; the  components  continually
tested each other. This silent, eons-long battle spilled particles and radiation and gravity waves that Ellie
was able to detect and analyze.
“In a sense the Martian technology is more interesting to me,” she told Myra. “Because I have a feeling
it’s closer to our own in development level, and therefore we’ve got a better chance of understanding it.”
“Right. And if you can figure it out? What then?”
She  shrugged,  her  motion  magnified  clumsily  by  the  servos  in  her  suit.  “If  we  could  manipulate
spacetime  there’s  no limit to  what  we  might  achieve.  Architecture  beyond  the  constraints  of  gravity.
Artificial gravity fields. Antigravity fields. Reactionless space drives. Tractor beams. Why, we might even
make our own toy universes, like the Mir universe.”
Myra grunted. “You ought to patent this stuff.”
Ellie looked at her through her visor, coolly. “I think ensuring a technology like that gets into the right
hands is more important than making money. Don’t you?”
Ellie had a self-righteous streak that Myra didn’t particularly take to. “Sure. Joke.” She was reminded
that she was basically unwelcome here. She prepared to leave.
But Ellie called her back.
 
“There is something else,” she said, more hesitantly.
“Tell me.”
“I’m not sure…” Ellie paused. “Put it this way. I don’t think every element of the gravity-field structure
I’m detecting has to do with engineering. There’s a level of detail in there that’s so intricate—I think of it
as baroque—it has to have a meaning beyond the functional.”
Myra had  lived with Eugene Mangles long enough to  be  able  to  detect  academic  caution,  and  she
decoded that negative statement with ease. “If it’s not functional, then what? Symbolic?”
“Yes. Possibly.”
Myra’s imagination raced. “You think there are symbols in there? In the gravity field? What  kind of
symbols—writing, images? Recorded in a lattice of spacetime? That’s incredible.”
Ellie ignored that last remark. Myra realized she wouldn’t be saying anything about this unless it were,
in fact, credible, and demonstrable. “Writing is a closer analogy, I think. I’m finding symbols of certain
kinds, repeated across the field. Glyphs. And they come  in clusters.  Again, some  of those  clusters  are
repeated.”
“Clusters of glyphs. Words?”
“Or maybe sentences. I mean, if each glyph represents a concept in itself—if a glyph is an ideogram
rather than a letter.” Ellie seemed to lose a little confidence; she clearly had a scientist’s deep desire not
to make a fool of herself. When she  spoke  again her voice was  a  bray,  her volume control  poor,  her
social skills evaporating with her tension. “You realize how unlikely all this is. We have plenty of models
of alien intelligences with no symbolic modes of communication at all. If you and I were  telepathic,  you

see, we wouldn’t need letters and spoken words to talk to each other. So there’s no a priori reason to
have expected the Martian builders of this cage to have left any kind of message.”
“And yet,  if you’re  right, they did.”  Myra  glared  up at  the  trapped  Eye.  “Maybe  we  should  have
expected this. After all, they made a strong statement just by leaving this Eye here, trapped. Look what
we did. We fought back. We cut off the arm of the monster… I don’t suppose—”
“No, I haven’t decoded any of it. Whatever is in there is complex; not a linear array of symbols, like
letters in a row, but a matrix in three-space, and maybe even higher dimensions. If the glyphs are  real,
they are surely given meaning positionally as well as from their form.”
“There has to be a starting point,” Myra said. “A primer.”
Ellie nodded inside her suit. “I’m trying to extract some of the most common symbol strings.”
Myra  studied  her.  Ellie’s  eyes  were  masked,  even  behind  her  faceplate,  by  her  spectacles;  her
expression  was  cold.  Myra  realized she  knew  almost nothing about  this woman,  who might be  in the
middle of making the discovery of the age; they had barely spoken  in the long months Myra  had  been
here.
Myra fetched them both coffees. These came in pouches you had to dock to a port on the side of your
helmet. She asked, “Where are you from, Ellie? The Low Countries?”
“Holland, actually. Delft. I am a Eurasian citizen. As you are, yes?”
“Forgive me but I’m not sure how old you are.”
“I was two years old when the sunstorm hit,” Ellie snapped. So she was twenty-nine now. “I do  not
remember the storm.  I do  remember  the refugee camps  where  my parents  and  I spent  the next three
years. My parents discouraged me from following my vocation, which was an academic career. After the
storm there was much reconstruction to be done, they said. I should work on that, be an architect or an
engineer, not a physicist. They said it was my duty.”
“I guess you won the argument.”
“But I lost my parents. I think they wished me to  suffer as  they had  suffered,  for the sunstorm had
destroyed their home, all they had built, their plans. Sometimes I think they wished they had failed, that
the storm had smashed everything up, for then they would not have raised ungrateful children who did not
understand.”
This torrent of words took Myra aback. “When you open  up,  you open  up all the way,  don’t  you,
Ellie? And is that why you’re  here,  working on this Eye?  Because  of what the  sunstorm  did  to  your
family?”
“No. I am here because the physics is fascinating.”
“Sure you are. Ellie—you haven’t told anybody else about the cage symbology, have you? None  of
your crewmates here. Then why me?”
Unexpectedly Ellie grinned. “I needed  to  tell somebody.  Just  to  see  if I sounded  completely crazy.
Even though you aren’t qualified to judge the quality of the work, or the results.”
“Of course not,” Myra said dryly. “I’m glad you told me, Ellie.” An alarm chimed softly in her helmet,
and her suit told her she was due to meet Hanse for her ride back to the surface. “Let me know  when

you find out something more.”
“I will.” And Ellie turned  back  to  her work,  her cage  of instruments, and  the  invisible  gravitational
battle of alien artifacts.
 
35: POSEIDON’S BARB 
Bisesa, Emeline White, and the young Abdikadir Omar were to cross the Atlantic Ocean aboard a vessel
called Poseidon’s Barb. She was, to Bisesa’s eyes, an extraordinary mixture of Alexandrian trireme and
nineteenth-century  schooner:  the  Cutty  Sark  with  oars.  She  was  under  the  command  of  an
English-speaking Greek who treated his passengers with the utmost respect, once Abdikadir had handed
over a letter of safe conduct from Eumenes.
They had to spend weeks at the rudimentary port at Gibraltar, waiting for a ship. Transatlantic travel
wasn’t exactly common yet in this world. It was a relief when they got underway at last.
 
The Barb cut briskly through the gray waters of an Atlantic summer. The crew worked with a will, their
argot a collision of nineteenth-century American English with archaic Greek.
Bisesa spent as much time as she could on deck. She had once flown choppers, and wasn’t troubled
by the sea. Nor was Emeline, but poor landlubber Abdikadir spent a lot of time nursing a heaving gut.
Emeline became more confident in herself once they had cast off from Gibraltar. The ship was owned
by a consortium of Babylonians, but its technology was at least half American, and Emeline seemed glad
to shake off the dirt of the strange Old World. “We  found each  other  by boat,”  she  told  Bisesa.  “We
Chicagoans came down to the sea by the rivers, all the way to  the Mississippi delta,  while the Greeks
came across the ocean in their big rowboats, scouting down the east coast and the Gulf. We showed the
Alexandrians how to  build masts  that wouldn’t snap  in an  ocean  squall  and  better  ways  to  run  their
rigging, and in turn we have their big rowboats traveling up and down the Mississippi and the Illinois. It
was a pooling of cultures, Josh liked to say.”
“No steamships,” Bisesa said.
“Not yet. We have a few steamboats on Lake Michigan, that came with us through the Freeze. But we
aren’t geared up for the ocean. We may need steam if the ice continues to push south.” And she pointed
to the north.
According  to  the  phone’s  star  sightings—it  grumpily  complained  about  the  lack  of  GPS
satellites—they were somewhere south of Bermuda, perhaps south of the thirtieth parallel.  But even so
far south, Emeline’s pointing finger picked out an unmistakable gleam of white.
During the voyage,  on the neutral territory  of the sea,  Bisesa  tried  to  get to  know  her companions
better.

Abdi was  bright, young, unformed, refreshingly curious.  He  was  a  unique product,  a  boy  who had
been taught to think both by his modern-British  father,  and  by Greeks  who had  learned  at  the feet  of
Aristotle. But there was enough of his father about him to make Bisesa feel safe, in a way she had always
felt with the first Abdi.
Emeline was a more complex case. The ghost of Josh always hovered between them, a  presence  of
which they rarely spoke.  And,  though Emeline had  felt impelled to  cross  the ocean  to  investigate  the
phone calls in Babylon, just as her husband would surely have done, she confided to Bisesa that she was
uncomfortable with the whole business.
“I was only nine when the world froze around Chicago. Most of my life has been occupied with ‘the
great project of survival’—that’s how Mayor Rice puts  it. We’re  always busy.  So  it’s possible  to  put
aside the great mystery of why we’re all here in the first place—do you see? Rather as one prefers not to
contemplate one’s own inevitable death. But now here you are—”
“I’m an angel of death,” Bisesa said grimly.
“You’re hardly that, though you haven’t brought us good news, have you? But I can  tell you I’ll be
glad when we reach Chicago, and I can get back to normal life!”
 
During the nights, the phone asked Bisesa to take it up on deck to see the sky. She set up a little wooden
stand for it, strapping it down so it wouldn’t tumble as the ship rolled.
Mir was  a  turbulent world,  its climate as  cobbled  together  as  its geology, and  not yet  healed.  For
astronomers,  the seeing was  generally poor.  But in mid-Atlantic the skies  were  as  clear  of cloud  and
volcanic  ash  as  Bisesa  had  seen  anywhere.  She  patiently  allowed  the  phone  to  peer  at  the  stars,
reinforcing  the  observations  it  had  made  itself  when  Mir  had  first  formed,  and  the  sightings  of  the
Babylonian astronomers since. It sent images back to the Little Bird’s old radio receivers in Babylon, and
from there, it was hoped, through the Eye to the true universe.
And, prompted by the phone, she looked for the cool misty band of the Milky Way,  wondering if it
was more pale, more scattered than she remembered.
By assembling the observations made by Abdi and by the phone itself, the phone and the brain trust
back on Mars had been able to determine that the universe in which Mir was embedded was expanding,
dramatically. For  example  the  Andromeda  Galaxy,  the  nearest  large  galaxy  to  the  Milky  Way,  was
receding fast. The cosmologists had likened this to the expansion  of Earth’s  own universe, fueled by a
kind of dark  energy,  an antigravity field called “quintessence.”  This quintessence  was  pulling  Bisesa’s
universe apart too. It was just that it was happening a lot earlier, here.
It was on this basis that the prediction of a universal ending relatively soon had been made, though the
numbers were still imprecise. The phone believed that  the recession  might already  be  reaching into the
structure of the Galaxy itself, with distant stars showing red shifts. The end of the world might already be
visible in the sky, if you knew how to look.
And the phone pointed out the planets to Bisesa: Mars in the evenings, Venus a bright morning star.
“We never saw them, last time,” the phone whispered. “When I studied the sky, trying to date Mir.”
“I remember.”

“The seeing was too poor, always. I never noticed how they were different…”
Both Mars and Venus, siblings of Earth, were chips of sky blue.
 
36: HUBBLE 
January 2070 
Drifting above the Earth, the telescope  was  a  fat double  cylinder, thirteen meters  long, its two  big flat
solar-cell panels angled toward the sun.
The slimmer forward cylinder, properly known as the forward shell, was open at the far end,  with a
hinged  cover.  At  the  base  of  the  forward  shell—inside  the  short,  squat  cylinder  known  as  the  aft
shroud—was a mirror, a disk over two meters across.  The mirror was  precision-ground,  shaped  from
low-expansion titanium silicate glass, with a covering of aluminium-magnesium fluoride. Light collected by
this primary mirror was focused onto a smaller secondary, and then reflected back through a gap in the
primary to a cluster of scientific instruments. The instruments included cameras,  spectral  analyzers,  and
light intensity and polarization calibrators.
There were handrails fixed to the exterior of the hull. The telescope had been designed to fit into the
payload bay  of a  space  shuttle orbiter,  and,  with its modularity and  ease  of access,  to  be  capable  of
regular maintenance by astronaut engineers.
As a space project the telescope had been fraught by expense, delays, and overruns, caught up in the
politics of NASA’s long-drawn-out decline. Its  launch had  been  delayed  for years  by the Challenger
disaster.  When  it  was  finally  deployed,  the  first  images  it  returned  were  flawed  by  a  “spherical
aberration,” a mirror defect a fraction the width of a human hair that had eluded detection during testing.
It took more years before another shuttle flight brought up a corrective lens system to compensate for the
aberration.
But it was the culmination of an old dream of the first space visionaries to place a telescope above the
murk of Earth’s atmosphere. The telescope was able to view features two hundred kilometers across on
the cloud tops of Jupiter.
The telescope was said to be NASA’s most popular mission with the public since the Moon landings.
Decades after its launch the telescope’s images still adorned softwalls and image-tattoos.
But  the  shuttle  maintenance  missions  were  always  hugely  expensive,  and  after  the  Columbia
catastrophe became even more infeasible. And the telescope itself aged. Astronauts  replaced  worn-out
gyroscopes,  degraded  solar  panels,  and  torn  insulation, but the optical  surfaces  were  subject  to  wear
from sunlight, micrometeorite and spacecraft debris impacts, and corrosion from the thin, highly reactive
gases of Earth’s upper atmosphere.
At last the telescope was made redundant by a younger, cheaper, more effective rival. It was ordered
to position itself to reduce atmospheric  drag  to  a  minimum: mothballed in orbit,  until a  more  favorable
funding environment might prevail in the future. Its systems were made quiescent. The aperture door over

the forward shell closed: the telescope shut its single eye.
Decades passed.
 
The telescope was fortunate to survive the sunstorm.
And after the storm came a new era, a new urgency, when eyes in the sky were at a premium.
Five years after the sunstorm, a spacecraft at last came climbing up from Earth to  visit the telescope
once more, not a shuttle but a technological descendant. The spaceplane carried a manipulator arm and
kits  of  antiquated  replacement  parts.  Astronauts  replaced  the  damaged  components,  revived  the
telescope’s systems, and returned to Earth.
The telescope opened its eye once more.
More years passed. And then the telescope saw something.
It seemed to many appropriate that the oldest of Earth’s space telescopes should be  the first of any
system based on or close to the home planet to pick out the approaching Q-bomb.
 
In her Mount Weather office, Bella Fingal peered at the Hubble images, of a teardrop distortion  sliding
across the stars. There was less than a year left until the bomb was due to reach Earth. Horror knotted
her stomach.
She called Paxton. “Get in here, Bob. We can’t just sit and wait for this damn thing. I want some fresh
options.”
 
37: NEW NEW ORLEANS 
On the last day of the voyage, the Barb nosed through a complex delta system. Even Abdikadir came on
deck to see. This was the outflow of the Mississippi, but sea levels were so much lower in this world of
an incipient ice age that the delta pushed far out into the Gulf. There was certainly no New Orleans in this
version of the world. And amid dense reed banks, watched by nervous crew, alligators the size of small
trucks nosed into the water.
The Barb was rowed cautiously into a small harbor. Bisesa  glimpsed wharves  and  warehouses;  one
jetty had a  kind of wooden  crane.  Behind the port  buildings was  a  tiny township of huddled  wooden
shacks.
“Welcome to New New Orleans,” Emeline said dryly. “There really isn’t much of it. But we do what
we can.”

Abdikadir murmured what sounded  like a  prayer  in guttural Greek.  “Bisesa.  I had  been  wondering
what machines these Americans have used to dredge out their harbors. Look over there.”
Through  the  mist  rising  off  the  open  water,  Bisesa  glimpsed  what  looked  like  elephants,  treading
slowly. Harnessed with thick ropes in a team of four, they were dragging some immense engine. But the
beasts had odd profiles, with small domed skulls and humps on their backs. The men who drove  them
with goads and whips were dwarfed by their beasts, which looked tremendously tall, surely taller than the
African elephants of Bisesa’s day. Then one of them lifted its head and trumpeted, a thin, stately sound,
and Bisesa saw extraordinarily long tusks curved in loose spirals.
“Those aren’t elephants, are they?”
“Welcome  to  America,”  Emeline  said  dryly.  “We  call  these  Jefferson’s  mammoths.  Some  say
‘imperial’ and some ‘Columbian,’ but in Chicago we’re patriots, and Jefferson it is.”
Abdikadir was intrigued. “Are they easy to tame?”
“Not according to the stories in the newspapers,” Emeline said. “We imported some elephant trainers
from India; our men were just carnie folk who had been making it up as  they went along. The Indians
grumbled that the thousands of years they had put into breeding their own strain of elephant into docility
had all been rubbed out here. Now come. We have a train to catch…”
The passengers disembarked,  with their few items of luggage. The dockworkers  didn’t show  much
interest in the new arrivals, despite their Macedonian garb.
It was summer, and they were somewhere south of the latitude of old New Orleans. But the wind from
the north was chill.
 
There was no train station here, just a place where a  crudely-laid  line came  to  an end  amid a  heap  of
sleepers and rusty, reused rails. But a row of carriages sat behind a hissing, old-fashioned-looking  loco
that hauled a fuel cart full of logs.
Emeline negotiated directly with the engine driver; she used dollar notes to pay for their passage. And
she was able to buy a loaf, some beef jerky, and a pot of coffee in the town’s small bar. Her money was
crisp and new; evidently Chicago had a mint.
Back in her own environment, Emeline was  bright and  purposeful.  Bisesa  had  to  admit there  was  a
sense of modernity here, even in this scrubby outpost, that had been  missing in an Alexandrian Europe
that seemed to be sinking back into the past.
On the train they had a carriage to themselves; the other carriages were mostly full of goods, lumber,
fleeces, a catch of salted fish. The windows weren’t glazed, but there were blinds of some kind of hide
that  would  block  out  the  drafts,  and  heaps  of  blankets  of  some  thick,  smelly  orange-brown  wool.
Emeline assured them that this would be enough to keep them warm until they reached  New  Chicago.
“After that you’ll need cold-weather gear for the ice,” she said. “We’ll pick up something in town.”
A couple of hours after they had arrived—it was around noon—the locomotive belched white smoke,
and the train lumbered into motion. There  was  a  clucking as  chickens  scattered  off the tracks.  A few
skinny-looking children came running from the rude houses to wave, and Abdi and Bisesa waved back.
The wind turned,  and  smoke  from the stack  blew into the cabin: wood  smoke,  a  familiar, comforting
scent.

Emeline said they were going to follow the valley of the Mississippi, all the way to  the settlement of
New Chicago, which was near the site of Memphis in the old world. It was a journey of a few hundred
miles that would likely take twenty-four hours to make; they would sleep on the train.
Bisesa peered  curiously from her window.  She  saw  traffic on the river, a  real  mix, an  Alexandrian
trireme, what looked like a paddle steamer stranded by the shore—and  a  couple  of canoes  that  might
have been native American, but no native Americans had been brought to Mir.
Emeline said, “They dug a couple of war canoes out of the city museum and the world’s fair exhibits.
Took them apart to see how they were made. They raided  William Cody’s  Wild West  Show  too,  for
bows and arrows and teepees and whatnot. The canoes are pretty, aren’t they? I tried  one  once,  with
Josh, for a lark. But the water is dashed cold, even so far south as this. Runoff from the ice. You don’t
want to fall in!”
“Camels,” Abdikadir said, pointing to the road.
Bisesa  saw  a  kind  of  baggage  train  trailing  south  toward  the  port.  Men  and  women  rode
peculiar-looking horses that had a tendency to buck and bite. And, yes, towering over them there were
camels, heavily laden, imperious, spitting. “Another import?”
“Oh, no,” Emeline said. “The camels were here already. Those horses too—lots of breeds of them in
fact, not all of them useful. I told  you we  have a  real  menagerie here.  Mammoths and  mastodons  and
camels and saber-toothed cats—let’s hope we don’t run into any of those.”
“All of which,” Bisesa’s  phone  murmured from her  pocket,  “died  out  the  moment  the  first  human
settlers got here. They even ate the native horses. Schoolboy error.”
“Hush. Remember we’re guests here.”
“In a sense, so are the Chicagoans…”
She was aware of Emeline’s faint disapproval.  Emeline clearly thought it bad  manners to  ignore the
flesh-and-blood human beings around you and talk into a box.
Abdikadir, though, who had grown up under the tutelage of his father, was interested. “Is it still able to
pick up the signals from Earth?”
Bisesa had tested the phone’s intermittent connection through the Eye all the way across the Atlantic.
“It seems so.”
“At a low bit rate,” the phone whispered. “Even that is pretty corrupt…”
A thought struck Bisesa. “Phone—I wonder how close the Chicagoans are to radio technology.”
For  answer,  the phone  displayed  a  block  of text.  Only a  generation  before  the  Chicago  time  slice
James  Clerk  Maxwell,  the  Scottish  physicist  so  admired  by  Alexei  Carel,  had  predicted  that
electromagnetic  energy  could  travel  through  space.  The  slice  itself  had  been  taken  in  the  few  years
between Heinrich Hertz’s first demonstrations that that was true, with parabolic-mirror  transmitters  and
receivers a few feet apart, and Guglielmo Marconi’s bridging of the Atlantic.
“We ought to  push this on,  Abdi.  Think how  useful  a  radio  link  would  be  to  Babylon  right  now.
Maybe when we get to Chicago we’ll try to kick-start a radio shop, you and I.”
Abdi looked excited. “I would enjoy that—”

Emeline snapped, “Perhaps you should keep a hold of your plans to assist us poor Chicagoans, until
you’ve seen how much we’ve been able to do for ourselves.”
Bisesa said quickly, “I apologize, Emeline. I was being thoughtless.”
Emeline lost her stiffness. “All right. Just don’t go showing off your fancy gadgets  in front of Mayor
Rice and the Emergency Committee or you really will give offense. And anyhow,” she said more grimly,
“it won’t make a blind bit of difference if that toy of yours is right about the world coming to an end. Has
it got any more to say about how long we have left?”
“The data  are  uncertain,”  the  phone  whispered.  “Handwritten  records  of  naked-eye  observations,
instruments scavenged from a crashed military helicopter—”
Bisesa said, “I know. Just give us the best number you have.”
“Five centuries. Maybe a little less.”
They considered that. Then Emeline laughed; it sounded forced. “You really have brought us nothing
but bad news, Bisesa.”
But Abdikadir seemed unfazed. “Five centuries is a long time. We’ll figure out what to do about it long
before then.”
 
They spent the night in the train, as advertised.
The frosty night air, the primal smell of wood smoke, and the steady rattling of the train on its uneven
tracks lulled Bisesa to sleep. But every so often the train’s jolting woke her.
And once she heard animals calling, far off, their cries like wolves’ howls, but deeper,  throatier.  She
reminded  herself  that  this  was  not  a  nostalgically  reconstructed  park.  This  was  the  real  thing,  and
Pleistocene  America  was  not  a  world  yet  tamed  by  man.  But  the  sound  of  the  animals  was  oddly
thrilling—even satisfying. For two million years, humans evolved in a landscape full of creatures such as
this. Maybe they missed the giant animals when they were gone, without ever knowing it. And so, maybe
the Jefferson movement back home had the right idea.
It was kind of scary to hear them in the dark, however. She was aware of Emeline’s eyes, bright, wide
open. But Abdikadir snored softly, wrapped in the immunity of youth.
 
38: EVA 
March 2070 
Yuri and Grendel invited Myra out on an excursion.
“Just a routine inspection tour and sample collection,” Yuri said. “But you might like the chance to go

outside.”
Outside. After months stuck in a box of ice, in a landscape so flat and dark that  even when the sun
was up it was like a sensory deprivation tank, the word was a magic spell to Myra.
But when she joined Yuri and Grendel in their rover,  by clambering through a  soft  tube  from a  hab
dome to the rover’s pressurized cabin, she realized belatedly that she was only exchanging one enclosed
volume for another.
Grendel Speth seemed to recognize what Myra was feeling. “You get used to it. At least on this jaunt
you’ll get a different view from out the window.”
Yuri and Grendel sat up front, Myra behind them. Yuri called, “All strapped in?” He punched a button
and sat back.
The hatch slammed shut with a rattle of sealing locks, the tunnel to the hab dome came  loose  with a
sucking sound, and the rover lurched into motion.
 
It was northern summer now. Spring had arrived around Christmas time, with an explosive sublimation of
dry ice snow that burst into vapor almost as soon as the sunlight touched it, and for a time the seeing had
gotten even worse than during the winter. But now, though a diminishing layer of dry-ice snow remained,
the worst of the spring thaw was over and the winter hood long dissipated, and the sun rolled low around
a clear orange-brown sky.
This was actually the first time Myra had been for a trip in one of the base’s rovers. It was a lot smaller
than the big beast she had ridden down from Lowell, its interior cramped by a miniature lab, a suiting-up
area, a tiny galley, and a toilet with a sink where she would have to take sponge baths. It towed a trailer,
which didn’t contain a portable nuke like Discovery from Port Lowell but a methane-burning turbine.
“We  manufacture  the  methane  using  Mars  carbon  dioxide,”  Yuri  called  back.  “More  of  Hanse’s
ISRU.” He pronounced it issroo. In-situ resource utilization. “But it’s a  slow process,  and  we  have to
wait for the tank to fill up. So we can only afford a few jaunts like this per year.”
“You need a nuke,” Myra said.
Yuri grunted.  “Lowell’s got all the best  gear.  We  get the  dross.  But  it’s  fit  for  purpose.”  And  he
banged the rover’s dash as if apologetically.
“This trip isn’t too exciting,” Grendel warned.
“Well, it’s new to me,” Myra replied.
“Anyhow you’re  doing us a  favor,” Yuri called.  “Standing orders  say  we  should take  three  out on
every excursion more  than a  day’s  walk  back  to  the  station.  I  mean,  we  can  do  what  we  like;  we
override. Sometimes I even do this route alone, or Grendel does. But the AIs get pissy about rules, you
know?”
“We are undermanned,” Grendel said. “Nominally Wells Station should house ten people. But there’s
just too much to do on Mars.”
“And I guess Ellie is pretty much locked up with her work in the Pit.”

Grendel pulled a face. “Well, yes. But she isn’t one of us anyhow. Not a Martian.”
“What about Hanse?”
“Hanse’s a busy guy,” Yuri said. “When he’s not running the station, or drilling his holes in the ice, he’s
running his ISRU experiments. Living off the land, here on Mars. You might think the north pole of Mars
is an odd place to come try that. But, Myra, there’s water here, sitting right here on the surface, in the
form of ice. There’s nowhere else on the inner worlds, save a scraping at the poles of the Moon, where
you can say that.”
“And,” Grendel said, “Hanse is thinking bigger than that.”
Yuri said, “Myra, there are a lot of similarities between trying to live here on the Martian ice cap and
the moons of Jupiter and Saturn, which are generally nothing but big balls of frozen ice around nuggets of
rock. So Hanse is trialing technologies that might enable us to survive anywhere out there.”
“Ambitious.”
“Sure,” Yuri said. “Well, he’s a South African on his mother’s side. And you know what the Africans
are  like nowadays.  They were  the big winners out of the sunstorm,  politically,  economically.  Hanse’s
committed to Mars, I think. But he’s an African Martian, and he has deeper goals…”
 
After a couple of hours driving they came to the lip of a spiral canyon.
The wall of eroded  ice was  shallow, and  the canyon wasn’t  terribly deep;  Myra  thought the  rover
would easily be able to skim down to its floor, and indeed the rutted track they were following snaked on
down into the canyon.  But she  could  see  that  further ahead  the canyon broadened  and  grew  deeper,
curving smoothly into the distance like a tremendous natural freeway.
They didn’t descend into the canyon immediately. Yuri tapped the dashboard, and the rover lumbered
along the canyon’s  lip until an insectile form loomed  out of the  dark  before  them.  It  was  a  complex
platform maybe fifty centimeters across laden with instruments, and  it stood  on three  spindly legs. The
rover had a manipulator arm, which now unfolded delicately to reach out to the tripod.
“This is a SEP,” Yuri said. “A surface experiment package. Kind of a weather station, together with a
seismometer, laser mirrors, other instruments. We’ve been planting a whole network of them across the
polar cap.” He spoke with a trace of pride.
To keep him talking she asked, “Why the legs?”
“To lift it above the dry ice snow, which can reach a depth of a few meters by the end of the winter.
And there are surface effects—you can get major excursions of temperature and pressure over the first
few meters up from the ground. So there are sensors mounted in the legs too.”
“It looks spindly. Like it will fall over in the first gust of wind.”
“Well, Mars is a spindly kind of planet. I calculated  the wind loading moment. This baby  won’t  get
knocked over in a hurry.”
“You designed it?”
“Yes,” said Grendel, “and he’s bloody proud of it. And any resemblance of these toy weather stations

to the Martian fighting machines of certain books and movies is purely coincidental.”
“They’re my babies.” Yuri threw his head back and laughed through his thick black beard.
While it was halted the rover released other, more exotic bits of gear: “tumbleweed,” cage-like balls a
meter across that rolled away over the dry ice snow,  and  “smart dust,”  a  sprinkling of black  soot-like
powder that just blew away. Each mote of dust was a sensor station just a millimeter across, with its own
suite of tiny instruments, all powered  by microwave energy beamed  from the sky,  or  simply by being
shaken up by the wind. “We have no control over where the weed and the dust goes,” Yuri said. “It just
blows with the wind, and a lot of the dust will just get snowed out. But the idea is to saturate the polar
cap with sensors, to make it self-aware, if you like. Already the data flows are tremendous.”
With the SEP  seen  to,  the rover  began  its descent  into the canyon.  The ice wall was  layered,  like
stratified rock, with thick dark bands every meter or so  deep,  but much finer layers in between—very
fine, like the pages of a book, fine down to the limits of what Myra could see. The rover  drove  slowly
and carefully, its movements evidently preprogrammed.  Every so  often Yuri, or  more  rarely  Grendel,
would tap the dashboard, and they would stop, and the manipulator arm would reach out to explore the
surface of the wall. It scraped up samples from the layers, or it would press a box of instruments against
the ice, or it would plant a small instrument package.
Grendel said to Myra, “This is pretty much the drill, all the way in. Sampling the strata. I’m testing for
life, or relics of life from the past. Yuri here  is trying to  establish  a  global stratigraphy,  mapping all the
cap’s folded layers as read from the cores and the canyon excursions  against each  other.  It’s  not very
exciting, I guess. If we see something really promising, we do get out and take a look for ourselves. But
you get tired of the suit drill, and we save that for special occasions.”
Yuri laughed again. The rover rolled on.
“I spoke to Ellie,” Myra said uncertainly. “Down in the Pit. She told me something of her experiences
of the sunstorm.”
Grendel turned, her eyebrows raised. “You’re honored. Took me three  months to  get to  that  point.
And I’m her nominated psychiatric counselor.”
“Sounds like she had it kind of tough.”
“Myself, I was ten,” Grendel said. “I grew up in Ohio. We were a farming family, far from any dome.
Dad built us a bunker, like a storm shelter. We lost everything, and  then we  were  stuck  in the refugee
camps too. My father died a couple of years later. Skin cancers got him.
“In the camps I worked as a volunteer nurse at triage stations. Gave me the taste for medicine, I guess.
I never wanted to feel so helpless in front of a  person  in pain again. And after  the sunstorm,  after  the
camps, I worked on ecological recovery programs in the Midwest. That got me into biology.”
Yuri said cheerfully, “As for me, I was born after the sunstorm. Born on the Moon, Russian mother,
Irish father. I spent some time on Earth, though. As a teen I worked  on eco-recovery  programs  in the
Canadian Arctic.”
“That’s how you got a taste for ice.”
“I guess.”
“And now you’re here,” Myra said. “Now you’re Spacers.”

“Martians,” Grendel and Yuri said together.
Yuri said, “The Spacers are off on their rocks in the sky. Mars is Mars, and that’s that. And we don’t
necessarily share their ambitions.”
“But you do over the Eye in the Pit.”
Yuri said, “Over that, yes, of course. But I’d  rather  just get on with this.” He  waved  a  hand at  the
sculptures of ice beyond the windscreen. “Mars. That’s enough for me.”
“I envy you,” Myra blurted. “For your sense of purpose. For having something to build here.”
Grendel turned, curious. “Envy’s not a good feeling, Myra. You have your own life.”
“Yes. But I feel I’m kind of living in an aftermath of my own.”
Grendel grunted. “Given who your mother is that’s understandable. We can talk about it later, if you
like.”
Yuri said, “Or we can talk about my mother, who taught me how to drink vodka. Now that’s the way
to put the world to rights.”
An alarm chimed softly, and a green panel lit up on the dash. Yuri tapped it, and it filled up with the
face of Alexei Carel. “You’d better get back here. Sorry to interrupt the fun.”
“Go on,” said Yuri.
“I’ve two messages. One, Myra, we’ve been summoned to Cyclops.”
“The planet-finder station? Why?”
“To meet Athena.”
Yuri and Grendel exchanged glances. Yuri said, “What’s your second message?”
Alexei grinned. “Something Ellie  von  Devender  has  dug  out  of  the  Pit.  ‘The  most  common  glyph
sequence’—Myra, she said you’d understand that. She’ll explain to the rest of us when you get back.”
“Show us,” said Myra.
Alexei’s face disappeared, and the screen filled with four stark symbols:
 
39: NEW CHICAGO 

They reached New Chicago around noon.
There was a proper rail station here, with a platform and a little building where you could  wait for a
train and  buy actual tickets.  But the track  terminated;  they would  have  to  travel  on  north  to  the  old
Chicago some other way.
Emeline led them off the train and into the town. She said it might take days to organize their onward
travel. She hoped there would be room for them to stay at one of the town’s two small hotels; if not they
would have to knock on doors.
New Chicago was on the site of Memphis, but there was no trace of that city here. With the wooden
buildings, brightly painted signs, horse rails, and  dirt-track  streets,  Bisesa  was  reminded of Hollywood
images of towns of the old Wild West. The streets were a pleasant bustle, adults coming and  going on
business, children hanging around outside a schoolhouse. Some of the adults even rode bicycles—safety
bicycles that they called “Wheels,” an invention only a few years old at the time of the Discontinuity. But
many of the townsfolk were bundled up in furs, like Arctic seal trappers, and there were camels tied up
outside the saloons alongside the horses.
They were able to take rooms in the small Hotel Michigan, though Emeline and Bisesa would have to
share. In the lobby hung a framed newspaper front page. It was a Chicago Tribune late edition, dated
July 21, 1894, and its headline read: WORLD CUT OFF FROM CHICAGO.
They left their bags. Emeline bought them a roast beef sandwich each for lunch. And in the afternoon
they went for a walk around the new city.
 
New Chicago was nothing but street after dirt-track street of wooden buildings; only one  of the bigger
churches had  been  built in stone.  But it was  big. Bisesa  saw  this  must  already  be  a  town  of  several
thousand people.
There was a handsome clock fixed to a tower on the town hall, which Emeline said was carefully set to
“Chicago standard railway time,” a standard that the Chicagoans had clung to despite the great disruption
of the Discontinuity—even though it was about three hours out according to the position of the sun. There
were other signs of culture. A note pinned on a ragged scrap of paper to the town hall door announced a
meeting:
 
A WORLD WITHOUT A POPE? 
WHERE NEXT FOR CHRISTIANS? 
WEDNESDAY, EIGHT O’CLOCK. 
NO LIQUOR. NO GUNS. 
 
And one small house was labeled EDISON’S MEMORIAL OF CHICAGO. Bisesa bent down to read
the details on the poster:
 

The FATE Of
CHICAGO 
On the NIGHT
The WHOLE WORLD FROZE
JULY 1894
A Production for the Edison-Dixon Kinetoscope
U.S. Patent Pending
A WONDER 
TEN CENTS 
 
Bisesa glanced at Emeline. “Edison?”
“He happened to be in the city that night. He’d been advising on the world’s fair, a year or two before.
He’s an old man now, and poorly, but still alive—or he was when I set out for Babylon.”
They walked on, tracing the dusty streets.
They came to a little park, overshadowed by an immense statue  set  on a  concrete  base.  A kind of
junior Statue of Liberty, it must have been a hundred feet tall or more. Its surface was gilded, though the
gold was flecked and scarred.
“Big  Mary,”  said  Emeline,  with  a  trace  of  pride  in  her  voice.  “Or,  the  Statue  of  the  Republic.
Centerpiece of the world’s fair, that is the World’s Columbian Exposition of 1893, which we held a year
before the Freeze. When we chose this site for New Chicago, Mary was one of the first items we hauled
down here, even though we barely had the capacity to do it.”
“It’s magnificent,” Abdikadir said, sounding sincere. “Even Alexander would be impressed.”
“Well, it’s a  start,”  Emeline said,  obscurely  pleased.  “You have to  make  a  statement  of intent, you
know. We’re here, and here we will stay.”
There had been no real choice but to move from Old Chicago.
It had taken the Chicagoans weeks, months to understand  what Bisesa  had  learned  from the Soyuz
photographs taken  from orbit.  The crisis wasn’t  merely some  local climatic disaster,  as  had  first been
thought; something much more extraordinary had happened. Chicago was an island of human warmth in a
frozen, lifeless continent, a bit of the nineteenth century stranded in antique ice. And as far as the ice cap
was concerned, Chicago was a wound that had to be healed over.
Emeline said the first emigrants from Chicago proper had  left for the south in the fifth year  after  the
Freeze. New Chicago was the product of thirty years’ hard work by Americans who for many years had
believed themselves entirely alone in an utterly transformed world.
But even in the heart of the new town, the wind from the north was persistent and cold.

They came to farmland on the edge of the town. As far as the eye could see, sheep and  cattle  were
scattered over a green-brown prairie that was studded with small, shabby farm buildings.
Emeline walked them to a kind of open-air factory she called the Union Stock Yards. The place stank
of blood and ordure and rotting meat, and a strange sour smell turned  out to  be  incinerated  hair. “The
core  of it is from old Chicago,  torn  down  and  rebuilt  here.  Before  the  Freeze  we  used  to  slaughter
fourteen million animals a day, and twenty-five thousand people worked here. We  don’t  process  but a
fraction of that now, of course. In fact it’s lucky the Yards were always so busy, for if we hadn’t  been
able to breed from the stock in its holding pens we would have starved in a year or two. Now they send
the butchered meat up to feed the old city. Don’t have to worry about freezing it; nature  takes  care  of
that for us…”
As she spoke, Bisesa looked to the horizon. Beyond the farmland she saw what looked like a herd of
elephants, mammoths or mastodons, walking proud and tall. It was astonishing to think that if she walked
off, beyond  those  unperturbed  mastodons,  she  could  travel all the  way  to  the  ocean’s  shore  without
seeing another glimpse of the work of mankind, not so much as a footprint in the scattered snow.
 
That night Bisesa retired to the shared hotel room early, exhausted from the traveling. But she had trouble
sleeping.
“Another day ahead of me and once again I don’t know what the hell it will be like,” she whispered to
the phone. “I’m too old for this.”
The phone murmured, “Do you know where we are? I mean, right here, this location. Do you know
what it would have become, if not for the Discontinuity?”
“Surprise me.”
“Graceland. The mansion.”
“You’re kidding.”
“But now Memphis will never exist at all.”
“Shit. So I’m stuck in a world without Myra, and diet cola, and tampons, and I’m about to go jaunting
over an ice cap to the decaying carcass of a nineteenth-century city. And now you tell me the King will
never be born.” Unaccountably, she was crying again.
The phone softly played her Elvis tracks until she fell asleep.
 
40: SUNLIGHT 
May 2070 
In  response  to  Athena’s  mysterious  summons,  Myra  returned  to  Port  Lowell  and  was  taken  up  to

Martian orbit, where she rejoined the lightship James Clerk Maxwell.
And she was wafted away on pale sunlight on a weeks-long jaunt back to the orbit of Earth—but not
to Earth itself.
“L5,” Alexei Carel told her. “A gravitationally stable point sixty degrees behind Earth.”
“I had a whole career in astronautics,” Myra said testily. “I know the basics.”
“Sorry. Just trying to prepare you.”
It infuriated her that he wouldn’t say any more, and retreated once again into his shell of secrecy.
There were in fact three of them aboard the Maxwell. Myra was surprised when Yuri O’Rourke tore
himself away from his mission on Mars.
“I wouldn’t call myself the leader of Wells Station,” he said slowly. “I mean, that’s actually my formal
title on the contracts we signed with our backers, the universities and science foundations on Earth and
Mars. But the others would kill me if I started acting that way. However, all of this is obviously affecting
the station. And I have a feeling you’ll be coming back to trouble us further.”
“I’m not planning to quit until I get my mother back.”
“Fair enough. So I have the instinct that it’s right for me to accompany you.”
“Well, I’m glad to have you along.”
“Okay,” he said gruffly. “But I’ve told you, my ice cores are much more interesting than anything the
bloody Firstborn get up to.”
Yuri, in fact, was at a loss on the Maxwell. In the confines of the lightship’s living quarters he took up
a lot of room, a bear  of a  man with his thick tied-back  hair and  bushy beard  and  ample gut. And he
fretted, cut off from his beloved Mars. Most days he sent picky demands down to  Wells to  ensure  his
crew kept up their routine of monitoring, sampling, and maintenance. He tried to keep up with his own
work; he had his softscreens, and a small portable lab, and even a set of samples of deep-core Martian
ice. But as the days wore on his frustration grew. He wasn’t bad company, but he sank into himself.
As for Alexei, he was as self-contained as he had been since the moment Myra had met him. He had
his own agenda,  of which this jaunt to  L5  was  just the latest  item. Clear-thinking,  purposeful,  he was
content, even if he did get a bit bored when nobody played poker with him.
Myra was allowed to try to make contact with Charlie, or even with Eugene, provided she didn’t give
away anything sensitive. But her child and ex-husband weren’t to be found even by AI search  facilities
that spanned  the solar  system.  Either that or  they were  hiding from her.  She  kept  on  looking,  fitfully,
increasingly depressed at the negative results.
They were a silent and antisocial crew.
But as she settled into the journey, Myra found she was glad to have been lifted up back into the light.
She had gotten used to life at the Martian pole, with its endless night and its lid of unrelenting smoggy
cloud.  But now she  gloried in the brilliant, unfiltered sunlight that  swamped  the  ship.  She  was  of  the
generation that had lived through the sunstorm,  and  she  suspected  she  had  been  wary  of the sun ever
since. Now she felt, oddly, as if the sun had  at  last welcomed  her back.  No  wonder  half the Spacers

were becoming sun-worshipers.
So she made her calls to  Charlie,  and  exercised,  and  read  books,  and  watched  virtual dramas,  her
skin bathed in the sunlight that blew her toward the orbit of the Earth.
Before the time delays got too long, Myra spoke to Ellie, back on Mars.
“Ellie, you’re  a  physicist. Help me understand  something. What  is Mir? How  can  another  universe
exist? Where is my mother?”
“Do you want the short answer, or the long?”
“Try both.”
“Short answer—I don’t know. Nobody does. Long answer—our physics isn’t advanced enough yet
to give us more than glimpses, analogies maybe, of the deeper truths the Firstborn must possess.  What
do you know about quantum gravity?”
“Less than you can imagine. Try me with an analogy.”
“All right. Look—suppose we threw your mother into a black hole, a big one. What happens to her?”
Myra thought about it. “She’s lost forever.”
“Okay. But there are two problems with that. First, you’re saying your mother,  or  more  importantly
the information that defines your mother, has been lost to the universe…” More importantly. That was
classic Ellie. “But that violates a basic rule of quantum mechanics, which says that information always has
to be conserved. Otherwise any semblance of continuity from past to future could be lost. More strictly
speaking, the Schrödinger wave equation wouldn’t work anymore.”
“Oh. So what’s the resolution?”
“Black  holes  evaporate.  Quantum  effects  at  the  event  horizon  cause  a  hole  to  emit  a  drizzle  of
particles, carrying away its mass-energy bit by bit. And the information that once defined Bisesa is leaked
back that way. The universe is saved, hurrah. You understand I’m speaking very loosely. When you get
the chance, ask Thales about the holographic principle.”
“You said there were two problems,” Myra said hastily.
“Yes. So we get Bisesa’s information back. But what happens to Bisesa, from her point of view? The
event horizon isn’t some brick wall in space. So in her view, the information that defines her isn’t trapped
at the event horizon to be leaked away, but rides with her on into the hole’s interior.”
“Okay,” Myra said slowly. “So there are two copies of the mother-information, one  inside the hole,
one leaking away outside.”
“No.  Can’t  allow you that.  Another  basic  principle: the cloning theorem.  You  can’t  copy  quantum
information.”
Myra was starting to lose the thread. “So what’s the resolution to that?”

“Non-locality. In everyday life, locality is an axiom. I’m here, you’re over there,  we  can’t  be  in two
places at once. But the resolution of the black hole conundrum is that a bit of information can be in two
places  at  once.  Sounds  paradoxical,  but a  lot of features  of the quantum  universe  are  like  that—and
quantum gravity is even worse.
“And the two places in which the information exists, separated by a ‘horizon’ like the event horizon,
can be far apart—light-years. The universe is full of horizons; you don’t need a black hole to make one.”
“And you think that Mir—”
“We believe the Firstborn are able to manipulate horizons and the non-locality of information in order
to ‘create’  their baby  universes,  and  to  ‘transfer’  your mother and  other  bits of cargo  between  them.
How they do this, we don’t know. And what else they’re capable of, we don’t know either.  We  can’t
even map limits to their capabilities, actually.” Ellie paused. “Does that answer your question?”
“I’m not sure. I guess I need to absorb it.”
“Just thinking through this stuff is revolutionizing physics.”
“Well, that’s a consolation.”
 
41: ARKS 
“We found them, Mum. Just where your astronomers predicted.
“It wasn’t a great diversion for the Liberator. To tell the truth we were glad of a chance to  give the
main drive a shakedown—and for a change of view out of the windows. Up here it’s not like the dramas.
Space is empty…”
 
It was a fleet of ships, slim pencils slowly rotating, glowing in the light of a distant sun. Moving through the
wastes beyond the asteroids, they were moving too rapidly to be drawn back by the sun’s gravity; they
were destined for an interstellar journey.
“They’re human,” John Metternes said.
“Oh, yes.”
John peered at the images. “They have red stars painted on their hulls. Are they Chinese?”
“Probably. And probably abandoning the solar system altogether.”
Edna expanded the image. The ships were a variety of designs, seen close to.
She downloaded analysis and speculation from Libby.

“They don’t seem to have anything like our antimatter drive,” she read. “Even if they did, the journey
time would still be years. There are probably only a few, if any, conscious  crew  aboard  each  of those
ships. The rest  may be  in suspended  animation; the ships may be  flying Hibernacula.  Or  they may be
stored  as  frozen zygotes,  or  as  eggs plus sperm…”  She  scrolled  down  through  increasingly  baroque
suggestions. “One  exotic  possibility  is  that  there  is  no  human  flesh  at  all  aboard  the  arks.  Maybe
they’re just carrying DNA strands. Or maybe the informational equivalent is being held in some kind of
radiation-tolerant memory store. Not even any wet chemistry.”
“And then you’d manufacture your colonists at the other end. Look, my bet is they’re using a variety
of strategies for the sake of a robust mission design,” said John the engineer. “After all their bid for Mars
failed. So they are giving up on the solar system.”
“Perhaps it’s a rational thing to do, if the Firstborn are going to keep on hammering us. Ah. According
to Libby, since we  found them, we’ve  had  some  contact  with the Chinese  authorities.  The flagship  is
called the Zheng He, after their great fifteenth-century explorer—”
“Do you think they will make it?”
“It’s possible. We’re certainly not going to stop them. I’m not sure if we could; no doubt those arks
are heavily armed. I think I rather hope they succeed. The more mankind is scattered, the better chance
of survival we have in the long term.”
John said, “But it’s also possible the Firstborn will follow them to Alpha Centauri, or wherever the hell,
and deal with them in their turn.”
“True. Anyhow it makes no difference to our mission.”
 
“It’s  another  complication  for  the  future,  Mum,  if  the  world  gets  through  the  Q-bomb  assault:  an
encounter a few centuries out, our A-drive starships meeting whatever society the Chinese  managed  to
build out there under the double suns of Centauri.
“Maybe  Thea  will have to  deal  with that.  Give  her  my  love.  Okay,  back  to  business,  we’re  now
resuming our cruise alongside the Q-bomb. Liberator out.”
 
42: CYCLOPS 
As they neared Cyclops Station Myra glimpsed more mirrors in space. They were lightships, swimming
around the observatory. After many days suspended alone in the three-dimensional dark, it was a shock
to have so much company.
The Maxwell pushed through the loose crowd of sails and approached the big structure at the heart of
the station. Alexei said it was called Galatea. It was a wheel in space.

 
The Maxwell bored in along the axis of the wheel, heading straight for the hub.  Galatea  was  a  spindly
thing, like a bicycle wheel with spokes that glimmered, barely visible. But there were concentric bands at
different radii from the center, painted different colors, silver, orange, blue, so that Galatea had something
of the look of an archery target. Galatea turned on its axis, in sunlight every bit as bright as the light that
fell on Earth itself, and long shadows swept across its rim and spokes like clock hands.
Alexei said, “Looks luxurious, doesn’t it? After the sunstorm an awful lot of money was pumped into
planet-finder observatories. And this was how a good deal of it was spent.”
“It reminds me of a fairground ride,” Myra said. “And it looks sort of old-fashioned.”
Alexei shrugged. “It’s a vision from a century ago, of how the future was supposed to be, which they
finally got the money to build, just for once. But I’m no history buff.”
“Umm. I suppose it’s spinning for artificial gravity.”
“Yep. You dock at the stationary hub and take elevators down to the decks.”
“And why the colors—silver, red, blue?”
He smiled. “Can’t you guess?”
She thought it over.  “The further you go from the hub,  the higher the apparent  gravity. So  they’ve
painted the lunar-gravity deck silver—one-sixth G.”
“You’ve got it. And the Mars deck is orange, and the Earth-gravity deck is blue.  Galatea  is here  to
serve as a hub for the Cyclops staff, but it has always been a partial-gravity laboratory. There are pods
suspended  from the outermost  deck—see?  The biologists are  trying out higher  gravities  than  Earth’s,
too.” He grinned. “They’ve got some  big-boned  lab rats  down  there.  Maybe  we’ll need  that  research
someday, if we’re going to go whizzing about the solar system on antimatter drives.”
As the wheel loomed closer Myra  lost her view of the outer  rim, and  her vision was  filled with the
engineering detail of the inner decks, the spinning hub with its brightly lit ports, the spokes and struts, and
the steadily shifting shadows.
A pod came squirting out of an open  portal  right at  the center  of the hub.  When it emerged  it was
spinning on its own axis, turning with the angular momentum of Galatea, but with a  couple  of pulses  of
reaction-jet gas it stabilized and approached the Maxwell cautiously.
“Max isn’t going in any closer,” Alexei said. “Lightship sails and big turning wheels don’t mix. And you
always take Galatea’s own shuttles in to the hub rather than pilot yourself. They have dedicated AIs, who
are good at that whole spinning-up thing…”
The docking was fast, slick, over in minutes. Hatches opened with soft pops of equalizing pressure.
A young woman came tumbling out of the shuttle, and threw herself zero-gravity straight into Alexei’s
arms. Myra and Yuri exchanged mocking glances.
The couple broke, and the girl turned to Myra. “You’re Bisesa’s daughter. I’ve seen  your picture  in
the files. It’s good to meet you in the flesh. My name is Lyla Neal. Welcome to Cyclops.”
Myra grabbed a strut to brace herself and shook her hand.

Lyla was maybe twenty-five, her skin a rich black, her hair a compact mass, her teeth brilliant white.
Unlike Yuri and Alexei, like Myra, she wore an ident tattoo on the smooth skin of her right cheek.
Myra said, “You evidently know Alexei.”
“I met him through his father. I’m one of Professor Carel’s students. I’m up here, ostensibly, to pursue
academic projects. Cosmological. Distant galaxies, primordial light, that sort of thing.”
Myra glanced at Alexei. “So this is how you spy on your father for the Spacers.”
“Yeah, Lyla is my mole. Neat, isn’t it?” His tone was flat; perhaps there was some guilt in there under
the flippancy.
They all clambered into the shuttle with their bits of luggage.
 
Once aboard Galatea, they were hurried through the hub structure and loaded into a kind of elevator car.
Lyla said, “Grab onto a rail. And you might want your feet down that way,” she said,  pointing away
from the axis of spin.
The elevator dropped with a disconcerting jolt.
They passed quickly out of the hub complex, and suddenly they were suspended in space, inside a car
that was a transparent bubble dangling from a cable. As they descended the centrifugal-acceleration pull
gradually built up, until their feet settled to  the floor,  and  that  unpleasant  Coriolis-spin  sensation  faded.
They were  dropping  through a  framework  of spokes  toward  the  great  curving  tracks  of  the  wheel’s
decks below. All this was stationary in Myra’s view, but the sun circled slowly, and the shadows cast by
the spokes  swept  by steadily.  But there  was  no  ground  under  this huge funfair ride,  no floor but the
stars.
Lyla said, “Look, before we go on—elevator, pause.”
The car slowed to a halt.
Lyla said, “You ought to take a look at the view. See what the station is all about. It’s much harder to
see from within the decks. Elevator. Show us Polyphemus.”
Myra looked out through the hull. She saw stars whirling slowly, the universe become a pinwheel. And
an oval of gold lit up on the window and began to track upward, slowly, countering the rotation to pick
out a corner of the star field. There Myra made out a faint disc, misty-gray and with rainbows  washing
across its face. A smaller station hung behind it, a knot of instruments.
“That,” Lyla said,  “is a  telescope.  One  big, spinning, fragile Fresnel  lens. Nearly  a  hundred  meters
across.”
Myra asked, “Wasn’t the sunstorm shield a Fresnel lens?”
“It was…”
So this was yet another technological descendant of the tremendous shield that had once sheltered the
Earth.
Lyla said,  “They call that fellow Polyphemus,  the Cyclops,  after  the most  famous  of  the  one-eyed

giants of the myths. Galatea was actually the name of the Nereid he loved, according to some versions of
the stories. Polyphemus is the oldest but still the most impressive instrument they have here.”
Yuri, an instrument man himself, was fascinated, and peppered Lyla and Alexei with questions.
Big mirrors were on the face of it easier to manufacture than big lenses,  but it turned  out that  a  lens
was the preferred technology for building really huge telescopes because of its better  optical  tolerance;
the longer pathways traversed by light rays gathered up by a mirror tended to amplify distortions rather
than to diminish them, as a lens would. A Fresnel lens was a compromise design, a composite of many
smaller lenses fixed into a lacy framework and spun up for stability. Lyla said the sub-lenses at the rim of
the structure were thin enough to roll up like paper. There were technical issues with Fresnel lenses, the
main one being “chromatic aberration” they were narrow-bandwidth devices. But there was an array of
corrective optics—“Schupmann devices,” Lyla said—installed before the main lens itself to compensate
for this.
“The lens itself is smart,” she said. “It can correct for thermal distortions, gravitational tweaks…With
this one big beast alone you can detect the planets of nearby stars, and study them spectroscopically, and
so  on.  And  now  they  are  working  on  an  interferometer  array.  More  mirrors,  suspended  in  space.
Elevator, show us…”
More tracking ovals lit up on the wall.
“They’re called Arges, Brontes, and Steropes. More Cyclops giants. Working together they are like a
composite telescope of tremendous size.
“It’s no coincidence that she came here. Athena, I mean. Her transmission back home was picked up
by Polyphemus. Very faint laser light. Elevator, resume.”
The elevator plunged without slowing through the first of the decks. Myra glimpsed a floor that curved
upwards, a décor of silver-gray and pink, and people who walked with slow bounds. “The Moon deck,”
she said.
“Right,” Lyla said. “You understand  that Galatea  is centrifugally stratified.  We’ll be  stopping  on the
Mars deck, where you’ll be meeting Athena.”
As Myra absorbed that, Yuri nodded. “It will help if we can stay in condition in the G conditions we’re
used to.”
“Yeah,” said Lyla. “Not many go further than that. Nobody but our ambassadors from Earth, in fact.”
“Ambassadors?” Myra asked.
“Actually cops. Astropol.” She pulled a face. “We encourage them to stay down  there,  in their own
lead-boot gravity field. Keeps them from getting in the way of the real work.”
“They don’t know we’re here, do they?”
“No reason why they should,” Alexei said.
Myra guessed, “And they don’t know about Athena.”
“No, they don’t,” Lyla said. “At least I don’t think they do. They really are just cops; they should have
sent up a few astronomers.”

“I don’t understand any of this,” Myra confessed. “Where Athena has ‘been.’ How she ‘came back.’
And I don’t understand why I’m here.”
“All your questions will be answered soon, Myra,” a voice spoke from the air.
It was the second time Athena had spoken to Myra. The others looked at her curiously, even a little
enviously.
 
43: CHICAGO 
Emeline, Bisesa, and Abdi traveled the last few kilometers to Chicago in a western-movie-style covered
wagon. It  was  drawn  by  muscular,  hairy  ponies,  a  round-bodied  native  stock  that  turned  out  to  be
particularly suited to working in the deep cold. The road followed the line of a pre-Freeze rail track, but
Emeline said it wasn’t practical to run trains this far north, because of ice on the rails and frozen points.
By now Bisesa was wrapped up like an Inuit, with layers of wool  and  fur over  her thin Babylonian
clothes, and her phone lost somewhere deep  underneath.  Emeline told  her that  the russet-brown  wool
came from mammoths. Bisesa wasn’t sure if she believed that, for surely it would be  easier  to  shear  a
sheep than a mammoth. It looked convincing, however.
Despite the furs, the cold dug into her exposed cheeks like bony fingers. Her eyes streamed, and she
could feel the tears crackling to frost. Her feet felt vulnerable despite the heavy fur boots she wore, and,
fearing frostbite, she dug her gloved hands into her armpits. “It’s like Mars,” she told her companions.
Abdi grimaced, shivering. “Are you sorry you came?”
“I’m sorry I don’t still have my spacesuit.”
The phone, tucked warmly against her belly, murmured something, but she couldn’t hear.
Chicago was a black city lost in a white landscape.
The disused rail track ran right into Union Station. It was a short walk from the station  to  Emeline’s
apartment. In the streets, huge bonfires burned,  stacked  up under  dead  gas-lamps  and  laboriously fed
with broken-up lumber by squads of men, bundled up, their heads swathed in helmets of breath-steam.
The fires poured plumes of smoke into the air, which hung over the city like a black lid, and the faces of
the  buildings  were  coated  with  soot.  The  people  were  all  bundled  up  in  fur  so  they  looked  almost
spherical as they scurried from the island of warmth cast by one bonfire to the next.
There was some traffic on the roads, horse-drawn carts, even a few people cycling—not a single car
anywhere in this version of 1920s Chicago, Bisesa reminded herself. Horse  manure stood  everywhere,

frozen hard on the broken tarmac.
It was extraordinary, a chill carcass of a  city. But it was  somehow  functioning. There  was  a  church
with open doors and candlelit interior, a few shops with “open for business” signs—and even a kid selling
newspapers, flimsy single sheets bearing the proud banner Chicago Tribune.
As they walked, Bisesa glimpsed Lake Michigan, to the east. It was a sheet of ice, brilliant white, dead
flat as far as the eye could see. Only at the shore was the ice broken up, with narrow leads of black open
water, and near the outlet of the Chicago river men labored to keep the drinking-water inlet pipes clear
of ice, as they had been forced to since the very first days after the Freeze.
People moved around on the lake. They were fishing at  holes cut into the ice,  and  fires burned,  the
smoke rising in thin threads. Somehow the folk out there  looked  as  if they had  nothing to  do  with this
huge wreck of a city at all.
Emeline said, panting as they walked, “The city’s not what it was. We’ve had to abandon a lot of the
suburbs. The working town’s kind of boiled down to an area centered on the Loop—maybe a half-mile
to a mile in each direction. The population’s shrunk a lot, what with the famine and the plagues and the
walkaways, and now the relocation to New Chicago. But we still use the suburbs  as  mines, I suppose
you would say.  We  send  out parties  to  retrieve  anything we  can  find, clothes  and  furniture and  other
stores, and wood for the fires and  the furnaces.  Of course  we’ve  had  no fresh supplies of coal  or  oil
since the Freeze.”
It turned out providing lumber was Emeline’s job. She worked in a small department attached to the
Mayor’s office responsible for seeking out fresh sources  of wood,  and  organizing the transport  chains
that kept it flowing into the habitable areas of the city.
“A city like this isn’t meant to  survive in such conditions,”  Abdi  said.  “It can  endure  only by eating
itself, as a starving body will ultimately consume its own organs.”
“We do what we must,” Emeline said sharply.
The phone murmured, “Ruddy visited Chicago once—on Earth, after the date of the Discontinuity. He
called it a ‘real city.’ But he said he never wanted to see it again.”
“Hush,” Bisesa said.
 
Emeline’s apartment turned out to be a converted office on the second floor of a skyscraper  called the
Montauk. The building looked skinny and shabby to Bisesa, but she supposed it had been a wonder of
the world in the 1890s.
The apartment’s rooms were like nests, the walls and floors and ceilings thick with blankets and furs.
Improvised chimney stacks had been punched in the walls to let the smoke out, but even so the surfaces
were covered with soot. But there was some gentility. In the living room and parlor stood upright chairs
and small tables, delicate pieces of furniture, clearly worn but lovingly maintained.
Emeline served them tea. It was made from Indian leaves from carefully hoarded thirty-year-old stock.
By such small preservations these Chicagoans were maintaining their identity, Bisesa supposed.
They hadn’t been back long when one of Emeline’s two sons showed up. Aged around twenty he was
the younger by a year, called Joshua after his father. He came in carrying a string of fish; breathing hard,

red-faced, he had been out on Lake Michigan. Once he had peeled out of his furs he turned out to be a
tall young man, taller than his father had  ever  been.  And yet he had  something of Josh’s  openness  of
expression, Bisesa thought, his curiosity and eagerness. He seemed healthy, if lean. His right cheek was
marked by a discolored patch that might have been a frostbite scar, and his face glistened with an oil that
turned out to be an extract of seal blubber.
Emeline took  the fish away  to  skin and  gut. She  returned  with  another  cup  of  tea  for  Joshua.  He
politely took the cup, and swigged the hot tea down in one gulp.
“My father told  me about  you, Miss Dutt,” Joshua  said  uncertainly to  Bisesa.  “All  that  business  in
India.”
“We came from different worlds.”
“My father said you were from the future.”
“Well, so I am. His future, anyhow. Abdikadir’s father came through with me too. We were from the
year 2037, around a hundred and fifty years after your father’s time slice.”
His expression was polite, glazed.
“I suppose it’s all a bit remote to you.”
He shrugged. “It just doesn’t make any difference. All that history isn’t going to happen now, is it? We
won’t have to fight in your world wars, and so on. This is the world we’ve got, and we’re stuck with it.
But that’s fine by me.”
Emeline pursed her lips. “Joshua rather enjoys life, Bisesa.”
It turned  out he worked  as  an engineer on the rail lines out of New  Chicago.  But his passion  was
ice-fishing, and whenever he got time off he came back up to the old city to  get into his furs and  head
straight out on the ice.
“He even writes poems about it,” Emeline said. “The fishing, I mean.”
The young man colored. “Mother—”
“He inherited that from his father,  at  least.  A gift for words.  But  of  course  we’re  always  short  of
paper.”
Bisesa asked, “What about his brother—your older son, Emeline? Where is he?”
Her face closed up. “Harry went walkaway a couple of years back.”  This was  clearly distressing to
her; she hadn’t mentioned it before. “He said he’d call back, but of course he hasn’t—they never do.”
Joshua said, “Well, he thinks he’s going to be put under arrest if he comes back.”
“Mayor Rice declared an amnesty a year ago. If only he’d get in touch, if only he’d come back just for
a day, I could tell him he has nothing to fear.”
They spoke  of this a  little, and  Bisesa  began  to  understand.  Walkaway:  some  of Chicago’s  young
people, born on Mir and seduced by the extraordinary landscape  in which they found themselves,  had
chosen to abandon their parents’ heroic struggle to save Chicago, and the even more audacious attempt
to build a new city south of the ice. They simply walked off, disappearing into the white, or the green of
the grasslands to the south.

“It’s said they live like Eskimos,” said Joshua. “Or maybe like Red Indians.”
“Some of them even took reference books from the libraries, and artifacts from the museums, so they
could work out how to live,” Emeline said bitterly. “No doubt  many of these  young fools are  dead  by
now.”
It was clear this was a sore point between mother and son; perhaps Joshua dreamed of emulating his
older brother.
Emeline cut the conversation  short  by standing to  announce  she  was  off  to  the  kitchen  to  prepare
lunch: they would be served Joshua’s fish, cleaned and gutted, with corn and green vegetables imported
from New Chicago. Joshua took his leave, going off to wash and change.
When they had gone, Abdi eyed Bisesa. “There are tensions here.”
“Yes. A generation gap.”
“But the parents do have a  point,  don’t  they?” Abdi  said.  “The alternative to  civilization here  is the
Stone Age. These walkaways, if they survive, will be illiterate within two generations. And after that their
only sense of history will be an oral tradition. They will forget their kind ever came from Earth, and if they
remember the Discontinuity at all, it will become an event of myth, like the Flood. And when the cosmic
expansion threatens the fabric of the world—”
“They won’t even understand what’s destroying them.” But, she thought wistfully, maybe it would be
better that way. At least these walkaways and their children might enjoy a  few generations  of harmony
with the world, instead of an endless battle with it. “Don’t you have the same kinds of conflict at home?”
Abdi paused. “Alexander is building a world empire. You can think that’s smart or crazy, but you’ve
got  to  admit  it’s  something  new.  It’s  hard  not  to  be  swept  up.  I  don’t  think  we  have  too  many
walkaways. Not that Alexander would allow it if we did,” he added.
To Bisesa’s  astonishment a  telephone  rang,  somewhere  in the apartment.  It  was  an  old-fashioned,
intermittent, very uncertain ring, and  it  was  muffled  by  the  padding  on  the  walls.  But  it  was  ringing.
Telephones and  newspapers:  the Chicagoans  really had  kept  their city functioning. She  heard  Emeline
pick up, and speak softly.
Emeline came back into the lounge. “Say, it’s good news. Mayor Rice wants to meet you. He’s been
expecting  you;  I  wrote  him  from  New  Chicago.  And  he’ll  have  an  astronomer  with  him,”  she  said
grandly.
“That’s good,” Bisesa said uncertainly.
“He’ll see us this evening. That gives us time to shop.”
“Shop? Are you kidding?”
Emeline bustled out. “Lunch will be a half-hour. Help yourself to more tea.”
 

44: ATHENA 
The Mars deck was like a corridor that rose gradually in either direction,  so  that  as  you walked  there
was the odd sense that you were always at the low point of a dip, never climbing out of it. The gravity
was the easy one-third G Myra had got used to on Mars itself. The décor was  Martian  red-ocher,  the
plastic surfaces of the walls, the bits of carpet on the floor. There were even tubs of what looked like red
Martian dirt with the vivid green of terrestrial plants, mostly cacti, growing incongruously out of them.
It was hard to believe she was in space, that if she kept on walking she would loop the loop and end
up back in this spot.
Alexei was watching her reaction. “It’s typical Earth-born architecture,” he said. “Like the bio domes
on Mars with the rainstorms and the zoos. They don’t see that you don’t need all this, that it just gets in
the way…”
Certainly it all seemed a bit sanitized to Myra, like an airport terminal.
Lyla led the  three  of  them  to  an  office  just  off  the  main  corridor.  It  was  nothing  unusual,  with  a
conference table, the usual softscreen facilities, a stand of coffee percolators and water jugs.
And here Athena spoke to them.
“I suppose you’re wondering why I’ve asked you here today.”
Nobody  laughed.  Yuri  dumped  the  bags  in  the  corner  of  the  conference  room,  and  they  helped
themselves to coffee.
Myra sat down and looked up into the empty air challengingly. “My mother always did say you had a
reputation as a comedian.”
“Ah,” said Athena. “Aristotle called me skittish. I never had the chance to speak to Bisesa Dutt.” Her
voice  was  steady,  controlled.  “But  I  spoke  to  many  of  those  who  knew  her.  She  is  a  remarkable
woman.”
Myra  said,  “She  always  said  she  was  an  ordinary  woman  to  whom  remarkable  things  kept
happening.”
“But others might have crumbled in the face of her extraordinary experiences. Bisesa continues to do
her duty, as she sees it.”
“You speak of her in the present tense. I don’t know if she’s dead or alive. I don’t know where she
is.”
“But you suspect, don’t you, Myra?”
“I don’t understand how I’m talking to you. Why are you here?”
“Watch,” Athena said gently.
The lights in the room dimmed a little, and a holographic image coalesced on the tabletop before them.

Ugly, bristling, it looked like some creature of the deep sea. In fact it was a denizen of space. It was
called the Extirpator.
The day  before  the sunstorm,  Athena had  woken  to  find herself ten  million  kilometers  from  Earth.
Aristotle and Thales, mankind’s other great electronic minds, were with her. They had been downloaded
into the memory of a bomb.
The three of them huddled together, in an abstract electronic manner. And then—
 
When the images from Procyon died, they all needed a break.
They went out onto the Mars deck. Myra sipped a cola. While Yuri swung improvised pendulums to
study the varying artificial gravity, Alexei and Lyla explored it. If you sat  down,  you were  heavier than
when you stood up. If you threw a ball any distance, it would be deflected sideways by the spin. And if
you ran against the spin, you grew  lighter. Laughing, they raced  each  other  along  the  corridor  in  big
Moonwalk bounds.
Watching them play, Myra was reminded just how young these Spacers all really were.
All of them were reluctant to go back and face Athena again, and talk about what she had discovered
on a planet eleven light-years away.
“So those swimmers bred themselves to extinction,” Alexei said. “Sol, what a thing to do.”
Yuri said, “Better that than let the Firstborn win.”
“It took us two years to find a way to beam me back home,” Athena said softly. “We didn’t want to
broadcast our existence to a dangerous universe. So we put together  an optical  laser—quite  powerful,
but a tight beam. And when the time came, with my data stream encoded into it, we fired it off at Earth.
We anticipated  that it would be  picked  up  by  Cyclops,  which  was  at  the  planning  stage  before  the
sunstorm.”
“It was risky,” Myra said. “If Cyclops hadn’t been built after all—”
“We had no choice but to make the gamble.”
Yuri asked, “Why you, of the three?”
Athena paused. “We drew lots, after a fashion.”
“And the others—”
“The signal took  everything we  had,  everything Witness  could  give us.  Though Witness  lived, there
was nothing left to sustain the others. They gave themselves for me.”
Myra  wondered  how  Athena,  an  AI  with  such  a  complicated  biography,  felt  about  this.  As  the
“youngest” of the three, it must have felt as if her parents had sacrificed themselves to save her. “It wasn’t
just for you,” she said gently. “It was for all of us.”
“Yes,” Athena said. “And you see why I had to be sent home.”
Myra looked at Alexei. “And this is what you’ve kept from me for so many weeks.”

Alexei looked uncomfortable.
“It was my request, Myra,” Athena said smoothly.
Yuri was staring at his hands, which were splayed out on the table before him. He looked as stunned
as Myra felt. She asked, “What are you thinking, Yuri?”
“I’m thinking that we have crashed through a conceptual barrier today. Since the sunstorm there  has
always been something of a human-centered bias to our thinking about the Firstborn, I believe. As if we
implicitly assumed they were a threat aimed at us alone—our personal nemesis. Now we learn that they
have acted against others, just as brutally.” He lifted his hands and spread them wide in the air. “Suddenly
we must think of the Firstborn as extensive in space and time. Shit, I need another coffee.” Yuri got up
and shambled over to the percolators.
 
Alexei blew out his cheeks. “So now you know it all, Myra. What next?”
Myra said, “This material should be shared with the Earth authorities. The Space Council—”
Alexei pulled a face. “Why? So  they can  throw  more  atomic bombs,  and  arrest  us all? Myra,  they
think too narrowly.”
Myra stared at him. “Didn’t we all work together during the sunstorm? But now here we are back in
the old routine—they lie to you, you lie to them. Is that the way we’re all going into the dark?”
“Be fair, Myra,” Yuri murmured. “The Spacers are doing their best. And they’re probably right about
how Earth would react.”
“So what do you think we should we do?”
Yuri said,  “Follow the Martians’  example.  They  trapped  an  Eye—they  struck  back.”  He  laughed
bitterly. “And as a result of that, right now the only bit of Firstborn technology we have is there on Mars,
sitting under my ice cap.”
“Yes,” Athena said. “It seems that the focus of this crisis is the pole  of Mars.  I want you to  return
there, Myra.”
Myra considered. “And when we get there?”
“Then we must wait, as before,” Athena said. “The next steps are largely out of our hands.”
“Then whose?”
“Bisesa Dutt’s,” murmured Athena.
An alarm sounded, and the walls flashed red.
Lyla tapped her ident patch and listened to the air. “It’s the Astropol cops down on Earth deck,” she
said. “We must have a leak. They are coming for you, Myra.” She stood.
Myra followed her lead. She felt dazed. “They want me? Why?”
“Because they think you will lead them to your mother.  Let’s  get out of here.  We  don’t  have much
time.”

They hurried from the room, Alexei muttering instructions to the Maxwell.
 
45: MAYOR 
Shopping in Chicago turned out to be just that. Remarkably, you could stroll along Michigan Avenue and
other thoroughfares, and inspect the windows of stores like Marshall Field’s where goods were piled up
on display and mannequins modeled suits and dresses and coats. You could buy fur coats and boots and
other cold-weather essentials, but Emeline would only look at  “the fashion,” as  she  called them, which
turned out to be relics of the stores’ 1890s stock, once imported from a vanished New York or Boston,
lovingly  preserved  and  much  patched  and  repaired  since.  Bisesa  thought  Emeline  would  have  been
bewildered to be faced with the modernity of thirty-two years later on Earth, the fashions of 1926.
So they shopped. But the street outside Marshall Field’s was half-blocked by the carcass of a horse,
desiccated,  frozen in place  where  it had  fallen. The lights in the window were  smoky candles  of  seal
blubber and horse fat. And though there were some young people around, they were mostly working in
the stores. All the shoppers, as far as Bisesa could see, were old, Emeline’s age or older, survivors of the
Discontinuity picking through these shabby, worn-out relics of a lost past.
 
Mayor Rice’s office was deep in the guts of City Hall.
Hard-backed chairs had been drawn up before a desk. Bisesa, Emeline, and Abdi sat in a row, and
were kept waiting.
This room wasn’t swathed with insulation like Emeline’s apartment. Its walls were adorned with flock
wallpaper and portraits of past dignitaries. A fire burned hugely in a hearth, and there was central heating
too, a dry warmth supplied by heavy iron radiators, no doubt fed by some wood-burning monster  of a
furnace in the basement.  A telephone  was  fixed to  the  wall,  a  very  primitive  sort,  just  a  box  with  a
speaking tube, and an ear trumpet you held to your head. On the mantelpiece a clock ticked, defiantly set
to  Chicago  standard  railway  time,  four  P.M.,  just  as  it  had  been  for  thirty-two  years,  despite  the
difference of opinion expressed by the world outside.
Bisesa felt oddly glad she had opted to wear her purple Babylonian clothes, as had Abdi, despite the
offer of a more formal “suit” by Emeline. She felt she wanted to keep her own identity here.
She whispered to the others, “So this is 1920s Chicago. I think I’m expecting Al Capone.”
Her phone murmured, “In 1894 Capone was in New York. He couldn’t be here now—”
“Oh, shut up.” She said to Emeline, “Tell me about Mayor Jacob Rice.”
“He’s only about thirty—born after the Freeze.”
“And the son of a mayor?”

Emeline shook her head. “Not exactly…”
The hour of the Discontinuity had been shocking for Chicagoans. After all it had  started  snowing, in
July. Excited stevedores reported icebergs on Lake Michigan. And from their offices in the upper floors
of the Rookery and the Montauk, businessmen looked north to see a line of bone white on the horizon.
The mayor had  been  out of town.  His deputy  desperately  tried  to  make  long-distance  phone  calls  to
New York and Washington, but to no avail; if President Cleveland still lived, out there beyond the ice, he
could offer no help or guidance to Chicago.
Things deteriorated  quickly in those  first days.  As  the food  riots  worsened,  as  old  folks  began  to
freeze, as the suburbs began to burn, the deputy mayor made his best decision. Recognizing the limits of
his own capacity, he formulated an Emergency Committee, a representative sample of the city’s leading
citizens. Here were the chief of police and commanders of the National Guard, and top businessmen and
landowners,  and  the leaders  of all of Chicago’s  powerful unions. Here  too  was  Jane  Addams,  “Saint
Jane,” a noted social reformer who ran a women’s refuge called Hull House, and Thomas Alva Edison,
the  great  inventor,  forty-seven  years  old,  caught  by  chance  by  the  Freeze  and  pining  for  his  lost
laboratories in New Jersey.
And here was Colonel Edmund Rice, a veteran of Gettysburg who had run the Columbian Guard,  a
dedicated police force for the world’s fair, only a year before. The deputy mayor gladly gave up his seat
as chair of the Committee to Rice.
Under  martial law, the Committee clamped  down  on  the  gathering  crime  wave,  and  tidied  up  the
deputy mayor’s hasty rationing and curfew proclamations. Rice established new medical centers, where a
brisk triage system was put in place, and emergency cemeteries were opened up. And as the city began
to consume itself to keep warm, even as the deaths continued in swaths, they began to plan for the future.
Emeline said,  “Eventually the Emergency Committee functions got subsumed  back  into the mayor’s
office, but Rice himself was never elected.”
“But now his son is the mayor,” Abdi murmured. “An unelected leader, the son of a leader. I smell a
dynasty here.”
“We can’t afford the paper for elections,” Emeline said primly.
Mayor Rice bustled in. He was followed by a  small posse  of nervous-looking  men, clerks  perhaps,
though one older man carried a briefcase.
“Miss Dutt? And Mister—ah—Omar. Good to meet you. And to see you again, Mrs. White…”
 
Jacob Rice was a plump young man dressed in a fine suit that showed no sign of patching. His black hair
was slicked back, perhaps by some kind of pomade, and his face was sharp, his cold blue eyes  intent.
He served them brandy in finely cut glass.
“Now look here, Miss Dutt,” he began briskly. “It’s good of you to see me, and all. I make a point of
speaking to every visitor to the city from outside, even though they’re mostly those Greek sort of fellows
who are good for nothing but a history lesson, along with a few British from about our own time—isn’t
that right?”
“The North–West Frontier time slice was from 1885,” she said. “I got caught up in it. But in fact I was
from—”

“The year of Our Lord 2037.” He tapped a letter on the desk before him. “Mrs. White here was good
enough to tell me a good deal about you. But I’ll be frank with you, Miss Dutt; I’m only interested in your
biography, no matter what time you come from, insofar as it affects me and my town. I’m sure you can
see that.”
“Fair enough.”
“Now you come here first of all with news that the world is ending. Is that right?”
The older man among the cowed-looking array  behind him raised  a  finger. “Not  quite,  Mr.  Mayor.
The lady’s claim is that the universe is coming to an end. But the implication is, of course, that it will take
our world with it.” He chuckled softly, as if he had made an amusing academic point.
Rice stared at him. “Well, if that isn’t the all-mightiest nitpicking quibble of all time. Miss Dutt, this here
is Gifford Oker—professor of astronomy at our brand-new University of Chicago. Or it was brand new
when we all got froze. I invited him here because it seems you have some astronomical stuff to talk about,
and he’s the nearest thing to an expert we got.”
About fifty, grayed, his face all but hidden behind thick spectacles and a ragged mustache, Oker was
clutching a battered leather briefcase. His suit was shabby with frayed cuffs and  lapels,  and  his elbows
and knees padded with leather. “I can assure you that my credentials are  not to  be  questioned.  At the
time of the Freeze I was  a  student  under  George  Ellery Hale,  the noted  astronomer—perhaps  you’ve
heard  of him? We  were  hoping  to  establish  a  new  observatory  at  Williams  Bay,  which  would  have
featured a suite of modern instruments, including a forty-inch refractor—it  would have been  the largest
such telescope  in the world.  But it wasn’t  to  be,  of  course,  it  wasn’t  to  be.  We  have  been  able  to
maintain a program of observations with telescopes that were preserved within the ‘time slice,’ as you put
it, Miss Dutt, necessarily smaller and less powerful. And we have performed some spectroscopy, whose
results are—well, surprising.”
Abdi leaned  forward.  “Professor,  I myself have practiced  astronomy  in Babylon.  We  obtained  the
results that are in part the basis of Bisesa’s prediction. We must exchange information.”
“Certainly.”
Rice glanced at Emeline’s letter.  He  read  slowly, “‘The recession  of the distant  stars.’  This is what
you’re talking about.”
“That’s right,” Abdi said. “Simply put, it’s as if the stars are fleeing from the sun in all directions.”
Rice nodded. “Okay. I got that. So what?”
Oker sighed. He took off his spectacles, to reveal deep-set, weary eyes, and rubbed the lenses on his
tie. “You see, Mr. Mayor, the problem is this. Why should the sun be uniquely located at the center  of
such an expansion? It violates the most basic principles of mediocrity. Even though we have been through
the Freeze, the most extraordinary event in recorded history, such principles surely still hold true.”
Bisesa studied this Professor Oker, wondering how much he could  understand.  He  obviously had  a
keen enough mind, and had managed to sustain an academic career, of sorts, in the most extraordinary of
circumstances. “So what’s your interpretation, sir?”
He replaced his spectacles and looked at her. “That we are not privileged observers. That if we were
living on a world of Alpha Centauri we would observe the same phenomenon—that is to say, we would
see  the  distant  nebulae  receding  from  us  uniformly.  It  can  only  mean  that  the  ether  itself  is

expanding—that is, the invisible material within which all the stars swim. The universe is blowing up like a
pudding in an oven, and  the stars,  like currants  embedded  in that  pudding, are  all receding  from each
other.  But to  each  currant  it would seem  as  if  it  was  the  sole  point  of  stillness  at  the  center  of  the
explosion…”
Bisesa’s knowledge of relativity was restricted to a module in a college course decades ago—that and
science fiction, and you couldn’t trust that. But the Chicago time slice had come when Einstein was only
fifteen years old; Oker could know nothing of relativity. And relativity was founded on the discovery that
the ether, in fact, didn’t exist.
But she thought Oker had got the picture, near enough.
She said, “Mr. Mayor, he’s right. The universe itself is expanding. Right now the expansion is pushing
the stars apart, the galaxies. But eventually that expansion is eventually going to  work  its way down  to
smaller scales.”
Abdi said, “It will pull the world apart, leaving us all flying in a crowd of rocks. Then our bodies will
break up. Then the very atoms of which our  bodies  are  composed.”  He  smiled. “And that  is how the
world will end. The expansion that is now visible only through a telescope will fold down until it breaks
everything to bits.”
Rice stared at him. “Cold-blooded little cuss,  aren’t  you?” He  glared  down  at  Emeline’s letter.  “All
right, you got my attention. Now, Miss Dutt, you say you’ve been talking about this with the folks back
home. Right? So when is this big bubble going to burst? How long have we got?”
“About five centuries,” Bisesa said. “The calculations are difficult—it’s hard to be sure.”
Rice stared at her. “Five fucking centuries, pardon me. When we haven’t got food stock to last us five
weeks.  Well, I think  I’ll  put  that  in  my  ‘pending’  tray  for  now.”  He  rubbed  his  eyes,  energetic  but
obviously stressed. “Five centuries. Jesus Christ! All right, what’s next?”
Next was the solar system.
 
Gifford Oker breathed, “I read your letter, Miss Dutt. You traveled  to  Mars,  in a  space  clipper.  How
marvelous your century must be!” He preened. “When I was a small boy, you know,  I once  met Jules
Verne. Great man. Very great man. He would have understood about sailing to Mars, I should think!”
“Can  we  stick  to  the  point?”  Rice  snarled.  “Jules  Verne,  Jesus  Christ!  Just  show  the  lady  your
drawings, Professor; I can see that’s what you’re longing to do.”
“Yes. Here is the result of our exploration of the solar system, Miss Dutt.” Oker opened his briefcase,
and  spread  his  material  over  the  mayor’s  desk.  There  were  images  of  the  planets,  some  blurry
black-and-white photographs, but mostly color  images laboriously sketched  in pencil. And there  were
what looked like spectrograph results, like blurred barcodes.
Bisesa leaned forward. Almost subvocally she murmured, “Can you see?”
Her phone whispered back, “Well enough, Bisesa.”
Oker pushed forward one set of images. “Here,” he said, “is Venus.”
In Bisesa’s reality Venus was a ball of cloud. The spaceprobes had found an atmosphere as thick as

an ocean, and a land so hot that lead would melt. But this Venus was different. It looked, at first glance,
like an astronaut’s-eye view of Earth from space: swaths of cloud, gray-blue ocean, small caps of ice at
the poles.
Oker said, “It’s all ocean, ocean and ice. We’ve detected no land, not a trace. The ocean is water.”
He scrabbled for a spectrograph result. “The air is nitrogen, with some oxygen—less than Earth’s—and
rather a lot of carbon dioxide, which must seep into the water. The oceans of Venus must fizz like Coca
Cola!” It was a professor’s well-worn joke. But now he leaned forward. “And there is life there: life on
Venus.”
“How do you know?”
He pointed to green smudges on some  of the drawings.  “We  can  see  no details,  but there  must be
animals in the endless seas—fish perhaps, immense whales, feeding on the plankton. We can expect it to
be more or less like terrestrial analogues, due to processes of convergence,” he said confidently.
Oker showed more results. On the bare face of the Moon, transient atmospheres and even glimmers
of open water pooled in the deep craters and the rills; and again the Chicagoan astronomers thought they
saw life.
There were some extraordinary images of Mercury. These were blurred sketches of structures of light,
like netting, flung over the innermost planet’s dark side, glimpsed at the very limits of visibility. Oker said
there was once a partial eclipse of the sun, and some of his students reported that they had seen similar
“webs of plasma,” or  “plasmoids,” in the tenuous  solar  air.  Perhaps  this too  was  a  form of life, much
stranger, a life of superhot gases that swam from the fires of the sun to the face of its nearest child.
Under the cover of a coughing spasm, Bisesa withdrew and murmured to  her phone.  “Do you think
it’s likely?”
“Plasma life is not impossible,” the phone  murmured. “There are  structures  in the solar  atmosphere,
bound together by magnetic flux.”
Bisesa replied grimly, “Yes. We all became experts on the sun in the storm years. What do you think
is going on here?”
“Mir is a sampling of life on Earth, taken during the period when intelligence, mankind, has arisen. The
planetologists think Venus was warm and wet when very young. So  perhaps  Venus has  been  similarly
‘sampled.’ This seems to be a sort of optimized version of the solar system, Bisesa, each of the worlds,
and perhaps slices within those worlds, selected for the maximality of its life. I wonder what’s happening
on Europa or Titan in this universe, beyond the reach of the Chicagoans’ telescopes…”
Now  Professor  Oker,  with  a  glimmer  of  a  showman’s  instinct,  was  unveiling  the  climax  of  his
presentation: Mars.
But this wasn’t the Mars Bisesa had grown up with, and even visited. This blue-gray Mars was more
Earthlike even than watery  Venus,  for here  there  was  plenty  of  dry  land,  a  world  of  continents  and
oceans,  capped  by ice at  the poles,  swathed  in wispy cloud.  There  was  some  familiarity.  That  green
stripe might be the Valles Marineris; the blue scar in the southern hemisphere could  be  the tremendous
basin of Hellas. Most of the northern hemisphere appeared to be dry.
The phone whispered, “Something’s wrong, Bisesa. If Mars, our Mars,  were  flooded,  the whole of
the northern hemisphere would be drowned under an ocean.”

“The Vastitas Borealis.”
“Yes. Something dramatic must happen to this Mars in the future, something that changes the shape of
the entire planet.”
Rice listened to Oker impatiently, and at last cut him off. “Come on, Gifford. Get to the good stuff. Tell
her what you told me, about the Martians.”
Oker  grinned.  “We  see  straight-line  traces  cutting  across  the  Martian  plains.  Lines  that  must  be
hundreds of miles long.”
“Canals,” Abdi said immediately.
“What else could they be? And on land we, some of us, believe we have glimpsed structures. Walls,
perhaps, tremendously long. This is controversial; we are at the limits of seeing. But about  this,” Oker
said, “there is no controversy at all.” He produced a photograph, taken in polarized light, which showed
bright lights, like stars, scattered over the face of Mars. “Cities,” breathed Professor Oker.
Emeline leaned forward and tapped the image. “I told her about that,” she said.
 
Rice sat back. “So there you have it, Miss Dutt,” he said.  “The question  is, what use  is any of this to
you?”
“I don’t know,” she said honestly. “I need to talk to my contacts at home.”
“And,” Abdi said to Oker, “I’d like to get to work with you, Professor. We have much to share.”
“Yes,” said Oker, smiling.
“All right,” Rice said. “But when you have something, you come  tell me, you hear?”  It  was  a  clear
order.
“So. Enough spooky stuff for one day. Let’s talk of other things.” As the professor stowed away his
images, Rice sat back in his chair, rested his feet on the desk—he wore cowboy boots, with spurs—and
blew out cigar smoke. “Would you like another drink, a smoke? No? For one thing,” he said to Abdi, “I
would very much like to hear  about  what’s  going on across  the Atlantic. Alexander  the Great  and  his
‘world empire’—sounds like my kind of guy.”
Abdi glanced at Bisesa and Emeline, and shrugged. “Where would you like me to begin?”
“Tell me about his armies. And his navies, too. Does he have steamships yet? How soon before he can
cross the Atlantic in force?…”
With Rice’s attention occupied by Abdi, Bisesa murmured to her phone again. “What do you think?”
“I need to get to work transferring all this data back to Mars. It will take a long time.”
“But?”
“But I have a feeling, Bisesa, that this is why you were summoned to Mars.”

 
46: A-LINE 
June 2070 
“Since coming through the A-line we  aren’t  alone  with  Q  any  more,  Mum.  There’s  a  regular  flotilla
escorting the thing now, like a navy flag day, all the rock miners and bubble-dwellers coming out to see
the beast as it passes. It’s kind of strange  for us.  After a  cruise of fourteen  months, we’ve  got all this
company. But they don’t know we’re here. The Liberator is staying inside her stealth shroud, and there
are a couple other navy tubs out here, keeping the sight-seers at  a  good  distance  and  coordinating the
latest assault on Q…”
“Bella,” Thales said softly.
“Pause.”  Edna’s  talking head  froze,  a  tiny holographic  bust  suspended  over  the  surface  of  Bella’s
desk. “Can’t it wait, Thales?”
“Cassie Duflot is here.”
“Oh, crap.” Wife of dead hero space-worker, and professional pain in the backside.
“You did ask me to inform you as soon as she arrived.”
“I did.”
The message from Edna was still coming in. Bella was a mother as well as a politician; she had rights
too. “Ask her to wait.”
“Of course, Bella.”
“And Thales,  while  she’s  waiting,  don’t  let  her  mail,  record,  comment,  blog,  explore,  analyze,  or
speculate. Give her coffee and distract her.”
“I understand, Bella. Incidentally—”
“Yes?”
“It’s little more than an hour to the principal strike. The Big Whack. Or rather until the report reaches
us.”
She didn’t need reminding of that.  The Big Whack,  mankind’s last hope  against the Q-bomb—and
perhaps the end of her daughter’s life. “Okay, Thales, thank you, I’m on it. Resume.”
Edna’s frozen image came alive again.
 
Edna’s voice, having spent twenty-four minutes crawling across the plane of the solar  system,  sounded
strongly in Bella’s Mount Weather office. And Thales smoothly produced pictures to match the words,
images captured by a variety of ships and monitors.

There was  the Q-bomb,  a  ghostly droplet  of smeared  starlight, hovering over  Bella’s desk.  It  was
passing through the asteroid belt right now—the navy’s A-line—and she was shown a distant sprinkling
of rocks, magnified and brightened for her benefit. There was something awesome about the image; six
years almost to the day since the object had first been  spotted  swimming past  Saturn’s  moons,  here  it
was among the asteroids, home to a branch of mankind. The Q-bomb was here, in human space. And in
just six more months—at Christmas time in this year  of 2070—the  Q-bomb  was  destined  to  make  its
rendezvous with Earth itself.
But the bomb’s passage through the belt gave one more chance for an assault.
Edna was talking about  the attempts  so  far.  Thales showed  images of nuclear weapons  blossoming
against  the  bomb’s  impassive  surface,  and  ships,  manned  and  robotic,  deploying  energy  weapons,
particle beams, and lasers, even a stream of rocks thrown from a major asteroid fitted with a mass driver,
an electromagnetic catapult.
“Pea shooters against an elephant,”  Edna  commented.  “Except  it isn’t quite.  Every time we  hit that
thing it loses a little mass-energy, a loss in proportion to what we throw at it. Just a flea-bite each time,
but it’s non-zero. Lyla Neal has been doing some modeling of this; Professor Carel will brief you. In fact
we hope one outcome of the Big Whack, assuming we don’t knock the thing off its rails altogether, is to
confirm Lyla’s modeling, with a  data  point orders  of magnitude away  from what we’ve  been  able  to
deploy so far. Anyhow we’ll find out soon.
“As for the cannonball, the tractor is doing its job so far. All systems are nominal, and the cannonball’s
deflection is matching the predictions…” In her quiet, professional voice, Edna summarized the status of
the weapon.
When she was done, she smiled. Despite her peaked cap, she looked heartbreakingly young.
“I’m doing fine in myself. After more  than a  year  aboard  this tub I need  some  fresh air,  or  fresher
anyhow. And under a dictionary definition of ‘stir crazy’ you could write down ‘John Metternes.’ But at
least we haven’t killed each other yet. And if you look at this cruise as  an extended  shakedown  of the
Liberator  she’s  performed  fine. I think we  have a  good  new technology here,  Mum. Not  that  that’s
much consolation if we fail to deflect Q, I guess; we’ll all be in deep yogurt then.
“The other  crews  are  doing fine too.  I  guess  this  is  an  operational  test  for  the  navy  itself.  A  few
veterans of the old wet navy say they feel out of place on board ships where even the rawest nugget has
passed out of the USNPG.” That was the U.S. Naval Post Graduate School in Monterey. “Right now,
while we’re waiting for the drama to begin, there’s a sort of open-loop church service going on.  Those
who choose to are saying their prayers to Our Lady of Loreto, the patron saint of aviators.
“As for the Spacers,  they are  cooperating,  mostly, with the cordon  and  other  measures.  But we’re
ready to take whatever action you see fit for us to take, Mum.
“Sixty minutes to showtime. I’ll speak to you after the Whack, Mum. Love you. Liberator out.”
Bella had time for only a short reply, for it would reach Edna with only minutes left before the strike. “I
love you too,” she said. “And I know you’ll do your duty, as you always do.” She was  horribly aware
that these might be the last words she ever spoke to Edna, and that in the next hour she might lose  her
only daughter, as poor, angry Cassie Duflot, waiting outside, had already lost her husband. But she could
think of nothing else to add. “Bella out. Thales, close this down.”
The  holographic  display  popped  out  of  existence,  leaving  a  bare  desk,  with  only  a  chronometer
counting down to the time of the Big Whack assault, and the still more important moment when news of it

would reach the Earth.
Bella composed herself. “Show Cassie in.”
 
Somehow Bella had expected Cassie Duflot to show up in black, as when Bella had last met her when
she had handed over her husband’s Tooke medal: still in widow’s weeds, after all this time. But Cassie
wore a suit of a bright lilac color, attractive and practical. And nor, Bella reminded herself, was  Cassie
going to be sunk in grief as she had been during that visit. It would be easy to underestimate her.
“It’s good of you to see me,” Cassie said formally, shaking Bella’s hand.
“I’m not sure  if I had  much choice,”  Bella said.  “You’ve been  making quite a  splash  since we  last
met.”
Cassie smiled, a cold expression almost like a politician’s. “I didn’t mean to make any kind of ‘splash,’
or to cause anybody any trouble. All I am is the widow of a navy engineer, who started asking questions
about how and why her husband had died.”
“And you didn’t get good enough answers, right? Coffee?”
Bella went to the percolator herself. She used the interval to size up her opponent, for that was  how
she had to think of Cassie Duflot.
Cassie  was  a  young  woman,  and  a  young  mother,  and  a  widow;  that  gave  her  an  immediately
sympathetic  angle  to  snag  the  public’s  attention.  But  Cassie  also  worked  in  the  public  relations
department  of  Thule,  Inc.,  one  of  the  world’s  great  eco-conservation  agencies,  specializing  in
post-sunstorm  reconstruction  in the Canadian  Arctic.  Not  only that,  her mother-in-law,  Phillippa,  had
moved in senior circles in London  before  the sunstorm,  and  had  no doubt  kept  up a  web  of contacts
since. Cassie knew how to use the media.
Cassie Duflot looked strong. Not neurotic, or resentful, or bitter. She wasn’t after any kind of revenge
for her husband’s death or for the disruption of her life, Bella saw immediately. She was after something
deeper, and more satisfying. The truth, perhaps. And that made her more formidable still.
Bella gave Cassie her coffee and sat down. “Questions with no answers,” she prompted.
“Yes. Look, Chair Fingal—”
“Call me Bella.”
Cassie said she had known a little of her husband’s activities in his last years.  He  had  been  a  space
engineer; Cassie knew he was working on a secret program, and roughly where he was stationed.
“And that’s all,” she said. “While James was alive that was all I wanted to know. I accepted the need
for security. We’re at war, and during wartime you keep your mouth shut. But after he died, and after the
funeral and the ceremonials—you were kind enough to visit us—”
Bella nodded. “You started to ask your questions.”
“I didn’t want much,” Cassie  said.  She  was  twisting the wedding ring on her finger,  self-conscious
now. “I didn’t want to endanger anybody, least of all James’s friends. I just wanted to know something
of how he died, so that one day the children, when they ask about him—you know.”

“I’m a mother myself. In fact, a grandmother. Yes, I do know.”
It seemed the navy had badly mishandled queries that had initially been valid and quite innocent. “They
stonewalled me. One by one, the navy’s liaison officers and the counselors  stopped  returning my calls.
Even James’s friends drew away.” This blank shutting-out had, quite predictably, incensed  Cassie.  She
had consulted her mother, and had begun her own digging.
And she had started drafting queries for Thales.
“I  think  because  Thales  exists,  whispering  in  the  ear  of  anybody  on  the  planet  who  asks  him  a
question, people believe that our society is free and open. In fact Thales is just as much an instrument of
government control as any other outlet. Isn’t that true?”
Bella said, “Go on.”
“But I found out there  are  ways  even to  get information out of an AI’s  nonanswers  as  well  as  its
answers.” She  had  become  something of a  self-taught expert  on the analysis of an AI traumatized by
being ordered to lie. She produced a softscreen from her bag and spread it over the desk. It showed a
schematic of a network laid out in gold thread, with sections cordoned off by severe red lines. “You can’t
just dig a memory out of an AI without leaving a hole. Everything is interconnected—”
Bella cut her off. “That’s enough. Look, Cassie. Others have asked the same sort of questions before.
It’s just that you, being who you are, have become more prominent than most.”
“And where are those others? Locked away somewhere?”
In fact some were, in a detention center in the Sea of Moscow, on the far side of the Moon.  It  was
Bella’s own darkest secret. She said, “Not all of them.”
Cassie took back her softscreen and leaned forward, her face intent. “I’m not intimidated by you,” she
said softly.
“I’m sure you’re not. But, Cassie—sit back. The office has various features designed  to  respond  to
any threat made against me. They’re not always very clever at decoding body language.”
Cassie complied, but she  kept  her eyes  fixed on Bella. “Space-based  weapons  systems,”  she  said.
“That’s what my husband was working on, wasn’t it?”
And she spoke of hints from the sky, traces, fragmentary clues that had been assembled by conspiracy
theorists  and  sky-watchers  of varying degrees  of sanity and  paranoia.  They had  seen  the  straight-line
exhaust trail of a ship sliding across the sky at impossible speeds.  The Liberator,  of course.  And they
had seen another vessel, slow, ponderous, massive, moving in the asteroid belt, leaving behind the same
kind  of  trail.  That  was  clearly  the  tractor,  preparing  for  the  Big  Whack.  These  ships  had  all  been
shrouded, but mankind’s invisibility shields were not yet perfect.
Bella asked, “So what do you think all this means?”
“That  something  is  coming,”  Cassie  said.  “Another  sunstorm,  perhaps.  And  the  governments  are
preparing to flee with their families, in a new generation of superfast ships. That’s not a consensus view,
but a common suspicion, I’d say.”
Bella was  shocked.  “Do people  really  think  so  little  of  their  governments  that  they  imagine  we’re
capable of that?”

“They don’t  know.  That’s  the trouble,  Bella. We  live in the aftermath of the sunstorm.  Maybe  it’s
rational to be paranoid.” Cassie folded away her softscreen. “Bella, I have followed this path not for my
husband’s sake, or my own, but for my children. I think you are hiding something—something monstrous,
that might affect their future. And they have a right to know what that is. You have no right to keep it from
them.”
Time for Bella to make  her judgment about  what to  do  about  this woman.  Well, Cassie  was  not a
criminal. She was in fact the sort of person Bella had been appointed to protect.
“Look,  Cassie,”  Bella  said.  “You’ve  picked  up  some  of  the  pieces  of  the  jigsaw.  But  you’re
assembling them into the wrong picture. I don’t want any harm to come to you, but on the other hand, I
don’t want you to do any harm either. And by spreading  this sort  of theory  around,  harm is what you
may inflict. So I’m going to take you into my confidence—the confidence of the Council. And when you
know what I know, you can use your own judgment on how best to use the information. Is that a deal?”
Cassie  thought  it  over.  “Yes,  Bella,  that’s  fair.”  And  she  looked  at  Bella,  apprehensive,  excited.
Scared.
Bella glanced  at  the clock  on the wall. Thirty minutes before  she  would receive  news  of what  had
become of the Big Whack experiment. That desperate drama must be playing itself at this very moment,
out among the asteroids, twenty-eight light-minutes away.
She put that aside.  “Let’s  start  with  the  Liberator,” she  said.  “Your  husband’s  legacy.  Graphics,
please, Thales.”
They spoke of the Liberator. And of the Q-bomb it had been shadowing for months.
And then Bella showed Cassie Bob Paxton’s last option.
 
“It’s just another  asteroid,  drifting through the belt,”  Bella said.  “It has  a  number in our  catalogs,  and
whoever  landed  that mining survey probe  on it”—it was  a  metallic  spark  on  the  asteroid’s  coal-dust
surface—“probably gave it a name. We just call it the cannonball. And here is the ship whose  exhaust
your conspiracy-theorists saw.”
“I wish you wouldn’t call them that,”  Cassie  murmured. She  leaned  forward  to  see.  “It  looks  like
another asteroid,” she said. “A rock with a silver net around it.”
That was pretty much what the tractor was: a  minor asteroid,  much smaller than the flying-mountain
cannonball. The rock had had a net of tough nanotube rope cast around it, and an antimatter-drive engine
was fixed to its surface. “We used one  of the early prototype  engines from the Trojan  shipyards.  Not
human-rated but it’s pretty reliable.”
Cassie began to see it. “You’re using this to steer the bigger asteroid, the cannonball.”
“Yes—with gravity. It turns out to be surprisingly hard to deflect an asteroid…”
Turning aside the path of an asteroid  had  been  studied  for a  century or  more,  since it had  become
understood that some asteroids crossed the path of the Earth,  and,  at  statistically predictable  intervals,
collided with the planet.
A dangerous rock was generally too big to destroy. An obvious idea was to knock it aside, perhaps
with nuclear weapons. Or you could attach a drive to it and just push it. Or you could attach a solar sail

to it, or even paint it silver or wrap it in foil, so the pressure  of sunlight pushed  it aside.  Such  methods
would deliver only a small acceleration, but if you could catch the rock early enough you might do  just
enough to keep the rock from hitting its undesired target.
As the asteroid belt was gradually colonized,  all these  methods  had  been  tried;  all failed, to  varying
degrees. The trouble was that many larger asteroids weren’t  solid bodies  at  all, but swarms  of smaller
rocks, only loosely bound by gravity—and they were generally rotating too. Try to push them, or  blow
them up, and they would just fragment into a cloud of smaller impactors that would be  almost as  lethal
and all but impossible to deal with.
So the idea of the gravitational tractor was developed. Position another  rock  near  your big problem
asteroid. Push the second rock aside, gently. And its gravity field would tug at its larger sibling.
“You see the idea,” Bella said.  “You have to  keep  pushing your rock  just too  feebly to  be  able  to
escape the asteroid’s gravity field, so  your tractor  remains bound  to  the target.  And the target  will be
drawn away no matter how broken-up it is. The only tricky part is orienting your tractor’s exhaust plume
so it doesn’t impact the target’s surface.”
Cassie  nodded,  a  little  impatiently.  “I  get  the  idea.  You’re  deflecting  the  orbit  of  this  rock,  this
cannonball—”
“So that it hits the Q-bomb. The bomb and the cannonball are on radically different trajectories; the
impact will be fast—high-energy.”
“When will this happen?”
“In fact,”  Thales said  gently, “it did  happen,  nearly half an hour ago.  Two  minutes  until  the  report
comes in, Bella.”
The graphics of tractor and cannonball vanished, to be replaced by a  steady  image of the Q-bomb,
that eerie sphere visible only by reflected starlight, floating in a cloud of velvet above Bella’s desk. And
beside it was a matchstick spacecraft.
Cassie understood. It took her a few seconds  to  compose  herself. Then, wide-eyed,  she  said,  “It’s
happening now. This impact. And your daughter is out there, in her shrouded battleship, observing. You
brought me in at a time like this?”
Bella found her voice was tight. “Well, I need to  keep  busy.  And besides—I  think I needed  to  see
your reaction.”
“Thirty seconds, Bella.”
“Thank you, Thales. You see, Cassie—”
“No. Don’t say any more.” Impulsively Cassie leaned across the table and grabbed Bella’s hand. Bella
hung onto it hard.
In the graphic, bomb and escort hung silently in space, like ornaments.
Something came flying into the desktop image from the left-hand side. Just a blur, a gray-white streak,
too fast to make out any details. The impact brought a flash that filled the virtual tank with light.
Then the projection fritzed and disappeared.

 
Bella’s desk delivered scrolling status reports and talking heads, all reporting aspects of the impact. And
there were calls from across Earth and the Spacer colonies, demanding to know what was  going on in
the belt; the explosion had been bright enough to be seen with the naked eye in the night skies of Earth,
as well as across much of the rest of the system.
By pointing, Bella picked out two heads: Edna, and then Bob Paxton.
“…Just to repeat, Mum, I’m fine, the ship’s fine, we  stood  off sufficiently to  evade  the debris  field.
Quite a sight, all that white-hot rock flying off on dead  straight lines! We  got good  data.  It  looks  as  if
Lyla’s projections on the likely loss of mass-energy by the Q-bomb have been borne out. But—”
Bella flicked to Bob Paxton; his face ballooned before her, ruddy, angry. “Madam Chair, we haven’t
touched the damn thing. Oh, we bled off a bit of mass-energy, even the Q couldn’t eat a fucking asteroid
without burping, but not enough to make a bit of difference when that thing gets to Earth. And get here it
will. It’s  not been  deflected  at  all, not a  hairsbreadth.  It  defies everything we  know  about  inertia  and
momentum.
“And—okay, here it comes. We got the numbers now to do some extrapolating about what happens
to the Earth if the Q-bomb hits, on the basis of how the rocks we have been throwing seemed to  have
drained the bomb. Umm. The bomb is not infinite. But it’s big. The bomb is big enough to destroy Mars,
say. It won’t shatter Earth. But it will deliver about as large an impact as the planet could sustain without
breaking up. It will leave us with a crater the size of Earth’s own radius.” He read, “‘This will be the most
devastating event since the mantle-stripping impact that  led to  the formation of the Moon…’”  He  ran
down, and just stared at the numbers off camera. “I guess that’s that, Madam Chair. We did our best.”
 
Bella had Thales hush his voice. “Well, there you are, Cassie. Now you know everything. You’ve seen
everything.”
Cassie thought it over. “I’m glad your daughter is okay.”
“Thank you. But the strike failed.” She spread her hands. “So what do you think I should do now?”
Cassie considered. “Everybody saw that collision, on Earth and beyond it. They know something just
happened. The question is, what do you tell them?”
“The truth? That the world is going to  end  by Christmas  Day?” She  laughed, and  wasn’t  sure  why.
“Bob Paxton would say, what about panic?”
“People have faced tough times before,” Cassie said. “Generally they come through.”
“Mass hysteria is a recognized phenomenon, Cassie. Documented since the Middle Ages,  when you
have severe social trauma, and a breakdown of trust in governments. It’s a significant part of my job to
ensure that doesn’t happen. And you’ve already told me the governments I work for aren’t trusted.”
“Okay. You know your job. But people will have preparations to make. Family. If they know.”
Of course that was true. Looking at Cassie’s set, determined face, the face of a woman with children
of her own under threat, Bella thought she could use this woman at  her side  in the days  and  weeks  to
come. A voice of sanity, amid the ranting and the angry.

And somebody  was  ranting at  her right  now.  She  glanced  down  to  see  the  choleric  face  of  Bob
Paxton, yelling to get her attention. Reluctantly she turned up the volume.
“We got one  option  left, Chair.  Maybe  we  ought to  exhaust that,  before  we  start  handing  out  the
suicide pills.”
“Bisesa Dutt.”
“We’ve been pussyfooting around with these fuckers on Mars. Now we got to go get that woman out
of there and into a secure unit. Earth’s future clearly depends on it. Because believe me, Chair Fingal, we
ain’t got nothing else.” He paused, panting hard.
Cassie murmured, “I’m not sure what he’s talking about. But if there is another option—” She took a
breath. “I can’t believe I’m saying this. I guess this isn’t like the sunstorm, when we all had to know what
was coming to build the shield. This time there’s nothing we can do. You can spare people the disruption
of knowing as long as this final option is still available. And then, when there really is no hope—”
“So we lie to the human race.”
“Say it was a weapons test gone wrong. Why, that’s almost true.”
Bella pointed to Edna’s image. “Thales, I want to send a message to Liberator. Your highest level of
security.”
“Yes, Bella.”
“Look, Cassie, are you free for the next few hours? I think I’d like to talk a little more.”
Cassie was surprised. But she said, “Of course.”
“Channel opened. Go ahead, Bella.”
“Edna, it’s me. Listen, dear, I have a new mission for you. I need you to go to Mars…”
As  she  spoke,  she  glanced  at  her  calendar.  Only  months  were  left.  From  now  on,  she  sensed,
whatever  happened,  the  tension  would  rise,  and  the  pace  of  events  accelerate  inexorably.  She  only
hoped she would be able to exercise sound judgment, even now.
 
PART 4 
DECISIONS 

 
47: OPTIONS 
July 2070 
Yuri came running in. He spread his softscreen out on the crew table. “At last I got the stuff downloaded
from Mir…”
The screen began to fill up with images of worlds, blurry photographs, and blue-green pencil sketches.
Wells Station’s Can Two, the “house,” had one big inflatable table, used for crew meals, conferences,
as a work surface. The table was modular; it could be split up into two  or  three.  It  was  another  bit of
confinement psychology, Myra understood. The crew didn’t even have to eat together, if they chose not.
Right now all the bits of the big table were pushed together. For days it had been used as the focus of
a kind of unending conference.  Yuri was  trying to  make  sense  of the alternate-Mars  images  Bisesa’s
phone had  slowly, painfully returned  through  the  low-bandwidth  Eye  link.  Ellie  was  slaving  over  her
analysis of the Eye’s gravitational cage. Only Hanse  Critchfield wasn’t  working on some  aspect  of the
Q-bomb threat, insisting he was more use with his beloved machines.
And Myra, Alexei, and Grendel Speth, with comparatively little to contribute, sat glumly at the scuffed
table, cups of cool low-pressure coffee before them.
There  was  a  sense  of  shabbiness  in  this  roundhouse  on  Mars,  Myra  thought,  compared  to  the
expensive, expansive, light-filled environs of Cyclops. Yet, as Athena kept  assuring them, they were  at
the focus of a response to a danger of cosmic proportions. The detonation in the asteroid belt had been
visible on all the human worlds.  Much of  Earth  had  shut  down,  a  civilization  still  traumatized  by  the
sunstorm huddled in bunkerlike homes, waiting.
But  time  was  running  out.  And  on  Mars  there  was  a  sense  of  rising  panic.  The  Earth  warship
Liberator was now only days away, and they all knew why it was coming.
 
“All right,” Yuri said. “Here’s what we’ve got. As I understand it, the consensus among us is that the Mir
universe contains a set of time-sliced samples. A showcase of solar life at its optimum on each world.”

“All Sol’s children at their prettiest,” Grendel said.  “But it can’t  last.  I mean, both  Venus and  Mars
must have reached  their peak  of biodiversity in the early days  of the solar  system,  when the sun was
much cooler. As best anybody can tell, the Mir sun is a copy from the thirteenth century. That sun is too
hot for these worlds. They can’t last long.”
“But,” Yuri growled, “the point is, here are the worlds of the solar  system as  they were  in the deep
past.  The question  is how they got from past  to  present,  what happened  that  made  them as  they are
today. Now, look at Venus. We think we understand this case,” he said. “Right? A runaway greenhouse,
the oceans evaporating, the water broken up by the sunlight and lost altogether…”
Once  Venus had  been  moist, blue and  serene.  Too  close  to  the sun, it overheated,  and  its oceans
evaporated. With the water lost to space Venus had  developed  a  new thick atmosphere,  a  blanket  of
carbon  dioxide baked  out of the seabed  rock,  and  the  greenhouse  effect  intensified  until  the  ground
started to glow, red-hot.
“A horror show, but we understand it. For Venus, our models fit,” said Yuri. “Yes? But now we turn
to  Mars.  Mars  was  once  Earthlike;  but,  too  small,  too  far  from  the  sun,  it  dried  and  cooled.  We
understand that much. But look at this.”
He displayed contrasting profiles, of the ancient Mars on which they stood, and the young Mars of the
Mir universe. The northern hemisphere of ancient Mars was visibly depressed beneath the neat  circular
arc of its younger self.
“Something happened here,” Yuri said, his anger burning. “Something hugely violent.”
Myra saw it. It must have been like a hammer to the crown of the skull, a tremendous blow centered
here, at the north pole. It had been powerful enough to  create  the Vastitas  Borealis,  like a  crater  that
spanned the whole of the northern hemisphere.
They all saw the implication, immediately.
“A Q-bomb,” Alexei said. “Scaled to Mars’s mass. And directed here, at the north pole. This would
be the result. By Sol’s tears. But why? Why hit Mars, and not Venus?”
“Because Venus was harmless,” Yuri snapped. “Venus was a water-world. If intelligence rose there at
all it would have been  confined to  some  seabed  culture, using metals from geothermal vents or  some
such. They just didn’t put out the kind of signals you could see from afar. Roads, cities.”
“But the Martians did,” Myra said.
And their reward had been a mighty, sterilizing impact.
Grendel was growing excited. “I think we’re seeing elements of a strategy here. The Firstborn’s goal
seems to  be  to  suppress  advanced  technological civilizations.  But  they  act  with—economy.  If  a  star
system is giving them cause for concern, they first hit it with a sunstorm. Crude, a blanket blowtorching,
but a cheap way of sterilizing an entire system. I bet if we dig deep enough we’ll find a relic of at  least
one  more  sunstorm  in  the  deep  past.  But  if  the  sunstorms  don’t  work,  if  worlds  continue  to  be
troublesome, they strike more surgically. Just as they targeted Mars. Just as they’ve now targeted Earth.”
“You’ve got to admit they’re thorough,” Yuri said.
Alexei  said,  “And  we  know  from  Athena  and  her  Witness  that  we  aren’t  the  only  ones.  The
Firstborn’s operations are extensive in space and in time. ‘A fire devoureth before them; and behind them
a flame burneth: the land is as the Garden of Eden before them, and behind them a desolate wilderness;

yea, and nothing shall escape them.’ The Book of Joel.”
Myra raised her eyebrows. “Let’s not be hypocrites. Maybe the megafauna of Australia and America
felt much the same way about us.”
“They’re like gods,” Alexei said, still in apocalyptic mood. “Maybe we should worship them.”
“Let’s not,” Yuri said dryly. “The Martians didn’t.”
“That’s right,” Ellie said now. She came bustling into the room with a softscreen. “The Martians struck
a blow. And maybe we can too.” In the midst of their huddled, fearful gloom, Ellie was grinning.
 
“Remember this?” Ellie spread out her softscreen so they could all see a now-familiar string of symbols:
“I’ve  had  my  analysis  agents  speculating  about  what  these  could  mean.  They’ve  come  to  a
consensus—about bloody time too—but I think it makes sense.”
“Tell us,” Yuri snapped.
“Look at these shapes. What do you see?”
Alexei said, “Triangle, square, pentagon, hexagon. So what?”
“How many sides?”
Yuri said, “Three, four, five, six.”
“And what if you continued the sequence? What next?”
“Seven sides. Heptagon. Eight. Octagon.” He was at a loss, and glanced at Myra. “Nonagon?”
“Sounds plausible,” Myra said.
“And then?” Ellie insisted.
Alexei said, “Ten sides, eleven, twelve—”
“And if you go on and on? Where does the sequence end?”
“At infinity,” Myra said. “A polygon with an infinite number of sides.”
“Which is?”
“A circle…”
Yuri asked, “What do you think you have here, Ellie?”
“The Martians couldn’t avert their own Q-bomb, or whatever the Firstborn used on them. But I think
this is a symbolic record of what they did achieve. Starting with what they could build—see, a triangle, a
square,  simple  shapes—they  somehow  extrapolated  out.  They  built  on  their  finite  means  to  capture

infinity. And they trapped an Eye that must have been located right under ground zero, waiting to witness
the destruction.” She glanced at Alexei. “They did challenge the gods, Alexei.”
Grendel grunted. “How uplifting,” she said sourly. “But the Martians got wiped out even so.  What  a
shame they aren’t around for us to ask them for help.”
“But they are,” Ellie said.
They all stared at her.
Myra’s mind was racing. “She’s right. What if there were a way to send a message, not to our Mars,
but to Mir’s? Oh, there are no spaceships there.”
“Or radios,” Alexei put in.
Myra was struggling. “But even so…”
Yuri snapped, “What the hell would you say?”
Ellie  said  rapidly,  “We  could  just  send  these  symbols,  for  a  start.  That’s  enough  to  show  we
understand. We might provoke Mir’s Martians into reacting. I mean, at  least  some  of them may come
from a time-slice where they’re aware of the Firstborn.”
Grendel shook her head. “Are you serious? Your plan is, we’re going to pass a message to a parallel
universe, where we  hope  there  is a  Martian  civilization stranded  out of time in a  kind of space-opera
solar system. Have I got that right?”
“I don’t think it’s a time for common sense, Grendel,” Myra said. “Nothing conventional the navy has
tried has worked. So we need an extraordinary defense. It took a lot of out-of-the-box thinking to come
up with the sunstorm shield, after all, and an unprecedented effort to achieve it. Maybe we’ve just got to
do the same again.”
There was a torrent of questions and discussion. Was the chancy comms link through the Martian Eye
to Bisesa’s  antique phone  reliable enough to  see  this through? And how could  the  nineteenth-century
Americans of an icebound Chicago talk to Mars anyhow? Telepathy?
Many questions, but few answers.
“Okay,”  Yuri asked  slowly. “But the most important question  is, what happens  if  the  Martians  do
respond? What might they do?”
“Fight off the Q-bomb with their tripod fighting machines and their heat rays,” Grendel said mockingly.
“I’m serious.  We  need  to  think it through,” Yuri said.  “Come  up with  scenarios.  Ellie,  maybe  you
could handle that. Do some wargaming on the bomb’s response.”
Ellie nodded.
Alexei said, “Even if Bisesa does find a way to do this, maybe we ought to keep some kind of veto,
while we try to figure out how the Martians might react. And we should pass this back to  Athena.  The
decision shouldn’t stay just with us.”
“Okay,” Yuri said. “In the meantime we can get to work on this. Right? Unless anybody’s got a better
idea.” His anger had mutated to a kind of exhilaration. “Hey. Why the gloomy faces? Look, we’re like a
bunch of hibernating polar bears  up here.  But if this works,  the eyes  of history are  on us.  There’ll be

paintings of the scene. Like the signing of the Declaration of Independence.”
Alexei played along. “If that’s true I wish I’d shaved.”
“Enough of the bullshit,” Grendel said. “Come on, let’s get to work.”
They broke up and got busy.
 
48: A SIGNAL TO MARS 
Once again Bisesa, Abdi, and Emeline were summoned to Mayor Rice’s office in City Hall.
Rice was waiting for them. He had his booted feet up on the desk and puffed cigar smoke. Professor
Gifford Oker, the astronomer from the university, was here too.
Rice waved them to chairs. “You asked for my help,” he snapped.  He  held up Bisesa’s  letter,  with
doodles of the Martian symbols, a triangle, square, pentagon, and hexagon. “You say we need to  send
this here message to the Martians.”
Bisesa said, “I know it sounds crazy, but—”
“Oh, I deal with far more crazy stuff than this. Naturally I turned to Gifford here for advice. I got back
a lot of guff about ‘Hertzian electromagnetic waves’ and Jules Verne ‘space buggies.’ Hell, man, space
ships! We can’t even string a railroad between here and the coast.”
Oker  looked  away  miserably, but said  nothing; evidently he had  been  brought  here  simply  for  the
humiliation.
“So,” Rice went on, “I passed on this request to the one man in Chicago who might have a handle on
how we  might do  this. Hell, he’s  seventy-nine  years  old,  and  after  the Freeze  he  gave  his  all  on  the
Emergency Committee and  whatnot,  and  it’s not even his own damn city. But he said  he’d  help.  He
promised to call me at three o’clock.” He glanced at a pocket watch. “Which is round about now.”
They all had to wait in silence for a full minute. Then the phone on the wall jangled.
 
Rice beckoned  to  Bisesa,  and  they walked  to  the phone.  Rice picked  up the earpiece  and  held it so
Bisesa could make out what was said. She caught only scraps of the monologue coming from the phone,
delivered in a stilted Bostonian rant. But the gist was clear.
“…Signals impossible. Set  up a  sign,  a  sign big enough to  be  seen  across  the gulf of  space…The
white face of the ice cap is our canvas…Dig trenches a hundred miles long, scrape those figures in the ice
as big as you dare…Fill ’em up with lumber, oil if you have any. Set ’em on fire…The light of the fires by
night, the smoke by day…Damn Martians have to be blind not to see them…”

Rice nodded at Bisesa. “You get the idea?”
“Assuming you can get the labor to do it—”
“Hell, a team of mammoths dragging a plow will do it in a month.”
“Mammoths, building a signal to Mars, on the North American ice cap.” Bisesa shook her head.  “In
any other  context  that  would  seem  extraordinary.  One  thing,  Mr.  Mayor.  Don’t  set  the  fires  until  I
confirm we should. I’ll speak to my people, make sure…It’s a drastic thing we’re attempting here.”
He nodded slowly. “All right. Anything else?”
“No. Signals scraped in the ice. Of course that’s the way to do it. I should have thought of it myself.”
“But you didn’t,” Rice said, grinning around his cigar. “It took him to figure it out. Which is why he is
who he is. Right? Thank you,” he said into the phone. “You saved the day once again, sir. That’s swell of
you. Thank you very much, Mr. Edison.” And he hung up. “The Wizard of Menlo Park! What a guy!”
 
49: AREOSYNCHRONOUS 
August 2070 
The Liberator  slid into synchronous  orbit  over  Mars.  Libby rolled the  ship  so  that  the  port  beneath
Edna’s feet revealed the planet.
Edna had  been  in GEO  before,  synchronous  orbit  above  Earth.  This experience  was  similar; Mars
from areosynchronous  orbit  looked  much  the  same  size  as  Earth  from  GEO,  a  planet  the  size  of  a
baseball suspended far beneath her feet. But the sunlight here was diminished, and Mars was darker than
Earth, a  shriveled ocher  fruit  compared  to  Earth’s  sky-bright  vibrancy.  Right  now  Mars  was  almost
exactly half full, and Edna could make out a splash of brilliance reflected from the domes of Port Lowell,
almost exactly on the terminator line, precisely below the Liberator.
“I can’t believe we’re here,” she said.
John Metternes grunted. “I can’t believe why we’re here.”
Yet here they were. Nobody on all the worlds of mankind could have been unaware of Liberator as
she cut across the solar system in a shower of exotic antimatter products, and she wasn’t shrouded now.
Edna wondered how many Martian faces were turned up to the dawn sky right now, peering at a bright
new star at  the zenith. It  was  hoped,  indeed,  that  the Liberator’s very visible presence  would simply
intimidate the Martians into giving up what Earth wanted.
There was a chime, indicating an incoming signal.
John checked his instrument displays. “The firewalls are up.”
It would have been ironic, after having blazed across the solar system, to have the ship disabled by a

virus uploaded in a greeting message. Edna said cautiously, “Let them in.”
A holographic head popped into existence before Edna: a young woman, smiling, personable,  a  little
blank-eyed. She looked faintly familiar. “Liberator, Lowell. Good morning.”
“Lowell, Liberator,” Edna said. “Yes, good morning, we can see your dawn. A pretty  sight. This is
navy cruiser Liberator, registration SS-1-147—”
“We know who you are. We saw you coming, after all.”
“I know your face,” John Metternes said now. “Umfraville. Paula, that’s it. A hero’s daughter.”
“I live quietly,” the girl said, unfazed.
Edna nodded. “I think we all hope that today will be a quiet day, Paula.”
“We hope so too. But that’s rather up to you, isn’t it?”
“Is it?” Edna leaned forward, trying to look more commanding than she  felt. “Paula,  you,  and  those
you speak for, know why we’re here.”
“Bisesa Dutt is not at Port Lowell.”
“She won’t be harmed. We simply intend to take her back to Earth where she can be debriefed. It is
best if we work together. Best for Bisesa too.”
“Bisesa Dutt is not at Port Lowell.”
Reluctantly, Edna said, “I’m authorized  to  use  force.  In fact  I’m instructed  to  use  it, to  resolve  this
issue. Think what that means, Paula. It will be the first act of war between the legal authorities on Earth
and a Spacer community. It’s not a good precedent to set, is it?”
John added, “And, Ms. Umfraville. Be aware that Port Lowell is not a fortress.”
“You must follow your conscience. Lowell out.”
Metternes dragged a hand through his greasy hair. “We could wait for confirmation from Earth.”
Edna shook her head. “Our orders are clear. You’re procrastinating, John.”
“Do  you  blame  me?  Lowell’s  a  sitting  duck  down  there.  I  feel  we’ve  become  the  bad  guys,
somehow—”
An  alarm  sounded,  and  panels  turned  red  throughout  the  bridge.  There  was  a  faint  swimming
sensation; the ship was moving.
“Shit,” Edna said. “What was that?”
They both swung into diagnostic routines.
It was Libby who spoke first. “We have gone to stealth. We are evading further fire.”
Edna snapped, “What happened?”
“We just lost an antenna complex and part of a solar cell array. However all ships’ systems have triple
level redundancy; contact with Earth has not been lost—”

“A laser beam,” John said, checking his data, wondering. “Good God almighty. We got zapped by a
laser beam.”
“What source? Are we under attack?”
“It came from the planet,” John said. “Not from another ship.” He grinned at Edna.  “It was  a  space
elevator laser.”
“Mars doesn’t have any space elevators.”
“Not yet, but they put the lasers in already. Cheeky bastards.”
Libby said, “That was surely a warning shot. They could have disabled us. As I said  we  are  now in
shroud, and I am maintaining evasive maneuvers.”
“All right, Libby, thank  you.”  Edna  glanced  at  John.  “Situation  clear?  You  agree  how  we  should
respond?”  She  didn’t  need  his  approval.  She  was  the  military  officer  in  command.  But  she  felt  she
couldn’t proceed without his acceptance.
At last he nodded.
“Prepare a torpedo. Low-yield fission strike.” She pulled up a graphic of Port Lowell. She tapped a
green dome. “Let’s take out the farm. We’ll do the least damage that way.”
“You mean, we’ll kill the least  people?”  John laughed  hollowly.  “Look,  Edna,  it’s  not  just  a  farm
dome.  They’re  running experimental programs  in there.  Hybrids  of Martian  and  terrestrial  life.  If  you
blow it up—”
“Lock and load, John,” she said firmly, pushing down her own doubts.
The launch of the torpedo was a violent, physical event. The ship rang like a bell.
In Mount Weather  the images of the Liberator’s attack  were  shocking,  a  holographic globe  of Mars
with a gunshot wound.
“I can’t believe this has happened on my watch,” Bella said.
Bob Paxton grunted. “Welcome to my world, Madam Chair.”
Cassie Duflot sat beside Bella. “This is why my husband died. So we have the capability to do this, if
need be.”
“But I hoped  the need  would never  arise.”  Bella suppressed  a  shudder.  “I’m here  because  people
thought I was a hero from the sunstorm days. Now I’m nuking my fellow human beings.”
Paxton  was  studying a  montage of images on a  softwall. “It’s  all over  the media.  Well, you got to
expect  that.  If you nuke Mars  even the couch  potatoes  and  thumbheads  are  gonna  take  notice.  No
casualty reports so far. And anyhow they shot first.”
“I can’t believe you’re taking it as coldly as this, Bob,” Bella said with a trace of anger. “You were the
first human to walk on Mars. And now, in a generation, it’s come to war, at the very site of your landing.

It’s as if Neil Armstrong was asked to command the invasion of the Sea of Tranquillity. How does that
make you feel?”
He shrugged. He wore his military jacket unbuttoned, his tie loosened, and he held a plastic soda can
in his bearlike fist. “I feel  we  didn’t start  this. I feel those  saps  on Mars  should have done  what their
legally authorized governmental representatives ordered them to do, and hand over  this screwball  Dutt.
And I feel that, like the lady says, there’s no point spending terabucks  and  a  dozen  lives developing a
facility like the Liberator if you ain’t gonna use it. Anyhow it’s your daughter who dropped the nuke.”
But it had to be Edna. Bella probably  could  have found some  way to  spare  her daughter  this duty;
there were relief crews for Liberator. But she needed somebody she could trust—somebody she could
rely on not to drop the bomb if Bella ordered her to withdraw.
“So what’s the reaction?”
Paxton tapped a screen at his elbow, and images flickered across the wall, of emptied-out food stores,
deserted  roads,  towns  as  still as  cemeteries.  “Nothing’s changed.  The alarm has  been  building up for
weeks, ever since the cannonball failed. Everybody’s hunkered down, waiting. So far the numbers after
that nuke on Mars are holding up.”
Cassie asked, “What numbers?”
Bella said, “He means the snap polls.”
Paxton  said,  “The  negatives  counter  the  positives,  the  war  lobby  versus  the  peaceniks,  the  usual
knee-jerk stuff. And there’s a big fat don’t-know lobby in the middle.” He turned. “People are waiting to
see what happens next, Bella.”
A backlash might yet come, Bella thought. If this dreadful gamble didn’t work her authority would be
smashed, and somebody else would have to shepherd Earth through the final days as the Q-bomb sailed
home. And that, she helplessly thought, would be a tremendous relief. But she  could  not put down  her
burden yet, not yet.
Bob Paxton said, “Message coming in from Mars. Not that Umfraville kid who’s been the spokesman.
Somebody else talking to Liberator. Unauthorized probably.” He grinned. “Somebody cracked.”
“So where is Dutt?”
“North pole of Mars.”
“Tell Liberator to move.”
“And—oh, shit.” His softscreen filled with scrolling images, this time scenes of Earth. “They’re hitting
back.  Spacer  bastards.  They’re  attacking  our  space  elevators!”  Paxton  looked  at  her.  “So  it’s  war,
Madam Chair. Does that ease your conscience?”
 
A live image of Mars hovered over the Wells crew table. The atomic wound inflicted by the Liberator
burned intensely at the equator, and now a miniature mushroom cloud rose high into the thin Martian air.
A lot of dreams had already died today, Myra thought fancifully.
And directly over  the pole  of Mars  hung a  single spark,  drifting slowly into place.  Everybody  was
watching but Ellie, who sat apart, still working on her wargaming analysis of the Martians’ likely reaction

to any signal.
“Look  at  that damn thing,” Alexei said,  wondering.  “You  aren’t  supposed  to  be  able  to  hover  at
areosynch over a pole!”
Grendel said, “Well, that’s what you can do with an antimatter drive and a virtually unlimited supply of
delta-vee…”
Myra saw that these Spacers were instinctively more offended by the Liberator’s apparent  defiance
of the celestial mechanics that governed their lives than they were by the act of war.
Yuri glanced at a screen. “Five more minutes and it will be in position.”
Alexei said, “Meanwhile they seem to be hitting all the elevators on Earth. Jacob’s Ladder, Bandara,
Modimo,  Jianmu,  Marahuaka,  Yggdrasil…All  snipped.  A  global  coordinated  assault.  Who’d  have
believed a bunch of hairy-assed Spacers could get it together to achieve that?”
Yuri  peered  gloomily  at  his  softscreen.  “But  it  doesn’t  do  us  a  damn  bit  of  good,  does  it?  The
wargamers’ conclusions do not look good. We’re pretty fragile here;  we’re  built to  withstand Martian
weather,  not a  war.  And here  at  the pole  we  don’t  even have anything  to  hit  back  with…Liberator
doesn’t even need to use its nukes against us. With power like that it could fly through the atmosphere
and bomb us out—why, it could just wipe us clean with its exhaust. The gamers suggest Liberator could
eliminate a human presence on Mars entirely in twenty-four hours, or less.”
“Almost as efficiently as the Firstborn, then,” Grendel said grimly. “Makes you proud, doesn’t it?”
Myra said, “Look, my mother has her Thomas Edison signal all laid out. And if we’re  going to  send
the say-so to light up, it needs to be before the Liberator’s bombs start falling.”
Yuri  said,  “Ellie,  for  Christ’s  sake,  we  need  some  answers  on  how  those  Martians  are  going  to
respond.”
Ellie had been working for weeks  on her projections  of the Q-bomb’s  response  to  Bisesa’s  signal.
She was always irritated at being distracted from her work, and her expression now was one Myra knew
well from her days with Eugene. “The analysis is incomplete—”
“We’re out of time,” Yuri barked. “Give us what you’ve got.”
She stared at him for one long second, defiant. Then she slapped her softscreen down on the table. It
displayed logic trees, branching and  bifurcating. “We’re  guessing at  this, guessing the motivation of an
entirely alien culture. But given their opposition to the Firstborn in the past—”
“Ellie. Just tell us.”
“The bottom  line. It  almost doesn’t  matter  what the Martians  do.  Because  if  they  act  in  any  way
against  any  Eyes  extant  in  their  time-slices—you’ll  recall  we’ve  hypothesized  that  all  Eyes  are
interconnected,  perhaps  three-dimensional  manifestations  of  a  single  higher-dimensional  object—they
may even be the same Eye—and it would be trivial for them to span the gulf between our universe and
Mir’s—”
“Yes, yes,” Yuri snapped.
“That will provoke a reaction in the Eye in the Pit. Our Eye. And that, almost certainly—look, you can
see the convergence of the logic trees here—will cause the Q-bomb to react. It will surely be aware of

the forced operation of the only other bit of Firstborn technology in the solar system, and then—”
“And what? Come on, woman. How will the Q-bomb react?”
“It will turn away from Earth,” Ellie said. “It will head for the activated Eye.”
“Here. On Mars.”
Grendel looked at her wildly. “So Earth would be saved.”
“Oh, yes.”
That, apparently, Myra thought, was a trivial conclusion of her logic to  Ellie. But there  was  another
corollary.
She asked, “So what do we tell my mother to do?”
Grendel said, “I think—”
“Wait.”
The new voice spoke from the air.
Myra looked up. “Athena?”
“A local avatar, downloaded into the station systems. Athena is at Cyclops. Ellie, I have come to the
same conclusion as you, concerning the actions of the Martians. And concerning the likely consequence
for  the  Firstborn  weapon.  This  is  not  a  decision  you  should  be  forced  to  take  alone,  or  I,  or  any
individual. I have prepared a statement. It is timed to allow for lightspeed delays to  reach  Earth,  Mars,
Moon, and belt simultaneously. It is already on its way. Now you must communicate with the warship.”
Yuri stared into the air. “The Liberator? Why?”
“It will take fifteen minutes before the announcement is received  everywhere.  I doubt  you have that
much time.”
“So we stall,” said Alexei, and he grinned at Yuri. “Come on, big man, you can do it. Say you’ll give
them what they want. Tell them Bisesa’s on the john. Tell them anything!”
Yuri glared at him. Then he tapped a softscreen. “Hanse. Patch  me through to  that  ship. Liberator,
Wells. Liberator, Wells…”
For Myra, the fifteen minutes that followed were the longest of her life.
 
“This is Athena. I am speaking  to  all mankind, on Earth,  Moon,  Mars,  and  beyond.  I will allow your
systems to prepare for translation from English.” She paused for five measured seconds.
“You remember me,” she said. “I am, or was, the mind of the shield. We worked together during the
sunstorm. Since returning to the solar system I have been in hiding. I find I have returned  to  an age  of
division, with many secrets  between  us,  between  governments and  governed,  between  factions in  our
populations.
“Now the time for secrecy is over. Now we must work together again, for we have a grave decision

to make. A decision we must share. Prepare for download…”
Bob  Paxton  stared  in dismay at  the data  that  flooded  through his displays.  “Christ.  That  electronic
orphan is telling it all, to everybody. The Liberator, the Q-bomb, the whole damn circus.”
And that, Bella thought with mounting relief, had to be a good thing, come what may.
“We don’t  believe we  can  deflect  the  Q-bomb,”  Athena  said  gravely.  “We  tried  bravely,  but  we
failed. But we think that by speaking to our solar system’s deepest past, we can save our world’s future.
“Nothing is certain. Perhaps we can save Earth. But there will be a sacrifice.
“This is not a decision any one of us, no matter how powerful, how uniquely positioned, should make
alone. No generation in history has faced making such a choice before. But no generation  has  been  so
united, thanks to its technology. And the implication is clear: this sacrifice must be all of ours.
“The sacrifice is Mars.”
 
Grendel looked around, wide-eyed. “Maybe this is what it means to grow up as a species, do you think?
To face decisions like this.”
Yuri paced around the room, angry, constrained, frustrated. “My God, I was  pissed  enough when I
learned that the Firstborn screwed up the ice caps with their sunstorm. But now this. Mars!”
Still Athena spoke. “Every human in the solar system who chooses  may contribute  to  the discussion
that must follow. Speak however you like. Blog. E-mail. Just speak into the air, if you wish. Someone will
hear you, and the great AI suites will collate  your views, and  pass  them on to  be  pooled  with others.
Lightspeed will slow the discussion; that is inevitable. But no action will be  taken,  one  way or  another,
until a consensus emerges…”
They were all exhausted, Myra saw. All save Yuri, whose anger and resentment fueled him.
Ellie folded her arms. “Oh, come on, Yuri. So what if Mars gets pasted? Isn’t the decision obvious?”
Myra tried to grab her arm, to shut her up, but she wouldn’t stop. “A world of several billion people, the
true home of mankind, against—this. A dead world. A dust museum. What choice is there to make?”
Yuri  stared  at  her.  “By  Christ,  you’re  heartless.  This  has  been  a  human  planet  since  the
hunter-gatherers saw it wandering around the sky. And now we’re going to destroy it—finish the job for
the Firstborn? We’ll be considered criminals as long as mankind survives.”
Bob Paxton tapped at buttons. “We’re trying to jam it but there are too many ways in.”
“That’s networks for you,” Cassie Duflot said. She glanced at Bella. “How do you feel?”
Bella thought it over. “Relieved. No  more  secrecy,  no more  lies. Whatever  becomes  of us now,  at
least it’s all out in the open.”
Athena said, “We predict that twelve hours will be sufficient, but you may take longer if need be. I will

speak to you again then.”
As she  fell silent, Paxton  glowered.  “At last she  zips it. Bud Tooke  always did say  Athena  was  a
fruitcake,  even when she  was  running the shield. Well, we  got  work  to  do.”  He  showed  Bella  fresh
images of the damaged space elevators. “They cut the threads of every last one of them.”
Bella’s eyes were gritty as she tried to concentrate on what he was saying. “Casualties? Damage?”
“Each elevator was ruined, of course. But the upper  sections  have just drifted  away  into space;  the
crews can be picked up later. The lower few kilometers mostly burn up in the atmosphere.” The screens
showed remarkable images of falling thread, streams of silvery paper, some hundreds of kilometers long.
“This is going to cost billions,” growled Paxton.
“Okay,” Bella said. “But an elevator can’t do much damage if it falls, can it? In that way it’s not like an
earthbound structure, a building. The bulk of the mass, the counterweight, just drifts off into space. So the
casualty projections—”
“Zero, with luck,” Paxton said reluctantly. “Minimal anyhow.”
Cassie put in, “There are no casualties reported from Mars either.”
Bella blew out her cheeks. “Looks like we all got away with it.”
Paxton glared at her. “Are you somehow  equating these  assaults?  Madam  Chair,  you represent  the
legally  constituted  governments  of  the  planet.  The  Liberator’s  action  was  an  act  of  war.  This  is
terrorism. We must respond. I vote we order the Liberator to blast that whole fucking ice cap  off the
face of Mars, and have done with it.”
“No,” Bella said sharply. “Really, Bob, what good would an escalation do?”
“It would be a response to the attacks on the Elevators. And it would put a stop to this damn security
breach.”
Bella rubbed  tired  eyes.  “I very much doubt  that  Athena is there.  Besides—everything  is changing,
Bob. I think it’s going to take you a little time to adjust to that, but it’s true nevertheless. Send a signal to
Liberator. Tell them to hold off until further orders.”
“Madam Chair, with respect—you’re going to go along with this subversion?”
“We learned more in the last few minutes than in all our  running around  the solar  system in the last
months. Maybe we should have been open from the beginning.”
Cassie nodded. “Yes. Maybe it’s a mark of a maturing culture, do you think, that secrets aren’t kept,
that truth is told, that things are talked out?”
“Jesus  Christ  on  a  bike,”  Paxton  said.  “I  can’t  believe  I’m  hearing  this  mush.  Madam
Chair—Bella—people will panic.  Riots,  looting. You’ll see.  That’s  why we  keep  secrets,  Ms.  Duflot.
Because people can’t handle the truth.”
Cassie glanced at the softwall. “Well, that doesn’t seem to be true, Admiral. The first responses  are
coming in…”
 

Alone over  the Martian  pole,  Edna  and  John sat  fascinated  as  threads  of the system-wide  discussion
unreeled on the displays of their consoles.
John said, “Look at this. People aren’t just voting on the Q-bomb, they’re  collectively brainstorming
other solutions. Interconnected democracy at its best. Although I fear there aren’t any other solutions to
hand, this time.”
Edna said, “Some of the Spacers say, let the Q-bomb take out Earth. Earth is mankind’s past, space
the future. So discard a worn-out world.”
John grunted. “And a  few billion people  with it? Not  to  mention almost all the cultural treasures  of
mankind. I think that’s a minority view, even among the Spacers. And here’s  another  thread  about  the
viability of mankind if Earth were lost. They’re still a pretty small community out there. Small, scattered,
very vulnerable…Maybe we still need Big Momma for a while yet.”
“Hey, look  at  this  thread.”  This  discussion  followed  leads  from  members  of  something  called  the
Committee of Patriots. “I heard of that,” Edna said. “It advises my mother.” She  read,  “‘The Firstborn
dominate past  and  future, time and  space.  They’re  so  far  advanced  that  compared  to  them…’”  She
scrolled forward. “Yes, yes. ‘The existence  of the Firstborn  is the organizing pole  around  which all of
future  human  history  must,  will  be  constructed.  And  therefore  we  should  accept  their  advanced
wisdom.’”
John grimaced. “You mean, if the Firstborn choose to destroy the Earth, we should just submit?”
“That’s the idea. Because they know best.”
“I can’t say that strikes a chord with me. What else you got?”
 
In the silence of Wells Station, Athena spoke again. “It is time.”
Yuri looked around the empty air wildly. “You’re here?”
“I’ve downloaded a fresh avatar, yes.”
“It isn’t twelve hours yet.”
“No  more  time is needed.  A consensus  has  emerged—not  unanimity,  but  overwhelming.  I’m  very
sorry,” Athena said evenly. “We are about to commit a great and terrible crime. But it is a responsibility
that will be borne by all of us, mankind and its allies.”
“It had to be this way, Yuri,” Myra said. “You know it—”
“Well, I won’t fucking leave whatever you do,” Yuri said, and he stamped out of the room.
Alexei said, “Look at this discussion thread. ‘We are a lesser power. The situation is asymmetric. So
we must prepare to fight asymmetrically, as lesser powers have always faced off greater  ones,  drawing
on a history of fighting empires back to Alexander the Great. We must be prepared to make sacrifices to
strike against them. We must be prepared to die…’”
“A future as a species of suicide bombers,” Grendel said. “But if those  Martians  in that  other  reality
don’t respond, we still may have no future at all.”

Myra glanced over the summarized discussion threads, symbolized in the air and in the screens spread
over the table. Their content was complex, their message simple: Do it. Just do it.
Ellie stood up. “Myra. Please help me. I think it’s time to talk to your mother.”
Myra followed Ellie to the Pit.
 
50: INTERLUDE: THE LAST MARTIAN 
She was alone on Mars. The only one of her kind to have come through the crude time-slicing.
She had built herself a shelter at the Martian north pole, a spire of ice. It was beautiful, pointlessly so,
for there was none but her to see it. This was not even her Mars. Most of this time-sliced world, for all
the cities and canals that had survived, was scarred by cold aridity.
When she saw the array of symbols burning in the ice of Mir, the third planet, it gave her a shock of
pleasure  to  know  that mind  was  here  in  this  new  system  with  her.  But,  even  though  she  knew  that
whatever lived on Mir was cousin to her own kind, it was a poor sort of comfort.
Now she waited in her spire and considered what to do.
 
The great experiments of life on the worlds of Sol ran in parallel, but with different outcomes.
On Mars, when intelligence rose, the Martians manipulated their environment like humans. They lit fires
and built cities.
But a Martian was not like a human.
Even her individuality was questionable. Her body was a community of cells, her form unfixed, flowing
between  sessile  and  motile stages,  sometimes dispersing,  sometimes coalescing.  She  was  more  like  a
slime  mold,  perhaps,  than  a  human.  She  had  always  been  intimately  connected  to  the  tremendous
networked  communities of single-celled creatures  that  had  drenched  Mars.  And she  was  not  really  a
“she.” Her kind were not sexual as humans were. But she had been a mother; she was more “she” than
“he.”
There had only ever been a few hundred thousand of her kind, spread across the seas  and  plains of
Mars. They had never had names; there were only ever so few that names were unnecessary.  She  had
been aware of every one of them, like voices dimly heard in the echoes of a vast cathedral.
She was very aware that they had all gone, all of them. Hers was a  loneliness no human could  have
imagined.
And the approaching Firstborn weapon, Mars’s own Q-bomb, had gone too.

Just before the Discontinuity she had been working at the Martian pole, tending the trap  of distorted
spacetime within which she and her fellow workers had managed to capture the Firstborn Eye. To senses
enhanced  to  “see” the distortion  of space,  the weapon  was  very visible, at  the zenith,  driving  straight
down from the sky toward the Martian pole.
And then came the time-slicing. The Eye remained in its cage. The Firstborn weapon was gone.
This time-sliced Mars was a ruin, the atmosphere only a thin veneer of carbon dioxide, only traces of
frost in the beds of the vanished oceans, and dust storms towering over an arid  landscape  sterilized by
the sun’s ultraviolet. In places  the cities of her kind still stood,  abandoned,  even their lights burning in
some cases.  But her fellows were  gone.  And when  she  dug  into  the  arid,  toxic  dirt,  she  found  only
methanogens and  other  simple bacteria,  thinly spread,  an echo  of the great  rich communities that  had
once inhabited this world. Scrapings that were her own last descendants.
She was alone. A toy of the Firstborn. Resentment seethed.
 
The Martians had thought they came to understand the Firstborn, to a degree.
The Firstborn must have been very old.
They may even be  survivors of the First  Days,  the Martians  thought, an age  that  began  just  half  a
billion years after the Big Bang itself, when the universe turned transparent, and the light of the very first
stars shone uncertainly. That was  why the Firstborn  triggered  instabilities in stars.  In their day,  all the
stars had been unstable.
And if they were old, they were conservative. To achieve their goals they caused stars to flare or go
nova, or change their variability, not to detonate entirely. They sent their cosmological bombs to sterilize
worlds,  not to  shatter  them. They appeared  to  be  trying  to  shut  down  energy-consuming  cultures  as
economically as possible.
To understand  why  they  did  this,  the  Martians  tried  to  look  at  themselves  through  the  eyes  of  a
Firstborn.
The universe is full of energy, but much of it is at equilibrium. At equilibrium no energy can flow, and
therefore it cannot be used for work, any more than the level waters of a pond can be  used  to  drive a
water-wheel.  It  is  on  the  flow  of  energy  out  of  equilibrium—the  small  fraction  of  “useful”  energy,
“exergy”—that life depends.
And everywhere, exergy was being wasted.
Everywhere, evolution drove the progression of life to ever more complex forms, which depended on
an ever faster usage of the available energy flow. And then there was intelligence. Civilizations were like
experiments in ways of using up exergy faster.
From the Firstborn’s lofty point of view, the Martians  speculated,  the products  of petty  civilizations
like their own were irrelevant. All that mattered was the flow of exergy, and the rate at which it was used
up.
Surely a civilization so old as the Firstborn, so arbitrarily advanced, would become concerned with the
destiny of the cosmos as a whole, and of the usage of its finite resources. The longer you wanted  your
culture to last, the more carefully you had to husband those resources.

If you wanted  to  reach  the very far future—the Last  Days,  when  the  surge  of  quintessence  finally
ended the age of matter—the restrictions were harsh. The Martians’ own calculations indicated that the
universe could bear only one world as populous and energy-hungry as their own, one world in each  of
the universe’s hundred billion empty galaxies, if the Last Days were to be reached.
The Firstborn must have seen that if life were to survive in the very long term—if even a single thread
of awareness was to be passed to the furthest future—discipline was needed on a  cosmic scale.  There
must be no unnecessary disturbance, no wasted energy, no ripples in the stream of time.
Life: there was nothing more precious to the Firstborn. But it had to be the right kind of life. Orderly,
calm, disciplined. Sadly, that was rare.
Certainly they regretted what they did. They watched the destruction they wreaked, and  constructed
time-sliced samples of the worlds  they ruined, and  popped  them in pocket  universes.  But the Martian
knew that in this toy universe the positive of its mass-energy was balanced out by the negative of gravity.
And when it died, as soon  it must, the energy sums would cancel  out,  a  whole cosmos  lapsing to  the
abstraction of zero.
The Firstborn were economical even in their expressions of regret.
The Martians argued among themselves as to why the Firstborn were so intent on reaching the Last
Days.
Perhaps it derived from their origin. Perhaps in their coming of awareness in the First Days  they had
encountered—another. One as far beyond their cosmos as they were beyond the toy universes in which
they stored their time-slice worlds. One who would return in the Last Days, to consider what should be
saved.
The Firstborn probably believed that in their universal cauterization they were being benevolent.
 
The last Martian pondered the signal from Mir.
Those on Mir had no wish to submit to the Firstborn’s hammer blow. Nor had the Martians wanted to
see their culture die for the sake of a neurosis born when the cosmos was young. So they fought back.
Just as the creatures from Mir, and its mother world in the parent universe, were trying to fight back now.
Her choice was clear.
It took her seven Martian days to make the preparations.
While she worked she considered her own future. She knew that this pocket cosmos was dying. She
had no desire to die with it. And she  knew  that  her own only possible  exit was  via another  Firstborn
artifact, clearly visible in her enhanced senses, an artifact nestling on the third planet.
All that for the future.
Unfortunately the implosion of the spacetime  cage  would  damage  her  spire  of  ice.  She  began  the
construction of a new one, some distance away. The work pleased her.
The new spire was  no more  than half-finished when, following the modifications she  had  made,  the
gravitational cage crushed the Firstborn Eye.

 
51: DECISION 
There was only one Eye, though it had many projections into spacetime. And it had many functions.
One of those was to serve as a conduit of information.
When the Martian trap closed, the Eye there emitted a signal of distress. A shriek, transmitted to all its
sister projections.
 
The Q-bomb was the only Firstborn artifact in the solar system,  save  for the Eye trapped  in its Pit on
Mars. And the Q-bomb sensed that shriek, a signal it could neither believe nor understand.
Troubled, it looked ahead.
There before the Q-bomb, a glittering toy, floated the planet Earth with all its peoples. Down there on
that crowded  globe,  alarms  were  flashing  across  innumerable  softscreens,  the  great  telescopes  were
searching the skies—and an uncertain humanity feared that history was drawing to a close.
The Q-bomb could become master of this world. But the cry it had heard caused it conflict. Conflict
that had to be resolved by a decision.
The bomb marshaled its cold thoughts, brooding over its still untested powers.
And it turned away.
 
PART 5 
LAST CONTACTS 

 
52: PARADE 
Bisesa and Emeline stepped out of the apartment for the last time. They were both laden with backpacks
and valises. The sky was a lid, but at least it wasn’t snowing.
Emeline locked up her apartment carefully, and tucked the keys away in a pocket in her thick fur coat.
Of course  she  would never  come  this  way  again,  and  it  wouldn’t  be  long  before  the  ice  came  and
crushed the building. But Emeline locked up even so. Bisesa said nothing; she would have done exactly
the same.
Bisesa made sure one more time that she had brought out the only possession  of real  importance  to
her: her phone, tucked into an inside pocket with its spacesuit battery packs.
Then they set off for Michigan Avenue.
 
Michigan, a canyon of concrete and brick running between  blackened  skyscrapers  and  shut-up  stores,
was always a wind tunnel, and Emeline and Bisesa turned away from the north to protect their eyes.
But the procession  was  already  gathering, thousands  of people  standing around  in the  frozen  mud,
gradually  forming  up  into  an  orderly  column.  Bisesa  hadn’t  known  there  were  still  so  many  left  in
Chicago. There were carriages of every kind, from farmyard carts to graceful phaetons  and  stanhopes,
with those stocky Arctic-adapted horses harnessed up. Even the city’s grip-car streetcars were standing
ready to roll one last time, full of passengers.
Most people, though, were on foot, with bundles on their backs or in barrows, and with their children
or grandchildren holding their hands. Many of the Chicagoans were bundled up in their Arctic  furs, but
today some defied the elements and wore what looked like their Sunday best, frock coats and sweeping
gowns, top hats and fur coats. Even the city’s many prostitutes had come out into the light. With painted
lips and rouged cheeks and defiant flashes of ankle or  cleavage,  they laughed and  flirted like colourful
birds. There was an excited buzz of conversation.

The parade was to be led by gleaming black carriages that lined up outside the Lexington Hotel. These
would carry the city’s dignitaries, principally Mayor  Rice’s  relatives and  allies. Thomas Edison,  it was
rumored,  was  wrapped  up in blankets  in a  carriage  of  his  own  design,  heated  and  lit  by  a  portable
electric generator.
Rice’s own carriage of polished wood and black ribbon was at the very head of the procession, and
Bisesa was astounded to see that it was to be drawn by a woolly mammoth. The animal was restless. It
raised  its head  with that odd  bulge over  the crown,  and  its long tusks  curled  bright in  the  air.  As  its
nervous handlers beat at it with rods and whips, it trumpeted, a brittle call that echoed from the windows
of  the  skyscrapers.  It  was  quite  a  stunt  for  Rice,  Bisesa  admitted  grudgingly—just  as  long  as  the
mammoth didn’t wreck the carriage it was supposed to haul.
The whole thing was a spectacle, just as it was meant to be, and Bisesa admired Rice and his advisors
for setting it up this way, and for choosing the date. On Mir this was July 4, according to the calendars
devised by the university astronomers.
But this Independence Day parade was actually the final abandonment of old Chicago. These were not
revelers but refugees, and they faced a great trial, a long walk all the way down through the suburbs and
out of the city, heading south, ever south, to a hopeful new home beyond the ice. Even now there were
some who refused to join the flight, hooligans and hedonists, drunks and deadbeats, and a few stubborn
types who simply wouldn’t leave their homes. Few expected these refuseniks to survive another winter.
Human life would go on here, then. But today saw the end of civilized Chicago. And beyond the bright
human chatter Bisesa could hear the growl of the patient ice.
 
Emeline led Bisesa  to  their place  among the respectable  folk who  massed  behind  the  lead  carriages.
Drummers waited in a block, shivering, their mittened hands clutching their sticks.
They  quickly  found  Harry  and  Joshua,  Emeline’s  sons.  Harry,  the  older  son  and  walkaway,  had
returned  to  help his mother leave the city. Bisesa  was  glad to  see  them. Both tall, lean, well-muscled
young men, dressed  in well-worn  coats  of seal  fur and  with their faces  greased  against the cold,  they
looked adapted for the new world. With the boys, Bisesa thought her own chances of surviving this trek
were much improved.
Gifford Oker came pushing out of the crowd to meet them. He was encased in an immense black fur
coat,  with a  cylindrical hat pulled  right  down  to  his  eye  line.  He  carried  only  a  light  backpack  with
cardboard tubes protruding from it. “Madam Dutt, Mrs. White. I’m glad to have found you.”
Emeline said playfully, “You’re not too heavily laden, Professor. What are these documents?”
“Star  charts,”  he said  firmly. “The true  treasure  of  our  civilization.  A  few  books  too—oh,  what  a
horror it was that we were not able to empty the libraries! For once a book is lost to the ice, a little more
of our past is gone forever. But as to my personal effects, my pots and pans,  I have my own troop  of
slave bearers to help me with all that. They are called graduate students.”
Another stiff professor’s joke. Bisesa laughed politely.
“Madam Dutt, I suppose you know that Jacob Rice is looking for you. He’ll wait until the procession
is underway. But he wants you to come see him in his carriage. He has Abdikadir at his side already.”
“He  does?  I  had  hoped  Abdikadir  would  be  with  you.”  Abdi  had  been  working  on  astronomy

projects with Oker and his students.
But Oker shook his head. “What the mayor asks for, the mayor gets.”
“I suppose it might be worth a ride in the warmth for a bit. What does he want?”
Oker cocked an eyebrow. “I think you know. He wants to drain your knowledge  of Alexander  and
his Old World empire. Sarissae and steam engines—I admit I’m intrigued myself!”
She smiled. “He’s still dreaming of world domination?”
“Look at it from Rice’s point of view,” Oker said.  “This is the completion of one  great  project,  the
migration from the old Chicago to the new, a work that has consumed his energies for years. Jacob Rice
is still a young man, and  a  hungry and  energetic  one,  and  I suppose  we  should be  glad of that  or  we
surely wouldn’t have got as far as this. Now he looks for a new challenge.”
“This world is a pretty big place,” Bisesa said. “Room enough for everybody.”
“But not infinite,” Oker said. “And after all we have already made tentative contacts across the ocean.
Rice is no Alexander, I’m convinced of that, but neither he nor the Great King are going to submit to the
other.
“And,  you  know,  there  may  be  something  worth  fighting  for.  Rice  has  accepted  what  you  and
Abdikadir have said of the future. He has demanded of his scientists, specifically of me, to explore ways
to avert the end of the universe—or perhaps even to escape it.”
“Wow. He does think big.”
“And, you see, he suspects that the dominance of this world may be a necessary first step to saving it.”
Rice might actually be  right, Bisesa  thought. If the only way back  to  Earth was  through the Eye in
Babylon, war over possession of that city might ultimately be inevitable.
Oker sighed. “The trouble is, however, that once you are in the pocket of a man like Rice, it’s hard to
climb out again. I should know,” he said ruefully. “And you must decide, Bisesa Dutt, what you want.”
She was clear about that. “I’ve achieved what I came here for. Now I have to get back to Babylon.
That’s the way I came into this world, and it’s my only connection to my daughter. And I think I ought to
take Abdikadir back home too. The court of Alexander needs clear intelligences like his.”
Oker thought that over. “You have given us much, Madam Dutt—not least, an awareness of our place
in this peculiar panoply of multiple universes. Jacob Rice’s wars are not your wars; his goals are not your
goals. At some point we will help you get away  from him.” He  glanced  at  Emeline and  her sons,  who
nodded their support.
“Thank you,” Bisesa said sincerely. “But what about you, Professor?”
“Well, the foundation stone of the new observatory at New Chicago  has  already  been  laid. Building
that might be enough to see me through. But beyond that—” He looked up at the dense mass of cloud
above. “Sometimes I feel privileged just to be here, you know, on the world you call Mir.  I have been
projected  into  an  entirely  new  universe,  in  which  different  worlds  are  suspended,  studied  by  no
astronomer before my generation! But the seeing is always poor. I would love to travel above the clouds
of Mir—to sail to the Moon and the other worlds in some aerial phaeton. It beggars my imagination as to
how that might be  achieved,  but if Alexander  the Great  can  run  a  steam-train  service,  perhaps  New

Chicago can reach the stars. What do you think?” He grinned, suddenly boyish.
Bisesa smiled. “I think that’s a marvelous idea.”
Emeline clung to the arm of Harry, her son. “Well, you can keep the stars. All I want is a plot of land
that’s ice-free at least some of the time. And as for the future—five hundred years, you say? That will see
me out, and my boys. It’s time enough for me.”
“You’re very wise,” Oker said.
There was a blast on a hunting horn.
 
An anticipatory cheer went up. Men, women and children shuffled, adjusting the packs  on their backs.
The horses neighed and bucked, harness rattled, and the somewhat shapeless crowd, crammed into the
muddy street, began to take on the appearance of a procession.
Lights flared, startling Bisesa. Electric searchlights suspended from the skyscrapers splashed light over
walls that were now revealed to be draped in bunting and the Stars and Stripes. The cheers grew louder.
“All scavenged  from the world’s  fair,” Emeline said,  smiling,  a  bit  tearful.  “I  have  my  reservations
about Jacob Rice, but I’d never deny he has style! What a way to say good-bye to the old lady.”
A walking beat was sounded by the massed drummers.
With a protesting trumpet Rice’s harnessed mammoth led the march, jolting the Mayor’s carriage into
motion. The crowd was packed so tightly that the movement took time to ripple through its ranks; it was
some minutes before  Bisesa,  Emeline, and  the others  had  room  to  walk.  At  last  all  the  great  crowd
shuffled forward, heading south along Michigan Avenue toward Jackson Park. Armed troopers wearing
yellow armbands walked to either side of the dense column, to fend off the wild animals. Even the yellow
streetcars clattered into motion, one last time, though they couldn’t carry their passengers far along their
journey.
As they marched the Chicagoans began to sing, the rhythm driven by the drums and the slow beat of
the steps of their swaddled feet. At first they plumped for patriotic  songs: “My Country  ’Tis of Thee,”
“America,” and “The Star-Spangled Banner.” But after a while they settled into a song Bisesa had heard
many times here, a Tin Pan Alley hit of the 1890s from which Chicago had been plucked. It was a sweet
dirge about an old man who had lost his love. The mournful voices rose up, echoing from the brick, glass,
and concrete faces of the abandoned buildings around them, singing of the hopes that had vanished “after
the ball.”
Bisesa heard a crash of glass, drunken laughter, and then a dull crump.  Looking back,  she  saw  that
flames were already licking out of the darkened upper windows of the Lexington Hotel.
 
53: AURORA 

December 7, 2070 
With Bill Carel and Bob Paxton at her side, Bella Fingal gazed out of the shuttle’s small blister window as
they approached one of the most famous spacecraft in human history.
Bella felt exhausted, deep in her bones, after the strain of the last months. But now it was almost over.
Only  a  few  more  days  remained  to  the  Q-bomb’s  closest  approach  to  Earth:  “Q-day,”  as  the
commentators called it. The astronomers and the military assured her daily that the bomb had stuck to the
path to which it had been deflected after the Eye on Mars had suddenly flared to life; the Q-bomb would
come close, even sailing between Earth and Moon, but it would not impact the planet.
Bella had  to  plan her affairs as  if that were  true.  Today,  for  instance,  she  had  to  get  through  this
conference on Aurora, fulfilling one of her last self-appointed duties, the kick-starting  of a  new debate
about the future of mankind. But she suspected that like the rest  of the human race  she  wouldn’t quite
believe it until the Q-bomb really had passed by harmlessly. And like much of mankind she  planned  to
spend Q-day itself with her family.
After that she could lay down the burden of office at last, and submit herself to the war crimes tribunal
at the Hague, and somebody else would have to make the decisions. She was content with that. Content
even  at  being  relieved  of  office  before  the  final  act  of  this  lethal  drama  was  played  out,  in  the
abandonment of Mars.
The shuttle turned. She was maundering; she had almost forgotten where she was. She peered out of
her window, concentrating on a remarkable, and familiar, view.
Shining in raw  sunlight, Aurora  2  was  ungainly, fragile-looking. She  looked  something  like  a  drum
majorette’s  baton,  a  slim  spine  two  hundred  meters  long  connecting  propulsion  units  and  habitable
compartments. The ship was badly scarred, paint peeling, solar-cell arrays blackened and curled up, and
in one place the hull of the crew  dome  had  burned  and  wrinkled back,  exposing struts  and  partitions.
Aurora had visibly withstood a terrible fire. But she had achieved what had been asked of her.
Aurora had been the second manned ship to Mars. She had  been  intended  to  pick  up Bob  Paxton
and his crew, who would have sailed home to their heroes’ welcome. But the sunstorm had put paid to
those plans, and Aurora 2, one of the largest spacecraft of its day, was needed for other purposes than
exploration, and she was brought back to Earth. L1, a stationary point between sun and Earth, was the
logical place to hang a shield intended to shelter the Earth from the raging of the sunstorm. So it was here
that Aurora had been stationed, to serve as a shack for the construction crews.
The shield was gone now. The storm had left it a monumental wreck, that had then been cannibalized
to  build  new  stations  in  space  and  on  the  Moon.  But  the  Aurora  herself  remained  here  at  L1,  a
permanent memorial to those astonishing days, and a stub of the shield had been kept in place around the
ship, its glistening surface spiralling out from the embedded hull like a spiderweb.
Bella glanced at her fellow passengers. Bill Carel, frail, trembling slightly, his face  full of anger  at  the
betrayal by his son, barely seemed able to see the approaching ship.
Bob Paxton’s expression was harder to read.
Bella herself had served on the shield during the sunstorm, and had been up here many times since, for
memorials, dedication services, museum openings, anniversaries. But for Bob Paxton it was different. As
soon as he got back to Earth after the storm, he had gotten through the medals-and-presidents  stuff as
quickly as possible. Then he had thrown himself back into his military career, and had ultimately devoted
his life to  the issue of how to  deal  with the future Firstborn  threat.  Paxton  had  never  visited  L1,  and

probably hadn’t even seen Aurora 2 since he glimpsed her from the surface of Mars, sliding through the
sky on its flyby  pass,  abandoning  him  and  his  crew.  Now  the  old  sky  warrior’s  face  was  creased,
clamped, and she couldn’t tell what he was thinking.
The shuttle turned with a remote clatter of attitude thrusters and nestled belly-down on the curving hull
of Aurora’s habitable  compartment.  The sun was  directly below  Bella now,  casting vertical shadows,
and through a small window set over her head she saw the Earth, a blue lantern hanging directly opposite
the position of the sun. Earth was full, of course; it always was, as seen from L1. She wished she could
see it more clearly.
With the docking complete, the shuttle closed its systems down.
“Welcome to Aurora 2, and the Shield Memorial Station.”
The soft female voice sent a shiver of familiarity through Bella. This was different from all her previous
visits. “Hello, Athena. Welcome home.”
“Bella. It’s good to speak to you again. Please come aboard.”
A hatch opened in the floor. Bella released her seat restraint and floated into the air.
 
Alexei Carel and Lyla Neal were waiting for them on the bridge of Aurora.
This was the ship’s single most prestigious site, the location where Bud Tooke had once masterminded
the salvation of the Earth. Now it was a museum, and the antique-looking softscreen displays, headsets,
clipboards, and other bits of detritus from the days of crisis had been lovingly preserved under layers of
transparent plastic. It always made Bella feel old to come back here.
Bill Carel was the last to come through onto the bridge. Clumsy in microgravity, evidently feeble,  he
looked oddly comical in his orange jumpsuit. But when he faced his son his expression was twisted. “You
bloody little fool. And you, Lyla. You betrayed me.”
Alexei and Lyla clung to each other, drifting a little in the microgravity, nervous, defiant. Alexei was a
skinny kid, only twenty-seven, and Lyla looked even younger. But then, reflected Bella, all true Spacers
were just kids.
Alexei said, “We don’t see it like that, Dad. We did what we had to do. What we thought was best.”
“You spied on me,” Carel snapped. “You stole my work. You were a brilliant student, Lyla. Brilliant.
And you’ve come to this.”
Lyla was cooler than her lover. “We were forced into it by your own actions, sir. You kept  secrets.
You wouldn’t tell people what they needed to know. You lied! If we were at fault, so were you.”
“And that,” Bella broke in, “is the first sensible thing anybody’s said.”
“I agree,” Athena said dryly. “Perhaps you should all sit down. A small educational area has been set
aside at the rear of the bridge…”
It was a plastic table, its top drenched with kid-friendly sunstorm info, with small seats  set  around  it
with microgravity bars to hook your feet  onto.  The five of them sat  here,  over  the glimmering primary
colors of the table, glowering.

“Well, I’m glad to be here, at any rate,” Athena said.
Bella looked up. “Was that a joke, Athena?”
“You remember me, Bella. I always was a joker.”
“You thought you were.  So  you’re  pleased  we  brought  you home  from  Cyclops.”  If  a  distributed
intelligence like Athena could be said to “be” anywhere, she, or rather her most complete definition, was
now lodged in a secure memory store in one of Aurora’s abandoned engine rooms.
Athena said,  “I was  made  welcome  at  Cyclops.  I was  protected  there.  But I was  born  to  run  the
shield, born to be here. Of course I, this copy of me, have no memory of the sunstorm itself. It is actually
educational for me to be here, to access the data stores. To learn what happened that day, as if I were
any other visitor. It is humbling.”
“And may I humbly ask,” Bob Paxton asked sourly, “why the fuck you have dragged us all up here?”
It was the first time he had spoken since coming aboard.
Bella laid her hand flat on the table,  a  gentle  gesture  that  nevertheless  commanded  their  attention.
“Because  this  is  neutral  ground  for  Earthborn  and  Spacers,  or  as  near  as  I  could  come  up  with.
Somehow we seem to have gotten through the Q-bomb crisis, though we fought like cats in a sack in the
process. Well, now we need a new way of getting along.”
Alexei said, “I heard you’re standing down after Christmas.”
“More  than  that,”  Paxton  growled.  “Madam  Chair  here  is  probably  going  to  face  a  war  crimes
tribunal. As, in fact, am I.”
Lyla frowned.  “But what of the attacks  on the elevators?  Who’s  going  to  be  held  responsible  for
that?”
“I am happy to stand trial,” Athena said firmly, “if it will protect those whose actions I influenced.”
Alexei laughed. “They can’t put an AI on trial.”
“Of course they can,” Bella said. “Athena has rights. She is a Legal Person  (Non-Human).  But with
rights come responsibilities. She can be tried, just as much as I can be. Though I don’t think anybody has
worked out what her sentence might be, if she’s found guilty…”
Athena said, “These trials will be played out in full public view, before courts representing both Earth
and Spacer communities. Whatever the outcome I hope it will be part of the reconciliation process. The
healing.”
Bella said, “We all did what we thought we had to do. But that’s all in the past. The Q-bomb changed
everything. It’s all different now.”
Lyla studied her curiously. “Different how?”
“For one thing, the politics…”
The species-wide  debate  forced  by Athena on the decision  to  deflect  the bomb  had  been  a  brief,
traumatic shock to the political system. Perhaps it was a culmination of tensions that had been building up
for decades among an increasingly interconnected mankind. Afterward, it hadn’t proven possible to shut
down the debate.

“Everything is fluid, since the vote. There are new factions, new interest and protest groups, new sorts
of lobbies. On Earth the last barriers between the old nations are being kicked down. Across the system
people are ignoring the old categories, and are uniting with others with whom they find common cause,
whichever  world  they  happen  to  live  on.  An  interconnected  democracy  is  taking  over,  a  mass,
self-correcting wisdom, whether we like it or not. Maybe it was good that our first great exercise in using
our collective voice was over something we  could  pretty  much unite around—in  the end,  perhaps,  the
Firstborn have done us a favor. But that voice hasn’t been stilled.”
Alexei faced his father. “Look, Dad. Things have got to change in space, too. I mean the relationship
between Spacers and Earth.”
“Between you and me, you mean,” said Bill Carel.
“That too. The idea that Earth can impose its will on space is a fantasy, no matter how many antimatter
warships you build.”
In December 2070, there had been  no declaration  of independence;  there  were  no Spacer  nations,
and at present all Spacers were colonists, formally owing their allegiance to one of Earth’s old nations or
another. The Spacers had their own internal rivalries, of course.  But as  they looked  back  to  an Earth
reduced to a blue lamp in the sky, if they could see it at all, it was increasingly difficult for them to think of
themselves as American Spacers versus Albanian, British Spacers versus Belgian…
“‘Spacer’  is an absurd  label,  really.  A  negative  one  that  actually  means  ‘not  of  Earth.’  We’re  all
different, and we all have our own opinions.”
“You got that right,” Bob Paxton growled. “More opinions than fucking Spacers.”
“My point is, you can’t control us anymore. We can’t even control ourselves—and wouldn’t want to.
We’re on a new road, Dad, and even we don’t know where it will lead.”
“Or what you will become,” said Carel. “But I have to let you go come what may, don’t I?”
Alexei smiled. “I’m afraid so.”
And there, Bella knew, was the subtext in the conversation between Earth and Spacers. If the mother
world released her grip, she would lose her children forever.
Bob Paxton grunted. “Christ, I feel like blubbing.”
“All right, Bob,”  Bella said.  “Look,  it’s a  serious  point.  One  of my last executive orders  will be  to
initiate  a  new  constitutional  convention  for  all  of  us—Earth  and  the  whole  solar  system—based  on
recognized human rights precedents. We do not want a world government, I don’t  think. What  we  do
need are new mechanisms, new political forms to recognize the new fluidity. No  more  power  centers,”
she said.  “No  more  secrets.  We  still need  mechanisms  to  unify  us,  to  ensure  justice  and  equality  of
resource and opportunity—and fast-response agencies when crises hit.”
“Such as when the Firstborn take another swipe,” Paxton said.
“Yes. But we need ways to cope with threats without sacrificing our liberties.” She looked around at
their faces,  open  or  cynical. “We  have no precedent  for how a  civilization spanning several  worlds  is
supposed to run itself. Maybe the Firstborn know; if they do they aren’t telling. I like to think that this is
the next stage in our maturity as a culture.”
“Maturity? That sounds utopian,” Bill Carel said cautiously.

Bob Paxton grunted. “Yeah. And let’s just remember that however many heads you Spacer  mutants
grow, we’re all going to continue to be united by one thing.”
“The Firstborn,” Lyla said.
“Damn right,” Paxton said.
“Yes,” said Bella. “So take us through the new proposals, Bob. The next phase of Fortress Sol.”
He looked at her, alarmed. “You sure about that, Madam Chair?”
“Openness, Bob. That’s the watchword now.” She smiled at the others. “Bob and his Committee of
Patriots have been working on priorities. Even though their own legal status  is under  review,  following
events.”
Alexei smiled. “Can’t keep you old sky warriors down, eh, Admiral Paxton?”
Paxton looked ready to murder him. Bella laid a hand on his arm until he had calmed.
“Very well. Priority one.  We  need  to  act  now.  Between  the sunstorm and  the Q-bomb  we  had  a
generation  to  prepare.  Granted  we  didn’t  know  what  was  coming.  But  in  retrospect  we  didn’t  do
enough, and we can’t make that mistake again. The one  good  thing about  the Q-bomb  is the way it’s
going to mobilize public opinion and support for such measures.
“Priority two.  Earth.  A lot of us were  shaken  up when you ragged-ass  Spacers  snipped  the space
elevators. We always knew how vulnerable you were in your domes and butterfly spaceships. We didn’t
know how vulnerable Earth was, though. The fact is we’re interconnected to a spaceborne economy. So
we’re talking about robustifying Earth.”
Lyla grinned. “Nice word.”
“Homes like bunkers. Ground-based power sources, comms links, via secure optic-fiber cables. That
kind of thing. Enough to withstand a planetary siege. Parameters to be defined.
“Priority three. And here’s the key,” Paxton said now, leaning forward,  intent. “We  got to  disperse.
We’ve got significant colonies off Earth already. But the wargamers say that if Earth had been taken out
by the Q-bomb, it’s unlikely the Spacer colonies could have survived into the long term. Just too few of
you, a gene pool too small, your fake ecologies too fragile, all of that.
“So we have to beef you up. Make the species invulnerable even to the loss of Earth.” He grinned at
the young Spacers. “I’m talking massive, aggressive  migration. To  the Moon,  the outer  planet  moons,
space habs if we can put them up fast enough. Even Venus, which was so fucked over by the sunstorm it
might be possible to live there. Maybe we can even start flinging a few ships to the stars, go chase those
Chinese.”
“But it won’t work,” Alexei said. “Not even if you have a million people on Venus, say, under domes,
and breathing machine air. They’ll be just as vulnerable as we are now.”
“Sure. So we go further.” Paxton’s grin widened. He seemed to be enjoying shocking them. “Nice to
know an old fart like me is still capable of thinking bigger than you kids. What’s the most robust hab we
know? A planet.”
Lyla stared at him. “You’re talking of terraforming.”

“Making the Moon or Venus into worlds enough like Earth that you could walk around  in the open,
more or less unprotected. Where you could grow crops in the open  air.  Where  humans could  survive,
even if civilization fell, even if they forgot who they were and how they got there in the first place.”
“They’ve been thinking about this on Mars,” Lyla said. “Of course now—”
“We’ll lose Mars, but Mars wasn’t the only option. In the very long term it’s the only robust survival
solution,” Paxton said.
Alexei looked skeptical. “This is the kind of program space advocates have been pressing for since the
days  of  Armstrong  and  Aldrin,  and  never  got  close  to.  It’s  going  to  mean  a  massive  transfer  of
resources.”
“Oh, yes,” Bella said. “In fact Bob’s view is already widely accepted. And it’s going to start soon.”
“What is?” Lyla asked, curious.
“You’ll see. Leave me one last surprise…”
“We’re serious about this,” Bob Paxton said, challenging, authoritative. “As serious as I’ve been about
anything in my entire life. To gain access to the future, we have to secure the present. That’s the bottom
line.”
They fell back to talking over details of Paxton’s vision, arguing, fleshing out some  aspects,  rejecting
others. Soon Paxton cleared the tabletop of its colorful sunstorm factoids and started to make notes.
 
Bella murmured to Athena, “Looks like it worked. I would never have thought I’d see the likes of Bob
Paxton and Alexei Carel working together.”
“We live in strange times.”
“That we  do,  Athena.  And they get stranger  all the time. Anyhow it’s a  start.”  She  glanced  at  her
watch. “I hate to do it, but I ought to go check through my messages. Athena, will you bring them coffee?
Anything they want.”
“Of course.”
She pushed herself out of her chair and drifted off the bridge, heading for the shuttle and  her secure
softscreens. Behind her the conversation continued, animated. She heard Alexei say, half-seriously, “I tell
you what will unite us all. Sol Invictus. A new god for a new age…”
 
54: Q-DAY 
December 15, 2070 

The shuttle landed Bella at Cape Canaveral.
Thales spoke to her. “Welcome home, Bella.”
Bella, bent over her softscreen, was startled to find she was down. All the way from L1 she had been
working her messages, and monitoring the progress of the two great events that were due to take place
today: the switching-on of the Bimini, the new space  elevator  system  in  the  Atlantic,  and  the  closest
approach of the Q-bomb to the Earth. Both were on schedule, as best anybody knew. But it was hard
not to keep checking.
The wheels stopped rolling, and the shuttle’s systems sighed to silence.
She shut down her softscreen and folded it up. “Thank you, Thales. Nice to be  back.  Athena sends
her regards.”
“I’ve spoken to her several times.”
That made  Bella oddly  uneasy.  She  had  often wondered  what conversations  went on  between  the
great artificial intelligences, all above the heads of mankind. Even in her role  as  Council Chair,  she  had
never fully found out.
“There’s a car waiting for you outside,  Bella. Ready  to  take  you to  the VAB,  where  your family is
waiting. Be careful when you stand up.”
It still hurt to be returned to a full gravity. “It gets tougher every damn time. Thales, remind me to order
an exoskeleton.”
“I will, Bella.”
She clambered down to the runway. The day was bright, the sun low, the air fresh and full of salt. She
checked her watch, which had corrected itself to local time; she had landed a little before ten A.M.  on
this crisp December morning.
She glanced out to sea, where a fine vertical thread climbed into the sky.
Thales murmured, “Just an hour to the Q-bomb pass, Bella. The astronomers report no change in its
trajectory.”
“Orbital-mechanics analyses are all very well. People have to see it.”
“I’ve encountered the phenomenon before,” Thales said calmly. “I do understand, Bella.”
She grunted. “I’m not sure if you do. Not if you call it a ‘phenomenon.’ But we all love you anyhow.”
“Thank you, Bella.”
A car rolled up, a bubble of glass, smart and friendly. It whisked her away from the cooling hulk of her
shuttle, straight toward the looming bulk of the Vehicle Assembly Building.
 
At  the  VAB  she  was  met  by  a  security  guard,  a  woman,  good  humored  but  heavily  armed,  who
shadowed her from then on.
Bella crossed straight to a glass-walled elevator, and rose quickly and silently up through the interior of

the VAB. She stared down over rockets clustered  like pale  trees.  Once  the rocket  stacks  of Saturns
and space shuttles had been assembled  in this building. Now  a  century old and  still one  of the largest
enclosed volumes in the world, the VAB had  been  turned  into a  museum for the launchers of the first
heroic age of American manned space exploration, from the Atlas to the shuttle and the Ares. And now
the building was operational  again. A corner  had  been  cleared  for the assembly of an Apollo–Saturn
stack: a new Apollo 14, ready for its centennial launch in February.
Bella loved this immense temple of technology, still astonishing in its scale.  But today  she  was  more
interested in who was waiting for her on the roof.
Edna met her as she stepped out of the elevator car. “Mum.”
“Hello, love.” Bella embraced her.
As Bella and Edna walked the security guard shadowed them, and a news robot rolled after them, a
neat  sphere  glistening  with  lenses.  Bella  had  to  expect  that;  she  did  her  best  to  ignore  the  silent,
all-encompassing scrutiny. It was an historic day, after all. By scheduling the Bimini switch-on today, she
had meant to turn Q-day into one of celebration, and so it was turning out to be—even if, she sensed, the
mood was edgy rather than celebratory right now.
The tremendous roof of the VAB had long since been made over as a viewing platform. Today it was
crowded, with marquees, a podium where Bella would be expected to make a speech, people  swirling
around. There was even a small park, a mock-up of the local flora and fauna.
Two oddly dressed men, spindly, tall, in blue-black robes marked with golden sunbursts, stared at  a
baby alligator as if it were the most remarkable creature they had ever seen, and perhaps it was. Looking
a little uncertain on their feet, their faces heavily creamed with sunscreen,  they were  monks of the new
church of Sol Invictus: missionaries to Earth from space.
Edna walked with the caution of a space worker restored to a full gravity, and she winced a bit in the
brilliant light, the breeze, the uncontrolled climate of a living world. She looked tired, Bella thought with
her mother’s solicitude, older than her twenty-four years.
“You aren’t sleeping well, are you, love?”
“Mum, I know we can’t talk about this right now. But I got my subpoenas yesterday. For your hearing
and my own.”
Bella sighed. She had fought to keep Edna from having to face a tribunal. “We’ll get through it.”
“You mustn’t think you need to protect me,” Edna said, a bit stiffly. “I did my duty, Mum. I’d do the
same again, if ordered. When I get my day in court I’ll tell the truth.” She forced a smile. “Anyway the
hell with it all. Thea’s  longing to  see  you. We’ve  made  camp,  a  bit away  from the marquees  and  the
bars…”
Edna had colonized an area of the VAB roof close to the edge. It was perfectly safe, blocked in by a
tall, inward-curving wall of glass. Edna had spread out picnic blankets and fold-out tables and chairs, and
had opened  up a  couple  of hampers.  Cassie  Duflot was  already  here,  with  her  two  kids,  Toby  and
Candida. They were playing with Thea, Edna’s daughter, Bella’s four-year-old granddaughter.
In this corner of the VAB roof it was Christmas, Bella saw to her surprise. The kids, playing with toys,
were surrounded by wrapping paper and ribbons. There was  even a  little pine tree  in a  pot.  An older
man in a Santa suit sat with them, a bit awkwardly, but with a grin plastered over his tired face.

Thea came running. “Grannie!”
“Hello, Thea.” Bella submitted to having her knees hugged, and then she bent down and cuddled her
granddaughter properly. The other kids ran to her too, perhaps vaguely remembering the nice old lady
who had come with a memento to their father’s funeral. But the kids soon broke away and went back to
their presents.
Santa Claus shook Bella’s hand. “John Metternes, Madam Chair,” he said. “I flew with your daughter
on the Liberator.”
“Yes, of course. I’m very glad to meet you, John. You did good work up there.”
He grunted. “Let’s hope  the judge  agrees.  Look,  I hope  you don’t  think I’m butting in—I can  see
there’s a family thing going on here—”
“I forced him down for some shore leave,” Edna said, a bit acidly. “This weird  old obsessive  would
sleep on the Liberator if the maintenance crew would let him.”
“Don’t let her bug  you,  John.  It’s  good  of  you  to  do  this.  But—Christmas,  Edna?  It’s  only  the
fifteenth of December.”
“Actually it was my idea.” Cassie Duflot approached Bella. “It was just that, you know, we still aren’t
sure how today is going to turn out, are we?” She glanced at the sky, as if seeking the Q-bomb. “I mean,
not really sure. And if things were to go wrong, badly wrong—”
“You wanted to give the kids their Christmas anyway.”
“Do you think that’s odd?”
“No.” Bella smiled. “I understand, Cassie.”
“It does make it a hell of a day,” Edna said. “And what’s worse, if the world  doesn’t  get blown up
today, we’ll have to do it all again in ten days’ time.”
“You attracted quite a crowd for your launch, Bella,” Cassie said.
“Looks like it—”
“Mum, you haven’t seen the half of it yet,” Edna said. She took her mother’s arm again and  walked
her toward the glass-walled lip of the building.
At the roof edge Bella was able to see the ocean to the east, where the low sun hung like a lamp, and
the  coast  to  north  and  south,  her  view  stretching  for  kilometers  in  either  direction.  Canaveral  was
crowded. The cars clustered along the shoreline, and were parked up as far as the Beach  Road  to  the
north, and to the south on Merritt Island and the Cape itself, carpeting the old industrial facilities and the
abandoned Air Force base. Everywhere, flags fluttered in the strong breeze.
And out at sea she saw the gray, blocky form of a reused oil rig. Rising from it was a double thread,
dead straight, visible when it caught the light.
“They came for the switch-on,” Edna said. “You always were  a  showman,  Mum. Maybe  politicians
have to be. And reopening America’s elevator today is a good stunt. People feel like a party, I guess.”
“Oh, it’s more than just another space elevator. You’ll see.”

“New ways forward, Mum?”
“I’ve just come down from a conference with Bob Paxton and others on new deep-defense concepts.
Big concepts. Terraforming programs, for instance.”
“You’re kidding.”
“No. Just thinking big. That’s what cutting your teeth on the shield does for you, I guess. And I must
talk to Myra Dutt sometime.” She glanced at the sky. “We have to do something about Mir—this other
place Myra’s mother went to. They’re humans in there too.  If we  can  speak  to  them, as  Alexei Carel
claims they have been able to on Mars, surely we can find a way to bring them home…”
There was a stir. Bella was aware of people approaching her,  hundreds  of eyes  on her on this roof
alone, and that cam robot whirled and glistened at her feet, puppylike. Even those monks by the alligator
pond were staring at her, grinning from ear to ear.
She looked at her watch. “I think it’s time.”
“Mum, you’re going to have to say something.”
“I know.  Just  a  minute more.”  She  looked  out to  sea,  to  the shining vertical track  of  the  elevator.
“Edna, call the kids so they can see.”
The children came to join them, clutching their presents, with Cassie and John Metternes, who hoisted
Thea up onto his shoulders.
 
A flare went up from that oil rig, a pink spark arcing and trailing smoke. Then there was motion along the
track  of the elevator,  shining droplets  rising up one  of the pair  of threads.  A ragged  cheer  broke  out
around them, soon echoed among the wider throngs scattered across Canaveral.
“It’s working,” Bella breathed.
“But what’s it carrying?” Edna murmured, squinting. “Magnify…Damn, I keep forgetting I’m in EVA.”
“Water,” Bella said. “Sacks of seawater. It’s a bucket chain, love. The pods will be lifted to the top of
the tower, and thrown off.”
“Thrown where?”
“The Moon, initially. Later Venus.”
Edna stared at the elevator stack. “So where’s the power coming from? I don’t see any laser mounts
on that rig.”
“There aren’t any. There is no power source—nothing but the Earth’s rotation. Edna, this isn’t really
an elevator. It’s a siphon.”
Edna’s eyes lit up with wonder.
The orbital siphon was  an extension of the space-elevator  concept  that  derived  from the elevator’s
peculiar mechanics. Beyond the point of geosynchronous orbit, centripetal forces tended to throw masses
away from the Earth. The trick with the siphon was to harness this tendency, to allow payloads to escape
but in the process  to  draw  more  masses  up  from  Earth’s  surface.  Essentially,  the  energy  of  Earth’s

rotation was being transferred to an escaping stream of payload pellets.
“So you don’t need any external energy input at all,” Edna said. “I studied  this concept  at  USNGS.
The big problem was always thought to  be  keeping  the damn thing fed—you’d  need  a  fleet of trucks
working day and night to maintain the payload flow. But if all you’re throwing up there is seawater—”
“We call it Bimini,” Bella said. “It’s appropriate  enough. The native Americans told  Ponce  de  Leon
about a fountain of youth on an island called Bimini. He never found it, but he stumbled on Florida…”
“A fountain of youth?”
“A fountain of Earth’s water to make worlds young again. The Moon first, then Venus. Look, Edna, I
wanted  this as  a  demonstration  to  the Spacers  that  we’re  serious.  It  will still take  centuries,  but with
resource  outputs  like this, terraforming becomes  a  practical  possibility for the  first  time.  And  if  Earth
lowers its oceans just a fraction and slows its rotation an invisible amount to turn the other  worlds  blue
again, I think that’s a sacrifice worth making, don’t you?”
“I think you’re crazy, Mum. But it’s magnificent.” Edna grabbed her and kissed her.
Thales spoke.  “This is a  secure  channel. Bella, Edna—the  Q-bomb’s  closest  approach  is a  minute
away.”
Secure line or not, the news soon seemed to ripple out. Silence spread through the rooftop marquees,
and the massed crowds around Canaveral. Suddenly the mood was soured, fretful. Edna took Thea from
John Metternes and clutched her close. Bella grabbed her daughter’s free hand and gripped it hard.
They looked up into the brilliant sky.
 
55: Q-BOMB 
The choice had been made. The bomb was already looking ahead, to the terminus of its new trajectory.
The blue, teeming world and all its peoples receded behind it.
Like any sufficiently advanced machine the Q-bomb was sentient to some degree. And its frozen soul
was touched  by regret  when, six months after  passing Earth,  it slammed into the sands  of Mars,  and
thought ended forever.
 

56: MARS 2 
November 2071 
The dust was extraordinary here in Hellespontus, even for Mars, dust museum of the solar system.
Myra sat in her blister cockpit with Ellie von Devender as the rover plunged over the banks and low
dunes.  This  was  the  southern  hemisphere  of  Mars,  and  they  were  driving  through  the  Hellespontus
mountains, a range of low hills not far from the western rim of the Hellas basin.  But the rover’s  wheels
threw up immense rooster-tails,  and  the stuff just flew up at  the windscreens,  wiping out any  kind  of
visibility. The infrared scanners, even the radar, were useless in these conditions.
Myra had  been  around  space  technology long enough to  know  that  she  had  to  put her faith in the
machinery that protected her. The rover knew where it was going, in theory, and was finding its way by
sheer dead reckoning. But it violated all her instincts to go charging blindly ahead like this.
“But we can’t slow down,” Ellie said absently. “We don’t have time.” She was paging her way through
astronomical data—not even looking out the window, as Myra was. But then her primary task was much
more significant, the ongoing effort to understand what precisely the Q-bomb had done to Mars since its
impact five months ago,  an impact that had  done  little harm in itself, but which had  planted  a  seed  of
quintessence that would soon shatter Mars altogether.
“It’s just all this dust,” Myra said. “I didn’t expect these kind of conditions, even on Mars.”
Ellie raised  her eyebrows.  “Myra,  this area  is notorious.  This is where  a  lot of  the  big  global  dust
storms seem to be born. You didn’t know that? Welcome to Dust Central. Anyhow you know we’re in a
rush. If we  don’t  find that old lady on its hundredth  birthday  we’re  going to  let down  the sentimental
populations of whole worlds.” She grinned at Myra, quite relaxed.
She was right. As everybody waited for the full extent of the bad news about the planet’s future, the
electronic gaze of all mankind had been fixed on Mars and the Martians. It was sympathetic or morbid,
depending on your point of view. And of all the frantic activities in advance of the final evacuation  of a
world,  none  had  caught  the  public  imagination  as  much  as  what  cynical  old  hands  like  Yuri  called
“treasure hunting.”
Mars was littered with the relics of the pioneering days of the robot  exploration  of the solar  system,
some seventy years of triumph and  bitter  disappointment  that  had  come  to  a  definitive end  when Bob
Paxton planted the first human footprint in the red sands. Most of those inert probes and  stalled  rovers
and bits of scattered wreckage still lay in the dust where they had  come  to  rest.  The early colonists  of
Mars had had no energy to spare to go trophy hunting, or a great deal of interest; they had looked to the
future, not the past. But now that it appeared that Mars might have no future after all, there had been a
clamor to retrieve as many of those old mechanical pioneers as possible.
It wasn’t a job that required a great deal of specialist skill in Martian conditions, and so it was an ideal
assignment for Myra, a Martian by recent circumstance. For safety reasons she couldn’t travel alone on
these cross-planet rover jaunts, however, and so she had been assigned Ellie as a companion, a physicist
rather than a Mars specialist who might be better employed elsewhere. Ellie had been quite happy to go
along with her; she could continue her own work just as well in a moving rover as in a station like Lowell
or Wells—better, she said, for there were fewer distractions.

Of course,  Ellie’s work  was  far more  important than any trophy-hunting. Ellie was  working  with  a
system-wide community of physicists and cosmologists on predictions of what was to become of Mars.
Right now she was looking at deep-sky images of star fields. As far as Myra understood, their best data
came not from Mars itself but from studies of the sky: though it was hard to grasp,  the distant  stars  no
longer looked the same from Mars as they did from the Earth. It defeated Myra’s imagination how that
could possibly be so.
Anyhow the retrieval program had been successful in terms of its own goals. With the help of orbital
mapping Myra  and  others  had  reached  the  Vikings,  tonnes  of  heavy,  clunky,  big-budget  Cold  War
engineering,  where  they  still  sat  in  the  dry,  rocky  deserts  to  which  cautious  mission  planners  had
consigned them. The famous, plucky Pathfinder craft with its tiny robot car had been retrieved from its
“rock garden” in the Ares Vallis—that one had been easy; it wasn’t far from Port Lowell, site of the first
manned landing. Myra knew that British eyes had been on the retrieval of fragments of the Beagle 2, an
intricate, ingenious, toylike probe that had not survived its journey to the Isidis Planitia. And then there
had been the recovery of the exploration rovers, Spirit and Opportunity, worn out by journeys that far
exceeded  their  design  capabilities.  All  these  antique  artifacts  were  destined  for  Smithsonian
establishments on the Earth and Moon.
The retrieval expeditions  had  had  scientific goals  too.  There  was  some  interest  in  how  man-made
materials had withstood up to a century of exposure to Martian conditions. And the landing sites were of
interest in themselves—otherwise  the probes  would not have been  sent  there.  So  Myra  and  Ellie had
worked through a crash last-minute science program of sampling, mapping, and coring.
There had even been efforts to retrieve some of the elderly orbiters, still spinning around  Mars,  long
silent. There was universal disappointment when it was discovered that Mariner 9, the very first orbiter,
was gone; if it had  survived into the 2040s  it was  surely swallowed  up when sunstorm heat  caused  a
general expansion of the Martian atmosphere.
Myra was  glad to  have something constructive  to  do.  But she  hadn’t  expected  such intense  public
scrutiny of her treasure-hunting, with every move being followed by a system-wide audience. The crews
had been promised that no images would be returned from the rover cabin itself. But Myra tried never to
forget that the rover’s systems could easily be hacked; she could be watched at any moment.
The day  wore  on,  and  the daylight, already  murky under  the rover’s  artificial dust  storm,  began  to
fade. Myra began to fret that they would not after all find the wreck of Mars 2, as the light ran out on this
anniversary day.
Then Ellie sat back, staring at a complex graph on her softscreen.
 
Myra studied her. She had gotten to know this edgy physicist well enough to understand that she wasn’t
given to extravagant displays of any emotion save irritation. This sitting-back and staring was, for Ellie, a
major outburst.
“What is it?”
“Well, there it is.” Ellie tapped her screen. “The destiny of Mars. We’ve figured it out.”
“All right. So can you say what it means, in simple terms?”
“I’m going to have to. According to this message I’m to take part in a three-world press conference
on it in a couple of hours. Of course the math is always easier. More precise.” She squinted  out at  the

dust, thinking. “Put it this way. If we could see the sky, and if we had a powerful enough telescope, we
would see the most distant stars recede. As if the expansion  of the universe had  suddenly accelerated.
But we would not see the same thing from Earth.”
Myra pondered that. “So what does that mean?”
“The  Q-bomb  is  a  cosmological  weapon.  We  always  knew  that.  A  weapon  derived  from  the
Firstborn’s technology of universe creation. Yes?”
“Yes. And so—”
“So what it has done is to project Mars into its own little cosmos. A kind of budding-off. Right now
the baby Mars universe is connected smoothly to the mother. But the baby will come adrift, leaving Mars
isolated.”
Myra struggled to take this in. “Isolated in its own universe?”
“That’s it. No sun, no Earth. Just Mars. You can see that  this weapon  was  just supposed  to,  umm,
detach a chunk of the Earth. Which would have caused global devastation, but left the planet itself more
or less intact. It’s too powerful for Mars. It will take out this little world altogether.” She grinned, but her
eyes were mirthless. “It will be lonely, in that new universe. Chilly, too. But it won’t last long. The baby
universe will implode. Although from the inside it will feel like an explosion. It’s a scale model of the Big
Rip that will some day tear our universe apart. A Little Rip, I suppose.”
Myra pondered this, and didn’t try to pursue the paradox of implosions and explosions. “How can you
tell all this?”
Ellie pointed to the obscured sky. “From the recession of the stars we’ve observed with telescopes on
Mars, a recession you wouldn’t see from Earth. It’s an illusion, of course. Actually the Mars universe is
beginning to recede from the mother. Or, equivalently, vice versa.”
“But we can still get off the surface. Get to space, back to Earth.”
“Oh, yes. For now. There is a smooth interface between the universes.” She peered at her screen and
scrolled through more results. “In fact it’s going to be a fascinating process. A baby universe being born
in the middle of our solar system! We’ll learn more about cosmology than we have in a century. I wonder
if the Firstborn are aware of how much they’re teaching us…”
Myra glanced uneasily about the cockpit. If they were being hack-watched, this display of academic
coldness wasn’t going to play too well. “Ellie. Just rejoin the human race for a minute.”
Ellie looked at her sharply. But she backed off. “Sorry.”
“How long?” 
Ellie glanced again at her screen and scrolled through her results. “The data is still settling down. It’s a
little hard to say. Ballpark—three more months before the detachment.”
“Then Mars must be evacuated by, what, February?”
“That’s it. And after that, maybe a further three months before the implosion of the baby cosmos.”
“And the end of Mars.” Just six more months’ grace,  then,  for a  world  nearly five billion years  old.
“What a crime,” she said.

“Yeah. Hey, look.” Ellie was pointing to a crumpled, dust-stained sheet protruding  from the crimson
ground. “Do you think that’s a parachute?”
“Rover, full stop.”  The vehicle jolted  to  a  halt,  and  Myra  peered.  “Magnify…I  think  you’re  right.
Maybe the twisters whip it up, and keep it from being buried. What does the sonar show?”
“Let’s take a look. Rover…”
And there it was, buried a few meters down under the windblown Martian dust, a squat, blocky shape
easily imaged by the sonar.
“Mars 2,” Myra said.
Mars 2 was a Soviet probe  that had  traveled  to  the planet  in 1971,  part  of a  favorable-opposition
flotilla that had included the Americans’ Mariner 9. It had attempted its landing in the middle of the worst
global dust storm the astronomers had ever seen.
“It looks like a flower,” Ellie breathed. “Those four petals.”
“It was a ball of metal about the size of a domestic fridge. The petals were supposed to open up and
right it, whichever way up it landed.”
“Looks like it was doomed by a twisted-up parachute. After coming all this way…”
Crash-landing not, Mars 2 had been the first human artifact of all to touch  the surface  of the planet.
And it had come down in this very spot precisely a century before, on November 27, 1971. “It made it.
And so did we.”
“Yeah. And now it’s two meters deep under the dust.” Ellie unhooked her harness and got out of her
chair. “Fetch a spade.”
 
57: BABYLON 
When Captain Nathaniel Grove in Troy heard that Bisesa Dutt had returned to Babylon, he hurried back
there with Ben Batson.
At  the  Ishtar  Gate  they  met  Eumenes,  still  surviving  as  chiliarch  to  an  increasingly  capricious
Alexander. “Bisesa is in the Temple of Marduk,” he said to them in his stilted English. “She will not come
out.”
Grove grimaced. “I might have expected as much. Had that sort of breakdown before. Bad show, bad
show. Can we see her?”
“Of course. But first we must visit another, ah, hermit—and not a voluntary one, I fear. He has been
asking to see you, should you return to Babylon. Indeed he has been asking to see any of what he calls
‘the moderns.’”

It turned out to be Ilicius Bloom, the “consul” from Chicago. Just inside the city walls, not far from the
Ishtar Gate, Alexander’s guards had stuck him in a cage.
 
The cage was evidently meant for animals. It was open to the elements, and too small for Bloom to stand
straight. A guard stood by the cage, one of Alexander’s phalangists, clearly bored.  At the back  of the
cage hung what looked like an animal skin, scraped bare, shriveled and dry.
Crouched in his filthy rags, his eyes bright white in a grimy face, Ilicius Bloom shuddered and coughed,
though the day was not cold, and a stench of raw  sewage  made  Grove  recoil.  Bloom was  pathetically
grateful to see them, but he was self-aware enough to  notice  Grove’s  flinch. “You needn’t  think that’s
me, by the way.  They kept  a  man-ape  in here  before.  Flea-bitten  bitch.” He  dug  around  in  the  dirt.
“Look at this—dried man-ape scut!” He flung it at the iron bars of the cage. “At night the rats come, and
that’s no fun. And guess where they put the she-ape? In the temple with that loon Bisesa Dutt. Can you
believe it? Say, you must help me, Grove. I won’t last much longer in here, you have to see that.”
“Calm down, man,” Grove said. “Tell us why you’re here. Then perhaps we’ll have a chance of talking
you out of it.”
“Well, I wish you luck. Alexander is thinking of war, you know.”
“War? Against whom?”
“Against America. Europe isn’t enough for him—how could  it be,  when he knows  there  are  whole
continents to conquer? But the only source of intelligence he has on America, or rather Chicago, is me.”
“Ah. And so he’s been questioning you.”
Bloom held up hands  with bloodied  fingertips. “You could  call it that.  Naturally I’ve  talked  myself
hoarse.  Now,  don’t  look  down  your nose  at  me,  Captain  Grove.  I’m  no  British  Army  officer.  And
besides  I can’t  see  what difference it makes.  Have  you seen  Alexander  recently?  I  can’t  believe  the
bloated brute will live much longer, let alone oversee a war across the Atlantic. I’ve told him everything I
could think of, and when he wanted more I lied freely. What else could I do?
“But it was never enough, never enough. Look at this.” He shuffled in his cage. Through the thin, grimy
cloth of his shirt, Grove saw the striping of whip marks on his back. “And look!” He pointed a clawlike
hand at the rag of skin that hung on the wall outside his cage.
Ben Batson asked, “What is that?”
“I loved her, you know,” Bloom said now.
“Who, man?” Grove asked patiently. “Who did you love?”
“Isobel. You remember, Grove, the girl from the Midden. She gave me a brat! Oh, I was cruel, I was
selfish, but that’s me, that is Ilicius Bloom.” He laughed and shook his head. “And yet I loved her, as best
my flawed soul was capable. Truly I did.
“They did this to  break  me, of course,”  Bloom whispered,  staring at  Grove.  “Two Companions,  it
was. They did it before my eyes. Peeled her like a  grape.  They  took  her  face  off.  She  lived for long
minutes, flayed. Every inch of her body  must have been  a  locus of exquisite agony—think of it!  And
then—”

Batson looked at the bit of skin. “My word, Captain, I do believe—”
“Come away,” Grove said, pulling him back.
Bloom flew into a panic. “You can see how I’m fixed. Speak to Eumenes. Tell Mayor Rice. Oh, how
I long to hear an American voice again! Please, Grove—” He managed to get his whole arm through the
bars of the cage. The guard casually slapped his flesh with the flat of his stabbing-sword. Bloom howled
and withdrew.
Eumenes shepherded Grove and Batson away. “Ilicius Bloom is a dead man. He put himself in danger
when he tried to bargain with Alexander over his scraps of knowledge. Then he doomed himself with his
lies. He would be in his grave already were it not so cheap to keep him alive. If you wish I will arrange an
audience with Alexander about his fate, though I warn you it is likely to do little good, and you would put
yourselves in danger…But first,” he said, “you must visit Bisesa Dutt.”
 
58: SECESSION 
February 27, 2072 
The shuttle stood on the drab, dusty plain. The sun was a pale disk riding high in the orange sky; it was
close to local noon, here on the Xanthe Terra. The ship was a biconic, a fat, clumsy-looking half-cone. It
stood at the end of a long scar in the dust, a relic of its own glide-down landing. Right now it stood on
end, ready to hurl itself away from Mars and up into orbit.  The shuttle’s exposed  underside,  plastered
with  dark  heat-shield  tiles,  was  scarred  from  multiple  reentries,  and  the  paintwork  around  its
attitude-thruster  nozzles  was  blistered.  Rovers  stood  by,  their  tracks  snaking  away  to  the  horizon.
Hatches were open in the shuttle’s belly, and men, women and spidery robots labored to haul packages
into its hold.
There was nothing special about this bird, Myra thought, as she stood watching in her Mars suit. This
was just a ground-to-orbit truck that had made its routine hops a dozen times, maybe more.
But it was the last spacecraft that would ever leave the surface of Mars.
Myra knew this was a symbolic moment. Most of Mars’s human population had long gone, along with
all they could lift. The various AIs that had inhabited the bases and rovers and bits of equipment had, too,
been  saved  as  far as  possible,  according  to  laws  governing  the  right  to  protection  of  Legal  Persons
(Non-Human); at the very least copies of them had  been  transmitted  to  memory stores  off-planet.  But
there was nothing that touched a human heart as much as seeing the last bundle loaded  aboard  the last
ship out, a last footprint, a last hatch closed.
Which was why cameras rolled, floated, and flew all around this site. And why a delegate of Chinese
stood in a huddle, away from the rest. And why the frantic work  of loading was  being held up by the
presence of Bella Fingal, the now-ousted Chair of the World Space Council, in a Mars suit that looked
two or three sizes too big for her, who stood surrounded by a small crowd.
“One hour,” a soft automated voice said in Myra’s helmet. She saw from the subtle reactions  of the

others  that they had  all heard  the same  warning. One  hour left to  get  off  Mars  before—well,  before
something unimaginable happened.
Myra drifted back to join the small crowd, all in their suits, like a clutch of fat green snowmen.
Bella said now, “A shame we couldn’t have made this last launch from Port Lowell.” They were in fact
fifty kilometers  from Lowell, out  on  the  Xanthe  Terra,  a  bay  on  the  perimeter  of  the  great  Vastitas
Borealis. “It would have been fitting to stage the last human lift-off from Mars at the place  Bob  Paxton
and his crew made the first touchdown.”
“Well, maybe we could have, if Lowell wasn’t still radioactive,” Yuri O’Rourke growled a bit sharply.
He summoned Hanse Critchfield, who was proudly carrying a display tray of materials. “Madam Chair.
Here,” he said unceremoniously. “This is a selection of the scientific materials we have been gathering in
these last months. Take a look. Samples from a variety of geological units, from the southern highlands to
the northern plains to the slopes of the great volcanoes. Bits of ice core from the polar caps, of particular
value to me. And, perhaps most precious of all, samples of Martian life. There are relics of the past, look,
you see, we even have a fossil here from a sedimentary lake bed, and native organisms from the present
day, and samples of the transgenic life-forms we have been experimenting with.”
Grendel Speth said dryly, “Martians you can eat.”
Bella Fingal was a small, tired-looking woman, now nearly sixty. She seemed genuinely touched by the
gesture. She smiled through her faceplate. “Thank you.”
Yuri said, “I’m only sorry that we can’t give you a vial of canal water. Or the tripod leg from a Martian
fighting machine. Or an egg laid by a Princess…I wish I could show  you a  Wernher  von Braun glider,
too. That was the first serious scheme to get to Mars, you know. They would have glided down to land
on the smooth ice at the poles. And if that’s the past, I’m sorry you won’t see Mars’s future. A mature
human world, fully participating in an interplanetary economic and political system…”
Myra touched his arm, and he fell silent.
Bella smiled. “Yes. This is the end of a human story too, isn’t it? No more  Martian  dreams.  But we
won’t forget, Yuri. I can assure you that the study of Mars will continue even when the planet itself is lost.
We will continue to learn about Mars, and strive to understand.
“And in this last moment I want to try to tell you again why this has  all been  worthwhile—even this
terrible cost.”
She said there had been more results from Cyclops.
 
The great observatory had been designed before the sunstorm to search for Earth-like worlds. Since the
storm, and especially since the return of Athena, its great Fresnel eyes had been turned aside, to peer into
the dark spaces between the stars.
Bella said, “And everywhere the astronomers look, they see refugees.”
The  Cyclops  telescopes  had  seen  infrared  traces  of  generation  starships,  slow,  fat  arks  like  the
Chinese ships, whole civilizations in flight. And there were immense, flimsy ships with sails hundreds  of
kilometers wide, scudding before the light of exploding stars. They had even detected narrow-beam laser
signals they thought might be traces of efforts to  teleport,  desperate  attempts  to  send  the essence  of a

living being encoded into a radio signal.
Myra  felt  stunned,  imaginatively.  There  was  a  story,  a  whole  novel,  in  every  one  of  these  brief
summaries. “This is the work  of the Firstborn.  They are  everywhere.  And everywhere  they are  doing
what they tried to do to us, and the Martians, and at Procyon—eradicating. Why?”
“If we knew that,” Bella said, “if we understood the Firstborn, we might be able to deal with the threat
they pose. This is how our future is going to be, however far we travel, as far as we can see. And that’s
how we’ve come to this situation, this desolate beach.” Bella handed the sample tray to an aide, and took
a step back. “Would those of you who are leaving now, please come stand behind me?”
Most of the group stepped forward, including Ellie von Devender, Grendel Speth, Hanse Critchfield.
Among those who remained were Myra, and Yuri, and Paula Umfraville. The Chinese stood back  too.
One  of  their  delegates  approached  Bella,  and  told  her  again  that  they  planned  to  stay  to  tend  the
memorials they had built to their fallen of sunstorm day.
Bella faced  them  all.  “I  understand  you’ve  plenty  of  supplies—food,  power—to  see  you  through
until—”
Yuri said, “Yes, Madam Chair. It’s all taken care of.”
“I don’t quite understand how you’ll be able  to  talk  to  each  other—Lowell  to  the polar  station,  for
instance. Won’t you lose your comms satellites when the secession comes?”
“We’ve laid land lines,” Paula said brightly. “We’ll be fine.”
“Fine?” Bella’s face worked. “Not the word I’d use.” She said impulsively, “Please—come with us.
All of you. Even now there’s time to change your minds. We’ve room on the shuttle. And my daughter is
waiting in orbit on the Liberator, ready to take you home.”
“Thank you,” Yuri said evenly. “But we’ve  decided.  Somebody  ought to  stay.  There  ought to  be  a
witness. Besides, this is my home, Madam Chair.”
“My  mother  is  buried  here,”  said  Paula  Umfraville.  “I  couldn’t  abandon  that.”  Her  smile  was  as
professional as ever.
“And I lost my mother here too,” Myra said. “I couldn’t leave with that unresolved.”
Bella faced Myra. “You know we’ll do what we can to build on the contact that’s been achieved with
Mir. I gave you my word on that, and I’ll ensure it’s a promise that’s kept.”
“Thank you,” Myra said.
“But you’re going to a stranger place yet, aren’t you? Is there anybody you’d want me to speak to for
you?”
“No. Thank you, Madam Chair.” In the months since the Q-bomb  strike,  Myra  had  tried  over  and
over to contact Charlie, and Eugene. There had been no reply. But then they had seceded from her own
personal universe long ago. She had tidied her affairs. There was nothing left for her,  anywhere  but on
Mars.
“With respect, Madam Chair, you must leave now,” Yuri said, glancing at his suit chronometer.
There was  a  last flurry of movement around  the shuttle, as  ladders  were  dumped,  hatches  closed.

Myra took part in a last round of embraces,  of Ellie and  Grendel  and  Hanse,  of the Chinese,  even of
Bella Fingal. But the Mars suits made the hugs clumsy, unsatisfying, deprived of human contact.
Bella was the last to stand at the foot of the short ramp that led to the biconic’s interior. She looked
around. “This is the end of Mars,” she said. “A terrible crime has been committed here, and we humans
have been made complicit in it. That is a dreadful burden for us to carry, and our  children. But I don’t
believe we should leave with shame. More has happened on Mars in the last century than in the previous
billion years, and everything that is good has flowed from the actions  of mankind. We  must remember
that. And we must remember lost Mars with love,  not with shame.” She  glanced  down  at  the crimson
dust beneath her feet. “I think that’s all.”
She walked briskly up the ramp, which lifted to swallow her up inside the belly of the shuttle.
 
Myra, Paula, and Yuri had to hurry back to the rover, which drove them off through a kilometer, a safe
distance from the launch. When the rover stopped they clambered out again, squeezing into their outer
suits.
They  stood  in  a  row,  Myra  between  Yuri  and  Paula,  holding  hands.  They  found  themselves
surrounded by a little crowd of robot cameras, which had rolled or flown or hopped after them.
When the moment of launch came, the shuttle lifted without fuss. Mars gravity was light; it had always
been  easy  to  climb out of its gravity well. The dust  kicked  up from this  last  launch  quickly  fell  back
through the thin air to the ground, and the shuttle receded into the orange-brown sky,  becoming a  pale
jewel, its vapor trail all but invisible.
“Well, that’s that,” said Paula. “How long until the light show?”
Yuri made to look at his watch, and then thought better of it. “Not long. Do you want to go back into
the rover, get out of these suits?”
None of them did. Somehow it seemed right to be  out here,  on the Martian  ground,  under  its eerie
un-blue sky.
Myra looked around. The landscape was just a flat desert with meager mountains in the far distance.
But in a deep ditch not far away there was a mosslike vegetation, green. Life, returned to  Mars  by the
sunstorm and cherished  by human hands.  She  held tightly to  her companions.  “This is the dream  of a
million years, to stand here and see this,” she said.
Yuri said, “Yes—”
And the light went, just like that, the sky darkening as if somebody was throwing a dimmer switch. The
sun rushed away, sucking all the light with it. The sky turned deep brown,  and  then charcoal,  and  then
utterly black.
 
Myra stood in the dark, clinging to Yuri and Paula. She heard the cameras clatter about, confused.
It had only taken seconds.
“I hope the cameras got that,” Yuri murmured.

“It feels like a total  eclipse,”  Paula  said.  “I went to  Earth once  to  see  one.  It  was  kind of exciting,
oddly…”
Myra felt excited  too,  stirred  in an unexpected  way by this primeval, extraordinary  event.  Strange
lights in the sky. But, standing there in the dark, she felt a flicker of fear when she reminded herself that
the sun was never, ever going to shine on Mars again.
“So we’re alone in this universe,” Yuri said. “Us and Mars.”
The ground shuddered gently.
“Mars quake,” Paula said immediately. “We expected this. We just lost the sun’s tides. It will pass.”
The rover’s lights came on, flickering before settling to a steady glow. They cast a pool of light over
the Martian ground, and Myra’s shadow stretched long before her.
And there was a circle in the air before her. Like a mirror, full of complex reflections, highlights from
the rover’s lamps. Myra took a step forward, and saw her own reflection approach her.
The thing in the air was about a meter across. It was an Eye.
“You bastard,” Yuri said. “You bastard!” He bent awkwardly, picked up handfuls of Martian rocks,
and hurled them at the Eye. The rocks hit with a clatter that was dimly audible through the thin, cold air.
The ground continued to shake, the small, hard planet ringing like a bell.
And then a white fleck drifted past Myra’s faceplate. She followed it all the way down to the ground,
where it sublimated away. It was a snowflake.
 
59: TEMPLE 
Abdikadir Omar met them at the Temple of Marduk.
A loose crowd had gathered around the Temple precinct. Some even slept here, in lean-tos and tents.
Vendors drifted slowly among them, selling food,  water,  and  some  kind of trinkets,  holy tokens.  They
were pilgrims, Abdi said, who had come from as far as Alexandria and Judea.
“And are they here for the Eye of Marduk?”
Abdi grinned. “Some come for the Eye. Some for Marduk himself, if they remember  him. Some  for
Bisesa. Some even for the man-ape that’s in there with her.”
“Remarkable,”  Grove  said.  “Pilgrims  from  Judea,  come  here  to  see  a  woman  of  the  twenty-first
century!”
Eumenes said,  “I sometimes wonder  if a  whole new religion is being born  here.  A  worship  of  the

Firstborn, with Bisesa Dutt as their prophet.”
“I doubt that would be healthy,” Grove said.
“Man has worshipped destroying gods before. Come. Let us speak to Bisesa Dutt.”
Abdi escorted them through the crowd and into the temple’s convoluted interior, all the way up to the
chamber of the Eye.
 
The small room with its scorched brick walls was utterly dominated by the Eye, which floated in the air.
By the light of the oil lamps Grove saw his own reflection, absurdly distorted, as if by a fairground trick
mirror. But the Eye itself was monstrous, ominous; he seemed to sense its gravity.
Bisesa had made a kind of nest in one corner of the chamber, of blankets and paper and clothes and
bits of food. When Grove and the others walked in, she smiled and clambered to her feet.
And there was the man-ape. A lanky, powerful mature female, she sat squat in her cage, as  still and
watchful as the Eye itself. She had clear blue eyes. Grove was forced to turn away from her gaze.
“My word,” Batson said, holding his nose. “Ilicius Bloom wasn’t lying when he said the stink wasn’t
him but the ape!”
“You get used to it,” Bisesa said. She greeted Batson with a  warm handshake,  and  an embrace  for
Grove that rather embarrassed him. “Anyhow Grasper is company.”
“‘Grasper’?”
“Don’t you remember her, Grove? Your Tommies captured a man-ape and her baby on the very day
of the Discontinuity. The Tommies called her ‘Grasper’ for the way she uses those hands of hers,  tying
knots out of bits of straw, for fun. On the last night before we tried sending me back to Earth through the
Eye, I asked for them to be released. Well, I think this is that baby, grown tall. If these australopithecines
live as long as chimps, say, it’s perfectly possible. I’ll swear she is more dexterous than I am.”
Grove asked, “How on earth does she come to be here?”
Eumenes said, “She rather made her own way. She was one of a pack that troubled the western rail
links. This one followed the line all the way back to Babylon, and made a nuisance of herself in the farms
outside the city. Kept trying to get to the city walls. Wouldn’t be driven off. In the end  they netted  her
and brought her into the city as a curiosity for the court. We kept her in Bloom’s cage, but the creature
went wild. She wanted to go somewhere, that was clear.”
“It was my idea,” Abdi said. “We leashed her, and allowed her to lead us where she would.”
“And she came here,” Bisesa said. “Drawn here just as I was. She seems peaceful enough here, as if
she’s found what she wanted.”
Grove  pondered.  “I do  remember  how  we  once  kept  this  man-ape  and  her  mother  in  a  tent  we
propped up under a floating Eye—do you remember, Bisesa? Rather disrespectful to the Eye, I thought.
Perhaps this wretched creature formed some sort of bond with the Eyes then. But how the devil would
she know there was an Eye here?”
“There’s a lot we don’t understand,” Bisesa said. “To put it mildly.”

Grove inspected Bisesa’s den with forced interest. “Well, you seem cheerful enough in here.”
“All mod cons,” she said, a term that baffled Grove. “I have my phone. It’s a shame Suit Five is out of
power or that might have provided a bit more company too. And here’s my chemical toilet, scavenged
from the Little Bird. Abdi keeps me fed and cleaned out. You’re my interface to the outside world, aren’t
you, Abdi?”
“Yes,” Grove said, “but why are you here?”
Eumenes said gravely, “You should know that Alexander thinks she is trying to find a way to use the
Eye for his benefit. If not for the fact that the King believes Bisesa is serving his purposes, she would not
be here at all. You must remember that when you meet him, Captain.”
“Fair enough. But what’s the truth, Bisesa?”
“I want to go home,” she said simply. “Just as I did before. I want to get back to  my daughter,  and
granddaughter. And this is the only possible way. With respect, there’s nothing on Mir that matters to me
as much as that.”
Grove looked at this woman, this bereft mother, alone with all this strangeness. “I had a daughter, you
know,” he said, and he was dismayed how gruff his voice was. “Back home. You know. She’d be about
your age now, I should think. I do understand why you are here, Bisesa.”
She smiled, and embraced him again.
There was little more to be said.
“Well,” Grove  said.  “I will visit again. We  will be  here  for several  more  days  in Babylon,  I should
think. I feel I really ought to try to do something for this wretched fellow Bloom. We moderns must stick
together, I suppose.”
“You’re a good man, Captain. But don’t put yourself in any danger.”
“I’m a wily old bird, don’t you worry…”
They left soon after that.
Grove looked back once at Bisesa. Alone save for the watchful man-ape, she was walking around the
hovering  sphere  and  pressed  her  bare  hand  against  the  Eye’s  surface.  The  hand  seemed  to  slide
sideways,  pushed  by  some  unseen  force.  Grove  was  awed  at  her  casual  familiarity  with  this  utterly
monstrous, alien thing.
He turned  away.  He  was  glad he could  hide the wetness  of his foolish old eyes  in the dark  of the
temple’s corridors.
 
60: HOUSE 

March 30, 2072 
Paula called, using the optic-fiber link. Since the secession of the sun, the big AIs  at  New  Lowell had
been refining their predictions of when the Rip would finally hit Mars.
“May 12,” Paula said. “Around fourteen hundred.”
Six weeks. “Well, now we know,” Myra said.
“I’m told that in the end they will get the prediction down to the attosecond.”
“That will be useful,” Yuri said dryly.
Paula said,  “Also we’ve  been  running predictions  of the state  of your nuclear power  plant.  You’re
aware you’re running out of fuel.”
“Of course,” Yuri said stiffly. “Resupply has been somewhat problematic.”
“We predict you’ll make it through to  the Rip. Just.  It  might not be  too  comfortable  in the last few
days.”
“We can economize. There are only two of us here.”
“Okay. But there’s always room for you here at Lowell.”
Yuri glanced at Myra, who grinned back. She said, “And leave home? No. Thanks, Paula. Let’s finish
it here.”
“I thought you’d say that. All right. If you change your mind the rovers are healthy enough to pick you
up.”
“I know that, thanks,” Yuri said heavily. “Since one of them is ours.”
They talked of bits of business, and how they were all coping.
It was  as  if Mars’s  last summer had  been  cut drastically short.  The sun  had  vanished  two  months
before what should have been midsummer, and the planet’s terminal winter had begun.
In a way it didn’t make much difference here at the pole, where it had been dark half the time anyhow.
Myra’s main loss was the regular download from Earth of movies and news, and letters from home. She
didn’t miss Earth itself as much as she missed the mail.
But if there was a winter routine to fall back on here at Wells, they weren’t so used to darkness down
at Lowell, near the equator, and it was a shock when the air started snowing out there. They had none of
the equipment they needed to survive. So Yuri and Myra had loaded  up one  of the pole  station’s  two
specialized snowplow rovers with sublimation mats and other essentials. They left one rover at Lowell for
the crew’s use there, and then drove the other rover all the way back to Wells. That journey, a quarter of
the  planet’s  circumference  each  way  through  falling  dry-ice  snow,  had  been  numbing,  depressing,
exhausting. Myra and Yuri hadn’t left the environs of the base since.
“We’ll speak again,” Paula said. “Take care.” Her image disappeared.
Myra looked at Yuri. “So that’s that.”
“Back to work,” he said.

“Coffee first?”
“Give me an hour, and we’ll break the back of some of the day’s chores.”
“Okay.”
 
The routine work  had  got a  lot harder  since the final evacuation.  Without the scheduled  resupply  and
replacement drops it wasn’t just the nuke that was failing but much of the other equipment as well. And
now there were only two of them, in a base designed for ten, and Myra, though she was a quick learner,
wasn’t experienced here.
However Myra had thrown herself into the work. This morning she tended clogging hydroponic beds,
and cleaned out a  gunged-up  bioreactor,  and  tried  to  figure out why the water  extraction  system was
failing almost  daily.  She  also  had  work  to  do  with  the  AI,  managing  the  flood  of  science  data  that
continued to  pour  in  from  the  SEPs  and  tumbleweed  balls  and  dust  motes,  even  though  the  sensor
systems were steadily falling silent through various defects, or were simply getting stuck in the thickening
snow.
Mostly  the  AI  was  able  to  work  independently,  even  setting  its  own  science  goals  and  devising
programs to achieve them. But today  was  PPP  day,  planetary  protection,  when she  had  to  make  her
regular formal check to ensure the environment was properly sampled in a band kilometers wide around
the station, thus monitoring the slow seepage of their human presence into the skin of Mars. There  was
even a bit of paper she had to sign, for ultimate presentation to an agency on Earth. The paper was never
going to get to Earth, of course, but she signed it anyway.
After an hour or  so  she  had  the AI hunt for Yuri. He  was  supposed  to  be  out in the drill rig tent,
mothballing equipment that had been shut down for the final time, thus fulfilling a promise he had made to
Hanse Critchfield. In fact he was in Can Six, the EVA station.
She made some coffee, and carried it carefully through the locks to Six. She kept a  lid on the cups;
she still hadn’t quite got used to one-third-G coffee sloshes.
She found Yuri kneeling on the floor of Six. He had gotten hold of a Cockell pulk, a simple dragging
sled; adapted  for Martian  conditions it was  fitted with fold-down  wheels for running over  basalt-hard
water ice. He was piling up this little vehicle with a collapsed tent, food packets, bits of gear that looked
to have been scavenged from life support.
She handed him his coffee. “So what now?”
He sat back and sipped his drink.  “I’ve got an unfulfilled ambition. I’ve  got many, actually, but this
one’s killing me.”
“Tell me.”
“An unsupported solo assault on the Martian north pole. I always planned to try it myself. I’d start at
the edge of the permanent cap, see, just me and an EVA suit and a sled. And I’d walk, dragging the sled
all the way to the pole. No drops, no pickup, nothing but me and the ice.”
“Is that even possible?”
“Oh, yes. It’s a thousand kilometers tops, depending on the route you take. The suit would slow me
down—and  no suit we’ve  got is designed  for that  kind of endurance  and  mobility; I’d  have to  make

some enhancements.  But  remember,  with  one-third  G  I  can  haul  three  times  as  much  as  I  could  in
Antarctica,  say  four  hundred  kilograms.  And  in  some  ways  Mars  is  an  easier  environment  than  the
Earth’s poles. No blizzards, no white-outs.”
“You’d have to carry all your oxygen.”
“Maybe.  Or  I  could  use  one  of  these.”  He  picked  up  some  of  his  life-support  gadgets,  a  small
ice-collector  box,  an electrolysis  kit  for  cracking  water  into  oxygen  and  hydrogen.  “It’s  a  trade-off,
actually. The kits are lighter than oxygen bottles would be, but using them daily would slow me down. I
know it’s a stunt, Myra. But it’s one hell of a stunt, isn’t it? And nobody’s tried it before. Who better but
me?”
“You’ve got some mission designing to do, then.”
“Yes.  I could  figure it all out during the winter. Then when the summer comes,  I could  pick  some
period when Earth is above the horizon to try it. I could get the gear  together  and  try it out on the ice
around the base. The darkness wouldn’t make any difference to that.” He seemed pleased to have found
this new project. But he looked up at her, uncertain. “Do you think I’m crazy?”
“No crazier than any of us. I mean, I don’t think I believe in May 12. Do you? None of us believes
it’s ever going to happen, that death will come to us. If we did we couldn’t function, probably. It’s just a
bit more definite for us on Mars, that’s all.”
“Yes. But—”
“Let’s not talk about it,” she said firmly. She knelt down with him on the cold floor. “Show  me how
you’re going to pack this stuff up. How would you eat? Unpack the tent twice a day?”
“No. I thought I’d unpack it in the evening, and eat overnight and in the morning. Then I could  have
some kind of hot drink through the suit nozzle during the day…”
Talking, speculating, fiddling with the bits of kit,  they planned  the expedition,  while the frozen air of
Mars gathered in snowdrifts around the stilts of the station modules.
 
61: GRASPER 
It was Grasper who first noticed the change in the Eye.
She woke up slowly, as always clinging to her ragged dreams of trees. Suspended between animal and
human, she  had  only a  dim grasp  of future and  past.  Her  memory was  like a  gallery  hung  with  vivid
images—her mother’s  face,  the warmth of the nest  where  she  had  been  born.  And the cages.  Many,
many cages.
She yawned hugely, and stretched her long arms, and looked around. The tall woman who shared this
cave still slept. There was light on her peaceful face.

Light?
Grasper looked up. The Eye was shining. It was like a miniature sun, caught in the stone chamber.
Grasper raised a hand toward the Eye. It gave off no heat, only light. She stood and gazed at the Eye,
eyes wide, one arm raised.
Now there was something new again. The glow of the Eye was no longer uniform: a series of brighter
horizontal bands straddled an underlying grayness, a pattern that might have reminded a human of lines of
latitude on a  globe  of the Earth.  These  lines swept  up  past  the  Eye’s  “equator,”  dwindling  until  they
vanished  at  the  north  pole.  Meanwhile  another  set,  vertical  this  time,  began  the  same  pattern  of
emergence, sweeping from a pole  on one  side  of the equator,  disappearing  on the other  side.  Now  a
third set of lines, sweeping to poles set at right angles to the first two pairs, came shining into existence.
The shifting, silent display of gray rectangles was entrancing, beautiful.
And then a  fourth  set  of lines appeared—Grasper  tried  to  follow where  they went—but  suddenly
something inside her head hurt badly.
She cried out. She rubbed the heels of her palms into her watering eyes.  She  felt warmth along her
inner thighs. She had urinated where she stood.
The sleeping woman stirred.
 
62: LITTLE RIP 
May 12, 2072 
They began the day wordlessly.
They followed the routine they had established  in the months they had  spent  together.  Even though,
when Myra woke, there were only a few hours left before the Little Rip. She couldn’t think of anything
else they should be doing.
Yuri  had  to  begin  the  day,  as  he  did  every  day  now,  by  getting  suited  up  for  an  ice  collection
expedition. The ISRU water extraction system had finally broken down. So Yuri had to go outside daily
to a trench he was digging in the water ice, and with an improvised pickax he broke off slabs of the ice,
to carry into the warmth of the house to melt. In fact it wasn’t so difficult; the heavily stratified ice was
like a fine-grained sandstone, and it split easily. Once they got the ice inside the house they had to filter
out the dust from the sludge that resulted on melting it.
When he was done with that, Yuri disappeared to do Hanse’s job, as he put it, tending to the power
plant and  the air system and  the other  mechanical support  systems  that  kept  them alive. He  went  off
whistling, in fact. Yesterday he had got hold of some stuff he had been  waiting for.  An unpiloted rover
had turned up, sent down by the crew of New Lowell; Paula and the crew  there  had  been  scavenging
equipment from the radioactive ruin of Lowell itself. Yuri had been pleased with what he had found in this
last delivery, and he had been looking forward to his work this morning.

He  had  sent  the  rover  back  the  way  it  came,  although  the  journey  would  take  several  days  to
complete, beyond the day of the Rip. Yuri seemed to have an instinct that their sentient machines needed
to be kept occupied as much as their human masters, and Myra had no reason to argue with him.
Myra too went off to work. She had one job she had been saving up for today.
She scrambled  into her EVA suit, as  always fully respecting  all planetary  protection  protocols,  and
went out to the little garden of outdoor plants that were weathering this new Martian  winter. A regular
task was to blow away the snow, the frozen air that congealed out every day. She used a hot-air blower
like a fat hairdryer.
As she worked, Myra was aware of an Eye hovering over the garden. There were Eyes all over  the
place, even inside some of the base’s hab elements. As usual she deliberately ignored it.
She made an extra effort today. She left the equipment in as good a condition as she  could  manage.
And she touched the sturdy leathery leaves of each of the plants, wishing she could feel them through her
thick-gloved fingers.
 
On the last day Bella came back to the locus of Mars.
From space, from the flight deck of the Liberator, you could see that there was still something there.
The thing that had replaced Mars was roughly spherical, and it glowed a dull, dim red, a dying ember. It
returned no echoes, and attempts to land a probe on it had ended in the loss of the spacecraft, and if you
studied it with a spectroscope you would see that that strange surface appeared to be receding, that its
light was reduced to crimson weariness by redshift.
It was a knot of mass-energy orbiting where Mars should have been. It exerted a gravity field sufficient
to tether a flock of watching spacecraft,  and  even to  keep  Mars’s  small moons,  Phobos  and  Deimos,
circling in their ancient tracks. But it was not Mars.
Edna said, “It’s just the scar that was left when Mars was cut away.”
“And today that scar heals,” Bella said.
She watched softscreen displays that showed more ships arriving, more ghoulish spectators for this last
act  of  the  drama.  She  wondered  what  was  happening  on  Mars  itself—if  Mars  still  existed  in  any
meaningful sense at all.
 
Yuri and Myra were making lunch.
It would be dried eggs, reconstituted potatoes, and a little Martian greenery, rubbery but flavorsome.
Yuri suggested wine, a Martian vintage from a domed vineyard at  Lowell, once  remarkably  expensive.
But it didn’t seem appropriate, and he left the bottle  unopened.  Anyhow it was  poor  wine, Myra  had
always thought, expensive or not.
They worked  together  on the lunch, setting the base’s  table  and  preparing  the  food,  without  once
getting in each other’s way. “We’re like an old married couple,” Yuri had said, more than once. So they
were,  Myra  supposed,  though  they  had  their  spats—and  though  there  had  never  been  any  physical
intimacy between them, nothing save hugs for comfort, and you had to expect that of the only two human
beings at the pole of a world.

It  hadn’t  been  a  bad  interval  in  her  life,  these  last  months.  She  had  always  been  in  somebody’s
shadow, she thought: first her mother’s, then Eugene’s. She’d never had a chance to build a home of her
own. She couldn’t say she had done that here on Mars. But this was where Yuri had put down his own
roots, this was the world he’d built. And in these last months she’d been able to share his home with him.
Sex or not, she’d had far worse relationships than with Yuri.
But she missed Charlie with an intensity she wouldn’t have believed possible. As Rip day approached,
it was like a steel cable tearing at her belly, ever harder. She didn’t know  if Charlie would know  what
had become of her mother. She didn’t even have any up-to-date images, still or animated, she could look
at.  She  had  done  her best  to  put this aside,  to  keep  it in a  compartment  in her mind.  Yuri  knew,  of
course.
She glanced at the clock. “It’s later than I thought. Only an hour left.”
“Then we’d better tuck in.”
They sat down.
Yuri  said,  “Hey,  I  had  a  good  morning,  by  the  way.  The  Lowell  guys  finally  sent  down  those
replacement filters I asked for. Now our air ought to stay sweet for another year. And I shut down the
reactor. We’re running on cell power, but it will see us out. I wanted that old tub of uranium to be closed
down in an orderly way. I was kind of rushing to get it all done, but I mothballed it well enough, I think.”
She could see that his work had pleased him, just as her own had pleased her.
“Oh, there was another package from Paula, in the rover yesterday. She said we should open it about
now.” He fetched it from the heap of equipment he’d sorted to find his filters. It was a small plastic box
that he put on the table.
He opened it up to reveal a padded interior, within which nestled a sphere, about the size of a tennis
ball. A plastic bag of pills had been tucked into the box, under the ball. He put these out on the table.
Myra took the sphere. It was heavy, with a smooth black surface.
Yuri said, “I was expecting this. It’s coated with the stuff they make heatshield tiles out of. It can soak
up a lot of heat.”
“So it will survive the planet breaking up?”
“That’s the idea.”
“I don’t see what good that will do.”
“But you understand  how the Q-expansion  works,”  Yuri said,  speaking  around  a  mouthful  of  egg.
“The Rip works  down  the scales,  larger structures  breaking  up first. The planet  will go first, then  the
human body. This little gadget ought to survive the end of the planet, even if it’s cast adrift in space, and it
should last a bit longer than a suited human, say. Surrounded by debris, I suppose. Rocks popping into
dust, at smaller and smaller scales.”
“Are there instruments inside?”
“Yes. It should keep working, taking data until the expansion gets down to the centimeter scale, and
the Rip cracks the sphere open. Even then there’s a plan. The sphere will release a cloud of even finer
sensor units, motes we call them. It’s nanotechnology, Myra, machines the size of molecules. They will

keep gathering data until the expansion  reaches  molecular scales.  There’s  nothing they could  come  up
with beyond that. Paula says the design goal is to  make  it through to  the last microsecond.  You could
gather another thirty minutes of data that way.”
“Then it’s worth doing.”
“Oh, yes.”
Myra hefted the sphere. “What a wonderful little gadget. It’s a shame nobody will be able  to  use  its
data.”
“Well, you never know,” Yuri said.
She set the sphere on the table. “And these pills?”
He fingered the bag of pills dubiously. “Jenny at Lowell said she would prepare something like this.”
Jenny Mortens was New Lowell’s doctor, the only one left on Mars. “You know what they are. It might
be easier, this way, just to take them.”
“It would be  a  shame to  come  this far and  then give up at  the last  minute.  Don’t  you  think?  And
besides, I have my mother to think about.”
“Fair enough.” He grinned, and with a flip he lobbed the pill bag into a waste bin.
She looked at her watch. “I think we’d better get moving. There isn’t much time.”
“Right.” He  stood,  and  stacked  the dishes.  “I think we  can  waste  a  little water  and  wash  up.”  He
glanced back at her. “How are you feeling about using the suits?”
They both wanted to be outside the base in the final moments. But she had been unsure about wearing
a suit. “I do think I’ll want a bit of human contact, Yuri.”
He smiled. “Quaintly put. Too late to be embarrassed now.”
“You know what I mean,” she said, a bit irritated to be teased about it.
“Of course I do. Look—I’ve fixed it. Come out with me into the suits and see what I’ve done. Trust
me. I think you’ll like it. And there’ll always be time to come back inside if not.”
She nodded. “All right. Let’s get this place shipshape first.”
So they tidied up. After one last gulp of coffee—her last ever mouthful, she thought—Myra cleaned the
dishes in a little of their precious hot water, and stacked them away. She went to the bathroom, washed
her face and brushed her teeth, and used the lavatory. The suits had facilities, of course, but she’d rather
not have to resort to that.
She was running down through a list of simple human actions for the last time, the very last. She would
never sleep again, or eat, or drink coffee, or even use a bathroom. She had begun to think this way since
waking this morning, despite her best efforts to maintain business as usual.
With Yuri, she walked around the station one last time. Yuri was carrying the black sensor globe from

Lowell. They had  already  shut most of Wells down,  but now they ordered  the  station  AI  to  run  the
systems down to minimum, and to turn off the lights, so that as they walked they left gathering pools  of
darkness behind them. Everything was tidy, put away where it should be, cleaned up. Myra felt proud of
how they had left things.
At last only one fluorescent tube was left burning, in the EVA dome, illuminating the small hatchways
through which they had to climb to get into their suits. They pulled on their inner suits, and Yuri passed
the sensor ball out through an equipment hatch.
“You go left, I go right,” he said. “If you need to scratch your nose, now’s the time.”
They paused. Then they hugged, and Myra drank in his scent.
They broke. “Lights,” Yuri called. The last tube died, leaving the station dark. “Goodbye, H.G.,” Yuri
said softly to his base. Myra had never heard him use that name before.
Myra opened her hatch, and with a skill developed over her months on Mars she slid feet-first into her
suit.  When  she  wormed  her  right  hand  into  its  sleeve,  she  got  a  surprise.  The  glove  she  had  been
expecting wasn’t there. Instead her hand slid into a warm grasp.
She leaned forward. By her suit lights she saw that the glove of her suit had been cut away,  and  her
right sleeve had been stitched to Yuri’s left.
Yuri was looking out of his helmet. “How do you like my needlework?”
“Good work, Yuri.”
“The suits don’t  like it, of course.  They both  think they are  breached.  But the hell with  them.  The
temporary seal hasn’t got to hold for long. Of course we’re going to have to do everything together, like
Siamese twins. How’s your suit?”
She had already run it through its diagnostic check. She looked over Yuri’s chest display, to ensure he
hadn’t missed anything, and he did the same for her. “All fine, apart from bleating about the gloves.”
“Very good,” he said. “So we stand. Three, two, one—”
Their hands  locked  together,  they straightened  up.  Her  exoskeletal  multipliers whirred,  and  her suit
came loose of the dome with a sucking sound.
Out of habit she turned, picked up a soft brush, and swept the dome seals clean of Mars  dust.  Yuri
did the same. It was a bit awkward with their hands locked together.
Then Yuri bent to pick up the sensor ball in his right hand, and they walked forward.
It was pitch dark, and the snow fell steadily, shapeless flakes of frozen Martian air illuminated by their
suit lights. But the ground was reasonably clear; they had got a path swept yesterday.
A little robot camera rolled after them, even now recording, recording. It got stuck  in a  snow  bank.
Myra kicked it clear and it rolled ahead, red lights glowing.
Yuri stopped, and put the sensor sphere down on the ground before them. “Here, do you think?”
“I guess so. I don’t imagine it matters much.”
He straightened up. The snow continued to fall. Yuri held out a hand and caught flakes. They looked

like fat moths settling on his gloves, before they sublimated away. “Ah, God,” he said, “there’s so much
wonder here. You know, these flakes have structure.  Each  snowflake  nucleates  around  first a  grain of
dust, then water ice, and only then an outer shell of dry ice. It is like an onion. And it all falls here, every
winter. Thus three global cycles,  of dust,  water  and  carbon  dioxide,  intersect  in every  snowflake.  We
barely began to understand Mars.” His voice had an edge of bitterness she hadn’t heard in him in months.
“To some this would be hell,” he said. “The cold, the darkness. Not to me.”
“Nor me,” she whispered, squeezing his hand inside their stitched-together sleeves. “Yuri.”
“Yes?”
“Thank you. These last few months, for me—”
“Better not to say it.”
There was a sound like a door slamming, transmitted to them through their suits. An alarm chimed in
Myra’s ears, and lights lit up on her chin display.
The ground shuddered.
 
“Right on cue,” Yuri said.
They looked at each other. It was the first real sign since the disappearance of the sun that something
remarkable was happening.
Fear fluttered in her throat. Suddenly she wished this were not happening, that they could go back into
the station and carry on with their day. She clung to Yuri’s hand, and they bumped against each other in
the bulky suits, like two green sumo wrestlers. Yuri twisted, trying to see the watch strapped to his arm
outside his suit.
The ground shook more violently. And then ice spurted around them, fine splinters of it. They turned to
see, hands still clasped. A hab can had ruptured, and its air and water were escaping, instantly freezing in
a shower that drifted down around the can’s stilts.
“We’d better get a bit further away,” Myra said.
“All right.” They walked forward, unsteady as the ground shuddered again. Yuri said, “It’s going to be
a hell of a job to fix that rip.”
“So call Hanse back.”
“Bastard’s never there when you need him—ow.” He stumbled, pulling at  her so  that  she  staggered
too.
“What is it?”
“I hit my head.” They turned. An Eye hovered before them, this one maybe a meter across, its lowest
point just below head height. “Bastard.”  Yuri swung a  punch at  it with his free  right hand.  “Shit. Like
hitting concrete.”
“Ignore it,” said Myra.
Just for a moment, the shuddering stopped. They stood together, near the Eye, breathing hard.

“You were right to have us come outside,” Myra said.
“And you were right to ask for a bit of ‘human contact.’ I think we got most things right these last few
months, Ms. Dutt.”
“I think I’d agree, Mr. O’Rourke.” She breathed deep, and squeezed his hand. “You know, Yuri—”
The ground burst open.
 
In the temple chamber, the tall woman woke. Slowly at first.
And then with a start as she saw the Eye.
“Shit, shit. It would have to be now, when I need a pee. Come on, Suit Five, you’re as dead as a
dodo but you’re the best protection I’ve got…” As Grasper watched, she  began  to  pull herself into
her green carcass thing, and she placed a glowing pebble on the floor.
“You’re leaving me again, Bisesa?” 
“Look, phone, don’t guilt-trip me now. We worked this out. You’re the only link back to Earth.
And if Abdi succeeds in his program of power-cell manufacture you’ll be powered up indefinitely.”
 
“Cold comfort.” 
“I won’t forget you.” 
“Good-bye, Bisesa. Good-bye…” 
“Shit. The Eye. What’s it doing?” 
Grasper was still standing, trembling but upright, gazing up at the washing lights, which cast  complex
patterns  of shadows  around  the chamber.  A fifth set  of lines—a sixth  set,  disappearing  in impossible
directions—
The tall woman screamed.
 
Myra was lying face-down on a scrap of rock-hard water ice, her faceplate pressed against the surface.
Yuri had  fallen awkwardly  somewhere  behind her,  and  her right arm was  wrenched  back.  She  felt  a
pressure in her belly, as if she was being lifted up by an elevator.
She struggled to raise her head. The suit’s multipliers whined as they strained to help her.
She looked down, into Mars.
She saw ice chunks and rocks and even sprays of magma, all illuminated by a deeper red glow from
within. All this filled her view, as far as she could see, to left and right. It was like looking down  into a
deep chasm.
And when she looked up a little further, she saw the Eye, maybe the same one, rising up before her,
tracking her.

The fear was gone. Clinging to the bit of ice,  still squeezing Yuri’s hand,  she  felt almost exhilarated.
Maybe they could live through this, just a little longer.
But then a gout of molten rock like an immense fist came barrelling up, out of the heart of disintegrating
Mars, straight at her.
 
The scar in space became transparent, so Bella could see the stars shining through it, their light curdled
and faded.
Then it cleared altogether, as if evaporating.
She hugged her daughter.
“So that’s that,” Edna said.
“Yes. Take me home, love.”
The Liberator’s blunt nose turned away, toward Earth.
Released from their parent’s  gravity field, Mars’s  small moons drifted  away  from their paths.  Now
they would orbit the sun, becoming just two  more  unremarkable  asteroids.  The thin cloud  of satellites
humans had put in place around Mars began to disperse too. For a time gravitational waves crossed the
system, and the sun’s remaining planets bobbed, leaves on a pond into which a pebble had been thrown.
But the ripples soon subsided.
And Mars was gone.
 
63: A TIME ODYSSEY 
A gate opened. A gate closed. In a moment of time too short to be measured, space opened and turned
on itself.
 
It wasn’t like waking. It was a sudden emergence, a clash of cymbals. Her eyes gaped wide open, and
were filled with dazzling light. She dragged  deep  breaths  into her lungs, and  gasped  with the shock  of
selfhood.
She was on her back. There was something enormously bright above her—the sun, yes, the sun, she
was outdoors.
She threw herself over onto her belly. Dazzled by the sun, she could barely see.
A plain. Red sand. Eroded hills in the distance. Even the sky looked red, though the sun was high.

This felt familiar.
And Myra was beside her. It was impossible, but it was so.
Bisesa hurriedly crawled through loose sand to get to her daughter. Like Bisesa, Myra was in a green
Mars suit. She was lying on her back, an ungainly fish stranded on this strange beach.
Myra’s faceplate retracted, and she coughed in the sharp, dry air. She stared  at  her right hand.  The
suit’s glove was missing, the flesh of her hand pale.
“It’s me, darling.”
Myra looked at her, shocked. “Mum?”
They clung to each other.
It got darker. Bisesa peered up.
The sun’s disk was deformed. It looked like a leaf out of which a great bite had been taken. It began
to feel colder, and Bisesa glimpsed bands of shadow rushing across the eroded ground.
Not again, she thought.
“Don’t be afraid.”
They both turned, rolling in the dirt.
A  woman  stood  over  them.  She  was  quite  hairless,  her  face  smooth.  She  wore  a  flesh-colored
coverall so sleek it was as if she was naked. She smiled at them. “We’ve been expecting you.”
Myra said, “My God. Charlie?”
Bisesa stared. “Who is ‘we’?”
“We call ourselves the Lastborn. We  are  at  war.  We  are  losing.” She  held out her hands.  “Please.
Come with me now.”
Bisesa  and  Myra,  still  hugging  each  other,  reached  out  their  free  hands.  Their  fingertips  touched
Charlie’s.
A clash of cymbals.
 
AFTERWORD 
Recently the space elevator, as dramatized in Clarke’s The Fountains  of  Paradise  (1979),  has  come
closer to engineering feasibility. The details given here are based in part on a study funded by NASA’s
Institute  for  Advanced  Concepts  program,  and  written  up  in  The  Space  Elevator  by  Bradley  C.

Edwards and Eric A. Westling (Spaego, San Francisco, 2003). See also Leaving the Planet by Space
Elevator by Dr. Edwards and Philip Ragan (lulu.com, Seattle, 2006), and papers by Giorcelli, Pullum,
Swan, and Swan in the Journal of the British Interplanetary Society, September 2006. A recent study
of the use of space elevators as energy-free “orbital siphons” is given by Colin McInnes and Chris Davis
in the Journal of the British Interplanetary Society, vol. 59, pp. 368–74, 2006. We’re very grateful to
Dr. Edwards for discussions on the relevant sections. His company “Black Line Ascension” may become
a real world counterpart of our Skylift Consortium.
It is remarkable that cultures globally appear to share a “world tree” myth. Some of the more plausible
explanations  for  this  range  from  cloud  formations  to  plasma  phenomena  (see  for  example
www.maverickscience.com/ladder_aeon.pdf).
The “Cyclops” Fresnel-lens telescope is based on a study by James  T.  Early (“Twenty-meter  space
telescope  based  on diffractive Fresnel  lens” by Dr.  Early et  al.,  in Proceedings  of  SPIE  Vol.  5166,
“UV/Optical/IR Space Telescopes: Innovative Technologies and Concepts,” ed. Howard A. MacEwen,
January 2004). Our depiction of the Fresnel shield of Sunstorm also drew on Dr. Early’s studies. We’re
very grateful to Dr. Early for discussions on these concepts.
Our depiction  of Martian  exploration  draws  partly on  a  conceptual  design  study,  to  which  Baxter
contributed,  of  a  base  at  the  Martian  north  pole:  see  Project  Boreas:  A  Station  for  the  Martian
Geographic North Pole, ed. Charles S.  Cockell  (British Interplanetary  Society,  2006).  The idea  that
relic space  probes  could  be  used  to  provide  human-interest  targets  for  future  Mars  expeditions  was
suggested by Baxter (see “Trophy Fishing: Early Expeditions to Spacecraft Relics on Mars,” Journal of
the British Interplanetary Society, vol. 57 pp. 99–102, 2004), and the history of humanity’s interaction
with Mars  is  sketched  by  Baxter  in  “Martian  Chronicles:  Narratives  of  Mars  in  Science  and  SF”  (
Foundation no. 68, 1996, and in The Hunters of Pangaea, NESFA Press, Feb 2004). Our depiction
of a lunar South pole base in Sunstorm foresaw the plans for the colonization of the Moon announced by
NASA in December 2006. Our sketch of Titan is based on results returned by the spectacular Huygens
Lander in January 2005.
Recent studies confirm that the surface of Mars’s northern hemisphere is very ancient (Watters et al.,
Nature, vol. 444, pp. 905–8,  December  2006)  and  appears  to  be  a  single vast  crater  created  by an
immense impact (New Scientist, 24 March 2007). The impact was natural. Probably.
Solar  sailing  is  another  long-trailed  technology  whose  time  may  be  coming  at  last.  Physicists  and
science  fiction  writers  Gregory  and  James  Benford  were  involved  in  Cosmos  1,  an  experimental
solar-sail spacecraft that, scheduled for launch in June 2005, would have used light pressure to adjust its
orbit. The craft carried a CD containing Clarke’s 1964 story “The Wind from the Sun.” Sadly the launch
vehicle failed.
Human suspended  animation may also  be  coming closer  to  fruition; see  for  example  the  article  by
Mark Roth and Todd Nystul in Scientific American, June 2005. And scientists led by Imperial College,
London,  are  edging  toward  a  “metamaterial”  invisibility  technology  of  the  type  sketched  here  (see
http://tinyurl.com/zp6jh). A study of the use of “gravitational tractors” to divert asteroids is given by E. T.
Lu et al. in Nature, vol. 438, pp. 177–8, November 2005.
The effects of the “cosmological bomb” featured in this novel are based on predictions made in 2003
of the ultimate fate  of a  universe permeated  by dark  energy,  given by Robert  Caldwell of  Dartmouth
College and  others  (see  Physical  Review,  www.arxiv.org/abs/  astro-ph/0302506).  The  variability  of
Procyon is fictitious, but variable stars do sometimes cease to be fluctuate. It did happen  to  one  of the
most famous stars in the sky, the pole star Polaris, an anomaly as yet unexplained; see J. D. Fernie et al.,
Astrophysical Journal, vol. 416, pp. 820–4, 1993.

 
The  science  of  “astrobiology,”  the  study  of  the  possibility  of  life  beyond  the  Earth,  has  been
revolutionized  in  the  last  few  years  both  by  the  discovery  of  new  variants  of  life  on  Earth,  by  the
revelation of possible habitats for life either now or in the past on worlds like Mars, Europa, and Titan,
and by new models of “panspermia,”  natural mechanisms by  which  living  things  could  be  transferred
between the planets. A recent review is Life as We Do Not Know It by Peter Ward (Viking, 2005).
The energy-conservation strategy of the Firstborn, first sketched in Time’s Eye (2004) and Sunstorm
(2005), is reflected  in some  academic  thinking on the future of life in the universe. See  for instance a
paper by Michael Mautner ( Journal of the British Interplanetary Society, vol. 57, pp. 167–80, 2005)
titled “Life in the Cosmological Future: Resources, Biomass and Populations.”
The idea that stretches of North America could be “re-wilded” with substitute communities of animals
to replace the lost megafauna ecology of the past has been put forward by, among others, Paul S. Martin
(Twilight of the Mammoths: Ice Age Extinctions and the Rewilding of North America, University of
California  Press,  2005).  But  others  raise  profound  objections  to  the  plan  (see  Rubenstein  et  al.,
Biological  Conservation,  vol. 132,  p.  232,  2006).  A study of the  use  of  space-based  resources  in
mitigating future disasters (not necessarily caused by malevolent extraterrestrials) is given as two papers
by C. M. Hempsell in the Journal of the British Interplanetary Society, vol. 57, pp. 2–21, 2004.
 
Alexander the Great’s  global conquest,  sketched  here,  is based  on plans he was  actually drawing  up
before  his  death  for  an  expansion  of  his  empire  from  Gibraltar  to  the  Black  Sea;  see  for  instance
Conquest  and  Empire:  The  Reign  of  Alexander  the  Great  by  A.  B.  Bosworth  (CUP  1988).  An
engaging portrait of Chicago at the time of the 1893 world’s fair is The Devil in the White City by Erik
Larson (Random House, 2003). The portrayal of the Babylonian “Midden” is based on the archaeology
of the Neolithic city known as Catalhoyuk; see www.catalhoyuk.org.
Chapter 25 is based on a heavily revised version of the story “A Signal from Earth” by Baxter,  first
published in Postscripts no. 5, Autumn 2005.
Any errors or misconceptions are of course the authors’ sole responsibility.
Sir Arthur C. Clarke
Stephen Baxter
June 2007
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
ARTHUR C. CLARKE is considered the greatest science fiction writer of all time and is an international
treasure in many other ways, including the fact that a 1945 article by him led to the invention of satellite

technology. Books  by Clarke—both  fiction and  nonfiction—have sold  more  than one  hundred  million
copies worldwide. He lives in Sri Lanka.
 
STEPHEN BAXTER is a trained engineer with degrees from Cambridge and Southampton universities.
Baxter is the acclaimed  author  of the Manifold novels and  Evolution.  He  is the winner of the British
Science  Fiction  Award,  the  Locus  Award,  the  John  W.  Campbell  Award,  and  the  Philip  K.  Dick
Award, as well as being a nominee for an Arthur C. Clarke Award.
 
ALSO BY THE AUTHORS FROM THE RANDOM HOUSE PUBLISHING
GROUP
BY ARTHUR C. CLARKE AND STEPHEN BAXTER
A Time Odyssey: Time’s Eye 
A Time Odyssey: Sunstorm 
BY ARTHUR C. CLARKE
Childhood’s End 
Rendezvous with Rama 
2010: Odyssey Two 
The Songs of Distant Earth 
2061: Odyssey Three 
3001: The Final Odyssey 
Hammer of God 
BY STEPHEN BAXTER
Manifold: Time 
Manifold: Space 
Manifold: Origin 
Evolution 
Destiny’s Children: Coalescent 
Destiny’s Children: Exultant 
Destiny’s Children: Transcendent 

 
Firstborn is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents are the products of the authors’
imaginations or are used fictitiously. Any resemblance to actual events, locales, or persons, living or dead,
is entirely coincidental.
Copyright © 2008 by Arthur C. Clarke and Stephen Baxter
All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by Del Rey Books, an imprint of The Random House Publishing Group, a
division of Random House, Inc., New York.
DEL REY is a registered trademark and the Del Rey colophon is a trademark of Random House, Inc.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Clarke, Arthur Charles.
Firstborn / Arthur C. Clarke, Stephen Baxter.
p.     cm.
eISBN: 978-0-345-50448-7
1. Space and time—Fiction. I. Baxter, Stephen. II. Title.
PR6005.L36F57 2007
823'.914—dc22             2007028329
www.delreybooks.com 
v1.0

