Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 1 
The Big Meeting 
On a cold Sunday in January, I left my home in Illinois to catch a late flight to San Francisco 
for a client meeting the next morning. But it wasn’t just any meeting. About a dozen people 
from different areas of the company were all presenting designs to the CEO of a giant retail 
website. VPs, directors, product owners, and UX designers were all involved in putting 
together a 3-hour event that would lay the groundwork for an entire season’s worth of 
projects, as long as they could get this one executive’s approval.  
The whole thing had started weeks before, when I sat in a different meeting about the 
meeting. While the rest of the product teams had been planning for it for a few weeks, our 
project had been overlooked in the previous review with the CEO. He asked why our project 
wasn’t represented and so the rest of the team insisted that I be present at the next meeting. 
It was extremely inconvenient for me. I had been in San Francisco the week before and was 
now being asked to come back for a single day the following week. To make matters worse, I 
needed to create new designs to support a view for every product team that was being 
represented, so I had a lot of work to do to get ready. However, none of that mattered. It was 
obvious that everyone was prepared to drop what they were doing to make this meeting 
successful.  
After working with several product managers and attending yet another meeting about the 
meeting, I finally had a list of designs I needed to provide and started working on them right 
away. The Friday before, I sat in on a 4-hour conference call with the entire team while each 
one practiced their presentation to a VP, who provided feedback and suggestions for how to 
best present their ideas to the CEO.  
The whole charade centered around one thing: presenting design ideas to a CEO for the 
purpose of getting his approval. There were meetings about meetings, discussions about what 
he might say, late nights getting everything just right, and rearranging schedules to make it 
happen. I personally would spend 16 hours traveling, two nights in a hotel, and a whole day 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2 
in a conference room just for this one meeting. You’ll be happy to know the meeting went 
well. The CEO was very receptive, provided great feedback, and everyone set to 
implementing the interfaces they had designed. But that’s not the important part of this story. 
What struck me about this whole thing was the amount of effort that was going into just 
communicating design ideas to one person. The amount of time the other designers spent 
actually creating the mockups was nothing compared to the time and energy that went into 
finding the best way of communicating them. It was clear to everyone: if we don’t get 
approval for our designs, our projects won’t see the light of day. Communicating about the 
designs was more important than the designs themselves.  
You may not have a large staff like this and you may not be working with a large company 
where a meeting with the CEO is such a big deal, but the principle is still the same. The way 
we talk about design to our stakeholders is critical to the success of our projects.  
 
What This Book is About 
The purpose of this book is to help designers become better communicators: to expertly 
explain their design decisions to the people who have influence over their project. The entire 
premise of the book centers around a meeting: a meeting with clients or stakeholders where 
we present and talk about our design decisions. Everything is written with this meeting in 
mind: before, during, and even after this meeting. Everything that we will walk through 
focuses on this meeting and is meant to help you become better at leading, participating in, 
and saving the day in these situations.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
3 
Some of these meetings will involve a lot of other people, but the majority of them involve 
just a few. Some might take place in a conference room while others are simple hallway 
conversations. So don’t obsess over the details of how this overlays with your own reality, 
but instead focus on the overarching principles that you can apply in any situation. The goal 
is to remain flexible and able to adapt quickly in different situations.  
I go into great detail about writing things down, asking questions, honing your listening 
skills, or making multiple designs. It might seem as if you’d need weeks to prepare to talk to 
someone about your work. But in reality, it all happens very quickly. Sometimes you’ll have 
plenty of time to prepare. Other times you’ll have to do them off-the-cuff and make very 
quick judgment calls. That’s the reason learning these skills and committing them to habit is 
so important. You want articulating design decisions to be something you can do so 
effortlessly, that you no longer need to spend conscious effort applying all the advice 
contained in this book.  
Talking to people about design might seem like a basic skill, but it’s actually really difficult to 
do. In my experience, designers have a difficult time adequately communicating to non-
designers in a way that’s effective. So keep reading and learn how to better communicate to 
stakeholders, keep your sanity, and deliver the best user experience. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 1 
Chapter 1 
A Maturing Industry 
 
 
“To improve is to change; to be perfect is to change often.” 
– Winston Churchill 
Historically, designers have been relegated to the business of making pretty pictures. Most of 
us transitioned into “UX” from other areas. But now that UX is everywhere, we are thrust 
into the limelight of product development with our own ideas forming a critical piece of the 
puzzle. It’s what we’ve always wanted! The problem? We’re not used to having to explain 
ourselves to other people, especially non-designers.  
As we look at how to talk about design to non-designers, I want to first provide the context 
to help us understand how we got here to begin with. My own career has been littered with 
experiences (good and bad) of articulating design decisions to stakeholders. Those 
experiences shaped my understanding of design and helped me see the importance of 
communication in the process. In addition, the term UX hasn’t been around that long. It’s 
important to know how the evolution of this term affects our ability to talk about our work 
with others. Of critical importance, however, is the shift that’s taken place in organizations 
from seeing design as merely a utility to being a fully engaged partner in the product 
development cycle. Similarly, web and mobile interfaces have transitioned from being only 
platforms for products to being the product themselves. All of these factors greatly influence 
design within companies, teams, and the minds of our stakeholders. So let’s jump right in and 
start all the way back in 90s.  
 
Talking My Way Into Design 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2 
My path to working in UX started in marketing. I studied business for my undergraduate 
degree and, during college, quickly realized how powerful design was when it came to 
bringing products to life. Every class project needed something designed. Local bands 
needed posters and album artwork. Friends needed simple websites. So despite the fact that I 
wasn’t in the art department at my school, I had access to the tools (computers and software) 
for creating products and began my journey there, self-taught.  
It was easy to get freelance work as a designer. It seemed like everyone needed a graphic or 
web designer and so I did what I could to pay my way through college doing something I 
loved. One year, I got a part-time job doing web design for a small record label. In my senior 
year, I was working full-time at an electronic payment services company as the “Marketing 
Coordinator” although most of my time was spent designing print ads and the company 
website. By the time I graduated, I had a decent portfolio of design work and was ready to 
take on the world.  
I know it sounds crazy, but I really enjoy interviewing for jobs. I applied for just about 
anything and I said yes to every interview. It was a low risk opportunity to practice talking 
about my work. Sometimes I would go to interviews for jobs that I knew I didn’t want. 
Why? I enjoyed learning how to talk to people in those kinds of meetings and built up a 
vocabulary for discussing design with others. Once I actually negotiated a salary for a web 
design job that I had no intention of accepting, simply because I wanted to see if I could get 
the manager to offer me a higher salary. He didn’t (in fact, he laughed at me) but it was 
exciting for me to push those boundaries and see just how skillful I could be at convincing 
him that I was worth it. 
More than anything, I loved to talk with people about my work. I loved watching people 
look through my portfolio, comment on what they liked, or ask me questions about why I did 
what I did. I got a rush from telling other people about my design decisions back then and I 
still do today. I love to talk about design.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
3 
After graduation, I got an interview for a job as the Creative Manager at an electronic 
payment services provider, the same industry I had worked in before. The role required me 
to lead the “design department” although at the time there was only one full-time web 
designer and a handful of freelance contractors. It was a dream job for a college graduate and 
of course I accepted the interview if for no other reason than curiosity. If nothing else, it 
would be great to show someone my work and talk about design.  
I passed the first interview with someone from HR who wouldn’t really know whether I was 
qualified or not. She was just a gatekeeper. I passed the technical interview because I knew 
how to use design software and could easily show my skills. I passed the third interview with 
the Director of Marketing because she liked my portfolio and I was good at talking about it. 
So far so good! By this point, I had a lot of confidence. Here I was, fresh out of college, 
interviewing for a manager role at a decent-sized company, doing the thing that I loved so 
much. I probably thought I knew a lot about design.  
My last interview was with the VP of Marketing. She was a short woman who wore her hair 
in a bun. She had come from Proctor & Gamble and had a reputation for doing some great 
work. Her style was terse and to-the-point. She was smart and quick to reply. This woman 
did not mess around. In fact, you probably didn’t want to mess with her at all. It was a little 
intimidating but having passed all the other tests I thought I had nothing to fear.  
She quizzed me on my portfolio, which I easily defended. She asked me about my past 
experience and ran through my resume, which I gladly bragged about. But then she got 
down to the point. She made a transition from interviewer to client and asked me the most 
impressionable question of my career, “Let’s say I have a new project for you. What’s the 
first thing you would ask me about it?”  
Having done freelance work and been on plenty of projects at my other jobs, it was an easy 
answer. How many times had I been in a situation where a client needed something? I only 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4 
had limited experience, but this was perhaps the most common meeting for a designer: the 
meeting with a stakeholder. Without hesitating, I began what felt like was a tried-and-true 
approach to all my previous work: “Is this a print piece or a website? Will there be color or 
not? Will we use stock photography or original? How many pages would the website or 
brochure have? And, finally, what is your timeline? When do you need it done?” 
“You’re wrong,” she said. “None of that really matters. The most important thing you could 
ask me… the very first thing you should always ask is: What are we trying to communicate?”  
I was stumped; silent. Not only did I know that she was right, but she had exposed my 
superficial design ego in a way that made me feel small and completely clueless about the 
thing that I was most confident in: my ability to talk about design.  
The good news is, I got that job and I’ve had many other jobs since then, but I never forgot 
that mistake. I was not astute enough to recognize that my stakeholder had a different 
agenda than my own. I failed to understand what she needed or to address her concerns. To 
her, the project was about communication. To me, it was only about pixels. In that moment, I 
realized that my ability to talk to other people about design went far beyond my own 
ambitions. I had to take into consideration the needs of my audience. My designs had to do 
something for the client. They had to solve a problem. And if I couldn’t communicate that, I 
was bound to be wrong again. In order for me to be successful as a designer, I had to figure 
out how to communicate to my clients what my designs did. I had to answer their questions 
in a way that made sense them, not me. I had to express to them the rationale behind a design 
using words that would appeal to them and meet their needs.  
If I could do that, I thought, I would be successful.  
 
UX is Still Young 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5 
In order to understand the problems we’re facing with communicating to stakeholders, it’s 
important to take a quick look back at how we got here in the first place. We didn’t used to 
be called user experience designers, whatever that means. It’s a new term that has evolved in 
meaning over the past decade and continues to evolve even now. I won’t address the 
differences between UX, UXD, UI, IA, IxD or any other niche player in the product 
development life cycle. It’s my opinion that these designations are a luxury that, while 
valuable, have potential to confuse people with unnecessary complexity. The point is this: 
user experience design is a relatively new thing and we’re all continually adjusting to the 
changing attitudes and approaches to creating great stuff. It’s all design. When it comes to 
titles, no one really knows what they’re talking about. Right or wrong, we’re all just making 
stuff up and calling it “UX” along the way. And this wouldn’t be a big deal if we designers 
were the only ones involved, but we’re not. Our stakeholders are equally confused by the 
terminology and it’s not their fault. 
 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6 
It’s a new word 
As far as I can tell, the term “user experience design” emerged in the 90s as a branch of 
human-computer interaction (HCI), information architecture (IA) and other software-design 
disciplines revolving around the practice of usability. The term itself is frequently credited to 
Don Norman.1 While the ideas and influences for UX have been around since the 1950s in 
Henry Dreyfuss’ “Designing for People”2, it was not until Apple released the first iPod and 
then the first iPhone in 20073 that the term came into widespread use as the role of a designer 
who is creating a whole end-to-end experience using a user-centered design philosophy.  
Since then jobs for “UX” have been growing at astounding rates. From 2008-2013, the 
number of job titles including “UX” on LinkedIn jumped from only 159 to 3,509 - growing 
by a factor of 22 in just five years.4 ComputerWorld says that recruiters specializing in digital 
products are seeing a similar trend, reporting massive increases in the demand for UX 
Designers.5 UX Designer is one of the top jobs projected for growth through 2020.6 Through 
a series of market changes driven by rapidly evolving technology, user experience design 
seems to have come out of nowhere leaving both designers and stakeholders scratching their 
heads about the best ways of working together.  
Schools are responding to the changing demand for designers by offering courses in 
information architecture, interface design, and usability testing techniques. Rightly so. But 
the majority of people working in UX today didn’t come from a school that specialized in the 
field nor did we take a class to teach us a user-centered approach. We migrated into UX 
                                                
1 http://www.smashingmagazine.com/2010/10/05/what-is-user-experience-design-overview-tools-and-
resources/ 
2 Dreyfuss, Henry. Designing for People. Allworth Press; illustrated edition, 2003. ISBN 1-58115-312-0 
3 How long has the term and topic UX been around? http://www.quora.com/How-long-has-the-term-and-
topic-UX-been-around/answer/Dave-Malouf 
4 10 Hot Job Titles that Barely Existed 5 Years Ago http://www.slideshare.net/linkedin-talent-solutions/10-
job-titles-that-didnt-exist-5-years-ago-infographic 
5 Tech hotshots: The rise of the UX expert http://www.computerworld.com/article/2493971/app-
development/tech-hotshots--the-rise-of-the-ux-expert.html 
6 LOOKING FOR A NEW CAREER? HERE ARE THE 3 MOST PROMISING CAREERS OF 2020 
https://blog.generalassemb.ly/the-3-most-promising-careers-of-2020/ 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
7 
from other areas within the company: marketing, IT, design, research. Even human 
behaviorists and psychologist are finding their relevance in the explosive field called UX.  
It’s a new role 
In my experience, a typical UX designer’s story might sound like this: “I went to art school 
and started working as a graphic designer making marketing materials: brochures, print ads, 
and logos. Eventually, I started making web sites too. I even learned how to write some 
HTML and CSS. Soon I found myself designing more websites and apps than anything else. 
Now I’m a UX designer.” You may have entered UX from the development side with a 
highly technical engineering background. Maybe you didn’t go to art school, but started in 
business or psychology. Whatever your path, a lot of us UXers have similar stories. Most of 
us didn’t start out in UX because UX didn’t exist. 
By the time “Web 2.0” was popularized, designers had their first real opportunity to create 
applications instead of just brochure websites. The functionality and interaction that was 
once limited to desktop software was now possible and more easily available in the browser 
and to a much wider population of digital designers. With the advent of the iPhone, more 
companies began demanding better experiences and, in fact, needed experiences specifically 
tailored to these new devices. Thanks to Apple, everyone started expecting everything to be 
well-designed. Suddenly the demand for designers who knew how to create great 
experiences exploded. As design-centric social media skyrocketed too, designers were able to 
create just about any interface they could think of and share it with the world. It was the 
democratization of design tools coupled with a free platform for sharing ideas. Almost 
overnight, the web designer had been transformed into a cacophony of acronyms that almost 
all boil down to creating the user experience.  
It’s a new team 
The awkwardness of UX’s adolescence could not be any more clear than it is in our 
relationships and interactions with developers.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
8 
Depending on the business, the website may have been born in the IT department. The 
engineering-types helped to build, support, and maintain it. They’ve been on a similar 
journey where the website was just a thing but now the website has become the thing. 
Previously, the website didn’t need to connect to the backend, but now the website is the 
primary interface for the backend; the system was rarely exposed to the general public, now 
exposing the system to the public is a given. 
The good news is developers are used to helping the business solve problems with 
technology. They’re the ones who help the help desk. They know what the common 
complaints are among users. They maintain the backlog of issues and bugs that need to be 
fixed. Do users not understand that they need to create a complex password with a 
combination of characters and numbers? Just add messaging that lists all the password 
requirements. Developers have been solving these problems far longer than designers. 
The difference is that the interface they used for solving these problems never mattered much 
before. As long as you could teach someone how to use it, it was good enough. We didn’t 
need effective design, we needed documentation and training. The answer to a design 
problem was to educate the user. If we can help them understand the system, then they will 
know how to use it. 
Over time developers, too, have come to see the value of creating a great UX. They 
understand that better design can result in a better application: both for them to build and 
for the business. They’re on board to help us create the best possible experience, but they 
probably have different ideas about how to do it. 
There is a whole ecosystem of custom-built applications with terrible interfaces that 
companies must support with an army of developers and training staff. Designers are now 
being asked to re-design these applications, work with the developers entrenched in legacy 
systems, and create a better product. Everyone wants it, but getting there isn’t easy.   
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
9 
It’s a new challenge 
We have a design industry full of people with backgrounds that are vastly different than their 
current job titles. Artists, researchers, and recovering marketers are all doing the best they 
can in this changing scenery. The graphic or web designer as we knew it, has been almost 
completely replaced by “UX” 
Now companies are adjusting to their changing needs in a highly competitive marketplace 
where great design is the expected norm. For a lot of corporate history, design was just a 
utility. We used to only hire designers to make our stuff look more professional, to be sure 
the brand was consistent, or to communicate a creative idea. Now we hire designers because 
there are difficult problems that have to be solved in order for our products to be successful 
in the marketplace. Designers are now at the center of the product development cycle in a 
way that was previously not thought to be necessary. More people in the organization than 
ever before see the value in designing a great user experience. Sometimes that’s the only way 
to differentiate yourself in a crowded market and it makes an impact on your bottom line.  
What happens when you take an industry full of creative right-brained thinkers and thrust 
them into the middle of a product cycle with usability problems and business goals? Well, it’s 
no surprise that there is a disconnect between what the other stakeholders want to do and 
what the user experience designer has so carefully crafted.  
This book sits at the intersection of the growing UX design industry and the digital product 
business where designers transitioning from making pretty pictures to creating great user 
experiences meet with developers, managers, and executives whose agenda and perspective 
may, at times, be at odds. The growth of the UX designer has changed our role in so many 
ways, none more so than the need to explain ourselves to other people that don’t share our 
experience in design.  
 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
10 
Design is Subjective… Sorta 
When I interview designers for a role in UX, I always ask them “What makes a good design 
good?” Most of the answers are predictable and some of them are sort of right, but they all 
tend to sound something like this: “a good use of space,” “simplicity,” or one of my favorites 
“when you can’t remove anything else”. Those are good things and they express how a lot of 
people approach design but they aren’t truly what make a design good in the eyes of a 
business. They all speak to subjectivity; to an aesthetic that not everyone will agree on.  
I’m not exactly sure where these designers come up with phrases that sound like something 
straight out of a Jonathan Ive memoir. I don’t think they learned it in art school. What 
concerns me is that I think they picked up these catch phrases from a social media design 
phenomenon where “UX” means “something that looks as cool as an iPhone” They’ve 
adopted it from a Dribbble7 mentality that suggests pretty things are the same as usability. 
It’s the same culture that causes well-intentioned designers to create a “re-design” mockup of 
any popular website or app without any clue as to what that business needs are. It’s less 
about solving problems and more about popularity.  
The truth is, all design is subjective. What one person likes, another person hates. What 
seems obvious to me, might not be obvious to you. What works in one context could fail 
miserably in another. This is why design is such a difficult thing to talk about, especially with 
people that aren’t designers. There is little common understanding of what design is or 
should be.  
UX has come a long way in this regard. People understand that our decisions need to be 
founded in some sort of explainable logic. We are much better at using research to support 
our ideas so that we remove some of the subjectivity from the equation. That’s a good shift, 
but even research can be biased, unintentionally flawed, or otherwise inconclusive. This adds 
complexity to the challenge of talking about design and UX. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
11 
Businesses Don’t Critique 
One of the valuable things about art school is learning to critique someone else’s work and to 
receive critique from others. In a genre where everything is subjective, it’s healthy to analyze 
one’s work in an environment where everyone is on the same intellectual page, as far as the 
subject goes. It’s beneficial for two people who share the same vocabulary to discuss their 
work and make each other better. This is a great skill for every designer to have and it will go 
a long way towards helping you be articulate with stakeholders. 
The shortcoming of the critique in business is that it doesn’t always help us address the needs 
of the business with our design solutions. With a fine art critique where invoking dialog is 
the goal, two people can disagree and go their separate ways. “I see your point about how the 
red swaths in this landscape are reminiscent of the Dedocian period, but they’re actually 
intended to communicate the flushed faces of the people through Theochronic symbolism.” 
End of story; no more discussion; agree to disagree. Even in schools that bring in volunteer 
“clients” or design imaginary products, the problems being solved have no real long-term 
effect. But when the user experience of a company’s product is in question, millions of dollars 
in revenue could be on the line. We can’t simply go our separate ways. We have to find a way 
to talk about it and arrive at a final decision.  
Further, two designers critiquing each others work are using a shared background and 
vocabulary that helps them talk to one another. It’s not like that when talking about design to 
stakeholders. Designers will discuss which UI control is right for this context. They’ll debate 
button styles. They compare their mockups to the user flows that were defined at the 
beginning of the project. We talk a lot about designs: the use, the form, the function and we 
fundamentally understand how to solve our company’s problems with design but we lack the 
ability to explain that understanding to people who don’t share our background in design. 
We have yet to truly master the art of explaining these things to non-designers.  
                                                                                                                                                                               
7 Dribbble is a social media site for sharing designs http://dribbble.com 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
12 
So while it’s valuable and necessary for teams to push each other on their work, it’s not what 
will ultimately make a difference in the final decision for our project. It’s just family chatter; 
an internal conversation for an in-group of designer-types. It’s not at all the same as talking 
to someone who doesn’t have the same level of interest in design. It’s not necessarily the right 
way to talk to a non-designer. 
Ego and Intuition 
In some ways, there is an arrogance that prevents us from being truly productive with people 
outside of our own peers. We don’t always see the other stakeholders on our project as 
knowing anything valuable about design. We don’t trust their instincts the way we trust our 
own. After all, we’re the experts. We were hired to design things because that’s what we’re 
good at. Why should a manager care? Can’t they just trust me to do my job?   
Designers make a lot of decisions based purely on intuition. In fact, our intuition is really 
good at solving design problems in an elegant and simple way. We’re wired to think visually, 
to organize elements logically for the user, and to pay careful attention to the details. The 
problem is that because design is subjective and because we don’t always understand how 
our intuition connects to the problem at hand, we’re unable to adequately tell other people 
why we did what we did and that’s one of our biggest failures.  
It’s as if our brains go on autopilot when it comes to making design decisions. It’s muscle 
memory. A dancer might have a difficult time describing how she moves because she has 
done it so much that she just knows how to do it. She doesn’t think about it, she just does it. 
Likewise, we tend to create things that we just know to be the right solution: perhaps it is our 
preference, maybe it’s based on experience, or maybe it was unconsciously picked up from 
observing users. Whatever the reason, when someone is good at what they do they have a 
hard time telling people why they did what they did. They don’t think, they just do.   
To make matters worse, we may be the only people in the room without a specific, 
articulated justification for our choices. Developers make choices based on what’s possible or 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
13 
how to maximize their time and code. Executives want to do what’s going to make them the 
most money and so they propose things that they think will accomplish that. Marketing 
wants you to make changes so that everything is consistent and on-brand. But unless you’re 
prepared to defend your decisions intelligently, the only thing you can say is that you 
disagree. That degree of subjectivity has to change. 
 
A Shift Toward Products 
A designer, a developer, and a CEO walk into a bar. Three different bars, on opposite sides of town. The 
designer orders a pale ale with an oaky flavor and a hint of citrus. The developer asks for his favorite beer 
on tap. The CEO goes for the day’s special but without too much foam, in a cold-frosted mug, and with a 
glass of water. They all drink the same beer.  
Attitudes have changed 
To understand how designers fit into corporate culture, we have to understand the changing 
shift and attitudes toward design as something more than just an aesthetic. When our job was 
to make the company look good, it didn’t matter as much who got their way on the final 
design. Now that we’re solving problems that affect the bottom line, everyone has an opinion 
on the best way to solve it. 
Once the web took over everything, organizations large and small were on a much more level 
playing field, in terms of reaching their audience. Everyone wanted and needed a web site, 
designers hurried to meet the need, learned basic skills, and started pumping out websites to 
meet demand. For the first time, the world of HCI and interface design that started in the 
tech companies of Silicon Valley was available to a much wider group of creators that had no 
idea what they were doing. That’s how the majority of the web was built.  
The web has changed 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
14 
All organizations embraced the web because it was an inexpensive mass-medium. First for 
communicating your message, next for selling your product, and now for actually being the 
product itself. This evolution caused a shift in how organizations think about design.  
When designers were only communicating messages, companies didn’t need to micromanage 
a design process that was just meant to make the company look good. Executives were 
typically happy if the website didn’t look like crap, or at least that it looked better than their 
competitors. But for the most part, design was this other thing over there. It was nice to 
have, we liked it, but we needn’t get involved much.  
As the web shifted to allow us to sell our products, the focus was still on aesthetic with the 
addition of utility. As long as the website “worked” management didn’t need to care too much 
about the details. Something just needed to exist and get the job done. “We need filters. 
Those are the filters there? Great. We need ‘Add to Cart’ - I don’t care what the color is, 
what difference does that make?” And in this world, as long as the stakeholders knew where 
to find the thing they thought was important, that was all that mattered. We might even set 
goals for the website or hire a salesperson to monitor and grow our “eBusiness” but it was 
less about strong opinions and more about getting the job done.  
In the past ten years there’s been a dramatic shift in attitudes toward what the web and web-
like interfaces (like native mobile apps) represent. You know the story about the explosive 
growth of social media, the proliferation of native and web apps, and the proclivity of people 
to carry these things around in their pockets to be constantly engaged, consuming whatever 
the next thing is. Researchers believe web revenue will continue to climb as a percentage of 
overall retail8 and that as much as 60% of all retail transactions will involve the web in some 
way in coming years.9 Mobile revenue has crossed the 50% mark for many of the largest 
                                                
8 U.S. online retail sales will grow 57% by 2018 
https://www.internetretailer.com/2014/05/12/us-online-retail-sales-will-grow-57-2018 
9 60% of U.S. retail sales will involve the web by 2017 
https://www.internetretailer.com/2013/10/30/60-us-retail-sales-will-involve-web-2017 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
15 
companies10, what Luke Wroblewski calls their “mobile moment.”11 The most successful 
business stories nowadays are of companies who created a product that was focused on the 
design.12 Heck, there is even a movie13 and book14 about how design is changing the business 
world! Great design has taken center stage as an asset, a competitive advantage, or a must-
have in order to survive in the market.  
Businesses have changed 
Closely aligned with the growth of the web to serve products and experiences, is a new 
business approach where whole organizations arrange themselves to value design and make 
it part of their core culture. As start-ups and big corp CEOs are starting to value design, we 
see an organizational model that allows businesses to really hone in on and make product 
design their primary strength. To complicate matters, businesses are quick to adopt buzz-
words, especially those that seem to help them solve a problem they see in their organization. 
An executive might read an article about a successful business that has a design-centered 
product approach. The quote from the “user experience designer” is the tipping point. Maybe 
that’s what he needs! His web designer now has a new title. This is why UX continues to be 
misunderstood, even by the designers doing the work. Businesses are changing to adapt to 
this new reality, but none talk about UX in the same way. 
As a result, you have designers who started out somewhere else creating stuff that was 
mostly focused on the look and feel. And you have managers and executives who cared more 
about the utility and function of their thing - but more and more these two primary players 
are moving towards each other in a way that has incredible potential to change their 
                                                
10 Mobile now over 50% of Facebook ad revenue, crosses $1B 
http://vator.tv/news/2014-01-29-mobile-now-over-50-of-facebook-ad-revenue-crosses-1b 
11 The Mobile Moment 
http://www.lukew.com/ff/entry.asp?1841 
12 Design Is Changing How We Innovate 
http://www.fastcodesign.com/3035110/innovation-by-design-2014/design-is-changing-how-we-innovate 
 
Design as business change agent 
http://www.designersdna.com/design-as-business-change-agent-2/ 
13 Design is the New Business http://www.designthenewbusiness.com/ 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
16 
organization for the better. Executives now realize just how important design is and they 
want to influence the process because their business is on the line. Likewise, designers have 
come to understand the value of creating an experience that is based on solving problems and 
backed up by research. And so the two meet in the middle, in a meeting.  
That’s where we find ourselves today. In a meeting with people that have no idea how to do 
our jobs, yet consistently find it their place to tell us how to do it. It’s enough to drive any 
designer insane. 
 
Digital Experiences are Real Life 
The organizational transition to understanding and valuing the UX of digital products is 
maturing. From these original attitudes and approaches to design comes a mutual 
understanding that a great UX will create a great product. A great product will sell, be easier 
to support and maintain, and be good for the bottom line. These historical attitudes, the 
stereotypical personality types that create these roles in the organization, all come together 
for a single purpose: to create the best possible products. The way that we now realize we 
can create the best possible products is through design. The problem is that only one of these 
players is a designer.  
But why does this matter? If we are the experts, then why do we have to justify our decisions 
to non-designers? The reason is that UX has gone mainstream: in the organization and even 
within pop-culture. The most popular and interesting companies have put design at the 
forefront of their product offering, creating a buzz culture that drools over every next new 
release and a fan following that promotes their brand for them. I’m not only thinking of 
Apple, but also brands like IKEA, innovators like Tesla, and unique problem-solving designs 
                                                                                                                                                                               
14 Change by Design, Harper Collins, 2009 - Tim Brown 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
17 
from Dyson, Segway, or Nest. These brands command respect, elicit strong opinions, and 
foster loyalty from the people who follow them.  
Social media has changed how people view digital products 
It’s not only physical products that have transformed our understanding of the value of UX 
within the organization, regular “websites” have proven that UX is a critical component to a 
company’s success. Millions use Facebook every single day. Each minor tweak to the UI or 
change to the design incurs the praise or wrath of every user. Why? Because Facebook (and 
other services like it) is a very personal part of our lives. Never before have we had a 
platform for sharing the most intimate and mundane details of our everyday lives. For many, 
social media is their window into the world. It is the lens they use to know their friends and 
family. It’s a powerful social engine that frames every modern conversation. And so it’s no 
surprise that the details of how the interface works elicits strong reactions from people who 
perceive it almost as an intrusion into the way they live their lives. For the first time, people 
who barely noticed the design of their favorite website before are now obsessed with the 
smallest interface details of other apps. They notice them, they touch them, they interact with 
them and those elements become part of their lives. Changing those things means changing 
the way people interact with the world. This is why so many people have an opinion about 
your work.  
Politics has changed how people view digital products 
Also notable was the reaction to the failures of the launch of healthcare.gov in 2013 in the 
United States. Usability was a core factor in the demise of that initial launch. But why did 
that matter to people? If the website “worked” why did it matter if it worked well? For the 
same reasons as social media, the healthcare website was an intensely personal, deeply 
intrusive interface that threatened to change the way people lived their lives. I might argue 
that even the best UX might have still resulted in failure if for no other reason than the 
sociological implications that a “designed system” was representative of the massive changes 
facing the American people. An interface was responsible for people’s private healthcare. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
18 
Changing the way people did healthcare meant changing their perception of their health. But 
the point is this: the President of the United States was talking about usability in public 
forums to a mass audience!15 It’s no wonder that UX has become a central focus of many 
organizations.  
To take it a step further, we don’t have to look far to see how digital products have fueled 
uprisings and revolutions in places like Syria, Turkey, Egypt and even Ferguson, Missouri in 
the United States. In these situations, the use of digital products became the voice of the 
people and upset the political balance. An interface designed by someone in a meeting with 
stakeholders became a tool for empowering an entire population toward revolution. This is 
why so many people have an opinion about your work.  
Personal devices have changed how people view digital products 
Perhaps the biggest factor, though, in the explosive growth of UX as a discipline is the 
personalization and shrinking of the devices we use to interact with the world on a daily 
basis. Sitting at a computer is not a terribly personal experience. It is a separate device at 
arms length, with physical controls that one has to learn to manipulate. The input methods 
are indirect: what I do down there with the mouse changes what I see up here on the display. 
And at the end of the day, I have to put my computer away and move on with my life. 
Something as simple as looking up the weather on a computer has to be done purposefully 
and intentionally.  
As mobile phone growth turned powerful smart phones into touch-screen super phones, our 
ability to interact with products and services on a regular basis shifted from being an 
intentional arms-length conscious choice, to an automatic muscle-memory involuntary twerk 
of the wrist. Like social media, our devices are intensely personal and becoming more 
intimate. Our interface with the world is no longer the machine at arms-length. It’s the 
touchable glossy display that we always have with us. Always on, always connected, always 
                                                
15 http://www.politico.com/story/2013/10/obama-healthcare-quotes-98610.html 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
19 
shaping the way we see our world. As a result, universal understanding of the importance of 
UX has grown too. Every software update introduces new ideas and elicits strong opinions 
from every user. This is why so many people have an opinion about your work.  
Start-up culture has changed how people view digital products 
Today, businesses and even entire industries are built around the “disruption” of creating a 
better user experience. The way that you succeed in business is to find an existing category 
and then tweak the user experience to the nth degree. It’s not necessarily about being 
original, but about being the best – and design is usually the great differentiator. 
The most prominent example I can think of is Uber. The entire business is built on creating a 
better end-to-end user experience for taking a cab. A simple task with incredible implications 
for improving the UX. Uber did what any good “disrupter” should do: they looked at the 
process of taking a cab, broke it down, and solved all the problems with better design. No 
one likes standing on the street and waving their arms? Fixed. Actually, no one likes waiting 
out in the rain either. Fine, stay inside. Cabs aren’t clean or reliable? We guarantee they are. 
Payment and tipping annoying? We fixed it. Want to provide feedback? It’s baked in. The 
entire process of getting a cab has been upended by one company who looked at the problem 
and found design solutions to everything. This is why so many people have an opinion about your 
work.  
 
This is why so many people have an opinion about your work 
Our whole culture has shifted its thinking about design, specifically the design of interfaces, 
devices, services, and products. Everyone has a personal device now and they are only 
getting more personal. The internet of things will continue to push UX into (and onto) our 
faces at every turn. Everyone has apps they use, love, and hate. The people in your meetings 
are probably participating in another user experience while at the same time reviewing and 
considering your own. It’s no wonder that everyone everywhere at every level of the 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
20 
organization is intensely interested in and has an opinion about the UX that you are trying to 
create. How are you going to deal with it? 
As a result, more people than ever before are interested and involved in the design of your 
product. What was once relegated to the “Oh, that’s nice” category of insignificance is now 
the center of everyone’s attention. People from all over the organization see the value of 
creating a great user experience and they all want to participate in the process. Marketing, 
executives, developers, customer service, even people in accounting will want to tell you how 
they think it should work. People are excited about UX because they recognize the long-term 
effect it has on the product, the business, and the bottom line. The good news? You’re a very 
popular person! 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 1 
Chapter 2 
Great Designers are Great Communicators 
 
“Words: so innocent and powerless as they are standing in a dictionary, how potent for good 
and evil they become in the hands of one who knows how to combine them.” 
- Nathaniel Hawthorne 
Trying to navigate this new reality that designers are at the forefront of the digital product 
business can be a real challenge. We creative thinkers are now thrust into the middle of a 
process with business people, expected to be the experts on design, and then asked to tell 
everyone else what we think should be done. Like a fish out of water, we struggle to breathe. 
In order to make this mental shift and be effective in our new role, it’s critical that we 
understand just how important good communication is to design. 
 
Too Many Chiefs in the Kitchen 
Designing in this new reality called UX would all go really well if it weren’t for the fact that 
other people on the project might disagree with our decisions. Actually, they will! 
There are now a lot of people who may know little or nothing about design, yet who have the 
authority to oversee and dictate our design practice. They have a vested interest in 
participating in the conversation but they aren’t trained designers and they don’t have the 
same depth of knowledge in design or technology that we do. What used to be a somewhat 
obscured conversation between graphic artists is now open and available to many other 
players in the business. Quite simply, there are too many cooks in the tribe and too many 
chiefs in the kitchen. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2 
What’s more, these people will often gladly admit they aren’t the experts. They know that 
they don’t know, yet they still insist their ideas and opinions are right. This is one of the most 
bizarre parts of our relationship with stakeholders. People who have influence over our 
project readily admit they are not good at our jobs, yet insist on making changes that we 
believe will be detrimental to the user experience. They say that they trust us and yet 
frequently overrule us. It can be incredibly demeaning and confusing, but the problem may 
not lie entirely with them. 
These stakeholders have to be part of our process, but we struggle with including them in a 
way that’s helpful and doesn’t derail our objectives. This is what we have to figure out.  
Everyone is a Designer! 
Everyone knows good design when they see it, even if they don’t know how to create it 
themselves. That sounds frustrating (even ridiculous), but it’s actually true. The same can be 
said for other arts, like music. I may not know how to play an instrument, but I can 
recognize a pleasing tune. I can decide what music I like (and don’t like), even if I can’t tell 
you how to create it yourself. While there may be different preferences, we’re all able to 
choose music we want to listen to whether we know how to reproduce those sounds 
ourselves or not.  
The phenomenon that a non-expert can have an opinion about your design work is 
something that is almost entirely unique to design within today’s organizations. Accounting 
practices are fairly standard and few employees would complain about how money is tracked 
as long as it is being tracked. That is, unless it ever affects them personally, like with their 
paychecks: the way they’re paid or the details on their pay-stub. In accounting, the paycheck 
is the user interface for most people in the organization. 
The same could be said for development. Few people look at the code except the developers, 
right? No one cares what the programmers are doing, unless it actually affects them. What if 
the service is so slow that the thing (network, website, or computer) is rendered unusable? 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
3 
Suddenly everyone will have an opinion: we should make it faster. But the details of how to 
accomplish that are obscured to the end user. The only part we “see” is the speed. That is the 
main interface for development. 
1 
 
 
The Interface is Your Interface 
“No passion in the world is equal to the passion to alter someone else's draft.” 
– HG Wells 
                                                
1 Andy Zelman, Skeleton Claw Comics. http://skeletonclaw.com Used with permission. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4 
Similarly with design, people only care about the part that affects them. They care about the 
interface. But when you’re in the business of doing nothing but creating the user interface, 
then everyone is going to care about everything that you do! All of your work is exposed so it 
naturally conjures more opinions and ideas than many other areas in the organization. More 
than that, your work is now becoming the interface of the entire company like never before. 
So the people who run the business have strong opinions about how your work reflects on 
them. Few people will tell you how to create those interfaces. The process or tools you use to 
create the designs are obscured to them. But unlike accounting or development, the vast 
majority of your work is exposed to every stakeholder you meet with.  
It’s a strange feeling: what could be more rewarding than to know that our work and 
expertise is so highly valued that so many people want to be a part of it? Design is being held 
up on a pedestal! Finally getting the recognition it deserves! We knew that we could solve 
for real business problems and make a dent in the world. It’s what we’ve always wanted, 
right? Be careful what you wish for! If we want our work to be the center of attention, we 
must also take responsibility for showing people how and why our work is valued. That part 
doesn’t come automatically. It takes work, it takes practice, but more importantly… it takes 
good communication.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5 
2 
 
 
There is no U or X in Team 
Collaboration seems like it should be the pinnacle of great design work: different opinions 
coming together to form the best possible solution. That’s the thing everyone really wants. 
The image is of a handful of respectful intellectuals passionately debating the right solutions 
that ultimately leads to a collaborative discussion yielding an ideal design that no one could 
have thought of on their own. Teamwork at its best! Everyone leaves satisfied, fulfilled, and 
respected - ready to take on the next design challenge. Right? We think we want that kind of 
collaboration, but it becomes far more complicated when we disagree with each other. When 
we disagree, we tend to get defensive. When we get defensive, we fail to focus on the real 
issues. The meeting ends, not with collaboration, but with grumbling compromise and, often, 
a crippled user experience.  
In situations like this, meetings can easily turn into design-by-committee. Everyone has a 
suggestion for how to solve a problem. We hear different opinions on every side and are 
unable to defend our own choices against this barrage of feedback. One suggestion evolves 
                                                
2 Tom Chi & Kevin Cheng, OK/Cancel. http://okcancel.com/comic/137.html Used with permission. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6 
into an idea for something else. That spurns a thought about something different, and the 
conversation can spiral out of control into a hodge podge of well-intentioned tweaks that 
collectively spell doom for the overall goals of the project. The thing we came together to 
accomplish has been muddied by group think and mob mentality. Remember, teamwork 
always ends with work. 
The CEO Button 
Because of this, we see things like the CEO button.  
The CEO button is an unusual or otherwise unexpected request from an executive to 
add a feature that completely destroys the balance of a project and undermines the 
very purpose of a designer’s existence.  
It’s funny because it’s true. You might spend weeks or months building the best possible app. 
Your team has poured in all the best practices that you learned at that one conference. 
You’ve done usability testing to prove it works. Your mom was even able to use it without 
incident! And yet one executive can come in and blow up the whole thing. We want to avoid 
this.  
Homepage Syndrome 
Another common problem is the homepage syndrome.  
The homepage syndrome is a condition whereby the home screen of an application or 
website becomes a catch-all for everything, creating a garage-sale of links, buttons, and 
banner ads that unravels the fabric of usability, causing designers to cry themselves to 
sleep.  
You see, sometimes no matter how hard we try, the homepage just becomes a huge mess. 
Everyone wants their business unit represented on the homepage. It’s as if something doesn’t 
exist if it isn’t on the homepage! That new thing we’re launching? Put it on the homepage. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
7 
That other thing that isn’t performing well? Maybe if we put it on the homepage it will get 
better! Sound familiar? We have to learn to deal with this phenomenon.  
 
Communication Matters 
The good news is that it doesn’t have to be this way. It’s possible to avoid the disruption and 
compromise that happens so frequently in organizational design through better 
communication with our stakeholders. I’ve found that the majority of issues or concerns that 
our stakeholders bring to our attention are often just a matter of misunderstanding or 
miscommunication. The way that we talk to them about our designs is the key to making sure 
that we always end up with the best possible user experience.  
It makes sense when you think about it. All human relationships are really nothing more than 
a series of bound up understandings and misunderstandings. We don’t always have control 
over how other people understand us in the beginning. Everyone brings their past 
experiences into conversations with us on a daily basis. We do, however, have control over 
how we communicate with them in order to influence those future understandings. The way 
that we talk to people and the things we say will influence the future.  
Words are Powerful 
This makes our words really powerful. Throughout human history, words have had 
significant power to change people, circumstances, and entire systems of government. Words 
can spark wars, end relationships, and damage emotions. Conversely, words can also be used 
to build people up, change minds, and reinforce positive connections. Saying something out 
loud can make it real. So real, in fact, that you can make things happen simply by talking 
about them.  
Our words have a profound effect on the people around us. As a parent, I have to be careful 
about how I talk to my kids because the things that I say to them are the things that they will 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
8 
grow up to believe whether or not what I say is true. If I am constantly berating my kids over 
their behavior, they will believe bad behavior is just part of who they are. If I tell my kids 
they’re stupid, they could grow up believing that they shouldn’t even try to learn. The things 
I say to my kids will shape their understanding of themselves and their perception of world 
around them. You might think it’s just impressionable children who don’t know better, but 
all people are just as easily impacted by our words. In life, there are no adults, only more 
experienced children.  
For decades, eyewitness testimony has been called into question because of how easily it can 
be influenced. Police have to be careful about what they say because a witness’s perception 
of what happened is so greatly influenced by what they hear. Witness memory can actually 
be changed by the way they are questioned. It’s well documented that memories can be 
altered under interrogation by police.3 The truth is not necessarily what actually happened, 
but what we think happened. We can use words not only to express ourselves and make our 
opinions known, but also to speak into the reality of other people. Our words can actually 
alter people’s perception of the situation. 
Good Communicators Win 
Overall, being a better communicator will give you more opportunities. I’m amazed (and 
offended) at the number of designers who apply for a job yet lack basic communication skills. 
People will send me a resume without explanation, forget about interviews, or fail to follow 
instructions. Ultimately, I’m only going to pursue candidates who can communicate well and 
so the poor communicators get passed over very quickly.  
It is common for my clients to express that one reason they hired me was because it’s so hard 
to find people who are reliable and can communicate effectively. I’ve heard many stories 
about former contractors who simply couldn’t pull it together enough to set expectations, 
follow instructions, or clearly articulate their work. The need to work with other people on 
                                                
3 Eyewitness Testimony, Elizabeth Loftus, 1996, Harvard University Press (March 2, 1996) 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
9 
the project, particularly developers and managers, is quite often the thing that sets me apart 
from other designers. When one of my clients went on vacation, he asked me to help run his 
business while he was gone because he knew he could trust me to represent him well. A 
contractor with good communication skills was more trusted than his own employees! I get 
more work simply because I can communicate effectively.   
If you’ve ever hired an overseas contractor, then you know how difficult it is to find quality 
people. They can be really inexpensive, but it’s questionable whether the cost savings justifies 
itself when it comes to quality and communication. The biggest barrier is usually 
communication. I have to spend an inordinate amount of time writing everything down, 
detailing requirements, and going over it with them multiple times before they finally 
understand what they need to do. The mistakes are almost always the result of a 
miscommunication. It’s not that they’re unintelligent, it’s that there’s a gap in communication. 
It’s much easier to have a miscommunication when you don’t speak the same language. But 
even in this situation, the overseas contractors with better communication skills (and better 
English-language proficiency) are far more likely to be chosen for work for the simple matter 
that they will be easier to work with because of their communication skills.  
No matter what sort of design work you’re looking for, it will be easier if you’re a good 
communicator. Strangely enough, being a good communicator may be all it takes to set 
yourself apart from other designers. Even a designer who might be more artistically talented 
than you. Very simply: good communicators win. 
 
Being Articulate Means Success 
It’s more than just communication, we have to turn those words into something that will 
enact change or compel people to agree with us. It’s not just about using words with a 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
10 
frequency or persistence, it’s about using them in a way that is compelling and convincing. 
It’s about being articulate.  
Being articulate can make you successful in any area of life. It can help you get almost 
anything you want: a job, a spouse, or a bargain. It is the ability to use your words, tone, and 
approach with people to communicate a specific message and elicit a specific response. The 
key to being articulate is to understand both the message you want to communicate and the 
response you want in return. If you can learn to craft your messages in such a way that they 
yield the desired response, you’ll find that you’re much more successful at getting the things 
that matter to you. The same ideas can be applied in your design practice. 
The Best Ideas [Don’t Always] Win 
In general, designers are pretty terrible at explaining themselves to non-designers, yet when 
people disagree the most articulate person usually wins. It’s too altruistic to believe that the 
best ideas are the ones that always win. They should, perhaps, but the reality is far from that. 
The best ideas get stuffed into an amalgamation of meetings where competing needs vie for 
attention. The person who can convince the other they’re right is the one who gets his way. 
Your design might be revolutionary, but an aggressive and well-spoken salesperson is more 
likely to get his way if he can convince your boss that he’s right and you’re not. 
Designers lacking the ability to convince people why they did what they did end up on the 
losing side of the argument, forced to make changes they disagree with simply because they 
were unable to fend them off. This is not to say that the stakeholder relationship is 
adversarial. No, these discussions can feel very much like good, solid teamwork. But our 
inability to speak up and articulate your side will often land us in the position of making 
changes that won’t yield the best results.  
Alternately, being articulate about our designs: 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
11 
• 
Imparts intelligence - you’re smart, you know what you’re talking about, you have 
expertise in this area, and you can be trusted with the solution. 
• 
Demonstrates intentionality - you’ve thought about it, pursued it, and are logical in 
your approach. This isn’t just a random idea, there is purpose and focus. 
• 
Expresses confidence - you know what you want and how to get it done. Having a 
solid argument shows that you’re not wishy-washy and you mean what you say. 
• 
Shows respect - you value everyone’s opinions and time enough that you’re well-
prepared. You’re not wasting time or disregarding others. 
The way to be articulate about design is to offer a message that communicates why we did 
what we did in order to help stakeholders see our reasoning. We build trust with 
stakeholders by showing our expertise through logic and reason, not feelings and intuition. 
So we need to harness the power of communication, be articulate, and use these skills to help 
people see that our UX decisions provide the best possible solution. Being articulate will help 
us be successful.  
 
Becoming a Great Designer 
To hone in on the best practices for articulating design decisions, let’s look at what makes a 
design project successful because that will form the basis for how we communicate about it. 
In order to overcome these obstacles, we have to boil UX down to its very core. We have to 
understand the fundamentals of what makes a great experience and how we can reproduce 
that thinking and approach in others.  
Focus on the Product, not the Process 
Many teams are into the latest methodology: Waterfall, Agile, Lean. Whatever your flavor of 
project management or product development, don’t let the details of process get in the way of 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
12 
being truly creative and making sure your ideas get to market. While these approaches can 
be incredibly useful for keeping projects on track and creating great results, we can get 
bogged down in the details of execution and less focused on what we’re trying to achieve. 
This carries over into our meetings with stakeholders who may have no idea about the 
methodology we follow. These approaches use language that can cloud our stakeholders’ 
ability to understand our decisions. Let’s not burden them with a sub-culture that is 
unfamiliar. (Scrum master, anyone?) The truth is, it’s irrelevant to the discussion of the 
designs. We need to think about our work differently in order to talk about it more 
effectively.  
The Big Three 
Let’s return to the question that I ask every designer that I interview for a job: What makes 
a good design good? We could debate the answer to this question but when it comes to 
creating the user experience for a web or mobile application a design is really only good 
when it solves a problem. Mostly, we are trying to solve problems for the business: to 
accomplish some goal that will help the business grow. But if we’re also practicing a user-
centered design approach, then we must also make our designs easy to use for the people 
who will use it. Those two things together (solving a problem and making it easy for users) 
will help us create truly great experiences. This is what makes a good design good.  
However, the one thing that we often forget is that there are other people involved who have 
influence over our project. It’s not enough to simply create an incredible app, we also have to 
get the support of everyone else on our team. Without their support, our project can’t see the 
light of day. The difference between a good designer and a great designer is in their ability to 
not only solve the problem but also to articulate how their design solves it in a way that is 
compelling and fosters agreement. If you can do that, you’re a great designer. 
So there are three things that every UX project (or design) needs to be successful:  
1. It solves a problem 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
13 
2. It’s easy for users 
3. It’s supported by everyone 
These are the basics of creating a great user experience that the average person (like your 
stakeholders) can understand. Projects that fail are usually lacking in one of these areas. If 
you can do all three of these, your project will be a success.  
Let’s look at each one in more detail. 
 
Solve the Problem 
Designers involved in the practice of creating a user experience should already be 
accustomed to solving problems. This is, after all, the great shift that’s taken place in 
corporate design practice in recent years. Of all the things we’re trying to accomplish with 
our work, we have to solve problems: business goals, engagement, conversion, frequency, 
feedback. Whatever the problem is, our job is to find a solution and measure its success. 
How will we know we’ve done our job? By looking at the results before and after, tracking 
some specific metric, and watching it improve. We may not all remember this in practice, but 
we’re at least aware that this is (or should be) the primary focus of our jobs as user 
experience professionals. 
Hopefully you and your team have already established these goals, metrics, or KPIs for your 
project. If not, I recommend doing them yourself so you have a measuring stick to use in all 
your conversations. Projects without goals will surely languish because there is no way to 
convince someone else that you’re right if you have nothing by which to measure its success. 
It just becomes a matter of opinions and subjectivity will make it difficult to move forward. 
So if your team isn’t set up to establish these in the beginning, do it now for your own sanity. 
Find out what the most important factors are for your stakeholders: impressions, conversion, 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
14 
account sign ups… pick one or two measurable issues that you’d like to improve and write it 
down. Set this as your goal and use it to your advantage when talking to other people.   
While we’re certainly adept at approaching these problems to find creative solutions, we’re 
not always in tune with our own thought process to help other people understand why we 
did what we did. This is where our intuition becomes so vital and this is what makes us good 
designers: we know how to solve problems with design. It’s often natural for us to see a 
solution without giving it much thought. Other times, we might wrestle with a solution 
through trial and error. Either way, we’re making changes over time, morphing our ideas 
into something that will add value. In fact, this is what sets us apart from non-designers: our 
ability to intuitively solve problems. The hard part, though, is figuring out what drives that 
intuition. What makes this ‘feel right’ so that we can help other people see our perspective? 
How does this combination of small moves result in the right solution? So the practice of 
solving problems with design must also be accompanied by an awareness that will help us 
explain our decisions to other people.  
Let’s take a step back to the first time you design a UI control or element for your app. You 
need to make yourself consciously aware of every decision you’re making and why. You need 
to be constantly asking yourself: What problem am I trying to solve with this? Chapter 8 
will list some of the most common ways I describe my own solutions, but for now just 
consider that you need to practice making yourself aware of all the changes you’re making, 
all the new things you’re adding, and all the rearranging that goes into finding the right 
interface. Those unconscious choices hold the key to explaining your designs to other people 
and making sure that your expert perspective remains at the center of the final decision 
process.  
The best way I know to practice being conscious of your decisions is to write them down. 
There is something about moving your unconscious thought to a tangible form that allows 
you to remember everything you’ve done. Since you have measurable problems you’re trying 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
15 
to solve, write down the problem and then list your solutions next to it. Whatever it takes to 
demonstrate your own thought process. I am a list maker, so I love to type lists and sync 
them across all my devices so that I can have access to them if needed. Some people prefer to 
put pen to paper and allow their hand to make the physical movements necessary to connect 
their thoughts to the real world. This can be done with simple notes or more complex 
sketches. Make a list on paper of your solutions or even draw a storyboard that demonstrates 
the before and after effect of your designs. The method you use for writing down your 
answers doesn’t matter. The point is to get you thinking about your decisions in concrete 
ways. 
Here are a few examples from my own work: 
Problem 
Proposed Solution 
Users don’t realize the filter 
controls have updated the list 
of results because it’s 
instantaneous 
✓ 
Move the count of items in the list closer to the filters so 
the user can see the number change 
✓ 
Briefly show a loading spinner on each checkbox as the 
user checks it 
✓ 
Add a “Done” button that closes the panel so the user 
can have a sense of completing the task 
Users do not proceed to the 
next steps from the marketing 
landing page 
✓ 
Move the headline and hero image to the left to make 
space for the call to action on the right 
✓ 
Change the color of the call to action to red, update the 
copy 
✓ 
Remove background image, too distracting 
✓ 
Position the “Next steps” list so that it will usually 
overlap on the fold, causing the user to want to scroll to 
the second CTA 
Users are not adding to their 
Reduce the number of actions required to add an item to cart 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
16 
carts from the “search results” 
list view. 
from search. One-Tap Add: 
✓ 
Tapping “Add to cart” will auto-add the item to cart 
first without requiring a quantity or other information 
✓ 
On tap, the button changes to a quantity incrementer 
with a value of 1. User can increase quantity as needed. 
✓ 
Remove secondary “add to cart” confirmation button 
✓ 
New messaging animates to indicate the item was 
added.  
✓ 
“Ready to Checkout?” call to action slides in 
underneath messaging. 
✓ 
Items with options, like color or size, will automatically 
select a default but allow the user to change it within 
view 
It can also be useful to describe your designs using only words. So much of our work is 
purely visual that it can be difficult to understand what that ‘sounds like’ in a world without 
pictures. Since our end goal is to tell other people about it, why not attempt to describe every 
detail in sentence form and assume the reader doesn’t have the ability to see it? How would 
you describe your designs to someone on the phone? Or by email? Writing down how you 
see your work will reveal many of your motivations, some of which you never realized were 
there. The purpose of this exercise is to help you uncover your thought process and articulate 
your decisions first to yourself. It’s not intended to be a substitute for demonstrating your 
designs visually. 
Here’s an example from one of my projects:  
“The list view is sorted alphabetically by country by default. The standard sort menu is available in 
the top-right. I made each item in the list exactly the right height for a mobile touch target. On the far 
left of each item is that country’s flag. We thought that would make them more easily identifiable to 
people. Next to the flag is the name of the country in bold and then a short description of the project 
directly underneath, in smaller grey type. A quick reference to the report title. On the far right of 
these controls are two things: 1) a summary of the data for the report type the users has selected. For 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
17 
example, it will show the percentage, like 34% for infection rate or the total in short form like 1.5m. 
2) A disclosure arrow to indicate that there is more content ‘to the right’ if the user taps this item. The 
flag will make it quick for the user to find the right country and the short snippet of data will help 
them know if they need to tap for more detailed report. With this design, users should be able to 
quickly browse the list to find the correct report.”  
It doesn’t have to be long and it shouldn’t be time-consuming. This isn’t busywork. Do 
whatever it takes to help you identify your thinking. For example, if you find yourself 
comparing your designs to another popular platform, it’s a good sign that your decision was 
based on solving a problem they might have already addressed. “When you tap on the 
button, it loads the next set of results the same way that SocialApp does.” It’s ok to make 
decisions based on another app, but it doesn’t always make the best case. What it will do is 
allow you to go through a new series of questions to get to the bottom of your thinking: Why 
does SocialApp do it this way? Is our context similar enough that solving the problem in the 
same way makes sense? Does SocialApp have any data about doing it this way? Every time 
you’re able to describe your designs, you’ll uncover a part of your thought process that can 
help you find the best ways to talk about it.  
You do not have to share these notes with your client. They may never see them and that’s 
ok. Right now, this is more about practicing being intentional than it is about communicating 
with others. But the process of writing about what you create will help your brain to connect 
the dots between the problem you’re working on and how your designs solve it. The better 
you are at making those connections, the better prepared you’ll be to talk about them with 
others. Whatever works for you, the goal here is to find a way to turn your thought process 
into something real, sharable, and visible; to uncover the words that will help you explain 
yourself to other people in a way that makes sense.  
 
Make it Easy 
If we’re truly taking a user-centered design approach, then we absolutely must be designing 
interfaces that are easy for users. We may be solving business problems, but we have to make 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
18 
it simple to use if we’re going to create a great UX. Like solving problems, this is another 
area where many UX practitioners do pretty well. Really, a focus on usability is the whole 
purpose of UX to begin with. So in the same way that UX has become a focal point of the 
organizational product design process, so too has our own understanding of ease of use. We 
know that usability is the core issue to be faced with our designs, but it can be difficult to 
describe that to other people. 
My assumption is that you already understand something about usability or you wouldn’t be 
here to begin with. The purpose of this section is not to tell you how to make your apps easy 
to use, that’s the topic of many other classic UX books, but rather to think about usability in 
a way that will help you defend, talk about, and evolve your designs to the point of a public 
release.  
Just as you were solving problems and making yourself aware of your decisions, you must 
also do the same thing here. At every step of the process, for every decision you make, ask 
yourself: How does this affect the user? The trick with answering this question is that often 
we simply don’t know how our decisions will affect our users. We can only make our best 
guess, try it out, and then draw conclusions from what we observe. Like the previous section, 
write it down. You need to be able to answer this question first to yourself so that you’re 
prepared to give that answer to stakeholders.   
One way that I capture how my designs affect users is to write a story that is either based on 
a user session I observed or loosely based on the overall use case. Here are some examples:  
Design Changes 
How it Affects the User 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
19 
Having two similar buttons for Login and Sign Up next 
to each other is confusing to some users. We’ve observed 
users hesitate which button they should choose because 
they’re so similar. Since Sign Up is the most common 
case in this context, I’ve made that button the full width 
of the container and changed the Login button to a text 
link. This should make it easier for new users to Sign Up, 
while still allowing existing users to login. Most existing 
users will go directly to their account page by being 
automatically logged in. This should reduce confusion 
and increase conversion. 
When researchers are in the field, they need quick access 
to their data without having to navigate through the app. 
So rather than keep the hero image at the top of the home 
screen, we’re moving it down in favor of a “Recent 
Projects” list at the top. They can still see this important 
information, but their reports are more easily available to 
them because that’s their primary use of the app once 
they’ve already accessed the projects. 
 
 
Simplified, usability is about two things: common sense and research. When you’re first 
starting on a project, you may not have much to work with in terms of data or user 
observation. You really have no choice but to make your best guess about what will work for 
the user. As a usability expert, you have experience designing interfaces so you’re able to 
make informed assumptions: making decisions based on what you believe will create the 
simplest experience. This is where common sense comes to play. There really is no reason to 
overthink it. Create the easiest solution you can think of. Do what makes sense and move on.  
Of course, what you think makes sense and what someone else thinks makes sense are quite 
often two different things. That’s why we have research. Once we’ve made some informed 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
20 
guesses, we have to check our ideas with real people. We aren’t doing user experience design 
if we haven’t actually seen a user experience it. Research can take many forms, but the most 
common tools are either analytics or a usability study. We will talk more about this in 
chapter 7, but let me say here that the challenge with analytics is that it can only tell us what 
the users did. It cannot tell us why they did it. The only way to actually know how your 
decisions affect users is to observe them. So make your best guess with the data you have, 
but then check your designs with real people and make notes. You’ll always be surprised by 
the results and you’ll be in a much better position to defend your decisions.  
 
Get Support 
It’s not enough to solve problems and make our app easy to use, because if a stakeholder 
disagrees with our solution then we aren’t going to get anywhere at all. You could have the 
most innovative design in the world, but if no one on your team understands what you’re 
trying to do then you’re not going to be successful at implementing it.  
What happens if you don’t get support? You’ll constantly re-hash the same conversations 
over and over again. When people don’t remember why you did what you did, (because your 
explanation wasn’t compelling or memorable), they’ll bring it up again at the next meeting. 
“Now, why did we agree to do this again?” When people aren’t convinced you’re right, 
they’ll continue to think of alternatives to suggest. The project scope will increase with time 
as people propose adding things: a simple control, one more button, a new menu. And as a 
result, you won’t be able to move as fast as you need to because you’ll be bogged down 
managing requests. In the end, you might have to ship a product with a compromised user 
experience, all because you couldn’t get stakeholders on board with your solution.  
Getting the support of everyone on your team is the primary focus of this book. We aren’t 
going to be able to get anywhere unless we’re able to get everyone on the same page and 
agree to move in the right direction. That’s what getting support is all about: convincing 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
21 
people that the way we’ve solved the problem will make it easy for our users and is, 
therefore, the best possible choice for a great user experience. You need to create an 
environment where everyone understands what you’re doing so that you can move on to the 
next thing.  
In order to get the support we need, we have to understand our designs by asking ourselves: 
Why is this better than the alternative? Implicit in this question is that we know what the 
alternatives are, we’ve considered them or even tried them, and we’re prepared to explain 
why our solution is better.  
Everything we design has another way of doing it. For each thing we create, there is an 
alternate, often opposing, way of solving the same problem. This is the whole reason we have 
disagreements about the solutions to begin with and a key problem with articulating design 
decisions. Designers can be really good at coming up with a solution for the problem, but 
we’re less adept at coming up with all the solutions to the problem. We get so myopic when 
we think we’ve found it. Eureka! Our solution seems so obvious that there is very little need 
to waste time considering any other approach. (After all, we’re on a tight sprint and need to 
get something to the client by the end of the day.) Yet, this thinking almost always creates a 
conversation that we’re not prepared to deal with: when the client suggests an alternate idea 
that we haven’t considered.  
Ironically, we are usually cognitively aware of some of the other alternatives. We probably 
tried them, moved stuff around, and eventually landed on the solution we believe is best. But 
it’s all those little movements that we failed to make ourselves consciously aware of and so 
we’re less prepared to help other people understand our thought process. Likewise, we often 
know what our clients are going suggest. If you’ve worked with your stakeholders before, 
you can make a pretty good guess about how they’ll react (this is addressed in at length in 
chapter 4). Yet if you can guess how they’ll react but you fail to consider those alternatives 
and understand why your solution is better, you will have a difficult time winning them over.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
22 
The point is this: be consciously aware of why your design decisions are better than the 
alternatives. Just like the previous two questions, write down your answers. Make a list of 
the other ways that you could solve this problem. Create a bunch of alternative designs, don’t 
throw them away, and have them available if you need them. With those alternatives, make a 
short list of why you think they don’t solve the problem as well as your proposed design. 
Thinking critically about these other options will help you be prepared to discuss your 
decisions with other people.  
Sometimes I create very simple wireframes of the alternatives in addition to my 
recommendation. When the client starts asking questions about my proposed solution, I can 
quickly show these to visually demonstrate why my recommendation is better.  
 
 
Make it Happen 
In summary, if we’re going to be successful at communicating with people about our designs 
we have to be able to answer these three questions about our work:  
1. What problem does it solve? 
2. How does it affect the user? 
3. Why is it better than the alternative? 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
23 
The purpose of answering these questions is more of an exercise in getting you to understand 
your choices than it is a prescriptive method for documenting them. Don’t worry too much 
about the details of how you write them down. If you can answer these three questions, you’ll 
be well on your way to defending your decisions with the people who have influence over 
your project.  These answers will form the basis of your response to every stakeholder 
concern about your designs.  
Your ability to be thoughtful about a problem and articulate any solution is more 
important than your ability to design the perfect solution every time. When other people 
realize that you've put thought into it and are being intentional, they're more willing to trust 
you even if they disagree. That’s how you become a great designer: by describing and 
expressing your designs to other people in way that makes sense to them. 
In that sense, being a great designer is just as much about communication skills as it is about 
design chops. You have to understand your decisions and then articulate them to someone 
else who doesn’t know design as well as you do. Using these questions as our guide, you can 
find better ways to explain your design decisions for the purpose of convincing people you’re 
right and ensuring the best experience for users.  
While it’s easy to see exactly how being more articulate will help us succeed, in practice it’s 
far more difficult and complicated than that. Being articulate is more than just learning to say 
the right things, because nothing we say will have any affect if we don’t first consider the 
people that we’re communicating with. Recognizing the importance of communication in 
design makes it natural for us to take the next step on this path towards being a great 
designer: to begin seeing things from the perspective of our stakeholders.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
24 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 1 
Chapter 3 
Understanding Relationships 
 
“I don't like that man. I must get to know him better.”  
― Abraham Lincoln 
Before we get into the details of listening to and talking to our stakeholders, I want to take a 
moment to look at the relationship. The single most important thing you can do to improve 
communication between you and your stakeholders is to improve those relationships, earn 
trust, and establish a rapport that will speak more for you than the words that come out of 
your mouth in a meeting.  
So much of life and work is built around relationships, not just who you know, but the quality 
of those relationships too. If we’re going to be effective with communication, we start with 
the relationship. We need to see the world through the eyes of the people who have influence 
over our project.  We have to get in their heads, find out what makes them tick, and use this 
information to help us approach them in a way that’s productive and valuable for everyone.  
What’s ironic to me, is that UXers are so good at putting the user first, at garnering empathy 
for and attempting to see the interface from the perspective of the user. Yet we often fail to 
do the same thing for the people who hold the keys to our success. We think carefully about 
the users of our applications, but less so about the stakeholders on our projects. Let’s apply 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2 
these same principles to the people we work with, so that we can create a better product 
together. We need to take the time to understand our stakeholders. More than that, we need 
to engage with them on a personal level and improve the quality of our interactions. The 
same care and detail that goes into demonstrating user interactions also needs to be applied 
in our interactions with stakeholders. When it comes to relationships, you are truly an 
interaction designer!  
The purpose of this chapter is to take a step back from the process, before we get bogged 
down in a cycle of meetings. We start here, with a high-level view of our stakeholder 
relationships so that we can approach them in the right way. In order to do that, we need to: 
• 
See them as human - everyone has other stuff going on that we simply cannot predict 
• 
Create shared experiences - finding common ground is important to earning trust 
• 
Develop empathy - get to know their viewpoint so intimately that we’re driven to 
action 
• 
Ask good questions - to get to know a little more about where they’re coming from 
In addition to getting to know our stakeholders, it’s important to look at the individuals on 
our team and work to improve the quality of our communication through: 
• 
Identifying influencers - based on what we already know about their role on the team, 
we can understand the values that drive their reactions to our work 
• 
Building good relationships - simple things can go a long way in establishing rapport: 
be yourself, do stuff, give stuff. Communication is easier in good relationships.  
 
See their Perspective 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
3 
In order to know how to approach people and respond to them, we have to first see their 
perspective. We have the opportunity to learn to speak their language, to get to know them 
better, and to keep our project on track. It’s not easy, but we can get a better sense for where 
people are coming from when we remember they’re human, find common ground through 
shared experiences, develop empathy for their viewpoint, and ask questions that allows us 
insight into their world. 
 
See Them as Human 
The trouble with people is that we’re all so unpredictable and yet so incredibly predictable at 
the same time. Often the people in your meetings are dealing with stuff (life stuff, work stuff, 
relationship stuff) that is more important to them than your current design project. People 
are too busy (or at least they think they are). “I have too many things going on right now,” “I 
have to get to another meeting,” or “I’ve got to make this deadline.” Whatever the case, a lot 
of people that you need to help you are not always fully focused on the thing you want them 
to be focused on. More than that, their attitudes and responses to your work may have more 
to do with the things happening outside of this meeting than the stuff you’re showing them. 
Before we go any further, stop for just a minute and think about the people on your project. 
Call to mind their faces, names, and even their role in the company. Now pause and consider 
this: each one of them is a unique individual. Each person is a human with feelings, emotions, 
and a past that speaks into their present every single day. They all have relationships outside 
of work: friends, spouses, parents, children. When they’re finished with your meeting, they’re 
going to go visit their mother in the hospital. One of them has to shuttle his kids to athletic 
games. And someone else on your team will go home to an empty house, lonely with nothing 
but the TV for company. Despite the fact that we spend so much time together during 
working hours, all of these people’s most important relationships are somewhere else.   
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4 
We can’t pretend to ever really know what’s going on inside their heads, but we can take the 
time to realize that the way they respond to our stuff might have (or probably has) nothing to 
do with us at all. There are just too many other factors, distractions, and problems in the 
average person’s life for us to ever assume that the thing we want from them is the thing they 
care about.  In psychology, the concept of attribution describes how people see each other, 
and specifically, how we understand other people’s behavior. Interestingly, most people tend 
to see other people’s behavior as a reflection of their particular personality traits whereas we 
see our own behavior as being primarily situational. You see, we already have an unfair view 
of our stakeholders reactions. It’s natural for us to believe that their personality (“They’re not 
a designer”) is what causes them to disagree with our solutions, but that’s not true. 
Was your colleague short with you in the hallway about the new interactions you made? 
Maybe she’s dealing with some issues in her personal life. Did that guy in your last meeting 
throw you under the bus and blame you for a problem that he was actually responsible for? 
Perhaps he’s feeling pressure from his boss. Has an executive ever shown up and declared 
that everything had to be changed? It’s possible he just came from a meeting where the 
budget was slashed. Stakeholder reactions to our design work often has an underlying 
situational explanation that we might never know about. 
I will never forget the time that a manager came to our team late in the day with an 
emergency request. Suddenly, everything we were working on had to be stopped so that we 
could put together some concepts for a completely new, different idea. He was aggressive 
and rude, out of the ordinary. The only explanation was that it had suddenly become a high 
priority. I tried to understand the situation, but it just didn’t make sense nor did it line up 
with what we had agreed on previously. We did our best to appease him and shifted focus to 
this new thing, but then a few days later he dropped the project and told us to go back to our 
original work. Later, I found out that he had lost one of his biggest contracts and was on the 
verge of missing his financial goals near bonus time. This new project was a last ditch effort 
to make something happen, but he would never have told us it was because of his own bonus.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5 
Of course, it wasn’t appropriate for him to treat our team that way just because his own 
financial incentives were on the line, but that’s not the point. The point is that there was 
something else going on that we didn’t understand at the time. And actually, there are always 
other things going on in the room that you will never know about. There are always things 
that are influencing people’s behaviors that we are not privy to. And there will always be stuff 
that we simply can’t predict. Always. The more often you remember that, the better off you’ll 
be. 
Our job as articulate designers is to recognize just enough of that reality so that we can talk 
to them in a way that pushes past all the extra stuff and gets down to the core thing we need 
to know to be successful. We have to recognize that the way people react to our work may 
not have anything to do with us or our designs at all. So, as often as you need to, stop, take a 
look at the people around you, and remember one thing: they are human. 
 
Create Shared Experiences 
Our inability to see the perspective of another person often results from a lack of shared 
experiences. We simply don’t have enough in common with the other person. Why do some 
people seem to get along better than others? Why are there some people we’re immediately 
drawn to? It’s because we have something in common with them. When we have shared 
experiences, that gives us something to talk about. When we don’t have anything in common 
with another person, it’s nearly impossible to talk to them. Everything we think of falls flat 
when there are no shared interests. However, everyone has something in common with 
another person. That’s why the weather is such an easy thing to talk about! And while the 
weather is a perfectly fine experience to share, if we want to understand our stakeholders, we 
need to be willing to go deeper than that.  
That’s not to say that we should dig into people’s personal lives. Actually, there are plenty of 
ways in which we can create shared experiences with other people on a professional level. It 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6 
can be something as simple as going to lunch together or grabbing a drink after work. It 
doesn’t matter what you talk about: work, life, or the TV show you watched last night. The 
point is that you’re removing yourself, your ego, and the pressure of the minute-to-minute 
business of work. You’re out of the office; out of your usual context and experiencing 
something with this other person that you would not have otherwise.  
Many companies organize team building and informal gatherings of employees for this very 
reason. But if that’s not built in to your culture, you can make it happen on your own. Other 
ways of creating shared experiences include going to a conference, volunteering at your 
company’s annual charity, or asking that person’s advice on something you know they’re 
skilled at. “Hey, I was thinking of buying a telescope for my kids and I know you’re into 
astronomy. What would you recommend?” Finding ways to create connections with other 
people is an important step in understanding them.  
That’s So Josh! 
I will never forget how drastically my relationship with and approach towards a colleague 
changed once I had a shared experience with him. Josh was in a similar role to mine, but in a 
different department. As a result, we used a lot of the same shared resources and our paths 
would cross on projects occasionally. My impression of him was that he was a trouble-maker: 
he was unorganized, inconsiderate, and not respected within the organization. It was 
especially difficult to work on a project with him because I knew he would have lots of 
different ideas and his ideas always felt like they were just creating extra work for me. He 
was my nemesis. But by chance, we both ended up working at the same conference one year. 
We drove together, about 3 hours one-way. We stayed at the same resort, which happened to 
be a paradise of relaxation. And we spent everyday out of our usual context setting things up, 
talking to people, and eating most of our meals together. Very quickly, I got to know him 
through our shared experiences. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
7 
Almost immediately, my opinion of Josh changed. From then on, his suggestions were 
innovative! He was no longer inconsiderate, but just a little busy and less mindful of the 
details. “That’s so Josh!” Nothing had changed, except my own perspective of him and our 
shared experiences. From then on, it became much easier to work with Josh and get his buy-
in on projects simply because we had those shared experiences. In fact, he became one of my 
greatest allies.   
You don’t have to go on a road trip with stakeholders to create shared experiences. Finding 
that common ground can be as simple as pointing out something interesting in the hallway on 
the way to a meeting. You might notice that they have the latest mobile device, are wearing a 
brand you like, or have a souvenir from Paris on their desk. Anything you can do to 
explicitly call out common ground between you will go along way toward reminding 
everyone (yourself included) that you have common interests. We are more than just pixel 
pushers! We are people. Often, the only thing keeping us from developing good relationships 
is ourselves.  
 
Develop Empathy 
Empathy is a big buzz word in UX. If we can develop true empathy for our users, then we’ll 
build better applications. But what about our stakeholders? We need to empathize with them 
too, if we really expect to get through to them.  
Empathy drives behavior. It is so much more than just understanding another person or 
seeing their perspective. It’s the ability to actually share in their feelings and experience so 
much that you have to help them. To get to know their viewpoint so intimately, that we feel 
their pain. Empathy is what drives people to defend civil rights injustices. It’s the reason we 
have events to raise support and awareness for cancer. It causes us to care so much about the 
challenges of another person that we’re driven to action. Empathy is the ultimate form of 
understanding. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
8 
Developing empathy for our stakeholders means attempting to look at our project from their 
perspective so that we’re no longer defensive and protective of our own ideas. We realize 
their reactions and suggestions are based in a reality that, for them, is more important than 
our own. When you have empathy for stakeholders, you not only understand their 
perspective but you’re actually driven to action: you want to make changes to your designs 
because you feel their pain. You see the urgency of meeting their needs and want to do 
something about it. That doesn’t mean that you do anything and everything they say. It 
simply means that your priority for communicating with them has shifted from a position of 
defense to one of solidarity. You still might disagree on the solution, but at least now you’re 
better prepared to talk to them about your choices. Having empathy for our stakeholders is 
important to establishing a foundational mindset that will allow us to form the best possible 
response to their feedback, as we will see in Chapter 6 and beyond. We cannot expect to 
listen to and respond to their feedback without first empathizing with their situation. 
 
Leading with Vision 
I was working with an executive once who was very much a visionary thinker but we were 
building a basic minimum viable product (MVP) for the first release. At the first couple of 
meetings, he was underwhelmed by our basic functionality. He knew the constraints of the 
project, but we needed him to be on board in order to get his approval. He was always 
present, but never very excited. In the process of working with him, I tried to see our project 
from his perspective. As an executive, he always had a high-level 30,000-foot view of 
everything going on, yet we were showing him a minute detail that might only be a small blip 
on the radar of this product. He was looking toward the end-game, a massive release with 
fanfare but we were focused on this intermediary step, the here and now.  
So I chose to start bringing two different mockups to each meeting. One was this baseline 
MVP, which was modest and simple. The other was an innovative, no-limits picture of 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
9 
awesome that we would never be able to pull off, at least in the short term. But it allowed me 
to hold his attention by keeping both concepts in front of him. I was able to lead our 
conversations with this incredible vision of a preferred future, while also showing and getting 
approval for the thing that would allow us to take a step in that direction. He could see 
where we were going and so he was more likely to approve our MVP.  
I could not have been prepared with this approach if I wasn’t able to empathize with the 
position he was in. It took more work on my part, but it was worth it in the long run because 
it meant keeping our designs moving. He trusted us more because he could see our vision. 
Actually, I’ve found that it’s often a best practice when working with executives to show both 
what’s possible in the short-term and what’s preferred for the future. This approach creates a 
buzz that keeps everyone excited and makes it more likely that they’ll agree with you. We’ll 
go into more detail about the importance of designing for vision in the final chapter. 
 
Ask Good Questions 
Seeing the perspective of our stakeholders requires a lot of patience and work. It’s not 
something that comes automatically, but can only be developed with time and practice. Some 
people are naturally good at seeing other people’s perspective, but the majority of us need to 
be very intentional about it. You should learn to see the perspective of your stakeholders the 
same way you would with users of your application: by asking questions. If we want to see 
our stakeholders as human, to create shared experiences, and develop empathy for their 
situation, the best thing we can do is to just ask.  
My brother-in-law, Lars, is one of the most interesting people I know. Everywhere he goes, 
people like to talk to him. What’s funny is that he doesn’t seem like a very outgoing person. 
His personality is a little reserved, he’s careful when he speaks, and he never talks too much. 
Yet it seems like people are drawn to him. When people see him, they stop to talk. If they 
spot him across a room, they’ll seek him out. Why? It’s because Lars is really good at asking 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
10 
questions. People love to talk to Lars because Lars is good at getting them to. You leave a 
conversation with Lars feeling like you just met someone who was really smart, interesting, 
and was intensely interested in the mundane details of your life. He’s a great 
conversationalist not because he’s good at talking, but because he’s good at asking questions. 
Talking to Lars makes me feel smart and that makes me want to talk to him more! What that 
means for us is that we have to be better at asking people questions about themselves so they 
feel valued and are comfortable talking to us. This approach to relationships and 
conversations will help us build a reputation that makes people want to talk to us more and, 
as a byproduct, listen to us more when it matters the most. 
Get Personal 
As Lars has shown me, people love to talk about themselves. Even people who are more 
humble and less inclined to volunteer information still enjoy chatting about the stuff that’s 
important to them.  So take the time to know a little bit about each person so that you can 
begin to see that their life doesn’t revolve around work. Don’t ask yes / no questions and 
don’t get so personal that you overstep normal social behavior. Keep it light, but let them tell 
you what they’re willing to tell. Questions like:  
• 
What did you do this weekend?  
• 
How was your holiday?  
• 
Have you seen any good movies lately?  
• 
So what’s new?  
These questions are simple, open ended, and allow the person to divulge as much or as little 
as they’re interested in. They are general enough to be safe with any audience and can create 
conversation to help you see their perspective. They’ll create a path for you to get to know 
them better and eventually ask more specific questions.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
11 
If you know they have kids, ask about their kids. Everyone will talk to you about their kids 
and it’s something many people have in common. The same goes with pets; people love to 
talk about their pets. I was having a one-on-one meeting with a stakeholder and asked her if 
she had pets while we walked to the conference room. She pulled out her phone to login to 
the remote camera she had mounted in her outdoor cat enclosure. Conveniently, the 
conversation quickly turned to technology and the app that controls her camera. That 
naturally shifted to a discussion of the UX. Asking her about pets gave her something she 
loved to talk about and allowed me to demonstrate my own expertise in the process, earning 
some trust and respect regarding the project we were about to discuss. You never know how 
asking good questions will improve your relationships and help you earn the trust you need 
to communicate about your designs. 
Offer Yourself 
But it’s not a one-way street. You should also offer some information about yourself to get 
people talking. Find something that you’re interested in and ask them about it:  
• 
I went camping this past weekend, do you like camping?  
• 
We hosted my family for dinner last night, do you like to cook?  
• 
I saw this great movie yesterday, have you seen it?  
Offering people a glimpse into your own life is a great way to create a sense that they are just 
like you. No matter how they might respond to you in the moment, you may find that you 
have a lot in common.  I was visiting a client in New York who offered to take me to lunch in 
his car. It was a small car, but I happened to notice that it had an upgraded exhaust system. I 
asked him about it because I am restoring a classic car myself and was curious about his 
interest in cars. I told him about my car project and we started chatting about cars in general. 
That conversation turned into a story about him borrowing money to buying a plane when 
he was only in his twenties. He still owned that plane and loved to fly. I had been working 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
12 
with this guy for several months, but I had no idea he was a pilot! In fact, every time I talk to 
him now he always gives me the latest update on flying because he knows I’m genuinely 
interested in his hobby. Revealing some of my own interests allowed us to establish some 
common ground.  
Go Pro 
But seeing our stakeholder’s perspective requires that we understand how they approach 
their jobs and our project too, not just their personal life. So it’s important to get to know 
how people think in our work-context too. Ask things like:  
• 
What did you think of the meeting last week?  
• 
How’s your work going on the other project?  
• 
Do you have a lot going on this week?  
If you find that you’re butting heads with the people in charge, it’s common that the stated 
goals or priorities for the project actually differ from the individual’s. So I suggest being as 
direct as possible when trying to uncover people’s viewpoints and perspectives in situations 
where they can be difficult to read:  
• 
What’s your opinion on this project?  
• 
How does this project affect your job? 
• 
What is your priority for this project?  
Allowing people express what might be their own opinion or perspective gives them 
permission to deviate from the party-line because they can speak freely without the pressure 
that they’ll upset the process or misrepresent the company.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
13 
I was having some difficulty with a manager who was pushing us on some priorities and his 
suggestions seemed to conflict with our goal of improving conversion. I asked him how our 
project would affect him and he told me that his highest priority was migrating off of the old 
platform as quickly as possible, because during the transition he was paying for the 
development of both the old and the new. As long as both platforms were on his budget, he 
was under a lot of pressure. However, he never could have gotten approval to build the new 
platform if the stated goal hadn’t been improved conversion. So while our official mandate 
was to increase conversion, his own personal agenda was to replace the platform as soon as 
possible. Knowing that significantly improved our ability to communicate with each other on 
the designs and priorities for the rest of the project. 
Again, the point of asking questions is to get the other person to talk to you about what’s 
important to them. You just want to understand more about their perspective so that you 
have a better sense for how to respond to them, when needed. That’s how you create an 
awareness of the other person’s viewpoint and set yourself up for a better relationship, better 
communication, and better success in creating the best user experience.  
 
Identifying Influencers 
Now that we’ve considered the best ways of seeing our stakeholder’s perspective, let’s look at 
the kinds of people who influence our projects so that we can tailor these approaches to 
them.  
Every project has a variety of people who influence it’s outcome. To keep it simple, let’s 
assume that there are only three main types of people that you will have to understand:  
1. Team Influencers: the people on your direct team 
2. Executive Influencers: the people who oversee your project  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
14 
3. External Influencers: people outside of your team 
Depending on where the person sits in relation to you, it can be difficult to get to know them 
well enough to understand them and see their perspective. But our job is to identify these 
people and seek to understand them as best as we can.  
Team Influencers 
People who are within your immediate influence are the people you see and interact with 
everyday. This probably includes other designers, developers, and project managers or 
product owners. It can be more difficult to work with these people on a regular basis simply 
because you have to work with them on a regular basis! However, the benefit is that you 
have plenty of opportunity to learn about them, find out what makes them tick, and tailor 
your approach to them in a way that appeals to their needs.  
Healthy companies have healthy teams and so your work with this group could feel like 
hanging out with friends on a daily basis. Unhealthy teams have difficult people and 
relationships which make it hard to accomplish much at all. Most of the time, I find that 
there’s a mix of team dynamics: there are people you most identify with, get along with, and 
who will come to your aid. And then there are some people who you don’t understand or 
who have difficult personalities and you need to learn to handle them better. Whatever the 
mix on your team, the goal is to find ways of understanding them so that we can better 
communicate with them.  
In general, your team is the best source of people who can help you on your project. You 
have daily opportunities to pour into these relationships for the benefit of the user 
experience. The more time you can spend with these people describing solutions, 
communicating value, and establishing a foundation of vocabulary, the better off you’ll be as 
far as creating a culture that follows your lead on important UX decisions. It is hard work 
because you have to put on your game face everyday and find ways to lead, even if you’re not 
the leader. Your team influencers are your most important allies.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
15 
Executive Influencers 
The people outside your immediate influence, but who have a stake in and influence over 
your project are the executive influencers. Most commonly, this is an executive or manager 
that oversees your team, perhaps one or two levels removed. This is the boss; the person 
whose approval you most need. On small teams and in start-ups, this might be the CEO 
whom you also work with in close quarters. In larger organizations, it’s a manager or VP that 
you may not have regular access to. Either way, these people are the most important people 
on your project. Without their final approval, we can’t get what we need to be successful. In 
many ways, communicating with these people is the primary purpose of this book.  
Hopefully there isn’t more than one or two major external influencers on your project. The 
difficult part about understanding this group is that we don’t usually meet with them often 
enough to easily size them up and understand their perspective. They are probably busy, late 
to your meeting, short and to-the-point, and may not have much time or brain space to 
devote to your carefully thought-through presentation. In this case, you have to use keen 
observation in every meeting, get to know the people who know them (like an administrative 
assistant or direct report) and do your best with the limited information you have. In short, 
you have to figure them out and respond to them almost instantaneously. Over time, you’ll 
develop a rhythm that can add to your bucket of understanding and help you communicate 
with them. 
External Influencers 
A third group of people, which matter less to your day-to-day decision making but who can 
also help or hurt your efforts are the external influencers. This group lives in a different part 
of the organization probably unrelated to your work or project, but they may have the ear of 
anyone in the other two groups and speak into your project via proxy. Often, we may not 
even know who the external influencers are because we only hear about them second hand. 
But just as often, they are people who have access to and / or use our project and therefore 
have an interest in seeing it become the best it can be.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
16 
These might be people in accounting and finance, IT, customer service or call center 
employees, or HR depending on the kind of app you’re building. They could be people 
outside the organization too: a spouse, friend, or former colleague of an executive influencer. 
It’s not uncommon for people in meetings to say things like, “I was showing the app to my 
friend in accounting and he seemed to think the button was not obvious enough. He didn’t 
even notice it until I pointed it out to him!” and then expect that we should make design 
decisions exclusively on this anonymous person in accounting. Even worse is the external 
influencer who is deemed to be part of the user base for the product. “I was showing it to my 
wife because she’s part of our target audience and she didn’t like the grid view at all. She 
thinks we should default to the list view instead.” Now you have to find a nice way to tell this 
person that not only is his wife wrong, but she’s not even part of our user base either! It’s no 
small challenge, for sure.  
 
Stakeholder Values 
I tend to see people in different roles as individual people and try to avoid creating stereotypes 
in my head based on their job title. Everyone is unique and will have to be considered in 
different ways no matter what their role. While that’s true, our stakeholder’s viewpoint of 
our project is still influenced significantly by how they spend their time and energy everyday. 
To the extent that it’s possible, let’s look at some of the more common roles on the team, 
what the people in those roles value, and what that means for our approach. This is just a 
starting point to help you understand how different roles will affect people’s perspective of 
your project and what you can focus on when working with them. 
Executives or Managers 
It’s no exaggeration that executives and senior managers have a lot on their plate. But it’s less 
about being too busy and more about brain capacity: they’re constantly switching between 
completely different topics, projects, and challenges. Walking into your meeting might even 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
17 
be disorienting if they can’t remember where you last left off. Your job is to bring them up to 
speed as quickly as possible, present your solutions, and solicit their feedback. They want to 
know that you’ve thought about it and have made smart decisions that align with their vision 
for the organization. 
Because they value… 
You should focus on… 
• 
Concise information 
• 
Growing the business 
• 
Solving problems 
• 
Getting to the point 
• 
Accomplishing goals 
• 
Describing the solution 
 
Developers or Engineers 
Working with developers can be one of the most challenging relationships for designers, 
simply because they think so differently about our projects than we do. Developers are 
usually looking at a backlog of bugs and enhancements on the one hand and a roadmap for 
future development that’s bigger than they can manage on the other. They tend to be more 
analytical, so they don’t even “see” some of the UI details you’ve designed. They may even be 
concerned with “over-designing” something that they think is not worth the extra effort. 
Your job is to help them see the value in everything you’ve done so they’re excited about the 
end result, while also demonstrating that you understand the effort involved. 
Because they value… 
You should focus on… 
• 
Building it once and 
minimizing re-work 
• 
Efficiency and maintainable 
• 
Understanding all of the use 
cases up-front 
• 
Maximizing existing scope 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
18 
code 
• 
Understanding the effort 
involved 
and re-using UI patterns 
• 
Communicating the value for 
the users or business 
 
Product Owners 
If your organization is large enough to have a dedicated product owner, working with them 
will be one of the primary things you do. The great news is that product owners tend to want 
their products to be the very best it can be, so they’re usually one of our greatest allies and 
get really excited about all the creative designs we can produce. Taking direction from a 
product owner is challenging, though if they don’t have a good understanding of design, 
what’s technically possible, or an unclear vision for the product roadmap.  
Because they value… 
You should focus on… 
• 
Innovation and creativity 
• 
Meeting business goals 
• 
The big picture, long-term 
roadmap 
• 
Finding new approaches to 
solving problems 
• 
Connecting your designs to 
the business objectives 
• 
How your design moves 
them forward 
 
Project Managers 
Most projects will have a project manager, even if it’s a combination of people from one of 
the other roles above. This is the person who’s in charge of making sure the project stays on 
track, on budget, and on time. They like things like gaant charts, deadlines, and meetings. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
19 
Your job with the PM is to be sure they always understand where you’re at in the process, 
alert them about any concerns as soon as possible, and allow them to negotiate between 
everyone else to get stuff done.  
Because they value… 
You should focus on… 
• 
Deadlines and staying on 
schedule 
• 
Managing scope and budgets 
• 
Keeping everyone in the loop 
• 
Possibly efficiencies of re-
using design elements 
• 
Managing expectations on 
any changes 
• 
Updating them on your 
progress 
 
Marketing, Content, and Creative 
I hate to put all three of these roles into the same category, but there is plenty of overlap in 
these roles from the perspective of a designer. Only the largest companies will employ 
separate people for each one of these roles. The point, for designers, is that there are people 
who will be concerned more with the content, look and feel, and copy of your application. 
There may be branding guidelines, style guides, or a defined design language that drives 
most of these conversations. Your job is to already be aware of these requirements, find out 
what the standard content and copy is, and incorporate it into your designs as early as 
possible.  
Because they value… 
You should focus on… 
• 
Brand consistency across the 
• 
Creating styles that match 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
20 
organization 
• 
Consistent voice in copy and 
messaging 
• 
Creating a product that 
provides value to customer 
and is sell-able 
the brand or communicating 
any differences 
• 
Making sure the copy you 
use is already approved or if 
it deviates, why 
• 
Specific value proposition in 
features or microinteractions 
• 
 
 
Stakeholder Stories 
Writing user stories is a popular method for designers and developers to understand their 
users, but have you ever written a story like that for your stakeholders? As we seek to 
understand the people we work with, perhaps it will be useful to write out stories so we can 
understand the project from their perspective. Here are a few examples to get you started.  
Executives 
• 
As an executive, I want to see what my team is working on so that I can provide a 
report back to upper management.  
• 
As an executive, I want to provide feedback on the design of my products so that I can 
help you make them better.  
• 
As an executive, I want to provide a vision and roadmap of the future so that my team 
can be excited about where we are headed.  
Developers 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
21 
• 
As a developer, I want to build a solid application so that I can be proud of my work.  
• 
As a developer, I want to write quality code so that I don’t have to deal with so many 
bugs or a lot of maintenance.  
• 
As a developer, I want to understand all the requirements up front so that I can plan 
my work and maximize my time.  
Product Owners 
• 
As a product owner, I want to create the best possible product so that I can create 
value for our customers and for the company.  
• 
As a product owner, I want to deliver new and creative ideas so that I can make an 
impression on the company with my leadership.  
• 
As a product owner, I want to make a product that is simple and elegant so that people 
will want to use it.  
Project Managers 
• 
As a project manager, I want to meet with everyone on the team so that I can make 
sure we’re on track.  
• 
As a project manager, I want to cut scope so that we can stay on schedule and under 
budget.  
• 
As a project manager, I want to plan carefully so that I can make sure we have the time 
a resources we need to be successful.  
Marketing, Content, and Creative 
• 
As a marketer, I want to provide feedback on the product design so that we will have a 
product that is competitive and will sell.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
22 
• 
As a brand or content strategist, I want to make sure all of our products communicate 
the same look or tone so that our customers have a consistent experience across the 
entire organization.  
• 
As a creative director, I want to be involved in your project’s design so that I can make 
sure it aligns with all of the other initiatives I oversee. 
These are meant to be casual examples to make the point that each person on our team has a 
different perspective. We could probably write many more. You could take the time to write 
your own user / stakeholder stories for the people on your team too. The more we can do to 
get into their frame of mind, the better we’ll be at articulating our design decisions to them.  
 
Build Good Relationships 
The overall lesson is this: communication is much easier in good relationships. Good 
relationships take work. In fact, building good relationships is a pretty basic and 
straightforward process: you get out of it what you put into it. So let’s take a practical look at 
some things you can do to improve the quality of your relationships with stakeholders.  
Technology has improved the speed at which we’re able to communicate, but not necessarily 
the quality. Text messaging and emails are incredibly useful tools for getting work done, but 
we have to be careful not to go to an extreme of limiting our capacity to communicate to a 
few hundred characters. It might be necessary for you to fire off a short response to people 
on your team for the purpose of getting it done, but don’t let that be the only way that they 
ever interact with you. Whenever possible seek them out and have a friendly and casual 
conversation with them. This is more difficult when working remotely, but not impossible. 
Take the time to do the simple things that will help you improve your relationships and, as a 
by product, your communication with each other.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
23 
Be Yourself 
The best advice I can give you is to tell you to just be yourself around people. Too often, 
people are serious about doing serious work seriously. In an attempt to be professional, some 
people (maybe you) never let anyone see who they really are. We may put up fronts, never 
let our guard down, and always focus on work, work, work. This is no way to maintain a 
rapport with your peers and bosses. You need to show people you’re human and reveal your 
own personality, when it’s appropriate. There are absolutely times when we have to put on 
our professional hat and get things done, but there are also in-between times, break times, 
and coffee times when we can learn to be human with those around us. Finding that balance 
is important. People appreciate getting to see the “real” you.  
Do stuff 
It’s also important to do things for other people to make them feel valued. Pretty much 
anything you do that is outside of the usual way your team communicates and relates to one 
another will make an impression on people that you care. Typically, this is just checking in 
with people regularly to see how they are. That might be stopping by their desk, inviting 
them to coffee, or leaving a note. Sometimes just saying hi to someone for no reason at all is 
enough express this. To take it a step further, ask if there’s anything you can do to help them. 
Any of the questions in the previous section would be a great fit here, but the key is to 
express that you’re on the same team and you care enough to ask.  
When I’m visiting one particular client’s office, I always stop by Jennifer’s desk because I 
enjoyed working with her on a previous project. She’s almost never there, so I leave her a 
note to say hello on a post-it. Later, I found out she had been keeping all of my notes stuck to 
her display because she appreciated them so much. On another client, I sometimes work 
directly with the CEO so whenever I’m on-site I always walk by his office even if I don’t 
have an appointment. Once, he was in another conversation but he waved me over, stopped 
his meeting briefly, shook my hand, and thanked me for being there. Another time, I was 
reading an article that reminded me of a client I had worked for months earlier. I watched his 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
24 
online status for a few days to see when he was available and then sent him a short message 
with a link to the article. Even though we didn’t have an active project together, it was 
important for me to maintain the relationship. I want people to know that I’m there to serve 
them, to help them do their jobs better, and to make them successful at designing great 
products. Going out of my way to do these simple things helps me express that to them and 
makes it easier when talking to them about design.  
Give stuff 
Taking it a step further, relationships will be improved when you actually do things that 
show a genuine interest in people by giving them something useful or meaningful.  
Hand written notes 
I sometimes send hand-written thank you notes or cards to people after we’ve worked 
together. Not often, but occasionally. When all of our communication is electronic, a hand-
written card is especially notable and always makes an impression. But don’t misunderstand 
me, I’m not much of a letter-writing person to begin with. I’m not the person that sent you a 
thank you note for a wedding gift the same day that you gave the gift. I’ve never been that 
guy. This is a real stretch for me to remember to do, but I think it’s always valuable and I 
probably don’t do it enough. If you have trouble with something like this, set your goals low: 
write one hand-written note to a client or stakeholder every 2-3 months. Hopefully, that will 
help you establish a pattern of expressing your gratitude to the people you have the privilege 
of working with.  
Simple, inexpensive gifts 
Another simple way to build into your relationships is to send simple gifts to people, when 
appropriate. These aren’t meant to be bribes, but just small tokens of appreciation to show 
the other person that you care. Some companies have policies about gift giving, so be sure 
you understand the environment and always use good judgment. But as a rule, giving a small 
gift is a great way to show the other person that you’re more than just a defender of buttons.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
25 
For individuals, the best gifts are the ones that show you listen to them. One of my clients 
was a hobbyist photographer, so I sent him a coffee cup that looks like a lens. My client who 
loved to fly, I sent a license plate frame that said “My other car is a plane” - he still talks 
about it to this day and has offered me to fly with him next time I’m in New York. I gave a 
co-worker who was getting married a humorous book about what bachelors need to know 
before the wedding. And my boss who had a reputation for always ordering a Jack Daniels 
with water got just that. I bought one bottle of each, designed a custom label for the package 
with the title “Joan’s Regular”, and had a friend shrink wrap them together so it looked like 
a real product. All these things were inexpensive, simple ways to let the other person know 
that I value them. The gifts were not generic, but tailored to something specific I knew about 
them. The sentiment was not in the gift itself, but in the thought I had put into choosing it. 
They knew I listened to them and understood something about them. 
If you’re concerned about showing favoritism or if you’re not good at giving individual gifts, 
one simple way to give people a gift is to be the person who brings snacks or food. If 
everyone is groaning about an early morning meeting, bring breakfast with you. You can also 
put a communal jar of candy on your desk to give people a reason to stop by. Occasionally 
offer to make a coffee run for the team during the 3pm slump. This way of giving gifts 
doesn’t favor one particular relationship, but it still shows people that you value them.  
It might seem like focusing on stakeholder relationships has nothing to do with design. 
Cultivating good relationships is a great skill no matter what your job is, but it’s one area that 
I think designers can improve upon. Many designers expect their designs to speak for 
themselves, especially as it relates to user experience. “If your design requires an explanation, 
then it’s not very good.” As if you could expect to just hand your stakeholder some mockups 
and wait for them to give it a stamp of approval. It’s surprising just how much a good 
relationship can affect another person’s view of our work. Having good relationships really 
does make our designs more acceptable to the people that matter.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
26 
People may view us for the utility we provide, specifically related to our roles as designers. 
We are actually making something that they need and they may, unintentionally, see our 
interactions with each other as the way to get things done. But when we don’t have that 
human connection, meeting with stakeholders can sometimes be downgraded to nothing 
more than an exchange of skills. The more we can show them that we’re people too, the more 
value and stock they’ll put into our ideas, suggestions, and proposals. We’re not robots 
churning out stuff just to get a paycheck; we’re smart people with great ideas working 
together to create great products. Focusing on these relationships is more than just being 
nice and making sure people like us. It’s reminding them that we’re people too and that we 
can be trusted to create great solutions. Having good relationships will help ensure that this 
happens. 
 
Stakeholders are People Too 
If we really expect to communicate effectively with our stakeholders, then we need to use the 
same skills with them that we use in identifying with our users. We have to understand 
people by the roles and position on our team, recognize what’s important to them, and make 
a note of the best ways of approaching them. Part of this process involves remembering that 
they are human, that they have other things going on in their lives or being intentional about 
creating shared experiences so that we change our view of them personally. Finally, 
developing empathy for stakeholders drives us to act and to want to position our approach 
towards them in a way that agrees with their needs, rather than our own. At the end of the 
day, a focus on building good relationships is the most important factor in establishing good 
channels of communication.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 1 
Chapter 4 
Reducing Cognitive Load 
 
“Before anything else, preparation is the key to success.” 
– Alexander Graham Bell 
In usability, getting users to complete a task is all about their available brain space: their 
cognitive load. The more clutter, options, or roadblocks we put in front of them, the more we 
fill their head and make it difficult for them to complete a task. The same is true when it 
comes to the task of meeting with stakeholders. Our goal should be to remove as much of the 
clutter, options, and roadblocks as possible so that their brains are freed to focus on the 
primary task of the meeting: getting approval for our designs. If they are distracted by an 
incoherent outline, grumpy co-workers, or a derailed conversation that has nothing to do 
with the project, it will be much more difficult for us to complete the task. Our goal is not to 
just have a meeting, but to make the meeting productive, valuable, and successful.  
To that end, understanding our stakeholders would be of little use if we didn’t use that 
knowledge to break down these barriers and make our meetings more ‘usable’. So for this 
chapter, we’ll look at removing any distractions from the conversation, anticipating what the 
stakeholders might say, and bringing in other people who can help us move things forward. 
In addition, we can never be fully prepared for these meetings without first rehearsing it, 
either in our heads or outloud. The time you spend prepping for the meeting makes you that 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2 
much more likely to be successful at making your case for your design decisions because you 
can focus on being articulate and less on the agenda. Our goal is to reduce the cognitive load 
for our stakeholders, our team, and ourselves. 
 
Remove Distractions 
When you’re in a meeting to get approval for your designs, staying focused is critical. It very 
easy for design discussions to go off on a tangent or be taken in an unexpected direction 
because of one small thing. There’s just something about design that elicits so much more 
clutter conversation than other disciplines. One way to keep focused is to remove anything 
that you think will be a distraction. A lot of people are easily distracted by things that simply 
don’t matter to the goal of the meeting. They can be so distracted by one thing, that they’ll 
identify a different, unrelated problem or be unable to discuss the real issues. So part of your 
job is to pay attention to the things that derail the discussion and remove those things from 
the equation all together.  
A common example is with the use of placeholder content: stock images and lorem ipsum 
copy.  I can’t tell you how many times my clients have obsessed over the placeholder content 
I chose. And yet, here are some examples: 
• 
I was designing a site for a diesel manufacturer and chose a product image to use on 
the homepage. The client spent an inordinate amount of time talking about how that 
particular engine part was not their best seller and, in fact, was being discontinued 
because of engineering flaws. He then proceeded to educate me on their entire line of 
engine bits.  
• 
I was working with a retailer who did not have any images of the inside of their stores, 
so I found a placeholder image online and included it in the mockups. It turns out, I 
had chosen a photo from their closest competitor and rival. It was difficult for him to 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
3 
move past the fact that he was looking at a his competition in a mockup for his own 
store’s site. 
• 
On a mapping application I used a Google Maps screen shot as the background 
placeholder for where the map would be. My client used a different (“enterprise”) 
mapping service provider and he had a difficult time reconciling that the image did not 
look like the maps they would see in the real application.  
• 
On an app for a pharmaceutical company my client was confused about why she 
couldn’t understand the ipsum copy even though she had studied Latin in college. She 
spent part of the meeting trying to read it outloud and I had to explain to her why we 
use ipsum copy in design.  
In each case, my placeholder content created an unnecessary distraction. 
The challenge is that removing these distractions often requires more work on our part. We 
use ipsum copy because it easier than writing real copy. We use stock images because a 
quick search will give us tons of options. In fact, an Agile / Lean approach values fast 
iterations, MVPs, quick work, and short sprints. So the prospect of being required to dig 
deeper and go two extra steps with your wireframes might go against the philosophy you’re 
accustomed to relying on. Worse, it might slow you down, right? Not necessarily. 
I was working with a guy who was very sensitive to everything being perfectly lined up in a 
grid. My wireframes were a little messy because, well, they’re just wireframes: quick and 
dirty, just enough to communicate the intent. He started making suggestions for changing the 
layout: “move this call-to-action over here, drop this element down there.” Not minor tweaks, 
but overall re-work. I began to realize that he was so distracted by how maligned some of the 
elements were, that he was trying to make the design feel more balanced. So I paused the 
discussion and took a few minutes to go back and make sure everything was aligned. Almost 
immediately, his reaction changed. Many of his objections over the placement of major 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4 
elements had gone away. We could now focus on the real business. But I learned that with 
this particular person, it was important that I take the time to clean up my wireframes so that 
I could save time both in a meeting and in possible suggested re-work. 
So it might not be quite as simple as removing placeholder content. Some people are really 
distracted by any use of color so it’s better to avoid color as much as possible. Others will be 
distracted by legacy UI elements that aren’t the focus of the meeting, like an old nav they’ve 
never liked. So you can’t just use a screen shot of it in your mockups. Everyone is a little 
different and our job is to figure out these distractions.  
At this point you have to weigh whether the extra time up front removing these distractions 
will give back time when it comes to getting approvals and agreement from stakeholders. I 
personally think it’s worth the extra effort to discover and remove distractions for the sake of 
keeping the project moving than sacrificing the time and effort involved in bringing a 
conversation back to it’s core purpose. If your client doesn’t discover a missing business 
requirement because they’re distracted by something else, that missing requirement will 
eventually surface, usually after it’s too late in the process and cause everyone to run around 
trying to make it happen at the last minute. So work with your team to find ways to do what 
it takes to keep the stakeholders focused even if it takes some extra time and preparation.  
One client of mine really loved the left panel that Axure creates when a prototype is 
generated. It’s just an iframe that lists every single page in the prototype; a site map of the 
entire project.1 She liked it so much, in fact, that she would comment on it during each of our 
calls, “Oh, it’s so convenient to be able to see all the pages right there.” I usually just ignored 
her infatuation and moved on with the meeting. Finally during one call, she actually 
suggested we use it as the navigation of the app. “I just love how you can see everything all 
the time. We should use that for our navigation instead!” — All of the previously agreed 
                                                
1 This was an early version of Axure that did not provide the option to turn off the display of 
this panel. In more recent versions, this panel can be removed from the prototype. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5 
upon design work we had done to create a consistent, meaningful hierarchy for the app was 
on the chopping block! Again, I chose not to respond in the moment but instead, after that, I 
began going into the Axure folder structure and sending her the link, not to the index.html 
file which would show the left panel, but to the direct html file that would open outside of the 
iframe so that she would not see that left panel any more. After that, she never mentioned it 
again.  
 
One of my clients was so distracted by the left panel that Axure generates (highlighted here in red) 
that she suggested we use that for the navigation of the app we were designing. 
 
One app I was designing needed an icon for the user’s account, so we chose a 
person/silhouette icon. The software I was using had a limited set of icons available and that 
particular user icon was really bubbly, a terrible expression of a user. Still, for the sake of 
time, I used it as a placeholder because I didn’t think it was worth creating my own just for 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6 
these mockups. After the third meeting where a different person addressed how terrible the 
icon was, I finally decided to take the extra effort to make my own and get that out of the 
conversation. Had I used a better icon to begin with, I could have saved myself from 
explaining the limitations of my installed icon set each time.  
 
The default placeholder icon that was easily available to me (left) was so terrible that it was 
distracting to everyone who saw it, so I finally took the time to design one that would be better 
(right) and the conversation went away. 
 
The point is that as you get to know people more, you should be able to figure out what is 
distracting to them and remove those things from the conversation. Too often, people 
(especially non-designers) obsess over things that don’t really matter for the goals of the 
website or application. Even after you help them understand that those things are temporary 
or off-topic - I find that they still keep coming around to it again and again. “I know we 
talked about this last time, but I still think we need to re-design that menu…”  Just get rid of 
the distractions altogether! Distractions should only happen once. If you go to two meetings 
where the same distraction comes up both times, you’re doing it wrong. So figure out what 
those distractions are and remove them so that you can focus on the real issues regarding the 
effectiveness of your designs. 
 
Anticipate Reactions 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
7 
Based on what you know about the people you’re working with, you should be able to 
anticipate how they will react to your designs. In the previous chapter, we identified the 
influencers on our projects and called out some of their values and motivations. When we 
combine what we know about their perspective with the values they carry in their role, we 
can make some pretty good guesses about how they’ll respond to our designs. The good news 
is that most people are fairly predictable. That is, they tend to obsess over and react to the 
same kinds of things every single time. If you’ve met with them before, anticipating their 
reaction becomes much easier. It will take a few meetings to really hone in on how people are 
wired, but what’s fascinating is that I’ve found anticipating reactions to be much more 
formulaic and predictable than you might expect.  
The manager who asked about the color you used is going to think more critically about the 
details of the UI. The developer who wanted to see the analytics for the current app values 
the use of data to backup your claims. The executive who thought the call to action wasn’t 
high up enough on the page needs to know how your choices affect conversion and sales. We 
can expect to hear similar ideas, recommendations, and objections from these people each 
time. What seems like a fuzzy soft skill, might actually be more of a recipe: personality + role 
/ values + observed reactions = predictable behavior! While it’s not actually that simple, it 
gets easier and more predictable over time.  
So go through each of your designs, look at the agenda for the meeting, and figure out the 
best flow for presenting your ideas. In the same way that we create a flow for our users 
through the application, we also want to curate the flow of our design discussion. Now match 
up those needs with the people in the room. For each person, ask yourself:  
• 
What do they care about the most?  
• 
What are their own personal goals for this design?  
• 
What do I already know they want or don’t want?  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
8 
Answering these questions should give you a good picture of what to expect from them and 
allow you to take notes that will prepare you to respond in the moment.  
For some people, you might not know the answer to these questions because their 
participation is unclear. People get invited to meetings because they have a unique 
perspective on our product even if they aren’t directly involved. In those cases, you have to 
decide how important their input is and engage them at an appropriate level. They’re at your 
meeting for a reason. Figure out what that reason is and make it relevant for them so you can 
get the most out of everyone’s time. Think about their particular role and make your best 
guess about how their viewpoint can help you. If you’re not sure, ask them directly what they 
hope to get out of it or how they see themselves contributing. It’s appropriate for you to tell 
people that you want to be sure you’re making the most of everyone’s time. Understanding 
their involvement helps you structure the agenda and sets you up to anticipate how things 
will play out. 
Write down objections 
Once you’ve considered all the people involved, write down what you expect they will object 
to along with your own counter points. Until you get really good at responding off-the-cuff, 
it can be difficult in the moment to remember how you were planning to respond. So write 
them down, make a list, and read and re-read that list over and over until you’re fully 
inundated with your best guess about how people will react to your designs. Even if you 
can’t associate each anticipated reaction with a single person, it’s still a good idea to make a 
simple list of objections that you think might come up. These could be in the form of 
questions that might be asked or opinions you think will be expressed. It’s a fairly 
straightforward and simple practice. Just jot down what you think people will say.  
For example:  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
9 
Home Page 
Product Page 
• 
Why did we remove one of 
the CTAs? 
• 
Does the carousel advance 
automatically? (Justin) 
• 
The utility nav is too crowded 
(Kristen) 
• 
What happened to the 
Recommended item feed? 
• 
We can’t ‘hide’ the Join 
button under the menu 
(Mark) 
 
• 
Why isn’t the image larger 
like we discussed? 
• 
Do we have to use two 
different buttons? Can we 
get the CTA above the fold? 
• 
Why are Reviews further 
down on the page? 
• 
The fixed nav interaction 
should automatically add the 
item to cart (Kristen) 
• 
This flow has more complex 
use cases than I think you’ve 
considered (Mark) 
 
Create alternatives 
Part of anticipating how people will react is preparing in advance the alternatives that you 
considered or that you think will be suggested. You’ll remember from chapter 2 that one of 
the questions we’re trying to answer for our stakeholders is: Why is this better than the 
alternative?   
Bringing alternatives (especially those that aren’t the right solution) complicates the 
conversation because it forces us to have a well-articulated explanation for our choices. 
Many designers avoid this by not presenting alternatives that aren’t recommended. The fear 
is that the client will prefer the ‘wrong’ concept and insist it be used. While this is always a 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
10 
risk, approaching our meetings with this fear actually undermines the purpose of articulating 
design decisions. If we aren’t able to convince stakeholders that our solution is better, then 
either we aren’t doing a good job of communicating to them or we don’t understand their 
needs enough to create a design that solves the problem. What we really need is for them to 
agree with our solution, even after considering all of the alternatives. We can’t protect them 
from all the bad ideas that might be suggested. Instead, we arm them with the knowledge 
and language for why our decisions are best. That’s the only way we’re truly going to earn 
their long-term support and get them on board with our solution.  
You’ll want to bring these alternative designs and mockups as evidence that you’ve tried 
these other approaches and they weren’t as effective as what you’re proposing. For example, 
if you know that someone is going to ask you about the icon you chose, then bring a batch of 
alternative icons that might also communicate the same concept. It demonstrates that you’ve 
thought about it and chose what you believe to be the best one. Sometimes the design we’ve 
come to discuss was suggested in a previous meeting. The stakeholder asked you to make 
some changes (despite your best efforts at convincing them otherwise) and now you have to 
show them that design. In these situations, bringing alternatives is absolutely critical to 
demonstrating why your proposed solution is better. However, you still have to lead the 
conversation with the design they’re expecting. So present the idea they asked for, but also 
prepare alternatives that you think address the problem in a better way.  
More than simply addressing someone else’s suggestion, bringing alternatives creates a 
common place to discuss the merits of each option: a place that, by the way, you created and 
you control. If you come to the meeting with no alternatives, your stakeholders are going to 
search the internet from their phone and propose the first option they find. You make a much 
stronger case if you have a set of prepared ideas that were clearly well-thought out than 
whatever they found by spending a few seconds online. It’s much easier to keep the 
conversation moving forward if you have several alternatives to discuss rather than trying to 
address new ideas and suggestions on the spot. So don’t toss out all the rejected ideas, bring 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
11 
them with you. More than that, try the alternatives you think people will suggest so that 
you’re prepared in the moment to demonstrate the differences. We’ll look at presenting 
alternatives again in chapter 7, but remember that having more than one design always 
creates a conversation that there is more than one way to solve this problem.  
Prepare data 
Likewise, prepare data (analytics, usability reports) to support any part of your proposal. It’s 
one thing to make a suggestion, but it’s a completely different thing to show the data that 
supports your ideas. Most of the time, it’s enough to let everyone know that your decisions 
are based on data, but you must be prepared to show that data, if it’s in question. Actually, I 
don’t recommend mentioning or pulling out the data unless you have to. Using data to 
bolster your position is helpful when people disagree or when they react to your designs with 
skepticism. Since you’re only anticipating how they will react at this point, have the data 
available, prepare it in advance, and know that you’re basing your decision on it but don’t 
slap it on the table during the course of your presentation. Data is very powerful (almost too 
powerful) and using it all the time can create an environment where no one wants to suggest 
anything different. You may stifle the conversation before it even gets started.  So be 
prepared to defend your decisions with data, but don’t use it unless it’s necessary to make 
your case.  
 
During the course of working with stakeholders, your job is to figure out what makes them 
tick, what things they care about, and then come up with a plan for how you’ll respond to 
them in the moment. Writing down anticipated reactions, bringing alternative designs, and 
having data available are important parts of this process. You won’t be able to do it perfectly 
each time, but it will help you be prepared. Often, just knowing what to expect in a meeting 
can go a long way toward being articulate in the moment.  
 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
12 
Create a Support Network 
One of the best things you can do to make sure that you’re articulate and that your 
stakeholders agree with your recommendations is to get other people to support you in your 
decisions. That is, you want to be sure there are other people in the room who will back you 
up, help you make your case, and tip the scales when it comes to the final decision.  
Getting other people to support your decisions is about showing that you’re not alone in your 
ideas. That there are other smart people in the room who agree with you (and who may have 
more relational capital than you). It’s about bringing out the best practices that the experts 
agree is the right decision. If 9 out out of 10 designers agree, then why shouldn’t your 
clients? Majority doesn’t always rule, but it’s definitely more compelling than an individual 
making his case to an unsympathetic manager. 
The Ringer 
In television, it’s common to have pre-arranged ‘ringers’. Whether it’s a news broadcast, talk 
show, or reality TV: there are always people whose answer or reaction the producers have 
pre-arranged. They may need help building energy and momentum to make the show feel 
more interesting. The ringer might be the anchor who asks a good question of the reporter 
that he didn’t cover in the initial story. Or the ringer could be an audience member asking a 
question to communicate something that’s more effective coming from an average person 
than the expert host. Whatever the case, a ringer’s purpose is to bolster support for an idea.  
In design meetings, we want to be sure there are other people who are prepared to ask good 
questions, point out specific important elements, or otherwise support our proposed designs. 
We may not remember everything that needs to be communicated, so a ringer can jump in to 
cover anything we forgot. They can ask you a question that sets you up to provide a well-
articulated answer. Sometimes the ringer will just reinforce what you already said.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
13 
Often, ringers happen naturally on teams that are close-knit. After practicing the 
presentation with the rest of your team, it’s common for a ringer to naturally emerge during 
the course of the meeting. When your co-worker realizes that you forgot to demo an 
interaction, he might ask “So what happens when you click on the button?” even though he 
already knows the answer. Or in situations where more than one design is presented, your 
ringer will speak up, “The first option is better because…” as if the two of you hadn’t talked 
beforehand.  
I recommend being forthright with people about your need for support. It’s ok to ask people 
to be your ringer. It may seem underhanded, but the purpose is not to deceive people or bowl 
them over with unauthentic enthusiasm. The purpose of getting people to back you up is to 
build a case to demonstrate that other people agree with you. Be open with people about 
your need for support, ask them to help you, and tell them to speak up when the situation 
calls for it.  
 
Identifying People 
The process of getting people on-board with your vision takes place more in one-on-one 
meetings than it does in a conference room. People can be reluctant to agree in a group 
setting if it’s clear the executive in charge has a different idea. Your job is to work with 
people beforehand and figure out who is on-board with your designs before that 
conversation even takes place. You want to find the swing votes that will build a majority or 
ask other people to be prepared to help you. Make sure that you build into other people and 
relationships enough that you already have these go-to people available. It’s not something 
you should expect to pull off right before the meeting.  
The easiest place to get this support is on your own team: other designers or developers who 
have already been part of the discussion and design process. They’re already on board and 
they were part of the discussion that lead to the decision you’ll present. These people should 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
14 
always be prepared to come to your defense if things take a turn that you’re not expecting. 
But it’s not enough to just assume that they will. If there is a concept, idea, or design that you 
think will meet resistance, be up-front with them that you may need backup.  
Have them help you write down your justification for the decision so that everyone can 
speak with one voice about your rationale. This is critical because when you’re the one 
presenting, you may not be able to look away to check your notes and remember everything 
that went into the design. Your teammates can be there with the same list and interject when 
they see an important part of the logic is missing from the discussion.  
However, your team cannot be your only source of support because everyone in the room 
knows that you share the same perspective. So it's also necessary for you to seek out other 
people in the organization who have a stake in your project and may have some influence, 
clout, or reputation that you can lean on. There are almost always other people who 
understand what you’re doing, are excited about the project, and can’t wait to see it succeed. 
This might be someone you used to work with in a different area or it’s the person who 
stopped by your desk, saw the designs, and seemed excited about the project. When people 
find out you’re working on something they’re interested in they might even contact you 
themselves to express support and interest.  
So find these other people and pull them aside. Invite them to the meeting, if it’s appropriate, 
and prep them to speak up if needed. Explain to them what the meeting is about, give them a 
copy of the agenda and designs in advance, and ask them directly for their support. It’s ok to 
go so far as to tell them you might want them to speak up if there is any disagreement. If 
possible, point out the specific problem areas that you think will be a point of contention and 
help them understand how to respond. Give them any data or other rationale you have. 
Explain everything to them so that they have the same understanding that you do and are on 
board with the vision of your designs. You want this person to be your representative, to feel 
confident in their ability to support you, and to agree that your solutions are the best.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
15 
People Get It 
I was in a meeting with the President of a large eCommerce site where we were presenting 
some recently implemented designs, as well as a few new concepts that were in the works. 
The meeting went well, there were a few questions from him that I was able to address, and 
we walked away from the meeting with good vibes and a list of items to consider for another 
round of revisions. Immediately afterwards, one of the other executives pulled me aside and 
said, “Hey, I’m sorry I haven’t made myself available much but I really want your project to 
succeed and I’d like to help, if I can. Maybe we can go over everything before these meetings 
so that I can back you up and we can all speak with one voice.”  
Here was someone who knows the value communicating to stakeholders. As it was, she was 
one of the stakeholders herself, but she saw that there was an opportunity for us to work 
together to achieve the best result. She liked our ideas, trusted our expertise, and wanted to 
make sure we wouldn’t be blocked. Needless to say, she became part of my support network. 
And even though she wasn’t involved in every meeting we had about the project, I made a 
habit of keeping in touch with her regularly, pulling her into the loop on our designs, and 
allowing her to be our advocate in conversations that took place outside of our formal 
presentations.  
 
Always remember that other people can help you accomplish what you want. Learn to build 
into those relationships and allow them to add value to the conversation. Find the people 
who can help you accomplish your vision, and set them up for success right alongside you.  
Having this small group of people who support you in a meeting creates an atmosphere of 
consensus. It demonstrates that you know what you’re talking about because other people 
agree with you. It spreads the responsibility of the decision onto the whole team. This is not 
just one person’s idea, but an idea that is supported by other people too. More than that, it 
allows other people to speak on your behalf. You may find that you don’t have to do nearly 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
16 
as much talking to express yourself because other people will do it for you. It is much more 
difficult for an executive who disagrees with your solution to insist you change it when the 
other experts in the room also agree with you.  
 
The Dress Rehearsal 
Now that you understand your stakeholders, removed the distractions, anticipated their 
reactions, and gathered a group of people to back you up, it’s time to go through the meeting 
step-by-step, practice your presentation, and prep everyone involved. The level of 
importance of the meeting often determines how much practice you need, but I’ve found that 
you should still make a habit of doing these things even for less important meetings. Whether 
it’s a daily stand-up to review yesterday’s work or a big presentation for an executive, each 
one of these following action items provides structure and a framework to guide your 
conversation. I recommend doing all of them every time, but the degree to which you spend 
time on it differs in each situation.  
Make a List 
Most people understand the value of having an agenda for a meeting and it cannot be 
underestimated when meeting with stakeholders about designs either. For an executive 
presentation, you probably already have an elaborate outline of the content you’ll cover on a 
slide deck. That’s good and it will probably keep you on track. However, I’d still recommend 
having a separate printed version of your agenda for your own reference. Design discussions 
naturally wander around topics and can be difficult to keep on-task when multiple people 
have ideas or suggestions that are not immediately relevant or may be jumping ahead. 
Storing the agenda in an accessible place is important for everyone else on the team (as we 
will see in the next chapter), but a paper agenda gives you a physical base that you can 
quickly go back to. Printing to paper seems so low-tech these days, but you’ll be more 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
17 
confident if you’re not fumbling with technology (even a separate tablet or phone) to find 
your place.  
Even for short meetings with your own team, like a daily standup, I still recommend putting 
together a quick agenda. It’s so easy to forget the thing you meant to talk about or get 
sidetracked on details about something else. If you’re like me, you go throughout your day 
working on multiple designs (perhaps even multiple projects) at a time. A co-worker will 
stop you to ask you about an interaction, which causes you to re-think it on-the-spot. In the 
middle of the night, you wake up to the realization that there is a very important use case no 
one had considered. You need a place to write these things down so that you don’t forget to 
review them with the people that matter. I personally like to use a simple notes app that 
syncs with all my devices so that even if I’m out shopping, I can add an item to my constantly 
evolving agenda for the next meeting and then release my brain from the burden of needing 
to remember it.   
If you’re not a note taker or if it isn’t your responsibility to remember everything on a 
project, there is still tremendous value to quickly jotting down an agenda for every meeting. 
You don’t have to create an elaborate outline. Just a simple list will suffice. Even if your 
meeting is with one other person, a list like this will be your guide and help you know if the 
meeting was a success or not. When I’m in a rush, I will still take five or so minutes before 
the meeting to jot down a few things I want to discuss. Even the smallest amount of 
preparation will help you know what to talk about. Always make a list.  
Practice Out loud 
It’s also important that you practice having the meeting out loud beforehand. That’s right, 
like the dress rehearsal of the school play you need to go into a room, talk through your 
entire agenda as if there were already people present, and even anticipate and answer mock 
questions out loud. You’ve already anticipated how people are going to respond, so play out 
the meeting in your head and verbally answer their questions to an empty room. Practicing 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
18 
what you’ll say gives you the opportunity to hear your words. Hearing yourself speak aloud 
is very different from how it sounds in your head. Plus, you’ll catch yourself saying things 
that could be worded differently, aren’t helpful, or are repetitive. This is your chance to 
practice using the phrases and tactics you’ll learn in chapters 7 and 8 as well as catch yourself 
saying the things you shouldn’t from chapter 6.  
The idea of holding a mock meeting might seem silly, but it’s actually a critical part of 
preparing to be articulate. The more you practice going through the content, the less your 
brain will have to think about the agenda and the more mental capacity you’ll have to be 
focused on being articulate and responding. You commit it to memory. We want to reduce 
our own cognitive load to the point that holding the meeting is a breeze. But also, design 
decisions can be particularly difficult to understand and there may be underlying reasons for 
your choices that you haven’t even uncovered yet. I’ve found that I can identify some of my 
own motivations for design simply by talking out loud to myself.  
I’ve spent countless hours of my career practicing meetings out loud: pacing the floor of my 
office, presenting my content to a picture on the wall, and even answering questions from 
invisible audience members. I’ve done the same thing in my car, in line at the grocery store, 
or waiting for a plane. Any onlooker might think I’m crazy, talking and gesturing as if there 
were someone else with me. But the habit of practicing for a meeting is one of the only ways 
you’ll know how you sound. You anticipate reactions and then you practice how to reply.  
As with agendas, the degree to which you need to practice will vary depending on the 
importance of the meeting. A big presentation with the CEO should be practiced a lot. A 
daily meeting with your boss will require less, but it’s still a good idea if there are issues that 
might be difficult to discuss or if you’re unsure how you might say it. For a big meeting, I 
might book the meeting room the day before so that I can practice in the same environment 
as much as I need to. For a simple phone call with my boss, I might stand at my desk and 
talk through the agenda once or twice to build my confidence. You have to decide how much 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
19 
practice is needed to make sure you have the mental capacity you need to be articulate in the 
moment.  
Overall, hearing yourself say things out loud gives your words new meaning, commits them 
to memory, and is the perfect testing environment. Practicing for a meeting is the usability 
test of being articulate: you get to run through everything and make sure it all works as 
expected. If not, there’s still time to tweak it before the meeting starts. So regardless of the 
importance, always practice your meetings. 
“Practicing for a meeting is the usability test of being articulate.” 
 
Prep Everyone 
Finally, before you head to the conference room have a short huddle with everyone involved 
in your support network. Review the agenda, go through each point, and note the items that 
are of importance. Ask people to jump in at specific points and make sure there isn’t anything 
missing. This is a great opportunity for a peer to check your work and make sure you’re on 
the right track to getting your designs approved. It also ensures that everyone is on the same 
page, knows their part, and is ready to help you be articulate. It doesn’t need to be long. 
Even just 5 or 10 minutes before the meeting will do, but it will help you and your peers to 
be prepared to present and respond.  
 
Remember that the main purpose of taking so much care to prepare for discussing design 
decisions is to reduce the cognitive load both for your stakeholders and for you. Just as we 
would approach the usability of a design, our meetings have the same opportunity for 
refining what people see, optimizing the flow of the conversation, and testing our 
assumptions before it all begins. When our stakeholders have the mental capacity to focus on 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
20 
the most important decisions, we’re far more likely to have conversations that are productive 
and helpful for the user experience. When we ourselves have the mental capacity to be free 
from remembering the agenda, we too can focus more on being articulate and carefully 
respond to feedback.  
If you find your meeting happening exactly as you expected, that’s a good sign that you did 
your homework and are well-prepared to defend your design decisions. Allow it to build 
your confidence in the moment because confidence, too, will help you be articulate and give 
you the perspective you need to really listen to the feedback that’s about to come. 
 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 1 
Chapter 5 
Listening is Understanding 
 
“No man ever listened himself out of a job.” 
– Calvin Coolidge 
Now that you’ve prepared yourself to present your designs and anticipated what the 
response will be, you have the opportunity to actually meet face-to-face with the people that 
have influence over the project. This is where our skill at communicating really begins, but 
not because of anything that we say. The first thing we have to do is listen.  
Listening is an important skill for every relationship and it’s no different when discussing 
design decisions. Listening isn’t just waiting for the other person to stop speaking so that we 
can begin our response. The whole purpose of careful listening is to make sure we 
understand our stakeholders before responding.  
A proper and articulate response requires that we use implicit skills like: listening without 
interrupting, hearing what they’re not saying, uncovering the actual problem they’re trying 
to solve, and then pausing before moving on. We also must use more explicit techniques like 
taking notes, asking questions, and repeating or rephrasing what was said. These tactics 
allow us to outwardly demonstrate that we understand what they’re saying. Since most 
stakeholders don’t speak our UX jargon, we must listen closely for the clues that will help us 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2 
attach their words to our designs and when we respond, we need to use language that will be 
effective for everyone. We want to understand exactly what they’re saying so that we can 
form the best response.  
 
Implicit Activities 
Implicit listening is applying skill in understanding what people are saying without 
outwardly doing anything specific to demonstrate that we hear them. An implicit listener is 
one who can quickly organize what’s being said and derive meaning without any other 
external clues or further information. For the purpose of listening to design feedback, I’d like 
to highlight four ways we can implicitly mine stakeholder feedback to get at the core 
information we need to respond.  
 
Let Them Talk 
The first thing you should do is to let them talk as much as they want without interrupting. 
That’s right, allow your stakeholders to say as much as they need to and don’t cut them off. 
People like to hear themselves talk and they need enough space and time to be sure they’ve 
expressed themselves without feeling rushed.  
It can be difficult not to interrupt them, especially if they’re saying things we know to be 
incorrect or uninformed. Besides, we also like to hear ourselves talk! It’s difficult to hear 
someone talk about your design work without feeling the urge to jump in and contribute 
your own ideas. After all, it’s your design they’re talking about but don’t stop them. It is to 
your advantage to let them finish first.  
The are a variety of reasons why people need to talk so much. Some people just want to 
sound smart in public. It may be that there are other people in the room they’re trying to 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
3 
impress. As I mentioned in chapter 3, you never know what sort of politics are at play. Other 
people are audible learners and so the process of talking about something helps them 
understand it. In fact, because design can be so difficult to talk about (especially for non-
designers) the process of talking through one’s thoughts may allow stakeholders to arrive at 
their opinions over time. They may even eventually explain your design to themselves in the 
process without you having to say a word. Whatever the reason, allow your stakeholders to 
say their piece before moving on.  
There are three main benefits to letting them talk as much as they want:  
1. They will make themselves more clear - as people talk, they naturally repeat 
themselves and rephrase what they mean in an effort to communicate clearly. Since 
your job is to be sure you understand exactly how they see your designs, it’s critical 
that you give them the space they need to describe them. Not everyone knows the 
vocabulary to use when discussing design and it may take them a few tries to fully 
express themselves.  
2. It gives them confidence that they were understood - the more people are able to say 
what they need to get a point across, the more confidence they’ll have that they did just 
that. You want your stakeholders to know that they communicated effectively so that 
they can’t blame a misunderstanding on their inability to communicate (or your 
inability to listen). Letting them talk gives them room to have that confidence.  
3. It demonstrates that you value what they’re saying - no matter what you say in 
response, allowing stakeholders to talk as much as they want communicates to them 
that you appreciate what they’re saying and you’re listening to every word. When you 
make them feel that way, it builds trust and they’ll be more likely to agree with you 
later if they know they’ve been heard.  
1.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4 
2. While they talk, present yourself as valuing their input by maintaining eye contact and 
nodding your head in agreement. Be sure to listen for specific words they use: jargon 
and terms they prefer when describing your designs. Most people won’t use language 
like UI control, input element, drop list, popover, carousel, or tooltip. Part of your job 
with listening is to figure out what words they’re comfortable using to describe your 
designs so that you can use those terms too when you respond. It will be difficult to 
earn their approval if you’re using a different vocabulary, so be sure to adopt the 
words that they use and also (eventually) find ways to teach them terms that will be 
more effective in the future. We’ll look at this more in the following section, Repeat 
and Rephrase. 
3. Overall, allowing stakeholders to talk freely creates an atmosphere where your 
stakeholders know they can express themselves without being interrupted, which 
makes them more likely to tell you what they think every time. They know that this is a 
safe place for them to express themselves and be heard. 
 
Hear What Isn’t Being Said 
Not everything that our stakeholders say will be immediately clear. Sometimes we have to 
look deeper than their actual words to derive their intended meaning. So another important 
part of listening to your clients and stakeholders is to hear what isn’t being said. You have to try 
to understand both what they’ve expressed out loud, as well as what never came out of their 
mouths. What’s the subtext? What is the elephant in the room that no one really wants to 
mention? Often what people say and what they mean can be two completely different things.  
This might be more important in design than any other field, simply because design is more 
subjective and people aren’t always sure how to express themselves. Further, your 
stakeholders realize this is something that you made. You created it. It’s your baby. They 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5 
may be sensitive to that fact and try to tell you about a problem they see in indirect ways. 
Most commonly, people will respond with questions rather than direct disagreement if this is 
the case. “Oh, that’s interesting. Why did you use the primary call to action here instead of 
the secondary one?” The subtext might actually be that this person thinks the secondary 
CTA is a better choice but they just don’t want to come out and say it that way. Any time 
someone uses the word ‘interesting’ in a response to your designs, that’s a big clue that they 
disagree with your approach. 
As I’ve mentioned before, there are other factors going on in every meeting that we simply 
don’t know about. If one person is being disruptive about something benign, perhaps he’s 
trying to make a point to someone else in the room. Or when your manager didn’t care about 
the dashboard graphs last week but is now suddenly insisting they be changed, maybe she’s 
reacting to the meeting she just returned from with her own boss. We can expect that there is 
often something else going on.   
Polite Paula 
In one of my previous roles, I pitched an idea for a web interface that was a little unusual. 
My manager responded with enthusiasm because she knew I was excited about the idea and 
wanted me to succeed. She was the kind of person who was always supportive. She agreed to 
let me spend only Fridays working on this side project so it didn’t distract me from my 
regular work. For several months, I worked on this new idea and when it was ready I 
brought it to her for feedback. She was so nice but rather than tell me outright that it was a 
disaster, she instead asked me questions about it in a way that showed me the flaws in my 
design. Since it was my pet project, I was naturally a little defensive. I answered her 
questions as best as I could, but in the end it was unclear to me what she wanted me to do. 
Looking back, I realize now that she was just trying to tell me indirectly that she didn’t think 
it was worth pursuing. I would have preferred if she had been upfront with me about it, but I 
couldn’t control how she choose to respond to my work. We have no choice but to hear what 
they’re not saying if we have any hope of knowing the best way to respond.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6 
Discouraging Dan 
At another company, we had a marketing site for an online service that was completely 
broken: bad links, missing images, and outdated copy. It looked like an abandoned house. As 
it turns out, an unusual number of email support questions were related to simple problems 
with this site. I knew the product owner didn’t have the resources re-design it. To me, it was 
low hanging fruit: a simple 5-page brochure site that could quickly be templated and 
updated. Because it really bothered me that the site was broken, I decided to redesign it 
while I was in between projects. My thinking was that functional and improved would be 
better than perfect and delayed. The first design I showed to the product owner was met 
without enthusiasm, “Oh… um, wow Tom. That’s really nice, thank you. It looks much 
better, but you really don’t need to be spending time on this.” I assumed he was just being 
nice. He wasn’t my boss and didn’t have the authority to ask me for help, but the site clearly 
needed some TLC. What could it hurt? I finished the designs, created the pages, and put it 
on a staging server. Again, the product owner wasn’t excited. He appreciated my effort and 
gave me the green light to put in production, but it seemed like he could care less that I had 
done him this favor.  
A few weeks after putting it into production, our group got an email announcing that this 
service was being shut down immediately, the marketing site would be taken offline, and 
existing customers would be given a transition period to find a new service. I can only 
assume that this product owner could not tell me that the service was being discontinued at 
that time. He tried to discourage me from working on the site, but I was not astute enough to 
read between the lines. While I don’t regret the time I invested in it (because I am proud of 
the way it turned out), I could have redirected my effort to something else that may have had 
a bigger impact if I had been skilled enough to hear what wasn’t being said. I should have 
dived deeper to understand his lack of enthusiasm before blindly moving forward on my 
own. These kinds of subtle cues are easy to miss and require a keen understanding of our 
stakeholders. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
7 
 
Uncover the Real Problem 
While you’re listening to your stakeholder’s feedback, be sure to uncover the real problem 
they’re trying to solve. Often, our stakeholders see a need that isn’t being met with our 
designs and they may express it with a suggestion that isn’t the right solution. So don’t focus 
on what they think needs to be changed or the specific words they use, but instead on the 
underlying problem they’re trying to solve by suggesting that change.  
People naturally think in terms of solutions rather than first identifying the problem. Because 
design is visual, it’s much easier to say “Move this button over there” than it is to recognize 
that the problem is the proximity between the button and the date picker. Other times, 
people use vague language simply because they don’t know how to express their reaction to a 
design. When someone says, “There’s way too many colors here! It’s like a rainbow!” what 
they’re actually expressing is, “The number of colors are distracting and I don’t know where 
to look or what’s important.” We can help our clients understand the real problem by asking 
questions and repeating it back to them (in the following sections), but first we have to be on 
the lookout for this situation. 
Reordered Inputs 
A client once asked me to change the order of some text input fields on a form. It was a 
simple request. She just wanted to move some things around but it struck me as odd because 
we had already agreed on the order and the most efficient way for a user to enter the data. 
While simple, her request was contradictory to what we had previously agreed upon. When I 
asked her why, her response was nothing more than an expressed preference: she simply 
preferred that the data be entered in that way. I asked her for an example of another 
application that did this and she sent me the spreadsheet that she gets as an export from the 
system, which she uses to generate reports for her meetings. Now, she didn’t actually think 
that our app needed to look like a spreadsheet; that’s not what she was trying to accomplish. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
8 
But in her explanation she mentioned that the order of the columns in the spreadsheet 
needed to match the data entered in the system. She thought that the way the user entered 
the data in the form would be reflected in the exported file that she would get from a dump 
of the database. She had no idea that we could customize the order of the data in the report 
for her, independent of the user’s input. Had I made the simple change she originally 
requested without question, it would have resulted in a less optimal experience for the user. 
By digging deeper and understanding the real problem she was trying to address, I was able 
to respond and address her concerns without changing the design at all. 
 
My client asked me to change the order of some input fields because she didn’t realize that the 
exported file could be independently ordered from the user’s input.  
 
Duplicate data 
Another project I worked on had a complicated series of forms that were presented to the 
user as multiple steps. Each form could be different based on the options chosen in the 
previous step. First, the user would enter some information about the people in the report 
like name, address, height, and weight and then choose the next form they needed. When 
they chose the second form (the event category in the example below), we decided it was 
best to take them to a completely new page without the whole app navigation because the 
forms were so complex. We wanted the user to focus on the task and not be distracted. On 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
9 
that second form, the user’s previously entered details were plainly visible at the top of the 
view.  
When our client saw it, she said it was fine but the user needed to be able to edit the patient’s 
details on this second form as well as the first. I questioned this because the user had just 
entered that information. Why would they need to immediately change it? Her response was 
confusing: she went on a tangent about a paper government form she was used to filling out, 
she expressed that she didn’t want to train employees that the details had to be entered 
correctly the first time, and that sometimes you might want two different addresses for the 
same person. Paper forms? Training? Duplicate data? None of it made any sense, so I 
pushed back.  
 
This is a simplified version, but in my original design the user moved horizontally from one step to 
the other, but my client expressed frustration at not being able to edit the information from Step 1.  
 
For several meetings, she continued to insist that we allow the user to edit the patient details 
on the second form until finally I began to realize that she saw this app as a digital version of 
the paper form she had mentioned earlier. I had indeed designed it to be similar and she was 
distracted by what she saw as the differences. After some tough choices, we decided that the 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
10 
second form would not load on a new page but would instead simply load inline on the page 
directly below where the user had entered their details. We moved from a horizontal 
progress status to a vertical one. It was effectively still the same, but not having to return to a 
previous step to see their information gave the user a greater sense of control.   
 
The final design allowed the user to move vertically and gave my client a better sense of control over 
entering the data.  
 
When she saw our solution, she agreed it was better and we moved on to the next design. 
Had we made the changes she suggested to begin with (allowing users to edit the same data 
in two places), it would have resulted in a host of other usability problems. Listening to her 
and working hard to uncover the real problem she was trying to solve helped ensure that we 
maintained a better user experience.   
In summary, the visual nature of design naturally lends itself to changes in those visuals in 
order to accomplish the desired result. People make suggestions on how to change those 
things rather than describe the problem they see. It’s hard for most people to think 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
11 
concretely about and express design problems. They only know that it doesn’t feel right. We 
have to be adept at listening to their solutions and connecting the dots in order to uncover 
the real problem. 
 
The Art of the Pause 
“The right word may be effective, but no word was ever as effective as a rightly timed 
pause.” 
– Mark Twain 
One last implicit listening skill is mastering the art of the pause: when you think they’re done 
talking, just wait. Don’t immediately jump in with your response. Instead, pause for several 
seconds (maybe two or three) and allow there to be silence, however uncomfortable that 
might seem. This can actually be a little awkward, especially on a conference call or video 
chat where there are frequently delays and they may not be able to tell if you’ve dropped off. 
(My own clients commonly ask if I’m still on the line, unsure if I was disconnected.) But 
whether you’re on a call or face-to-face, it’s worth risking the awkwardness to be sure that 
your stakeholder is finished talking and that there is a small gap in the discussion.  
The purpose of the pause is three-fold:  
• 
First, you want to be sure they’re actually done talking. Make sure they haven’t just 
paused themselves. Sometimes people stop and then immediately think of something 
else or a better way of saying it. If there’s a better way for them to give you their 
feedback, you will want to hear it because people don’t always express it correctly the 
first time. Give them a chance to be articulate themselves. They need to feel good 
about what they said so they can’t blame a misunderstanding on poor wording.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
12 
• 
Second, it gives you a chance to let the air settle; to let their words sit on everyone’s 
ears for just a moment. You’re letting the conversation simmer briefly, which gives you 
a chance to very quickly consider how to respond. You’re not jumping directly into a 
defensive posture, but instead taking a moment to consider what was said and form an 
appropriate response. Just these few seconds of waiting will make you much more 
prepared to respond. 
• 
The third (and most important) benefit to pausing is that you communicate to the 
other person that what they said is important enough for you to really consider it and 
think about it. Since you didn’t jump directly to a conclusion that might conflict with 
theirs, you create a sense that what they just said was really valuable. People want to 
be heard (or at least to feel heard) and pausing gives you a chance to show them that 
you take their feedback seriously. If the silence is too deafening for you, say something 
like “I hear what you’re saying. Let me think about that for a second.”  
All of these implicit listening skills should establish a framework for how you see and hear 
your stakeholder’s feedback. As you listen to them, you’re making a conscious, non-verbal 
effort to truly understand what they mean. These internalized activities allow you to better 
organize your thoughts so that you can find the most effective response.  
 
Explicit Activities 
In addition to the internalized activities we use to listen to design feedback, there are also 
several explicit activities we can use to improve listening. Explicit listening includes verbally 
demonstrating that you’re listening, as well as doing things that outwardly show you are 
engaged in the conversation. For design meetings, taking notes, asking questions, and 
repeating back or rephrasing what they say are all important ways to effectively listen to our 
stakeholder’s feedback.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
13 
 
Write It All Down 
The first thing you need to do to listen is to take notes. You’re not going to remember 
everything your stakeholders say or suggest. One of the best ways to listen to them is to 
write down what they say. Record everything, especially the items that need to be followed 
up on. Even in smaller meetings, it’s important to write down what was discussed and save it 
somewhere. I’ve already recommended writing things down and taking notes at different 
stages of the process, so always have a way to take notes in your meetings. You might never 
reference your notes after the meeting, but that’s ok. Taking notes is more than just having a 
place to record what was said.  
Notes prevent you from having the same conversation again 
The fact is, taking notes is the only way you’re going to remember what was discussed and 
create a history that will help you avoid the same conversations again in the future.  I’ve 
found that a lack of notes is frequently responsible for miscommunications, repeat 
conversations, and changing requirements on many projects. Having notes avoids the re-
work that will prevent you from being successful in communicating about your designs.  
When it comes to design, notes are critical because opinions and ideas about the right 
decision will change over time. If you don’t have notes, you don’t have a paper trail to 
understanding what logic went into the original decisions. You only have “he said, she said” 
and a bunch of re-hashed conversations. When design decisions are made verbally in a 
meeting, it can be nearly impossible to remember later why that decision was made. 
Additionally, there may be team members who aren’t present at the meeting. Having notes 
helps you to quickly bring them up to speed without re-counting the entire meeting.  
I am, admittedly, not the best at keeping my notes organized, but I do keep them and there 
have been multiple occasions when we chose a path for a specific interaction that was called 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
14 
into question after the public release. “Hey, why did we do it this way?” I was able to find 
my notes from months earlier and follow up with everyone and even remind them of the 
person who suggested the change, why, and the date. When you can do that, it usually shuts 
down the conversation, saves everyone time, and allows you to move on. With detailed 
information like that, you can either address the problem and discuss a better solution or 
remember that the decisions was right the first time and move on.  
Notes free you to focus on being articulate 
For the same reasons discussed in chapter 4, writing things down reduces your cognitive 
load and frees your mind to focus on being articulate in your response. Once it’s written, you 
don’t have to think about it any more. If you allow all their ideas and feedback to float freely 
through your brain, you’ll have a difficult time organizing their suggestions in a way that will 
yield the best response. Write down what they’re saying so you can take the next step and 
form your responses without needing to actively recall everything they said from memory.  
Notes build trust with your stakeholders 
Another benefit to taking notes is that just the act of writing things down will make you look 
attentive, smart, and as a result, more articulate! Taking notes makes you look like a good 
communicator. It makes the other person feel valued because you care enough about what 
they said to write it down. This gives them confidence that you heard what they said and 
you’re planning to follow through.  
When people have that impression of you, they do a much better job of listening to and 
considering your own response later. It’s a shared respect that goes both ways. As a result, I 
often use note taking as a way to tell people I’m listening and bring out the best in the 
discussion even if I disagree with their suggestion. Verbally saying something like, “Oh, I see 
your point. Let me write that down” earns trust and shows that you’re a safe person to talk 
to.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
15 
I don’t mean to suggest that you should write things down that you have no intention of 
following up on only to make the other person feel good. Taking notes can create a positive 
perception, but you shouldn’t be disingenuous. For instance, if I’m not sure I really want to 
do what that person is suggesting, I might write it down but leave a question mark next to it 
so that I can follow up later. Taking notes is more than just remembering what was decided. 
It has intrinsic value above and beyond what you will actually do with the notes after the 
fact. 
Notes keep the meeting on-track 
Writing things down is also a great way to make sure your meeting stays focused by giving 
you a place to record parts of the conversation that get off topic. People will think of just 
about anything in a design meeting and it’s easy for it to get derailed by something that isn’t 
the core focus.  
Let’s say you’re showing the homepage to discuss the interaction on the category menu, but 
when your boss notices that the login form is messed up suddenly the meeting is headed in a 
different direction. Since you’re taking notes, you can suggest delaying the discussion on the 
login form since that’s not the purpose of the meeting. “Yeah, I noticed the login form this 
morning too. Let me make a note of that and I will follow up right after this meeting, but for 
now let’s stay focused on the category menu.” Taking notes gives you a natural place to put 
stuff that might otherwise be distracting. 
Writing things down feels more permanent than only saying it out loud. It gives them a sense 
of security that the thing they said was important and will not be discarded.  
 
Taking Better Notes 
The best way to take notes is to ask another person to do it for you. This frees up your brain 
to be focused on listening and being articulate. If you’re trying to write down what people 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
16 
are saying, you’ll miss important parts of the conversation because things can move quickly. 
If you don’t have the authority to tell someone else to take notes for you, find a note buddy 
who is willing to help. Offer to swap note taking responsibilities at each other’s meetings. It 
could even be someone from a different department or project; any willing person who can 
be trusted to capture the conversation. You might also consider recording audio or video of 
the meeting, but I’ve found that I rarely have time to review the video afterwards in order to 
re-capture lost notes. The best practice is to write down what people say so you have an 
immediately accessible history to reference, even if you do it yourself.   
To get the most of your notes from a design meeting, they should be:  
• 
Accessible: store your notes in a place that everyone can access. As we will see in 
chapter 9, following up with your notes afterwards is an important part of the process. 
Here in the meeting, you just need to be sure that everyone can see or has access to 
them. This might be a wiki page in your project’s repo, a separate page on your design 
mockups, or a shared folder or document. Make sure that your notes are always 
available to everyone on the team, even during the meeting itself.   
• 
Organized: Write your notes within each agenda item so that it stays connected to the 
design in question. Usually, this would be by page, UI control, or interaction - attach 
your notes to one specific thing. I usually create a bullet list of notes under each 
agenda item as the meeting progresses.  
• 
Specific: Write down the names of people who make the suggestion you’re noting, as 
well as the names of people who agree or disagree. This is not always an exact science, 
but something as simple as “Cynthia suggests changing the color, Brian isn’t sure” This 
comes in useful later when trying to remember who was responsible for suggesting the 
change.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
17 
• 
Definitive: When a decision is made, make that explicitly clear so that you can find it 
later if you need to remember it: “Final: drop down control should be a popover 
menu.” Items that are still undecided should also be marked so that you can follow up 
on it later. I add a question mark to anything pending a decision: “Reconsider 
placement of sort options (?)” 
• 
Actionable: Be sure that nearly every item has a follow up action or person associated 
with it. Writing down ideas is useful, but if there’s no action there is almost no point, 
“To do: update prototype w/ new control” or better “Chad to update prototype w/ new 
control.” If there is a lot of follow-up to be done, it might be useful to create a separate 
section in your notes just for follow-up to be sure you don’t miss it in the list of other 
notes. I often create a separate heading below the agenda called Follow-Up. 
• 
Referenced: Add links, urls, screen shots, or other reference material to your notes so 
that it’s easier to communicate what the point of the discussion was. When people 
suggest other websites or apps as a reference, add that information so you can 
remember the conversation. Without references, it will be difficult to remember what 
you meant by “See how SocialApp does it.” Adding screen shots or urls inline with the 
agenda makes your notes much more valuable long-term. 
• 
Forward-Looking: Aside from the agenda items that you need to cover right away, 
there are always other design decisions that will come up during the course of the 
conversation. You need a place in your notes to add items to be discussed at the next 
meeting, or in a different context. I do this by simply adding a new heading in my 
notes called “Next Meeting” Having this real-estate set aside gives me a place I can 
quickly organize discussion that might be off-topic and note it for the next time 
around.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
18 
• 
To summarize, taking notes is a critical part of listening to stakeholders. It’s important 
to write things down so that we have a history of what was decided and avoid having 
the same conversation twice. But more than just a place to record our decisions it also 
allows us to focus more on being articulate in our response because we no longer have 
to re-think everything that was said previously. With our notes in hand, it’s much 
easier to go through each piece of feedback and prepare the best response. Regardless 
of the size or importance of the meeting, always take notes.  
 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
19 
I don’t always take good notes, but when I do they’re Accessible (Google Docs), Organized, Specific, 
Definitive, Actionable, Referenced, and Forward-Looking! 
 
Ask Questions 
The challenge with talking about design to stakeholders is that they often don’t know the 
right words to say to communicate their meaning. In the same way that we designers have 
difficulty expressing our decisions to them, they too have difficulty expressing their own 
thoughts to us. And so much of listening is just about getting the other person to talk. We 
need to pull the words out of them that will help us do our job better. It’s not usually enough 
to just allow someone to say their piece and then move on. Some people will have plenty to 
say that is difficult to interpret while others won’t have much to say at all. We have to get 
them talking more, to say it in a different way, and to express their thoughts more carefully. 
The way that we do that is by asking good questions.  
Here are a handful of common questions that are useful to ask in any situation to get people 
talking more and help you understand their suggestions or feedback:  
• 
What problem are you trying to solve? - Like the previous section, it’s ok to be direct 
if it’s not clear what they’re trying to accomplish with their suggestions. Just ask them 
outright.  
• 
What are the advantages of doing it this way? - This gives them a neutral way of 
explaining why they think their suggestion is better without explicitly labeling one as 
better than the other. Allowing them to express these differences will reveal a lot about 
why they think that is the right solution. 
• 
What do you suggest? - Often stakeholders will say something needs to change 
without any idea about how that will be done. While our job is to find the solution, 
giving them an opportunity to propose something helps us understand their needs and 
gives them some context to realize the difficulty of the problem.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
20 
• 
How will this affect our goals? - Stakeholders often have our goals in mind, but they 
don’t always realize how what they’re saying is connected to them. You want them to 
directly connect your designs to the goals every time. Often, just the process of 
answering this question helps them see why their suggestion won’t work as well as 
they thought.  
• 
Where have you seen this before? - Asking for reference material (other apps and 
websites) is one of the best ways of seeing their perspective. The point isn’t to suggest 
that their idea won’t work if it doesn’t exist already, but to find out if it’s rooted in a 
known design pattern from some other app or website.  
The main purpose of asking questions is to get your stakeholders to explain what they mean 
so that you can be sure you understand. Asking questions also has benefits beyond simply 
getting the other person to clarify what they mean. Even if you already understand what the 
other person is trying to say, asking good questions shows that you’re listening. By repeating 
back to them what they said in your words and in the form of a question, you’re reinforcing 
that you understand. This creates more trust. The other person feels respected, valued, and 
understood. Just like letting them talk, they’re much more likely to agree with you later 
when they feel good about being heard now.  
 
Repeat and Rephrase 
“The beginning of wisdom is the definition of terms.”  
― Socrates 
The words we choose to talk about our designs can make or break the conversation. If we 
aren’t using the same vocabulary to talk about our work with other people, there will 
inevitably be misunderstanding, confusion, and missed expectations along the way. Our 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
21 
stakeholders don’t always know or use the same words that we do. Finding that common 
ground is a balancing act of meeting them where they are, while also helping them take steps 
in the right direction by teaching them to talk about design. If we’re going to agree on a 
solution, we need to get everyone using a shared vocabulary that facilitates understanding. 
Part of listening is identifying the words our stakeholders use to describe our designs, and 
then repeating it back to them in way that helps everyone get on the same page. 
Rephrase: Convert ‘Likes’ to ‘Works’  
The most important way we can do this is to help our clients move from talking about what 
they like and don’t like (which are their preferences) to what works and what doesn’t (which 
is the effectiveness of the design). It’s too easy for someone to say they simply don’t like 
something. A subjective response like that gives us no way to address their concerns because 
it’s not possible to tell them their opinion is incorrect. We can only have a different opinion.   
Instead, listen for opportunities to convert ‘likes’ into ‘works’. Repeat back what they said by 
rephrasing the statement to focus on effectiveness. You might also consider following up with 
a question to confirm that’s what they intended to communicate or for additional 
clarification. 
For example, “I understand that you want us to move that UI control over there, but why 
doesn’t it work to have it over here?” When people hear their concerns rephrased inside a 
frame of effectiveness, they often recognize that they’re only expressing a personal 
preference. You might still have to deal with managing their request, but at least we’re 
getting to core issue and understanding how to respond to them more intelligently.  
This doesn’t mean we should teach them, correct them, or send them a copy of chapter 12 for 
homework. (Although the latter wouldn’t be a bad idea!) What we should do is re-phrase 
their response in the form of a question that forces them to talk about it in a way that’s more 
helpful. If you’re not sure, ask them directly.  Encourage them to tell you what doesn’t work 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
22 
about your design. This means that you, too, must work hard to strike the word ‘like’ from 
your vocabulary and always place an emphasis on the utility and function of the design. 
Getting our stakeholders to move from discussing their preference to describing the function 
of the application is a key skill in the process of articulating design decisions. The reality is, 
we don’t really care about what our stakeholders like or don’t like (although we could never 
tell them that). With a user-centered design approach, we’re concerned with what does and 
doesn’t work for the user and ultimately for the business. Flipping this switch in the minds of 
our stakeholders can make a big difference in our ability to communicate.  
Repeat: What I Hear You Saying 
Another way to train our stakeholders to communicate more clearly is by repeating back to 
them what they said using words that are more relevant to a discussion of design and UX. 
Since we don’t expect that they’ll know all the ‘right words’ to describe our designs, we have 
to listen to what they’re saying and translate that into a vocabulary that will become our 
common ground. Leading with the phrase “What I hear you saying…” is the best approach 
to accomplishing this because it emphasizes that we are listening to them, understand what 
they said, and will now confirm it by expressing it in our own words. This is an opportunity 
to bridge the language gap: take what they said in their own words and translate it into 
something that will be more helpful in the design decision-making process.  
For example: 
Stakeholder: “I don’t like how these disabled buttons look. I have no idea why they 
don’t work! We should add some help text or a tooltip or something.” 
Designer: “What I hear you saying is that you don’t think a segmented control is the 
best choice in this context because the user won’t understand why the disabled options 
aren’t available to them. Is that right?” 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
23 
 
Why aren’t kittens available? Teaching our stakeholders to call this a segmented control without 
talking down to them can be useful in moving toward a shared vocabulary. 
 
Repeating what our stakeholders say using terms that will be more helpful to the 
conversation is a great step towards a common language without coming across as overtly 
condescending or alienating them for using the wrong words. You have to find the right 
balance of helping them without making them feel silly. 
This is actually something I’ve learned with my kids. The best way to teach them is not to 
correct them directly, but to repeat back what they said in the correct way. When my child 
says, “Gimme that big red thingy!” it’s much more effective to respond “Oh, you’d like this 
measuring cup?” than it is to say, “Silly child, this is a measuring cup! And ‘thingy’ isn’t even 
a real word! Ask for it using the right words and then I’ll give it to you.” My child isn’t 
ignorant. She just lacks the vocabulary to describe what seems to me like everyday objects. 
Our stakeholders aren’t to be treated like children just because they don’t use the same 
words we do. Instead, we can help them be more effective by repeating words that are more 
useful back to them.  
Here are some example of how you might craft your responses in a way which introduces 
stakeholders to a shared vocabulary:  
 
Stakeholder: “That button needs to be moved over here.” 
Designer: “We purposefully placed the call to action above the fold.” 
 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
24 
Stakeholder: “That arrow is too difficult to see.” 
Designer: “The disclosure is meant to be subtle so it doesn’t distract from the content.” 
 
Stakeholder: “This menu is hard to use.” 
Designer: “We’re using the system’s native droplist, but we could design a custom 
control.” 
Remember that an important part of listening is rephrasing and repeating back what our 
clients have said so that we can confirm we’re on the same page and have a solid 
understanding of the best way to respond.  
 
Let’s review what it looks like to listen to stakeholder’s design feedback. We cannot 
communicate effectively with them unless we listen to them and fully understand what 
they’re saying. There are several implicit ways we listen, such as letting them talk as much as 
they need to, trying to hear what isn’t being said, and working to uncover the real problem 
they’re addressing. After that, pause for a few seconds to be sure they’ve finished talking. But 
there are also several explicit skills we can apply to be better listeners of design feedback. We 
take good notes by writing down what was decided. We ask questions to clarify and tune our 
understanding. And we repeat and rephrase what stakeholders say to help establish a shared 
vocabulary and common ground. All of these things help us be better listeners, understand 
what is being communicated and allow us to form the best response. You might think it’s 
time to tell them what you think now, but it’s not. First, we have to get in the right frame of 
mind.   
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 1 
Chapter 6 
The Right Frame of Mind 
 
“First learn the meaning of what you say, and then speak.” 
– Epictetus 
You’ve poured your soul into these designs. You’ve taken all this time to think about your 
stakeholder’s perspective. Plus, you just spent the better part of your mental capacity 
listening to them talk about why your designs don’t work as well as you think they do. It 
would be tempting (even logical) to think that you’re cleared now to launch into an epic 
speech about usability and wax eloquent on design patterns and data, but you’re not. Before 
you go to the point of no return, you have to get into the right mindset. You have to put on 
an attitude that will help you speak smoothly and get what you want. It requires you to give 
up control, check your ego at the door, and always lead with a yes. More than that, 
preparing to respond is about learning to be charming and avoiding replies that will only 
hurt your efforts. Once you’re in the right frame of mind, you can set up your response by 
following a pattern called Thank, Repeat, Prepare. The purpose of this chapter is to make 
sure you are mentally prepared to take on the responsibility of using your own words to win 
people over. It requires a bit of mental exercise in order to craft an effective response.   
 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2 
Give Up Control 
If you’re familiar with twelve-step programs that help people overcome addiction, then the 
first step is appropriate in our relationship to our designs too. The first step to recovery is 
admitting you’re not in control.1 No matter what we may think, we don’t usually have the final 
say when it comes to our designs. We have a significant amount of input into the process, but 
at the end of the day there is always someone else who can overrule us. There may even be a 
whole team of people who disagree with our proposed solutions! We’d like to think that we 
can design whatever we want, but we’re naturally limited by those in authority over us. 
There are other people involved, whether that’s our team or an individual executive. The 
sooner you realize this, the sooner you’ll see how important it is for you to learn to influence 
people with your words. You can’t force them to agree with you. You have no choice but to 
find a better way. 
Even if we could, would we really want to get our way every time without needing the 
approval of others? Would we even want to have the authority to design something against 
the better judgment of our peers? It would be incredibly unsatisfying as a designer to know 
that no one else agreed with us and yet we still chose to go our own way. The whole purpose 
of user experience design is to create something that’s useful, in fact delightful, for the widest 
possible audience. What sort of enjoyment would we get from an experience that everyone 
else around us thinks is terrible? That’s no way to live a designer’s life and as much as it can 
be difficult dealing with feedback from other people, the approval of and appreciation from 
the people on our team is actually far more rewarding in the long-term. 
This is why letting go of our designs is a healthy thing. We create it, we give it life and 
influence its direction, but then it has to grow up and go out into the world on its own. Once 
we show it to someone else, it is no longer only ours to cherish and coddle. When we share 
                                                
1 The twelve steps were originally published in the 1939 book, Alcoholics Anonymous: The Story of How 
Many Thousands of Men and Women Have Recovered from Alcoholism but have been adapted and used in 
many different substance abuse and addiction recovery programs. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
3 
our designs with other people, we are letting them into our world and allowing them to 
influence our process. The parallels to parenting are not lost on me.  
The hardest part of listening to design feedback from a non-designer is letting go. When we 
recognize that we don’t have ultimate control over the final outcome, we make a mental shift 
that exposes just how much we need to communicate well in order to maintain the sanity of 
the user experience. Letting go of control creates an emotional release where you can keep 
your wits about you and not take everything so personally.  
What does that look like in practice? It’s nothing more than taking on the attitude that your 
work is not your own. It’s making the simple recognition that you can’t control everything. 
It’s admitting that you need help from other people to create the best experience. It’s a 
mental practice of taking two steps back, getting out of your bubble, and walking around to 
the other side of the table to sit with your stakeholder. Armed with empathy for their 
perspective, it becomes much more natural to allow their feedback to exist separate from 
your own personal interests. If you can convince yourself of those things, then you’ll be in a 
healthier place to talk about your designs with others. You cannot respond unless you’ve first 
learned to let go. 
 
Check Your Ego at the Door 
Getting in the right frame of mind is also about remembering to check your ego at the door. 
We have to separate ourselves from our own ideas and ambitions in a way that allows other 
people to inform the project without being blind to their suggestions. We can’t think that 
we’re the only ones with good ideas, that we have all the best solutions, or that there is only 
one way (our way) to accomplish the goals. Our egos can get in the way of our ability to 
respond to stakeholders effectively. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4 
There is a tension here, though.  Our expertise in design suggests that we should be 
recommending the best solutions. We do want our stakeholders to understand us and trust 
that we know what we’re talking about. They should know that our expertise and 
recommendations are to be taken seriously. We want to convince them that we’re right but at 
the same time, we can’t actually believe that our ideas are the only way. There’s a delicate 
balance between believing that we have the best ideas, while also recognizing that they aren’t 
the only ideas. The challenge is to make solid recommendations while also separating yourself 
from your ego and taking seriously the suggestions and ideas of other people. This is hard to 
do.   
The difficulty with ego is that it’s almost impossible to see in yourself. That’s the reason it’s a 
problem to begin with. If everyone could easily recognize when they’re being egotistical, the 
world would be a much simpler place to navigate. The red flag to look for is when you find 
yourself thinking that your solution is so much better that you don’t see any value at all in the 
other person’s suggestion. In normal, healthy discussions, you can usually see the value of 
what the other person is saying even if you disagree. When your ego is getting in the way, 
that value is lost. Any time you think that you’re right and they’re wrong, you should be 
cautious. It doesn’t mean you have to agree with them, it only means that you may need to 
re-evaluate the situation. 
When our egos are preventing us from seeing the value of other ideas, it will manifest itself in 
the form of excuses for why the other person’s suggestion is not valid. For example, “they 
don’t understand technology,” “they’re old,” “they’re not our target user,” or “they don’t 
know anything about design.” When you start excusing other people’s ideas with glib 
stereotypes or by writing off their expertise, there’s a good chance your ego is to blame. Be 
on the lookout for these kinds of subtle reactions in your own mind and find a better way to 
position yourself so that you can form the best response. If the only logic for disagreeing with 
someone else’s suggestion is “they don’t understand my job…” you’re not going to be able to 
build your case on that kind of generic (and egotistical) assumption. By removing your ego, 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5 
you create the space you need to form a response that will be based in reality and logic 
instead of opinion and stereotypes. Removing your ego makes you less defensive and 
therefore better prepared to respond appropriately.  
 
 
Arrogance Killed the Interface Star 
Early in my career, I led a design team at a medium-sized company that 
provided electronic payment services to small businesses. The company 
offered a terminal-based system for customers to manage their accounts. 
It was expensive and clunky, so they decided to move to a web 
application. This was a big deal! The web version would be cheap and 
simple to use by comparison. In fact, the old system was so terrible that 
anything would have been an improvement. It’d be pretty hard to screw 
this up, I thought. 
 
One of the first things we decided on was the resolution. (Yeah, I know 
how weird that sounds today.) At the time, a lot of people had 1024×768 
pixel screens, designers had 1,200+, but some people were still stuck with 
old 800x600s and even a few with 640×480. I made the decision that we 
would design for 1024×768 because ‘most people should have a larger 
screen by now’. It seemed like a reasonable choice: it wasn’t as large as 
my own screen, but it wasn’t the smallest either. A sort of middle ground. 
 
Another designer (who was much more experienced than I was) 
suggested we go with 800 pixels since we were dealing with small 
companies who were unlikely to have new machines. But my arrogance 
got in the way. I wanted the application to look good and an 800 pixel 
width was just too limiting for me. I even remember joking, “If anyone 
still has an 800 pixel screen, they don’t deserve to use it”, but there was 
more truth to my attitude than I’d like to admit. And so, we designed the 
entire app for an 1024 pixel fixed width.2 Can you see where this is 
going? 
 
We released the app with plenty of internal fanfare. We didn’t do any 
                                                
2 At the time, a lot of the web was shifting from being 100% fluid width to being fixed because designers 
were discovering that they could have much more control over how their content looked if they gave 
everyone the same width. My how times have changed! 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6 
usability testing. In fact, we didn’t really change the overall experience at 
all. We just took the terminal app field-for-field and put it into an HTML 
form. But anyway, the app was released and we could all pat each other 
on the back. 
 
Later during a follow up call, one of the salespeople was enthusiastic. It 
was so much better than the old system (high fives!), but it had really 
been a hassle for customers to scroll ‘sideways’ to see all of the fields… 
Wait, what? That’s right, sideways scrolling. He didn’t even suggest it was a 
flaw with the design. As is common in usability testing, users tend to 
blame themselves. “It’s too bad. If only our customers had more modern 
computers.” However, it was a major design flaw that adversely affected 
the productivity of pretty much everyone that used it. And so we went 
back to redesigning the app for an 800 pixel screen. 
 
This took place during a time when user-centered design was brand new 
to web designers, but I still see situations like this today. Well-meaning 
individuals are so invested in their work, they make decisions at the 
expense of their users. My mistake cost our company real time and 
money, not to mention the hassle and credibility from our clients. 
Hopefully you can learn from my mistake and check your ego at the 
door. 
 
 
 
Not every design decision will cost you tangible amounts of money but letting your ego get in 
the way has real consequences even if you don’t realize it. Despite learning from my own 
mistakes, I still find it a daily practice to keep my ego in check. There is no magic pill. It 
takes conscious effort, reminders from your team, and practice. So do your best to check 
your ego at the door. It will allow you to have an open mind and put you in a much healthier 
place to respond to the people who’s support you need to be successful. 
 
Lead with a YES 
One of the biggest barriers to effective communication is when people see each other as 
being on opposite teams. It’s easy for there to be an ‘us versus them’ mentality when 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
7 
discussing design with someone who is not a designer. One of our jobs as good 
communicators is to remember and reinforce that we’re all in this together, headed toward 
the same goals, and with the same level of passion for the product. There is no better way to 
foster this atmosphere of collaboration than to always lead with a YES.  
The concept of leading with a yes was modeled for me by Dave Ferguson, one of the co-
founders of the NewThing Network, a non-profit network of churches and social justice 
organizations whose mission is derived from the passion, charity, and volunteerism of others. 
Dave and I worked together for many years in the suburbs of Chicago and I absorbed much 
of his leadership style into my own routines. Since the beginning of Dave’s leadership, he 
wasn’t often in a position to pay people salaries to accomplish the mission and vision of the 
organizations he leads. Because he relied on donations, he simply couldn’t do everything that 
other stakeholders thought was important to the mission of the organization. Instead, he had 
to learn to influence people with his leadership style and the passion they had to do good 
things for others. When he was first starting out as a pastor, people would come to him with 
great ideas that he wasn’t able to pull off on his own. Rather than turn people away, he chose 
to always deliberately say yes to people who had ideas that might be seem impossible given 
his resources.  
He found that people were more motivated, empowered, and passionate when their ideas 
were given permission to succeed. Even if they didn’t fully accomplish their goal, it was far 
better to empower people to do great things than to shut them down at the outset. Dave says, 
“…we have learned that if we want to be involved in innovative and creative new things, we 
have to ‘lead with a yes.’”3 Dave has been helping other people learn to do this by always 
looking for the opportunity to agree with and empower them with a positive reaction to their 
ideas and suggestions. Dave references an article from Fast Company magazine titled “My 
Greatest Lesson” by Katherine Hudson. In that article she says, “When someone offers you a 
                                                
3 The Big Idea by Dave Ferguson, Jon Ferguson, and Eric Bramlett. Page 180. Used by permission. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
8 
challenge, don’t think of all the reasons why you can’t do it. Instead, say, ‘Yes!’ Then figure 
out how you’ll get it done.” This is the foundational principle for leading with a yes. 
This idea has had a profound effect on the way I communicate to people about design. It 
means to always stay positive and never refuse someone, regardless of the implications their 
suggestion might have on the project. It’s about stating directly that you value the other 
person’s perspective. It’s about being open to new, innovative ideas even if you’re not sure 
they will work. It’s a positive, life-giving word that will change the way you communicate 
about your designs to other people.  
Developing a Yes Reflex 
Leading with a yes means that you always start every response with a positive affirmation of 
the other person’s idea or request. It is a mindset that this person isn’t wrong. They have just 
as much potential for good ideas as you, and they’re a valued part of the process. Dave calls 
this the ‘yes reflex’: 
“Most of us have a no reflex to new and creative ideas that seem impossible. But you 
can change this… the next time someone brings up a new opportunity, make sure the 
first word that comes out of your mouth is yes…The yes mindset gives outrageous, 
seemingly impossible ideas a chance to live and breathe and sometimes be implemented 
in whole or in part.”4 
The purpose of honing your ‘yes reflex’ is not to give in to every request from our 
stakeholders or to just let them have their way with the experience we’ve so carefully crafted. 
Instead, it creates a space where everyone recognizes that we’re all on the same team, 
accomplishing the same goals, and we can work together toward the best solution. As Dave 
writes, it gives you more time to figure it out:  
                                                
4 The Big Idea by Dave Ferguson, Jon Ferguson, and Eric Bramlett. Page 180. Used by permission. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
9 
“Training yourself to have a yes reflex doesn’t commit you to actually implementing 
the idea. Before “Yes” ever commits you to doing something, it actually buys you time 
to figure out how you are going to make it happen. Often we say yes and then take 
time to regroup and consider the opportunity’s potential benefits and liabilities. 
Leading with a yes gives you time to figure out if you can really pull it off… We’re not 
making the case for having no boundaries; we’re describing how innovation happens. 
And innovation happens in places where ‘No’ is seldom heard…”5 
Leading with a yes is much easier when you agree with the other person’s suggestion.  “Yes, 
that’s a great idea. I completely agree that this control should be a text link instead of a 
button.” It’s even easier when the other person can do the work they’re suggesting, like 
another designer on the team. “Yes, let’s make that happen! Please go ahead and update the 
documentation to reflect this new design. Good idea…”   
However it’s not always easy to say yes when you disagree. If you understand the problem 
they’re trying to solve, but you disagree with the solution they propose, then leading with a 
yes might sound like, “Yes, I completely agree with you that we need to re-consider the 
placement of this UI control.” We’re not saying that their precise solution is correct and that 
we will implement it in that way. We’re only agreeing on the problem because it might still be 
possible that another approach will solve it. Further, it leaves the conversation open-ended to 
allow their idea to live in the room for awhile, giving other people the opportunity to 
contribute to a solution. 
Leading with a yes also means finding a way to say no, while actually (verbally) saying yes.  
For instance, the change they’re suggesting will take more time or money than your team has 
and you know it’s not possible even if everyone agrees with the solution. Perhaps there is a 
tradeoff for another feature. In those cases, leading with a yes might sound like,  
                                                
5 The Big Idea by Dave Ferguson, Jon Ferguson, and Eric Bramlett. Page 180. Used by permission. 
Emphasis mine. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
10 
“Yes, I agree that the interaction for add to cart should be updated. With the release 
next week, we will need to postpone implementing the new search template so we can 
get this in. Do you agree?”  
You know that your stakeholders aren’t going to budge on the new search template, but you 
can start the conversation about what needs to happen to move things forward. You’ve 
started off on the right foot and allowed them to participate in the process in a positive way. 
You’re empowering other people to take part in your project at a level that is necessary for 
them to see the realities and decisions in your world. Often, people outside our immediate 
influence simply don’t understand everything that goes into our decisions. Leading with a yes 
invites them to be part of the decision so they can help us navigate the process. This often 
results in them agreeing with our point-of-view.  
“Yes, you’re right that our documentation isn’t where it should be and we need to fix 
that. If you’d be willing to help me oversee that part of the project and audit the 
existing docs, I think we can arrange our priorities to make it happen.”  
It’s a common problem for people to offer ideas without any responsibility. The more 
ownership you propose, the less likely you are to encounter resistance. It’s too easy for 
people on the outside to criticize what they have a limited view of. If you give people the 
chance to be part of the solution, they will either take you up on it or they will decline and 
retract their suggestion. In either case, you’ve remained positive and helped them to see that 
their opinions are valuable and appreciated.  
Sometimes leading with a yes alone can get you the trust you need to move forward without 
even having to discuss it further. Often our stakeholders just want to know that we value 
their time and feedback. I was in a meeting with several people including the president of the 
company. He was very hands-on and wanted to participate in the details of the new 
application we were designing, so we had scheduled a regular design review with him to 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
11 
provide input on the project. During one meeting, he began nit-picking one specific UI 
control: a menu that allowed the user to sort and filter a list of search results. It was an 
important part of the experience, but his feedback evolved from a casual question to very 
specific suggestions about the placement, copy, color, and interaction. While I was happy to 
address his concerns, the details of his feedback seemed misplaced to me. Why would an 
executive care so much about these little details? Rather than get into a discussion about it or 
offer my own opinion, I said “Yes, I agree with you that we need to re-consider the 
implementation of this menu.” Almost abruptly, he stopped, looked directly at me and said, 
“Great, I know you guys will find the right solution. Let’s move on.”  
You see, he didn’t actually want to get into the details of design minutia. In hindsight, he was 
probably “just talking” - he saw something, had a suggestion, and chose to go down the path 
of working with us to make it better. He knew that it wasn’t his job to come up with all that 
stuff. So what seemed at first to be an unusual or concerning series of suggestions was 
actually just a casual conversation. My agreement with him that there was a problem to be 
addressed reminded him that we could be trusted with the solution. He wanted to know that 
we were listening to him and considering his feedback. After that, he was happy to let us do 
our jobs. Leading with a yes reinforced this and let us get on with the meeting.  
As you develop your yes reflex, remember that it:  
• 
Reinforces that you’re all on the same team and facilitates collaboration 
• 
Allows you to be open to new ideas, even if you’re not sure how it will work 
• 
Keeps the conversation open-ended, giving you time to find the appropriate response 
• 
Gives you the opportunity to consider ideas in light of limitations and resources 
• 
Shifts responsibility for new ideas onto others, allowing them to participate in the 
solution 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
12 
• 
Builds trust and confidence with stakeholders that you value their input 
• 
 
 
Be Charming 
One challenge that we designers face in receiving feedback is that we simply don’t have a 
good rapport with non-designers When we go into a stakeholder meeting, we may assume 
the worst, prepare for a battle, and put up our guard to protect us against an onslaught of 
negative feedback. We can get defensive and that is reflected in both our posture and our 
response. Yet the surest way to get what we want (the best possible user experience) is to go 
into the meeting with an attitude that will convey our expertise, so that our stakeholders will 
want to trust us with the decisions. We have to be likable, approachable, and project a sense 
of self that’s appealing to others. In short, we have to learn to be charming.  
Charm is something that can be learned and honed for any relationship, but is equally 
valuable in our interactions with stakeholders. It’s the ability to communicate to other people 
in a way that appeals to their needs and compels them to agree with us. It’s about presenting 
ourselves in a light that reflects our best qualities and demonstrates an earnest effort to show 
an interest in helping the other person. This puts us both on a path toward mutual benefit. If 
you can do that, you’ve mastered the ability to be charming.  
In our relationship with stakeholders, being charming is the best way to assume the attitude 
we need to respond to them appropriately. A grumpy and defensive remark isn’t going to 
woo them into agreement. Instead we can smile with confidence, be authentic, not take 
ourselves too seriously, and orient ourselves towards them.  
Have Confidence 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
13 
The most useful tool you have in being charming is confidence. If you have confidence in 
yourself and your designs, people will trust you and give you the freedom to decide. When 
you lack confidence, you convey uncertainty, which leads stakeholders to question your 
solution. Having confidence is not being arrogant, cocky, or asserting that you’re always 
right. It is allowing the knowledge that your skills are valuable to overflow into your tone, 
body language, and attitude when you talk about your work. Being confident is being proud 
of your work, while also understanding that you’re not the only smart person in the room.  
To build your confidence, consider this: you got this job for a reason. Maybe it was your 
beautiful portfolio, your impressive resume, or your past work experience. Whatever it was, 
your stakeholders chose you for this job. That conveys a certain amount of trust, belief in 
your expertise, and a willingness to let you make decisions. While you should always have to 
work to earn their trust, you’re already in a great position to communicate your message with 
confidence.  
The best way to communicate that confidence is to smile. Most people think of smiling as 
expressing happiness, but smiling expresses a lot of other emotions as well: agreement, 
enjoyment, appreciation, connection, and yes, confidence. When we smile, we show that we 
expect to be in agreement with others, we appreciate their time and attention, and we are 
confident in our ability to solve difficult problems. People without confidence don’t smile, 
they look concerned, worried, upset, or distant. If we want to convey confidence, we must 
smile as much as possible. AJ Harbinger, who runs a coaching business and podcast called 
The Art of Charm, suggests practicing in the mirror, “Smiling makes you look more 
confident and approachable. You should practice this in the mirror, especially if you’re not 
super smiley by nature. Remember that you want to smile with your whole face, not just with 
your mouth.”6  When you’re meeting with stakeholders, make a conscious effort to smile even 
if it feels a little unnatural. Smiling will show your confidence and build theirs in the process. 
                                                
6 A Daily Checklist for Staying Confident 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
14 
What’s interesting is that confidence, in general, has so many benefits and can make a huge 
impact on your success in life, your salary, your relationships, and yes, even your ability to 
communicate to people about your designs. Harbinger adds these points about confidence:7  
• 
Confidence is a self-fulfilling prophecy. For example, children who think of themselves 
as the smartest in the room get the best grades.8 
• 
The same study found confidence had more to do with lifetime earnings than IQ. In 
short, it’s better to be confident than smart. 
• 
Not only can overconfidence make you successful even when you know you’re 
bluffing, it might eventually become just regular old confidence.9 
• Sitting up straight in your chair will increase your overall confidence. This applies to 
posture overall. What’s more, behaving confidently will make you feel more confident 
over time.10 
Just Be Yourself 
A challenge for designers in corporate settings is being authentic: learning to be ourselves 
around stakeholders. No one likes it when they have the feeling that the other person is being 
fake. We are at our best when we are ourselves. We are relaxed, natural, and able to think 
more clearly. Too often, designers put on airs in a meeting. They puff themselves up to 
protect themselves from negative feedback but having that attitude will only backfire. 
                                                                                                                                                                               
http://theartofcharm.com/confidence/daily-checklist-staying-confident/ Used by permission. 
7 A Daily Checklist for Staying Confident 
http://theartofcharm.com/confidence/daily-checklist-staying-confident/ Used by permission. 
8 Confidence as important as IQ in exam success 
http://www.newscientist.com/article/dn17187-confidence-as-important-as-iq-in-exam-
success.html#.U9xQh4BdXv0 
9 Study: Better to Be Confident Than Right 
http://www.cbsnews.com/news/study-better-to-be-confident-than-right/ 
10 Body Posture Affects Confidence In Your Own Thoughts, Study Finds 
http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2009/10/091005111627.htm 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
15 
Instead, use your strengths to your advantage and be confident in your ability to 
communicate.   
Additionally, being yourself helps everyone else relax too. They can relate to you more easily 
when they see you for who you really are. Harbinger notes that being yourself will help other 
people be authentic too because you’ve shown them “that it’s okay to relax and be genuine” 
and it makes people feel good to be around you.11 
Part of what makes us so great as individuals is our own unique way of winning people over. 
Everyone is different, yet everyone has a way with people. What is it that you do to make 
people smile? How do you get someone’s attention if you need to? How did you win the 
heart of your spouse or the class election in grade school? Whatever successes you’ve had in 
the past, now is the time to mine them for meaning and use them to your advantage in 
projecting a persona that is uniquely you.  
Some people are witty or funny. Some are good at hospitality and making people feel 
welcome. Others are great at listening and following-up, giving gifts, paying compliments, or 
remembering important dates. Whatever your thing is, you have an opportunity to use that 
unique gift with the people you want to influence. There is no better way to influence people 
than to use your natural-born tendencies to appeal to the needs of your audience. The point 
is this: relax and be yourself. You’ll be better for it and your stakeholders will appreciate 
your authenticity. Just the act of being ‘normal’ with other people contributes to your own 
unique way of being charming. 
Don’t Take Yourself So Seriously 
One of the biggest killers of any conversation is someone who is so serious about their work, 
their project, or their task that they’re unable to relax and respond with a posture that makes 
them feel human. Sometimes we act like robots: unable to grasp a lighthearted comment or 
                                                
11 How to Be Charming to Women 
http://theartofcharm.com/flirting-and-attraction/charming-women/ Used by permission. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
16 
show simple kindness. When we get in this mode of ‘getting things done’ it can be really easy 
to have tunnel vision and become too focused on what we’re trying to accomplish. That can 
be fine (and really effective) when we’re heads down in our computers creating awesome 
stuff, but it’s much less effective with a group of people that we want to agree with us. When 
you meet with stakeholders, more than any other time during your work, you have to stop 
taking yourself so seriously. Learn to relax and take everything with a good dose of reality: 
not everyone thinks as seriously about your work as you do.  
Another key element to learning charm is finding ways to specifically convey that we’re okay 
with critique of our work. Doing this requires that we be ourselves, as we saw in the 
previous section. It also means that we have to take a step outside of our project and 
remember that the people we work with are human, as we saw in chapter 3. Most of all, 
though, we should be kind, lighthearted, and even funny around the people we want to agree 
with us. Put simply, we need to be likable. 
Using humor is a great way to be likable and exude charm. Humor disarms uneasy situations 
and laughter reduces tension. Breaking the ice with a benign joke or lighthearted comment is 
a great way to get everyone to relax and focus on the purpose of the meeting. Plus, it reminds 
everyone that the decisions we’re making are not life or death.  
However, there’s a delicate balance of knowing what’s appropriate, what’s actually funny, 
and what’s completely off limits. It can be good to poke fun at the elephant in the room, 
especially if everyone is particularly uptight about it. But it’s not okay to focus jokes on one 
specific person, no matter how funny or relevant it might be.  
Harbinger says that humor is a great way to be charming, but that the goal is not to make 
other people laugh. “Focus instead on making yourself laugh. Be self-amusing and have fun 
first, then look to share that enjoyment…  By focusing on having a good time yourself you’ll 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
17 
generate a fun, positive attitude that will infect those around you and make you more 
charming.”12 
It’s not my place to advise you on using humor, but with the right exposure and good inputs 
you can learn to use humor to make people smile, disarm them, and keep the conversation 
moving forward in an upbeat way. The goal of using humor is not to have stakeholders in 
raucous laughter, but to break the ice, help everyone relax, and maintain a good spirit. 
Humor is a solid way to not take yourself too seriously and to be charming with the people 
you work with. 
Orient Yourself Toward Others 
The last skill we need to learn to be charming is to have a posture that is oriented toward 
other people. When we align ourselves with the needs of others, we create a connection that 
can overcome any obstacles to our communication. Harbinger says this is about making 
someone feel as if they are the most important person in the world.13 
The opposite, of course, is being egotistical; only focused on ourselves. Just as we are 
checking our ego at the door, we are also turning our minds to our stakeholders and thinking 
critically about what they need to hear in order to agree with us. It’s not a selfish attempt to 
pander to them to get what we want, but an honest look at how we can talk to them in a way 
that will make them (and us) successful. When we put on an attitude that orients our 
response toward the needs of our stakeholders, we are addressing their concerns in a way 
that (combined with all of these other approaches) turns on the charm and allows them to 
hear our response in the best possible light.  
When I do something to hurt my wife’s feelings I know it may take time for her to forgive me 
so that we can move on. However, I can accelerate that process by being charming. I have 
                                                
12 How to Charm Women with Humor 
http://theartofcharm.com/flirting-and-attraction/charm-women-humor/ Used by permission. 
13 Developing Charisma is Possible 
http://theartofcharm.com/building-a-connection/developing-charisma-possible/ Used by permission. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
18 
confidence that she will forgive me, so I can approach her with a smile and an assumption 
that reconciliation is possible. I can be myself by being honest about my intentions and 
provide my perspective. I also don’t need to take myself so seriously, so I will always break 
the tension with a joke or witty reference to my own stupidity. All the while, my response is 
oriented toward her needs: what does she need from me to reconcile? If I do that, we are 
usually able to move on pretty quickly and focus on the most important things together.  
My six-year-old son is remarkably good at being charming for his age. His younger sister 
loves to play with him so much that she never wants to stop. He’s learned that if he just stops 
playing and walks away, she’ll burst into a fit of tears. So rather than endure that over and 
over again, he’s found ways to redirect, distract, or entice her with other things that meet her 
needs. After they’ve played the same game a dozen times, he doesn’t outright say he’s tired of 
playing with her. Instead, he proposes something more transitional that meets her needs of 
having more play time. I’ve overheard him say things like, “Hey, this is a really fun game but 
I have to go to the bathroom. Let’s take a break for a few minutes and then we can play again 
later! Like after lunch!” Usually, she’s moved on and is occupied with something else after 
he’s returned from the bathroom. He is applying charm through an orientation toward her 
needs.  
Using charm in our response to stakeholders is not really all that different from a marital spat 
or two children playing together. As I mentioned in chapter 2, we are all only more 
experienced children. We have to approach our stakeholders with the same care that we 
would our loved ones. Getting into the right frame of mind requires that we use charm to our 
advantage and are conscious of how to apply it to our conversations. Learning charm is 
critical in our approach to stakeholders. It helps us exert a positive influence and ensures 
that they are working with us to create the best user experience. 
 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
19 
Change Your Vocabulary 
As you make the transition into a mindset that is positively focused on yielding a great 
response to stakeholders, it’s important to commit some things to memory about what you 
should and shouldn’t say in the process. Before you respond, you have to change your 
vocabulary. 
“You’re Wrong” 
Don’t say “you’re wrong” - no one likes to be told they’re wrong (even if they are) and you’ll 
only make them defensive. Remember, your goal is to stay positive and always lead with a 
yes. Even directly telling them you disagree can be a flash point for the conversation. If you 
need to disagree, find ways to communicate that disagreement as an alternate idea or a 
different perspective. While there may be times to put your foot down and explicitly stand up 
for something you believe in strongly, it’s almost always better project yourself as being in 
alignment with the stakeholders as much as possible. Finding those opportunities for outright 
disagreement are difficult and probably not worth the risk.  
“From a Design Perspective…” 
Don’t start any sentence with “From a design perspective…” because that’s usually just 
another way of saying “from my perspective.” Remember, we don’t care about your 
perspective; we care about the user’s perspective. Plus, this just sounds like you’re trying to 
one-up them with your expertise in design. While your expertise and perspective is indeed 
valuable, it’s not usually necessary to point it out. Our stakeholders understand that what we 
say is our perspective. Sometimes we use this phrase to mean “the reason we did it this 
way…” If that’s the case, then say that. You do not want to create a separation between your 
expertise and that of the stakeholders. We’re all on the same team. “From a design 
perspective…” doesn’t reinforce that, so strike it from your vocabulary. 
“Like” and “Don’t Like” 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
20 
Don’t talk about what you like or don’t like but instead focus on what works and what 
doesn’t work. Remember, our interest is in the usability and effectiveness of the application, 
not our own personal preferences. In fact, remove the word “like” from your vocabulary 
altogether. If you catch yourself saying it or asking other people what they like, stop and 
correct yourself. It will be worth emphasizing that you shouldn’t have used “like” to begin 
with.  
This is more difficult if you’re discussing the visual design of an application, rather than 
specific flows or general usability. Visual design matters less to the utility of an application, 
but it conjures a lot of opinions about what looks good and what doesn’t. A lot of people are 
visual and the specific look and feel of those UI elements will be front and center. If the 
express purpose of the meeting is to review the visual design, you still need to find ways to 
communicate why you think the visuals work or don’t work, rather than why you like or 
don’t like them. For instance, because specific colors and styles contribute to the user 
experience, you can keep your comments focused on how the visuals affect branding, 
perception, or emotion. Hopefully the visual design of the UI is defined by branding 
guidelines, a documented design language, other existing applications, or a style guide. Even 
if that’s not the case, keep in mind that our purpose is to make sure the user experience is 
consistent, thoughtful, and delightful. A rightful focus on avoiding the word ‘like’ will help us 
be effective in our response.  
Too Much Jargon 
Finally, avoid using industry-specific jargon as much as possible. Instead, find words that the 
average person can understand to ensure that we’re all on the same page. It is easy in our UX 
designer bubble to become accustomed to referring to specific processes (Agile, scrum, 
sprints), tools (Git, Bootstrap, Axure), or elements (accordion, CTA, modal). Many 
stakeholders don’t share in our design-web-app culture of vocabulary, so before we respond 
we have to take the time to filter our response for words that might be unclear. Instead, use 
the knowledge you have from listening to them and adopt the words that you heard them use 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
21 
in chapter 5. This is your opportunity to repeat and rephrase what they said in an effort to 
both communicate clearly, as well as teach them to talk about design too but you can’t start 
off by using words that are unfamiliar. Always be cognizant of the vocabulary you use and 
make sure it’s something your stakeholders will understand.  
 
Making a Transition 
Now that you’re in the right frame of mind, you need to provide a transition to your response 
that will set you up for success. This transition will set the stage for everything you’re about 
to say and help determine exactly how your stakeholders listen to you. You have the 
opportunity to get their attention and let them know what to expect. It’s critical to ensuring 
that your stakeholders listen to and accept your response in the best possible light. This is the 
response before the response.  
However you decide to structure the actual response, remember to keep this transition brief. 
The point is to provide a transition only, not a long introduction. I recommend a simple 
approach called Thank, Repeat, Prepare. Each of these three things should be part of one 
quick statement. 
Thank 
The first thing you should always do is thank them for the feedback they just provided. It’s 
the most polite way to get from what they said to what you want to say and it recognizes that 
their time is both valuable and appreciated. We always want our stakeholders to know how 
much we appreciate their time and attention. They’re the reason we’re so fortunate to have 
this incredible job! So very briefly form a word of thanks as you start this transition. 
Repeat 
Next, briefly summarize what they just said if you haven’t already. I don’t mean that you 
should go over each point line by line from your notes. Instead, make a statement that 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
22 
describes what they’ve just done for you in a way that is flattering and complimentary. This 
will naturally build off of the ‘thanks’ that you’ve already led with and remind them that you 
were listening.  
Prepare 
Lastly, tell them that you’re about to respond to their feedback. Perhaps it seems obvious 
(and it is) but the transition is meant to provide a segue for everyone. However unnecessary 
it might seem, setting the stage in this way will create the right kind of vibe and prepare them 
to listen to and absorb what you’re about to say.   
It’s not enough to just tell them that you’re going to respond. You need to give them some 
insight about the content of your response. You’re foreshadowing what’s to come. You 
should tell them not only that you’re going to respond, but how and what you plan to say. 
This is an opportunity to let the cat out of the bag, to clue them in as to what your feedback 
will be to make sure there are no surprises. You’re trying to avoid beating around the bush, 
be direct, and get straight to the point.  
For example: 
“Thanks for sharing your thoughts with us about this project. Your 
insights are really valuable and I appreciate you going through all that 
with us. I’m going to go back through all of your points so we can discuss 
them, but I want you to know that some of the things we decided on have 
an explanation that I think you’ll agree with once we start talking about 
it.”  
“Thank you for sharing your feedback. I appreciate the opportunity to go 
through all of this with you because it’s important for us to be on the 
same page. I’d like to go back over everything you said because there are 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
23 
some important points where you need to be aware of our decisions in 
more detail and it will help you to see where we’re coming from.” 
These are somewhat general and can be used in about any situation, but you can see how 
they all create an air of respect, reinforce the team mentality, and let the stakeholder be 
prepped for what’s going to come next. In both cases, I’ve told the stakeholder that our ideas 
have an explanation worth considering. Maybe it seems like communications mumbo-jumbo, 
but the practice of telling someone what they should or are likely to think is actually very 
effective. Interestingly, people will often believe what you tell them… so tell them that they 
will agree with you! Even if they don’t, you’ve at least set the stage in a positive way.  
Here are some other examples that might deal with more specific 
feedback:  
“Thanks for pointing out the differences between the existing app and 
our new designs. You’re right that there are some important things we 
should consider and I want you to know we put a lot of thought into how 
we designed it, so I’d like to explain to you why we did what we did with 
the grid views.”  
“Thanks for being upfront that you’re concerned about our 
implementation of the cart and checkout flow. I’m going to address each 
of your points because we had some very specific reasons for doing it this 
way that I want you to be aware of. I think you’ll agree that this is going 
to increase conversion once you understand our thought process.”  
“Thanks for your viewpoint on the homepage. You’ve definitely given a 
lot of great feedback and I’d like to go through it all, if that’s ok. Our 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
24 
thinking about the layout had more to do with our long-term vision and 
some other initiatives that we expect to see down the road, so it’s 
important for you to know why we approached it in this way.”  
The point is this: it’s not enough to just launch right into a defense of your work. You must 
take the time to get in the right frame of mind, stay positive, and make a graceful transition to 
what’s next.  
 
All this prep work will pay off. It might seem like there’s a lot to consider, remember, and do 
in order to just have a simple conversation with a stakeholder about design but the process 
moves very quickly in real-life. Our job is to adopt these practices and make them habitual so 
that we can transparently navigate the conversation with this approach. We need to focus on 
letting go of control and separating ourselves from our ego to get into the right frame of 
mind. With that done, we learn to always lead with a yes and use charm, humor, and our 
own personality in a way that will make people want to agree with us. This step includes 
avoiding certain phrases, like “You’re wrong,” while using language that focuses on what 
works and what doesn’t work. Finally, we can set up our response to stakeholders by 
crafting a short transition that thanks them, summarizes what they’ve said, and prepares 
them for what we’re about to say.  
Getting in the right frame of mind is about:  
• 
Giving up control of the outcome so that we can allow other people to provide 
feedback on the project 
• 
Checking our ego at the door so that we can be open to other people’s ideas 
• 
Leading with a yes so that we create an atmosphere of agreement and cooperation 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
25 
• 
Learning to apply charm so that we can win people over with our own unique 
personality  
• 
Changing our vocabulary so that we avoid tainting our response with potential 
miscommunications 
• 
Forming a transitional phrase so that we can set the stage for what we’re about to say 
At last, we can now jump into our own response and find the best ways of helping our 
stakeholders see our perspective and win them over. The best part is, there are already some 
tried-and-true ways to get what we want. The next step is to respond. 
 
 
Further Reading 
AJ Harbinger from the Art of Charm website (http://theartofcharm.com) 
provides great resources for learning how to be charming. I recommend 
these additional articles from the Art of Charm on learning to be more 
charming in any relationship.   
Anybody Can Have Charm  
- http://theartofcharm.com/flirting-and-attraction/anybody-can-have-
charm/ 
Why Confidence Is More Important Than Looks  
- http://theartofcharm.com/confidence/confidence-important-looks/ 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
26 
What a Good Smile Can Do for You  
- http://theartofcharm.com/confidence/good-smile-can/ 
Confidence: Fake It ‘Til You Make It  
- http://theartofcharm.com/confidence/confidence-fake-til-make/  
Developing Charisma is Possible  
- http://theartofcharm.com/building-a-connection/developing-charisma-
possible/  
It’s Not Always What You Say, But How You Say It  
- http://theartofcharm.com/building-a-connection/always-say-say/ 
How to Improve Your Speech  
- http://theartofcharm.com/confidence/improve-speech/ 
The Importance of Confident Body Language  
- http://theartofcharm.com/confidence/importance-confident-body-
language/ 
Speaking with Confidence in Work and in Life  
- http://theartofcharm.com/building-a-connection/speaking-confidence-
work-life/  
 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 1 
Chapter 7 
The Response: Strategy and Tactics 
 
“Strategy is buying a bottle of fine wine when you take a lady out for dinner. Tactics is 
getting her to drink it.” 
– Frank Muir 
Now that it’s time to actually respond to our stakeholders, we have to take everything we’ve 
gathered so far and apply it on-the-spot. Responding to stakeholder feedback is a simple 
matter of forming your words in a way that will yield the best response by staying focused on 
the goal of the meeting: to get agreement from them. There is a structure and format to your 
response that will make it easier to get what you need out of your time together. In order to 
accomplish our goal, we break down our response into several core parts that will form the 
building blocks of our words. That logic will flow together to allow us to present our 
reasoning in such a way that it will communicate the very best response. This is the key to 
articulating design decisions.  
When we communicate with people about design and expect to get their buy-in on our 
project, it’s no different than other communication mediums that demand a response like 
marketing and advertising, politics, or even military campaigns. There is a rhythm and 
pattern to our response that mimics these other communications approaches. As with any 
good communications plan, we have to have an objective or goal, a strategy for achieving the 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2 
objective, tactics for delivering the strategy, messaging for employing the tactics, and finally 
eliciting a response from the recipient. Each one feeds back into the other to help us 
accomplish the goal.  
 
Objective ⟶ Strategy ⟶ Tactics ⟶ Messaging ⟶ Response 
 
Over the next three chapters, we will look at these parts in detail. In this chapter, we’ll start 
by first defining our strategy for responding. We have to know what we want to say in order 
to achieve our objective of getting agreement. Next, we will look at four specific tactics for 
delivering that strategy. These tactics are tailored to design discussions and give us some 
options for how to talk about our work in the context of the user experience. In chapter 8, 
we will review several of the most common response types used for user experience design 
feedback. These templates will help you identify the key messages that are important for 
your situation and give you a starting point for your response. Finally in chapter 9, we will 
bring everything together by creating a response that touches on all the important areas and 
then directly asks for agreement from our stakeholders. This is what I call the IDEAL 
response. If this all seems a little too contrived for the average conversation, stick with me 
through this process because we need to look at all the parts individually first in order for 
them to flow naturally in a real context.  
At a high level, crafting a good response requires that we: 
• 
Define our strategy for responding. What will we say to make a compelling case? 
• 
Employ tactics that will help us get there. How will we deliver the strategy? 
• 
Identify common, relevant responses. What key messages are important in our 
context? 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
3 
• 
Apply a common framework and ask for agreement. What do we want our 
stakeholders to do next? 
 
A UX Strategy for Responding 
We already know our objective: to get agreement from our stakeholders. Everything we say 
will have to take this into account. The way we do that is to employ a strategy for responding 
that keeps us focused on that objective.  Let’s go back to the three questions I posed in 
chapter 2 that will help you be a better communicator and a great designer. It’s important to 
emphasize that all throughout this process you’re going back to your answers to these 
questions and using them to inform how you respond to your stakeholders:  
1. What problem does it solve? 
2. How does it affect the user? 
3. Why is it better than the alternative? 
The answers to these three questions form the basis for every response you provide to 
stakeholders. If we can communicate these three things, we’ll set ourselves up for success. 
Conveniently, we can craft our strategy for responding around our answers to these 
questions. That will lay the groundwork for the tactics we choose to use in our response. 
Let’s see how each of these questions gives us a clear strategy for responding. 
 
Appeal to a Nobler Motive 
Our first strategy for responding is to appeal to a nobler motive. Every time you respond to 
design feedback, you should always attempt to attach your decisions to a goal, metric, or 
other problem that you’re solving. This is where your answer to the question “What problem 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4 
does it solve?” comes in handy. This idea of associating your decisions with an agreed upon 
metric is one of the steps to effective communication that Dale Carnegie calls “Appealing to a 
nobler motive” in his 1936 classic How to Win Friends and Influence People.1 I find that this is 
especially effective in design discussions and is often the missing ingredient from a designer’s 
portfolio of communication techniques. You want to find the thing that you know your 
stakeholders care the most about and connect it to the proposed user experience. If you can 
do that, you’re well on your way to being a great communicator. 
With any application or website, we have an agreed upon set of goals, metrics, KPIs, or other 
success indicators. We are trying to solve problems with our designs and every decision 
should reflect that. As mentioned in chapter 2, having these problems defined in the 
beginning and a metric for measuring success will be critical to making your case with 
stakeholders. If you don’t have any goals or metrics, write them yourself and present them to 
the client. You both need them if you’re going to succeed.  
Often, design feedback from stakeholders isn’t taking these goals into account at the outset. 
People look at something and react, often without considering the original intent of the 
project. Art and design, after all, are intended to elicit emotion, to create a response, and so 
one stakeholder’s knee-jerk reaction to your work may not be an indicator of failure, they 
just simply aren’t thinking about the original goals. Your job is to keep those front-and-
center, remind them why you’re all there, and keep the discussion moving forward.  
Increasing Add to Cart 
I was working on an eCommerce site where the goal was increasing the add to cart rate. We 
had created some great interactions specifically geared towards improving this metric and the 
design was tailored to the unique logistics challenges of this particular business. As 
stakeholders compared the experience to other popular eCommerce sites, a lot of questions 
arose: Why was this button so big? Did the interaction really have to use that particular 
                                                
1 How to Win Friends and Influence People, Dale Carnegie, 1936, Simon and Schuster 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5 
control? Are we sure this is the right copy for the call to action? Beyond the design, 
questions came up about other metrics: what about cart abandonment? Overall conversion? 
Didn’t those matter too? In these conversations, I could point back at our goal for the phase 
(increasing add to cart) to remind them of that focus and why we believe these decisions will 
improve that KPI. Without this previously agreed-upon metric, we could have easily allowed 
the project to morph into a monster of addressing each concern that came up but the result 
would have been a mess. Instead, we kept our designs laser-focused on the problem we were 
asked to solve.  
More than only justifying your decisions, though, appealing to a nobler motive can also help 
you keep the meeting under control. In another meeting with the same team, the discussion 
turned to the visibility of the store finder utility and how it integrated with showing actual in-
store stock levels in the search results. While that conversation was important to the business 
overall and it was indeed an issue that needed to be addressed long-term, it was not 
something that we were trying to solve in this particular phase. Rather than allow that 
discussion to derail the meeting, I proposed adding this as a backlog item to be discussed for 
a future phase and delay the discussion. We were able to stay on track.  
You see, sometimes the thing you get stuck on is not actually going to help you achieve your 
goals and so it’s appropriate to suggest moving on and addressing it later. If your goal is to 
improve conversion, but everyone is talking about whether the loading indicator should be a 
spinner or a status bar - that’s a good sign that the conversation is not ultimately going to 
help you. The spinners might be important, but don’t get stuck on it. Agree to move on. Any 
time you can connect your design decisions to the original goals, use cases, or metrics of the 
application you stand a great chance of making your case.  
 
Represent the User 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6 
Our second strategy is to explicitly represent the user. Perhaps it’s so obvious that it’s easily 
overlooked, but our response should always represent the user in a way that is tangible and 
real; more than just lip-service. We naturally think about the user a lot. We probably even 
refer to “the user” in our meetings, but it’s important to remember that our role in the design 
process is not just about building things that take the user into consideration, but it is 
actually to advocate for them to our stakeholders. We are the representative of our users at 
this meeting.  
Imagine the lawyer on a class-action lawsuit or the leader of a worker’s union negotiating fair 
wages. We bare the same level of responsibility when we claim to be UX designers. It’s not 
enough to only watch users in a usability study and then work those learnings into our 
designs. We must go one step further and see ourselves as possibly the only window our 
stakeholders have into the needs and objectives of our users. When we talk about them to 
stakeholders we need real stories, concrete examples, and demonstrable experiences to use in 
our defense.  
Your response is an opportunity to bring what you already know about your users and 
present it to your client in the form of a story that creates the kind of empathy required to 
drive us to action: to make the best decision for them. Instead of focusing on the mechanics 
of the system, we create a human connection that demonstrates a real need being met.  
Adding a Button 
One of the great things about modern web applications is that they can update the page 
without the need to refresh and reload everything. However, I’ve discovered that this 
occasionally causes problems with users who expect to see the page change when they 
choose a different option. If it doesn’t, they think the app isn’t responding. In one app like 
this, we had a set of filters that the users could check and uncheck. The page was updated 
instantaneously, without even the need for a loading indicator, but some of the users we 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
7 
observed didn’t realize the search results had been updated so I added a “Done” button 
which closed the filter panel and gave them a sense of completion.  
 
The addition of a ‘Done’ button gave the user a greater sense of control, but did nothing more than 
close the panel. 
 
When I presented this change to our stakeholders, I had to justify the addition of a button 
that seemed unnecessary and did almost nothing, yet took up space in the UI. The most 
casual way to represent the user in this case would be to tell them about my observations in 
general terms:  
“In our usability study, people didn’t realize that the search results were being updated 
automatically so we added the ‘Done’ button to give them a way to explicitly indicate 
they were finished.”  
What would be better is to present the same idea as a story (or use case) that describes a real 
situation for users.  
“We have a lot of distracted users navigating the app while they shop and they need a 
way to indicate that they’ve finished filtering. The ‘Done’ button allows them to make 
that clear and gives them a sense of control over the filters.”  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
8 
What would be best, though, would be to tell a story of one user who makes a good 
spokesperson for others, using human details that encourage a connection to their needs. 
“We had a mom using the app in-store with her kids. She was distracted and didn’t 
notice the results updating so she tapped multiple times and got frustrated that it didn’t 
appear to respond. Giving her this ‘Done’ button will make it more clear and show her 
products more quickly.”  
As I mentioned in chapter 2, user observation and usability studies are critical to your ability 
to communicate effectively to stakeholders and make a case for the user. You can’t represent 
someone you’ve never met, observed, or talked to. So do whatever is necessary to make 
yourself get up and go watch people use your project. It doesn’t take very many observations 
to draw meaningful insights about the design of your application or website. You can then 
apply this understanding in your meetings with stakeholders to represent the user and make 
a case for why your designs are the right option for delivering the best user experience. 
 
Demonstrate Effectiveness 
Our third strategy for maintaining the user experience answers the final question Why is 
this better than the alternative? and positions us to get the agreement and support we need 
to move forward. In order to do this, our response must demonstrate how our proposed 
solution is better than the alternatives, including any of those suggested by our stakeholders.  
As I mentioned earlier, this is the part of the conversation where designers often fail to 
adequately make a case for their designs. While we probably do a pretty good job of solving 
problems and making things easy for users, we are less adept at helping people understand 
why and how our designs are the best approach. Being intentional about demonstrating this 
is key to communicating this value.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
9 
This part of our communications strategy keeps us focused on using the tactics and messages 
that will help us convey this important piece of the puzzle. We want to be sure that our 
response includes examples, data, alternatives, comparisons, and any other tangible or visual 
demonstration of why our designs are the best choice for both the user and the business. 
Being able to keep that front-and-center is critical.  
Your response is an opportunity to not only talk about why your design is better, but to also 
visually show why and how your designs will make a difference. Talk is cheap, but a picture 
is worth a thousand words. Every response should focus specifically on the differences 
between each design and express why your own solution is best. More than that, you must 
show your stakeholders precisely why that is the case. Being able to identify and express 
these differences is a key skill in articulating design decisions.  
Prototyping FTW 
One of the things that can be really difficult to understand until it’s in a usable form is user 
flows. UXers spend a lot of time putting post-it notes on the wall, discussing the right way to 
guide a user through the application, and then usually flesh those out in a series of static 
mockups to present to stakeholders. Often, what seems to make sense on the wall of a 
conference room has a very different feel when you’re holding it in your hand.  
A mobile app I worked on had a very complicated flow for users signing up for a series of 
special promotions because there were a lot of variables: Did the user arrive from a special 
url or an email campaign? Were they paid subscribers? Did they have an an online account? 
Were they logged in? Depending on the combination of variables, the user might be funneled 
into one of a dozen or so different paths. Early on it was clear just how confusing these flows 
were, even to those of us designing them. After the team had agreed on a solution, I realized 
we were overcomplicating it and suggested a simpler approach, but my stakeholders weren’t 
convinced it would cover all the cases.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
10 
Rather than argue about sticky pieces of paper on a wall, I instead jumped into prototyping 
mode and built a simple frame-by-frame demo of how it should work. The result was 
immediate agreement, like light-bulbs going off in everyone’s head as they saw the difference. 
The original flow felt confusing and error prone once we held it in our hands. The newer 
flow was simpler and obvious. So simple, in fact, it was hard to believe we hadn’t thought of 
it before. In this case, the most eloquent words might never have convinced anyone of the 
right approach. The best thing I could do was show everyone what it would feel like in real 
life. It wasn’t enough to just talk about it; I had to actually demonstrate the effectiveness of 
my solution. Demonstrating your designs is the most important strategy you can have for 
articulating design decisions.  
 
Tactics Are Actions 
Now that we have our strategy well-defined, the next step is to employ tactics to help deliver 
on that approach. In user experience design, I suggest five tactics to shape our response:  
1. Show a comparison 
2. Propose an alternative 
3. Give them a choice 
4. Ask others to weigh in 
5. Postpone the decision 
There is not one way to apply these tactics. You might choose to use one or all of them, 
depending on the situation. Your job is to decide which of these methods will create the best 
case for your designs and help you get agreement. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
11 
 
Show a Comparison 
The first tactic is to show a comparison. You want to take your proposed design and the 
suggested changes and show them side-by-side so that the differences between the two are 
clear. The purpose is to provide a visual reference that leaves no question about which 
approach is the best. Too often, we talk about design in meetings using words that cannot 
adequately demonstrate the effect it will have on the user experience. The idea here is to find 
a way to make quick design changes and put both options next to each other.  
I usually do this directly in design software by taking a screen shot of both ideas and 
dragging them onto the same canvas with a large dividing line down the middle. I may 
already know what the feedback is going to be and I’ve prepared both designs for discussion. 
Perhaps both stemmed from the previous meeting where my stakeholder insisted on a 
change. Now I’m coming back prepared to make a compelling case with visuals that will 
show the differences and, hopefully, make my case. No matter how you do it, show both 
options in the same view so they can be discussed without having to switch tabs or windows.  
Show All The Things 
One of the sites I worked on had a two-level horizontal navigation, one below the other. The 
second level of navigation was a set of filters that, while useful, were not part of our goals for 
the project. They were simply an artifact of the design discussion, “Let’s show all the filters!” 
However, one of our design goals was to fit as much content (in this case, news headlines) 
within the vertical browser space on a mobile form factor. So we optimized the design of the 
content blocks to be sure the headlines themselves were plainly visible, including removing 
many other elements that we might normally want to include, like content tags or the 
author’s name. As I was working on it, I realized that this second nav was taking up too 
much space so I redesigned it so that everything could fit in one horizontal menu. The way 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
12 
that I did that was by moving the filters into their own drop down menu and prioritizing a 
few of the main level items.  
I redesigned the nav to be one level because fitting headlines in the vertical browser space was an 
important goal for this project. 
 
When my client saw it, he disagreed. “How will anyone know what they can filter if they 
can’t see the filters? We need to show all the filters so they’re easier to access.” But because I 
knew that fitting more content within the vertical space was a priority, I decided to simply 
show him the difference rather than argue about the discoverability. I grabbed screen shots 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
13 
of both designs, dragged them into Photoshop side-by-side and put a big line right down the 
middle. When he saw it, he agreed that the single nav was the way to go. It was immediately 
clear by way of the comparison that the new design had helped us achieve one of our goals 
for the application. Not only was this technique effective, but it saved me the time and 
energy of having to describe a design decision that was better communicated visually.  
When clients and stakeholders make suggestions about how to change your design, it’s 
unlikely that you’ll get away without at least trying it out and showing it to them. If you only 
show them their idea by itself, they’re likely to believe it’s the right choice since there is no 
reference to your original proposal. They may not remember the differences. However, 
comparing the two side-by-side in the same view is a better technique because it allows 
everyone to see what was changed and plainly tells a story about which design solves the 
problem in the best way. Showing a comparison is a really effective way to make your case.   
 
Propose an Alternative 
The next tactic for responding is to offer an alternative solution that meets the need in a 
different way. In chapter 4, we took the time to anticipate their reactions and preemptively 
prepared alternatives that could be used in this situation. Now is the time to bring these ideas 
to the table so it’s clear that there is more than one way to solve this problem. Maybe you 
had a similar idea in the moment, some designs that didn’t make the final cut, or their 
suggestion was close, but not quite close enough. You might propose something completely 
different or even suggest something that meets them halfway. Whatever the case, proposing 
an alternative is a necessity in almost every situation.  
It’s rare for a stakeholder to be in-tune enough with the user and with interface design that 
they’d be proficient at proposing solutions that don’t require some level of refinement. Even 
if their suggestion is really great, be sure to think critically about it’s implications and add 
value to the process to make it even better. That doesn’t mean we should discount their input 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
14 
as irrelevant or value our ideas over theirs. Our job is to take their suggestions into serious 
consideration and then apply our own expertise to take it one step further. As the experts on 
design, this is where we add value the most.  
Most stakeholders don’t have the same depth of knowledge in technology or design that we 
do. They lack the vocabulary to suggest meaningful changes to our work in a way that makes 
sense to the end user. It’s been my experience that when people use generic terms to describe 
a solution, it’s a sign that they really don’t know what the best solution is and that our 
alternatives are welcome. A common expression of this is with the use of the word button 
and yet a button is rarely the right solution to a complex design problem. Instead of adding 
the button, choose a more appropriate UI control, move it to a different position, or make it 
more subtle. There is always a more appropriate way of implementing stakeholder 
suggestions than to just take them at face-value.  
Stakeholder: “Put a button here that does it.” 
Designer: “I’d recommend making the button a text link instead and then adding an 
icon to emphasize it, rather than a full size button which will compete with the other 
options in this menu.” 
In fact, most stakeholders expect that we will bring our own suggestions to the table and that 
we’re capable of offering solutions to the problems they identify. This is, in fact, why they’re 
paying us. So don’t be afraid of reprisal when you take their feedback and apply it 
differently. Even if they overrule you, you’re demonstrating that you’re intentional about 
your thought-process and creating an awareness that these decisions aren’t to be taken 
without consideration. A track record of being able to gracefully propose alternatives will 
win you the respect of your stakeholders as a trusted partner who is always interested in 
making their product the best it can possibly be.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
15 
However, when you’re in the moment of a meeting it can be difficult to propose the right 
alternative on the spot. Even with a set of pre-prepared designs, the best answer sometimes 
still alludes us. This is why we have jobs: because it’s really difficult to find the right 
solutions. A single idea in a single meeting is not usually going to be sufficient for creating 
the best possible user experience. Further, there is nothing more demoralizing than a change 
from a stakeholder you disagree with that you’re unable to fend off. For this reason, try your 
best to suggest any alternative that will keep the decision open. Any solution you propose 
(even one that’s not ideal) will create a conversation that demonstrates there are more ways 
to address this problem. Propose something, even if it’s wrong. Hopefully, that will give you 
the space you need to continue the dialog without feeling like everything’s going to be ruined 
unless you solve it now.  
 
Give Them a Choice 
A third tactic is to give them a choice between something you know they want and the new 
thing they’re suggesting. You want to present their suggestion alongside what they’ll lose if 
we go down that path. They have to make a sacrifice. This is very effective when the thing 
they’ll lose is more important than what they propose.  
In consumer behavior, the fear of loss is more powerful than the promise of gain. This is why 
we have coupons that expire, early bird rates, and limited time offers. The fear of missing out 
on a good deal overrides our sense of rational thought about whether or not we actually need 
what’s being advertised. Give someone a $20 bill and they might hang onto it for awhile, but 
deliver it with an ultimatum that it will disappear within the hour and I promise they’ll spend 
it (perhaps on something frivolous). Without attempting to manipulate our clients into 
making rash decisions, we can use this tactic to our advantage and help people better see the 
design priorities in light of the entire experience.  What is it that they will lose if we do what 
they’re proposing? Capitalizing on the fear of loss can be very effective.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
16 
This tactic isn’t meant to be a grab for control, the way a parent might force a decision on 
their child at dinner, “You can’t have dessert unless you eat your vegetables.” Instead, it’s an 
honest attempt to make them aware of the implications of their proposed choice. We need 
them to know that every decision affects everything else. Our job is to be attuned to those 
connections and communicate them when they’re relevant to the discussion. Because many 
people want their ideas to be front-and-center in the design, it’s often possible to point out 
that their suggestion will have a negative effect on the overall experience. Some examples: 
• 
“If we add that new call to action, it’s going to move the login form further down the 
page,” –  you know they’ve explicitly asked that the login form be above the fold and 
moving could adversely affect conversions. 
• 
“Adding that will require some time, so if we do that we won’t be able to launch with 
the dashboard graphs,” – you know that the dashboard graphs are a priority for this 
phase and that by comparison, the stakeholder’s suggestion isn’t as important. 
• 
 “If we put that new option in the menu, there will not be enough space for the existing 
items. We’ll have to remove either Preferences or History.” – you know that those 
options are part of the core feature set, whereas the new options add less value or even 
distract from the experience. 
• 
“Changing this text link to a button will compete with the other buttons on the page. If 
we do that, we’ll need to remove or change the other buttons to accommodate it.” – 
you know the other buttons are purposely designed to attract the most attention and 
adding another will create too much visual weight. 
• 
“Moving the messaging to the right column means that we cannot support products 
with multiple options. Should we remove support for these products?” – you know 
that we have to support products with multiple options and, therefore, moving the 
messaging is not possible. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
17 
• 
“Adding a logo here will distract the user from their profile tasks. If we have to add the 
logo, I’d recommend re-factoring the design of the user’s profile tasks to be smaller and 
more subtle.” – You know that the user’s profile tasks are the point of this view and 
that placing a logo in this space won’t actually add any value to the experience. 
In each case, we are emphasizing the trade-off. Not only does this allow them to see their 
feedback in light of all the other priorities on the project, but it also allows them be involved 
in the decision process and be empowered with the right information. Any time you can 
allow someone else to agree with you in a way that makes it their decision, do it that way. 
Think about what will be lost in the process of implementing your client’s suggestion, be 
aware of all these connections, and call it out when you know it will negatively impact the 
user experience.  
 
Ask Others to Weigh In 
The fourth tactic is to solicit help from other people and ask them to weigh in on the decision. 
This is where your pre-work of building good relationships, creating a network of support 
people, and pre-arranging ‘ringers’ is put to use. There are other people in the room who may 
agree with you and you want to ask them directly to speak up. Creating a feeling of 
consensus around your designs will bolster your case and help your stakeholders to see that 
other experts agree with you. This shows your stakeholders that others are already in 
agreement with you, they just need to join you.  
It also helps make your case without forcing you into the awkward position of outright 
disagreeing with the client yourself. This is partly because you let other people do the talking 
and take the pressure off of yourself. But also, when other people are able to agree with you 
(rather than directly disagreeing with the client), you maintain a positive atmosphere rather 
than a flat out accusation that one person is wrong. You’re deflecting the disagreement with 
the stakeholder by emphasizing the agreement from other people.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
18 
Hopefully you already know who you can call on to back you up, as we covered in chapter 4. 
Even if you don’t have a set group of support people, asking others to weigh in is still an 
effective tactic for pushing the conversation forward and getting more opinions out in the 
open. It’s possible that the people you ask to speak up will agree with your stakeholder, and 
that’s ok too. Building the conversation around a collective group of thoughts is still more 
positive than two individuals in direct opposition. Your job is to funnel that energy to the 
right place.  
When you ask others to weigh in on the conversation, it’s important to remember to always 
ask directly and remain neutral: 
• 
Ask directly: call on one person by name and ask them directly what they think. If you 
ask the entire group for feedback, few people will speak out in disagreement with the 
other person. You want to ask an individual person for their opinion. “David, what are 
your thoughts on this?” or “David had an interesting take on this issue earlier. David, 
do you mind sharing?” 
• 
Remain neutral: don’t ask for their feedback in a way that reveals your true feelings 
about the stakeholder’s suggestion. Instead, ask open ended (not yes/no) questions 
using language like opinion, viewpoint, or perspective. Ask for people’s thoughts or 
reactions in a general way. “David, I’d be interested in hearing your perspective on 
this,” rather than pitting him against another person, “David, do you agree with 
Susan?” 
Stuck in the Middle 
• 
At one of my largest clients, two different UX teams were coming together to 
collaborate on a special project for the first time. Each team brought a unique 
perspective and both groups were opinionated. I was stuck in the middle, tasked with 
managing a conversation of competing priorities. When it came to some of the details 
of the UI, like specific colors and the placement of smaller details, I found that it was 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
19 
far more difficult to reach a consensus than I would have expected. The leader on one 
of the teams was more vocal and opinionated than the others. I knew that if I could get 
his buy-in, it would be easier to make a decision. He was my ringer.  
• 
I made a point to share my designs with him early on, we discussed some of the details 
and landed on what we thought was the best solution. When it came time to meet with 
everyone else and questions arose, I called on him specifically to share his perspective. 
Because he was in a senior role and also because he was more vocal, he made the case 
for my design on my behalf without me having to be involved in the gritty details of 
outright disagreeing with the other people. He did the hard work of making a case for 
my designs, I stayed out of the relational complexity between these teams, and we kept 
the user experience right where we wanted it to be. Asking other people to weigh in is 
a great way to make sure you get agreement on the best possible user experience.  
 
Postpone the Decision 
Finally, if all the previous tactics have failed to move the conversation in a positive direction, 
suggest postponing the decision. Before you allow your team to make any decision that will 
negatively impact the user experience, wait until another time. That could be for just a few 
hours or even a few days; whatever it takes for you to take a step back, wrap your mind 
around the problem, and come back with a better solution. Too often, hasty decisions that 
seem like a good idea in the moment turn out to be poor choices when actually implemented. 
Build in some space for you to re-group and consider the best approach, even when you 
agree with what’s being proposed. Anyone will appreciate that you want to take the time to 
do it right and verify that the suggested solution is appropriate. So ask for that space.  
You can postpone the decision by leading with a yes, “Yes, I see your point and we really 
need to find the right solution. How about I take the next few hours to work on it and then 
we can touch base again before the end of the day.” The idea that you’re postponing the 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
20 
decision doesn’t have to slow down your progress. Iterating on your designs is a good 
practice anyway, so be prepared to pick up your stakeholder’s feedback and run with it, even 
in the moment of a meeting. Don’t waste time with this tactic by putting it out of your mind. 
Instead, seize the moment to capitalize on your own energy for defending your choices and 
make it happen right now.  
Meeting Adjourned 
I was working on a small team once where one person’s suggestion snow balled into 
brainstorm and morphed into a solution that was so far removed from the problem it was 
hardly recognizable. That’s my opinion, of course, but while I was watching the conversation 
play out, I saw the inevitable conclusion that the group-think generating this frankenstein of 
a solution would eventually agree on something that was far from ideal. Time to step in and 
do something about it! 
I interrupted the discussion saying it was clear that we needed to come to a decision and that 
design-by-committee was probably not going to help. Rather than waste everyone’s time by 
continuing the discussion, I canceled the meeting on-the-spot and sent everyone back to their 
desks only 15 minutes into an hour-long meeting. Meanwhile, I stayed behind in the 
conference room and cranked out several alternatives that would be more useful in leading 
the discussion, without five people looking over my shoulder and touching my screen.2  
Before the hour was up, I called everyone back together to review the options I had just 
created. One of them seemed to work, was tweaked, and eventually made it’s way to 
production. The end result was a product that was better because I had the insight to stop 
the crazy train before it pulled into the station. Postponing the decision even for a few 
minutes gave me the space I needed to come back with a solution that would help ensure the 
best possible experience for the user without diminishing the ideas that had been thrown 
                                                
2 Don’t touch my screen. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
21 
around in the moment. Plus, I saved everyone the time and hassle of wasted brain space that 
would only have resulted in re-work. 
You won’t always have to cancel your meetings like this, but the point is that it’s better to 
take your time (even just a few minutes) to get your designs right than it is to let a single bad 
decision unintentionally force you into user experience dead end. More likely, you can 
propose postponing the decision until your next meeting which allows you to find the 
capacity to figure out a better solution in time. Don’t be hasty and never be afraid to suggest 
delaying the decision.  
 
To be an effective communicator, you have to learn to respond to people very quickly, in the 
moment of a meeting. The only way to get good at it is to practice, memorize your strategy 
(the answers to the Big Three) and apply these tactics on-the-fly. This response will form the 
basis on which you and your designs will be judged, so it needs to be purposeful and 
actionable. The more you practice, the better you will get.  
The good news is that in addition to having a well-defined strategy and these easily-applied 
tactics, many design discussions revolve around similar themes and ideas. You can capitalize 
on this by remembering and re-using similar, common responses every time. In the next 
chapter, I’ll share some of the most common key messages that are used to justify design 
decisions so that you’ll have some pre-made templates for articulating your response.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 1 
Chapter 8 
The Response: Common Messages 
 
“He who wants to persuade should put his trust not in the right argument, but in the right 
word.” 
– Joseph Conrad 
Now that we’re knee deep in our response to stakeholders, let’s take a quick look at what 
we’ve got so far. Our objective is to get agreement from them. Our strategy for 
accomplishing that is to communicate that our design solves a problem, makes it easy for 
users, and is better than the alternatives. We’ll communicate that using any of the tactics 
from the previous chapter. So now we need to identify the important messages that will help 
us employ those tactics in our context. 
While every project is different and every client has unique needs, I’ve found that there are 
some ways of explaining design decisions that I seem to use over and over again. I often say 
the same kinds of things to defend my projects and I’ve compiled them here for reference. 
Some of them are similar or related to one another, but they should give you a good basis for 
the kinds of responses that are effective in design discussions.   
These are the key messages that you need to communicate in order to deliver on your 
strategy and achieve the objective. So with our strategy and tactics in mind, find the 
messages that apply most to your situation and modify them to accommodate your particular 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2 
context. The goal for this chapter is to give you a list of common ways of describing design 
decisions that you can use and re-use at each meeting: a set of templates to give you a head-
start on forming the best response.  
I’ve organized them into four categories in no particular order: Business, Design, Research, 
and Limitations. This is a list of re-usable responses whether you are appealing to the 
business, pointing out important design logic, addressing research and data you have, or 
noting the limitations you face. Use these messages to make your case for a better user 
experience. 
 
Business 
One of the best ways to make a case for your designs is to directly connect it to the needs of 
the business. Three of the most common responses for appealing to the business are:  
• 
“Helps achieve a goal” 
• 
“Facilitates a primary use case” 
• 
“Establishes branding” 
 
“Helps achieve a goal” 
Stakeholders always appreciate connecting your solution to the goals of the business. This is 
a solid way to make the case for your design through appealing to a nobler motive. This may 
very well be your answer to the question, “What problem does this solve?” because usually 
the problems we want to solve with the design are the same as the goals of the project or 
business overall. Whatever the source of the reasoning, always be sure to call out when your 
design is intended to help the company achieve their goals. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
3 
It can be difficult to know with certainty how a particular design will affect your goals, 
especially for smaller interactions that may not affect the overall use of the entire application. 
The point here is not to know with certainty. If we always knew with certainty what would 
definitely accomplish our goals, then we wouldn’t need to even meet. So have confidence that 
your experience leads you to believe with all reasonable certainty that this design is at least 
one step of a larger approach that will take you where you need to go.  
In order to do this effectively, make this connection clear and provide an explanation for how 
your solution solves this particular problem. Since you’ve already written down each 
problem alongside your solution in chapter 2 and part of your strategy is to appeal to a 
nobler motive, it should be a simple matter of making a statement that clearly communicates 
these connections. A pattern for expressing this is: “[design] will affect [goal] because 
[reason]” 
• 
“Moving ‘Related Items’ above the product description will increase product 
engagement because users will have more opportunities to see more products.” 
• 
“Putting ‘Recent Projects’ at the top of the home screen will improve data quality 
because users will have easier access to keeping their data current.” 
• 
“Removing the login requirement will reduce abandonment because users can bypass 
registration and still see promotions even if they aren’t logged in.” 
That doesn’t mean everyone will agree. After all, you might think that using a toggle switch 
for “Remember password” will improve engagement by keeping users logged in, but I might 
think that a tried and true checkmark will be a more effective solution. The purpose isn’t to 
expect automatic agreement. The purpose is that we’re being intentional and purposeful with 
all of our decisions and this is one way we can communicate that to our stakeholders. As 
often as you can, connect your design decisions to the goals and objectives of the business.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4 
 
“Facilitates a primary use case” 
This may be the most obvious and common explanation for any design decision because 
everything we do is about designing around a particular use case, user story, or feature set. 
Depending on your stakeholders, they may not be aware of how we use these techniques to 
create a structure and logic to our decisions. Pointing out which use cases are benefitted from 
the decision is a good way of demonstrating your thought process and will get you talking 
through the decision in a way that makes sense to them.  
Just as often, we try to optimize the primary use case by minimizing and limiting secondary 
or edge cases. For example, while any user is encouraged to maintain his account profile 
information it is not the main purpose of the application, so that informs our decision to put 
account management functions under a dropdown menu rather than a large call-to-action. 
Noting these justifications can help you keep people focused on making sure that the primary 
use case is always optimized even in the face of other needs and features. 
While designing for a use case may seem obvious, it’s surprising how often teams can make 
decisions in a group setting that completely ignore the main use case of the application. Since 
you’ve already identified that your decisions are tied to that case, remember to do a quick gut 
check and make sure you haven’t lost sight of it in the process of moving things around. It’s 
always useful, even after a decision has been made, to circle back and double-check your 
decisions against the documented use cases that you hope to design for. When you find your 
team getting off track, bring them back by reminding everyone what the use cases are and 
how our decisions affect them.  
 
“Establishes branding” 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5 
While less important to the overall user experience, I often find myself justifying design 
decisions based solely on the branding standards of the organization. Sometimes things are 
the way they are because the company has a specific image they’re trying to establish and our 
applications have to reflect this as well. This is more true with the use of color, fonts, or 
language than with specific interactions but it’s important to call out. If you chose that style 
because that’s what the marketing department told you to do, be sure and bring that to the 
attention of your stakeholders.  
Sometimes application design can be a good opportunity to work with and help an 
organization develop their brand identity. While it’s not usually an explicit part of the user 
experience process, some organizations don’t have standards that include styles for things 
like buttons, drop lists, and checkboxes. So we may have a chance to help them evolve their 
standards documentation with our own style guide and move their visual identity in a 
positive direction. Marketing people probably aren’t thinking about interface controls and 
are usually happy to have your voice in the process of updating those standards with a 
common design language. The standards they create will be based largely on their needs, like 
print ads and direct mailers. Helping them understand where we’ve run into problems can 
shape the conversation of branding to expand and include other elements that may have not 
previously been considered. The end result is better collaboration and a more comprehensive 
branding guide. That makes stakeholders happy too.  
 
Design 
Often we have design reasons for why we did what we did. I find there are three common 
ways of describing my decision for design reasons: 
• 
“Uses a common design pattern” 
• 
“Draws the user’s attention” 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6 
• 
“Creates a flow for the user” 
 
“Uses a common design pattern” 
Designers spend a lot of time on other sites, apps, and devices learning about the newest 
useful design patterns and so we naturally choose patterns that make the most sense to our 
audience and context. Every few months, new patterns emerge that challenge our thinking 
about device and system interaction while we all wait to see which ones catch on. It can be 
risky to choose a pattern that doesn’t have a track record, but purposefully choosing a 
pattern because it is widely understood in the market is a great way to build a case for your 
decisions.  
Your stakeholders are probably not aware of the concept of ‘patterns’ in UI design, so you 
have to be careful not to make them feel like an outsider. Help your stakeholders understand 
that because this consistency in the experience is so important, changing an expected pattern 
in one context will have the ripple effect of needing to use the same pattern in other places 
throughout the app. It’s not merely an isolated decision. We want to create consistency so the 
user will know what to expect. 
Also tricky with patterns is that there is a lot subjectivity in choosing them to begin with. 
Unless your project has a well-defined design language and robust style guide, you’ll be on 
your own in making the initial choices about what patterns work well for your users until 
you can test them. And even then, there’s a great deal of subjectivity. So remember that 
design patterns are meant to provide consistency and set a user’s expectations about what 
interactions will take place. Beyond that, it’s fruitless to argue over which one works without 
solid research to suggest otherwise. 
 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
7 
“Draws the user’s attention” 
There are parts of our design work that are more driven by intuition than others, and this is 
one of those blanket explanations that I find seems to explain a lot of my own choices in ways 
that I otherwise could not communicate. There’s a lot of psychology that goes into the 
thinking about where user’s look, how they scan (not read) websites, and what makes them 
move from one place to another. Much of that knowledge is distilled into design practice 
through things like the use of color, negative space, balance, or type size. These things can be 
incredibly subjective and difficult to justify to the average person, but often it is simple 
enough to explain that the combination of elements they see on the screen is meant to move 
the user from point A to point B. For example, 
• 
“The headline and CTA are arranged so the user reads the headline first and taps on 
the CTA next.” 
• 
“The containers overlap to give the user a sense that they are connected as they scroll 
through the page.” 
• 
“The elements are arranged left to right and top to bottom, because our audience tends 
to scan the page in that way.” 
• 
“We used green because green means go or success and the contrast will draw the 
user’s eyes to that element.” 
It’s important that we help our stakeholders understand the relationships between design 
elements and user action so they can see the rationale behind our decisions. We have to 
communicate that we’re not only putting things on the page in a way that looks good but that 
we’re trying to draw the user into the application and lead them to action with an appropriate 
placement of design elements. Our decisions are based on getting the user to act, which is the 
ultimate purpose of any website or app.  
 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
8 
“Creates a flow for the user” 
A lot of time and effort goes into creating user flows. We can spend days or weeks with a 
wall full of post-its trying to find the best path for our users to navigate the application. That 
hierarchy gets expressed in our work and influences how we structure the entire design. We 
define user cases, edge cases, error flows, and remove dead ends only to hear a stakeholder 
suggest a change that disrupts this flow, potentially sending us back to the drawing board. 
Sometimes this happens without us even realizing it: we make a change in one place that 
affects something else down the line. Unintentionally, we’ve broken the path we so carefully 
tried to plan based on the whims of a well-meaning, but uninformed, stakeholder. So pay 
careful attention to how your decisions will affect the flow you’ve created. Don’t let your 
stakeholders break that without first understanding why you did it that way.  
“Our checkout flow was designed so that each successive control for the next step is in 
exactly the same place and the user moves forward in a linear fashion. If we make the 
change you’re proposing, it will break that flow on step 3 and cause the user to have to 
stop and go back, rather than quickly completing the step by moving forward.”  
“Our signup flow requires only the email address to be submitted first because we can 
reduce abandonment by not exposing all the fields at once and allowing the user to 
progressively add information to their profile later. If we add the additional fields to 
this step, it will complicate the process with validation rules and break the user’s flow 
if they make a mistake that has to be corrected first.”  
 
Research 
Using data, user testing, and other research is perhaps the most compelling justification for 
our design decisions. I’ve found three common responses useful when research is used to 
inform our choices: 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
9 
• 
“Validated by data” 
• 
“Revealed in user testing” 
• 
“Supported by other research” 
 
“Supported by data” 
Using data to support your design decisions is the golden ticket to getting agreement because 
it is the most scientific way of demonstrating that your designs are having the intended effect. 
The importance of using data cannot be understated. Too often, companies have plenty of 
data to help them, but lack the time or skill to sift through it and draw meaningful 
conclusions, so find data that is useful to your context and allow it to help you make your 
case. 
Designers sometimes have a hard time wrapping their minds around a spreadsheet full of 
percentages and decimals, myself included. Hopefully, you have someone who can help you 
find meaning in the numbers or maybe you can get access to a slide deck where the data was 
presented in a palatable form. Product owners and project managers are usually the ones 
who will help you with this effort, but it’s entirely likely that you will have to do the hard 
work of combing through the chaos and drawing connections between elements of your 
design and the behavior of the user. It’s not easy, but the good news is that this hard work 
pays off in huge ways, because almost everyone is convinced by data.  
There are two types of data we can use to talk about our decisions. The first is existing data: 
data we already have on-hand that we can use to help us make decisions now. The second is 
reflective data, the data we collected after changing our design and comparing the before 
and after. The first allows you to make informed guessing. We don’t really know if our 
proposed solution will help us achieve the goal, but we can use the data to make our best 
guess. The second is what we do after our informed guess: we check our changes and make 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
10 
sure the numbers are better. When you have that kind of information it is more clear what 
the ‘right’ answer is. 
Using data is really compelling to stakeholders. For that reason, it’s also important to 
recognize that looking at bad data will still yield the wrong choice, so we have to be really 
careful with this approach. What I mean is that data often tells us what the user did, but not 
why. We try to infer the why by looking at the what and this naturally involves making 
assumptions. If we make changes based on a wrong assumption, we end up with a design 
that is likely to cause more problems than it solves. So keep in mind that making decisions 
based on data can only be truly effective when taken as a measure of the project on the 
whole, in context, and without too many assumptions.  
One of my former managers was a data-driven person. She and I could discuss different 
designs for hours, but if data supporting one side ever entered the picture it was a shut and 
closed case. I quickly picked up on this and discovered that every time I gathered data to 
support my proposal, she would agree. It was a strange power because it became tempting to 
augment the numbers to support my case even if there weren’t truly direct connections. This 
is the problem with data: nearly everyone is convinced by it, yet it can be easily manipulated. 
The key thing to remember here, then, is that our goal is not simply to get agreement and 
have our way with the designs. Our goal is to create the best user experience and help our 
stakeholders achieve their goals. Skewing a perspective on data to selfishly support our 
claims is not going to be effective in the long-term. 
In order to get the attention of your stakeholders, it’s important to begin your response with 
a phrase that emphasizes your use of data: 
• 
“According to our analytics…” 
• 
“We have data that suggests…” 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
11 
• 
“We are tracking this metric and…” 
It’s usually enough to simply state with confidence what the data shows without the need for 
further discussion:  
• 
“According to our analytics, 64% of users drop off at this point in the user flow.” 
• 
“We have data that suggests the phone number requirement is our biggest barrier to 
conversion.” 
• 
“We are tracking this metric and have seen a steep drop in engagement since making 
this change.” 
However, you should always be prepared to provide the data that you cite even if you don’t 
have it on-hand. I usually have the data available in a separate file or report that I saw earlier 
and I know I can share it with the client when asked. It’s usually enough to tell them you can 
send them the report afterwards, as long as you follow up. But it’s a best practice to visually 
show the data in a simple way in-the-moment so that the stakeholders can really latch on to 
the idea. Since many people are visual, showing a chart, image, or simple table will help 
bring home the importance of the data in this particular decision.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
12 
 
Having visuals available to show the data is really a effective way to make your case. 
 
You have to decide what kinds of data will be most relevant to your stakeholders and 
optimize your designs to improve those metrics. Using data to support your decisions is very 
convincing, as long as you’ve got an airtight connection and are making the right 
assumptions. 
 
“Revealed in user testing” 
Often we have experience watching people use our designs and those insights inform our 
decision making. Being intentional about realizing when those studies are influencing our 
decisions will help us communicate to our stakeholders, when appropriate. Demonstrating 
good design through a connection with a usability study is a very effective way of making a 
case for your designs because it shows that your ideas are working in the real-world with real 
people. It has a human element to it that creates a story for our stakeholders, rather than the 
mechanical feeling that raw data provides. Depending on your stakeholders, using real 
stories of users might be even more effective than numbers and charts. Using the tactic from 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
13 
chapter 7 for representing the user, tell your stakeholders a story about your users that will 
get them on-board with your decision. 
The challenge with user observation as a justification for design decisions is that it can be 
very subjective, based on what you remember of the session, and difficult to document for 
the purpose of meeting with a client. Usually, the way we bring these to our stakeholders is 
in the form of a memory - some special knowledge that might only reside in our heads. 
“During our usability study last week, we realized that people were confusing the ‘Ok’ and 
‘Cancel’ buttons because the design was too similar” While this statement is based on our 
experience with users, it is undoubtedly clouded by our own memory and conclusions from 
the study. Still, it’s an effective way to demonstrate that you’re interacting with users and 
improving your designs to accommodate what you’ve learned. That alone is very valuable to 
communicate.  
The best way to communicate our insights from user testing sessions is to assemble a set of 
slides with quotes from a few select users and maybe even a video clip showing the problem 
areas. Edit the video from the session down to a few seconds or create a highlight reel of the 
most relevant parts from the study. This values everyone’s time by only showing them the 
important parts while also giving them the opportunity to participate in a real user session. 
Even though this requires advance preparation to put together, it’s the only way to truly 
show your stakeholders why you did what you did - and might be more necessary depending 
on the scope of the proposed changes. I’d even recommend showing them one or two 
complete users sessions, if you have the time. I find that this may be the first time my 
stakeholders have ever seen a user session at all! Any time you can get your stakeholders to 
see real people using their app, you create a connection for them to empathize with and be 
drawn to act on changes for the sake the user.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
14 
 
Including a short clip from a user session in your slides is a quick way to give stakeholders quick 
access to real users. 
 
“Validated by other research” 
It’s common for me to cite other, external research that I’ve seen when discussing design. I 
spend a lot of time consuming blogs, books, and podcasts. Often, this information influences 
my thinking in ways that are almost unconscious. I discover new best practices all the time 
and begin incorporating them into my work without even realizing it. I often don’t even 
know this has happened until I am talking to stakeholders and parsing through my decision 
process on-the-spot. I find myself saying things like, “I read recently that…” and then have 
to backtrack to find those original sources.  
As a result, I’ve developed the habit of saving useful research in a project folder or keeping a 
list in a shared document so that I can easily provide it to other people. As I casually browse 
other research, I copy links, quotes, and data over to a separate file that I can sort through 
later, if needed. Usually my notes include the title, author, url, and a description of the part 
that’s relevant to my project or a short summary of the findings. This makes it much easier 
for me to make claims about other research because I can quickly send the reference to my 
client if they ask. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
15 
It’s actually pretty rare that you’ll have to provide the original research as proof, unless of 
course, people disagree. Most of the time stakeholders take these kinds of statements at face 
value and trust you with the rest. Much like using analytics, this can be a dangerous power 
because if you’re prone to overstate or misremember the data, you will still make bad 
decisions. For that reason, I don’t recommend quoting another study without having the 
reference on-hand. Sometimes what you remember about a study and what the actual 
learning was is heavily biased by your own perspective. It’s easy to bend it to your 
advantage, so be careful. 
Sometimes, though, having all your external references is critical to justifying your decisions. 
In cases where the stakes are higher, it might be the only way to convince people that your 
design is the best choice. What can be unfair, though, is if your stakeholder isn’t prepared to 
defend their own opinions against your pre-prepared list of research. It could feel like an 
attack, if you’re not careful. In that case, give them the opportunity to think about it and 
respond another time, send them your research in advance so they have a chance to review it, 
or bring research with you that presents both sides of the problem for discussion. You don’t 
want them to feel like they were bullied into agreeing with you.  
Taking Hamburger Off the Menu 
 
The hamburger menu icon 
 
One of the mobile projects I worked on used the all-too-common ‘hamburger menu’ for the 
primary navigation. During the course of a redesign, I tried several times (unsuccessfully) to 
convince my client to abandon the use of this icon as a catch-all for everything in the menu. 
My recommendation was based on research indicating that the icon is not as effective as the 
word ‘Menu’, but simply telling them this was not convincing enough. For our next meeting, 
I collected as many articles as I could on the subject (a few of which disagreed with my 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
16 
perspective) and opened them in separate browser tabs to make my case. When we reached 
that agenda item, I presented my proposed design (again) and then carefully clicked through 
each tab to give a quick summary of each post. When I was done, my clients were impressed 
with my preparedness, admitted that they did not have a similar amount of evidence to 
support their opinion, and we restarted the discussion about changing the icon. The end 
result was to create an A/B test with our two proposed options in the hopes that it would 
further inform our decision making. Had I not been prepared with this research, we would 
not have been able to restart that discussion.  
When using other external research to support your decisions: 
• 
Make a habit of saving research to a separate document as you find it 
• 
Note the title, author, url / source, and date 
• 
Write a short summary of the post or a sentence about how it relates to your project 
• 
Provide the list of references to your stakeholders when they ask 
• 
Try to find research to support other viewpoints for a balanced understanding 
• 
Give your stakeholders the chance to consider it or respond with their own 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
17 
 
When I find research that will be useful with my clients, I compile them in a document so that I can 
quickly reference them in a meeting if I need to. Often, clients will ask me to share the entire 
document with them so that they, too, can use the information to convince other stakeholders.  
 
 
Limitations 
As often as we’re justifying our decisions based on what we think needs to be done, we are 
also making a case for times when there are limitations that need to be taken into 
consideration. We can’t always do what our clients want, simply because of other factors out 
of our control or because we’re trying to adhere to standards in design and programming. 
I’ve found three common response for dealing with limitations: 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
18 
• 
“Not enough resources” 
• 
“Limited by technology” 
• 
“Complies with a standard” 
 
“Not enough resources” 
The unfortunate reality of design is that companies frequently do not have everything they 
need to pull-off their dreams for the app or website. There simply isn’t enough money or 
people for everyone to get to design and build anything they can think of. Taking these 
limitations into consideration is an important part of the decision making process because 
spending too much time on something that’s not possible is not an effective use of time. While 
limits in ‘resources’ is usually just matter of money and people, there are four main areas that 
seem to affect web and application design more than others:  
• 
Support: lack of support, infrastructure, or internal processes to handle the added 
requirements. Even if we can build and launch our project, it may be that there isn’t 
enough internal support for us to maintain it long-term. This could be because 
customer service isn’t set up to handle the additional calls, that accounting doesn’t have 
a practice in place for handling the payments, or that QA doesn’t have the capacity to 
test another app. It’s not as much about people as it is about process. The organization 
simply isn’t equipped to handle what we want to do yet. These support roles are an 
important consideration for how we design and factoring it into our decision process is 
an important point to clarify.  
• 
People: not enough designers or developers who can actually create it within the time 
and constraints given. Very simply, the stuff we want to do requires a larger staff that 
we don’t have. This may not even be a budget problem, but one of hiring: we can’t hire 
the right kinds of talent or we can’t hire enough people fast enough. Perhaps it is only 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
19 
a short-term problem, but not having enough people is a legitimate reason for scaling 
our designs. Always consider how your designs are affected by the current and future 
staff.  
• 
Money: insufficient budget for acquiring the services or technology needed to make it 
happen. No matter how much money you have, it’s almost never enough to go no-
limits on your product. There is always another piece of hardware or a hot new service 
we can use to augment our product and take it to the next level. But absent these 
resources, we must curb our designs to account for a limit in funding. Making this an 
explicit reason for your design decisions is important.  
• 
Time: not enough time to implement the designs, given the current requirements. 
When we have limited time, we usually scale back our ideas to a point that’s do-able. 
It’s this perceived ‘downgrade’ that is most important to communicate. Every 
stakeholder wants to build the biggest, best thing as soon as possible, which is why so 
many teams start with a minimum viable product and iterate over time. In theory, we 
should never have to tell a stakeholder there isn’t enough time because our process is 
such that we always create appropriate levels of work during each cycle. In reality, we 
are always scaling back ideas to fit the current calendar.  
In practice, telling your stakeholder that you’re limited by resources will either result in 
sobering agreement or righteous indignation. Either way, it can yield a good outcome. On 
the one hand, they’re apt to agree with you because they understand the realities of the 
resourcing situation. On the other hand, they might be compelled to fight on your behalf for 
additional resources to make it happen. The point isn’t really the final outcome, though, as 
much as it is your ability to thoughtfully explain the reality and constraints that you’re 
working within. We always have to design around our limits in resourcing.  
 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
20 
“Limited by technology” 
While we would like to think that we designers can create anything under the sun, the reality 
is that we’re limited by technology. What’s available to us will naturally force us to make 
design decisions that need to be explained to our stakeholders. Often, these things cannot be 
foreseen when creating the original designs and it is only during implementation that we 
have to make these adjustments. So our stakeholders had certain expectations, but when it 
came time to make it happen we realized that we had to make some sacrifices.  
Sometimes these limitations are straightforward and there’s simply no way to accommodate 
their request. A common example in mobile app design is the size of the device screen: we 
simply don’t have the space to do everything our client wants. Other times, there are more 
raw technical limitations. For example, I was working on a mobile web application where the 
client wanted to access the device camera in the browser so users could scan barcodes. While 
this is technically possible, support for it is not widespread and it was an easy decision to 
remove this idea. It might also be that there are other technological factors outside of your 
control that force your decisions. Perhaps the server simply isn’t capable of doing what you 
need or the technology you want isn’t cheaply or easily available. In these cases, it’s 
appropriate to suggest that while everyone agrees it’s a great idea, we can’t consider 
implementing those designs unless we have better technology.  
It’s not always simple. These can be the most difficult decisions to help other non-designers 
(and non-developers) understand because the reasons are often highly technical. 
Stakeholders don’t like (or understand) these limitations and might even be put off by the 
prospect that you can’t do the same thing their competitor does. I imagine an executive 
pulling out his phone, showing you the way someone else does it, and then asking “Why can’t 
we do that?” But these limitations are real and we have to help them see the constraints so 
they can be part of the decision.  
 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
21 
“Complies with a standard” 
Sometimes what our stakeholders want us to do will go against the technical or social 
standards we’ve set for our application. We want our app to work in all browsers, on 
different devices, and for all people so we have to follow the ‘rules’ that are set forth on the 
development side. This sometimes results in making changes to our design to accommodate 
these standards.  
One example is designing for accessibility. When you’re building an accessible application it 
will inform decisions about the kinds of controls you choose and how those interactions are 
implemented in the design. We usually start with a no-limits design that, once 
implementation begins, gets whittled down into what’s actually possible given our desire to 
make the app work for everyone. While nearly anything is technically possible, it may not 
always be recommended (or it may take too much time to get right) and so we have to adjust 
our expectations to account for these needs.  
Another common example is with standard HTML control types. Maybe the stakeholder 
wants a custom date picker, but the prospect of building and maintaining your own is out of 
scope. It’s not always the right decision to roll your own, so it’s better to help them 
understand why using a standard control is better for both the user and their bottom line. 
Sometimes highly interactive page elements require programming hacks to pull off. In that 
case, you might need to talk them away from something too complicated in order to build an 
application that’s meant to work on different devices or browsers. In each case, we’re trying 
to demonstrate that the standards put in place for applications have a natural benefit to both 
our development process, as well as the portability and accessibility of the application long-
term. These standards inform and influence our design decisions.  
Appeasing the Natives 
I was consulting with a non-profit on a web-based mobile application. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
22 
While the app would run in every major mobile browser, the client 
wanted it to behave more like a native application. To that end, their 
team had designed a series of interactions and design patterns that, while 
seemingly natural to some native mobile apps, would actually have 
required us to overwrite native browser functionality and potentially 
break a lot web standards in the process. Not only did this present 
technical challenges with the implementation, but it also created a set of 
confusing interactions where browser users could not scroll up and down 
(scroll-jacking) and could only navigate the website by swiping left and 
right. In the end, I was able to convince them that valuing native browser 
behavior was more important than maintaining the perception of a 
‘native’ app in the browser. For the first implementation, at least, they 
chose to forgo all the customized gestural events and stick with tried-and-
true (standards-based) HTML and Javascript.  
 
 
Hopefully now you can see how design decisions across different projects frequently share a 
similar rationale and explanation. As designers and communicators, our jobs are made easier 
when we have this short list of common messages to pull from, using them as the foundation 
for our response. Use them as templates to help you jumpstart your response, no matter what 
the context. 
Focused on our objective of getting agreement, we now have a memorized strategy, a set of 
actionable tactics, and a list of frequently-used messages as the basis for our response. The 
next step is to compile all of these together and plug them in to a formula that will finally 
accomplish our goal. We are only one step away from delivering on our promise to effectively 
articulate our design decisions in way that is compelling and fosters agreement. Next, we will 
assemble an ideal response.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 1 
Chapter 9 
The Ideal Response: Getting Agreement 
 
“Unless both sides win, no agreement can be permanent.” 
– Jimmy Carter 
We’ve now covered several tactics for forming your response, as well as some of the most 
common ways that we can respond to design feedback. If we combine all of these practices 
together, we can see how this will form the basis for a standard response to stakeholders that 
establishes a formula for success. 
Every response to design feedback needs to hit on a number of areas if it’s going to have the 
kind of weight it needs to be compelling and convincing. For UX discussions, I have a useful 
formula to help make our case to stakeholders. This is the IDEAL Response:  
Identify the Problem - We must always stay focused and make sure that our stakeholders 
are aware of the problem we’re addressing, otherwise the conversation can quickly become 
counter-productive. Very briefly state the problem that your design addresses for the 
purpose of getting everyone on the same page.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2 
Describe your Solution - This is where your specific design can be connected to the 
problem at hand. Make a clear connection between what you did and how it addresses the 
issue. Without a clear solution, the design is useless and ineffective.  
Empathize with the User - Stakeholders can forget about the people at the other end of 
our products. Our job is to represent them; to feel so burdened for them that we’re driven to 
action. State how your solution solves the problem for a specific user by calling to mind the 
people you are building this application or website for.  
Appeal to the Business - It’s not enough to just fix stuff. All our decisions must be 
motivated in-part by a need to grow the business or organization. This is where you describe 
how your decisions are meant to affect goals, metrics, or KPIs. Bring it up, tie them together, 
and demonstrate value.  
Lock-in Agreement - After clearly making your case, directly ask for agreement from your 
stakeholders. You don’t want to leave this conversation open-ended, without resolution. Ask 
them directly, “Do you agree?” Put them in a position of needing to respond to you and keep 
the project moving forward.  
Getting this agreement is, of course, the whole purpose of this book. Because without 
agreement, everything you talk about with your stakeholders is just an IDEA. You can make 
a great case, argue your position, and walk away feeling confident, but without the 
agreement of everyone on your team your project will not be successful. This is why locking 
in agreement is so critical because it allows you to move from having something that’s just an 
idea to something that is truly IDEAL.  
 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
3 
Getting Agreement 
 
Be Direct 
In order to get agreement, you need to directly ask your stakeholders for their buy-in. The 
simplest way is to ask, “Do you agree?” Put them in a position of needing to respond to you 
before you move on. Further, it should be clear that you’re asking them for a specific 
response (agreement) and that you expect an answer.  
It’s easy for design discussion to casually devolve into a handful of random ideas until 
eventually the conversation feels like it should move on. However, if you don’t have 
agreement yet, do not let the team move to the next thing. You have to be the one who 
pauses the chatter long enough to say, “Before we move on, are we all in agreement?” 
Getting that verbal confirmation is important to making sure that this item doesn’t come up 
again during the next meeting because someone forgot what was decided.  
Highlight the Benefits or Consequences 
In addition to being direct, phrase your question so that your stakeholders want to provide 
you with the answer that you need. In other words, make it clear what the right choice is by 
the way you ask so they’re compelled to answer with agreement. You can do this by 
highlighting either the negative effect of disagreement or the positive benefits of agreeing. 
For example, “Do you agree that we should improve conversion by removing these fields?” 
In this case, you’re emphasizing that your solution will improve conversion. Your 
stakeholder is unlikely to disagree with a decision to improve conversion.  
Security Blanket Statement 
One of my clients made a unilateral decision to remove some user information from a form 
validation message because of a security concern, but I didn’t agree it was a valid concern. 
After making my case that this data needed to be displayed for the user experience, I asked 
for agreement by saying, “Do you agree? Or do you think we should purposefully hide this 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4 
information from the user?” Phrasing my question in this way made it clear what I thought 
the right choice was, but it also put her in a position of needing to agree. No one wants to 
intentionally hide important information from users.  
Force Their Hand 
Finally, asking them direct questions about whether or not they agree forces them to also be 
direct in their response. Sometimes stakeholders are not forthright in their reaction and we 
need them to tell us exactly what they think in order to accomplish our goal. If they disagree, 
we need to know and there should be no question about it. When you phrase your question 
to be direct and to emphasize the affect it has on the user experience, stakeholders are 
compelled to give you an answer that makes it clear which side of the fence they’re on. If 
they’re unsure of their position, they’ll probably agree with you just so they can move on. If 
not, it creates an opportunity for you to continue the discussion and arrive at the right 
solution to meet everyone’s needs. Either way, you’ll have a definitive answer.  
 
Putting It All Together 
Now we begin to apply everything we’ve covered so far into one coherent response that:  
• 
Provides a natural transition using Thank, Repeat, Prepare 
• 
Considers our answers to the big three questions 
• 
Applies any number of the tactics necessary to make our case 
• 
Takes advantage of common responses to design considerations 
• 
Encapsulates all of them in the IDEAL response so that we can get agreement 
 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5 
What follows are several case studies: examples of responding to stakeholder feedback using 
the ideal response. My intent is to provide you with a handful of common situations and their 
responses to further demonstrate how you can articulate design decisions with your own 
stakeholders. These are situations that I may or may not have found myself in with my own 
clients. I can neither confirm nor deny the existence of these scenarios in real life. The names 
of design patterns and UI controls have been changed to protect their innocence.  
For the purpose of simplicity, I avoid providing much context about the product or the 
conversation. These examples are common enough that you should be able to infer enough 
from their context alone. Focus not on the specific details of feedback in each case, but rather 
on the application of how to communicate value to stakeholders in a way that appeals to their 
needs.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 6 
Control Over My Content 
  
Thank, Repeat, Prepare Thanks for coming to me with your idea for being able to manu
page. I know you’d like some more control over how your posts
intentionally limiting the amount of control we’re giving conten
some consistency so let’s talk about the best way to help you.  
Identify the problem 
Our challenge is that each view is supposed to be sorted chrono
expect the most recent content at the top. This keeps the list of 
content creators are submitting new content each week.  
Define the solution 
Rather than give you the ability to manually sort all of the conte
feature that allows you to ‘pin’ one article to the top of your stre
pin a new one, it would replace the existing one. We’ll add a spe
show that it’s been pinned. 
Empathize with the 
user 
This will maintain the user’s understanding of our content strea
chronologically. The visual clues will help them know that this 
removed from the regular stream of content.  
Appeal to the business 
For you, it will highlight that single post out of all the others, gi
longer period of time. Plus, it gives you a greater sense of contr
displayed without running the risk that everyone will start re-or
Lock-in Agreement 
Is that an acceptable solution for you to be able to choose one fe
you still think we should allow everyone to do what they want w
content?  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
7 
 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 8 
Add to Cart Interaction 
  
Thank, Repeat, Prepare Thanks for sharing your thoughts with us about this project. Yo
and I appreciate you going through all that with us. I’m going t
points so we can discuss them, but I want you to know that som
are rooted in an explanation that I think you’ll agree with once 
First, I want to review the new Add to Cart interaction.  
Identify the problem 
The issue we’re trying to address is that when a user sees this in
they’re confused by the presence of two buttons and don’t really
which one they should tap on.  
Define the solution 
Our solution is to consolidate those into one button that just say
the single button reveals more options and allows them to make
committing to the first rather than having to make all those dec
Empathize with the 
user 
Keep in mind that our users are frequently ordering at their pla
a busy manager walking down the hall who notices that a light 
a new one on-the-spot. So we don’t necessarily have their full a
them with really simple options that don’t require too much tho
Appeal to the business 
We believe our solution is going to increase conversion because
extra tap for the user, it makes the choice of adding an item to t
There is no question about what “Add to cart” means, as it relat
Very simply, more people are going to tap “add to cart”.  
Lock-in Agreement 
I know the company has preferred the existing language, but w
should be put into production with the next release. We might e
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
9 
with the existing implementation so we can directly compare th
conversion increase dramatically this year and this is one of the
that happen. Do you agree? 
 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 10 
Overbranding 
  
Thank, Repeat, Prepare Thanks for your input on the logo and colors. I agree with you 
things to improve it. The challenge is that the marketing depart
we’ve had little input in final decisions. However, I think there 
here.  
Identify the problem 
Marketing would like to brand this initiative separate from the 
campaign and awareness around it. The problem is that, in my 
understand the difference between these sub-brands. They use 
not for it’s branded add-ons and placing these extra elements lik
their way. 
Define the solution 
My suggestion is avoid the use of a logo in this space and instea
the use of color and copy to communicate the message. In this p
with small icons to identify the add-on services or add a line of 
highlight the value. This will save us a significant amount of spa
user. In order to do this, we’ll need to go back to marketing and
solution.  
Empathize with the 
user 
From the user’s perspective, a sub-brand like this is meaningles
interested in completing their tasks and getting their job done. B
we are hindering their ability to use the application efficiently, a
down. This is not only potentially frustrating to users, but also r
services when users aren’t able to get into the flow as quickly as
Appeal to the business 
Our goal for this initiative was to create a new revenue stream f
user enters the flow. While I know marketing wants to capitaliz
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
11 
a new product with these add-ons, I believe that a branded app
to the user (at best) and confuses them and slows them down (a
may actually dampen our efforts at creating revenue from this c
Lock-in Agreement 
I’d like your help working with marketing to remove some of th
I’m happy to coach them on some alternatives and help them un
perspective. Do you agree that we should do our best to reduce
add-on services?  
 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 12 
Main Menu Mess 
  
Thank, Repeat, Prepare Thanks for your input. I really appreciate your viewpoint on th
your suggestion about needing to add these new options to the 
there’s a better solution we can discuss to make sure these new 
Identify the problem 
The problem I see is that we frequently add new options to the 
catch-all for links that we don’t know what to do with. Secondly
promotions rather than permanent offers so it’s unlikely that a u
them in the menu since they don’t view them a constant feature
Define the solution 
My suggestion is focus our effort on highlighting these promoti
already use for other important messaging, like system alerts or
When these new offers are available, we can display them in tho
even more space for images and other content. 
Empathize with the 
user 
We don’t want our users to be overwhelmed by the number of o
Instead, we can provide more value to them by adding appropr
that’s relevant to their current task. 
Appeal to the business 
If we put these items in the main menu, it will actually backfire 
likely to find it buried in that menu. However, strategically plac
existing slots will actually increase visibility for the offers and im
initiative.  
Lock-in Agreement 
I’d like to move forward with the idea of using our existing slot
examples for our next meeting. Do you agree that this will prov
improve the experience? Or do you think it would be better to 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
13 
getting lost with the other options? 
 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 14 
Branded Banners 
  
Thank, Repeat, Prepare Thanks for your suggestion to add the logo to the header of the
brand the experience and I agree that’s important, so let’s talk a
that.  
Identify the problem 
The challenge with an application like this is that we have a lim
user to have access to everything in the navigation. Plus, we wa
their tasks and have as few distractions as possible.  
Define the solution 
The reason we chose not to include the logo in the header is bec
provide any functionality for the user. By not including it, we h
options and a simpler interface for the user. 
Empathize with the 
user 
The logo doesn’t directly provide value to the user once they’re 
reinforce the brand of a service they are already consuming. Th
on using the application efficiently because they have one less v
can remove from the interface, the better the user experience.  
Appeal to the business 
Branding is important, which is why we’ve worked the brand in
interactions throughout the app. We’re also providing an “Abou
the logo and links to our other products. It’s also worth pointing
invested in our brand because they signed up for the service. Th
displays the logo. 
Lock-in Agreement 
The marketing site is really the best place to communicate the b
application itself is the best place to keep the user focused on th
we keep the user focused on using our application when they’re
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
15 
explicit branding elsewhere when it matters more. Do you agre
 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 16 
Phone Number Collection 
  
Thank, Repeat, Prepare Thanks for your time and for sharing your thoughts with us on 
several suggestions for changes, which I’ve noted and I’d like to
can be sure we’re in agreement. 
Identify the problem 
The first thing you mentioned was the need to add a phone num
Our focus with this effort is to increase conversions on the form
for that goal. 
Define the solution 
We removed the phone number field for a few reasons. First, it
customers in the same medium that they contacted you. So an o
warrants an email, rather than a phone call. Next, fewer fields o
conversion because users can complete it more quickly and don
what they’re entering. But finally, I have some research showin
phone number field on a form will hurt conversion by more tha
required.  
Empathize with the 
user 
The reason for this is because many users are wary of sharing th
being added to a telemarketing call list. Further, the presence o
them skeptical of the company that is asking for it. Many wond
my phone number for an online form?” 
Appeal to the business 
I know you’d like to have the user’s phone number for your rec
our goal of improving conversion if we remove it from the form
we’ll have plenty of opportunities to follow up with them, engag
progressively add information to their profile. This will create m
with new customers and establish trust right from the beginning
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
17 
best balance of creating a great user experience while also achie
business.  
Lock-in Agreement 
Do you agree we should not include this field in the form? Or d
of including it and probably suffering from lower conversion?  
 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 18 
Too Many Messages 
  
Thank, Repeat, Prepare Thank you for your time today. I appreciate your input on our p
perspective on the business and I’d like discuss some of your co
few of my own. But I think we’re on the same page, as far as wh
Identify the problem 
The problem we’re trying to solve with this design is communic
shopper. Our approach is focused on highlighting just how muc
items without them having to think about it too much. The chal
implementation is that the business has defined too many messa
savings all in one small space. Here we have the list price, perce
shipping, and a “Great Value” flag. In addition to that, we’re als
messaging around urgency with a timer, quantity available, and
Define the solution 
Our solution is to apply some logic and rules around what mess
we don’t overwhelm the user with too many messages at once. F
choose between showing the percentage and the dollar off, but 
show the percentage savings because it’s greater than 30% and 
than the dollar off, which is only $3. Next, we will only show th
within 24 hours and we only show the quantity available when 
Structuring our messages around this logic is the best way to co
shopper, without creating a jackpot of showing all the messages
Empathize with the 
user 
Shoppers do not have time to read all the details, do the math, a
the best value. Showing them too many messages will only conf
won’t know which message to focus on. Our approach allows u
which messages to present to them so we can remove the burde
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
19 
focus on purchasing the item. This will result in faster purchase
Appeal to the business 
If we focus only on the most important, relevant messages for e
increase sales and revenue on these items because they will be e
and purchase. Reducing the number of messages the user has to
purchasing decision faster, resulting in better conversion. 
Lock-in Agreement 
Having a laser-focused value proposition by not including so m
way to go. Do you agree that we should focus our messages in o
shoppers?  
 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 20 
    Customize the Reports 
  
Thank, Repeat, Prepare Thank you for your perspective on the case list view. You have
like to go through every thing to be sure we’re on the same pag
Identify the problem 
You mentioned that you’d like the ability to customize each rep
graph itself. I agree that would be a great addition to the app. 
Define the solution 
We purposefully left out this idea because it wasn’t within our s
project. The concept requires adding quite a bit of functionality
well.  
Empathize with the 
user 
We understand that while this feature would be useful for some
using the application do not require this level of customization. 
interface will be simpler without it.  
Appeal to the business 
If we stay focused on finishing the case view in it’s simplest form
complete this core feature set within our timeline and get this vi
Afterwards, we can collect additional feedback from users and m
idea.  
Lock-in Agreement 
Are you comfortable with us moving forward without that featu
prefer we re-prioritize our tasks and adjust timelines to accomm
 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 21 
I Want a New Widget 
  
Thank, Repeat, Prepare Thank you for your thoughts on the dashboard. Yes, I agree tha
overall totals would be useful, but that wasn’t in the original de
solution. 
Identify the problem 
The problem is that the graphs have to take the full width of the
less control over the display since it’s a third-party solution. Als
widgets for the current status, as well as follow-ups so there jus
available to add another one. The current arrangement of widge
application for reducing late follow-ups.  
Define the solution 
I would recommend replacing either the Current widget or the 
Totals widget, if that is the priority now. We can use the existin
without modifying the design and we keep the interface simpler
Empathize with the 
user 
The challenge with this approach is that we’ve already reviewed
users and they agreed that our current widgets were the most n
don’t want to add one and create clutter or information overloa
want to honor what they expressed they needed from this dashb
expecting to train her staff based on our current designs. 
Appeal to the business 
To be practical, even just swapping one widget for another will
because we don’t have a design for the new widget and it will n
developers. From our perspective, that could delay the release a
while the Totals widget is nice, it does not help us accomplish o
ups. If we remove one of the existing widgets in favor of a Tota
modifying our objectives too because we’ll need a new target to
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
22 
arrangement of widgets. 
Lock-in Agreement 
Would you like to add this Totals widget by swapping out one o
adjust our timeline, go back to our users with this change, and t
our new goals are for this phase.  
 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 23 
Users Told Us 
  
Thank, Repeat, Prepare Thank you for your time today and for sharing your feedback w
I’ve taken notes on everything you suggested and I’d like to go 
we understand. With all of our designs, we are taking into cons
business and the users. I think it will help the discussion for you
process on some of these areas.  
Identify the problem 
Your first suggestion was that we change the input fields on the
an interesting part of the application because it has the highest 
the other parts of the app. About 40% of users drop off before c
like to solve getting users through this step so that we can make
subsequent steps and complete the process.  
Define the solution 
Our solution was based on an assumption that the field labels w
person, so the first thing we did was to update the names with m
But next, we spoke with some of the call center associates who 
many users simply don’t have the details of their medical history
requiring all these fields before moving on forces them to aband
Empathize with the 
user 
To make it easier for our users, we’ve removed many of the req
allowed them to indicate which information they have and whic
provide later. This allows them to complete this step for now, ev
We can prompt them to complete it the next time they login or 
after a few days. The user will have a greater sense of control an
next step because of these changes.  
Appeal to the business 
What that means for us is that we will see significantly higher s
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
24 
people will be able to make it to the next step. Not only that, bu
data because some users were filling in fake information just to 
is that we’ll see fewer support calls since users will be able to co
without assistance. That will save us real money in the call cent
data as it is entered, so we can still go back and complete their p
on site, if needed. There’s no risk of losing information. 
Lock-in Agreement 
We’d really like to see huge gains in the number of clients that a
profiles and believe this is the best way to accomplish that. Do y
solution? Or would you prefer we revert to the old designs?   
 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 25 
    Following a formula for responding to stakeholders might seem like a contrived way of 
creating a natural conversation. The purpose of the ideal response is to provide a framework 
and structure that reminds us to hit on all the important parts in our reply. It is not meant to 
force you into a way of talking that comes across as mechanical or is too strict to be normal 
speech. I’ve found that keeping the IDEAL acrostic in my mind is a memorable of way of 
making sure I’ve covered all my bases. Whether or not you form your response in the exact 
same way each time is less important than making sure you’ve addressed everything you 
need to. Remember, the key is to respond to stakeholders in a way that appeals to their needs 
and makes the best case for your design decisions. Use this framework as a tool to help you 
communicate to stakeholders, keep your sanity, and deliver the best user experience.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 1 
Chapter 10 
Meeting Adjourned: The After-Party 
 
“The single biggest problem in communication is the illusion that it has taken place.” 
– George Bernard Shaw 
Once the meeting is over, you still have plenty of work to do. The time immediately after a 
meeting is nearly as important as the meeting itself. So don’t rush off and leave everyone 
behind. Wait and talk to people afterwards to debrief and gain insights that weren’t apparent 
at the time. Informally have 1-on-1s with people that can help champion your cause and then 
follow-up quickly while it’s still fresh. This time immediately after the meeting is your best 
defense against making a decision that could ultimately spell disaster for the UX of the 
project. Plus, you might be able to correct some concerns even if you think the decision has 
already been made. Let’s quickly review some of the things you’ll need to do immediately 
after the meeting: 
• 
Stick around to chat with people 
• 
Follow-up quickly with your notes 
• 
Apply filters and remove the fluff 
• 
Seek out individuals that can help you 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2 
• 
Make decisions when there is ambiguity 
 
The Meeting After the Meeting 
The meeting after the meeting may be more important than the meeting itself. People hang 
around, casually discussing what just happened. But it is in these casual environments that 
some people will tell you how they really feel about the project or what they think needs to 
be done. For whatever reason, people don’t always speak up and say what they’re thinking in 
front of a group. Usually it’s because the purpose is to allow the boss to have his or her say, 
but sometimes it’s because what people are thinking may be unpopular or risky and they 
don’t want upset the status quo. And so they’ll wait until the meeting is over, pull you aside 
and tell you what they think. You’d be amazed at how many decisions were made 
immediately after the meeting was dismissed. This is your best chance to wrap up any 
unfinished business and work with the influencers to get the approval you need.  
Sometimes, the hallway outside a meeting is the most productive place. I was in a meeting 
with an executive to review the implementation of a design had been previously agreed upon. 
The meeting itself was fine. There were no huge hangups and nothing major to report. But 
immediately afterwards, once the executive had left, everyone stuck around specifically to 
talk to me.  
One person asked me to keep her in the loop in the future so that she could back me up 
during our next meeting. She wanted to help me succeed and was willing to be direct about 
it. Another person wanted to rewind to an earlier decision and give me permission to move 
forward, even without explicit approval from that executive. He wanted the project to move 
forward and was willing to stick his neck out for me. And a third person apologized for being 
absent from my other meetings, asked to meet with me directly to share her concerns, and 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
3 
promised to be more involved going forward. All three of these conversations might not have 
happened with the same degree of urgency if I had rushed off somewhere else.  
So always make plans to stick around after the meeting, chat with people, thank them for 
their participation, and see what happens. I promise that just as much will get done in the 
hallway as it did during the actual meeting itself.  
 
Follow-up Fast 
As soon as possible (preferably within an hour or at least within a day) send a follow-up to 
the entire team. It doesn’t have to be written perfectly, the purpose is more functional than 
poetic. You have to follow-up while it’s still fresh on everyone’s mind, including yours, before 
anyone has a chance to forget and disagree with the decisions they’ve already made.  
A quick follow up demonstrates that the meeting was a priority to you, so much so that 
you’re not going to do anything else until it’s settled. Second, it values the participants 
because it shows that you’re doing the leg work, keeping them informed, and making the best 
use of their time. Next, it shows that you’re listening. You’re not just going to throw away all 
their feedback: you wrote it down, are taking it seriously, and concretely communicating it to 
the entire team. And lastly, it gets everyone on the same page about what was decided so 
there is no confusion going forward. You’re creating a record for everyone to see and giving 
them the opportunity to reply if they have any additional insights.  
This written record has proven to be invaluable to me months later when new people on the 
project want to know who or when we made decisions. A quick search reveals my notes or 
communications and I’m able to avoid a re-discussion. I’ve also had managers hang on to 
these communications and use them in other meetings to update different stakeholders. Some 
might even copy and paste it into a different communication to their own boss. The use and 
re-use of the follow-up cannot be understated.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4 
The follow-up should do a few things: 
• 
First, thank them for their time and participation. People believe they’re very busy and 
we need to appreciate that they’re taking the time for us.  
• 
Second, re-cap everything that was talked about. This can just be a simple bulleted list 
with the decision noted. Having a simple list makes it easy for them to share with other 
people.  
• 
Last, the follow-up should always focus on actions, next steps, or expectations. You 
want to always (as much as possible) communicate what’s going to happen next. This 
helps people see that the meeting was a good use of their time because it’s moving 
things forward. It also off-loads the burden from you and allows the whole team to 
participate in the next steps.  
• 
Don’t be afraid to assign tasks to other people, even those outside your immediate 
influence. It’s common in meetings for one person to volunteer to investigate 
something, seek information from another person, or agree to take the conversation 
elsewhere. The follow-up is the perfect time to remind everyone who is doing what. Be 
as specific as possible. Note the item in question, mention to the person who will be 
responsible for it, and provide dates or a general timeframe for when we will know 
more. Ask direct questions too so there’s no ambiguity about what items are still open. 
List important decisions and make it clear why the decision is being made.  
Here’s an example of what a follow-up might look like:  
Thanks everyone for your time today! It was a very productive meeting and I appreciate you all 
being available. Here is what we discussed:  
 
• 
The carousel on the homepage moves too fast. Jon is going to change it to 100ms 
 
• 
The price for items in Best Sellers seems too small. I will check to make sure it’s consistent 
with the others and adjust as necessary.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5 
 
• 
The category tree appears to be using the wrong data. We have an email out to Abdul to 
address this.  
 
• 
Stan is concerned the CTA for membership is too large and uses the wrong copy. Jennifer 
is checking with content for correct copy. I will forward the usability study that informed 
this.  
 
• 
The release date has been approved, pending QA. Jon is going to email us tomorrow with a 
status update.  
 
The key here is to keep your update as short and specific as possible, without leaving out any 
important information. Your stakeholders should be able to quickly skim without being 
bogged down in the details.  
 
Applying Filters 
Another post-meeting strategy is to use your best judgment to filter out all the unnecessary 
information that isn’t worth repeating to the entire team. This can be difficult to assess, but 
it’s necessary if we expect to communicate without too much clutter. The general idea is that 
there are plenty of things that are said in a meeting that do not need to be re-considered, re-
discussed, or re-hashed again. Much of it will be obvious, but some of it is more difficult to 
discern.  
For example, when most of the people in the room nod their heads at the right solution but 
one or two people still have questions - allow them to speak their minds. Let them talk, listen 
to them, apply all the same skills you have learned so far. But when it comes time to writing 
your notes or creating the follow-up, use your own discernment to decide if it ever needs to 
be mentioned again. Some stuff can safely fall off the radar and no one will ever notice.  
Other times, you may have a colleague or stakeholder who is saying or suggesting things are 
totally off-the-wall. Related to the idea that people like to hear themselves talk, some people 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6 
will just riff on an idea. They might call it brainstorming, but it’s clear to everyone in the 
room that this person is going off on a tangent. It’s ok, though. Allow them to speak and 
make them feel valued. The important thing is that you recognize these situations and 
account for them in your follow-up by discreetly excluding their suggestions. 
Once I was in a meeting discussing the idea of an interactive map of the companies retail 
stores. The existing map was nothing more than a static image with labels that the user could 
pinch and zoom. While reviewing some of the map designs, the project manager went off on 
a tangent about how these maps weren’t innovative or forward thinking, that he would have 
expected more from us and wanted to know where our ‘out of the box’ ideas were. He then 
began pontificating on a 3D virtual reality map where the user could walk down store aisles 
and, using augmented reality, see all the details of each product on shelves with popovers and 
animations. While he meant well, I knew better than to spend time on this idea and was able 
to remove that part of the meeting from my follow-up notes.  
There are a few flags to watch our for. You have to quickly assess several things about the 
person:  
• 
What is this person’s intentions? Some people are just throwing out ideas casually and 
don’t actually have any intention of them going anywhere. They’re comfortable with 
the idea that it never progresses beyond the initial suggestion. 
• 
What is everyone’s opinion of the person? Sometimes you can tell that everyone else 
on the team doesn’t take this person seriously. You can tell by the way they react, 
either with rolling eyes, groans, or polite compliance. Understanding relationships and 
influence is important to applying these filters. 
• 
Do other people agree or disagree? It’s often clear that no one else agrees with this 
person and even if there isn’t a decision, you can safely ignore that idea. Read the room 
and make a judgement call. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
7 
• 
Is this person influential enough to matter? It may seem trite, but some people simply 
are not influential enough for their opinion to matter to us. Figure out who’s who and 
then use that to inform your decisions for following-up. 
• 
Are they likely to bring it up again in the next meeting? If so, you’ll need a way to 
politely defer the decision and communicate later. You actually don’t want them to 
bring it up again, so you’ll want to be sure and address their ideas before that happens.  
The point here is that it may be possible to just ignore some people’s suggestions for your 
designs and not allow them to cloud your judgement on the project. I don’t mean to suggest 
that we should disregard some people as irrelevant, but rather that we have to learn to 
understand when their comments don’t align with the objectives of the project. If they aren’t 
influential, no one agrees with them, and they aren’t likely to bring it up again then it’s a safe 
bet you can just move on and never mention it again.  
Never Mention it Again 
I was in a meeting with five or six people and there was one woman who was particularly 
charismatic and full of energy. She wasn’t from the same team, but she was an influential 
person and asked to be included. Overall, I’d say that while everyone enjoyed working with 
her (she was a fun person to be around) she had a reputation for being sort of crazy.  
During the course of the meeting, someone else was commenting on an interaction and 
making suggestions when she jumped in with an idea. Her idea took shape as something 
completely off-the-wall, virtually impossible to pull off or at least incredibly unrealistic, and 
the entire conversation shifted briefly to this wild brainstorm. I didn’t participate; I just took 
notes and asked questions. Other’s chimed in, but it seemed clear to me that no one else 
really thought this was a must-have. Her feature request was outside the scope, although 
‘revolutionary’ and definitely forward-thinking.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
8 
After the meeting when I was writing my follow-up, I came to the section of my notes with 
this idea. Rather than have it live to see the next meeting agenda, I chose to simply leave it 
off the follow-up entirely. I emailed everyone in the room, including her, a bulleted list of 
what we had talked about but her idea was purposefully missing. After that, I never heard 
another thing about it. No one else on the team mentioned it and she never brought it up to 
me.  
In this particular case, I had to use a keen sense of understanding the dynamics of the 
relationships at play in the room otherwise I might have stumbled into a request that had the 
potential to completely distract us. But it’s important to point out that I did two things to 
make her feel good about it in the moment: I asked questions and I wrote things down. She 
had no idea what I was writing down; it didn’t really matter. What mattered was that I 
respected her enough to listen and take notes. I made her feel valued. Even if she had noticed 
that I left her idea off the follow-up, she knew that I had at least considered it. I don’t know 
for sure, but my guess is that she either didn’t read the email at all or never even noticed that 
her idea was missing.  
Overall, you must learn to filter out all the cruft that can cloud our decision making. It’s too 
easy to think that everyone’s opinions and ideas need to be incorporated into our designs, but 
that’s not true. It’s actually a dangerous path. So use your skills in listening and relational 
discernment to remove the stuff you don’t need, keep the most important things, and follow-
up quickly with what’s being done.  
 
Seek Out Individuals 
Just like the meeting after the meeting, there may be some people you’ll want to specifically 
make a point to talk to. You might offer to follow them back to their desk, walk them to their 
next meeting, or invite them to continue the conversation later over coffee. It’s important that 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
9 
you ask right after the meeting, while everyone still has their brains in gear and is thinking 
about your project. Once they get back to their desks, it will be a lot more difficult for them 
to make time for you.  
The purpose of these one-on-ones is to give people an opportunity to share their thoughts 
and opinions outside the constraints of a meeting where other people are listening. You can 
use these interpersonal relationships to collect more information about the project, gain 
insights about team or company dynamics you might not otherwise know about, and build 
new relationships that can help you get what you need in the future. These people are the 
influencers on your project and they can become part of your coalition for influencing the 
next meeting and the next round of design revisions.  
Meetings are usually a good time to see people that you don’t normally get to interact with 
regularly. They may be from another department or team and so they don’t get to see 
everything you’re doing. I find that I’m always pleasantly surprised when someone I don’t 
know well comes to my defense and expresses agreement with my proposal. So you want to 
always be intentional about seeking these people out and finding ways to connect with them 
more regularly so they’re in the loop and have the opportunity to help influence your work.  
This is not a formal mentor relationship as much as it is an opportunity for you to involve 
people from other areas that you know are smart and can help champion your cause. It’s one 
thing for your boss to hear you defend your designs, but it’s quite another for him to hear 
other people outside your team agree with you. That sort of contribution is extremely 
valuable in design.  
 
Do Something, Even If It’s Wrong 
When I was a kid my dad and I built a treehouse together. I remember one time while he was 
holding up a board he dropped his tools. He was standing on a ladder, holding this heavy 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
10 
piece in place, and unable to do anything himself. I didn’t know what to do and just stood 
there looking at him in indecision. Should I try to help him hold the board? Should I jump 
down and get the tools? What should I do? After a few seconds of agony, he yelled to me, 
“Well… do something! Even if it’s wrong!” This was actually a common phrase of my dad’s. 
The sentiment is that sometimes it’s not clear what we should do, but it’s almost always 
better to do something rather than nothing.  
I wouldn’t suggest applying this logic to too many of life’s important decisions, but it’s often 
the case that meetings end without any clear resolution to some of the most important 
questions for our designs. Sometimes even when we press hard to get people to make 
decisions, people in a meeting will still not be able to agree or move forward. Perhaps no one 
is willing to speak up in front of other stakeholders. Maybe no one really cares about one 
particular element. What’s common, is for no obvious solution to appear to be the right 
course of action. No one is really sure what to do and so no one does anything at all.  
In these cases, I recommend simply making a decision yourself and communicating it to the 
rest of the team in your follow-up. It’s better to do something (even if it’s wrong) and give 
your team the opportunity to speak out for or against your choice rather than deal with stale 
decisions and a stagnant design process. Sometimes you just have to decide and tell everyone 
else what you’re going to do in order to get them to speak up.  
There’s a similar idea called the McDonald’s theory, proposed by Jon Bell. If you’ve ever 
had the experience of standing around with friends trying to decide where to go eat, then you 
know this feeling. Everyone is trying to be polite and no one seems to really care which 
restaurant you go to. As a result, you all continue to stand around and not go anywhere. 
According to Jon’s theory, you should suggest eating at McDonalds - make the decision for 
the group - and suddenly everyone will have an opinion about where to go. Jon Bell says, 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
11 
“Anne Lamott advocates “shitty first drafts,” Nike tells us to “Just Do It,” and I recommend 
McDonald’s just to get people so grossed out they come up with a better idea.”1 
One of my friends, Mark, who is a developer does the same thing with styling CSS in his 
projects. Since he’s not a designer (and not very good at CSS) he wants to be sure the 
designers will make it better. However, he’s had too many experiences where his CSS was 
seen as ‘good enough’ and never polished to the degree he knows it should be. Rather than 
have to explain to everyone what needs to be done, he simply applies appalling colors to 
every element: bright red, hot pink, and putrid brown to be sure that anyone who sees it will 
insist that the designer re-style it appropriately. Some times the best way to get people’s 
attention is to make a bad decision. 
The same thing happens with design decisions and business. No one is quite sure what the 
right solution is. Everyone wants to be polite. These are your designs, after all, and they may 
not want to hurt your feelings. If you’re faced with indecision or ambiguity, take the lead and 
make the decision for everyone. Find the choice that you believe is best and then 
communicate that to the team. Be specific, provide examples, and give them a deadline. Say 
something like, “If I don’t hear back from anyone by the end of the day, I’m going to move 
forward with this design.” You may not hear from anyone, but sometimes people will 
suddenly have stronger opinions and allow you to discuss the right solution. It’s not a perfect 
science, but it’s a great way to keep your designs moving forward. Remember: do something, 
even if it’s wrong. 
 
It’s important to keep in mind that even when the meeting is over your work is not done. 
Often, the most productive parts of the meeting happen after everyone has left the 
                                                
1 McDonalds Theory, Jon Bell, Apr 29, 2013 https://medium.com/@ienjoy/mcdonalds-theory-
9216e1c9da7d 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
12 
conference room. Don’t miss out on this opportunity to finalize decisions and get buy-in from 
people after the fact. Keep these tips in mind, once the meeting is adjourned:  
• 
The time immediately after the meeting is a great opportunity to hear what people 
really think. 
• 
The faster you follow-up the more you communicate urgency, value, and decisiveness. 
Do it now. 
• 
Filter out any clutter or unnecessary recommendations from your notes that you know 
do not need to be followed up on. 
• 
Stick around to chat, follow people back to their desks, and get the last-minute buy-in 
you need to move forward. 
• 
If there’s ambiguity, make a decision and communicate it to everyone else. That may 
the only way to move things forward. 
The thing with meetings and design decisions is that they don’t always go the way we want 
them to. Even with the most eloquent response and the best follow-up, we might still have to 
make changes to our designs that we disagree with. But if you walk away from a meeting 
feeling like all is lost, don’t worry. It’s still possible to save the day and re-work your designs 
to meet everyone’s needs without totally losing it. You just have to learn how to recover from 
disaster. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 1 
Chapter 11 
Recovering from Disaster 
 
“In every difficult situation is potential value. Believe this, then begin looking for it.” 
– Norman Vincent Peale 
After everything we’ve covered, I want to be honest and say that sometimes no matter how 
hard we try, we are still going to have to make changes to our designs that we disagree with. 
It could be that the people we work with are not willing to budge on their opinions despite 
our expert suggestions. Or it’s possible that we just haven’t done a good enough job of 
making a compelling case for our designs. In this chapter, I’d like to propose some options 
for dealing with changes we disagree with and hopefully recovering from a UX disaster. The 
purpose is to ensure that we maintain the integrity of the user experience even in the face of 
disagreement about the right solution.  
 
We’ll cover:  
• 
Ways to comply with the request without going overboard 
• 
Seeing the opportunity in these changes, no matter how terrible they might seem 
• 
Deciding to choose your battles and earn a deposit in the bank account of trust 
• 
Learning to recognize when you’re wrong and correcting yourself 
• 
Creating purposeful distractions without being underhanded 
• 
Setting expectations properly about what our stakeholders can expect going forward 
 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2 
First, let’s uncover the root problem that got us here in the first place. 
 
How is This Possible? 
Being asked to make changes that we disagree with is the very thing we’re trying to avoid. If 
it’s still happening, we need to correct the problem. The first step to addressing any problem 
like this is to understand why it happened in the first place and what could have been done to 
avoid it. We’ve gone to great lengths to listen to and understand our stakeholders so that we 
can appeal to their needs with our response. If they still disagree with us or continue to insist 
that we make a change, there are a few reasons why: 
They have a specific need that isn’t being met 
Some people (especially executives) simply want to know that they thing they’re interested in 
is available and accessible to them. This is not always user-centered in the way we would like 
it to be, but is driven in-part by their own personal use cases. Perhaps it’s something that 
high-profile clients or other executives ask them for. As long as they know where it is, they’re 
usually satisfied. They may even be perfectly happy to jump through a few hoops to get to it, 
if they know what to expect.  I worked with someone who loved to look at all the social 
media chatter about the app and insisted we add it to the homescreen. In reality, he just 
needed quick access to it. Helping him bookmark it with a vanity url that he could remember 
addressed his needs. However, it’s not always that simple. If you suspect that there’s an 
underlying need that isn’t being expressed, you’ll have to work harder to uncover their 
motivations and find a way to address their needs in order to overcome the objection. 
They want to know they’re being heard 
It’s also possible that our stakeholders simply want to know that their ideas and suggestions 
are being heard and taken seriously. Some times people insist on a change because they don’t 
think we’re listening to them. As figures of authority, it can be a way to exert their power. I 
don’t mean that our stakeholders would be so arrogant that they’d purposefully push their 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
3 
own agenda at the expense of the team or user experience. I think this can happen 
unconsciously when they don’t feel that we’ve done a good enough job of explaining why 
their suggestion doesn’t work. If this is happening, we need to communicate to them how 
much we value their input and feedback. They may have felt like we shrugged off their 
suggestion without taking it seriously. But more importantly, we did not help them 
understand why our solution was preferred. You’ll have to go back and allow them to state 
their perspective again. 
There is a misunderstanding 
If you’re confused about your stakeholders insistence on changing something that you’ve 
recommended against, it’s possible that you’re simply not on the same page. There could 
have been a miscommunication: your stakeholder didn’t understand what a carousel was, 
wasn’t listening close enough, or misunderstands the context. Clearing up the 
miscommunication is usually sufficient. Other times, the stated goal of the project has 
changed and morphed over time and we’re now solving different problems than we originally 
set out to. This is quite common and a stakeholder’s suggestion for changes is often a 
reflection of these moving objectives. Getting to the root cause and clearly re-defining the 
goals will help guide you back to a healthy place.  
Your designs are not the best solution 
I know it’s hard to believe, but it’s possible that your design is actually not the best choice. In 
fact, you could be wrong. We will look at understanding when you’re wrong later in this 
chapter, but it’s important to realize that our stakeholders and leaders have been placed in 
authority over us for a reason and they are are usually ultimately responsible for our 
successes and failures. They have expert knowledge in different areas and insights into the 
business we don’t have. Just because we disagree does not mean that we’re right. In the same 
way that our stakeholders extend trust to us for recommending the best solutions, we also 
have to learn to extend that same trust to them when it comes to the final decision. It may not 
be easy, but it’s our reality. Our leaders and managers might know something, perhaps 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4 
intuitively, that we don’t. They’ve been tasked with making the final call and sometimes we 
have to lean on them and go with their vision.  
They are completely unreasonable 
Some people are just totally unreasonable and no matter what we say, they will always insist 
that we do it their way. This is actually less common than you might think but it does 
happen. Usually when we think that our stakeholders are being unreasonable, it’s actually 
that we just don’t have the same perspective they do and it’s possible (even likely) we would 
make the same decision if we were in their shoes. Still, there is definitely an exception of 
people who just can’t be pleased no matter how hard we try. They believe their ideas are 
best, they do not trust their team, and they’ll push for their agenda no matter the cost. These 
are the most difficult relationships to manage, but I’ve found that even unreasonable people 
can eventually come around to our way of thinking. It just takes a lot more effort and 
relational capital to make it happen.  
 
Making Changes You Disagree With 
In the event that you’re faced with the challenge of incorporating a change you disagree with, 
I have a few simple suggestions that might help you address it without ruining the experience 
for the user. In most cases, we don’t have to make the changes exactly as they’ve been 
prescribed. As in the previous section, often people just want to know where to find the the 
thing they want regardless of the specific suggestion they make for designing it. Executives, 
in particular, tend to make requests to satisfy their own needs. Often, just making sure they 
know how to find the thing they value (even if it’s out-of-the-way) is sufficient for dealing 
with these requests. Here are a few ways of doing that:  
Make it subtle 
The goal here is to take the request and reduce it to something more palatable for the user 
experience. If they want a button, make it a text link. If they suggest a menu, hide it off 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5 
canvas unless the user explicitly asks for it. If they want it at the top, put it at the bottom, out 
of the way. Whatever it takes to appease them while also removing it from the domain of 
distraction that will cloud the usability of the app. It’s often possible to minimize the impact 
these requests have by making them more subtle. 
Make it an option 
Often, these requests don’t have to be publicly accessible if it’s just something your boss or 
team needs to see. I’ve successfully argued for these requests to be added as an option that 
isn’t turned on for everyone, either based on user login and permissions or even once as a 
cookie that was set after following a specific url. I was able to limit the audience so that it 
didn’t affect usability for the general public. If creating an option is viable for your project, 
see if your stakeholders are willing accept that as a possible solution. 
Carefully consider placement 
Depending on the technology you’re using and the kind of app you’re working on, you might 
be able to avoid including the proposed change in every view, particularly if the change 
involves a new navigation item. Similarly, if it involves the homepage. In those cases, you 
may be able to include these elements on only one view rather than all of them. Offer to add 
the element to the footer, to one other out-of-the-way page, or in a way that is not exposed by 
default in the primary template. Always keep in mind how the placement of the change will 
affect the rest of the app and look for an opportunity minimize it’s visibility while still making 
a point to accommodate the stakeholder’s suggestion. 
The hidden menu 
I had a boss once who was very much supportive of my user-centered approach to design, 
but he also had specific needs for the website that he felt were important and he wanted me 
to add several things to the homepage. I disagreed that these elements were important. They 
were essentially links to other external resources: a customer portal login, some financial 
documents. What I found was that as long as I could teach him where to go to get what he 
needed and that he could be empowered to also tell others how to find those resources, then 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6 
he was completely fine with me putting them out of the way. So that’s what we did. I ‘hid’ his 
things in an out-of-the-way menu and showed him where to find it. “Go to this page, click on 
this link, and choose from those options.” It was simple enough for him to remember and 
that’s all he really wanted. Carefully choosing the placement and working with him to find an 
appropriate solution helped maintain the sanity of the user experience.  
Plan a space 
It’s a good idea to always plan a place where you know you can easily add or remove 
elements that might be requested from time to time. I’d even recommend having several areas 
where content can be added and removed on a regular basis to accommodate changing 
needs. Many stakeholder requests are temporary or seasonal: a special promotion, 
announcements, or a new initiative. If you have planned real estate (like a container, sidebar, 
or flexible content area) where you can include these elements without disrupting the user’s 
flow, the conversation becomes a lot easier to manage.  Accommodating changes like this is 
all about expectations. If you expect these requests are coming and have already planned a 
space to add them, it’s simple to address.  
I’ve purposefully planned multiple areas on a homepage where I knew I could add elements, 
as they were requested, with the goal of removing them after a period of time. I also 
purposefully chose a different area with each request, based on it’s needs, so that we weren’t 
blindly dropping irrelevant content or functionality into the same black hole each time. This 
kept the homepage fresh and interesting because new content was moving in and out, so it 
was more effective at attracting the user’s attention too.  
In other cases, I’ve used an “About” view of a mobile app as a place to put everything the 
‘business’ wants and no users really need to ever see. One app had a small info icon in the 
nav. That icon linked to a page with content about who built the app, in partnership with 
others, with a goal of doing something, links to the blog, and on and on. As more ideas for 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
7 
‘business’ content emerged, I was able to move some of those elements to the About page and 
keep it out of the user’s way.  
On a website that I maintained long-term, I planned 
area (in orange) where I could add content that I kne
be requested from time to time. These spaces were no
the original design or requirements. By planning it ou
advance, the conversation was easy to manage withou
like everything would be ruined. Rotating the location
changing the design each time also kept the website f
gave stakeholders the sense that I was tailoring it to t
Some of these areas were conditional (based on a logi
cookie), others were time-based and automatically rem
after they had expired. When stakeholders came to m
special request, I already had the rules and patterns in
accommodate their needs. 
 
These are simple approaches to what I assume will be simple requests. A lot of the more 
common stakeholder suggestions are driven by a need to show something that we weren’t 
aware of in the beginning. Obviously, these suggestions aren’t going to work with more 
difficult requests for user flow tweaks or complicated interactions, but they’re valid options 
for times when someone just needs their thing to be included and you have to find a way to 
make it work.  
 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
8 
Making Lemonade 
It’s not always the case that one person’s ‘bad idea’ will turn out poorly and ruin everything. 
Usually, it’s our poor execution of that idea that causes these changes to create chaos. Rather 
than try to fight it or do the hard work of making it better, we often just ‘give in’ shrug our 
shoulders and add the thing they want exactly like they proposed it. However when we do 
that, we’re missing a huge opportunity to improve the design in a way that we had never 
thought of before.  
All design has constraints and limitations. Our challenge has always been to build websites 
or apps that are easy to use, yet are required to support a certain feature set, user story, or 
major constraint like mobile device viewport size. We relish in these challenges; this is what 
gets us out of bed each day: making great stuff with constraints. If our projects had no 
constraints at all, it might be theoretically easier but it would not be nearly as rewarding. The 
fact is, these constraints make us better designers. They are the reason we have a job: other 
people can’t figure out how to make it all work given the same requirements. And so, when 
directed to implement a design decision we don’t support, it’s important we don’t give up and 
just paste it on top of the interface—tempting as that may be. 
Making these changes is an opportunity to find the best possible way to implement that idea. 
It’s a new constraint that you are tasked with incorporating into the project. Our 
stakeholders expect that we’ll ‘figure out the best way to do it’ because that’s what we’re 
being paid for. In fact, our goal should be to take this constraint and actually use it to 
improve the experience rather than muddle through and hope we don’t break it. We need to 
flip this on it’s side and see the opportunity in the mess. We can improve the app and manage 
the conversation with clever solutions and creative thinking.  
In my experience, one person’s suggestion is a gold mine of other ideas waiting to be 
excavated. The changes they propose should spark a conversation that leads to an even 
better solution. Your job, as a communicator, is to lead that conversation to a place that will 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
9 
yield the best results for your application. You can do that by asking questions, 
understanding their perspective and listening: all the skills we’ve covered in these pages. 
Involve other people. Ask them how they would solve the same problem. Propose an 
alternative; even a bad alternative should start a conversation about solutions. You see, this is 
an opportunity for you to both practice your skills as a communicator as well as effectively 
lead a discussion on maintaining the right user experience.  
Uncovering other problems 
Sometimes having a stakeholder insist on a change can lead you down a path to improving 
the app that you never expected, solving problems that you might not have uncovered 
otherwise. A mobile app I designed displayed demographic data in both a list view and a bar 
chart view, controlled by tabs. Originally, the two views were distinctly different but over 
time as we moved things around they unintentionally became similar without us even 
realizing it. Finally, the client asked us to add an additional field to the bar chart and we 
realized that we could combine both views into one. What started out as two different ways 
to show the information merged into one consolidated view and a simpler user experience. 
Had we argued against all these changes, we never would have arrived at a better solution.  
On another project, one of my stakeholders requested changes to some interactions on form 
validation and messaging. While her intentions were well placed, the changes (I thought) 
would degrade the experience for the user. Rather than blindly comply, we did some quick 
user testing to make sure what we were doing would work. By observing users perform all 
the tasks end-to-end, we discovered a completely different flaw in the user flow. As it turned 
out, neither my suggestions nor the client’s were the right solution. Being open to changes in 
one part of the app revealed a flaw in another. Because of our timeline, we might not have 
uncovered that problem as soon if I hadn’t been open to the suggestions from my 
stakeholders.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
10 
Seeing stakeholder requests as an opportunity for change or a challenge to solve for is a 
much healthier approach than groaning accommodation. Plan for these changes, because they 
will happen. If you already know how you’re going to address them, with pre-planned real 
estate, an extra user study, or a re-evaluation of the approach, you’ll be in a much better 
position to ensure you’re creating the best user experience even in the face of difficult 
changes. Your stakeholders will appreciate your effort, your attitude will help you stay on 
track, and in the end the user will thank you for it.  
 
The Bank Account of Trust 
As you consider the different ways to approach stakeholder feedback, it’s important to 
realize that every relationship involves some give and take. It’s simply not possible to have a 
healthy relationship with other people that is only one-way. You can’t expect that other 
people won’t suggest changes, so no matter what you have to be prepared to deal with them. 
It’s much better to anticipate them and know how to react before it even happens.  
Purely from an economic stand-point, your job as a designer is already established as a give-
and-take relationship. You receive money in exchange for providing designs. Beyond that, in 
order for the relationship to not only function but also to thrive, you also have to make sure 
that your stakeholders are happy. That’s more than just a purely economical transaction. 
This happens by building trust, demonstrating your expertise, managing their expectations, 
communicating effectively, and (of course) delivering what they expect. In those areas, there 
is also give and take. Think of it like a bank account: every positive experience working with 
you is a deposit and every negative one a withdrawal. Stephen Covey calls this the 
“Emotional Bank Account” in The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People.1 Your goal is to maintain a 
positive balance with them at all times.  
                                                
1 Covey, Stephen, The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, p. 188, 1989, Fireside, Simon & Schuster 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
11 
For every time you agree with your stakeholder, you make a deposit. When the metrics 
improve as you promised: deposit. When you show them an incredibly beautiful design they 
love: deposit. But when we disagree, we start to see withdrawals. When you miss a deadline 
or fail to follow-up on feedback? Withdrawal. You refuse to make a change because you 
believe it’s in the best interest of the user? You might end up being right, but at least 
temporarily it’s a withdrawal of trust.  At the end of the day, your relationship with 
stakeholders can be measured by the balance you have in this bank account of trust. Their 
willingness to trust you when it matters most is dependent on having a positive balance.  
As a designer, that means that sometimes you have to relent and allow your stakeholders to 
make changes even when you’re opposed to them, maybe only because you need to make a 
deposit. The important thing is that you’re learning which battles are worth fighting for. 
You’re taking stock of the big picture and choosing to only make a fuss about the ones that 
matter most. You’re focused on your goals, the problem, the users, and making sure that the 
areas where you disagree can still allow you to deliver on your promise of building the best 
possible interface. It’s a balancing act, for sure, but one that you will always be learning to 
manage. You must constantly be balancing the needs of the user with the needs and 
requirements of your stakeholders. When those two things collide, you have to make hard 
decisions about where to draw the line. But realize that you always have a choice about 
where that line is. In many ways, as the designer, you get to draw (and re-draw) that line at 
every meeting and in each conversation. The outcome of the project is dependent, in large 
part, on your ability to effectively manage these conversations and find the best solutions 
given the constraints of working with real humans.  
The long-term goal of building trust with stakeholders is to come to a place where their 
default response is to assume that our choices are right, rather than questioning our decisions 
from the beginning. My clients know that I have opinions and can express my perspective. 
Over time, they learn to trust me and shift from a position of assuming my choices are 
questionable to assuming my choices have purpose. On a phone call recently, one of the 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
12 
stakeholders questioned a design element but then deferred to me, “I know Tom usually has 
good reasons for his choices. Tom, what’s the reason you did it this way?” When you can get 
your stakeholders to approach your work with this perspective, you set yourself up for long-
term success in building great user experiences that you can feel good about. 
 
When You’re Wrong 
One of the keys to good communication is building trust among the people that you work 
with. It’s not enough to only be good at telling people why you believe you’re right, although 
that’s important. You have to also build rapport, trust, and develop a track record of making 
good decisions. The more people see that your designs accomplish the goals, the more likely 
they’ll be to defer to your judgement when the time comes. This only comes with experience 
and by building good relationships.  
However, something strange happens when you’re wrong: there is potential for that trust to 
be broken. The metrics don’t improve like you’d hoped, you miss a target deadline for the 
release, or your designs are found to be difficult for users. It’s hard when you express 
confidence in your decisions and then watch as your assumptions come crumbling down. 
Hopefully your decisions won’t cause critical damage to your product, but in any case when 
your designs are shown to not be the right solution it creates a tension that can be hard to 
deal with. You have a choice: to own up to your decisions or to ignore, deny, or absolve 
yourself of any involvement.  
While being wrong might seem like it would tear down trust, it’s actually an opportunity to 
build more trust by admitting you made a mistake. It seems counterintuitive: we’ve let them 
down and now we’re supposed to admit it. How does that build trust? In a court of law, 
admitting to a crime means that you bear the punishment. You’ve broken the trust of the 
people and now you have to pay for your mistake. But in the world of relationships, people 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
13 
are far more forgiving than you might expect. People appreciate honesty more than smoke 
and mirrors. They prefer transparency over a cover up. The way they know they can trust 
you is when they see that you’ll own up to your mistakes. Honesty is truly the best policy. It 
may be hard at first: it will create difficult conversations. But in the end, you’ll almost always 
come out on top when people realize you’re a trustworthy person. That even when you screw 
up, you’re there to admit it, fix it, and move on.  
In a worst case scenario, your mistake will cost your company money. It’s possible you could 
lose your job for a major flub, but I don’t believe you should ever fear that sort of reprisal for 
being honest about what happened. It’s really hard to hire and keep good people. If you’ve 
done a good job of building relationships and establishing value at your organization, there’s 
very little chance you’ll be let go just because one of your designs didn’t meet expectations. 
So don’t fear your job and try to protect yourself, because you’ll only end up creating a self-
fulfilling prophecy.  
Move on 
The best thing to do is just get it out of the way so that everyone can move on. Rip off the 
bandaid of your pride and set things in motion to fix it. Be direct and clear about what 
happened. “I was wrong” or “I made a mistake” but also be quick to get to the solution and 
focus on action instead of excuses. Tell them what needs to be done to correct the problem 
and outline a clear plan for doing so. Most stakeholders are results-oriented, so quickly admit 
your mistake but jump directly to the solution. When you make yourself part of the solution, 
you’re also making yourself indispensable: they need you to help correct this problem. And 
because the blame lays on you, communicating a sense of urgency and willingness to go 
above and beyond on correcting the issue will help establish the trust you need to move 
forward.  
The reasons why something went wrong are not nearly as important as fixing it. Don’t obsess 
over re-hashing the history. This usually sounds like excuse-making. Instead, gloss over the 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
14 
why and get straight to the fix. If people want or need to know the history, they’ll ask and 
you’ll have the opportunity.  
The blame game 
It’s also important to recognize that often people just want to know who to blame for the 
problem. It may seem unfair, but some people want a scapegoat so they can talk about it with 
their bosses if it comes up. A good stakeholder will own the mistake with you, as the person 
who oversees the decisions on the project. But even if they don’t, you’ll get a swifter 
resolution if you own up to what happened and move on. Once the source of the mistake has 
been identified, everyone usually feels better about moving on.   
Fall on your sword 
There are also cases where you, as a leader, will need to own up to mistakes that might not 
have been completely within your control just for the purpose of moving on. Teams can get 
so hung up on ask, “Why did this happen?” that it derails the project even more. While it’s 
unlikely that you’re solely responsible for a failure on a project that involves a team of 
people, it’s still worthwhile to admit your part (however small) in getting the team to where 
they are now. This can sometimes result in you ‘falling on your sword’ and taking the hit for 
the whole team. It’s not always advisable, but in tense situations where everyone is pointing 
fingers, it might be the best way move on.  
 
Knowing When You’re Wrong 
The hardest part of admitting when you’re wrong is even knowing that you’re wrong in the 
first place. It can be easy for our own arrogance to get in the way of seeing the problem. As 
designers, we see our designs as our baby - this perfect thing we created and are watching go 
out into the real world. It’s really hard to see the flaws with it, even when people tell us. We 
are often in denial about the fact that our work doesn’t work. So how do we know when 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
15 
we’re wrong? There are three red flags and they all conveniently line up with the three things 
you need to be a successful designer: 
How to know when you’re wrong: 
• 
The problem still exists - While we try to solve problems, it’s not a given that our 
designs will always work as expected. If we find that the problem still exists, then 
we’re wrong and we need to change something. I’ve actually seen it happen where 
designers are in complete denial that their designs are to blame for an unsolved 
problem. “I redesigned it and it’s much better now. If conversion hasn’t improved, 
there must be some other issue.” No matter how great you think your designs are, if the 
problem still exists you’re wrong. 
• 
Users don’t get it - Because we want our designs to be easy to use, we have to see that 
they’re actually making it easier for people. If not, we’re wrong! I’ve worked with 
designers who are so convinced that their interface is easy to use, that no amount of 
failed user testing will convince them. They usually blame the users. “This interaction 
is common on mobile devices now. If the users don’t know how to use it, they must not 
be familiar with modern design patterns.” Guess what? The user is not to blame here, 
your designs are.  
• 
Everyone is against you - We can be really arrogant about how elegant our solutions 
are, especially if we’re the only designer on the project. We feel justified that ‘no one 
else knows good design’ and so even in the face of opposition, we insist we’re right. 
But when a majority of people disagree with your decisions, it’s a sure sign that you’re 
doing it wrong. “I know you all disagree with this decision, but from a design perspective 
this makes the most sense so you need to trust me and my expertise.” While we do 
want everyone to trust us with difficult decisions, it’s not true that you’re always right 
just because you’re a designer. So take stock of the room and be smart about how 
you’re perceived when you push for something no one agrees with. When you own the 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
16 
company, you can take those risks. But until then, allow other people to influence the 
project too.  
However it comes about, when you see that you’re wrong and you’re willing to admit it, go 
straight to the business of reconciling the project. Focus on action, propose a solution, 
communicate urgency, and be willing to hustle. Your reaction to a mistake will speak 
volumes about you as a person and set you up to build trust with everyone on your team 
going forward. Recognizing when you’re wrong and proposing a solution is one of the most 
important ways you can recover from disaster.  
 
Painting a Duck 
“Half the world is composed of people who have something to say and can't, and the other 
half who have nothing to say and keep on saying it.” 
– Robert Frost 
Yet even after all of this, it’s still possible that you’ll be unhappy with the outcome. The truth 
is that the world is full of unreasonable people who will want what they want, no matter 
what we think, and much to the detriment of the user experience. This may be more common 
in executive-types who have the authority to just tell us what to do and lack the perspective 
that we have on the project, but it can happen at any level of the organization.  
This attitude is heavily influenced by Parkinson's law of triviality where people in a meeting will 
spend a disproportionate amount of time on issues that are not central to the project. 
According to Wikipedia, “Parkinson observed and illustrated that a committee whose job 
was to approve plans for a nuclear power plant spent the majority of its time with pointless 
discussions on relatively trivial and unimportant but easy-to-grasp issues, such as what 
materials to use for the staff bike-shed, while neglecting the less-trivial proposed design of 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
17 
the nuclear power plant itself…”2 This has given rise to the phenomenon known as bike-
shedding in software development.  
While I’ve participated in plenty of meetings where bike-shedding was a problem, there’s a 
derivative of this attitude that seems pervasive in design meetings where feedback is always 
expected, regardless of the quality of the designs being presented. I’m not exactly sure what 
it is, but some people like to give feedback even when they have none to give. Why? I think 
some people just want to sound smart (perhaps to other people in the room), but for most 
people the reason we’re meeting is for them to give feedback. It’s as if they wouldn’t be 
getting their money’s worth of our time if everything we did was great. “What’s the point of 
having a meeting if there isn’t something to change?” It is for these people that I suggest 
painting a duck.  
According to Jeff Atwood of Stack Exchange, a duck is “a feature added for no other reason 
than to draw management attention and be removed, thus avoiding unnecessary changes in 
other aspects of the product.”3 The idea originated from a story out of Interplay 
Entertainment, a gaming software development company.4  
The story goes that one of the designers on an animated chess game was tired of all the 
changes his stakeholders wanted. It seemed like no matter what he did, they always had one 
more change. To solve this problem, he created the Queen character and animations exactly 
like he wanted them to be, but with the addition of a pet duck. He was careful to make the 
duck obnoxious and overdone, flapping around on the screen while also not disturbing the 
Queen. According to the Coding Horror blog, “Eventually, it came time for the producer to 
review the animation set for the queen. The producer sat down and watched all of the 
                                                
2 C. Northcote Parkinson's 1957, Parkinson's law of triviality, 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parkinson%27s_law_of_triviality 
3 Jeff Atwood, Coding Horror Blog, New Programming Jargon, July 2012, 
http://blog.codinghorror.com/new-programming-jargon/ 
4 http://www.interplay.com/ 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
18 
animations. When they were done, he turned to the artist and said, ‘that looks great. Just one 
thing - get rid of the duck.’”5  
 
I apologize if you’re so distracted by this duck that you’re unable to concentrate on reading. 
 
I don’t mean to suggest we should deceive or manipulate our stakeholders, but there is a 
truth to this story that bears considering for our work. Some people aren’t going to be happy 
no matter what and we have to find a way to work with them without compromising the 
integrity of the user experience. This may be an extreme example, but it makes a good point: 
that all relationships are about give and take. We need to be able to recognize situations 
where it’s appropriate to offer solutions that we rightly know our clients won’t accept, even if 
it’s just to keep their focus on the primary objectives. Painting a duck or even purposeful 
bike-shedding might seem like a waste of time (and it is!) when we should be focused on 
solving real problems. But if the alternative is addressing changes from an unreasonable 
person that may impact the effectiveness of our apps, it might actually save time and energy 
in the long to find a creative way around this problem. 
                                                
5 Jeff Atwood, Coding Horror Blog, New Programming Jargon, July 2012, 
http://blog.codinghorror.com/new-programming-jargon/ 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
19 
People ask me if this really works. “What do you do if they like the duck?” My clients have 
asked me if I’ve ever painted a duck with them. Of course I have! But practically speaking, 
painting a duck more commonly takes the form of presenting clients with multiple 
alternatives that I’ve carefully curated. It’s about controlling the order in which designs are 
presented or including designs that I know they won’t agree to. I can always present one 
extra design that I’m pretty sure they won’t like if it means they’ll be more likely to agree that 
my proposed solution is best. It’s not quite as sneaky as it sounds. In other situations, the 
duck might be a poor font choice or unnecessary visuals (like icons and graphics) to 
demonstrate that simplicity is better. While the story itself is fun, in my experience a real 
duck tends to be more of a jumping off point to turn the conversation toward a better 
solution rather than an outright deception. You will have to decide just how far to take your 
ducks with your own stakeholders. 
 
Managing Expectations 
An important part of your relationship with clients, bosses, and stakeholders is managing 
their expectations: of you, of the project, and of the outcomes. Your ability to properly set, 
adjust, and communicate expectations is more important than your ability to crank out 
killer designs on a daily basis. This is especially true when you’re faced with making 
unexpected changes or taking the project in a different direction based on stakeholder 
feedback. More than just making their changes, you have to help them understand how it will 
be done, what your thinking and approach will be, and when they can expect it to be finished. 
Setting those expectations up-front (and all through the process) is key to getting 
stakeholder support and buy-in long-term.  
I mention this in a chapter about recovering from disaster because it is in these moments of 
trying to right a wrong that we most need everyone to understand the situation. I’ve seen 
projects fail, not because the designers had bad ideas or didn’t work hard enough creating 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
20 
innovative solutions, but because they didn’t communicate expectations and eventually lost 
the support of everyone that mattered most.  
The most memorable example was Jim. I had hired him to lead the design effort of a new 
product. As a concept, this web-service had no track record, questionable internal support, 
and virtually no budget. Our job was to build something out of nothing, to create value in an 
area that hadn’t been explored before. It was new, exciting territory, but we faced an uphill 
battle of helping other people understand and support our vision for the product.  
Jim was young and inexperienced, but he had good ideas and was talented at expressing 
those ideas in the browser. He understood the vision for the product, had experience with 
similar services, and all the energy of a nuclear power plant when it came to executing that 
vision. Jim was also extremely opinionated, quite arrogant, and had a difficult time seeing 
anything wrong with everything he designed. To make matters worse, his communication style 
turned out to be defensive and terse, if not downright rude. Once the platform was being 
tested with real users, we got a lot of great feedback. People were interested in our idea, but 
didn’t understand the vision. They were willing to try it, but questioned the approach. 
Complicating matters was the fact that this new platform affected how everyone in the 
organization posted content to the website as well. Not only did we have a problem of 
helping people understand our vision for the new initiative, but we also had a lot of people 
upset by how their workflow had been changed.  
Jim’s approach to addressing these challenges was not ideal. His attitude sounded like this, 
“The system is easier to use, don’t they understand that? The things we’re doing are 
innovative and unique! Why can’t they see the value in that? The new features are geared 
towards an audience of young social media techies, why does it matter if the old people don’t 
get it?” Because he was unable to reconcile these questions, he was usually perceived as 
writing off other stakeholders. When someone would ask him about it, he would get 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
21 
defensive and basically tell them they were wrong, they didn’t understand, or they weren’t 
the target user. It was a relational disaster. 
When I finally pulled the situation into a triage of prioritizing changes and re-evaluating the 
project, his work habits had devolved into a cycle of trying pump out as many new features 
and fixes as possible. He was working overtime to get everything done, because he believed 
the problem could be solved by spending more time on it. If he could deliver on the features, 
he thought, then everyone would be happy, but no one was happy. Why? Because Jim 
wasn’t able to deliver on his promises over and over again. He was terrible at helping people 
understand his workload, any reasonable timeline, and he believed he was faster and better 
than he actually was. The relational fallout was worse: no one got on-board with the project 
despite the fact that we really did have some great designs and a well-built system. People 
got frustrated, moved on, or demanded something completely different. “Just give me back 
the old site,” they’d say, “because at least that worked and we knew how to use it.”  
In an unfortunate turn of events, Jim lost his job because his project was essentially a start-
up within a larger organization and once the product proved unsuccessful there was no more 
money to fund it. So while the product itself died, I was faced with the challenge of inheriting 
a new custom-built content management system for the website that everyone was still 
unhappy with and which had a list of bugs and missing features a mile long. I had to take 
ownership of this new project, in addition to all my other responsibilities and without the 
full-time support I’d previously had from Jim. If Jim couldn’t manage it all, how could I?  
I decided to approach the problem differently. I saw it not as a matter of the number of hours 
I needed to put in, but of relationships and conversations to manage. It was more about the 
people than it was about the problem. I immediately started aggressively pursuing everyone 
that had been put off by Jim’s attitude. I listened to them, made notes of their suggestions, 
and created a publicly visible list for everyone to see what was on my plate. I invited several 
key people into different conversations to help prioritize the needs in a group setting, so 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
22 
everyone could see how each person’s changes affected another. I attached priority values 
and time estimates to each task. In some cases, where it was appropriate, I outright refused 
to pursue an idea.  
The end result was a well-structured conversation: everyone was on the same page, everyone 
knew where we were going, and everyone supported my effort to make it happen. I didn’t 
stop there. I moved quickly to implement the schedule as fast as possible. As people saw that 
I was making good on my promises (even if it was at a slower pace than we would have 
liked), they learned to trust me and I quickly gained support for the new system. When I 
couldn’t deliver, I let them know ahead of time and let them help me re-prioritize things. 
They were part of the decisions, they had visibility into the project, and they felt ownership 
with me.  
Whereas before two people might have met in the hallway and grumbled about Jim or the 
missing features, now people would defend and support me in similar circumstances. “I was 
in a meeting with Tom and he has plans to make that happen,” or “Tom has been really open 
to suggestions. You should go ask him about that.” Overall, I was putting in fewer hours 
than Jim but making better progress. Because I still had all my other responsibilities, I had 
no choice but to make it work with less effort. In a short time, I accomplished more (and 
built more trust with people) than he had been able to during his entire tenure of full-time 
employment. What’s interesting, too, is that while he was still on staff I was dealing with 
most of the relational fallout from his poor communication style. As his boss, I had to calm 
people down and I was constantly apologizing for his behavior. It was so distracting, in fact, 
that I had a difficult time getting anything else done. Once he was gone, I got more done by 
myself than we had both been able to do when he was on our staff. The time I spent dealing 
with the aftermath of his mistakes was more than the time it took me to properly manage 
expectations and do the actual work. So I will repeat myself: Your ability to properly set, 
adjust, and communicate expectations is more important than your ability to crank out 
killer designs on a daily basis. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
23 
I don’t know for sure, but I suspect that Jim (like many other designers) believed that his 
designs would speak for themselves. That interpersonal communication, as a skill for 
designers, was wholly unnecessary because our designs are in and of themselves a 
communication medium. He was the expert, but his arrogance clouded his ability to value the 
stakeholders on the project. He was good at solving problems and he was very user-centric in 
his thinking, but he failed to realize that without the support of everyone else on the team he 
was not going to be able to succeed. In an extreme sense, he lost his job because he was a 
terrible communicator. This is a lesson that every designer needs to learn, though hopefully 
you won’t have to be fired to learn it. The way you communicate with and manage relationships with 
stakeholders is critical to your success as a designer.  
 
Over But Never Done 
Our journey of meeting with and communicating to stakeholders has come to an end and yet 
it is a process that we are constantly involved in. By now, the meeting has concluded, you’ve 
already done a great job following up with everyone on the team, and you’re well on your 
way to executing your vision for building an incredible user experience. Hopefully there 
aren’t too many changes that you’re concerned about, but even if there are, you’re well-
equipped to finding solutions that will benefit both the user and your clients. The 
culmination of everything we’ve covered together should prepare you to articulate design 
decisions, communicate with stakeholders, keep your sanity, and still deliver the best user 
experience.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
24 
Before we close this book, though, I’d like to provide two more things for you to use in your 
design practice that can help you succeed in building great products. The first is a resource 
to give to your stakeholders, teammates, and clients. The next chapter is written to non-
designers and is meant to help them understand and work with us more effectively. The 
second is an approach to design that values the needs of our stakeholders by learning to 
design with and lead from a place of vision, rather than only focusing on what’s realistic and 
possible given our constraints. The final chapter, Designing for Vision, is meant to help you 
communicate the most value to your leaders through creating and pitching product designs 
that purposefully defy the limits of your organization, your current project, and even your 
own thinking.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 1 
Chapter 12 
For Non-Designers 
 
“What we do see depends mainly on what we look for. ... In the same field the farmer will 
notice the crop, the geologists the fossils, botanists the flowers, artists the colouring, 
sportmen the cover for the game. Though we may all look at the same things, it does not all 
follow that we should see them.”  
 – Sir John Lubbock1 
There are other people in the organization besides designers who are interested in learning to 
talk about design. Stakeholders from every level see a gap in communication with their own 
team and seek out resources to help them work with us and make better products together. 
It’s no secret that designers have a difficult time getting around in today’s organizations. In 
particular, the designer-developer relationship can become particularly tenuous when these 
two people don’t see eye-to-eye.  
I’ve had teams ask me for help, “How can we work together more effectively?” Executives 
ask me, “Can you teach me to work with our designers?” These people understand the value 
of having good working relationships and the key to maintaining it in a technology-driven 
sector is to focus on clear communication. Most often, people get upset and projects become 
difficult when two or more people fail to communicate. Miscommunication results in missed 
expectations. Missed expectations leads to disappointment and distrust. We want to avoid 
this before it happens! 
Even in relationships where communication doesn’t appear to be constrained, the way you 
approach and talk with designers has an impact on their productivity, attitude, and 
                                                
1 The Beauties of Nature and the Wonders of the World We Live in, 1913 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2 
creativity. More than just clear communication, you need to be sure you’re getting the very 
best from designers.  
This chapter is devoted to helping the other people in the designer’s path to better 
understand, communicate with, and thrive on teams with designers. Whether you’re a 
developer, executive stakeholder, product owner, project manager, marketing type, or 
customer advocate: this chapter is for you. If you’re a designer, tear out these pages and hand 
them to your boss or favorite developer. (Or you can read along and pat yourself on the back 
as I affirm you and call out your suspicious quirks.) The goal for this chapter is to bridge the 
gap and help everyone on the team be more effective at communicating with one another. 
We want you to learn how to get the very best out of us. 
In order to do that, we’ll: 
• 
Identify several key areas where stakeholders can help us be more successful  
• 
Provide a list of tips for working with designers on a regular basis 
• 
Make a checklist of questions that most projects need in order to start off on the right 
foot 
 
The King and the Blind Man 
Once there was a king who had a blind man as an advisor. When the king was returning 
from a hunt with a large party, he became very thirsty and spotted a field of watermelon. So 
he called to his servants to fetch some to quench his thirst, but the blind man began to laugh.  
“Why do you laugh?” asked the king. 
“Good king, there are no watermelons here!” he replied.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
3 
The king was surprised, “You’re blind! How do you know there are no watermelons? I can 
see them with my own eyes. You cannot!”  
And the blind man responded, “My lord, one does not require eyesight to know these things. 
The season of watermelons is over. There may be some left rotting in the fields, but all the 
good fruit has already been harvested.”  
You see, the king saw watermelon and that’s what he wanted, but the blind man knew better. 
It seemed so obvious to the king that this was the solution to his thirst. It was also so unlikely 
that the blind man could understand the situation enough to help him with his problem. Yet 
the blind man’s perspective allowed him to help the king and ultimately spare him from 
collecting rotted watermelon. I suppose there are worse fates to be saved from!  
Obviously, this is an amusing illustration but the point is this: you have people on your team 
to make you successful, to help you do your job better, and to provide a perspective that you 
don’t have. There may be times when it seems like the designers don’t know what they’re 
talking about or couldn’t possibly contribute meaningful solutions to difficult problems, but 
that’s not true. Designers are problem solvers. Whether it’s addressing business concerns or 
proposing coding solutions. I’ve seen designers turn heads when they make suggestions that 
everyone else thought was outside their realm of understanding. So to make the most of your 
time with designers, you need to remember the Four ‘izes’: 
• 
Realize – we are good at our jobs 
• 
Prioritize – our needs so we can get to work 
• 
Authorize – the whole team to move quickly 
• 
Recognize – that we are people too 
 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4 
Realize – that we’re good at our jobs 
One of the biggest challenges we designers face is with other people believing and trusting 
that we’re actually good at what we do and that we make good choices. What’s strange is that 
so many of those same people will also compliment our work when they like it. However, 
when people disagree or question our design decisions, there can be a lot of distrust – or at 
least a lack of trust. Many people see the designer’s role as merely to make things look nice 
and they often aren’t afforded the opportunity to have a seat at the table when it comes to 
decision making.   
As you work with the designers in your life, realize that they’re actually good at their jobs 
and that their job is more than just making your stuff look pretty. They are equipped to find 
design solutions to business problems. You hired them and have them on your team for a 
reason: because they’re the experts and they’re better at design than you are. They have 
expertise in understanding what makes things easy for users. They’re trained in usability 
techniques and best practices. They know the right patterns and UI controls. You need to 
trust them to do their jobs without telling them how to do it.  
The truth is, design is really hard. It seems easy and simple to you because you only see the 
final result. There is a lot that goes into the design process: defining use cases, mapping 
flows, writing requirements, and a ton of ideation and iteration on wireframes and 
prototypes. You aren’t seeing everything we threw away or the time and angst we put into 
finding the right solutions. By the time our designs get to you, we’ve been working hard on 
checking all the different angles. There’s far more to it than just putting some elements on a 
page.  
If we’re coming to you with our proposal, you can assume that we believe it’s the best 
solution. You don’t need to ask us if we like or not, we do! We made it! If you disagree, then 
it’s absolutely appropriate for you to engage us in that conversation, but don’t begin with a 
posture of skepticism about whether we know what we’re doing or not. Instead, draw our 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5 
out decision process, seek to understand our perspective, and ask a lot of questions to be sure 
you’re on the same page.  
Also, because design can be complex and many elements are interrelated, realize that any 
changes you suggest will affect the rest of the project. There’s a ripple effect that may cause 
us to need to re-work the other parts. It’s not isolated. Many stakeholders make well-
intentioned suggestions, expecting the changes to be simple or only take a few minutes. “All 
you have to do is move this over there, right?” But the process of updating one part of the 
design requires that we step back and evaluate our decisions. Moving one thing requires that 
we also move another. Sometimes changing elements can break the flow of the application. 
Not always, but often. So realize that your suggestions are more than they seem and that 
they may not be as easy as they appear. Even simple changes will require a certain amount of 
re-work. 
 
Prioritize – our needs so we can be successful 
Easily the biggest blocker on any project is not having everything we need to do our jobs. 
When you ask us to design something, we need a lot of things from you to be able to do that 
effectively. It’s much more than you expressing your vision and letting us loose. We need 
business requirements to be documented and timelines to be established. Technical needs, 
too, are critical: access to servers, contract approvals, or sharing your analytics and data. 
Sometimes we just need permission and access to other people within the organization: 
gatekeepers, domain experts, and customer service advocates. We can’t work unless we have 
these things from you, so make it a priority to track down what we need. Let us help you be 
successful by equipping us with what we need to get the job done. Do the work necessary to 
set things in motion so that we can hit the ground running.  
This means that you have to prioritize our needs in order for us to get stuff done. You should 
be prepared when you meet with us. Review the designs we sent you in advance so you know 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6 
what your feedback is. There’s nothing worse than someone showing up, saying they didn’t 
have time to review our work earlier, and then riff on a handful of knee-jerk reactions to 
seeing our work for the first time. No, we need you to be better than that. Value our time in 
the same way we value yours by being prepared. 
You should have already jotted down your list of questions or concerns. You might even find 
some reference material, like other apps or data from a different project, that will help us 
understand your perspective so that we can deliver what you need. Most importantly, do this 
within a reasonable window of time. If you take too long to review and respond to our work, 
it may shorten the time we have available to implement your changes. We lose time waiting 
on you and then we’re rushed to get it done. You’re not going to get the best from us in that 
scenario. Please value our role on your team by prioritizing our needs so that we can be 
successful. 
Usability Testing and Research 
One resource that we often need, but don’t get, is permission and budget for doing usability 
testing. We need to check your project with other people to make sure it will work, as 
expected. This isn’t a focus group; we’re not asking users what they want. This is taking the 
time to observe people using our website or app, and then taking notes about ways we can 
improve the experience. It’s task-based and mostly observational. We don’t do this enough 
because we often don’t have permission to spend our time on it. It’s not expensive and the 
results will more than pay for themselves in uncovering problems earlier or optimizing tasks 
for a better app. So give us permission, the budget, and even encourage us to do more 
usability testing.  
 
Authorize – the whole team to move quickly 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
7 
Projects get stale or move slowly when decisions aren’t made quickly. The best thing you can 
do for the project is to make quick decisions, stick to those decisions, and empower other 
people to make decisions on your behalf. This will allow your entire team to move quickly 
and deliver the best product with a great user experience. I can’t emphasize this enough. The 
main difference between a scrappy startup and a bureaucratic behemoth is their ability to 
decide and move quickly. It has little to do with talent, resources, or ideas and everything to 
do with the team’s momentum. Projects fail or languish when the leaders don’t make 
decisions or don’t stick with the decisions they made. This is completely within your control. 
So make us successful by being decisive: make decisions, stick to them, and move on. Being 
wishy-washy or delaying a decision will cost you real time and money. We will either be 
waiting idle for you to make up your mind or we’ll be working and re-working our designs to 
accommodate the changes. It might seem like waiting a few days for the next meeting is 
completely appropriate, but in those few days we could be already working on the next thing 
or finding the flaws with our current thinking. The best projects I’ve worked on were the 
ones where we met with stakeholders daily. That’s right, every day. I would spend the day 
designing, show my work to the client in the afternoon, get immediate feedback, and then do 
it all over again. That sort of rhythm is empowering and exciting. Sometimes I propose daily 
design reviews with larger clients and they groan. Why? Because they already have too 
many meetings and can’t seem to wrap their minds around a process that iterates and moves 
so quickly. Yet, it is these projects that always take longer and yield inferior results. On 
projects where stakeholder are once a week (or less!), I can anticipate that it will take almost 
twice as long as needed.  
The better you are at making good, fast decisions, the better off we’ll be. Not just more 
productive, but also happier and satisfied with our work. We feel good about what we do 
when we know things are moving forward. It would be better to do something (even if it’s 
wrong) and keep the project moving, rather than do nothing and flounder in ambiguity. 
Indecision and changing decisions are the killer of an effective design process, so authorize 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
8 
your designers and your entire team to move as quickly as possible. I promise that whatever 
you risk in the process of empowering them with decisions will be made up for in morale, 
speed, and momentum. 
Empowering the Team 
One of the best ways you can keep your project moving quickly is to authorize us (the 
designers!) to make decisions and extend a reasonable amount of authority to us. Let us 
make some of the calls. When you’re unsure what to do, allow us to inform the decision. 
Trust us when we make a good case on our decisions, even if you disagree. Ask us what we 
would do, and then let us make the final call. This level of empowerment will result in a 
better product, happier teams, and quick movement. 
I recognize that not every product decision can be entrusted to the designers. There are other 
factors, business considerations, and even other teams or people involved. However, often 
those other considerations cloud your own judgement and prevent you from seeing that the 
simpler, more obvious solution is really the best. In my experience, the designer’s 
recommendations often come back as the solution we eventually land on anyway. I’ve 
worked with large clients where multiple teams and executive meetings slow the process for 
weeks at a time. We might toy with a handful of ideas, perhaps even implement the one that 
the VP liked best, only to eventually (months later) re-work the design to accommodate our 
original recommendation. What seems like a great idea in a meeting isn’t always what works 
best in practice. Not always, but frequently enough to be a memorable waste of time.  
The best website I ever built was a project where I convinced my boss to let me disappear for 
three months to work on it alone. It was risky. Other stakeholders in the organization felt left 
out and complained. People were really worried I would screw it up. No one, except my 
boss, saw my work. At the end of three months, I emerged from my hiatus with a finished 
product that was infinitely better than the existing site. Were the other stakeholders happy 
with what I did? No, not at all. Did it solve all of the problems we had with the old site? 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
9 
Barely. But that didn’t stop us from putting it in production and immediately iterating on 
making it better. You see, had I involved the others from the beginning of the process it 
might have taken me a year to arrive at consensus. In this situation, we chose to value doing 
something rather than nothing. We refused to let perfect be the enemy of good. That kind of 
trust and empowerment is rare, but you’d be hard-pressed to find a faster way of getting 
things done. 
My challenge to you would be to purposefully allow your designers the freedom to make 
design decisions. Start with some low risk decisions at first but quickly work your way 
towards larger overall product vision. Begin by agreeing with them as frequently as possible, 
until you feel you can let them decide on their own. Find the level at which you start to be 
uncomfortable giving over control, and then push past it just a little. I believe that the sweet 
spot of good leadership empowerment in decision making is just past your point of comfort. 
Leaders should always be just a little uncomfortable giving over decisions to their team.  
 
Recognize – that we are people too 
One big missing ingredient from stakeholder-designer relationships is the recognition that 
we’re all people. We need to remember that the people we work with are human. We need to 
focus on the relationship and communication. But mostly, we need to be kind, use helpful 
language, and create a conversation that yields positive results.  
This is going to seem obvious, but designers are people too. In business culture, projects and 
deadlines are often (unintentionally) valued more than the people delivering on them. 
Remembering that your team is made up of people who have lives, families, and interests 
beyond the conference room is important in any organization and it’s no different with 
designers. All of us have different personalities, original ideas, and a unique perspective on 
life. There are other things going on in their life besides this project. Someone is caring for an 
ailing mother, another has to shuttle kids from school to sports, and someone else will go 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
10 
home lonely. This human-centered leadership approach is nothing more than remembering 
and recognizing that the people you interact with are real: they have feelings, they can be 
built up and encouraged or they can be torn down and discarded. You can ignore them or 
you can show an interest in them. As you can imagine, you’ll get the best results when you 
approach people with a mindset that recognizes their humanity. So as often as you need to, 
stop, look around the room, and remember one thing: they are human. 
Once you’ve done that, the next step is to focus on building good relationships. While it’s 
important to recognize how our specific roles as designers shape our identity, the foundation 
of good communication is a good relationship. No amount of organization, management, or 
empowerment is going to make up for a personal / relational disconnect. Too often meetings 
are about projects, projects are about tasks, and tasks are tedious and un-human. The end 
result is a robotic approach to projects that has no flesh, no excitement, and no life. So in 
addition to being organized and making projects a priority, you also need to work hard to 
establish a rapport that will speak more for you than the words that come out of your mouth. 
Be kind and get to know us. Show a genuine interest in us by asking questions about our 
hobbies, pets, or favorite sports team. You don’t need beanbags and foosball tables at your 
office, you need to be nice and interested in people. It doesn’t take much to create a sense 
that you truly care about the people you work with.  
Use helpful language 
Recognizing that we’re all human, then, naturally leads us to a place where we are better 
equipped to use language and communication styles that are helpful when discussing design. 
When you provide feedback for our designs, focus on the designs themselves and not the 
designer who created them. Don’t be terse and don’t attack our work. Instead, ask lots of 
questions in an effort to understand our perspective and approach. Be direct, but be kind. 
Focus on the problems and potential solutions, not on the people and their decisions. Design 
is already a difficult thing to talk about because people (designers) can get wrapped up in 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
11 
their work. When you criticize people for their decisions, you back them into a corner and 
make them defensive. Design, more than many other disciplines, has the propensity to be 
divisive and polarizing. Recognize this at the outset and work hard to use words that will 
help the conversation along, rather than pit people against each other. The way you choose 
to talk to designers about their work will have a dramatic effect on their ability to be 
agreeable and productive for you. 
Also, be patient when things change. We can’t always know how our designs will work in the 
real world and so it’s natural that we need to modify our work even after it’s in production. 
It’s common for us to believe we’ve made all the right choices with our designs, but when we 
test it with users for the first time we find that we made the wrong assumptions. Those kinds 
of challenges are part of the process. In fact, I always feel a little self-conscious and sheepish 
when I have to go back to the developers and ask for a change. Even though this is part of 
the design process, I’m admitting my mistakes and taking the blame for something I caused. 
Because it’s my fault, it can be hard to own up to it… but that’s necessary if we’re going to 
create a great user experience. You should expect, even encourage us, to embrace these 
unexpected challenges and help us to prepare the rest of the team for the changes. As much 
as possible, support us through these changes and clear the path so we can feel good about 
doing the right thing for the user and the product. 
 
Ten Tips for Working with Designers 
To briefly summarize how you can work with designers more effectively, here are ten short 
tips:  
1. Focus on what works – remove the word ‘like’ from your vocabulary and always talk 
about what works or doesn’t work. Your personal preferences are less important than 
the needs of the user or business. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
12 
2. Don’t provide solutions – tell us about the problem you see, describe the issue that 
needs to be addressed, but don’t tell us what to change first. Let us find the solution. 
3. Ask lots of questions – this is the key to seeing our perspective, understanding our 
motivations. Ask questions to uncover our thought process. 
4. Don’t claim to be the user – the truth is, every user is different and you don’t 
represent the target market any more than the designer. Claiming to be the user of 
your app or website does not add value to the conversation.  
5. Let us explain our decisions – don’t offer your own perspective and walk away. Allow 
us the time and space to form an adequate response. 
6. Empower us to make decisions – even if you disagree with our choice, learn to trust 
us in areas where we have more expertise than you.  
7. Use helpful language – it can be difficult to receive feedback without getting a little 
defensive. Avoid harsh or extreme language and focus your feedback on the designs, 
not the designer. 
8. Ask if there is data – we should all use data to support our decisions, but just because 
the designer doesn’t have data doesn’t mean he’s wrong.  
9. Be prepared – review our work in advance and have a list of questions or concerns 
ready. Don’t wait and provide knee-jerk reactions in the moment. Your feedback 
should be purposeful and thoughtfully considered. 
10. Give us what we need to be successful – whether it’s logins, access to analytics, or 
permission to do usability test, we need things from you to get to work effectively. 
Make it a priority. 
 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
13 
Design Project Checklist 
To help everyone be better prepared, here is a checklist of the most common website and app 
project needs. If every stakeholder provided these things up-front, projects would move 
faster and create a better quality experience every time. I use this list with my own clients to 
make sure we have what we need at the beginning of every project. Following a checklist like 
this ensures that everyone is on the same page and makes on-going communication about the 
project much easier. It establishes a good foundation for talking about design decisions going 
forward.  
This is just a tool and should be used with a degree of flexibility appropriate to the project, 
company, or team. Some of these aren’t necessary for every project, some projects might 
have additional needs, and throughout the life of a project these things naturally change as 
the team settles into a rhythm. So use this as a guide, but don’t be afraid of changing it (or 
your answers!) as the project progresses.  
Management Vision & Goals 
✓ What is the purpose of the website or app? Define the primary use or need. Why does 
this website or app exist? 
✓ What is the overall vision for the website or app? A clearly defined vision helps us 
understand how this project affects the future roadmap. 
✓ What are the short-term goals for the business overall? What does the business want 
to accomplish and how does this project fit with those goals? 
✓ What metric we can track? How will we know we’ve succeeded? We need a way to 
measure our success. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
14 
✓ What is the strategy for accomplishing the goal? This is what needs to be done to 
accomplish the goal; the tasks, tactics, or deliverables for the project. 
✓ What are the business requirements for this project? Having documented 
requirements up-front is important, but we can also work together to create them. 
Users or Customers 
✓ Who are the users? What do we know about them? This could be a starting point for 
writing personas and user stories. 
✓ What is the primary problem we want to solve for them? What are the biggest pain 
points for users right now? This may not be the goal of the project right now. 
✓ How do users interact with the site or app? Their context / location, device type and 
size, entry and exit points, or frequency of engagement. 
✓ What is the plan or budget for usability testing and / or user interviews? We need to 
work with real users in order to design for them. 
Workflow and Communication 
✓ What tools should we use to communicate? What is the best way to get answers? 
Everyone has different preferences about email, text, video, and phone.  
✓ What should our meeting cycle look like? We’ll want both short, frequent updates, as 
well as longer, in-depth progress reports. For example, 30 minutes daily, plus a weekly 
hour-long (or more) design review. 
✓ What is the timeline for the project? How frequently can we release? Establish a 
pattern for when tasks should be completed. Take the deadline and work backwards 
on the calendar. This may inform resourcing or scope too. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
15 
✓ Who makes the final call on decisions? Identify one person overall and/or assign one 
individual per role, for Business, Product, Design, Engineering, or Content. No 
committees. 
Access to Information and People 
✓ What technical resources will we need access to? Who can provide us with access? 
This includes login credentials, email accounts, VPN, or access to servers. 
✓ What existing data is available? Access to analytics, usability studies, A / B tests, or 
any business reports or slide decks.  
✓ Is there an existing website or app we can use for reference? Another product that can 
be used as a basis for this project?  
✓ What is the org chart for the company? What people are important for our project? A 
list of relevant people, including: names, titles, relationships and areas of expertise 
along with contact information. 
✓ Do we have permission to work with these people? Necessary introductions or 
permissions need to be given for us to contact other people in the organization. 
Design and Tech 
✓ What design guidelines already exist? Branding guidelines, logo standards, design 
language documentation, style guides, or visual UI libraries. 
✓ What is the tone or style of the design? This might be defined by the design guidelines 
above. If not, we can discuss.  
✓ What are our ground rules or design goals for guiding the design? A short list of 
limitations, best practices, or focused priorities to guide design decisions.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
16 
✓ What are other websites or applications are similar or relevant? A list of competitors, 
similar or un-related products that are of interest.  
✓ What technical requirements will influence the design? Accessibility, browser / OS 
version, device or viewport size support, responsive / adaptive / mobile.  
 
A Seat at the Table 
The way that businesses approach design has changed dramatically. Design used to be 
something that only made the company look professional or projected an image for the 
product or brand. Nowadays, design is being used to solve real business problems and more 
and more companies are seeing that value. Entire organizations are pivoting to make design 
the center of their process because they recognize it’s good for the bottom line. The most 
famous and popular products now are those that are well-designed and provide a superior 
user experience.  
To meet this demand, a lot of companies are hiring designers, building teams, and modifying 
their processes to more clearly value design - yet a lot of these same companies still fall short 
when it comes to delivering a product. Initially, it might seem like their designers aren’t 
talented enough or there’s a disconnect between customer needs and the design team. This is 
what leads managers and developers to seek out resources (like this book) to learn how to 
better talk about design or to improve their communication and working relationships with 
designers. I wrote this chapter because difficulty working with designers is a real concern 
and every stakeholder can benefit from understanding their designers. But when it comes to 
overall business practice, there is an underlying issue. Better communication will help, but 
it’s not the main problem.  
Companies that struggle to incorporate design thinking into their organization have one 
problem: they don’t have designers at an executive level. The problem of delivering poorly-
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
17 
designed products isn’t one of talent, but of design leadership. They lack a vision that’s 
inclusive of the user experience. They have talented designers, but not design-thinking 
decision makers. Companies who consistently fail to deliver the products they believe they 
should offer need a new seat at the table: a designer.  
Think about the most popular products, websites, or apps you know of. Who started the 
company? Who is their CEO? In most cases, the people leading the organizations that create 
great products are people with a design-centric mindset, even if they aren’t technically 
qualified as a designer. They are designers in their own right, but they surround themselves 
with other talented designer-types too. These organizations don’t have to ‘pivot’ to make 
design the center of their culture because design is already valued at the highest level. They 
simply are an organization that values design. 
If you’re serious about wanting your company, product, or service to be known for a great 
user experience, put a designer at an executive level. It’s not longer adequate to hire a 
contracted freelancer through a sales manager to create your website. You can’t just invite 
the designers to a monthly meeting, inspire them with your vision and then wait for them to 
bring back the best product ever. You are going to fail if the only designer you have sits at a 
desk with the marketing people down the hall. Designers need to be involved at the highest 
levels of the organization if you expect to succeed in a marketplace driven by design. They 
need to be empowered to make difficult decisions, they need the autonomy to create the best 
product, and they need to sit in the C-suite right next to the other executives.  
How can you do this? In an ideal world, you’d have the authority, money, and time to create 
an organizational structure that reflects these values. Create a role for Chief Design Officer 
or VP of Design. Involve them in all the details, let them decide on product and design 
direction, and give them a team. Unfortunately, that’s not something every company can do 
easily. More practically, designers and executives need a deeper level of engagement and 
trust. The people designing the products, website, or app need to be meeting with the CEO. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
18 
They need frequent communication with other executives. This might just be about 
proximity: give them a desk in or near the executive suite. It’s amazing how much easier 
design and communication is when a VP walks by your desk occasionally to say hello. This is 
“management by walking around” (attributed to Hewlett-Packard2 and described in the book 
In Search of Excellence.3) 
One of the best (and simplest) models I’ve seen was a former employer. They moved the 
creative director to a desk with the other executives in an open-office environment. Just 
sitting next to each other greatly improved their thinking, made a political statement about 
their values, and firmly established the organization’s vision. The designers and artists 
weren’t off in another room, they had a seat at the table.  
The only way to truly to incorporate design thinking into your company values, processes, 
and products is to put designers in positions of authority. Everyone says they want to be like 
Apple, but few are willing to make the leadership choices required to create that kind of 
environment. If you find that your team isn’t living up to your expectations for creating great 
products and designing incredible user experiences, take a look at your own part in that 
process first. Before you go through another re-org or replace your design director, take a 
serious look at the people in authority (yourself included) and ask if they’re really equipped 
to lead a design-centric product company. If not, you’ve got an open seat at your next 
meeting that needs to be filled. 
 
In Closing 
The fact that you’ve read this chapter speaks volumes about your desire to work more 
effectively with designers. When you follow these best practices, you create an environment 
                                                
2 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Management_by_wandering_around 
3 In Search of Excellence: Lessons From America's Best-Run Companies. Tom Peters and Robert H. 
Waterman, Jr. 1982 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
19 
where designers are free to create, comfortable expressing themselves, and empowered to 
design great products. Whatever your role, I hope you’ll apply these principles in your 
practice on a daily the basis so that you can get the most of the designers on your team and 
deliver the best possible user experience.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 1 
Chapter 13 
Designing for Vision 
 
“An artist is not paid for his labor but for his vision.” 
– James McNeill Whistler 
Before we close out the book, I want to emphasize how important design is to organizational 
and product development. Most of us consider ourselves designers of the things that our 
company produces: web designers, interface designers, or product designers. But in our 
roles, we shape the vision and perception of the entire organization with our work. We are 
more than just designers of things, we are designers of the business. In a very real way, we 
are business designers. I am amazed at the power we designers have to shape the organization, 
and yet how few designers actually realize or use this power to the fullest extent. The fact is, 
design has the power to change the future, to influence people, and to benefit you and your 
career. Our fate is in our own hands when we understand that we can inspire people with 
our creativity. Imagining the future can earn your team praise, get the attention of 
stakeholders, and give you a shot at actually making something meaningful.  
We need to recognize that we have the power to imagine the future, the ability to create 
something that didn’t exist before, and the ideas to inspire the whole organization. We can 
use these tools for good, for the betterment of the product, and the satisfaction of our own 
work. Learning to talk about our designs extends beyond the conference room; it starts with 
purposeful habits of practicing creativity and staying inspired. Few other jobs have the same 
ability to create excitement around something that doesn’t exist and so for this final chapter, 
I’d like to go on a journey of discovering just how powerful it can be when we design for 
vision.  
 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2 
Recognizing Our Power 
You have more power than you realize. Designers have the skills and ability to cast a vision 
for a preferred future. A future that doesn’t exist yet and won’t exist without our help. Our 
role should not be to just iterate and moderately improve an interface, but to create an 
awareness of incredible new possibilities. We have the power to influence the future with 
expressions of our ideas that make the future seem real, attainable, and exciting.  
You see, most people can’t do what we do. They don’t think visually and, even if they did, 
they lack the skills to put pen to paper and sketch out something that looks like what’s in 
their head. This makes us special; we have unique skills that most other people around us 
don’t. We can choose to use them in a way that will benefit our organization and our own 
careers.  
Our value as designers is not just locked up in the day-to-day mechanics of pumping out new 
wireframes, theming an app, or brainstorming ideas. Sure, those things are valuable and 
that’s probably the main reason we have a job, but it’s not the only way (or the most 
important way) that we are valuable. We create more value when we help other people see 
the future; when we take ideas born out of a simple conversation and provide the context or 
skin it needs to feel real.  
This power is the reason we keep photos and video of special moments: because the visual 
representation of those moments suspends our memories of those events. We are transported 
into those moments again and again when we look at them. Naturally, we want to share 
those moments with other people so that they too can experience what we did. We post on 
social media and re-live them over and over. Those images, those visuals, are as much a part 
of the experience to us as the experience itself.  
Images make the unreal real. When you build a house you start with an empty plot of land 
and it’s difficult to visualize how you will live there, but once you see the drawings of what it 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
3 
will look like, you get excited and anxious. When you see your baby on an ultrasound for the 
first time, tears well up inside you because it hits home that this is really happening. Things 
that exist only in our mind become something completely different when they’re expressed 
visually. 
We can make these images. A friend wants to start a new business, but the website you 
create for her is what will really make it feel like a legitimate enterprise. Your boss jotted 
down some ideas at lunch, but you can take those ideas to the next level. In the middle of the 
night, you had a crazy idea and you can flesh it out to show to other people. We have what it 
takes to create the images that make the unreal real. Most people can’t do that. 
Right or wrong, sometimes the visual of a product alone sets our expectations about it: 
making promises about functionality, telling us how we’ll be better, and asking us to try it. 
Attractive visual design has become the hallmark of good products and so we may be 
influenced more by the way a thing looks than the way it actually works. That’s how much 
power design has. When we see something that’s well-designed, we may think the product 
itself is great before we’ve even tried it. The point is that our designs have the effect of 
making people believe in what we’ve created, even if it only exists on paper. That gives us a 
lot of power when it comes to our designs. We can use this power for good, to move our 
teams and projects forward into a preferred future, and to create a new reality that didn’t 
exist before.  
The reason this is important to communicating to stakeholders about design is because we 
have the power to inspire people with our work. Expressing a vision for what the future 
could look like to stakeholders gives us the opportunity earn their trust, demonstrate 
commitment, and get them genuinely excited about what we’re doing. It’s a huge deposit in 
the bank account of trust. Often, these inspirational designs will help our team move forward 
because our stakeholders will be on-board with the vision. They’ll see just how excited we 
are to work on this project and they’ll want to help us accomplish this vision. With a vision of 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4 
a preferred future it’s easier to get support, funding, research, and any other resource you 
might need to accomplish your vision. Your stakeholders will be saying, “This is awesome. 
What do you need to make this happen?” It puts you in a position of making the future 
happen rather than waiting around for someone else to tell you what it is.  
Designing for vision… 
• 
Gives us a creative outlet. A place to express something that we might not otherwise 
have the opportunity.  
• 
Creates a conversation with other people. Gets them dreaming about where we’re 
going, what’s possible, and what’s ideal without any of the usual constraints.  
• 
Brings people together. No longer stuck obsessing over one little thing, the entire 
team can get a sense for where we could or should be headed.  
• 
Builds credibility. People see you as a thinker, a visionary, as someone who is 
interested in providing long-term value, not just value for the immediate need.  
• 
Lives beyond you. These designs can be so exciting that they get passed around to 
other people in the organization. Long after you’re gone, they still might be hanging 
onto that vision of the future.  
And so, for these reasons, our ability to create visuals that communicate beyond words has 
the power to bring people into a world that didn’t exist before. We can show them what the 
future is like before the future has even been created. A picture is as close as you can get to 
being in this new future without actually being there. People can get really excited when they 
see what it will look like. This is what it’s like designing for vision.  
 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5 
Practicing Creativity 
Designing for vision requires that we are purposeful about practicing creativity on a regular 
basis. You’ve got to step away from your project and dream a little bit now and then. Even if 
the idea never sees the light of day. Some times the prospect of making – one. more. control. 
– seems mundane and boring. If you’re bored of your day-to-day job, this is a way to make it 
exciting and fresh. 
Find Inspiration 
One of the missing ingredients for learning to design for vision is a lack of inspiration. Some 
people might consider pursuing inspiration a waste of time compared to the act of simply 
getting things done. But when the goal is to create something completely new that didn’t 
exist before, it’s almost impossible to do that well without an external, aspirational creative 
that models how we might approach our own endeavors.  
The easiest and most practical thing you can do is to simply look at other people’s products. 
Find designs that you like, discover how they might be applied in your context. Download 
and use as many apps as possible. Collect a repository of favorite websites that you can 
reference when the time comes, browse through pattern libraries, try new open source tools, 
read cases studies, go to a conference, read a book… There are almost too many resources to 
help you find and create inspiration that you have no excuse, other than the practice and 
habit of making it happen.  
See UX Everywhere 
There are models everywhere, outside the world of tech, that can influence your thinking and 
passion for designing digital products. We tend to see the world through our lens of UX and 
may comment on the usefulness of everyday objects as a matter of pride. Turn those 
powerful observational skills into an opportunity to find patterns in the real-world that will 
inform your designs in the digital. Ask yourself: how does the design of this thing apply to 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6 
my current project? Is there something it does well that I can use? Start seeing everyday 
objects as opportunities for learning and inspiration in your own work. 
Use a Different Canvas 
An alternative way to get the most out of your creative mind is to stimulate it in a different 
way than you’re used to. Pursue a different artistic endeavor; something completely different 
from your usual design-a-thing day job. Find something that allows you to create, express 
yourself, and sink into a mode of creating where the worry of delivering melts away. Without 
hard expectations about what you create, you’ll be free to think more clearly and enjoy the 
process. This could be cooking, landscaping and gardening, painting, photography, or any 
other creative hobby that interests you and will spurn you to greater comfort with your 
creative self.  
You might even do something out of your comfort zone that you’re not at all interested in or 
skilled at. Being uncomfortable has the fortunate side-effect of causing us to see things in a 
different light, to approach problems in a different way. When we have no bearings on how 
to behave or what to do, we have no choice but to be creative and make it up as we go along.  
For me personally, I am restoring a classic car as an act of deliberate creativity. For several 
years now, I have been working on a 1969 Triumph GT6+, a small British sports car. Prior 
to starting this project, I had very little mechanical knowledge. In fact, I remember the day I 
had it towed to my house and a neighbor stopped by. He pointed to the distributor on the 
engine block and said, “Wow! You don’t see those any more…” I had no idea what it was, so 
I just laughed uncomfortably and replied, “Yep, you sure don’t!” But since that time, I’ve 
completely dismantled the entire vehicle, cleaned and painted each part, and am now 
meticulously putting it all back together.  
In the process, I’ve learned a lot of about engines but I’ve also learned a lot about design. I’m 
inspired by the engineers who created these cars before there were computers. I’m amazed at 
the ingenuity of working within such limitations and I’m baffled that humanity figured out 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
7 
how to make a car in the first place! But building a car has given me a way to step away from 
my desk, to pursue something creative that is 100% outside of my comfort zone. I rely on 
other people for advice and tools. I am constantly reading and learning about these old cars. 
It’s a slow process, but one that has freed my mind and given it new places to go, be inspired, 
and return to work ready for fresh ideas.  
So find something that can add to your fulfillment of designing interfaces and push you to 
greater limits of creativity. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
8 
Before and after photos of the frame and engine from my GT6. I didn’t know much about cars before 
starting on this project, but the process has given me a creative pursuit away from the screens and digital 
interfaces of my daily life.  
  
Ideate and Iterate 
Ideation and iteration are both important to ensure we’re practicing creativity. Generating 
new ideas should be one of your primary outputs. Iterating on those ideas, then, gives us a 
chance to refine and mature them. These approaches are important when working on 
visionary vaporware that has no current basis in reality. Thinking of a single new idea and 
expressing it in a mockup isn’t too hard, but it’s far more difficult to come up with five 
completely different or derivative ideas. That’s what we need to do regularly: learn to 
generate as many ideas as possible and iterate to make as many different versions as possible. 
Set a goal for yourself to create at least five completely different designs. Don’t re-use 
elements; create new ones. Start with a blank canvas each time. Then approach the same 
problem with a different use case. Go about creating each one by setting the previous design 
aside. The more ideas and versions you have, the better. The exact quantity you produce or 
the fidelity of these ideas isn’t important. The goal is to make it a habit of thinking differently 
about our projects and forcing our brains to learn (and re-learn) how to design.  
 
Making it Happen 
Practically speaking, designing for vision is creating visuals that express your vision of a 
preferred future. You design mockups of your product, website, or app but instead of being 
constrained by all the limitations you know you have (engineering, marketing, support) you 
create what you believe to be the best possible product and illustrate that with some form of 
interactive prototype or static mockup. These designs can then be shown or presented to 
your team or executives to inspire them to want to achieve the same goals. The purpose is to 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
9 
create a conversation that results in the organization chasing after something that is bigger 
than the current vision (perhaps even impossible), but is inspiring and motivating.  
However, frozen in the day-to-day maintenance of our jobs, we often overlook just how 
influential our ideas can be. It’s hard to think about vision and the future when there are so 
many other things to do.  
“Documentation needs to be written. The mockups need to be updated. And I have to get ready for a 
meeting this afternoon. How could I possibly take the time to design for something that doesn’t even 
exist? That isn’t even part of my project?”  
It can be hard to see the value of creating something that’s not on everyone’s radar. No one is 
expecting you to do this. No one is explicitly paying you to create visionary, inspirational 
stuff (usually). It’s sort of above and beyond your normal activities and so it can be a 
challenge to find the time to create things just for the purpose of inspiring others. But the 
long-term benefits of being purposeful about this direction is well worth it.  
We have to be purposeful about making the time and space to do this every so often, 
whatever is the most efficient for you while not interfering with your regular work day. Here 
are some tips for setting aside the time you need to design for vision:  
Find a Different Routine 
One of the most important things you can do is to find a completely different time and space 
to go dream about the future. You want to break from your usual routine so that your brain 
isn’t even in the same mode that it usually is when you’re pumping out UI controls on a daily 
basis. Finding that routine is about looking for a different time, space, activity, and 
materials that will help you relax, free your mind, and get down to the business of creating 
things.  
 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
10 
Time 
You might want to limit yourself to a certain block of time each week to be sure that it 
doesn’t interfere with your work. It can be easy to get carried away and spend all your time 
making stuff that doesn’t pay the bills. So set aside a specific window of time that you think 
will be helpful. A former boss of mine let me spend every Friday on these kinds of endeavors, 
but you might be even more limited than that. Set aside one or two hours each week. One 
hour is more than enough time to mockup an idea if you remove the usual constraints. It’s 
just enough time to get your thoughts flowing, but not enough to disrupt your daily work.  
If that still seems like too much, set aside 15 minutes every day. Just 15 minutes. It’s not 
enough time to get any serious designs made, which is why it can be so effective. You’re 
forced to come up with ideas and solutions quickly because there isn’t enough time to think 
deeply about any one concept. The focus is more on ideation. So set a timer and start 
sketching your ideas. Jot them down before the timer goes off. Each day you’ll have these 
small snippets. Which ones do you go back to? Which ones seem to have the most potential? 
At the end of a few weeks or months, you’ll have some really great concepts that can be 
further refined into expressive mockups.  
 
Space 
The space where you work is also really important and affects how you work. Our brains get 
into routines (and ruts!) based largely on our physical location. We condition ourselves to 
work when certain factors are present, many of them being physical: the chair, the window, 
the position of your desk, even your position in relationship to other people. Part of your 
challenge might be to find a different physical space where you can go. If you want to create 
something different, you’ll need to go somewhere different. A new space can inspire thoughts 
and ideas that you wouldn’t normally have. New spaces have new sounds, new visuals, and 
unexpected stimulations all around you that contribute to your sense of creativity.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
11 
I personally have a hard time getting work done if I’m not at my desk, but because I 
occasionally travel I’ve taken to listening to music almost constantly while I design. As a 
result, I usually can’t get any serious design work done unless I’m listening to music piped 
through headphones. I’ve learned that this is the way I work now. So if I want to do 
something out of my normal routine, I have to go somewhere other than my office: a different 
room in my house, a local bookstore, or a park. The exact location doesn’t matter as much as 
the change of routine. If you expect to create something that isn’t routine, you must change 
your current routine. So go find a new, perhaps unexpected, place to let your brain percolate 
and come up with better ideas. You’ll have to learn what works for you, but the process of 
searching for new, interesting places to create will yield better discipline and a different way 
of designing.  
 
Activity 
Sometimes the best way to come up with better ideas and create better designs is to actually 
not do any designing at all. That is, change your activity to allow your brain to relax and 
wander. Do something that would wholly prevent you from even accessing a computer or 
any of your usual tools. For example, rather than sit with your laptop at a coffee shop, go for 
a walk in the woods, hike in the mountains, do yoga, pull weeds in the garden, go jogging, sit 
on the beach, watch the sunrise… Do something that will allow your mind to be still, 
listening and thinking to what the future could be.  
When I get stuck trying to figure out how something should work: I go run. Fresh air, no 
screens, my brain is free, and my mind wanders. I usually don’t even pay attention to what 
I’m thinking. I’m not explicitly trying to solve problems, but it’s during these moments of 
thinking nothing that the solution presents itself without me even trying. Not always, but 
often. And even if I come back to my desk without having come up with the best idea ever, I 
am usually better prepared to tackle my work again. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
12 
Your brain’s ability to solve problems while doing a different activity is a common 
phenomenon. Remember that great idea you had in the shower? Or that thing you fixed 
while sitting in traffic? It turns out that we all have better ideas when we’re relaxed: doing a 
simple task and letting our minds wander.1 Anything that you can do that is relaxing and 
pleasurable will allow your brain to also relax and come up with ideas or solve problems you 
never thought possible. 
You won’t be able to actually create something tangible from a change of activity like this, 
but it’ll force yourself to be unencumbered and think freely about how to solve some of the 
difficult problems you face. When you’re out in the woods, you don’t have your computer. 
You’re forced to just think about all the hard problems. When you return, write down you 
thoughts, sketch out your ideas. Make a record of what you learned in the hopes that it can 
turn into something worth communicating to others on your team. A change of activity yields 
a change of ideas.  
 
Materials 
Lastly, I recommend changing up the kinds of materials and tools you use to force you into 
new habits and new ways of approaching your work. The simplest method is to bring along a 
pad of paper and a pencil, even if you’re not the type to draw or sketch. Often we design 
based on what we already know we can do with our tools. Our ideas are limited to the tools 
we have in front of us. When something is a little more time consuming to express with 
existing tools, we get stuck, waste time, or avoid that idea altogether. Changing the materials 
you use is a great way to discover new approaches because you’re not limited by your typical 
toolset.  
                                                
1 Why We Have Our Best Ideas in the Shower: The Science of Creativity, By Leo Widrich FEBRUARY 28, 
2013 https://blog.bufferapp.com/why-we-have-our-best-ideas-in-the-shower-the-science-of-creativity 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
13 
Once I was designing a UI that needed some specific icons, but I was tired of re-using similar 
icons over and over. I had developed a habit of just searching common icon libraries and 
grabbing something I liked. I needed to find something with a more unique personality, so I 
went outside with sidewalk chalk and drew my icons on the driveway. I then took photos of 
each of them, imported and traced them, and placed them in the project. There was nothing 
artistically innovative about the resulting icons, but I accomplished my goal of creating 
something unique that communicated the style and tone of my project. Changing materials 
gave me more opportunities to create a better vision.  
I’d also highly recommend removing internet access from the equation when you’re trying to 
find new ideas. It’s too easy to search and copy other ideas. While there’s nothing wrong 
with that, in terms of generating new ideas for your own product (taking someone else’s idea 
and expressing it in your own context) I personally find it more helpful when I’m untethered 
from the online world and forced to use my own brain capacity for all of my thinking.  It’s 
about reducing my dependence on screens or tools for finding solutions to problems. I have 
access to too much information. Often, my access to infinite amounts of knowledge hinders 
my own ability to truly be creative and solve problems with good, old-fashioned thought. 
When I intentionally put myself in situations where I can’t access those screens, I have no 
choice: I’m all on my own. 
So set aside your computer, phone, and tablet for the time being. Grab some paper and a 
pencil and start scribbling down things that will help you create the next version of your 
product. Write words, draw boxes, and generate ideas that can contribute to your vision of 
what the future can look like.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
14 
For one project, I designed a set of 
icons using sidewalk chalk, took 
photos, and then traced them on 
the computer. The result was 
something that was truly unique 
and refreshing to work on. 
Another time, I tried designing 
icons in the snow. This didn’t 
yield a real icon set for a project 
but it was an excellent exercise in 
expressing an idea with a very 
limited toolset. 
 
 
Making Stuff Up 
When it comes down to it, designing for vision is really just about making stuff up. There is 
no magic, except in your design’s ability to inspire people. Other than that, it’s just a 
collection of visionary vaporware that has no basis in anything real. You are just making 
things up, expressing them in a tangible way, and then using imagery to create an excitement 
and urgency about the future.  
If we take that a step further, I’d suggest it’s as important to create a fake product with your 
designs and mockups as it is to create the version 2.0 of your current project. You probably 
have a pretty good idea about what version 2.0 is going to be like, but what are the products, 
opportunities, or niches that no one is even thinking about? What would the 4.0 version look 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
15 
like? We are too encumbered by the limits of our bosses and developers. What would you 
design if you had unlimited resources? What’s the right thing to build? Is your current 
product even the thing you should be working on? We need to be designing more 4.0 
versions of our products and 1.0 versions of things that don’t even exist yet. 
It’s a good practice to create a product that doesn’t exist yet. Look for opportunities within 
your organization and express them as best as you can. Don’t wait for someone else to come 
along and pitch the next big thing. Take ownership of your skills, create something from 
nothing, and give people something to get excited about.  
• 
Don't limit yourself - forget all the business requirements, legacy ideas, or 
engineering questions. Just create something that makes sense to you.  
• 
Start from scratch - don’t re-use anything from an existing project or copy and paste 
from a template. Design this thing from the ground-up with only raw materials.  
• 
Don't obsess over the details - It doesn’t have to be perfect. The purpose is more 
about communicating a concept than it is about what’s realistic and final.  
• 
Make lots of different versions - the more different ways you can approach the 
problem, the better. Once you think you’ve finished, try it again. It’s a good habit to 
force yourself to make just one more iteration.  
This extends, too, to new designers who are looking to build their portfolios. Often, entry-
level designers have nothing to show for their skill and are looking for opportunities just to 
gain experience. This is a great opportunity to find something that you think needs to exist, 
and make it happen. You don’t need an internship or a school project to help you create 
something, just go create it and build the case for it yourself. Make up a business, design an 
app for a new product, or imagine what interfaces will be like in the future. Don’t wait for 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
16 
other people to give you something to do, go create something for yourself and demonstrate 
your skill.  
When I worked in the electronic payment services industry, I had an idea for a new kind of 
loyalty card that our company could use and re-sell as a value-added service. It had nothing 
to do with my job. It was just an idea. But I spent some time (not a lot of time) creating mock 
ups and designs that demonstrated what this new service might be like. I shared my ideas 
with my boss, who then sent it to the CEO and a few other executives. During my tenure, 
that idea never saw the light of day and I have no idea if it was ever even pursued as a 
product. However, it did create a conversation around our current thinking on loyalty cards, 
established my name with the CEO, and circulated a document that other people would later 
tell me they appreciated.  
More recently, one of my retail clients had mentioned the need for their customers to easily 
re-order items they had ordered in the past. During one of my purposeful creative pursuits, I 
created some designs for a stand-alone app aimed at power-users specifically for this 
purpose. I made some mockups and a simple demo showing how this system would work and 
shared it with the stakeholders on the project. Unknown to me, another team at the company 
was already working on something very similar. While my own expression of that idea didn’t 
cause them to stop what they were doing, it did create a “great minds think alike” 
conversation where our combined efforts were validated. I gave them something tangible and 
sharable that they could use to influence the thinking on their own initiative. It may not have 
been completely original, but it did demonstrate that I was willing to think beyond their 
immediate needs and contribute long-term value. My role was more than delivering the day-
to-day designs they expected. I also contributed ideas and designs to another project that was 
outside my current scope. It gave me another platform on which to communicate with them 
about design.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
17 
 
I created a very basic prototype of a re-ordering app to express a vision for this opportunity. Then I 
recorded a 2 min screen-capture video presentation demoing the idea. Even though my client was already 
working on a similar concept, it created a conversation and added value to the relationship. 
You see, even when our ideas fall flat or aren’t entirely useful they still create value for us as 
far as learning to communicate about design and build the kind of momentum we need to be 
successful. When we make things up, we show that we’re thinking, we’re invested in the 
success of the organization, and we’re smart enough to communicate our ideas to people in a 
way that’s compelling. This sort of commitment is invaluable to the organizations we work 
for. 
 
Taking your ideas to the right people 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
18 
Relationships are everything. Who you know will greatly influence the opportunities that are 
available to you. Working with and communicating with people will determine how likely 
they are to help you and connect you with those opportunities. It’s one thing to have great 
ideas and to even be able to express them in meaningful ways, but it’s another thing entirely 
to have an audience of people who are there to support, encourage, and help you on your 
journey. Even if you’re capturing that vision of a preferred future, it’s not going to help you if 
there aren’t people to share the vision with.  
The good news is, our skill in design can help us establish a connection with the people that 
make decisions. Like I’ve said before, everyone wants a designer on their team. Everyone 
needs something designed. You need to find opportunities to get in with the right people who 
have the power to make your vision a reality. You can leverage your success in articulating 
design decisions to influence these decision-makers. 
This isn’t about selfishly pursuing one-way relationships. It’s about finding the opportunities 
to create your own success with people who can (and want to) support you. Usually, this is 
your boss; your direct report. Often, it’s a peer or other colleague who recognizes your talent 
and makes a personal connection with you. Sometimes, it’s an executive who needs your help 
from time to time, which gives you access to them on a regular basis. Be on the lookout for 
people who have influence, build into those relationships, share your ideas with passion, and 
allow them to help you.  
How can you do that? The best opportunities to build these connections are when someone 
needs a ‘favor’ from you. When your boss asks for help putting together a presentation, do it. 
If there’s a critical bug that needs to be addressed, be the kind of person who sees the 
urgency and pitches in without complaining. When the product owner comes to the team 
with a last-minute missing requirement, step up and support her by making it happen. The 
more often you can help other people, the more likely you are to get help when you need it. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
19 
These kinds of situations are major deposits in the bank account of trust. The way to get 
what you want is to help other people get what they want. 
In these relationships, keep your ideas, designs, and vision handy. Eventually, you’ll have an 
opportunity to share your ideas with someone who can make your vision a reality. They’ll be 
surprised, delighted, and impressed that you can create that level of vision and communicate 
it so tangibly. Having an audience of people who can help you execute your ideas is a 
necessary part of designing for vision. 
 
More Than Pixels 
The things we create convey a message to our audience. These pictures possess a quality that 
gives them a voice and breathes life into what is otherwise just a collection of pixels. Our 
brains perceive them has having more qualities than they actually have: intelligence, purpose, 
even a soul. That’s because our designs reflect who we are. They are a mirror of our own 
existence; a reflection of our ability to create and to be the created. As much as we try to 
design toward the personas of our users or the brand of the organization, our work is still a 
reflection of us: our style, tone, and personal touch is everywhere. Just as we are drawn to 
people who are like us, so too we design interfaces that reflect our own shape and 
personality. This is perhaps why it’s so hard to talk about design. Because we are so 
intimately knit up in all that we create that we cannot stand back far enough to see what it 
really is. It’s difficult to know if what we’re reflecting in our designs is what we ever intended 
in the first place.  
Our skill at creating an experience for users that is both delightful and accomplishes business 
goals is something that few people can do. And even though we do our best to evaluate it, 
measure it, and improve it, I’m not sure we can ever have a complete picture of what we’ve 
created. No matter how much information we have, our ability to understand and talk about 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
20 
our designs is limited to our own unique perspective as the designer. When you hear your 
own voice on a recording, it sounds strange, “That’s not what I sound like, is it?” When you 
see a photo of yourself, you might think, “That’s not how I really look from that angle, is it?” 
Likewise, when we watch our designs operate in the world with a life of their own, we may 
react, “That’s not how I really meant for it to be used, is it?” We can’t always see ourselves 
(and our designs) for who we really are. 
I’ve written a lot in this book about how we should communicate to our stakeholders. The 
whole thrust of this content is to convey how critical it is to be able to explain yourself to 
someone who may not understand user experience design. You cannot and will not be able to 
really succeed as a designer unless you learn to talk to people in a way that makes sense to 
them because your designs do not speak for themselves. But more than that, product design is 
bigger than any one person’s skill at communication. Our ability to create incredible user 
experiences is influenced by the constantly changing world around us: other people are 
involved, external factors are beyond our control, and our life and relationships that make us 
who we are.  
Design is volatile and changing, but being a better communicator is something that we can 
always have. Our designs may get discarded, but we can still talk about them and learn from 
them.  That website will eventually shut down, but we understand the problem that it solved 
at the time. We may take another job, but we still carry these skills with us. No matter where 
life and work takes us, we can always rest in the knowledge that in any situation, in any role, 
and with all people, we are prepared to bring our ideas to life through the power of 
articulating design decisions.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

