

 
COMPUTER SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND APPLICATIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS 
  
NEW RESEARCH 
 
No part of this digital document may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or
by any means. The publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this digital document, but makes no
expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No
liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of information
contained herein. This digital document is sold with the clear understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering legal, medical or any other professional services. 

 
COMPUTER SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY  
AND APPLICATIONS 
 
 
Additional books in this series can be found on Nova’s website  
under the Series tab. 
 
 
Additional e-books in this series can be found on Nova’s website  
under the e-book tab. 
 

 
COMPUTER SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND APPLICATIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS 
  
NEW RESEARCH 
 
 
 
 
 
GAYLE CAIN 
EDITOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New York 
 

 
Copyright © 2017 by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or 
transmitted in any form or by any means: electronic, electrostatic, magnetic, tape, mechanical 
photocopying, recording or otherwise without the written permission of the Publisher. 
 
We have partnered with Copyright Clearance Center to make it easy for you to obtain permissions 
to reuse content from this publication. Simply navigate to this publication’s page on Nova’s 
website and locate the “Get Permission” button below the title description. This button is linked 
directly to the title’s permission page on copyright.com. Alternatively, you can visit 
copyright.com and search by title, ISBN, or ISSN.  
  
For further questions about using the service on copyright.com, please contact:  
Copyright Clearance Center 
Phone: +1-(978) 750-8400 Fax: +1-(978) 750-4470  
E-mail: info@copyright.com. 
 
NOTICE TO THE READER 
The Publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this book, but makes no expressed or 
implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No 
liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of 
information contained in this book. The Publisher shall not be liable for any special, 
consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or in part, from the readers’ use of, or 
reliance upon, this material. Any parts of this book based on government reports are so indicated 
and copyright is claimed for those parts to the extent applicable to compilations of such works. 
 
Independent verification should be sought for any data, advice or recommendations contained in 
this book. In addition, no responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage 
to persons or property arising from any methods, products, instructions, ideas or otherwise 
contained in this publication. 
 
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information with regard to the 
subject matter covered herein. It is sold with the clear understanding that the Publisher is not 
engaged in rendering legal or any other professional services. If legal or any other expert 
assistance is required, the services of a competent person should be sought. FROM A 
DECLARATION OF PARTICIPANTS JOINTLY ADOPTED BY A COMMITTEE OF THE 
AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION AND A COMMITTEE OF PUBLISHERS. 
 
Additional color graphics may be available in the e-book version of this book. 
 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 
Names: Cain, Gayle, editor. 
Title: Artificial neural networks : new research / editors, Gayle Cain. 
Description: Hauppauge, New York, USA : Nova Science Publishers, Inc., [2016]  
   | Series: Computer science, technology and applications | Includes index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2016035621 (print) | LCCN 2016044235 (ebook) | ISBN 9781634859646 | ISBN 9781634859790 
(ebook) | ISBN 9781634859790  
Subjects:  LCSH: Neural networks (Computer science) 
Classification: LCC QA76.87 .A785 2016 (print) | LCC QA76.87 (ebook) | DDC 006.3/2--dc23 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016035621 
 
Published by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. † New York 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
Preface 
 
vii 
Chapter 1 
Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemical 
Engineering 
1 
Ivan M. Savic, Dragoljub G. Gajic and Ivana M. Savic-Gajic  
Chapter 2 
Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemistry and 
Chemical Engineering 
25 
Aderval S. Luna, Eduardo R. A. Lima and  
Kese Pontes Freitas Alberton 
Chapter 3 
Applications of Artificial Neural Networks to Energy and Buildings 
45 
Cinzia Buratti, Domenico Palladino and  
Francesco Cristarella Orestano 
Chapter 4 
Applications of Artificial Neural Network to Predict Biodiesel Fuel 
Properties from Fatty Acid Constituents 
81 
Solomon O. Giwa 
Chapter 5 
Applications of ANN Methods for Solar Radiation Estimation 
107 
Gilles Notton, Kahina Dahmani, Rabah Dizene,  
Marie-Laure Nivet, Cyril Voyant and Christophe Paoli 
Chapter 6 
The Use of In Silico Methods to Design and  
Evaluate Skin UV Filters 
135 
Snezana Agatonovic-Kustrin and David W. Morton 
Chapter 7 
Modeling the Milling Tool Wear by Using a Multilayer Perceptron 
Artificial Neural Network from Milling Run Experimental Data 
157 
P. J. García Nieto and E. García-Gonzalo 
Chapter 8 
Parameter Extraction of Small-Signal and Noise Models of 
Microwave Transistors Based on Artificial Neural Networks 
175 
Zlatica Marinković, Vladica Đorđević, Nenad Ivković,  
Olivera Pronić-Rančić, Vera Marković and Alina Caddemi 
 

Contents 
vi
Chapter 9 
Applying Artificial Neural Networks to Deep Learning and 
Predictive Analysis in Semantic TCM Telemedicine Systems 
211 
Wilfred W. K. Lin and Allan K. Y. Wong 
Index 
 
221 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
 
This current book provides new research on artificial neural networks (ANNs). Topics 
discussed include the application of ANNs in chemistry and chemical engineering fields; the 
application of ANNs in the prediction of biodiesel fuel properties from fatty acid constituents; 
the use of ANNs for solar radiation estimation; the use of in silico methods to design and 
evaluate skin UV filters; a practical model based on the multilayer perceptron neural network 
(MLP) approach to predict the milling tool flank wear in a regular cut, as well as entry cut 
and exit cut, of a milling tool; parameter extraction of small-signal and noise models of 
microwave transistors based on ANNs; and the application of ANNs to deep-learning and 
predictive analysis in semantic TCM telemedicine systems. 
Chapter 1 - Today, the main effort is focused on the optimization of different processes in 
order to reduce and provide the optimal consumption of available and limited resources. 
Conventional methods such as one-variable-at-a-time approach optimize one factor at a time 
instead of all simultaneously. Unlike this method, artificial neural networks provide analysis 
of the impact of all process parameters simultaneously on the chosen responses. The 
architecture of each network consists of at least three layers depending on the nature of 
process which to be analyzed. The optimal conditions obtained after application of artificial 
neural networks are significantly improved compared with those obtained using conventional 
methods. Therefore artificial neural networks are quite common method in modeling and 
optimization of various processes without the full knowledge about them. For example, one 
study tried to optimize consumption of electricity in electric arc furnace that is known as one 
of the most energy-intensive processes in industry. Chemical content of scrap to be loaded 
and melted in the furnace was selected as the input variable while the specific electricity 
consumption was the output variable. Other studies modeled the extraction and adsorption 
processes. Many process parameters, such as extraction time, nature of solvent, solid to liquid 
ratio, extraction temperature, degree of disintegration of plant materials, etc. have impact on 
the extraction of bioactive compounds from plant materials. These parameters are commonly 
used as input variables, while the yields of bioactive compounds are used as output during 
construction of artificial neural network. During the adsorption, the amount of adsorbent and 
adsorbate, adsorption time, pH of medium are commonly used as the input variables, while 
the amount of adsorbate after treatment is selected as output variable. Based on the literature 
review, it can be concluded that the application of artificial neural networks will surely have 
an important role in the modeling and optimization of chemical processes in the future. 

Gayle Cain 
viii
Chapter 2 - Problems in chemistry and chemical engineering are composed of complex 
systems. Various chemical processes in chemistry and chemical engineering can be described 
by different mathematical functions as, for example, linear, quadratic, exponential, hyperbolic 
et al. There are many of calculated and experimental descriptors/molecular properties to 
describe the chemical behavior of the substances. It is also possible that many variables can 
influence the desired response. Usually, chemometrics is widely used as a valuable tool to 
deal chemical data, and to solve complex problems. In this context, Artificial Neural 
Networks (ANN) is a chemometric tool that may provide accurate results for complex and 
non-linear problems that demand high computational costs. The main advantages of ANN 
techniques include learning and generalization ability of data, fault tolerance and inherent 
contextual information processing in addition to fast computation capacity. Due to the 
popularization, there is a substantial interest in ANN techniques, in special in their 
applications in various fields. The following types of applications are considered: data 
reduction using neural networks, overlapped signal resolution, experimental design and 
surface response, modeling, pattern recognition, and multivariate regression. 
Chapter 3 - Energy consumption in buildings and indoor thermal comfort nowadays 
issues in engineering applications. A deep analysis of these problems generally requires many 
resources. Many studies were carried out in order to improve the methodology available for 
the evaluation of the energy consumption or indoor thermal conditions; interesting solutions 
with a very good feedback found in the Literature are the Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs). 
The peculiarity of ANNs is the opportunity of simulating and resolving complex 
problems thanks to their architecture, which allows to identify the combination of the 
involved parameters even when they are in a large amount. 
The Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) are very common in engineering applications for 
simulating the energy performance of buildings, for predicting a particular parameter, or for 
evaluating the indoor thermal conditions in specific environments. However, many different 
Artificial Neural Networks are available and each of them should be applied in a specific 
field. 
This chapter examines and describes the ANNs generally used in the engineering field. 
Studies of ANNs applied in topics such as energy consumption in buildings, gas emissions 
evaluation, indoor and outdoor thermal conditions calculation, renewable energy sources 
investigation, and lighting and acoustics applications are reported. After a brief description of 
the main characteristics of ANNs, which allows to focus on the main peculiarity and 
characteristics of this kind of algorithms, some applications shown in the Literature and 
applied to engineering issues are described.  
In the first part of the chapter an analysis of the main parameters which influence the 
ANN implementation in the examined papers was carried out, then some applications of ANN 
in energy and buildings field found in the Literature are described. In particular, the main 
studies were described considering five different clusters: in the first group the ANN 
applications to buildings and traditional energy plants are showed, in the second one the ANN 
implementation for the thermal and energy performance evaluation of renewable energy 
sources are reported. In the third and forth clusters the applications found in the Literature for 
the indoor thermal parameters investigation and outdoor thermal conditions calculation are 
described, while in the last one other topics investigated using ANN models such as lighting 
and acoustics issues are considered. 

Preface 
ix
Chapter 4 - Biodiesel is generally accepted as an alternative fuel to fossil-derived diesel 
and has been produced from numerous oil-based biological sources. Determination of fuel 
properties of biodiesel has mainly being experimental which in most cases is expensive, time 
consuming and strenuous. These fuel properties are strongly linked to fatty acid (FA) 
composition of the oil used in biodiesel production. This paper presents the application of 
artificial neural network (ANN) in predicting selected biodiesel fuel properties (cetane 
number (CN), flash point (FP), kinematic viscosity (KV) and density) from the FA 
compositions of the oils contained in raw materials employed in biodiesel production. ANNs 
are nonlinear computer algorithms which are widely and successfully applied in many fields 
of study in simulating complex problems. Palmitic, stearic, oleic, linoleic and linolenic acids 
were observed to be the principal FAs in oils gathered from 58 feedstocks sourced from in 
literature. FAs outside the five prominent FAs were embedded into them based on their levels 
of saturation and unsaturation, and were used as inputs in training the networks. Neural 
network toolbox in MATLAB® (2013b) was employed in this study. Data of FAs and fuel 
properties were used in training CN, KV, FP and density networks based on back propagation 
algorithm. Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm, logsig (hidden layer) and purelin (out layer) 
were used as training algorithm and transfer functions, respectively. Different architectures 
(5-6-4 (CN and FP); 5-7-4 (KV); 6-5-4 (density)) were employed in training the networks due 
to variation in the number of neurons in both the input (temperature as additional parameter) 
and hidden layers. In this study, the networks achieved high accuracy for the prediction of 
CN, KV, FP and density with correlation coefficients of 0.962, 0.943, 0.987 and 0.985, 
respectively. This result indicates good agreement between the predicted results and the 
experimental values, and those of previous studies found in literature. Errors associated with 
the prediction performance of the networks were estimated using statistical methods and were 
found to be within satisfactory range of accuracy. Finally, this study shows that the networks 
via ANN modelling can be alternative methods in predicting CN, KV, FP and density from 
FA compositions outside the intricate and time-consuming standard test methods. 
Chapter 5 - The objective of this paper is show how ANN methods can be used for solar 
radiation estimation at short time-scale (5-min): firstly an ANN method was applied for 
estimating horizontal solar irradiation from other meteorological parameters more easily and 
frequently measured over the World and a second ANN model was developed for 
transforming horizontal solar irradiation into tilted irradiation. 
Only one thousand continental stations around the world measures solar radiation and 
often with a poor quality. The authors showed that 5-min solar irradiations can be estimated 
from more available, more readily measurable and cheaper data using Artificial Neural 
Networks (ANN). 7 meteorological parameters and 3 calculated parameters are used as 
inputs, thus 1023 combinations of inputs data are possible; the best combinations of inputs are 
pursued. The best ANN models have a good adequacy mainly with sunshine duration in the 
input set. The 6 and 10 inputs models have a relative root means square error (nRMSE) equal 
to 19.35% and 18.65% which is very good for such a time-step.  
Solar collector are rarely in horizontal position; However, solar radiation is always 
measured in a horizontal plane; converting measured horizontal global solar irradiance in 
tilted ones is a difficult task, particularly for a small time-step and for not-averaged data. 
Conventional methods (statistical, correlation, …) are not always efficient with time-step less 
than one hour; thus, the authors want to know if an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) is able 
to realize this conversion with a good accuracy when applied to 5-min solar radiation data. 

Gayle Cain 
x
nRMSE is around 8% for the optimal configuration, which corresponds to a very good 
accuracy for such a short time-step. 
These two successive studies show the applicability of ANN methods for the estimation 
of solar radiation; estimating solar radiation is particularly difficult because the sky diffuse 
component of solar radiation is anisotropic and the relations between parameters are rarely 
linear. 
Chapter 6 - Excessive exposure to sunlight is the major cause of progressive skin photo 
aging, sunburn and skin cancers. The UVB component of sunlight directly damages cellular 
DNA and leads to the formation of squamous cell carcinomas, while the UVA component of 
sunlight penetrates deeper into the skin causing DNA damage through generation of reactive 
oxygen species (ROS). UV filters are the active ingredients in sunscreen products, which 
protect skin from the dangerous effects of UV light by absorbing, reflecting, or diffusing UV 
radiation. In order to maintain effective UV protection, sunscreen filters should remain on the 
skin surface, accumulate in the stratum corneum, forming an effective barrier against UV 
radiation without transdermally penetrating into the systemic circulation. Further skin 
penetration significantly reduces their efficacy and may also cause phototoxic and 
photoallergic skin reactions. However, chemicals in contact with the skin have the potential to 
be absorbed into the skin and enter the systemic circulation, with several studies reporting 
that a number of organic filters significantly penetrate the skin. For assessment of dermal 
absorption, in vitro and in vivo methods are used, although in vitro tests are preferred for 
ethical reasons and feasibility. Therefore, it would be useful if the skin penetration of a 
sunscreen filter can be predicted from its chemical structure alone. Computational and QSAR 
based methods can be quite useful for development of skin permeability models and have 
been used to relate physicochemical parameters to dermal permeability to predict dermal 
penetration and absorption of chemicals. Skin penetration or partitioning like sorption 
processes are generally driven by hydrophobic effects, which are expected to correlate with 
molecular size and lipophilicity, together with the various intermolecular interactions, which 
occur between the permeant and the skin. Hence, this study aimed to develop a QSAR using a 
heterogeneous data set based on published skin penetration data and then to use this 
established model to predict the skin penetration of UV sunscreen filter molecules. In order to 
overcome the limitations associated with linear modelling, artificial neural networks (ANNs) 
were used to build the QSAR model. Sensitivity analysis was also incorporated into the 
modelling process in order to establish the molecular requirements for the ideal sunscreen 
filter. The developed model provides insight into the molecular structural requirements that 
are important for an effective UV sunscreen filter, particularly in relation to dermal 
absorption. Producing sunscreens with limited dermal absorption of actives is a challenge for 
the cosmetic industry so the developed QSAR model should prove useful in developing more 
effective and safer sunscreen actives. 
Chapter 7 - Milling cutters are important cutting tools used in milling machines to 
perform milling operations, which are prone to wear and subsequent failure. In this research 
work, a practical model based on the multilayer perceptron neural network (MLP) approach 
to predict the milling tool flank wear in a regular cut, as well as entry cut and exit cut, of a 
milling tool is proposed. Indeed, a MLP–based model was successfully used here to predict 
the milling tool flank wear (output variable) as a function of the following input variables: the 
time duration of experiment, depth of cut, feed, type of material, etc. Regression with optimal 
hyperparameters was performed and a correlation coefficient equal to 0.92 was obtained. To 

Preface 
xi
accomplish the objective of this study, the experimental dataset represents experiments from 
runs on a milling machine under various operating conditions. Data sampled by three 
different types of sensors (acoustic emission sensor, vibration sensor and current sensor) were 
acquired at several positions. The MLP–based model’s goodness of fit to experimental data 
confirmed the good performance of this model. Finally, conclusions of this work are exposed.  
Chapter 8 - Microwave transistors are among the key components of circuits used in 
modern communication systems. In computer aided design of these circuits it is necessary to 
use their accurate and reliable models in order to represent them properly. There are a plenty 
of models developed, but still the models based on a transistor equivalent circuit 
representation are the most widely used and preferred by the circuit designers. The parameters 
of equivalent circuit models are extracted from a set of measured characteristics of a transistor 
to be modeled. For certain models there are analytical approaches for model parameter 
extraction. However, optimizations in circuit simulators are dominantly applied. 
Optimizations take a certain amount of time, which is especially important when repeated 
iterations are needed to determine the model parameters under different transistor working 
conditions. Artificial neural networks have appeared to be a very convenient tool to develop 
efficient extraction procedures of device model parameters. In this chapter a comprehensive 
study of the developed neural network based extraction approaches is given, considering 
transistor small-signal and noise models. A short introduction on the microwave transistor 
models and frequently used extraction procedures is given at the beginning, followed by a 
description of the multilayered neural networks and procedures of their training and 
validation. The main part of the Chapter refers to several extraction approaches based on 
neural networks, starting from the development of the extraction procedure, through their 
validation and up to the final application. The advantages and possible limitations are 
discussed. Appropriate numerical results are included to illustrate and verify the presented 
procedures. 
Chapter 9 - The study aims to establish a deep learning and predictive model in the semantic 
TCM telemedicine system using Artificial Neural Network Microsoft Azure Machine Learning. In 
Chinese Medicine diagnosis, four examination methods: Questioning/history taking, 
inspection, auscultation (listening) and olfaction (smelling), and palpation. Deep learning is 
an appropriate technique for the clinical decision support. The result is promising. Next step 
includs studying the herb-herb interaction. And when a model has been validated, it is easy to 
publish this as a web service with an auto-documented REST API, to be consumed by apps, 
and in future we deploy as SaaS and Integrative Medicine Model and using the Microsoft 
Azure and NVidia the state-of-the-art GPU Visualization Infrastructure and GPU Compute 
Infrastructure. 
 
 


In: Artificial Neural Networks: New Research 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-964-6 
Editor: Gayle Cain 
© 2017 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1 
 
 
 
APPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS 
IN CHEMICAL ENGINEERING 
 
 
Ivan M. Savic1, Dragoljub G. Gajic2 and Ivana M. Savic-Gajic1,* 
1Faculty of Technology, University of Nis, Bulevar oslobodjenja 124,  
16000 Leskovac, Serbia 
2School of Electrical Engineering, University of Belgrade,  
Bulevar kralja Aleksandra 73, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia 
 
 
ABSTRACT  
 
Today, the main effort is focused on the optimization of different processes in order 
to reduce and provide the optimal consumption of available and limited resources. 
Conventional methods such as one-variable-at-a-time approach optimize one factor at a 
time instead of all simultaneously. Unlike this method, artificial neural networks provide 
analysis of the impact of all process parameters simultaneously on the chosen responses. 
The architecture of each network consists of at least three layers depending on the nature 
of process which to be analyzed. The optimal conditions obtained after application of 
artificial neural networks are significantly improved compared with those obtained using 
conventional methods. Therefore artificial neural networks are quite common method in 
modeling and optimization of various processes without the full knowledge about them. 
For example, one study tried to optimize consumption of electricity in electric arc furnace 
that is known as one of the most energy-intensive processes in industry. Chemical content 
of scrap to be loaded and melted in the furnace was selected as the input variable while 
the specific electricity consumption was the output variable. Other studies modeled the 
extraction and adsorption processes. Many process parameters, such as extraction time, 
nature of solvent, solid to liquid ratio, extraction temperature, degree of disintegration of 
plant materials, etc. have impact on the extraction of bioactive compounds from plant 
materials. These parameters are commonly used as input variables, while the yields of 
bioactive compounds are used as output during construction of artificial neural network. 
During the adsorption, the amount of adsorbent and adsorbate, adsorption time, pH of 
                                                           
* Corresponding author: Ivan M. Savic, Ph.D. Faculty of Technology, University of Nis, Bulevar oslobodjenja 124, 
16000 Leskovac, Serbia, Tel.: +381 16 247203; fax: +381 16 242859, e-mail: ici_teh@yahoo.com. 

Ivan M. Savic, Dragoljub G. Gajic and Ivana M. Savic-Gajic 
2
medium are commonly used as the input variables, while the amount of adsorbate after 
treatment is selected as output variable. Based on the literature review, it can be 
concluded that the application of artificial neural networks will surely have an important 
role in the modeling and optimization of chemical processes in the future. 
 
Keywords: modeling, optimization, artificial neural network, extraction, adsorption, 
chemical processes 
 
 
ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS 
 
Artificial neural networks (ANNs) were found application in the various disciplines with 
the aim of modeling the complex problems. They are consisted of the linked simple 
processing elements, so called artificial neurons or nodes which provide a parallel processing 
of data (Hecht-Nielsen, 1990; Schalkoff, 1997). The basic characteristics of biological 
system, which give a special importance to the neural network, are nonlinearity, high 
parallelism, robustness, learning, the ability to manage the imprecise and insufficiently clear 
information, as well as the ability to generalize (Jain et al., 1996). The artificial models with 
those characteristics are desirable because (1) the nonlinearity provides a better fitting the 
data, (2) the insensitivity of noise provides precisely prediction in the presence of unreliable 
data and errors during the measurement, (3) the high parallelism enables fast data processing, 
(4) the learning and adaptability give a possibility to the system to update (edit) all the interior 
structure and (5) the generalization provides the application of model on the data that are not 
included in the learning process of networks. The main goal of the ANNs based on the 
calculation (neural pocessing) is development of the mathematical algorithms that enable to 
learn by imitating the information processing and learning as in human brain. The models of 
ANNs are empirical in nature, however they can give the correct solutions for precisly and 
imprecisely formulated problems and for the phenomena that can only explain experimentaly 
(Leondes, 2007). 
 
 
ARTIFICIAL AND BIOLOGICAL NEURAL NETWORKS 
 
A function of biological neuron is necessary to detail explain, because it is needed for 
better understanding of artificial neurons function and analogy between artificial and 
biological networks. 
 
 
BIOLOGICAL NEURON 
 
Human neural system is consisted of the great number of neurons different types and 
lenghts depending on their positions in the body (Schalkoff, 1997). The simplified shematic 
representation of biological neuron with cleary visible main functional units (dendrites, cell 
body and axon) is given in Figure 1. 
 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemical Engineering 
3
 
Figure 1. Scheme of biological neuron. 
In addition to nucleus that contains the information about the hereditary properties, a cell 
body has plasma with the molecules for production of the necessary material (Jain et al., 
1996). Dendrites receive signals from the neighboring neurons, so in this way the signals 
reach to the cell body. The total area of dendrites of one typical neuron which could receive 
signal is approximately 0.25 mm2 (Zupan and Gasteiger, 1993). Axon contains the branches 
and receives signals from a cell body. The signals are transferred through the synapse 
(microscopic interspace) to the dendrites of neighboring neurons. Schematic illustration of 
signal transfer between two neurons through the synapse is presented in Figure 2. The 
impulse in the form of electric signal is transferred inside of dendrite and cell body toward the 
presynaptic membrane. After arriving in the membrane, a neurotransmitter (chemical) is 
released from the vesicles in the amount proportional to the strength of the input signal. The 
neurotransmitter is released inside of synaptic interspace toward the post-membrane and 
optionally in the dendrites of neighboring neurons. It forces them to generate a new electrical 
signal depending on the threshold of the receiving neuron. The generated signal passes 
through the neighboring neuron in an identical way. The quantity of signal, which passes 
through the receiving neuron, depends on the intensity of source signal of each neurons, their 
synaptic strength and threshold of the receiving neuron. The transfer of multiple signals 
simultaneously is possible, because a neuron has a great number of dendrites/synapses. This 
simplified mechanism of signal transfer has caused the early development of neuro-
computing and construction of the units of ANNs (Vedmedenko, 2007). 
 
 
ANALOGY BETWEEN ARTIFICIAL AND BIOLOGICAL NEURONS 
 
Analogy between artificial and biological neurons is that the connections among the 
nodes represent the axons and dendrites, the weights represent the synapses, and threshold 
approximates an activity in the body (Jain et al., 1996). In Figure 3, n biological neurons with 
different signal intensities x and synaptic strength w, which enter in the neuron with the 

Ivan M. Savic, Dragoljub G. Gajic and Ivana M. Savic-Gajic 
4
threshold b, as well as an equivalent artificial neural system. The biological and artificial 
neural networks learn by gradually adjusting the magnitude of the weight or strength of 
synapses (Zupan and Gasteiger, 1993). 
 
 
ARTIFICIAL NEURON 
 
Frank Rosenblatt invented the mechanisms of artificial neuron and perceptron algorithm 
in order to solve the problems (Lingireddy and Brion, 2005). Artificial neural neuron receive 
the input data from environment and combine them in a special way to form an net input (ξ). 
After that, the data pass through the linear threshold, and the obtained signal (output, у) is 
transferred to the neighbor neuron or environment (Figure 3). The neural fire occurs when ξ is 
over than border threshold (so called bias, b). Dynamic of linear neuron is commonly 
assumed during calculation of ξ (Haykin, 1994). The input of network is calculated as a scalar 
product of input signals (x) irrespective of the neuron and their strength (w). For n signals, the 
operation of neural perceptron is expressed as follows (Equation 1): 
 
 
Figure 2. Mechanism of signal transfer between two biological neurons. 
 
 
Figure 3. Signal interaction of n neurons and analogy of summarizing signals in the biological and 
artificial neurons. 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemical Engineering 
5













b
x
w
b
x
w
y
n
i
i
i
n
i
i
i
1
1
,0
,1
 
 
 
(1) 
 
where 1 represents “on”, and 0 “off” (Figure 3) during solving the classification problems. A 
positive weight (wi > 1) increases the neuron, while a negative weight reduces ξ and inhibits 
the neural activity. The system is consisted of artificial neuron and inputs as shown in Figure 
3. It is called a perceptron which establishes a mapping between input activity (stimulus) and 
output signal. In Equation 1, the neural threshold can be considered as an additional input 
node whose value is always 1, and its weight is equal to b. In this case, the summarizing is 
performed from 0 to n (in Equation 1), and a network signal ξ is compared to 0. 
 
 
PERCEPTRONS 
 
Perceptron (Figure 3) could be trained on the set data using a special rule of learning 
(Lingireddy and Brion, 2005). The weight coefficients of perceptron including threshold are 
being changed proportionally the differences between the target response (Y) and perceptron 
solution (y) for the each data. Using the special techniques of finding, the learning process 
tends to find the set of weights which correspond to the global minimum. Rosenblatt derived 
the perceptron rule which helps to find the optimal weight vector in a finite number of 
iterations, despite the initial value of the weights in 1962. This rule could be precisely used 
only for linearly separable classes (Hecht-Nielsen, 1990). In this case, a linear hyper-plane 
separating one class of objects on one side, and the second class on the other side. The 
linearly and non-linearly separable classes are presented in Figure 4. 
In order to solve the non-linearly separable problems, the additional layers of neurons are 
inserted between the input layer (which contains the input nodes) and output neuron, whereby 
the architecture of multilayer perceptron (MLP) is obtained as presented in Figure 4 (Hecht-
Nielsen, 1990). How this layer could not interact with the environment, it is called a hidden 
layer. The nodes of this layer are called the hidden nodes. The additional hidden layers 
increase the ability of perceptron to solve a non-linearly classification problem. Using a 
similar dynamic of neuron, the information passes through the hidden layer and then reaches 
to the output layer. Learning of MLP is not such direct as in the case of the simple perceptron. 
Backpropagation neural network is a type of the trained MLP (Harris, 1994). However, the 
learning process is an upgrade of the algorithm of simple perceptron during which the weights 
are being adjusted in the hidden layers (Hecht-Nielsen, 1990). 
The activation function of neurons in the hidden layer has a role to provide the learning 
of neural network. The neurons of hidden layers do not have a higher ability than ordinary 
perceptron network in the case of linear problems. The non-linear activation functions are 
often used for the neurons in the output layer, what influences that the network with multiple 
layers to be a particularly powerful. All non-linear functions are often used. The sigmoid 
functions (logistic, arctangent or Gaussian function) are commonly used at the 

Ivan M. Savic, Dragoljub G. Gajic and Ivana M. Savic-Gajic 
6
backpropagation algorithm. The activation functions such as the step, sigmoid, logistic, 
hyperbolic tangent, etc. are given in Table 1. 
 
 
Figure 4. (a) Linear and nonlinear classification, (b) multilayer perceptron with the input, hidden and 
output layers, nodes and weights. 
Table 1. Commonly used activation functions 
 
Function 
Definition 
Range 
Linear 
x 
(-∞, +∞) 
Logistic sigmoid 
1
1
x
e
 
(0, +1) 
Hyperbolic tanget 
x
x
x
x
e
e
e
e
 
(-1, +1) 
Exponential 
x
e
 
(0, +∞) 
Sine 
sin( )x  
[0, +1] 
Step 
0
,1
0
,0


x
x
 
[0, +1] 
Ramp 
1
,1
1
1
,
1
,1







x
x
x
x
 
[-1, +1] 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemical Engineering 
7
The activation functions which correspond to the distribution of the target values can be 
selected for the neurons in the output layer. The logistics function is especially useful when 
the target values are limited. If these values are not limited, it is better to use the activation 
function which is also not limited. The exponential function is better to use in the case that the 
output values are positive and without having the upper limit. Otherwise, there is a natural 
connection between the output activation functions and different distribution of noise, which 
is studied statistically in the context of generalization of the output model. 
 
 
COMPARISON OF THE BIOLOGICAL AND  
ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS 
 
Centar of biological neural network in the human is a cerebral cortex (cerebrum), 
thickness of 2-3 mm with a lot of interconnected neurons average area of 2200 cm2 and with 
the total number of neurons of about 1011 (Jain et al., 1996). Each neuron is connected with 
1000-10000 other neurons (Schalkoff, 1997), making about 1014-1015 interconnections. In 
contrast, the ANNs (e.g., backward propagation) commonly have from 10 to 10,000 neurons 
for the most sophisticated implemented network with a density connection of 5-100 per 
neuron (Wythoff, 1993). ANNs can be considered as a homogeneous. They often work 
deterministically, while those in the human cortex are extremely heterogeneous and operate 
by the mixed complex deterministic and stochastic mode. In relation to the functionality, it is 
not surprising to note that artificial neural networks can be compared with the biological 
networks, because they were developed to imitate the computer features of the brain 
(Schalkoff, 1997). 
 
 
LEARNING 
 
The ability to learn is a special characteristic which relates to the intelligence system, 
biological and vice versa. In the artificial systems, learning can be considered as the process 
of updating the interior layout of the system. This represents the modification of network 
architecture, which involves adjusting the weights, rejection or making some connection links 
(Schalkoff, 1997). 
 
 
DIVISION OF ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS 
 
ANN could be classified in accordance with one or more relevant characteristics. Due to 
the numerous of different realization of the neural networks, there are a great number of 
division of the neural networks. According to types of connections and network architecture 
neural networks are divided to the layered, fully connected and cellular. In the layered 
networks, the neurons are arranged such as to form layers. The input of neuron represents the 
output of all other neurons from the previous layer, but at the same time its output leads to the 
input of all neurons in the next layer. Their representative is an algorithm of backward 
propagation. In the fully connected, the output of one neuron leads to the entrance of all 

Ivan M. Savic, Dragoljub G. Gajic and Ivana M. Savic-Gajic 
8
neurons in the network. Hopfield neural network belongs to this group of network (Calmese, 
2008). The neighboring neurons are only connected to each other only at the cellular 
networks. Regardless of local relevance, the signals are propagated on the neurons and 
outside the neighborhood due to the indirect propagation information. Cellular Neural 
Network (CNN) is a main representative of this type neural networks (Slavova and Mladenov, 
2004).  
According to the direction of propagation of information through the neural network, 
they can be divided into the feedback and feedforward. The higher layers of feedforward 
networks do not return the information to the lower layers. The propagation of the signal is 
performed in one direction from the input to the output. The representative of this type of 
neural network is a MLP, or. the network with the multiple layers. In the feedback network, 
the higher layers return information back to the lower layers. The output from the neurons is 
returned to the lower layers or in the same layer. The representative of this type are Kohonen, 
Hopfield, cellular neural network (CNN), etc. (Wiess, 2007). Feedback networks have the 
greater processing ability than feedforward networks.  
The main characteristic of the ANNs is their ability to learn, so that makes them 
fundametally different from other multivariate techniques (Anbumani and Nedunchezhian, 
2010). The algorithms of neural networks are divided according to the type of learning into 
the supervised and unsupervised (Priddy and Keller, 2005). In the supervised learning, the 
values of output variables is known (the feedback propagation network, radial basis function, 
probabilistic network). The unsupervised learning do not have the known values for the set of 
data, which is included in the training of network (Kohonen's self-organizing, AРT network). 
The most used algorithm is those with supervised learning where the current value is 
compared with the output values. If there are the difference between these two values, it could 
be accessed to training of the network. The most common form of training is a feedback 
propagation, in which the error in the output value is calculated and sent back through the 
system of neurons. In this phase, a proportional decrease or increase in the value of weight 
coefficients is occured depending on the error. After changing these values, the input values 
re-enter into the system and the process is repeated in order to achieve a highest quality of 
output values in compared to the current input values. 
 
 
APPLICATION OF ANN  
 
Development of ANNs, which found a practical application, is one of the most interesting 
fields of information technology. The neural networks have the possibility of defects 
tolerance, so they can function and if there is any damage. In other words, a network can give 
a response although there is no complete the set of data.  
The advantages of application of this technique in compared to one-variable-at-a-time 
(OVAT) approach are following: 
 
 
Save time and money. It is especially important in the phase of planning process, 
when is possible to estimate the effect of a large number of variables in the minimum 
number of experiments. 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemical Engineering 
9
 
Identification of interaction effects. The effect of interactions between variables can 
be identified. This is important when the effect of one variable depending on the 
level of other variable. 
 
Characterization of the response. In order to estimate the impact of independent 
variables on the response, it is imortant to observe the system in the part where the 
process takes place.  
 
Due to these reasons, the ANNs represent an attractive field of investigation and their 
application is broad. By neural networks are usually solve the following four types of 
problems: 
 
1. classification, 
2. prediction, 
3. pattern recognition and, 
4. optimization. 
 
However, in practice, neural networks showed the best results in the field of 
classification, function approximation, the problems of mapping whose tolerance is not 
precise, on the problems that have a lot of data available for training or on the problems that 
require rapid implementation of appropriate rule, depending on the input data. The ANNs 
could not generate the information that has not included in the training data. 
Neural network are used for: 
 
 
the management of production processes, 
 
petroleum research, 
 
medical diagnosis, 
 
investigation of EEG and ECG signals, 
 
finding the optimal solution, 
 
in the bio-computers systems, 
 
prediction of weather, 
 
other fields. 
 
 
THE APPLICATION OF ANN IN CHEMICAL ENGINEERING 
 
Due to their ability to describe multi-variable nonlinear models, robustness and efficacy, 
the data about positive aspects of ANN application for solving complex problems within the 
field of chemical engineering (biotechnology, pharmaceutical research, nanotechnology, 
polymer engineering, health and safety, environment, food research, fuel and energy, 
petrochemicals) can be found in the literature (Himmelblau, 2000; Pirdashti et al., 2013). In 
this case, ANNs are commonly used for fault detection, signal processing, process modeling 
and control. In this paper, the application of ANNs in chemical engineering and for solving 
the some processes has described. 
 
 

Ivan M. Savic, Dragoljub G. Gajic and Ivana M. Savic-Gajic 
10
APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS IN 
PHARMACEUTICAL RESEARCH 
 
Recently, there has been a growing interest for the application of ANN in the 
pharmaceutical sciences. Particularly is important their role in drug discovery, pharmaceutical 
technology and pharmaceutical analysis (Wesolowski and Suchacz, 2012). In drug discovery, 
the role of ANN is actually important for investigation of relationships between the chemical 
structure and the activity (QSAR) and toxicity (QSTR) of newly synthesized compounds, as 
well as pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics (Cheng and Sutariya, 2013). For example, 
Prakash et al. (2013) developed a new ANN model for virtual screening of active compounds 
which contain androstenedione carbonskeleton or their similar skeleton at the core. Modeling 
of data has performed based on bioassay record for human breast cancer cell line MCF7. 
Myint et al. (2014) used the fingerprint-based artificial neural network quantitative structure–
retention relationship (FANN-QSAR) method to predict bioactivities or properties of 
cannabinoid ligands. Li et al. (2013) developed a principal component analysis combined 
with artificial neural network (PCA-ANN-QSTR) model for aconitine compounds, which 
found in the roots/rhizome of Aconitum napellus, Aconitum carmichaeli, and other Aconitum 
plants in the family of Ranunculanceae. Zandkarimi et al. (2014) also applied an ANN to 
pharmacokinetic parameters (clearance, plasma protein binding, and volume of distribution) 
for alkaloid drugs. Paixao et al. (2014) used ANNs to predict drug distribution in the rat and 
humans. Jovanovic et al. (2015) explored the applicability of counter-propagation ANN, 
combined with genetic algorithm in prediction of topiramate concentration in patients with 
epilepsy. Also, in the literature, there are data about application of ANN for modeling of 
some pharmaceutical procedures. Thus, the ANN was used for monitor a pharmaceutical 
freeze-drying process (Dragoi et al., 2013). By this procedure, it is possible to estimate the 
temperature of the product and the thickness of the dried cake at a future time t + Δt. 
Papadimitriou et al. (2012) optimized the ability of PVP/PEG mixtures as carriers for the 
preparation of drug solid dispersions by melt mixing technique using the ANN. During 
optimization, the amount of drug in solid dispersions, ratio of polymeric carrier to plasticizer, 
temperature of melt mixing, and total melt mixing time were used as inputs, while the amount 
of drug resealed in 15 min was used as an output. The ANN was also used in order to 
optimize the spray drying process to prepare solid dispersions (Patel et al., 2014). In this 
study, the inlet temperature, feed concentration, flow rate, solvent and atomization parameters 
were used as input variables, while the yield, outlet temperature and mean particle size were 
defined as the output variables. Aksu et al. (2014) investigated the relationships between the 
formulation and process parameters (disintegrant type and amount, compression pressure) and 
the target product properties (tablet hardness, friability and disintegration time) and the 
pharmaceutically acceptable orally disintegrating tablet containing ondansetron using the 
ANN models. Aksu et al. also investigated the relationships between formulation ingredients 
and product properties of ramipril tablets manufactured by the direct compression (2012) and 
wet granulation method (2013). In addition to the use of ANNs in drug discovery and 
pharmaceutical technology, they increasingly used in pharmaceutical analysis. Recently, the 
ANN model was developed for UV spectrophotometric determination of metronidazole in 
mixture with spiramycin, diloxanide and clioquinol in pharmaceutical preparations 
(Elkhoudary et al., 2014). For the simultaneous determination of paracetamol and p-

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemical Engineering 
11
aminophenol using the spectrophotometric method based on the combination of the principal 
component analysis with the feed-forward neural network and the radial basis function 
network was proposed by Khodaveisi et al. (2015). Mizera et al. (2015) developed a sensitive 
and fast HPLC method for the determination of tebipenem pivoxyl and in the presence of 
degradation products formed during thermolysis. Based on retention times of tebipenem 
pivoxyl and its degradation products, they constructed the ANN model for prediction of 
quantitative structure–retention relationship (QSRR).  
 
 
APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORK  
FOR EXTRACTION PROCESSES 
 
It is known that on the extraction process, or on the isolation of bioactive compounds, 
impacts a great number of parameters, such as temperature, disintegration degree of plant 
material, solid to liquid ratio (solvomodule), nature of solvent and pH of medium. During the 
choice of medium, the solvent should be a selective for the desired compounds, to have a 
large extraction capacity, to be cheap and nonreactive with bioactive compounds and 
harmless to humans and equipment. How on the extraction process affects a great number of 
parameters, the process optimization is needed to perform. The conventional method monitors 
only one factor at a time on the extraction efficiency, while the effects of other factors are 
omitted. This approach can have a negative impact on the quality of the results of extraction. 
In order to overcome the aforementioned problem, it is necessary to apply the methods of 
mathematical modeling. The ANNs have proved as very powerful technique for the 
optimization of extraction process. This method simultaneously analyzes the effects of all 
parameters on the extraction yield. According to that, the adequate mathematical models (e.g., 
multilayer perceptron) are defined for interpretation of obtained experimental data (Sinha et 
al., 2012а). Khajeh et al. (2012) applied the three-layered ANN for prediction of yield of 
essential oil from Diplotaenia cachrydifolia, obtained by the method of supercritical 
extraction. In that case, Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm was used for training the neural 
network. The network with five hidden neurons had a high accuracy in the prediction of the 
yield of essential oil from D. cachrydifolia. There are a lot of studies, which compare the 
prediction ability of experimental design and ANN for optimization of extraction processes. 
The central composite design (CCD) and ANN models were applied in the case of simulation 
and optimization of microwave extraction of color from Bixa orellana (Sinha et al., 2013). 
The effect of pH, extraction time, the amount of seeds on the extraction efficiency was 
investigated by these techniques. The obtained data of CCD was used as the set data for 
training of neural networks. The performances of each model were estimated based on the 
values of correlation coefficients, root mean squared error and mean absolute deviation of 
validation set data. The obtained data of statistical analysis has showed that ANN has a better 
performances in compared with CCD model. Also, Sinha et al. (2012) modeled the 
microwave assisted natural dye extraction from pomegranate rind using CCD and ANN. They 
observed the extraction time, pH of the solution and amount of plant material as the 
independent variables. Savic et al. (2013) optimized the extraction procedure of the total 
flavonoids from green tea (Camellia sinensis). They used the extraction time, ethanol 
concentration and solid-to-liquid ratio in order to model and obtain optimal conditions for the 

Ivan M. Savic, Dragoljub G. Gajic and Ivana M. Savic-Gajic 
12
extraction of bioactive compounds. Also, CCD and MLP 4-3-1 with exponential function in 
the hidden layer and linear function in the output layer were used for describing the 
technological procedure for amygdalin isolation from plum seeds (Pruni domesticae semen) 
(Savic et al., 2015). Both models provided similar optimal conditions for amygdalin 
extraction, but the conditions suggested by MLP are more preferable due to higher amount of 
desired compound. Bauhinia monandra seed oil, a potential candidate for biodiesel 
production, was extracted using solvent extraction method (Akintunde et al., 2015). The 
influence of process parameters, such as the sample mass, time, and solvent type and their 
reciprocal interactions on seed oil yield was monitored using the ANN and response surface 
methodology (RSM). The obtained results were showed that the ANN model was better than 
the RSM model in the prediction of seed oil yield. 
 
 
APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORK  
FOR ADSORPTION PROCESSES 
 
Pollution of the natural aqueous systems by the heavy metals and other dangerous 
substances is one of a big problem of contemporary society. These substances cause a series 
of adverse effects on the biological systems even at very low concentrations after their 
inclusion in the food chain. In order to effectively solve the aforementioned problem, the 
numerous investigations are directed to find and/or improve the methods and materials, which 
will reduce the amount of heavy metals and other pollutants in the waters. Among the other 
methods which use today for purification of wastewater, adsorption is commonly used 
method due to high-efficiency, cost-effectiveness and availability of the natural and synthetic 
adsorbents. 
The ANNs play a significant role in the optimization of adsorption processes. This 
approach has showed as a suitable for describing the adsorption of heavy metals and dye from 
the aqueous solutions. Clays have an important place for purification of wastewater from 
heavy metals and color in the group of the natural adsorbents due to their high cation 
exchange capacity, layered structure, high availability, cost and possibility of regeneration 
(Savic et al., 2014). By the application of various modification methods, the adsorption 
properties of clays can be additionally improved and in this way to expand the field of their 
applications (Stojiljkovic et al., 2013, 2014, 2015). Savic et al. (2012) optimized Fe(III) ions 
adsorption from water using the RSM and ANN approaches. Bentonite clay was served as an 
adsorbent. The initial concentration of Fe(III) ions, contact time and bentonite concentration 
were defined as the inputs, while the percentage of adsorbed Fe(III) was defined as the 
output. Based on the obtained results, the best performances were confirmed in the case of 
MLP network with architecture of 3-9-1. ANN were also used to optimize the adsorption of 
Cu2+ ions from the aqueous solutions in batch system using light expended clay aggregate 
(LECA) (Shojaeimehr et al., 2014). There are data that ANN was developed in order to 
predict the decolorization of the Reactive Red 141 solution by an organoclay (Elemen et al., 
2012). The organoclay was synthesized by using hexadecyltrimethylammoniumbromide, as a 
cationic surfactant. Actually, it was confirmed that the decolorization depends on the contact 
time, initial dye concentration, adsorbent dosage and temperature. ANN was applied for 
modeling of Cr(VI) adsorption from the aqueous solution using zeolite prepared from raw fly 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemical Engineering 
13
ash (Asl et al., 2013). This approach was useful for describing the fixed-bed adsorption of 
methylene blue from aqueous solutions using NaOH-modified rice husk (Chowdhury and 
Saha, 2013). Chakraborty et al. (2013) also developed ANN model for determination of the 
cationic dye (crystal violet) concentration in the aqueous solutions. The adsorption study was 
carried out in a laboratory scale fixed-bed column packed with citric-acid-modified rice 
(Oryza sativa) straw as an adsorbent. Neural networks were used for modeling of adsorption 
process of metal-complex dye acid black 172 from the solutions on bamboo biochar (Yang et 
al., 2013). Based on ANN analysis, it is confirmed that the temperature is the most influential 
parameter, followed by time, ionic strength, pH and dye concentration. 
 
 
APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS  
IN CHEMISTRY 
 
Also, ANN is well suited in the various chemical fields. In theoretical and computational 
chemistry, ANN techniques can be a considered valuable tool for prediction of several 
physicochemical properties, ionization potential, lipophilicity of substances and relative 
permittivity and oxygen diffusion of ceramic materials. ANN as an effective tools assisting 
the solution of various problems in analytical chemistry, particularly those which refer to the 
data analysis (for instance, analysis of spectroscopy data), modeling of reaction kinetics, 
prediction of chromatographic retention data in the analysis of various samples (Petritis et al., 
2003; Miller et al., 2013), identification of compounds and determination of their 
concentrations (Mwila et al., 2013). For instance, the analysis of sugar contents in the honey 
samples can be achieved using Raman spectroscopy as a rapid method. Based on a single 
measurement, the quantifications of sugar contents could not be performed according to the 
molecular similarities between sugar molecules in honey matrix. Ozbalci et al. (2013) 
overcame this problem by coupling Raman spectroscopy with ANN. This approach enabled 
the discriminant analysis of glucose, fructose, sucrose and maltose contents of honey samples. 
For the simultaneous quantitative spectrophotometric determination of the four components in 
Broncho Free™ capsules, the ANN model was developed (Darwish et al., 2014). The 
advantage of this method is that provides the deconvolution of the highly overlapped UV 
spectra of the four components mixtures and their determination in the presence of the 
excipients. For these reasons, it is not necessary to perform preliminary extraction of 
analytes from the pharmaceutical formulation. Lashkarbolooki et al. (2013) has described 
application of ANN for prediction of phase equilibria in the binary system containing carbon 
dioxide. The application of ANN in biochemistry is also an interesting. Shen and Bax (2013) 
predicted the protein backbone and sidechain torsion angles from NMR chemical shifts using 
ANN. Seguritan et al. (2012) designed the ANN model for prediction of the viral and phage 
structural proteins. Also, the ANNs are used for determination of protein-protein interaction, 
which has a considerable role in most of the cellular processes (Kumar et al., 2014). Today, 
ANNs complete the concept of modern medicinal chemistry, because they can be applied to 
solve the biochemical problems relevant for rational design of new bioactive compounds, the 
potential drugs. ANN was also used for modeling of relationships between the structure and 
biological activity of compounds (Montanez-Godinez et al., 2015; Dearden and Rowe, 2015). 

Ivan M. Savic, Dragoljub G. Gajic and Ivana M. Savic-Gajic 
14
The ANNs was successfully utilized for modeling of biological activities of nanoparticles, or 
for rapid prediction their potential toxicities (Epa et al., 2012). 
Gajic et al. (2015) used the ANNs to estimate the extent and effect of fluctuations in the 
chemical composition of stainless steel at tapping of an electric arc furnace, and thus scrap 
and alloy masses in the charge material mix, on the specific electrical energy consumption. In 
this way, it is possible to further evaluate process control strategies and optimize overall 
operation of the electric arc furnace. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The main contribution of this book chapter is a brief description of a view on the present 
scope and future advances of ANNs based on some applications from recent research projects 
with emphasis in the generation of predictive ANN models. The ANNs has proved as an 
effective tool in modeling and optimization of some procedures with excellent accuracy in 
prediction than other methods. The advantages of application of ANNs in compared with a 
traditional OVAT approach are the reduced number of performed experiments needed to 
model the observed process. In this way, the consumption of available resources in the phase 
of development of the optimal procedure is being decreased, which is recommended from the 
economic point of view. The application of ANN models for solving the various problems in 
pharmaceutical industry has also described. This chapter aims to provide a comprehensive 
review of ANN applications and for some chemical processes, such as extraction and 
adsorption. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
This work was supported by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technological 
Development of the Republic of Serbia under the project TRp-34012 and the Erasmus 
Mundus Action II EUROWEB+, Contract No: 552125-EM-1-2014-1-SE-ERA MUNDUS-
EMA21. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Akintunde, A. M., Ajala, S. O. and Betiku, E. (2015). Optimization of Bauhinia monandra 
seed oil extraction via artificial neural network and response surface methodology: A 
potential biofuel candidate. Industrial Crops and Products, 67, 387-394. 
Aksu, B., Paradkar, A., de Matas, M., Ozer, O., Guneri, T. and York, P. (2012). Quality by 
design approach: application of artificial intelligence techniques of tablets manufactured 
by direct compression. AAPS Pharm Sci Tech, 13(4), 1138-1146. 
Aksu, B., Paradkar, A., de Matas, M., Ozer, O., Guneri, T. and York, P. (2013). A quality by 
design approach using artificial intelligence techniques to control the critical quality 
attributes of ramipril tablets manufactured by wet granulation. Pharmaceutical 
Development and Technology, 18(1), 236-245. 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemical Engineering 
15
Aksu, B., Yegen, G., Purisa, S., Cevher, E. and Ozsoy, Y. (2014). Optimisation of 
ondansetron orally disintegrating tablets using artificial neural networks. Tropical 
Journal of Pharmaceutical Research, 13(9), 1374-1383. 
Anbumani, K. and Nedunchezhian, R. (2010). Soft Computing Applications for Database 
Technologies: Techniques and Issues, Idea Group Inc (IGI), Hershey, USA, pp. 80. 
Asl, S. H., Ahmadi, M., Ghiasvand, M., Tardast, A. and Katal, R. (2013). Artificial neural 
network (ANN) approach for modeling of Cr (VI) adsorption from aqueous solution by 
zeolite prepared from raw fly ash (ZFA). Journal of Industrial and Engineering 
Chemistry, 19(3), 1044-1055. 
Calmese, I. D. (2008). The Proteretic Hopfield Neural Network Analog to Digital Converter, 
ProQuest, USA, pp. 3. 
Chakraborty, S., Chowdhury, S. and Saha, P. D. (2013). Artificial neural network (ANN) 
modeling of dynamic adsorption of crystal violet from aqueous solution using citric-acid-
modified rice (Oryza sativa) straw as adsorbent. Clean Technologies and Environmental 
Policy, 15(2), 255-264. 
Cheng, F. and Sutariya, V. (2013). Applications of artificial neural network modeling in drug 
discovery. Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology, 2012. 
Chowdhury, S. and Saha, P. D. (2013). Artificial neural network (ANN) modeling of 
adsorption of methylene blue by NaOH-modified rice husk in a fixed-bed column system. 
Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 20(2), 1050-1058. 
Darwish, H. W., Metwally, F. H., El Bayoumi, A. and Ashour, A. A. (2015). Artificial Neural 
Networks and Concentration Residual Augmented Classical Least Squares for the 
Simultaneous Determination of Diphenhydramine, Benzonatate, Guaifenesin and 
Phenylephrine in their Quaternary Mixture. Tropical Journal of Pharmaceutical 
Research, 13(12), 2083-2090. 
Dearden, J. C. and Rowe, P. H. (2015). Use of artificial neural networks in the QSAR 
prediction of physicochemical properties and toxicities for REACH legislation. Artificial 
Neural Networks, 65-88. 
Dragoi, E. N., Curteanu, S. and Fissore, D. (2013). On the use of artificial neural networks to 
monitor a pharmaceutical freeze-drying process. Drying Technology, 31(1), 72-81. 
Elemen, S., Kumbasar, E. P. A. and Yapar, S. (2012). Modeling the adsorption of textile dye 
on organoclay using an artificial neural network. Dyes and Pigments, 95(1), 102-111. 
Elkhoudary, M. M., Salam, R. A. A. and Hadad, G. M. (2014). Comparative artificial neural 
network and partial least squares models for analysis of Metronidazole, Diloxanide, 
Spiramycin and Cliquinol in pharmaceutical preparations. Spectrochimica Acta Part A: 
Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy, 130, 222-229. 
Epa, V. C., Burden, F. R., Tassa, C., Weissleder, R., Shaw, S. and Winkler, D. A. (2012). 
Modeling biological activities of nanoparticles. Nano Letters, 12(11), 5808-5812. 
Gajic, D., Savic-Gajic, I., Savic, I., Georgieva, O. and Di Gennaro, S. (2015). Modelling of 
electrical energy consumption in an electric arc furnace using artificial neural networks. 
Energy, in press. 
Harris, C. J. (1994). Advances In Intelligent Control, CRC Press, UK, pp. 185. 
Haykin, S. Neural Networks: a comprehensive foundation. (1994). Prentice Hall PTR, New 
York. 
Hecht-Nielsen, R. Neurocomputing. (1990). Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA. 

Ivan M. Savic, Dragoljub G. Gajic and Ivana M. Savic-Gajic 
16
Himmelblau, D. M. (2000). Applications of artificial neural networks in chemical 
engineering. Korean Journal of Chemical Engineering, 17(4), 373-392. 
Jain, A. K., Mao, J. and Mohiuddin, K. M. (1996). Artificial neural networks: A tutorial. 
Computer, (3), 31-44. 
Jovanovic, M., Sokić, D., Grabnar, I., Vovk, T., Prostran, M., Erić, S. and Miljković, B. 
(2015). Application of Counter-propagation Artificial Neural Networks in Prediction of 
Topiramate Concentration in Patients with Epilepsy. Journal of Pharmacy and 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, 18(5), 856-862. 
Khajeh, M., Moghaddam, M. G. and Shakeri, M. (2012). Application of artificial neural 
network in predicting the extraction yield of essential oils of Diplotaenia cachrydifolia by 
supercritical fluid extraction. The Journal of Supercritical Fluids, 69, 91-96. 
Khodaveisi, J., Dadfarnia, S., Shabani, A. M. H., Moghadam, M. R. and Hormozi-Nezhad, M. 
R. (2015). Artificial neural network assisted kinetic spectrophotometric technique for 
simultaneous determination of paracetamol and p-aminophenol in pharmaceutical 
samples using localized surface plasmon resonance band of silver nanoparticles. 
Spectrochimica Acta Part A: Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy, 138, 474-480. 
Kumar, H., Srivastava, S. and Varadwaj, P. (2014). Determination of protein-protein 
interaction through Artificial Neural Network and Support Vector Machine: A 
Comparative study. International Journal for Computational Biology, 3(2), 37-43. 
Lashkarbolooki, M., Shafipour, Z. S., Hezave, A. Z. and Farmani, H. (2013). Use of artificial 
neural networks for prediction of phase equilibria in the binary system containing carbon 
dioxide. The Journal of Supercritical Fluids, 75, 144-151. 
Leondes, C. T. (2007). Biomechanical Systems Technology (Set). World Scientific, pp. 220. 
Li, Z. J., Wang, L., Peng, J., Yan, X. L. and Meng, F. H. (2013). Study on the quantitative 
structure–toxicity relationships of aconitine compounds basing on PCA-ANN method. 
Medicinal Chemistry Research, 22(10), 4964-4969. 
Lingireddy, S. and Brion, G. M. (2005). Artificial neural networks in water supply 
engineering. ASCE Publications, USA, pp. 11. 
Miller, T. H., Musenga, A., Cowan, D. A. and Barron, L. P. (2013). Prediction of 
chromatographic retention time in high-resolution anti-doping screening data using 
artificial neural networks. Analytical Chemistry, 85(21), 10330-10337. 
Mizera, M., Talaczyńska, A., Zalewski, P., Skibiński, R. and Cielecka-Piontek, J. (2015). 
Prediction of HPLC retention times of tebipenem pivoxyl and its degradation products in 
solid state by applying adaptive artificial neural network with recursive features 
elimination. Talanta, 137, 174-181. 
Montanez-Godinez, N., Martínez-Olguín, A. C., Deeb, O., Garduño-Juárez, R. and Ramirez-
Galicia, G. (2015). QSAR/QSPR as an Application of Artificial Neural Networks. 
Artificial Neural Networks, 319-333. 
Mwila, K., Burton, M. H., Van Dyk, J. S. and Pletschke, B. I. (2013). The effect of mixtures 
of organophosphate and carbamate pesticides on acetylcholinesterase and application of 
chemometrics to identify pesticides in mixtures. Environmental Monitoring and 
Assessment, 185(3), 2315-2327. 
Myint, K. Z. and Xie, X. Q. (2015). Ligand Biological Activity Predictions Using 
Fingerprint-Based Artificial Neural Networks (FANN-QSAR). Artificial Neural 
Networks, 149-164. 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemical Engineering 
17
Ozbalci, B., Boyaci, I. H., Topcu, A., Kadılar, C. and Tamer, U. (2013). Rapid analysis of 
sugars in honey by processing Raman spectrum using chemometric methods and artificial 
neural networks. Food Chemistry, 136(3), 1444-1452. 
Paixao, P., Aniceto, N., Gouveia, L. F. and Morais, J. A. (2014). Prediction of drug 
distribution in rat and humans using an artificial neural networks ensemble and a PBPK 
model. Pharmaceutical Research, 31(12), 3313-3322. 
Papadimitriou, S. A., Barmpalexis, P., Karavas, E. and Bikiaris, D. N. (2012). Optimizing the 
ability of PVP/PEG mixtures to be used as appropriate carriers for the preparation of drug 
solid dispersions by melt mixing technique using artificial neural networks: I. European 
Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics, 82(1), 175-186. 
Patel, A. D., Agrawal, A. and Dave, R. H. (2014). Investigation of the effects of process 
variables on derived properties of spray dried solid-dispersions using polymer based 
response surface model and ensemble artificial neural network models. European Journal 
of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics, 86(3), 404-417. 
Petritis, K., Kangas, L. J., Ferguson, P. L., Anderson, G. A., Paša-Tolic, L., Lipton, M. S. and 
Smith, R. D. (2003). Use of artificial neural networks for the accurate prediction of 
peptide liquid chromatography elution times in proteome analyses. Analytical Chemistry, 
75(5), 1039-1048. 
Pirdashti, M., Curteanu, S., Kamangar, M. H., Hassim, M. H. and Khatami, M. A. (2013). 
Artificial neural networks: applications in chemical engineering. Reviews in Chemical 
Engineering, 29(4), 205-239. 
Prakash, O., Khan, F., Sangwan, R. S. and Misra, L. (2013). ANN-QSAR model for virtual 
screening of Androstenedione C-Skeleton containing phytomolecules and analogues for 
cytotoxic activity against Human Breast cancer cell line MCF-7. Combinatorial 
Chemistry and High Throughput Screening, 16(1), 57-72. 
Priddy, K. L. and Keller, P. E. (2005). Artificial neural networks: An introduction, Vol. 68, 
SPIE Press, Washington, USA, pp. 13. 
Savić, I. M., Nikolić, V. D., Savić, I. M., Nikolić, L. B., Stanković, M. Z. and Moder, K. 
(2013). Optimization of total flavonoid compound extraction from Camellia sinesis using 
the artificial neural network and response surface methodology. Hemijska Industrija, 
67(2), 249-259. 
Savic, I. M., Nikolic, V. D., Savic-Gajic, I. M., Nikolic, L. B., Ibric, S. R. and Gajic, D. G. 
(2015). Optimization of technological procedure for amygdalin isolation from plum seeds 
(Pruni domesticae semen). Frontiers in Plant Science, 6. 
Savic, I. M., Stojiljkovic, S. T., Stojanovic, S. B. and Moder, K. (2012). Modeling and 
optimization of using bentonite clay: comparison of central composite design and 
artificial neural network. Chemical Engineering and Technology, 35(11), 2007-2014. 
Savic, I., Stojiljkovic, S., Savic, I. and Gajic, D. (2014). Industrial application of clays and 
clay minerals, In: Clays and Clay Minerals: Geological Origin, Mechanical Properties 
and Industrial Applications, Editors: Liam R. Wesley, Nova Science Publishers, Inc., 
USA., pp. 379-402.  
Schalkoff, R. J. (1997). Artificial Neural Networks. McGraw-Hill, New York.  
Seguritan, V., Alves, Jr. N., Arnoult, M., Raymond, A., Lorimer, D., Burgin Jr. A. B. and 
Segall, A. M. (2012). Artificial neural networks trained to detect viral and phage 
structural proteins. PLoS Comput Biology, 8(8), e1002657. 

Ivan M. Savic, Dragoljub G. Gajic and Ivana M. Savic-Gajic 
18
Shen, Y. and Bax, A. (2013). Protein backbone and sidechain torsion angles predicted from 
NMR chemical shifts using artificial neural networks. Journal of Biomolecular NMR, 
56(3), 227-241. 
Shojaeimehr, T., Rahimpour, F., Khadivi, M. A. and Sadeghi, M. (2014). A modeling study 
by response surface methodology (RSM) and artificial neural network (ANN) on Cu2+ 
adsorption optimization using light expended clay aggregate (LECA). Journal of 
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry, 20(3), 870-880. 
Sinha, K., Chowdhury, S., Saha, P. D. and Datta, S. (2013). Modeling of microwave-assisted 
extraction of natural dye from seeds of Bixa orellana (Annatto) using response surface 
methodology (RSM) and artificial neural network (ANN). Industrial Crops and Products, 
41, 165-171. 
Sinha, K., Saha, P. D. and Datta, S. (2012). Response surface optimization and artificial 
neural network modeling of microwave assisted natural dye extraction from pomegranate 
rind. Industrial Crops and Products, 37(1), 408-414.  
Slavova, A. and Mladenov, V. (2004). Cellular Neural Networks: Theory and Applications, 
Nova Publishers, New York, USA. 
Stojiljkovic, S., Miljkovic, V., Nikolic, G., Kostic, D., Arsic, B., Barber, J. and Savic, I. 
(2014). The influence of the addition of polymers on the physico-chemical properties of 
bentonite suspensions. Science of Sintering, 46(1), 65-73. 
Stojiljkovic, S., Stamenkovic, M., Kostic, D., Miljkovic, M., Arsic, B. and Savic, I. (2015). 
Investigations of the changes in the bentonite structure caused by the different treatments. 
Science of Sintering, 47(1), 51-59.  
Stojiljković, S., Stamenković, M., Kostić, D., Miljković, M., Arsić, B., Savić, I. and 
Miljković, V. (2013). The influence of organic modification on the structural and 
adsorptive properties of bentonite clay and its application for the removal of lead. Science 
of Sintering, 45(3), 363-376. 
Vedmedenko, E. (2007). Competing interactions and pattern formation in nanoworld. John 
Wiley and Sons, Weinheim, Germany, pp. 92. 
Wesolowski, M. and Suchacz, B. (2012). Artificial neural networks: theoretical background 
and pharmaceutical applications: a review. Journal of AOAC International, 95(3), 652-
668. 
Wiess, M. L. (2007). Neuronal Network Research Horizons, Nova Publishers, New York, 
USA. 
Wythoff, B. J. (1993). Backpropagation neural networks: a tutorial. Chemometrics and 
Intelligent Laboratory Systems, 18(2), 115-155.  
Yang, Y., Lin, X., Wei, B., Zhao, Y. and Wang, J. (2014). Evaluation of adsorption potential 
of bamboo biochar for metal-complex dye: equilibrium, kinetics and artificial neural 
network modeling. International Journal of Environmental Science and Technology, 
11(4), 1093-1100. 
Zandkarimi, M., Shafiei, M., Hadizadeh, F., Darbandi, M. A. and Tabrizian, K. (2014). 
Prediction of pharmacokinetic parameters using a genetic algorithm combined with an 
artificial neural network for a series of alkaloid drugs. Scientia Pharmaceutica, 82(1), 53. 
Zupan, J. and Gasteiger, J. (1993). Neural Networks for chemists: an introduction. John 
Wiley and Sons, New York. 
 
 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemical Engineering 
19
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 
 
Name: Ivan Savic 
Affiliation: Faculty of Technology, University of Nis 
Education: Ph.D. 
Research and Professional Experience: Modeling and optimization, artificial neural 
networks, experimental design, extraction, adsorption. 
Publications Last Three Years: 
Book of chapters 
 
1.  Vesna D. Nikolic, Ivan M. Savic, Ljubisa B. Nikolic, Ivana M. Savic, Biosynthesis 
of paclitaxel and its pharmaceutical application for cancer treatment, In: Ed. Diego 
Morales, Paclitaxel: Biosynthesis, Mechanisms of Action and Clinical Uses 
(Pharmacology, Research, Safety Testing and Regulation), Nova Science Publishers 
Inc, USA, 2013. p. 101-122, ISBN: 978-1-62808-550-1. 
2.  Vesna D. Nikolic, Ljubisa B. Nikolic, Ivan M. Savic, Ivana M. Savic, Cyclodextrins 
as advanced materials for pharmaceutical applications, In: A. Tiwari and H. 
Kobayashi, Responsive Materials and Methods: State-of-the-Art Stimuli-Responsive 
Materials and Their Applications, John Wiley and Sons, 2013, p. 141-165. ISBN: 
978-1-118-68622-5. 
3. Ivana Savic, Stanisa Stojiljkovic, Ivan Savic, Dragoljub Gajic, Industrial application 
of clays and clay minerals, In: Clays and Clay Minerals: Geological Origin, 
Mechanical Properties and Industrial Applications, Editors: Liam R. Wesley, Nova 
Science Publishers, Inc., USA. (2014), pp. 379-402. ISBN: 978-1-63117-779-8.  
4.  Vesna D. Nikolic, Agnes J. Kapor, Ljubisa B. Nikolic, Ivan M. Savic, Ivana M. 
Savic-Gajic, The importance of inclusion complexes with cyclodextrins in pharmacy, 
In: Cyclodextrins: Synthesis, Chemical Applications and Role in Drug Delivery, 
Editor: Francis G. Ramirez, Nova Science Publishers, Inc., USA. (2015), pp. 225-
240. ISBN: 978-1-63482-788-1.  
 
International journals  
 
1.  Ivana Savic, Stanisa Stojiljkovic, Ivan Savic, Sreten Stojanovic, Karl Moder, 
Modeling and optimization of iron(III) adsorption from water using bentonite clay: 
comparation of central composite design and artificial neural network, Chemical 
Engineering and Technology, 35(11) (2012) 2007-2014. 
2.  Milorad Cakic, Zarko Mitic, Goran Nikolic, Ivan Savic, Ivana M. Savic, Design and 
optimization of drugs used to treat copper deficiency, Expert Opinion on Drug 
Discovery, 8(10) (2013) 1253-1263.  
3.  Ivana M. Savic, Ivan M. Savic, Stanisa T. Stojiljkovic, Dragoljub G. Gajic, 
Modeling and optimization of energy-efficient procedures for removing lead(II) and 
zinc(II) ions from aqueous solutions using the central composite design, Energy, 77 
(2014) 66–72. 
4.  Ivan M Savic, Vesna D Nikolic, Ivana M Savic-Gajic, Ljubisa B Nikolic, Svetlana R 
Ibric, Dragoljub G Gajic, Optimization of technological procedure for amygdalin 

Ivan M. Savic, Dragoljub G. Gajic and Ivana M. Savic-Gajic 
20
isolation from plum seeds (Pruni domesticae semen), Frontiers in Plant Science, 6 
(2015) 276. 
5.  Ivan Savic, Vesna Nikolic, Ivana Savic-Gajic, Ljubisa B. Nikolic, Blaga C. 
Radovanovic, Jelena D. Mladenovic, Investigation of properties and structural 
characterization of the quercetin inclusion complex with (2-hydroxy)propyl-β-
cyclodextrin, Journal of Inclusion Phenomena and Macrocyclic Chemistry, 82 
(2015) 383-394. 
6.  Dragoljub Gajic, Ivana Savic-Gajic, Ivan Savic, Olga Georgieva, Stefano Di 
Gennaro, Modelling of electrical energy consumption in an electric arc furnace using 
artificial neural networks, Energy, in press. doi:10.1016/j.energy.2015.07.068 
7.  Ana Tacic, Ivan Savic, Vesna Nikolic, Ivana Savic, Snezana Ilic-Stojanovic, Dusica 
Ilic, Slobodan Petrovic, Mirjana Popsavin, Agnes Kapor, Inclusion complexes of 
sulfanilamide with β-cyclodextrin and 2-hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin, Journal of 
Inclusion Phenomena and Macrocyclic Chemistry, 80(1-2) (2014) 113-124. 
8.  Zika Cvetkovic, Vesna Nikolic, Ivan Savic, Ivana Savic-Gajic, Ljubisa Nikolic, 
Development and validation of an RP-HPLC method for quantification of trans-
resveratrol in the plant extracts, Hemijska Industrija, 69 (6) (2015) 679-687. 
9.  Staniša Stojiljković, Miodrag Stamenković, Danijela Kostić, Milena Miljković, 
Biljana Arsić, Ivan Savić, Ivana Savić, Investigations of the changes in the bentonite 
structure caused by the different treatments, Science of Sintering, 47 (2015) 51-59. 
10. Staniša Stojiljković, Ivan Savić, Ivana Savić, Petar Mitković, Ljubiša Vasić, 
Aleksandra Marinković, An urban planning approach to the climatization of space 
using natural resources based on ceramic clay, zeolite and bentonite clay, Science of 
Sintering, 46 (2014) 259-268. 
11. Ivana Savic, Goran Nikolic, Ivan Savic, Katarina Nikolic, Danica Agbaba, 
Development and optimization of formulation for treatment a copper deficiency in 
human organism, Acta Poloniae Pharmaceutica - Drug Research, 69(4) (2012) 739-
749. 
12. Ivana Savić, Goran Nikolić, Ivan Savić, Milorad Cakić, Aleksandar Dosić, Janoš 
Čanadi, Modelovanje stabilnosti bioaktivnog bakar(II) kompleksa primenom 
eksperimentalnog dizajna, Hemijska industrija, 66(5) (2012) 693–699.  
13.  Ivan Savic, Valentina Marinkovc, Ivana Savic, Predrag Sibinovic, Nebojsa Cekic, 
Application of experimental design on photostability investigation of karvileks tablet, 
Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, 46(3) (2012) 275-282. 
14.  Ivan Savic, Goran Nikolic, Stanko Zerajic, Ivana Savic, Gel filtration 
chromatography analysis and modeling the process of pullulan depolymerization, 
Journal of Polymer Engineering, 32(4-5) (2012) 225-233. 
15.  Ivan Savic, Valentina Marinkovic, Ljiljana Tasic, Dusanka Krajnovic, Ivana Savic, 
From experimental design to quality by design in pharmaceutical legislation, 
Accreditation and Quality Assurance, 17 (2012) 627–633. 
16. Ivan Savic, Vesna Nikolic, Ivana Savic, Ljubisa Nikolic, Mihajlo Stankovic, 
Development and validation of HPLC method for the determination of amygdalin in 
the plant extract of plum kernel, Research Journal of Chemistry and Environment, 
16(4) (2012) 80-86. 
17. Ivan Savić, Vesna Nikolić, Ivana Savić, Ljubiša Nikolić, Mihajlo Stanković, Karl 
Moder, Optimization of total flavonoid compound extraction from Camellia sinesis 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemical Engineering 
21
using the artificial neural network and response surface methodology, Hemijska 
Industrija 67(2) (2013) 249–259.  
18. Ivana Savic, Katarina Nikolic, Goran Nikolic, Ivan Savic, Danica Agbaba, Milorad 
Cakic, Application of mathematical modeling for the development and optimization 
formulation with bioactive copper complex, Drug Development and Industrial 
Pharmacy, 39(7) (2013) 1084-1090.  
19.  Ivan Savic, Vesna Nikolic, Ivana Savic, Ljubisa Nikolic, Mihajlo Stankovic, 
Development and validation of a new RP-HPLC method for determination of 
quercetin in green tea, Journal of Analytical Chemistry, 68(10) (2013) 906-911. 
20.  Stanisa Stojiljkovic, Miodrag Stamenkovic, Danijela Kostic, Milena Miljkovic, 
Biljana Arsic, Ivana Savic, Ivan Savic, Vojkan Miljkovic, The influence of organic 
modification on the structural and adsorptive properties of bentonite clay and its 
application for the removal of lead, Science of Sintering, 45 (2013) 363-376. 
21. Stanisa Stojiljkovic, Vojkan Miljkovic, Goran Nikolic, Danijela Kostic, Biljana Arsic, 
Jill Barber, Ivana Savic, Ivan Savic, The influence of the addition of polymers on the 
physico-chemical properties of bentonite suspensions, Science of Sintering, 46(1) 
(2014) 65-73. 
22.  Ivan Savic, Vesna Nikolic, Ivana Savic-Gajic, Ljubisa Nikolic, Karl Moder, Michael 
Hopkins, Optimization of quercetin extraction from green tea (Camellia sinensis) 
using central composite design, and the pharmacological activity of the extract, 
Chemical and Biochemical Engineering Quarterly, 30(1) (2016) 103-115. 
 
National journals 
 
1.  Ivan M. Savić, Vesna D. Nikolić, Ivana M. Savić, Ljubisa B. Nikolić, Marko D. 
Jović, Maja D. Jović, The qualitative analysis of the green tea extract using ESI-MS 
method, Advanced Technologies, 3(1) (2014) 30-37. 
2.  Žika Cvetković, Vesna D. Nikolić, Ivana M. Savić-Gajić, Ivan M. Savić, Ljubiša B. 
Nikolić, Ispitivanje termo i foto stabilnosti trans-resveratrola, Advanced 
Technologies, 3(2) (2014), 25-34. 
3.  Vesna Nikolic, Dusica Ilic, Ljubisa Nikolic, Mihajlo Stankovic, Ljiljana Stanojevic, 
Ivan Savic, Ivana Savic, Synthesis and structure characterization of deoxyalliin and 
alliin, Advanced Technologies, 1(1) (2012) 38-46. 
4.  Predrag Sibinovic, Valentina Marinkovic, Radosav Palic, Ivan Savic, Ivana Savic-
Gajic, Dragan Milenovic, Rada Jankovic, Development and optimization of 
carvedilol formulation using experimental design, Journal of Engineering and 
Processing Management, 6(1) (2014) 49-65. 
 
International conferences 
 
1.  Stanisa Stojiljkovic, Ivan Savic, Ivana Savic, Optimization of zinc adsorption from 
aqueous solutions using bentonite clay, 6th International conference on sustainable 
energy and evironmental protection, 20-23 August 2013, Maribor, Slovenia, 
Proceedings, p. 344 – 350. 
2.  Ivan Savić, Vesna Nikolić, Ljubiša Nikolić, Sreten Stojanović, Aleksandar Došić, 
Ivana Savić, Stress photodegradation study of quercetin, «3th International congres 

Ivan M. Savic, Dragoljub G. Gajic and Ivana M. Savic-Gajic 
22
„Engineering, environment and materials in processing industry», 4.-6. Marth 2013., 
Jahorina, Republika Srpska, Proceedings CD, p. 559-607. 
3.  Staniša Stojiljković, Nebojša Mitić, Dragan Stojiljković, Ivan Savić, Aleksandar 
Došić, Ivana Savić, Thermal properties of heterogeneous systems based on bentonite, 
«3th International congres „Engineering, environment and materials in processing 
industry», 4.-6. Marth 2013, Jahorina, Republika Srpska, Proceedings CD, p. 649-
655. 
4.  Ivana Savic, Dragoljub Gajic, Stanisa Stojiljkovic, Ivan Savic, Stefano Di Gennaro, 
Modelling and optimization of methylene blue adsorption from aqueous solution 
using bentonite clay, Computer Aided Chemical Engineering, 33(Part B): 1417-1422, 
2014. 
5.  Ivana Savić-Gajić, Ivan Savić, Staniša Stojiljković, Dragoljub Gajić, Optimization 
of a bentonite-based material for thermal energy storage, “7th International 
Conference on Sustainable Energy and Environmental Protection”, 23-25 
November 2014, Dubai, UAE, Proceedings, S01060. 
6.  Ivan Savic, Dragoljub Gajic, Aleksandar Brkovic, Ivana Savic-Gajic, Olga 
Georgieva, Stefano Di Gennaro, Modelling the power consumption of an industrial 
chiller using artificial neural networks, “8th International Conference on 
Sustainable Energy and Environmental Protection”, 11-14 August 2015, 
Glasgow, Scotland, Proceedings, 226-229. 
7.  Ivan Savic, Vesna Nikolic, Ivana Savic, Ljubisa Nikolic, Mihajlo Stankovic, 
Mathematical modeling of amygdalin isolation from plum kernel using response 
surface methodology, 21st International Symposium on Mathematical Programming 
(ISMP), 19-24 August 2012, Berlin, Germany, Book of Abstracts 2012, MA 376, p. 
231. 
8.  Ivana M. Savic, Vesna D. Nikolic, Ivan M. Savic, Ljubisa B. Nikolic, Valentina D. 
Marinkovic, Antimicrobial activity of the extract of Camellia sinensis, 1st European 
Conference on Natural Products, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 23–25 September 
2013, Book of abstracts, p. 29 
9.  Ivan Savic, Dragoljub Gajic, Stanisa Stojiljkovic, Ivana Savic, Stefano Di Gennaro, 
Optimization of a bentonite-based heterogeneous composite for thermal energy 
storage, „1st South East European Conference on Sustainable Development of 
Energy, Water and Environment Systems“, June 29 – July 3 2014, Ohrid, 
Macedonia, Book of Abstracts, pp. 176, SEE2014.0051 
10.  Ivan M. Savic, Vesna D. Nikolic, Ivana M. Savic, Ljubisa B. Nikolic, Dragljub G. 
Gajic, Procedure for amygdalin isolation from plum seeds, 13th Mediterranean 
Congress of Chemical Engineering, Barcelona, Spain, 30.09.–3.10. 2014. Book of 
abstracts, 12_012_P 
11. Ivana M. Savic, Ivan M. Savic, Stanisa T. Stojiljkovic, Dragoljub G. Gajic, 
Optimization of procedure for removal of copper(II) ions from water, 13th 
Mediterranean Congress of Chemical Engineering, Barcelona, Spain, 30.09.–3.10. 
2014. Book of abstracts, 22_036_P 
12.  Ivan M. Savić, Vesna D. Nikolić, Ivana M. Savić-Gajić, Ljubiša B. Nikolić, 
Aleksandar Došić, Investigation of photostability of amygdalin, IV International 
Congress “Engineering, Environment and Materials in Processing Industry”, 4-6 
march 2015., Jahorina, Republika Srpska, Proceedings CD, p. 375. 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemical Engineering 
23
13.  Ivan Savic, Dragoljub Gajic, Aleksandar Brkovic, Ivana Savic-Gajic, Olga 
Georgieva, Stefano Di Gennaro, Modelling the power consumption of an industrial 
chiller using artificial neural networks, “8th International Conference on 
Sustainable Energy and Environmental Protection”, 11-14 August 2015, 
Glasgow, Scotland, Proceedings, 226-229. 
14.  Ivana Savic, Ivan Savic, Vesna Nikolic, Dragoljub Gajic, Stefano di Gennaro, 
Ljubisa Nikolic, Application of experimental design for extraction of quercetin from 
skin of red onion, „Eighth International Workshop on Simulation“, Vienna, Austria, 
September 21st – 25th, 2015. Book of abstracts, pp. 175. 
15.  Ivana M. Savic-Gajic, Ivan M. Savic, Vesna D. Nikolic, Ljubisa B. Nikolic, Agnes 
J. Kapor, Mirjana M. Popsavin, Enhancement of carvedilol water solubility and 
photostability using cyclodextrins inclusion complexes, „4th European Conference on 
Cyclodextrins“, Lille, France, October 6th - 9th, 2015. Book of abstracts, pp. 126. P47. 
 
National conferences 
 
1.  Ivan Savić, Vesna Nikolić, Ljubiša Nikolić, Ivana Savić, Maja Jović, 
Antioksidativna aktivnost ekstrakta zelenog čaja, 10th Symposium “Novel 
technologies and economic development”, Leskovac, 22 and 23. October 2013. Book 
of abstracts, BPT – 2 / BFT - 2, p. 52. 
2.  Ivan Savić, Vesna Nikolić, Ljubiša Nikolić, Ivana Savić, Marko Jović, Identifikacija 
bioaktivnih komponenata u ekstraktu zelenog čaja, 10th Symposium “Novel 
technologies and economic development”, Leskovac, 22 and 23. October 2013. Book 
of abstracts, BPT – 3 / BFT - 3, p. 53. 
3.  Staniša Stojiljković, Ivana Savić, Aleksandar Došić, Ivan Savić, Uticaj bentonitne 
gline na stepen bubrenja skrobnog hidrogela, 10th Symposium “Novel technologies 
and economic development”, Leskovac, 22 and 23. October 2013. Book of abstracts, 
OHT - 15 / OCT - 15, p. 113. 
4.  Ivana Nikolić, Tatjana Kundaković, Ana Tačić, Ivan Savić, Ivana Savić-Gajić, The 
antioxidant activity of the chickpea seed extract (Cicer arietinum L.), 11th 
Symposium “Novel technologies and economic development”, Leskovac, 23-24. 
October 2015. Book of abstracts, BPT/BFT-4, str. 42. 
5. Ivana Nikolić, Tatjana Kundaković, Ana Tačić, Ivan Savić, Ivana Savić-Gajić, The 
optimization of the isoflavones extraction from chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.), 11th 
Symposium “Novel technologies and economic development”, Leskovac, 23-24. 
October 2015. Book of abstracts, BPT/BFT-33, str. 71. 
6.  Ivana Savić-Gajić, Ivan Savić, Vesna Nikolić, Ljubiša Nikolić, Mirjana Popsavin, 
Agneš Kapor, Antioxidant activity of inclusion complex of rutin with β-cyclodextrin, 
11th Symposium “Novel technologies and economic development”, Leskovac, 23-24. 
October 2015. Book of abstracts, OHT/OCT-20, str. 114. 


In: Artificial Neural Networks: New Research 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-964-6 
Editor: Gayle Cain 
© 2017 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 
 
 
 
APPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS 
IN CHEMISTRY AND CHEMICAL ENGINEERING 
 
 
Aderval S. Luna1, , Eduardo R. A. Lima1  
and Kese Pontes Freitas Alberton2 
1Institute of Chemistry, Rio de Janeiro State University,  
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
2Software Development Lab – LADES,  
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Problems in chemistry and chemical engineering are composed of complex systems. 
Various chemical processes in chemistry and chemical engineering can be described by 
different mathematical functions as, for example, linear, quadratic, exponential, 
hyperbolic et al. There are many of calculated and experimental descriptors/molecular 
properties to describe the chemical behavior of the substances. It is also possible that 
many variables can influence the desired response. Usually, chemometrics is widely used 
as a valuable tool to deal chemical data, and to solve complex problems. In this context, 
Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) is a chemometric tool that may provide accurate 
results for complex and non-linear problems that demand high computational costs. The 
main advantages of ANN techniques include learning and generalization ability of data, 
fault tolerance and inherent contextual information processing in addition to fast 
computation capacity. Due to the popularization, there is a substantial interest in ANN 
techniques, in special in their applications in various fields. The following types of 
applications are considered: data reduction using neural networks, overlapped signal 
resolution, experimental design and surface response, modeling, pattern recognition, and 
multivariate regression. 
 
Keywords: artificial neural networks, optimization, modeling, pattern recognition, 
multivariate regression, chemical engineering 
                                                           
 Corresponding author address: Email: asluna@uerj.br. 

Aderval S. Luna, Eduardo R. A. Lima and Kese Pontes Freitas Alberton 
26
INTRODUCTION 
 
The late 1980s marked the emergence of the field of artificial neural networks (ANNs). 
This form of non-algorithmic computation is characterized by that system at some level, 
reminiscent of the structure of the human brain. While not be based on rules, neural 
computing constitutes an alternative to conventional algorithmic computation. 
ANNs are parallel distributed systems consisting of simple processing units (artificial 
neurons) that calculate certain mathematical functions (typically nonlinear). Such units are 
arranged in one or more layers and interconnected by a large number of connections 
unidirectional in general. In most models these connections are associated with weights, 
which store the knowledge acquired by the model and serve to consider the input received by 
each neuron network [1]. 
The solution of problems through ANNs is very attractive since the way they are 
represented internally by the network and the natural parallelism inherent in the architecture 
of ANNs create the possibility of a better performance than conventional models. In ANNs, 
the usual procedure in troubleshooting initially goes through a learning step, in which a set of 
examples is presented to the network, which extracts the necessary features to represent the 
information provided. These characteristics are then used to generate responses to the 
problem [1]. 
The ability to learn by example and generalize information learned is undoubtedly the 
main attraction of troubleshooting through ANNs. The generalization that is associated with 
network capacity to learn through a small set of examples and then give consistent answers to 
data not known is a demonstration that the ability of ANNs goes far beyond simply mapping 
input and output relationships. The ANNs can extract information not given explicitly by the 
examples. Furthermore, the ANNs are capable of acting as universal mappers of multivariate 
functions with a computational cost that grows only linearly with the number of variables. 
Another important feature is the ability to self-organization and temporal processing that, 
allied to those mentioned above, turns ANNs an attractive computational tool for solving 
complex problems [2]. 
 
 
APPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS  
IN CHEMICAL ENGINEERING 
 
The phenomenological modeling of chemical engineering (CE) systems leads to balances 
(of material, energy and momentum) and constitutive equations, generally demanding very 
arduous tasks for determining all the parameters and for implementing and numerically 
solving the equations obtained. Such problems are highly costly and time-consuming, and 
often untreatable considering the time and information available. It is even more severe when 
fast responses are needed from the model, such as in chemical industries for control purposes. 
Problems in Chemical Engineering are usually characterized by nonlinearities and a high 
number of input and output variables. Also, the complexibility of the systems sometimes 
makes it difficult to develop proper phenomenological models. This way the use of limited 
empirical models with several adjusted parameters is very common. In these cases, the use of 
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) appears as an excellent alternative, especially when a 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemistry and Chemical Engineering 
27
sufficient and representative set of data is available as it happens in industrial applications. 
This scenario evidences the appeal of ANNs in CE as very powerful tools that make it 
possible to correlate the mathematical dependence of variables of interest. 
In the neural network modeling, there is no need for a good understanding of the process 
internal laws and of the equations that describes them. It is especially useful for complex 
systems. Often, neural models provide better results than phenomenological ones, if a 
sufficient and representative set of data is available. Both approaches – mechanistic and 
neural – are nicely complementary, since neural network approach does not clarify the 
mechanism evolved in a process. It just answers the question “what”, but not “why”  or 
“how” [3].  
An ANN can be defined as a computing system made up of some simple and highly 
interconnected processing elements, called neurons, which manage information by their 
dynamic state response to the external inputs. The advantages of ANNs include its skills of 
learning from data inputs and capturing patterns usually ignored by common statistical 
methods [4].  
In general, ANNs modeling involves three main stages: (i) data preparation/selection, (ii) 
topological design, and (iii) selection of training and validation methods along with synaptic 
weights and biases. Data preparation/selection includes the selection of inputs that 
significantly affects the output target, such as outliers removal and definition of the 
operational regions of interest. Further, topological designs deal with the way the neurons are 
connected, resulting in different ANNs type, such as feed-forward (e.g., Multi-Layer 
Perceptron – MLP, Radial-Based Networks) and recurrent (e.g., Hopfield Network, Elman 
Network) architectures. Easy programming associated with general and straightforward 
application make MLP architecture the most used [3]. For training and validation of ANNs, 
several methods are available, such as classical backpropagation (BP) and its many variants, 
as well as numerous evolutionary algorithms. 
The flexibility of ANNs allows its use alone as an empirical model or associated to the 
phenomenological equations in hybrid models. Ensembles of ANNs can be utilized 
combining several ANNs to capture different aspects of process behavior. ANNs can also be 
combined with other soft computing tools, mainly fuzzy systems and evolutionary algorithms 
[3]. All these applications can be found in Chemical Engineering problems. 
Historically, ANNs have been widely used in the Chemical Engineering. Hoskins and 
Himmelblau published one of the first papers on the subject of ANN with its application in 
chemical engineering [5]. In that article, the authors described the basis of ANNs and 
demonstrated how an artificial neural network can learn and discriminate successfully among 
faults in a CE process. So, that work will be considered here as the starting point of the 
application of ANNs in chemical engineering. Figure 1 presents the number of publications 
along years reported in the literature using ANNs inthe main areas of CE, according to 
SCOPUS database. One can see that the number of publications grown linearly from 1994 to 
2006 and then remained approximately constant. 
Regarding the number of results of this search in Scopus database, we define 
 as the 
fraction of appearance of field j in the results of a field i, as follows 
 
 

Aderval S. Luna, Eduardo R. A. Lima and Kese Pontes Freitas Alberton 
28
From 
 it is possible to observe the correlation between groups. Table 1 presents the 
values of 
 for the considered fields. It can be observed that f is not a symmetric matrix and 
that control and safety presents higher correlation with other areas. 
Although some applications can be found in systems of costly experiments, the most 
common applications of ANN in CE can be found when data obtainment is get-at-able, since 
ANN requires a high amount of data. One of the most profitable fields of ANN applications 
in CE is chemical industries, where sensors scan the entire plant in a few seconds. Thus, one 
has the perfect scenario for ANN application: a significant amount of data, a difficult 
phenomenological modeling and a demand for a fast response. 
 
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Chemical Engineering
 
Figure 1. Number of publications using ANNs in the main areas of chemical engineering according to 
Scopus database by the end of May 2016. 
Table 1. Values of 
 (correlation function) regarding the number of publications along 
years from SCOPUS database 
 
Polymer 
Pulp and Paper 
Bioprocess 
Energy 
Oil and gas 
Environment 
Nanotechnology 
Pharmacy 
Control and safety 
Polymer 
1.000 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
0.008 
0.000 
0.000 
0.008 
0.260 
Pulp and Paper 
0.000 
1.000 
0.042 
0.000 
0.042 
0.042 
0.000 
0.000 
0.167 
Bioprocess 
0.000 
0.018 
1.000 
0.018 
0.018 
0.018 
0.000 
0.000 
0.145 
Energy 
0.000 
0.000 
0.006 
1.000 
0.023 
0.017 
0.000 
0.000 
0.211 
Oil and gas 
0.005 
0.005 
0.005 
0.021 
1.000 
0.021 
0.000 
0.000 
0.051 
Environment 
0.000 
0.017 
0.017 
0.051 
0.068 
1.000 
0.000 
0.000 
0.153 
Nanotechnology 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
1.000 
0.000 
0.000 
Pharmacy 
0.036 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
0.000 
1.000 
0.000 
Control and safety 
0.039 
0.005 
0.009 
0.042 
0.011 
0.010 
0.000 
0.000 
1.000 
 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemistry and Chemical Engineering 
29
In fact, industrially the ANNs models provide a good result. For these reasons, such tools 
are widely employed on processes monitoring, control and optimization strategies. 
Generally, the literature reports the applications of ANNs in CE according to different 
industrial fields: petrochemicals, oil and gas industry; fuel and energy; biotechnology and 
pharmaceutical industry; environmental, health and safety; food industry; polymer industry; 
cellular industry; mineral industry, and nanotechnology [3]. However, here we classify these 
works based on the most common reasons to apply ANNs in chemical engineering: 
 
 
Lengthy response or unavailability of physical sensors: in these cases, ANNs are 
generated to replace the physical sensor in real time. Examples: composition, cell 
products and rheology, organoleptic properties, food industries, cosmetics, 
pharmaceuticals and biopharmaceuticals. 
 
Multipurpose 
processes: 
networks 
are 
generated 
to 
complement 
the 
phenomenological modeling (operating in regions in which it diverges) for 
monitoring and operation of multipurpose plants. Sometimes adaptive groups are 
created, and the behavior of each operating region is provided by a network model. 
 
Advanced control, faults detection and diagnosis, and safety: ANNs are generated 
to replace phenomenological models of complex units, whose resolution can be time-
consuming and even impractical, as well as to model the controller itself. They are 
also used for mapping the behavior and most common patterns of the plant to 
recognize improper operation conditions and even safety problems. 
 
The following sections describe some common applications based on the classification 
described previously. 
 
 
Lengthy Response or Unavailability of Physical Sensors 
 
Fast response is an important attribute of sensors in process operation. Usually, 
monitoring systems of industrial plants involve measuring key variables everyone second 
with storage at every one minute. ANN models can work as virtual sensors – also known as 
soft sensors – predicting key properties that may not be measured in real time, from other 
variables easily measured in the process. Also, in several processes, some variables cannot be 
directed measured (also known as intangible parameters). 
Pioneer, the oil and gas industry concentrates significant applications of ANNs as soft 
sensors. One of the most common applications consists in the inference of the quality of 
products in distillation columns [6-8]. Distillation is considered the main unit operation in oil 
and gas treating, and aims to achieve desired purification degrees; however, direct 
composition measurements seldom can be made. On-line chromatography measurements 
typically take around 10-20 minutes, with the high cost of acquisition and intensive 
maintenance. The use of ANNs is then appealing. For example, to overcome the considerable 
time delay introduced by the corresponding gas chromatograph, Fortuna et al. developed 
neural based soft sensors to infer, in real time, the stabilized gasoline concentration in the top 
flow and the butanes concentration in the bottom flow of a debutanizer column, based on 
available data [9]. 

Aderval S. Luna, Eduardo R. A. Lima and Kese Pontes Freitas Alberton 
30
The biotechnology industry presents an extensive literature showing how neural networks 
can be used for classification, estimation and prediction, in which the physical sensors are not 
available for several variables [10]. Despite the innumerous ANNs applications in 
bioprocesses few are for on-line implementations,due to the nonlinear and complex behavior 
of biological systems [11-16]. ANNs can play a significant role in facilitating both qualitative 
identification and quantitative characterization of biomolecule compositions [17-19]. 
Bioseparation of proteins in aqueous two-phase systems was also addressed using ANNs [20]. 
The pulp and paper industry has large applications of ANNs for predicting critical 
properties [21-23], such as the kappa number (indicating the residual lignin), viscosity, yield, 
among others [23-25]. Other paper properties extensively modeled by ANNs are tensile index 
and tear index [23-24]. ANN can also be used in hybrid models to describe the steps of 
production; for example, Costa et al. proposed a hybrid approach using ANN to model black 
liquor burning process in an industrial recovery boiler furnace [26]. 
Polymer industry also deals with the absence of on-line physical sensors of essential 
properties, and many applications of virtual sensors for polymerization processes based in 
ANNs can be found [27-28]. As an example of application, Wagner et al. developed a model 
of an industrial reactive extruder based on ANN, allowing prediction of extrudate viscosity, 
an excellent measure of product quality [29]. BICC Cables Ltd developed an ANN inferential 
estimator capable of predicting the tensile strength of polymer coating [30]. Since the reliable 
method for determining the quality of the polymer coating is through destructive testing 24 h 
after production, large quantities of sub-standard material may be produced before it is ever 
detected. In other applications, ANNs were combined with equations of state for predicting 
the PVT behavior of different types of the polymer melts [31-32]. 
In polymer composites, measurements and mechanistic description of tribological 
properties (such as friction and wear) impose a very complicated problem [27, 33]. Jones et 
al. (1997) simulated the tribological properties of different test rigs with various materials 
[33]. Several authors introduced ANNs to predict the fatigue life [34-37]. Velten et al. were 
among the first to explore ANNs for inference in wear of polymer composites, such as the 
wear volume of short-fiber/particle reinforced thermoplastics [38]. Zhang et al. developed 
ANNs for prediction of specific wear rate or frictional coefficient from the material 
compositions, mechanical properties, and testing conditions (temperature, normal force and 
sliding speed) [39]. 
Especially the pharmaceutical, food and cosmetics industries deal with intangible 
parameters such as organoleptic properties (e.g., creaminess, suavity, odor, flavor, color, 
brightness), which govern the quality of most of their products. 
Food industry challenges include multi-criteria decision-making, arose from the lack of 
objective information regarding the desired qualitative standards of final products [40-42]. 
Since appropriate mathematical models cannot be derived, ANNs modeling and other 
methodologies based on artificial intelligence have allowed the construction of flexible and 
robust automatic decision-making systems for product evaluation [40-42]. For processing 
olive oil, the ANNs have been used to classify the fruit and to test its ripeness, to detect frauds 
or adulterations in the final product or to predict its characteristics [42]. In wine production, 
ANNs were developed for the evaluation of aged wine distillates with emphasis on the 
properties of aroma and taste [43]. ANN modeling has also been used to calibrate the 
“electronic nose” arrangement for milk recognition, because the heterogeneous nature of milk 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemistry and Chemical Engineering 
31
makes the analysis of the aroma especially complex, even for classical analytical methods 
(e.g., gas chromatography, mass spectrometry, gas chromatography, olfactometry) [44]. 
In the pharmaceutical industry, scientists have used ANN models associated with 
concepts of quantitative structure–property relationships (QSPR) and quantitative structure–
activity relationships (QSAR) for the prognosis of the behavior of new molecules, even 
before they are synthesized [45]. Such studies can infer the organoleptic, physicochemical 
and therapeutic properties of pharmaceutical compounds. For example, ANNs modeling was 
utilized to relate the structure of 332 diverse pharmaceuticals compounds to their aqueous 
solubility [46]. Also, the structure and molecular topology were used by Huuskonen et al. in 
the prediction of the solubility of the drug molecules [47].  
Petrović et al. demonstrated the possible use of dynamic neural networks to model 
diclofenac sodium release from polyethylene oxide hydrophilic matrix tablets. Fractions of 
polymer and compression force have been selected as the most influential factors. The ability 
of ANN to model drug release has been assessed by the determination of the correlation 
between predicted and experimentally obtained data [48]. 
In cosmetic industry, system based ANN is an appropriate technique to assess customer 
satisfaction on fragrance notes, reducing the needs of perfumery experts to choose the smell 
for their products [49-50]; with a few experts worldwide, their time availability is limited 
[51]. In another application in cosmetic industry, Marengo et al. used ANNs to determine the 
simultaneous separation of 20 typical antimicrobial agents; since such preservatives belong to 
different classes of chemical species, a high-quality control analysis was needed [45].  
The application of ANNs in nanotechnology is often concerned with the prediction of 
processing parameters and morphologic characteristics of nanoparticles samples in the 
experimental environments. Some examples of these applications are: modeling and 
simulation of current-voltage characteristics in carbon nanotube-based gas sensors [52]; 
prediction of the heat transfer of a silver/water nanofluid in a two-phase closed thermosiphon 
that is thermally enhanced by magnetic field [53]; estimation of particle size using diffuse 
reflectance spectra in near-infrared region [54]; analysis and prediction of correlations 
between processing parameters and the morphologic characteristics of nanocomposites using 
back-propagation neural network technique [55]. 
In heating and cooling systems, the applications of ANNs include modeling systems of 
ventilating and air-conditioning, solar radiation, power-generation, load-forecasting, 
refrigeration, among others [56]. In fact, estimating the flow of energy and evaluating the 
performance of the renewable energy systems usually involve the solution of complex 
mathematical equations. Particularly, in the field of renewable energy systems, data are 
inherently noisy; thus, such problems can be handled with ANNs [57]. 
 
 
Multipurpose Processes 
 
Multipurpose units are developed to produce different products, according to a schedule. 
Thus, production must be changed from one process or product to another one periodically. In 
this case, flexible tools for modeling, monitoring, and control must face pattern change 
suitably, and again ANN can be used. ANNs were employed to estimate the plant-model 
mismatch at each sampling instant and to correct the predictions from a process model  
[58-60]. 

Aderval S. Luna, Eduardo R. A. Lima and Kese Pontes Freitas Alberton 
32
The polymer industry has used ANN modeling to obtain a specific grade of products, 
determining operational conditions and inference properties, such as molecular weight, solid 
content, Mooney viscosity, and polydispersity. 
Zhou et al. proposed an ANN approach to achieve an on-line estimation of dry kerosene 
point in refineries varying crude oils [61]. Megan and Cooper focused on making model 
adaptations following a load disturbance to a reactor under concentration control and also 
applied ANN within a DMC algorithm for multivariable composition control of a distillation 
column [62]. 
Ruiz et al. presented a strategy for the development and implementation of a fault 
diagnosis system that interacts with a schedule optimizer in batch chemical plants, using 
ANN. The information needed to implement the FDS included a historical database of past 
batches, a Hazard and Operability (HAZOP) analysis and a model of the plant. One of the 
motivating examples presented corresponded to a multipurpose batch plant [63].  
 
 
Advanced Control, Faults Detection and Diagnosis, and Safety 
 
ANNs are useful tools for control, safety, fault detection, and diagnosis since a well-
trained ANN can appropriately recognize and handle with nonlinear behavior and may be less 
sensible to noises within their tolerances. 
In recent years, with the upsurge of the research in the field of nonlinear control, ANNs 
have become a popular tool for three major control schemes: predictive control, inverse-
model-based control, and adaptive control methods. Typical chemical process units using 
ANN tools for advanced control and optimization strategies are distillation columns and 
reactor systems (continuous stirred tank reactors, bioreactors, and the neutralizing reactors) 
because such systems are multivariable, nonlinear and typically difficult to simulate [7].  
For distillation columns, several applications of ANNs can be found, especially to control 
the top and bottom composition. Macmurray and Himmelblau used an external recurrent 
ANN within the model predictive control strategy [6]; Basualdo and Ceccato used ANNs and 
multiloop IMC (Internal Model Control) structures [64]; Ramchandran and Rhinehart used an 
ANN inverse model incorporated in the GMC (generic model control) strategy to estimate the 
reflux and holdup rate [65]. Montlaghi et al. constructed an expert system from ANN and 
genetic algorithm to provide the optimal operating condition and predict the output quality of 
the crude distillation column [66]. Savafi and Romagnoli used wavelet-based ANNs, also 
named wave-nets, to the modeling and optimization of an experimental distillation column 
[67]. 
Applications of ANNs in the control of reactors systems have also been widely studied 
[58-59, 68-69]. For example, in an industrial polypropylene plant, a nonlinear predictive 
control technique employing ANNs was implemented to control the melt flow rate in the 
polymerization reactor [70]; on-line ANN model was used to control the substrate 
concentration and pH of an anaerobic digestion system [71], among several others 
applications. 
ANNs has also demonstrated the higher robustness and good performance in detecting 
and diagnosing process malfunctions, distinguishing between abnormal and normal 
operations conditions, with quick response, ensuring operation process safety. 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemistry and Chemical Engineering 
33
Hoskins et al. applied ANNs approach for detection and diagnostic of faults in a large 
complex chemical plant [72]. Diagnose of multiple faults in a chemical process at steady state 
operation was addressed by Fan et al. by using ANNs [73]. Dufour et al. developed an ANN 
tool to detect faults on unmeasured feedstock properties of an industrial pulp digester, since 
variations of its properties have a significant impact on the kappa number, even under 
advanced process control [74]. 
In nuclear engineering, the application of ANNs to fault detection and diagnosis have 
received more and more attention in the last decades [75]. ANNs were applied for modeling 
and estimating several nuclear reactor safety parameters [76-78], for sensor fault detection 
and diagnosis [79-82], for monitoring signs of imminent failure on the melter vessel [30] and 
nuclear reactor [75], among others. Such applications avoid disasters; besides reducing 
downtime costs, as well as extra expenses incurred in the destination of the radioactive units 
and their components. 
Meireles et al. prepared a review aiming to help industrial managing and operational 
personnel decide which kind of ANN topology and training method would be adequate for 
their specific problems. The paper presents a comprehensive review of the industrial 
applications of ANNs since 1988. Common questions that arise to practitioners and control 
engineers while deciding how to use ANNs for specific industrial tasks are answered. ANN 
industrial applications are grouped and tabulated by their core functions and what they 
performed on the referenced papers, focusing mainly on pattern recognition and 
classification, optimization, modeling, identification, and control [83]. 
 
 
APPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS 
IN CHEMICAL AND RELATED AREAS 
 
The same procedure was applied to investigate the evolution the number of publication of 
ANNs in chemistry and related areas during 1989 still 2016. In this context, Figure 2 presents 
the number of publications along years reported in the literature using ANNs in the main 
areas of chemistry and related areas, according to SCOPUS database. One can see that the 
number of publications grown linearly from 1994 to 2015 and the number of publication is 
superior when it compared with the area of Chemical Engineering. The number of 
publications in chemistry and related areas is almost three times, during the last five years, 
when it was compared with the number of publication in chemical engineering related with 
ANNs. 
Once more, the same procedure was used to investigate the correlation between different 
areas of chemistry and related sectors that used ANNs. Table 2 presents the values of 
 for 
the considered fields. It can be observed that f is not a symmetric matrix and that 
chromatography presents higher correlation with other areas. This fact is evidenced by the 
wide dissemination of chromatographic systems in research and industrial laboratories. 
The application of artificial neural networks (ANNs) in chemistry and related areas are 
based on data reduction, overlapped signal resolution, experimental design and surface 
response, modeling, pattern recognition, and multivariate calibration method. 
The following sections describe some common applications based on the classification 
described above. 

Aderval S. Luna, Eduardo R. A. Lima and Kese Pontes Freitas Alberton 
34
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Chemistry
 
Figure 2. Number of publications using ANNs in the main areas of chemistry and correlated areas 
according to Scopus database by the end of May 2016. 
Table 2. Values of 
 (correlation function) regarding the number of publications along 
years from SCOPUS database 
 
Solvent polarity 
Food 
Adsorption 
OED* 
Pollutant 
Chromatography 
Sampling 
Microbiology 
Organic compounds 
Solvent polarity  
1.000 0.000 0.037 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 
Food 
0.000 1.000 0.000 0.071 0.000 0.143 0.024 0.000 0.048 
Adsorption 
0.013 0.000 1.000 0.026 0.000 0.026 0.000 0.000 0.013 
OED* 
0.000 0.048 0.032 1.000 0.016 0.274 0.000 0.000 0.032 
Pollutant 
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.045 1.000 0.182 0.000 0.000 0.045 
Chromatography 
0.000 0.020 0.007 0.057 0.013 1.000 0.003 0.000 0.060 
Sampling 
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 1.000 0.000 0.000 
Microbiology 
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 1.000 0.000 
Organic compounds 
0.000 0.015 0.008 0.015 0.008 0.135 0.000 0.000 1.000 
Note: OED*= Optimal Experimental Design. 
 
 
Data Reduction 
 
Before demonstrating the application of artificial neural networks in data reduction, it is 
convenient to introduce a particular type of ANN called Kohonen networks. This kind of 
ANN belongs to the class of self-organizing maps. In opposite to MLF (Multi-Layer 
Feedforward) and RBF (Radial Basis Function) networks, they are designed for unsupervised 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemistry and Chemical Engineering 
35
pattern recognition tasks. The Kohonen networks consist of one layer of neurons, ordered in a 
low-dimensional map. Each neuron or unit contains a weight vector of the same dimension as 
the input pattern. After training, the individual weight vectors are oriented in such way that 
the structure of the input space is represented as well as possible in the resultant map. The aim 
of the Kohonen network is to map similar objects on the same neighbouring neurons. More 
details about this technique can be found in the literature [84]. In this context, the data mining 
technique called Kohonen self-organizing map algorithm was applied to the data obtained 
from the analytical method where “dry distillation” was coupled to headspace solid-phase 
microextraction (HS-SPME) to investigate the chemical composition of the rosemary plant 
(Rosmarinus officinalis L.). The large data set obtained was then treated with a rarely used 
chemometric technique based on nonclassical statistics. This method highlighted a strong 
correlation between the volatile chemical compositions of the samples and their origins, and it 
allowed the samples to be grouped according to geographical distribution. Moreover, the 
method allowed to identify the constituents that exerted the most influence in the 
classification [85]. 
 
 
Overlapped Signal Resolution 
 
There are some chemometric techniques for simultaneous evaluation of overlapped 
signals, independent of the type of signal, such as deconvolution or semi-differential 
techniques coupled to curve fitting, multivariate curve resolution, and multivariate 
calibration. Specifically, in the field of electroanalytical chemistry, many applications based 
on different regression methods were reported such as multilinear regression (MLR), 
principal component regression (PCR), partial least squares regression (PLS), and artificial 
neural networks (ANNs). In this way, the ANN was compared to MLR, PCR, and PLS to 
resolve overlapped electrochemical signals using different parameters as input data: position, 
height, half width, derivative, and area of voltammetric peaks. The peak parameters based 
strategy can involve a reliable and fast alternative to resolve multicomponent system in 
voltammetry or, even in other analytical techniques such as chromatography or spectroscopy. 
The average relative errors of the test sets in the case of ANNs were similar than those 
belonging to PLS and MLR [86]. 
 
 
Experimental Design and Response Surface 
 
Response surface methodology (RSM) seeks the relationships between several 
explanatory variables and one or more response variables. The principal idea of RSM is to use 
a set of designed experiments to obtain an optimal response. RSM simplifies the original 
problem through some polynomial estimation over small sections of the available area, 
elaborating on optimum provision through a well-known optimization technique, say gradient 
method. However, the real world problems are usually complicated; polynomial estimation 
may not carry out well in providing a good representation of the objective function. Also, the 
primary issue of the gradient method, getting trapped in a local minimum (maximum), makes 
RSM at a disadvantage, while defining sub-sections of the available area is also a problem 
faced to the analyst. In this context, artificial neural networks were used to improve the 

Aderval S. Luna, Eduardo R. A. Lima and Kese Pontes Freitas Alberton 
36
estimation in the RSM context reducing the calculations. Finally, it was proposed another 
algorithm to optimize the established model called the simulated annealing method, which it 
is convenient, for maximizing the estimated objective function in reaching a suitable point. 
Three examples of different complexities were solved to highlight the merits of the proposed 
method when it properly adjusted to the problem at hand. The proposed methodology 
overtook the classical method [87]. Once more, the combination of ANN with multivariate 
optimization approach was more efficient than the single variable approach to predict the 
optimal solid-phase extraction (SPE) conditions for determination of cis- and trans-
resveratrol in Australian wines by capillary zone electrophoresis [88]. 
 
 
Modeling 
 
From the view of mathematic, an artificial neural network is often seen as a universal 
model that is based on the primary concept of artificial intelligent (AI) and tries to simulate 
the process of the human brain and nervous system. The ANNs contain a series of 
mathematical correlations that is applied to simulate the learning and memorizing operations. 
The ANNs techniques learn through an example in which an experimentally measured set of 
input factors or variables and the corresponding outputs are presented to determine the rules 
that govern the relationship between them. ANNs are considered to be powerful in capturing 
a non-linear effect and are practically applicable to every situation existing between the 
independent and dependent factors or variables [89]. ANN was applied for the prediction of 
percentage adsorption efficiency for the removal of Cu(II) ions from industrial leachate by 
pumice. The model was developed using a three-layer feedforward backpropagation network 
with 4, 8, and 4 neurons in first, second, and third layers, respectively. Lately, radial basis 
function (RBF) network was also proposed and its performance was compared to traditional 
network type. The RBF network model was able to predict the removal of Cu(II) from 
industrial leachate more accurately [90]. The same research group used the ANN for 
modeling the prediction of percentage adsorption efficiency for the removal of Zn(II) ions 
from industrial leachate by hazelnut shell [91]. 
 
 
Pattern Recognition 
 
Pattern recognition or classification method is defined as the assignation of a sample to 
one category based on the values of the indices measured on it. When there are Nc possible 
categories the samples can belong to, classification is usually accomplished by calculating, 
for each sample, the probability that it belongs to each of these classes given the 
measurements (posterior probability) and then to assign it to the class corresponding to the 
maximum value of this probability. Based on this, classification methods are often divided 
into parametric and nonparametric: the former assume the latter are distribution-free. 
Artificial neural networks used for classification problems fall in this second group since no 
assumption is made on the form of the posterior probabilities for each class [92]. A new 
methodology based on ANNs was proposed to classify food vegetable oils: canola, sunflower, 
corn, and soybean using fluorescence spectra data. The proposed methodology was able to 
classify with a 72% a rate of success [93]. The authenticity of grated Protected Denomination 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemistry and Chemical Engineering 
37
of Origin (PDO) Parmigiano Reggiano cheese was investigated using infrared spectroscopy 
data coupled with soft independent modeling of class analogy (SIMCA) and artificial neural 
networks (ANN) to classify the cheese samples. ANN was more efficient than SIMCA in the 
classification of all the cheese classes [94]. The use of ANNs for the independent analysis of 
GC – MS (gas chromatography – mass spectrometry) profiles of Lucilia sericata was 
investigated, where ANNs were required to estimate the age of the larvae to aid in the 
estimation of the postmortem interval (PMI). The ANNs correctly classified the data with 
accuracy scores of 80.8%, and 87.7% for two independent analysis approaches [95]. 
 
 
Multivariate Calibration Method 
 
Artificial neural networks are increasingly applied in analytical chemistry as a powerful 
complement to traditional statistical and modeling methods. ANNs represent so-called “soft” 
modeling without the need to know and establish a mathematical model. The ANN model 
should have an ability to learn and extract y-x mapping relations from the presentation of a set 
of training samples. Among the types of ANNs applied in calibration method, back-
propagation neural network (BPNN) is the most widely used one. Radial basis function neural 
network (RBFNN) and generalized regression neural network (GRNN) are ANNs, which both 
use radial basis functions as transfer functions, offering interesting alternatives to BPNN in 
the sense that they allow local and fast training [96]. More details about the types of ANNs 
can be found elsewhere [92]. Near infrared spectroscopy coupled with multivariate regression 
methods were used to predict four important properties of biodiesel: density (at 150C), 
kinematic viscosity (at 400C), water content, and methanol content. This study compared the 
performance of linear and non-linear calibration techniques – namely, multiple linear 
regression (MLR), principal component regression (PCR), partial least squares regression 
(PLS), polynomial and Spline-PLS –, and artificial neural networks (ANN) for prediction of 
biodiesel properties. The artificial neural network (ANN) approach was superior to the linear 
(MLR, PCR, PLS) and “quasi-nonlinear” (Poly-PLS, Spline-PLS) calibration methods [97]. 
The determination of the oxidizable amino acids in animal feed samples was investigated 
using a voltammetric electronic tongue. The quantitative information contained in the 
voltammograms was extracted employing the discrete wavelet transform (DWT) and then 
processed using artificial neural networks (ANNs). The ANN was subsequently used to 
model the system departing from the reduced information, and obtaining the concentrations of 
the species. The best results were achieved when using two hidden layers in a 
backpropagation neural network trained with the Bayesian regularization algorithm [98]. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Artificial neural networks have successfully been applied in several fields related to 
chemical engineering, chemistry and other relate areas since some years. Their versatility and 
their ability to deal with highly non-linear trends in data allowed obtaining significantly good 
results in many applications for which the use of traditional chemometric methods have 
failed. However, they are usually less easily interpretable, and there are many factors to have 

Aderval S. Luna, Eduardo R. A. Lima and Kese Pontes Freitas Alberton 
38
into account in the modeling phase so that examples of misuse are commonly encountered in 
the literature. Due to the robustness and efficiency of ANNs to solve complex problems, these 
methods have been widely employed in several research fields such as medicinal chemistry, 
pharmaceutical research, analytical chemistry, biochemistry, food research, etc. 
A look to the future would suggest the introduction into the chemometric literature of 
different network architectures and learning algorithms, for example, recurrent and dynamic 
networks, or Bayesian learning used until now by the computer scientists or the physicists. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
Luna, A. S., and Lima, E.R.A. thank the support of UERJ (Programa Prociência), 
FAPERJ, and CNPq. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Haykin, Simon. 2009. Neural Networks and Learning Machines. 3th. Edition, New 
Jersey, USA: Pearson Education, Inc. 
[2] 
Braga, Antonio P., Carvalho, André P. L. F., Ludermir, Teresa B. 2007. Redes Neurais 
Artificiais. 2ª. Edição, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Livros Técnicos e Científicos Editora 
Ltda. [Artificial Neural Networks, 2nd Edition, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Livros Técnicos 
e Científicos Editora Ltda]. 
[3] 
Pirdashti, M., Curteanu, S., Kamangar, M. H., Hassim, M. H., Khatami, M. A. 
“Artificial neural networks: applications in chemical engineering.” 2013. Reviews in 
Chemical Engineering 29 (4): 205 – 239. 
[4] 
Haykin, Simon. 1994. Neural Networks: A Comprehensive Foundation, New York, 
USA: Macmillan. 
[5] 
Hoskins, J. C. and Himmelblau, D. M. 1998. “Artificial neural network models of 
knowledge representation in chemical engineering.” Computers and Chemical 
Engineering 12: 881 – 890. 
[6] 
Macmurray, J. C., and Himmelblau, D. M. 1995. “Modeling and control of a packed 
distillation column using artificial neural networks.” Computers and Chemical 
Engineering 19(10): 1077 – 1088. 
[7] 
Hussain, M. A. 1999. “Review of the applications of neural networks in chemical 
process control – simulation and online implementation.” Artificial Intelligence 13: 55 
– 68. 
[8] 
Ramli, N. M., Jan, B. M., Abdullah, B. 2014. “Composition Prediction of a Debutanizer 
Column using Equation Based Artificial Neural Network Model.” Neurocomputing 
131: 59 – 76. 
[9] 
Fortuna, F., Graziani, S., Xibilia, M.G. 2005. “Soft sensors for product quality 
monitoring in debutanizer distillation columns.” Control Engineering Practice 13: 499 
– 508. 
[10] Munack, A., and Schönert, K. (Editors). 2014. Computer Applications in 
Biotechnology, New York, USA: Elsevier. 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemistry and Chemical Engineering 
39
[11] Bagheri, M., Mirbagheri, S.A., Kamarkhani, A.M. 2016. “Modeling of effluent quality 
parameters in a submerged membrane bioreactor with simultaneous upward and 
downward aeration treating municipal wastewater using hybrid models.” Desalination 
and Water Treatment 57 (18): 8068 – 8089. 
[12] Han, H., Li, Y., Qiao, J. 2014. “A fuzzy neural network approach for online fault 
detection in waste water treatment process.” Computers and Electrical Engineering 40 
(7): 2216 – 2226. 
[13] Han, H., Li, Y., Guo, Y. N. 2016. “A soft computing method to predict sludge volume 
index based on a recurrent self-organizing neural network.” Applied Soft Computing 
Journal 38: 477 – 486. 
[14] Baughman, D. R., and Liu, Y. A. 1995. Neural networks in bioprocessing and chemical 
engineering, San Diego, USA: Academic Press Inc.  
[15] Ignova, M., Montague, G. A., Ward, A. C., Glassey, J. 1999. “Fermentation seed 
quality analysis with 
self-organizing neural networks.” Biotechnology and 
Bioengineering 64 (1): 82 – 91. 
[16] Breusegem, V. V., Thibault, J., Cheruy, A. 1991. “Adaptive Neural Models for On-Line 
Prediction in Fermentation.” Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering 69: 481 – 487. 
[17] Anker, L. S., and Jurs, P. C. 1992. “Prediction of Carbon-13 Nuclear Magnetic 
Resonance Chemical Shifts by Artificial Neural Networks.” Analytical Chemistry 64: 
1157 – 1164. 
[18] Long, J. R., Mayfield, H. T., Henley, M. V., Kromann, P. K. 1991. “Pattern 
Recognition of Jet Fuel Chromatography Data by Artificial Neural Networks with 
Backpropagation of Error.” Analytical Chemistry 63: 1256 – 1261. 
[19] Meyers, B., Hansen, T., Nute, D. Albersheim, P., Darrill, A. York, W., Sellers, J. 1991. 
“Identification of the 1H-NMR Spectra of Complex Oligosaccharides with Artificial 
Neural Networks.” Science 251: 542 – 544. 
[20] Baughman, D. R., and Liu, Y. A. 1994.”An Expert Network for Predictive Modeling 
and Optimal Design of Extractive Bioseparations in Aqueous Two-Phase Systems.” 
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 33: 2668 – 2687. 
[21] Ingman, L.C. 2000. “Utilization of Neural Network Technology for Some Pulp and 
Paper Industry Applications.” TAPPI Process Control, Electrical and Information 
Conference and ISA-PUPID 39th Annual Symposium 1: 115 – 120. 
[22] Rajesh, K., and Ray, A. K. 2006. “Artificial neural network for solving paper industry 
problem: a review.” Journal of Scientific and Industrial Research 65: 565 – 573. 
[23] Dahlquist, E. 2008. Use of modeling and simulation in pulp and paper industry. 
Västerås, Sweden: EU COST and Malardalen University Press.  
[24] Zainuddin, Z., Wan Daud, W. R., Pauline, O., Shafie, A. 2011. “Wavelet neural 
networks applied to pulping of oil palm fronds.” Bioresource Technology 102: 10978 – 
10986. 
[25] Aguiar, H. C., and Filho, R. M. 2001. “Neural network, and hybrid model: a discussion 
about different modeling techniques to predict pulping degree with industrial data.” 
Chemical Engineering Science 56: 565 – 570. 
[26] Costa, A. O. S., Biscaia Jr, E. C., Lima, E. L. 2004. “Mathematical Description of the 
Kraft recovery boiler furnace.” Computers and Chemical Engineering 28(15): 633 – 
641. 

Aderval S. Luna, Eduardo R. A. Lima and Kese Pontes Freitas Alberton 
40
[27] Zhang Z., and Friedrich, K. 2003. “Artificial neural networks applied to polymer 
composites: a review.” Composites Science and Technology 63(14): 2029 – 2044. 
[28] Duce, C., Micheli, A., Starita, A., Tine, M. R., Solaro, R. 2006. “Prediction of Polymer 
Properties from their Structure by Recursive Neural Networks.” Macromolecular Rapid 
Communications 27: 711 – 715. 
[29] Wagner, M. G., and Montague, G. A., Tham, M.T. 1997. “Neural networks for steady 
state modeling of an extruder.” Artificial Intelligence in Engineering 11(4): 375 – 382. 
[30] Lennox, B., Montagueb, G. A., Frithc, A. M., Gentc, C., Bevanc, V. 2001. “Industrial 
application of neural networks – an investigation.” Journal of Process Control 11(5): 
497 – 507. 
[31] Golzar, K., Amjad-Iranagh, S., Modarress, H. 2016. “Investigation of polymer + 
solvent mixtures by means of cubic equations of state and artificial neural network.” 
Fluid Phase Equilibria 45: 134 – 143. 
[32] Yousefi, F., and Karimi, H. 2013. “Application of the equation of state and artificial 
neural network to the prediction of volumetric properties of polymer melts.” Journal of 
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry 19(2): 498 – 507. 
[33] Jones, S. P., Jansen, R., Fusaro, R.L. 1997. “Preliminary investigation of neural 
network techniques to predict tribological properties.” Tribology Transactions 312: 40 
– 320. 
[34] Aymerich, F., and Serra, M. 1998. “Prediction of fatigue strength of composite 
laminates by means of neural networks.” Key Engineering Materials 144: 231 – 240. 
[35] Lee, J. A., Almond, D. P., Harris, B. 1999. “The use of neural networks for the 
prediction of fatigue lives of composite materials.” Composites Part A: Applied Science 
and Manufacturing 30(10): 1159 – 1169. 
[36] Al-Assaf, Y., and El-Kadi, H. 2001. “Fatigue life prediction of unidirectional glass 
fiber/epoxy composite laminate using neural networks.” Composite Structures 53(1): 65 
– 71. 
[37] El-Kadi, H., and Al-Assaf, Y. 2002. “Prediction of the fatigue life of unidirectional 
glass fiber/epoxy composite laminate using different neural network paradigms.” 
Composite Structures 55(2): 239 – 246. 
[38] Velten, K., Reinicke, R., Friedrich, K. 2000. “Wear volume prediction with artificial 
neural networks.” Tribology International 33: 731 – 736. 
[39] Zhang, Z., Friedrich, K., Velten, K. 2002. “Prediction of tribological properties of short 
fiber composites using artificial neural networks.” Wear 252(7–8): 668 – 675. 
[40] Zhang, J., and Chen, Y. 1997. “Food sensory evaluation employing artificial neural 
networks.” Sensor Review 17(2): 150 – 158. 
[41] Linko, S. 1998. “Expert systems what can they do for the food industry?” Trends in 
Food Science and Technology 9(1): 3 – 12.  
[42] Funes, E., Allouche, Y., Beltrán, G., Jiménez, A. 2015. “A Review: Artificial Neural 
Networks as Tool for Control Food Industry Process.” Journal of Sensor Technology 5: 
28 – 43. 
[43] Raptis, C.G., Siettos, C.I., Kiranoudis, C. T., Bafas, G. V. 2000. “Classification of aged 
wine distillates using fuzzy and neural network systems.” Journal of Food Engineering 
46(4): 267 – 275. 
[44] Sanzogni, L., and Kerr, D. 2001. “Milk production estimates using feed forward 
artificial neural networks.” Computers and Electronics in Agriculture 32: 21 – 30. 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemistry and Chemical Engineering 
41
[45] Marengo, E., Gianotti, V., Angioi, S., Gennaro, M. C. 2004. “Optimization by 
experimental design and artificial neural networks of the ion-interaction reversed-phase 
liquid chromatographic separation of twenty cosmetic preservatives.” Journal of 
Chromatography A 1029(1–2): 57 – 65. 
[46] Mitchell, B. E., and Jurs, P.C. 1998. “Prediction of aqueous solubility of organic 
compounds from molecular structure.” Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 
38: 489 – 496. 
[47] Huuskonen, J., Salo, M., Taskinen, J. 1998. “Aqueous solubility prediction of drugs 
based on molecular topology and neural network modeling.” Journal of Chemical 
Information and Modeling 38: 450 – 456. 
[48] Petrović, J., Ibrić, S., Betz, G., Parojč ić, J., Ðurić, Z. 2009. “Application of dynamic 
neural networks in the modeling of drug release from polyethylene oxide matrix 
tablets.” European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 38: 172 – 180. 
[49] Kengpola, A., and Wangananonb, W. 2006. “The expert system for assessing customer 
satisfaction on fragrance notes: Using artificial neural networks.” Computers and 
Industrial Engineering 51(4): 567 – 584. 
[50] Hanafizadeh, P., Ravasan, A. Z., Khaki, H. R. 2010. “An expert system for perfume 
selection using the artificial neural network.” Expert Systems with Application 37: 8879 
– 8887. 
[51] Dowthwaite, Stephen V. 1998. Training the ABC’s of perfumery, vol. 3(1). UK, 
Perfumer and Favourite Allured Publications. 
[52] Akbari, E., Buntat, Z., Enzevaee, A., Ebrahimi, M.; Yazdavar, A. H., Yusof, R. 2014. 
“Analytical modeling, and simulation of I–V characteristics in carbon nanotube-based 
gas sensors using ANN and SVR methods.” Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory 
Systems 137: 173 – 180. 
[53] Salehi, H., Zeinali Heris, S., Koolivand Salooki, M., Noei, S.H. 2011. “Designing a 
neural network for closed thermosyphon with nanofluid using a genetic algorithm.” 
Brazilian Journal of Chemical Engineering 28: 157 – 168. 
[54] Khanmohammadi, M., Garmarudi, A. B., Khoddami, N., Shabani, K., Khanlari, M. A. 
2010. “A novel technique based on diffuse reflectance near-infrared spectrometry and 
back-propagation artificial neural network for estimation of particle size in TiO2 
nanoparticle samples.” Microchemical Journal 95: 337 – 340. 
[55] Ma, J., Zhu, S.G., Wu, C. X., Zhang, M.L. 2009. “Application of back-propagation 
neural network technique to high-energy planetary ball milling process for synthesizing 
nanocomposite WC-MgO powders.” Materials and Design 30: 2867 – 2874. 
[56] Kalogirou, Soteris A. 2000. “Applications of artificial neural networks for energy 
systems.” Applied Energy 67(1-2): 17 – 35. 
[57] Kalogirou, Soteris A. 2001. “Artificial neural networks in renewable energy systems 
applications: a review.” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 5(4): 373 – 401. 
[58] Willis, M. J., Montague, G. A., Di Massimo, C., Tham, M.T., Morris, A. J. 1992. 
“Artificial neural networks in process estimation and control.” Automatica 28(6): 1181 
– 1187. 
[59] Hunt, K. J., and Sbarbaro, D. 1992. “Studies in a neural network based control.” IEE 
Control Engineering Series, London. 

Aderval S. Luna, Eduardo R. A. Lima and Kese Pontes Freitas Alberton 
42
[60] Turner, P., Montague, G. A., Morris, A. J. 1995. “Neural networks in dynamic process 
state estimation and nonlinear predictive control.” Fourth International Conference on 
Artificial Neural Networks. 1: 284 – 289. 
[61] Zhou, Y. P., Zhao, B. Q., Wu, D.X. 2000. “Application of genetic algorithms to fault 
diagnosis in nuclear power plants.” Reliability Engineering and System Safety 67(2): 
153–160. 
[62] Megan, L., and Cooper, D. J. 1995. “A neural network strategy for disturbance pattern 
classification and multivariable adaptive control.” Computers and Chemical 
Engineering 19 (2): 171 – 186. 
[63] Ruiz, D., Cantón, J., Nougués, J. M., Espuña, A., Puigjaner, L. 2001. “On-line fault 
diagnosis system support for reactive scheduling in multipurpose batch chemical 
plants.” Computers and Chemical Engineering 25: 829 – 837. 
[64] Basualdo, M. S., and Ceccatto, H. A. 1995. “Predictive control methods for distillation 
columns using neural networks.” DYCORD International Federation of Automatic 
Control (IFAC) Symposium 95:171 – 176. 
[65] Ramchandran, S., and Rhinehart, R.R. 1995. “A very simple structure for neural 
network control of distillation.” Journal of Process Control 5(2): 115 – 128. 
[66] Motlaghi, S., Jalali, F., Ahmadabadi, M. N. 2008. “An expert system design for a crude 
oil distillation column with the neural networks model and the process optimization 
using genetic algorithm framework.” Expert Systems with Applications 35(4): 1540 – 
1545. 
[67] Safavi, A., and Romagnoli, J. A. 1997. “Application of wavelet-based neural networks 
to the modeling and optimization of an experimental distillation column.” Engineering 
Applications of Artificial Intelligence 10(3): 301 – 313. 
[68] Hernandez, E., and Arkun, Y. 1990. “Neural network modeling and an extended DMC 
algorithm to control nonlinear systems.” American Control Conference 1: 2454 – 2459. 
[69] Psichogios, D. M., and Ungar, L.H. 1991. “Direct and indirect model based control 
using artificial neural networks.” Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 30: 
2564 – 2573. 
[70] Keeler, J., Martin, G. et al. 1997. The Process Perfector — the next step in 
multivariable control and optimization. Technical Report, Pavilion Technologies Inc., 
Austin, TX. 
[71] Emmanouilides, C., and Petrou, L. 1997. “Identification, and control of anaerobic 
digesters using adaptive, online trained neural networks.” Computers and Chemical 
Engineering 21(1): 113 – 143. 
[72] Hoskins, J. C., Kaliyur, K. M., Himmelblau, D. M. 1991. “Fault diagnosis in complex 
chemical plants using artificial neural networks.” AIChE Journal 37(1): 137 – 141. 
[73] Fan, J. Y., Nikolaou, M., White, R. E. 1993. “An approach to fault diagnosis of 
chemical processes via neural networks.” Process System Engineering 39(1): 82 – 88. 
[74] Dufour, P., Bhartiya, S., Dhurjati, P. S., Doyle, F. J. 2005. “Neural network-based 
software sensor: training set design and application to a continuous pulp digester.” 
Control Engineering Practice 13: 135 – 143. 
[75] Messai, A., Mellit, A., Abdellani, I., Massi Pavan, A. 2015. “On-line fault detection of 
a fuel rod temperature measurement sensor in a nuclear reactor core using ANNs.” 
Progress in Nuclear Energy 79: 8 – 21. 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks in Chemistry and Chemical Engineering 
43
[76] Coban R., and Can, B. 2010. “A trajectory tracking genetic fuzzy logic controller for 
nuclear research reactors.” Energy Conversion and Management 51(3): 587 – 593. 
[77] Coban, Ramazan. 2013. “A context layered locally recurrent neural network for 
dynamic system identification.” Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 
26(1): 241 – 250. 
[78] Coban, Ramazan. 2014. “Power level control of the TRIGA Mark-II research reactor 
using the multi-feedback layer neural network and the particle swarm optimization.” 
Annals of Nuclear Energy 69: 260 – 266. 
[79] Jin, Y. L., and Hong, X. 2013. “Application of fuzzy neural network to fault diagnosis 
of the sensor with mechanical properties in nuclear power plant.” Advances in 
Materials Research 644: 68 – 71. 
[80] Elnokity, O., Mahmoud, I. I., Refai, M. K., Farahat, H. M. 2012. “ANN based Sensor 
Faults Detection, Isolation, and Reading Estimates - SFDIRE: Applied in a nuclear 
process.” Annals of Nuclear Energy 49: 131 – 142. 
[81] Sabura Banu, U., and Uma, G. 2011. “ANFIS based sensor fault detection for 
continuous stirred tank reactor.” Applied Soft Computing Journal 11(2): 2618 – 2624. 
[82] Kasinathan, M., Saidhar Rao, B., Murali, N., Swaminathan, P. 2009. “An artificial 
neural network approach for the discordance sensor data validation for SCRAM 
parameters.” IEEE First International Conference on Advancements in Nuclear 
Instrumentation Measurement Methods and Their Applications (ANIMMA) 1: 1 – 5. 
[83] Meireles, M. R. G., Almeida, P. E. M., Simões, M. G. 2003. “A Comprehensive 
Review for Industrial Applicability of Artificial Neural Networks.”. IEEE Transactions 
on Industrial Electronics 50(3): 585 – 601. 
[84] Vandeginste, B. G. M., Massart, D. L., Buydens, L. M. C., de Jong, S., Lewi, P. J., 
Smeyers-Verbeke, J. 1998. Handbook of Chemometrics and Qualimetry, Part B, 
Amsterdam, Elsevier.  
[85] Tigrine-Kordjani, N., Chemat, F., Meklati, B. Y., Tuduri, L., Giraudel, J. L., Montury, 
M. 2007. “Relative characterization of rosemary plants according to their geographical 
origins using microwave-accelerated distillation, solid-phase microextration, and 
Kohonen self-organizing maps.” Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 389: 631 – 
641. 
[86] Palacios-Santander, J. M., Cubillana-Aguilera, L. M., Naranjo-Rodríguez, J. L., 
Hidalgo-Hidalgo-de-Cisneros, J. L. 2007. “A chemometric strategy based on peak 
parameters to resolve overlapped eletochemical signals.” Chemometrics and Intelligent 
Laboratory Systems 85: 131 – 139. 
[87] Abbasi, B., and Mahlooji, H. 2012. “Improving response surface methodology by using 
artificial neural network and simulated annealing.” Expert Systems and Applications 39: 
3461 – 3468. 
[88] Spanilá, M., Pazourek, J., Farková, M., Havel, J. 2005. “Optimization of solid-phase 
extraction using artificial neural networks in combination with an experimental design 
for determination of resveratrol by capillary zone electrophoresis in wines.” Journal of 
Chromatography A 1084: 180 – 185. 
[89] Esfandian, H., Samadi-Maybodi, A., Parvini, M., Khoshandam, B. 2016. “Development 
of a novel method for the removal of diazinon pesticide from aqueous solution and 
modeling by artificial neural networks (ANN).” Journal of Industrial and Engineering 
Chemistry 35: 295 – 308. 

Aderval S. Luna, Eduardo R. A. Lima and Kese Pontes Freitas Alberton 
44
[90] Turan N. G., Mesci, B., Ozgonenel, O. (2011). “The use of artificial neural networks 
(ANN) for modeling of adsorption of Cu(II) from industrial leachate by pumice.” 
Chemical Engineering Journal 171: 1091 – 1097. 
[91] Turan N. G., Mesci, B., Ozgonenel, O. (2011). “Artificial neural networks (ANN) 
approach for modeling Zn(II) adsorption from leachate using a new biosorbent. 
Chemical Engineering Journal 173: 98 – 105. 
[92] Marini, Frederico. 2009. “Artificial neural networks in foodstuff analyses: Trends and 
perspectives.” Analytica Chimica Acta 635: 121 – 131. 
[93] da Silva, C. E. T., Filardi, V. L., Pepe, I. M., Chaves, M. A., Santos, C. M. S. 2015. 
“Classification of food vegetable oils by fluorimetry and artificial neural networks.” 
Food Control 47: 86 – 91. 
[94] Cevoli, C., Gori, A., Nocetti, M., Cuibus, L., Caboni, M. F., Fabbri, A. 2013. FT-NIR 
and FT-MIR spectroscopy to discriminate competitors, non compliance and compliance 
grated Parmigiano Reggiano chesse. Food Research International 52: 214 – 220. 
[95] Butcher, J. B., Moore, H. E., Day, C. R., Adam, C. D., Drijfhout, F. P. 2013. “Artificial 
neural network analysis of Lucilia sericata for post mortem interval estimation.” 
Forensic Science International 232: 25 – 31. 
[96] Chen, Y., He, J., Zhang, J., Yu, Z. 2009. “Extending the working calibration ranges of 
four hexachlorocyclohexane isomers in gas chromatography-electron capture detector 
by radial basis function neural network.” Talanta 79: 916 – 925. 
[97] Balabin, R. M., Lomakina, E. I., Safieva, R. Z. 2011. “Neural network (ANN) approach 
to biodiesel analysis: Analysis of biodiesel density, kinematic viscosity, methanol and 
water content using near infrared (NIR) spectroscopy.” Fuel 90: 2007 – 2015. 
[98] Moreno-Barón, L., Cartas, R., Merkoçi, A., Alegret, S., del Valle, M., Leija, L., 
Hernandez, P. R.; Muñoz, R. 2006. “Application of the wavelet transform coupled with 
artificial neural networks for quantification purposes in a voltammetric electronic 
tongue.” Sensors and Actuators B 113: 487 – 499. 
 
 

In: Artificial Neural Networks: New Research 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-964-6 
Editor: Gayle Cain 
© 2017 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3 
 
 
 
APPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS 
TO ENERGY AND BUILDINGS 
 
 
Cinzia Buratti, Domenico Palladino 
and Francesco Cristarella Orestano 
Department of Engineering, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Energy consumption in buildings and indoor thermal comfort nowadays issues in 
engineering applications. A deep analysis of these problems generally requires many 
resources. Many studies were carried out in order to improve the methodology available 
for the evaluation of the energy consumption or indoor thermal conditions; interesting 
solutions with a very good feedback found in the Literature are the Artificial Neural 
Networks (ANNs). 
The peculiarity of ANNs is the opportunity of simulating and resolving complex 
problems thanks to their architecture, which allows to identify the combination of the 
involved parameters even when they are in a large amount. 
The Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) are very common in engineering 
applications for simulating the energy performance of buildings, for predicting a 
particular parameter, or for evaluating the indoor thermal conditions in specific 
environments. However, many different Artificial Neural Networks are available and 
each of them should be applied in a specific field. 
This chapter examines and describes the ANNs generally used in the engineering 
field. Studies of ANNs applied in topics such as energy consumption in buildings, gas 
emissions evaluation, indoor and outdoor thermal conditions calculation, renewable 
energy sources investigation, and lighting and acoustics applications are reported. After a 
brief description of the main characteristics of ANNs, which allows to focus on the main 
peculiarity and characteristics of this kind of algorithms, some applications shown in the 
Literature and applied to engineering issues are described.  
In the first part of the chapter an analysis of the main parameters which influence the 
ANN implementation in the examined papers was carried out, then some applications of 
                                                           
 Corresponding Author: cinzia.buratti@unipg.it. 

Cinzia Buratti, Domenico Palladino and Francesco Cristarella Orestano 
46
ANN in energy and buildings field found in the Literature are described. In particular, the 
main studies were described considering five different clusters: in the first group the 
ANN applications to buildings and traditional energy plants are showed, in the second 
one the ANN implementation for the thermal and energy performance evaluation of 
renewable energy sources are reported. In the third and forth clusters the applications 
found in the Literature for the indoor thermal parameters investigation and outdoor 
thermal conditions calculation are described, while in the last one other topics 
investigated using ANN models such as lighting and acoustics issues are considered. 
 
 
FOREWORD 
 
Many different engineering problems are solved by applying traditional software which, 
thanks to mathematical algorithm resolution, allow to calculate the expected results. All these 
algorithms became very useful and common in engineering applications and in many different 
fields, but, as many Authors suggested, they cannot be considered as smart devices because 
they are not able to solve specific problems that can be very easy for human brain. A 
complete different kind of algorithms are therefore taking place in scientific research fields: 
the Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs). 
The Artificial Neural Networks are a sort of information elaboration systems able to 
simulate the behavior of the biological nervous system of the human brain for the resolution 
of a specific problem. This definition of ANN shows that they are not an easy and common 
algorithm written by a programmer, but information processing models able to perform 
complex operations with a small and acceptable error. 
In order to understand the complexity and the real operation of an Artificial Neural 
Network, a knowledge of how the biological nervous system works is necessary. 
The most important and fundamental component of the biological nervous system is the 
neuron: this cell consists in one nucleus and two kind of extensions (dendrites and axon) able 
to exchange the information (electrical impulses) through synaptic endings. In this context, 
the brain can be considered as a very complex, non linear, and parallel elaboration system, 
where all the neurons work together for the resolution of issues (Figure 1). 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Neuron pattern. 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks to Energy and Buildings 
47
Artificial Neural Networks are mathematical and elaboration models aimed to reproduce 
the behaviour of the biological neurons for the resolution of complex and non-linear problems 
by implementing a simple pattern of elements, interconnected one another. The ability to 
learn mathematical and statistical models from experience is the most important peculiarity of 
ANNs. This main characteristic does not allow ANNs to explicitly evaluate the mathematical 
relation between inputs and outputs. ANNs are therefore a sort of black box model because it 
is not possible to know univocally how they achieve their outcome and they are not 
programmed as a common calculation code, but they are trained through a learning process 
based on empirical data.  
To explain and focus on the real potentiality of ANNs, the following example can be 
useful. An engineer who wants to design heating plants for buildings has to evaluate the 
thermal loads and to design the heating plant using a specific software or doing the 
appropriate calculations. But an older engineer who works and designs heating plants for 
many years is able to design the plant without using software or without doing calculation 
thanks to his experience. The ANNs are like the older engineer, in fact, if properly 
implemented, they are able to solve a particular and specific problems based on their 
experience, i.e., thanks to their learning process based on the provided empirical data.  
The learning process, therefore, is an important step to be correctly evaluated and chosen 
because the effectiveness of ANN is mainly influenced on this process; generally, the choice 
of the learning process depends on the kind of researched result or on the purposes expected 
by the Network. Three different kind of learning processes are available:  
 
supervised learning: both input and target parameters have to be supplied for the training 
of the Network. Thanks to the training algorithm, e.g., the backpropagation, this data 
is used to modify the weights matrix of the connections, which links one neuron to 
another, and to minimize the error returned by the ANN; 
unsupervised learning: only the input data is provided, therefore the weights of the 
connections matrix are modified using only this kind of information. This kind of 
algorithm try to group the input data and to identify the appropriate cluster; 
reinforcement learning: no data is provided to the network, but it is able to interact with 
the environment which responds through positive or negative stimuli. These 
responses lead the algorithm during the training process.  
 
Among these methods, the most complex is the last one (reinforcement learning), but it 
allows to obtain the realest and the most flexible Network in respect to the other learning 
processes. 
Similarly to biological networks, ANNs are composed by base elements which allow to 
elaborate all of the information and data. These elements are called artificial neurons (or 
neurons) and they can be divided into different levels (layers): input, hidden, and output level. 
Each neuron of a specific level can be linked to the ones of another layer by connections, such 
as the biological synapses. This way, information are processed through the Network passing 
from the input layer to the output one, thanks to neurons connections.  
Considering the connections between the neurons, ANNs are classified in: 

Cinzia Buratti, Domenico Palladino and Francesco Cristarella Orestano 
48
 
Figure 2. Feedforward networks pattern. 
 
 
fully connected network: each neuron of one layer is connected to each neuron of 
another layer;- 
 
partially connected network: each neuron of one layer is only connected to a specific 
group of neurons of another layer. 
 
However the most common classification is the one where the transmission mode of the 
information is considered regardless of connection between neurons; in this case two types of 
Networks are distinguished: 
 
 
feedforward networks: the connections between the neurons are able to transmit the 
information only forward (from the first layer to the last one); 
 
feedback networks: the connections between the neurons are able to transmit the 
information both forward and backward. 
 
The architecture of a feedforward network is shown in Figure 2; it consists in only one 
input layer (I) directly linked with the input parameters (x), one or more hidden layers (H), 
and only one output layer (O) where the output (y) of the network is returned. As showed in 
Figure 2, the arrows underline that the transmission of information takes place in only one 
direction (forward).  
 
 
Figure 3. Feedback networks pattern. 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks to Energy and Buildings 
49
Figure 3 shows the pattern related to a feedback Neural Network; also in this case there is 
only one input layer (I) directly linked with the input parameters (x) and only one output layer 
(O) where the output (y) of the network is returned. Moreover, the information elaboration 
highlighted with arrows can go back. 
As the patterns of networks are different, also the learning process can be different. 
However, whereas among these two types of Network the feedforward Neural Networks are 
the most used in engineering problems, in the following chapter a short theoretical description 
of the learning process adopted for both them is reported, in order to point out the necessary 
steps and the peculiarity of the learning process. 
 
 
FEEDFORWARD NEURAL NETWORK: LEARNING PROCESS 
 
As described in the previous section, the most applied and used Artificial Neural 
Networks in engineering applications are the feedforward Neural Networks, probably because 
of their easier implementation with respect to the other ones. When a feedforward Neural 
Network is implemented, different types of learning processes are available; however, each 
learning process is based on the same methodology and theory.  
In this section the main concepts which influence the different learning processes are 
described; for a deeper study please refer to [1, 2]. 
The learning process method does not depend neither on the number of layers defined in 
the pattern of Network nor on the number of neurons. These two parameters can in fact only 
influence the time required for the training process, but not the training methodology. 
Whereas the learning process does not vary on the pattern of the Network, it can be 
useful to consider the easiest pattern to better explain the training process of a feedforward 
network. 
The easiest pattern of this kind of ANN is reported in Figure 4 and it consists in only one 
neuron, with n connections and n input parameters, and only one link with the output. In 
Figure 4 all the parameters which influence and characterize each neuron of ANN are also 
showed: an Activation function (A), a Transfer function (T), and a threshold value (), which 
allows to activate the neuron and to weigh the information. The Activation function (A) 
allows the neuron to elaborate the weighted information coming from the input layer, while 
the Transfer function (T) allows to calculate the output considering the activation potential of 
neurons. Moreover, each input data is linked to the neuron through only one connection, 
characterized by a weight (wi) that is applied to the information provided by the input (xi). 
 
 
Figure 4. Feedforward Neural Networks pattern: the easiest architecture. 

Cinzia Buratti, Domenico Palladino and Francesco Cristarella Orestano 
50
Therefore, considering the pattern showed in Figure 4, the information coming from the 
input layer is weighed by the wi of connections and corrected by the bias of neuron (); it is 
elaborated (A) and then transferred to the output layer (T). Therefore, the output returned by 
the Network (y) is calculated through the following equation (1): 
 
 
(1) 
 
The learning process of the ANN consists in the correction of the weight of the 
connection between input parameters and the neuron, until the desired output (target) is 
achieved. When a supervised method is adopted, the algorithm used for the learning process 
is the delta rule, which allows to minimize the error function through a chain rule. The error 
function (E) is calculated as the square difference between the provided target (dc), i.e., the 
desired output, and the outcome returned by the Network (yc); for the Network showed in 
Figure 4 it can be calculated by equation (2): 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
 
Through the delta rule application, the error function (E) is minimized; this means that 
the error function gradient is calculated and then the minimum is sought (3). Considering 
equation (3) and by applying the chain rule, the variation of the weight is determined 
(equation 4) with an appropriate learning rate (0<<1) which characterizes the learning 
process of the neuron. 
 
  
 
 
(3) 
 
 
 
 
(4) 
 
Once the weight variation is calculated, the weight of each connection can be modified at 
the next iteration, therefore the weight at the t-th iteration is modified considering the 
calculated variation (4) and the weight at (t-1)-th iteration. 
 
 
 
 
(5) 
 
The same iterative procedure can be applied both to the easiest pattern (the one already 
described) and to more complex patterns, such as the one named multilayer perceptron 
network (MLP), which can be characterized by one input layer, one output layer, and one or 
more hidden layers. In each layer many different neurons can be defined. The architecture of 
a MLP feedforward Neural Network is shown in Figure 5, where the different layers and 
neurons are highlighted. In this particular and more complex architecture, which is very 
useful for the resolution of non-linear problems, the outputs of each layer become the inputs 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks to Energy and Buildings 
51
of the next one, therefore the information and the error function are elaborated in more steps. 
For the MLP network, the methodology described before is named Back Error Propagation 
and it is the most common algorithm used for the learning process of a MLP feedforward 
Neural Network. 
 
 
Figure 5. Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) network pattern. 
For a MLP Neural Network, the error function is calculated by equation (6) while the 
method for the calculation of weight variation is the same described for the easiest pattern 
(equation 3-5): 
 
 
(6) 
 
The Back Error Propagation is a slow learning process, therefore different variations of 
this method were proposed in the Literature. These methodologies are named Newtonian 
algorithms and they allow to approximate the procedure described before in order to speed up 
the training process of the ANN. In particular, these algorithms propose to calculate the 
weight at (t+1)-th iteration considering the second derivatives of the error function (named 
Hessian matrix - H), the error function gradient (g), and the weight at t-th iteration, as showed 
in equation (7): 
 
 
 
(7) 
 
Among the Newtonian algorithms, the most used in engineering applications is the 
Levenberg-Marquardt, which is the fastest available method in the Literature. It allows to 
approximate the Hessian matrix (H) and the error gradient (g) using the Jacobian matrix (first 
derivatives of the error function), as reported in eq. (8) and (9): 
 
 
 
(8) 
 
 
 
(9) 
 

Cinzia Buratti, Domenico Palladino and Francesco Cristarella Orestano 
52
Under these simplifications, the correction of the weight is calculated as reported in eq. 
(10): 
 
 
 
(10) 
 
 
 
Figure 6. An example of Transfer function: the sigmoidal function. 
The fastest algorithm available for the training of a feedforward Neural Network is 
therefore the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm. Finally important factor which can influence 
the velocity of the learning process is the choice of the Transfer function (T). In the Literature 
many different functions are proposed and developed, but the most used, especially for 
engineering applications, are linear and sigmoidal functions. Among these two functions, the 
sigmoidal one is recommended because it allows to reduce the computational time required 
for the calculation of the gradient of the error function. In Figure 6 the spatial trends in 0-1 
range of a sigmoidal function is shown. 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORK APPLICATIONS IN 
ENERGY AND BUILDINGS 
 
More than 160 papers were found in the Literature about the applications of ANN to 
energy and buildings. An analysis of the papers focused on the energy engineering application 
and described in the following sections is reported. For the sake of clarity, five different 
application fields were considered: 
 
 
Buildings and energy plants (energy consumptions of buildings and traditional energy 
plants); 
Renewable Energy Sources; 
Outdoor Conditions: (application of ANN for the outdoor thermal conditions); 
Indoor Thermal Conditions (application of ANN for predicting indoor thermal 
parameters); 
Other applications (lighting, acoustics and so on). 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks to Energy and Buildings 
53
The first analysis is related to the application field of Artificial Neural Network as shown 
in Figure 7. For the sake of clarity, a further sub-grouping was considered in the previous 
classification, in order to focus on the real purpose and application of the ANNs. Figure 7 
highlights that Artificial Neural Networks are mostly used in the outdoor and indoor thermal 
conditions, with about 27% and 24% of the 163 studies found in the Literature respectively. 
In particular, a high percentage of papers are focused on the solar radiation calculation in a 
specific place (more than 16%), or on the indoor thermal conditions, such as indoor air 
temperature evaluation (11.5%). 
Another important topic where the application of ANN seems to be very common is in 
buildings and energy plants, with about 18.2% of the examined studies; in particular, many 
studies are focused on ANN models used to predict the energy consumptions of buildings 
(11.5%). The renewable energy sources (RES) is another important and actual topic 
investigated by using ANNs (17.6% of the examined studies); in this case, the solar collector 
energy systems are the most studied issue with this kind of models (6.7%). However, some 
interesting applications to geothermal energy sources (3.6%) and to photovoltaic energy 
systems (4.8%) can also be found. 
On the basis of the studies found in these different application fields, an analysis of the 
papers considering the main parameters which can influence the implementation of the 
networks was carried out. As highlighted in the previous section, a lot of parameters can 
influence the implementation of a network; the most important factors to be investigated for 
the feedforward neural networks are the number of hidden layers used for the implementation 
and the neurons defined in each hidden layer. In fact, as shown in [2, 3], both the parameters 
influence the effectiveness of the training process and they can led to the over-fitting, which 
is a common problem of this kind of networks. 
Nevertheless, not all the works found in the Literature describe the ANN implementation, 
but they are more focused on the peculiarity of the investigated case study or about the 
effectiveness of the ANN with respect to other methods available in the Literature. In this 
case, therefore, some information about the ANN are not provided and they are inserted as 
n.a. (not available) in this analysis. 
The first parameter checked and evaluated is the number of the Hidden layers defined in 
the architecture pattern of the implemented ANN. Many different papers carried out a 
sensitivity analysis, in order to check and to determine the best number of Hidden layers to be 
used; however, as highlighted in Figure 8, about 50% of the investigated studies did not 
provide any information about the architecture of implemented network. In the 50% of studies 
which provided this information, the ones implementing an ANN using only one hidden layer 
are more than 35%, while less than 15% used two or more hidden layers. 
Starting from this preliminary analysis, other two parameters are investigated: the number 
of inputs and the number of neurons defined in the hidden layers.  
The analysis is related to about 80 papers (50% of the total examined studies), the ones in 
which this information was provided. 
Figure 9 shows that in about 80% of these studies an ANN was implemented using few 
input parameters (in the 1-3 and 4-7 ranges), and only in few cases a higher number of input 
parameters was supplied for the learning process of the network. A similar distribution was 
found for the number of neurons used for the ANN implementation. It varies in the 1-25 
range (more than 95% of cases) and only in few applications a number of neurons in the 
Hidden layers higher than 25 was necessary. 

Cinzia Buratti, Domenico Palladino and Francesco Cristarella Orestano 
54
 
Figure 7. Percentage of studies carried out in different application fields. 
 
Figure 8. Number of Hidden layers defined in the Artificial Neural Network implementation. 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks to Energy and Buildings 
55
 
Figure 9. Number of input parameters and of neurons used for the Artificial Neural Network 
implementation. 
 
Figure 10. Transfer function defined and used in the Hidden layers. 
The last analysis is focused on the kind of transfer function used in the Hidden layer, 
which influences the learning process time of the network. The analysis was carried out by 

Cinzia Buratti, Domenico Palladino and Francesco Cristarella Orestano 
56
considering only the papers which provided information about the number of Hidden layers 
used for the implementation of the networks (80 papers). As shown in Figure 10, despite 
some of the investigated studies provided a lot of information about the implementation of the 
network, in about 23% they do not declare the transfer function defined in the Hidden layer, 
therefore the use of other mathematical functions cannot be excluded. As known by the 
theory [2, 3], a lot of transfer functions are available, but, as highlighted in Figure 10, only a 
few kind are generally used for this kind of application: hyperbolic tan (more than 35%), log 
sigmoid (almost 40%), and linear (1.3%).  
 
 
ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORK APPLICATIONS 
 
The Artificial Neural Networks can be employed for many different purposes and in 
many different applications; the choice of the pattern and of the ANN type in general depends 
on the application and on the researched output. In the Literature many different applications 
in various research fields were found. Relating to engineering fields, the first applications 
date back to the 90s, but they are focused on specific branches such as mechanical [3,4], 
chemical [5], and computer engineering [6-8]. In these papers the main reason of their 
application is the ability to predict one or more specific parameters and to solve non-linear 
problems.  
Since the end of the last century, issues relating the reduction of greenhouse gas 
emissions, the prediction of energy consumption, the implementation of new technologies or 
the study of innovative materials, the energy efficiency, and the indoor thermal conditions 
have been becoming more and more important topics to be investigated and to be studied. In 
these fields the application of ANNs can led to interesting results. 
As highlighted in the previous paragraph, the application of Artificial Neural Networks is 
very common in energy and buildings topics (Figure 7); many researchers highlighted that 
interesting results and very good feedback can be obtained when ANNs are applied to the 
prediction of one specific output, such as the energy consumptions or the indoor and outdoor 
thermal conditions. 
In this section an overview of the application of Artificial Neural Networks carried out 
and found in the Literature is reported and described; in particular, the most current issues 
with a greater spread of ANNs with good results are investigated and described. In agreement 
with previous analysis and for the clarity of discussion, the description is divided in several 
sub-sections considering the main purpose and the specific investigated field, in order to point 
out the critical issues related to the ANN implementation and the peculiarity of the research 
carried out during the years.  
All the applications in energy and buildings topics found in the Literature are analyzed. 
They are divided in the following sub-sections, in agreement with the previous analysis: 
 
Buildings and energy plants; 
Renewable energy sources; 
Indoor thermal conditions; 
Outdoor conditions; 
Other applications. 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks to Energy and Buildings 
57
In the first section "Buildings and plants energy simulation", all the application of ANNs 
for the energy consumptions prediction or simulation related to a specific building chosen as 
case study, or the one applied for the thermal and energy performance of no-renewable plants 
are reported and described. In "Renewable Energy Sources", the papers that used the ability 
and potentiality of ANNs for the energy performance investigation of the renewable energy 
systems such solar collectors, photovoltaic, and geothermal systems are considered.  
Many different papers found in the Literature used the ANNs for the calculation of 
specific thermal parameters; all the studies related to the indoor thermal conditions or to 
thermal comfort and indoor air quality in buildings are reported in "Indoor thermal 
conditions", while the ones more focused on the outdoor thermal parameters are included in 
"Outdoor conditions". Finally, in the last section the studies where the ANNs were used for 
other applications, such as lighting and acoustics, are described. 
 
 
Buildings and Energy Plants  
 
The application of the Artificial Neural Networks in buildings and plants energy 
performance evaluation is very common and with very good feedback in scientific research. 
Many researchers around the world investigated the application of ANNs in this topic, with 
different purposes and results [9-35].  
The first available papers found in the Literature date back to 2000 and they are focused 
on the critical issues related to the learning process for the ANN implementation. In 
particular, in some of these papers the ANNs were implemented for various and different 
purposes, such as the prediction of electrical energy consumptions of a food retail store [9], or 
of a passive solar building [10], or of an office building considering daylighting effects [19]. 
In [9], the electrical load of a retail food store was investigated and simulated using two 
different kind of Networks. The first one is a MLP, already described in section 2, while the 
second network is a Radial Basis (RBF), which is a particular feedforward Neural Network 
with only one hidden layer and where the radial basis function is defined in the output layer 
of the implemented pattern. The RBF has an important advantage with respect to the 
traditional MLP networks: the training process is more rapid and clustered data can model 
locally more readily than MLP. The two networks were trained and validated using 
experimental data related to a period of 2 months and then tested for the electrical 
consumption prediction. The electrical power consumptions simulated by the two 
implemented networks were firstly compared to the monitored data and then one another, to 
point out the best network which allows to better simulate the real electrical consumptions of 
the investigated food retail stores. Results showed that neural networks are a suitable 
instrument to predict the electrical load in a building; in this case study, the MLP structure 
provided better results than the RBF, but further improvements of the network are suggested 
to increase the accuracy. 
Kalogirou et al. [10] developed ANNs for the prediction of energy consumption in a 
particular and interesting case study: a passive solar building. The ANNs were implemented 
adopting the same methodology described in section 2; a MLP pattern was defined and the 
sigmoidal function was used as transfer function in the output layer. 40 different 
configurations of thickness and typology of opaque walls were simulated using a dynamic 
building model named ZID and they were chosen as input parameters to be provided for the 

Cinzia Buratti, Domenico Palladino and Francesco Cristarella Orestano 
58
training of the Networks, while the energy consumption of the building in kWh was supplied 
as target. The implemented Network was therefore used for the energy consumption 
prediction of the building in two different unknown scenarios (in winter and in summer 
conditions) and the results were then compared to the real data. A good agreement was found 
between predicted and actual data, thus the network can be used with efficacy for the purpose 
of predicting energy consumption in buildings, and it can be helpful in designing heating and 
cooling systems. 
Other interesting studies were focused on the thermal characterization of building plants 
[14, 15, 17, 18, 29]. Sözen et al. [14] used the potentiality of ANNs for the calculation of the 
thermodynamic properties of an alternative refrigerant; in particular the proposed approach 
aimed to calculate the specific volume, enthalpy, and entropy values of the refrigerant R508b 
both in saturated liquid-vapor and superheated zones [14]. Tan et al. [17] developed an ANN 
able to simulate the thermal performance of a compact heat exchanger which worked with air 
and water/ethylene glycol anti-freeze mixtures as working fluids. The ANN was used for the 
thermal transfer prediction and its results were compared to experimental data. Authors 
highlighted that the implemented ANN was able to predict the heat transfer with a higher 
degree of accuracy than the available conventional and non-linear regression models. 
Afterwards, many interesting researches about different fields were carried out and 
innovative applications and case studies were investigated [23, 24, 31, 34, 36]. They are 
grouped because all are focused on the real potential of ANN, highlighting their advantages 
when they are generalized. A trained network is defined generalized when it is characterized 
by the ability to be used with different inputs from those provided for the learning process, 
and it represents a very important target to reach.  
Buratti et al. [24] used the ability of ANN for the prediction of the global energy 
performance indicators of buildings, calculated in compliance with European regulations, 
which provide energy information about the examined building. The developed ANN was 
used not only for the energy performance simulation of the investigated buildings, but also for 
checking the energy performance certificates drafted in Umbria Region, in accordance with 
the European and national regulations. The developed ANN was firstly trained using the 
lowest number of input parameters, and then it was improved in order to minimize the error 
returned by the network after the generalization. Authors highlighted a good agreement 
between the energy indicators simulated by the ANN and the experimental data, and that the 
developed network can be an useful and interesting alternative tool to be used for checking 
the energy certificates. 
To this aim, a new energy indicator, called N.E.P.I. (Neural Energy Performance Index), 
defined as the ratio between the Global Energy Index simulated by the ANN and the one 
simulated with traditional software and declared in energy certifications was introduced. 
When N.E.P.I. is equal or very close to 1, it means that the ANN simulates the same energy 
consumption declared in the energy certification, therefore the energy certification can be 
considered correct and it does not require any additional check. When it is higher than 1, it 
means that a better energy class and then a lower energy consumption of building was 
declared in the energy certification; therefore, more and deep controls are recommended. 
When it is lower than 1 it means that a lower energy class and then a worse energy 
performance of building was declared in the energy certification.  
 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks to Energy and Buildings 
59
 
Figure 11. Graphical visualization of N.E.P.I. [24]. 
A graphical visualization of N.E.P.I. was also proposed, such as reported in Figure 11: 
the acceptable area is highlighted, therefore if the N.E.P.I. falls inside this zone the energy 
certification can be considered correct, otherwise it requires more and deeper checks. 
Moon et al. [34] used the peculiarity of ANN as a thermal control algorithm, in order to 
improve the energy efficiency and the thermal comfort sensation in accommodation 
buildings. Two ANNs were developed, the first one able to simulate the cooling energy 
consumptions considering different setback temperatures, the second one able to predict the 
time required for restoring current indoor temperature to the normal set-point temperature. 
Authors showed that the developed ANNs can be used to obtain a more comfortable and 
energy efficient environment with respect to traditional and conventional methods (fixed set-
point and setback temperatures during all the entire day). 
Ekonomou [36] proposed an interesting application of ANNs able to improve the 
effective implementation of energy policies in Greece; in particular, the purpose of the paper 
was to train an ANN able to predict the annual final energy demand of Greece, in order to be 
used to support engineering evaluations or political choices of Greece. The main data that 
influences the final energy consumption of Greece was therefore provided: the ambient 
temperature, the installed power capacity, the resident electricity consumption, and the gross 
domestic production were used as input parameters, by considering their trend in 1992 - 2008 
period. The developed ANN was then used to predict the energy consumptions in different 
scenarios: 2005-2008, 2010, 2012, and 2015. In order to check the efficiency of the Network, 
other two common methods were applied: Regression Model and Support Vector Model. The 
comparison showed that after 2008 the three methods provided higher final energy 
consumptions when compared to previous periods, but always very close to each other; 
therefore, the developed ANN well approximate the energy prediction, with an acceptable 
accuracy. Ekonomou suggested to use the ability of the trained ANN for the effective 

Cinzia Buratti, Domenico Palladino and Francesco Cristarella Orestano 
60
implementation of energy policies, since a correct energy consumption prediction affects the 
capital investment and the environmental quality. 
 
 
Renewable Energy Sources 
 
Another important issue investigated by using the potentiality and ability of Artificial 
Neural Network is represented by the renewable energy sources [38-67]. The main part of the 
studies carried out during the years are focused on the evaluation of the thermal and energy 
performance of solar systems [38-48], however, some studies tried to apply and implement 
the ANNs to biomass [49-53], to photovoltaic systems [54-61], and to geothermal energy 
sources [62-67]. 
Kalogirou et al. [38] developed an ANN for modeling the starting-up of a parabolic 
trough collector. The ANN was trained for predicting the temperature profile of the system 
using experimental data, such as ambient temperature, solar radiation, effective aperture-area, 
flash-vessel content and flash-vessel dimensions of height, diameter, and thickness. Results 
showed that the network correctly predicted the response of the system, as highlighted by R2 
value (0.999). In agreement with the results, the implemented ANN allowed to obtain a 
higher accuracy than analytical models and it was a more flexible and faster design tool. 
An interesting analysis and research was carried out by Souliotis et al. [45], who 
combined Artificial Neural Networks and TRNSYS code in modeling an Integrated Collector 
Storage prototype; the investigated system was modeled with ANNs and in TRNSYS, for 
simulating its annual performance. An experimental campaign was carried out for measuring 
the variation of the water temperature in the tank, the solar radiation, the ambient 
temperature, and the wind speed. All this data was used for the implementation of the ANN, 
whose purpose is the simulation of the water temperature inside the tank. The simulated data 
was then used in TRNSYS for modeling the annual performance of the system. The 
application of ANN combined with TRNSYS code represents an innovative and useful tool 
for analyzing this kind of systems. 
Almonacid et al. [59] developed an ANN able to estimate the maximum power of a High 
Concentrator Photovoltaic module, output not easy to be determined or calculated. Many 
different methodologies are available for the estimation of the maximum power with good 
results, but they require a lot of input data, not always easy to find. Therefore, in [61], 
Authors tried to propose a new estimation model for the evaluation of the maximum power of 
a High Concentrator Photovoltaic module by using the ANN approach. The ANN was trained 
by providing easily measurable atmospheric parameters for the learning process and by 
supplying the maximum power monitored in situ. Results showed that the implemented ANN 
is able to correctly predict the power of a High Concentrator Photovoltaic module with a very 
small mean square root error (about 3.29%). In agreement with the results, Authors also 
suggested that the developed ANN can be used for the estimation of the maximum power of 
this kind of systems located in the South of Spain. 
Many different Authors carried out interesting studies where the ANNs were applied to 
other renewable energy sources. Kumar et al. [62] tried to verify the ability of ANN in 
predicting heating and cooling potential of an earth-to-air heat exchanger. The purpose of the 
study was to develop a computer design tool able to evaluate any aspect of earth-to-air heat 
exchanger and the behavior of the final configuration. Considering the high number of 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks to Energy and Buildings 
61
parameters which can influence the energy balance, a sensitivity analysis was carried out, in 
order to choose only the most influence parameters to be provided for the implementation of 
the network. The ANN was validated with experimental data and was able to calculate the 
outlet air temperature and the heating and cooling potential of the investigated exchanger. 
Kalogirou et al. [65] carried out a similar study, but in this case the ANN was 
implemented in order to predict the earth temperature at various depths in Cyprus. Authors 
implemented an ANN for the generation of geothermal maps of temperature at three different 
depths (20, 50, 100 m), by providing experimental data of 41 boreholes for the training 
process. Data such as lithology class of the area, the ambient temperature, the rainfall at the 
location, and the ground temperature was provided for the learning process. In agreement 
with results and considering the good correlation found with experimental data (R2 equal to 
0.9918), Authors suggested that the trained ANN can be a helpful tool for engineers who need 
to design geothermal systems in Cyprus. 
Some papers explored the possibility of applying ANNs for simulating processes in 
biomass power plants. De et al. [50] proposed an ANN simulator for a steam cycle in a 
biomass and coal co-fired power plant in Sweden. In this paper two ANNs in series were 
implemented: the first one allowed predicting the steam produced in the boiler, which was the 
input value for the second neural network, used for evaluating the power supplied by the 
steam turbine. The proposed ANN models revealed a very good prediction accuracy, but 
Authors highlighted that for every change of the system, a retraining of the ANNs is required. 
ANNs can be also useful for assessing energy production from biomass. Gueguim Kana 
et al. [51] developed an ANN to optimize the biogas yield from the anaerobic digestion of 
sawdust and other co-substrates. The data supplied for the training of the network was 
provided by monitoring 25 mini-pilot digesters. The results obtained encouraged to carry out 
further works to include energetic and economic balance for an application in industrial scale. 
 
 
Indoor Thermal Conditions 
 
In this section, the analysis of the state of the art is extended to the Artificial Neural 
Networks application in the prediction of useful characteristics during the design phase of a 
building, such as indoor thermal parameters or building thermal properties [68-86]. 
Focusing on the evaluation of indoor thermal characteristics, one of the first studies was 
carried out by Ferreira et al. [68], who developed an ANN able to simulate the indoor air 
temperature of a hydroponic greenhouse. In this work, the outdoor air temperature, the solar 
radiation, and the indoor relative humidity were provided as input data, necessary for the 
implementation of the network. Similarly, Dombayci et al. in [74] implemented an ANN 
model able to predict the daily mean ambient temperature in Denizli, Turkey. In this work, 
the ANN was trained using meteorological data over three years (2003-2005) and it was 
tested using the data related to 2006. 
Moon et al. [78] developed an ANN model to estimate the indoor air temperature for 
obtaining an optimal control of openings on internal and external sides of a double skin 
envelope in an actual building. A double skin envelope allows to reduce energy consumption 
by acting as a thermal buffer zone between inside and outside. In this work Authors noticed 
that ANNs can be successfully applied in building thermal control because of the accurate 
prediction of the indoor air temperature; moreover, ANNs presents an important advantage 

Cinzia Buratti, Domenico Palladino and Francesco Cristarella Orestano 
62
with respect to other AI methods, like Fuzzy Logic, and Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference 
System (ANFIS), thanks to the larger amount of inputs which can be used. The ANN was set 
up with an input layer with 7 neurons, a hidden layer with 15 neurons, and an output layer. 
Indoor air temperature, outdoor air temperature, cavity temperature, solar radiation, opening 
conditions of inner and outer surfaces were provided as input parameters, 121 data sets were 
used overall for the implementation of the network. The analysis of the results showed that 
the developed ANN model granted a good prediction accuracy with stable Root Mean Square 
(RMS), Mean Square Error (MSE), and values of the temperature difference, so the proposed 
ANN model had the potential to be applied for thermal evaluation in buildings. 
 
 
Figure 12. Indoor air temperature: comparison between experimental and simulated data by means of 
ANN; prediction of indoor air temperature with different glazing systems (DGG = granular aerogel in 
interspace; DGM = monolithic aerogel in interspace) in three investigated dwellings (d4, d6, d9) [81]. 
Another interesting study was carried out by Buratti et al. [81]. They developed an ANN 
model able to simulate and to predict the indoor air temperature of residential buildings, by 
considering the outdoor thermal conditions and the thermal characteristics of the building 
envelope. Several residential buildings were experimentally investigated during the cooling 
period, for about one week for each dwelling; during the experimental campaigns the outdoor 
thermal conditions and indoor air temperature were monitored and the thermal characteristics 
of the building envelope were evaluated. A sensitivity analysis was carried out in order to 
choose the best pattern to be used; the best one was obtained using two hidden layers with 75 
and 35 neurons in the first and second layer, respectively. The best trained ANN showed a 
good R2 in all the processes (higher than 0.96), which demonstrated the good training of the 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks to Energy and Buildings 
63
network. Considering the indoor air temperature simulated by the ANN, a very small error 
was also obtained (lower than 0.4°C with respect to the monitored one in all the investigated 
buildings). The developed ANN, finally, was also proposed for the indoor air temperature 
evaluation, by testing innovative solutions for the window systems (Figure 12); in particular 
two different windows with granular (DGG) and monolithic aerogel (DGM) in interspace 
were considered and simulated. Results showed that the implemented ANN correctly 
simulated the air temperature trend within the room and in good agreement with the one 
simulated with a dynamic code considering the two adopted solutions. In agreement with 
results, the implemented ANN was considered an useful and interesting tool for indoor 
thermal prediction, which allowed to evaluate quickly, simply, and in real time the effect of 
different solutions on the indoor thermal conditions. 
Buratti et al. in [82] used the ability of ANN model to predict the thermal transmittance 
of wooden windows, which depends on many parameters. The study aims to develop an 
alternative tool to the numerical methods available for the thermal transmittance calculation. 
The implemented network is able to predict the U-value of windows by using only 10 input 
parameters (Figure 13): window typology, wood kind, frame and shutters thickness, glazing 
spacer, top frame junction characteristics, U-value of the glazing and glazing size. 282 
wooden windows are considered and used as sample data for the implementation of the 
network. In agreement with the results, the developed ANN allowed to evaluate in real time 
the U-value of windows with a very small error (about 1%) with respect to ones obtained by 
applying the CFD numerical method. 
 
 
Figure 13. Structure of the ANN for predicting thermal transmittance of wooden windows [82]. 
For several years researchers attempt to define alternative methods to predict indoor 
thermal comfort [87-98] and indoor air quality [99-105]. Artificial Neural Networks are 
continuously being studied with success because of their capability to provide good results in 
the assessment of comfort, since they have the peculiarity of apprehending how to react to 
some external causes starting from a certain number of data. In the case of comfort, input data 

Cinzia Buratti, Domenico Palladino and Francesco Cristarella Orestano 
64
is often composed by buildings and occupants’ characteristics, while the output data is in 
general the level of comfort. It is expressed in terms of indices reported in the Literature, such 
as the most used Predicted Mean Vote (PMV), a numerical index proposed by P.O. Fanger, 
which expresses the thermal comfort of environments with a rating from -3 (very cold) to +3 
(very hot), where 0 represents the thermal neutrality. 
The first works concerning this matter focused on the automation of residential buildings. 
Mozer [87], in the end of the 90s, proposed a “Neural Network House”: a completely 
automated house which learns from its inhabitants’ lifestyles to control the basic residential 
systems, i.e., air and water heating, ventilation, and lighting. The system, called ACHE 
(Adaptive Control of Home Environments), had two declared objectives: to anticipate 
inhabitants’ needs, in order to grant a high level of comfort, and to save as much energy as 
possible, by setting to minimum lighting, home appliances and other devices when there is no 
demand of them, thus reducing energy consumption. These two objectives are easily 
reachable if considered independently, but the purpose of ACHE was to reach them at the 
same time, being the real challenge of the system. An ANN was implemented, using as inputs 
both the variables involved (in terms of average, minimum, maximum, and variance values) 
and the occupation status of rooms. The network returned the prediction of the future state of 
the room occupancy and the future state of the variables which determine the comfort level, 
so that a decision could be made on energy devices functioning. After the ANN returns the 
future states prediction, the system have to take a control decision for the devices. The 
decision process was split in two steps: a setpoint generator determines a setpoint profile, by 
specifying the target value of some environmental variables (lighting level, air temperature, 
water temperature, etc.); a device regulator controls physical devices which allow to reach the 
setpoint. Thanks to the division of the decision process, if inhabitants preferences or 
environment characteristics change, only the setpoint generator and the device regulator have 
to relearn respectively. In this way, Authors obtained a system which allowed relevant 
benefits in comfort management under realistic operating conditions. 
Another recurring field of application of ANNs is the optimization of energy 
consumption of heating, ventilating, and air conditioning systems (HVAC), as discussed in 
some works [88-94]. The importance of this theme is related to the increasing attention on 
energy saving: an optimum functioning of HVAC system is fundamental, since people spend 
most of their time inside buildings. In the examined cases, the ANNs application is aimed to 
the assessment of comfort in real time, in order to control heating or cooling systems, 
minimizing energy demand. In these works Authors proposed the use of ANNs for evaluating 
the PMV, whose analytical determination requires high computational efforts and/or a high 
number of measured parameters. In the case of ANNs, it requires the use of an extensive 
sensor network, due to the many parameters involved: metabolic rate, clothing insulation, air 
temperature, mean radiant temperature, relative humidity, and air speed. The use of ANNs to 
estimate the PMV value allows to reduce computational time and cost, thus they can 
cooperate with HVAC systems, by regulating in real time the functioning and satisfying the 
comfort request of occupants. This also results in a reduction of energy consumption, thanks 
to the optimization of the HVAC system. 
Other studies investigated the possibility of assessing PMV by means of ANNs [96-98], 
obtaining good results. In particular, in [96] a feedforward Neural Network was implemented 
using Matlab programming language, with the purpose of determining PMV with less input 
parameters than the analytical method, so that no experimental investigations and less time 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks to Energy and Buildings 
65
are required. The ANN was trained on the basis of experimental data and of 272 
questionnaires using nine input parameters for the training process: thermal resistance of 
clothing, gender, metabolism, age, position inside the room (in form of X, Y coordinates), 
indoor and outdoor air temperature, and indoor relative humidity. The Artificial Neural 
Network was implemented using a supervised training, in which the target was the thermal 
sensation reported in the questionnaires. Once validated, the implemented ANN was applied 
to predict the thermal sensation in the same conditions but in a different time period. Results 
showed that the ANN allowed to correctly predict the thermal sensation declared in the 
questionnaires, suggesting that the trained ANN can be an useful tool for these applications. 
Furthermore, when comparing the results of the questionnaires with the ones predicted by the 
ANN and by the Fanger’s static model (Figure 14), a better correlation was found between 
ANN and questionnaires data than between Fanger’s model and questionnaires data. 
A less common use of Artificial Neural Networks in building applications deals with the 
prediction of indoor air quality [99-105]. Despite of this, indoor air quality is an important 
research field because of the impact on people's health and comfort. Artificial Neural 
Networks have a great potential to evaluate air quality, being possible through them to predict 
the concentration of pollutants inside the buildings. In [104] Authors were able to model CO2 
concentration by means of an ANN, by analyzing as case study an apartment building in 
Finland, collecting temperature, relative humidity, and CO2 concentration data from 8 
apartments. A multi layer perceptron (MLP) network was implemented by using one hidden 
layer with 10 neurons. Before training the network, a pre-processing of available data was 
carried out by removing outliers and by extracting the monitored features using a 60 minute 
time window. For each set the inputs were 7 statistical parameters extracted from temperature 
and relative humidity data, while as targets the measured CO2 concentrations were used. In 
conclusion, Authors noticed that predicting CO2 by means of ANNs is difficult, when using 
temperature and relative humidity as input data.  
 
 
Figure 14. PMV indices comparison: Artificial Neural Network vs. Fanger’s static model [96]. 

Cinzia Buratti, Domenico Palladino and Francesco Cristarella Orestano 
66
Outdoor Conditions 
 
As highlighted in Figure 7, the application of ANNs in the evaluation of the outdoor 
thermal conditions is common and they were applied with different and sometimes interesting 
purposes. In particular, the studies focused on the evaluation of greenhouse gas emissions, 
and environmental parameters such as air temperature and solar radiation. 
The reduction of greenhouse gas emissions is a current topic linked to the need of 
reduction of the energy consumptions. One of the first applications of ANN in this kind of 
topic dates back to 1998 [106]; the ability of ANNs was used for the short-term prediction of 
SO2 concentration in Macau, where, due to the economic growth of those years, an important 
deterioration of the air quality was revealed. The ability of ANN was used for the prediction 
of the SO2 concentration in 5 years in advance. Thanks to the good accuracy obtained in two 
different test periods of the implemented ANN, Authors suggested to use the developed ANN 
as a prediction model for an efficient air-quality analysis of the city. 
Other interesting studies were carried out about the gas emissions calculation and 
prediction [107-113]. Zhou et al. [107] proposed a new approach by using ANN for the 
prediction of nitrogen oxides emissions of a large capacity pulverized coal fired boiler. Sayin 
et al. [108] suggested to use the potentiality of ANNs to predict the brake specific fuel 
consumption, brake thermal efficiency, exhaust gas temperature, and exhaust emissions of a 
gasoline engine. 
An interesting analysis was carried out by Sipöcz et al. in [109]: the ability of ANN to 
solve non-linear processes was used for modeling the CO2 capture plant. The ANN was 
trained with data generated by using a rate based process simulator for an amine-based post-
combustion CO2 capture process. During the validation process of the network, a very small 
average error was obtained, with a maximum value of about 3.1%. Thanks to the good 
feedback and accuracy of the network, it was suggested by the Authors an use for diagnostic 
purposes related to CO2 capture plants. 
In [111] an ANN was developed to predict wheat production yield and greenhouse gas 
emissions in Esfahan (Iran), by providing only energy inputs for the training of the network. 
For the implementation of the network data collected from 260 farms was used. In particular 
human labor, chemical fertilizers, FYM (Farmyard manure), diesel fuel, irrigation water, 
electricity, pesticides, and machinery were provided as input parameters, while yield and CO2 
emissions were chosen as output simulated by the ANN. Different neural networks were 
developed and the accuracy and the choice of the best trained networks was carried out 
considering the coefficient of determination (R2). As showed, the applications of ANN in this 
kind of problems allow to estimate the amount of the output energy and greenhouse gas 
emissions considering not only the size of the farm, but also their real energy demand and 
consumptions. 
Other interesting studies proposed the application of ANNs for the assessment of outdoor 
environmental parameters, such as air temperature, air speed, and solar radiation [114-149]. 
The main part of the studies found in the Literature are focused on the evaluation of the 
solar radiation in a specific place or country and the methodologies adopted for the 
implementation of the ANN are very close each other. As an example, in [118] an ANN was 
trained for mapping the solar potential of Turkey. Muribu [123] developed an ANN able to 
predict the average daily total solar irradiation on a horizontal surface in Uganda. Bosch [125] 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks to Energy and Buildings 
67
applied the ANNs model for estimating the daily solar irradiation over a mountain area, in 
order to develop an useful tool for designing both active and passive solar energy systems. 
Jiang [127] carried out a comparative analysis between the results returned by the 
implemented ANN and the ones obtained by applying other empirical regression models and 
experimental data. The ANN was trained in order to compute the monthly mean daily global 
radiation in China, by using experimental data acquired with weather stations located in 
Haerbin, Lanzhou, Beijing, Wuhan, Kunming, Guangzhou, Wulumuqi, and Lasa, while the 
data monitored in Kashi, Geermu, Shenyang, Chengdu, and Zhengzhou was used for testing 
the accuracy of the model. The results were compared to the monitored and to the ones 
calculated by using empirical forecasting models proposed in the Literature, considering the 
mean percentage error (MPE), mean bias error (MBE), and root mean square error (RMSE) as 
statistical tests. The trained ANN showed a higher R2 value and lower MPE, MBE, and 
RMSE with respect to the ones obtained with the other applied methods, so the ANN was 
considered more suitable to predict the solar radiation. 
Other studies found in the Literature are focused on the application of ANNs to the air 
speed prediction. Çam et al. [119] developed an ANN for wind speed and wind power 
estimation in seven regions of Turkey, by using experimental data of the last 50 years, while 
Bilgili et al. [122] applied the ANN model for the prediction of the mean monthly wind speed 
in the Mediterranean region of Turkey.  
Focusing on the real potential of the wind speed prediction, Fadare [137] carried out an 
interesting study for mapping the wind speed profile for energy production in Nigeria. The 
network was trained and tested with data monitored for 20 years in 28 ground stations (10 m 
above the ground). 18 stations were used for the training, 10 stations for the test of the 
network. Information related to the location (geographical parameters) and to the month of 
the year were provided as input parameters, while the monthly wind speed was used as target. 
The best trained ANN was obtained with a Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) of 8.9% 
and with a correlation coefficient (R) of 0.938; the predicted wind speed by the ANN varied 
in 0.9-13 m/s range, with a mean annual value of about 4.7 m/s. As suggested by the Author, 
the developed ANN can be an useful tool for the assessment of the wind energy potential in 
different locations in Nigeria. 
As highlighted, the main part of the studies found in the Literature are focused on the 
prediction of the solar radiation or of the wind speed; however, the outdoor air temperature is 
another important parameter to be evaluated. Papantoniou et al. [149] applied the ANN 
approach for the evaluation of the outdoor air temperature in four cities: Ancona (Italy), 
Chania (Greece), Granada and Mollet (Spain). The effectiveness of the network was tested by 
using the traditional control parameters R2 and MSE. The network was trained by providing 
time (minutes of day), outdoor temperature, solar radiation, wind speed, and relative 
humidity. It was able to predict the outdoor air temperature with a time horizon of 4–24 h. 
Results showed a very good correlation between experimental and simulated data, with a very 
high R2 and an acceptable MSE; in particular the smaller MSE was found when the outdoor 
air temperature was predicted in a closer time horizon. 
 
 
 
 

Cinzia Buratti, Domenico Palladino and Francesco Cristarella Orestano 
68
Other Applications 
 
Many other interesting aspects are investigated in the Literature by using the Artificial 
Neural Network models. Related to the buildings and energy fields, the lighting and acoustics 
issues are other two important topics where the application of ANN led to interesting results. 
Many studies found in the Literature are focused on the assessment of indoor lighting 
conditions, analyzing both indoor daylighting and artificial illumination [150-160]. 
Kazanasmaz et al. [150] developed an ANN for the daylight illuminance prediction in 
office buildings, while Wong et al. [151] implemented an ANN for energy analysis by 
considering the effects of daylighting in office buildings. An interesting application was 
investigated by Kialashaki et al. [154]; they developed an ANN in order to estimate the global 
energy demand of residential buildings comparing two different models. Regression models 
and Artificial Neural Network. In order to develop an algorithm able to predict the future 
energy demand of buildings, all the energy vectors were taken into account, including the 
lighting consumptions.  
In [157] another application of Artificial Neural Networks was tried. Authors described 
the implementation of an artificial Neural Network for the assessment of illuminance level 
from dimmable LED luminaires inside an office. The aim of the work was the individuation 
of a method for both satisfying illumination preference of office users and minimizing energy 
consumption of the lighting system; these objectives can be reached by optimizing the 
illumination levels of the distributed luminaires. The proposed system, based on the 
implementation of an ANN because of the non-linearity of the problem, allowed avoiding the 
brightness, which affects users' eyesight and efficiency, and improving energy savings. The 
proposed architecture consisted in a two layer feedforward network, with 14 dimming levels 
of luminaires as inputs and illuminance values on 12 tables as outputs. As training data, 600 
sets of inputs-targets were collected: for each set, a combination of 14 random dimming 
levels was used as input, while the targets were the measured corresponding values of 
illuminance on the tables. The lighting control system was completed by an algorithm with 
the purpose of finding the best configuration of dimming for all the luminaires, which 
allowed the minimum energy demand. Authors highlighted an important advantage of this 
system: after training the ANN and completing the input-output mapping of the test bed, no 
more light sensors are needed as feedback to the controller, and luminaires will not change 
dimming values during the control phase. 
The acoustics topic was also investigated by applying the Artificial Neural Network 
models; in this case the applications found in the Literature are more varied [161-171]. The 
first studies found date back to the end of the 90s and at beginning of 2000 by Nannariello et 
al. [161-162], who tried to use the ability of ANN for the reverberation time prediction [161] 
and for the speech levels in university classrooms [162]. Too et al. [166] proposed a new 
approach for measuring acoustic impedance of a wall or material. The proposed method 
consists in the development of an ANN able to predict unknown acoustic impedance of a 
tested material starting from data evaluated using a box model with known boundary 
conditions.  
Considering windows as the weakest part of a façade of buildings from an acoustic point 
of view, Buratti et al. [170] proposed a new methodology for the evaluation of sound 
insulation properties of wooden windows. The weighted sound insulation index (Rw) was 
predicted as representative parameter of the façade acoustic insulation, generally measured by 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks to Energy and Buildings 
69
laboratory tests according to ISO 140-3. In this study, the Authors developed an Artificial 
Neural Network able to predict the Rw value by using data acquired during laboratory tests 
carried out on 55 wooden windows. The input parameters to be provided for the 
implementation of the network were chosen considering the ones which have more influence 
on Rw value; in particular, after a preliminary study, the window typology, the frame 
thickness, the shutters thickness, and the number of gaskets were provided as input 
parameters, while the Rw value was used as target. The network was trained using two hidden 
layers and the RMSE was considered as control parameter for checking the effectiveness of 
the training process. Results showed that the ANN is able to predict the Rw value of wooden 
windows (Figure 15) with an error within ±3%, which corresponds to about ±1.2 dB 
(comparable with the measurement uncertainty). In agreement with the results, Authors 
suggested the implemented network as an useful tool to easily estimate the acoustic 
performance of windows without laboratory tests. 
 
 
Figure 15. Rw predicted data obtained from the ANN model vs. Rw measured data [170]. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
In the present chapter an overview of the ANNs applications to building energy 
performance and related issues is reported. The Literature research showed different kinds of 
ANNs, but only feedforward Neural Networks are mainly applied for engineering problem 
solutions, probably because of their easier training process and implementation. The 
development and the applications of ANNs is very common in Energy fields, especially for 
the energy consumption prediction of buildings. In this area of interest, many different 
researchers focused on ANNs potentialities, by highlighting the effectiveness and the 
advantages of applying this kind of algorithms for the resolution of several problems. 

Cinzia Buratti, Domenico Palladino and Francesco Cristarella Orestano 
70
Especially in this field, a very good feedback was obtained as pointed out when comparing 
the results with the experimental data. Particularly, almost all the paper found in the 
Literature are focused on the possibility of ANNs generalization (i.e., the application of the 
implemented ANN in different situations, using unknown data) and highlighted that they can 
be an useful and very effective algorithm to be applied. Many different works highlighted one 
of the peculiarities of these elaboration models: the possibility of implementing a 
mathematical algorithm able to predict a specific outcome using few and selected input 
parameters, with respect to the ones required by the traditional methodologies. 
Other interesting research fields as thermal and lighting comfort indoor air quality, and 
acoustics assessment are also examined in this chapter: in these topics ANNs application is 
not very common as it happens in energy field, because the outcomes which are intended to 
be evaluated depend on numerous factors and they are often subjective. The analysis in these 
other issues showed that architecture and methodology adopted for the learning processes of 
networks are the same described in the first part of the Literature research, however not 
always a very good feedback was found because of the kind of the simulated parameters, so 
the reliability of ANNs seems to need improvement for some specific situations. 
The results encourage the prosecution of the ANNs research studies in all of the 
examined topics. The papers highlighted that a very good feedback can be obtained when the 
outcomes are strictly connected to the chosen input data or when a very wide sample data is 
available. Otherwise, when the chosen inputs are not directly connected to the outcomes, it is 
necessary to train the network using thousands of data for each chosen input parameter, in 
order to obtain a good reliability of the ANN. 
The Literature research highlighted that, despite a lot of memories were published in 
engineering fields, ANNs even have a large possibility of research, because they are an issue 
of current concern and thanks to the possibility to have a good feedback, with less waste of 
resources (in terms of time, costs, and instruments). Many different architectures of ANN 
with different learning processes are available, but the feedforward Neural Networks 
described in this chapter are mostly used in engineering problem resolutions. The application 
of other kinds of ANNs, such as PRNN (Pattern Recognition Neural Network), is suggested, 
especially in the topics where worse feedback were obtained by feedforward ANNs. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Haykin, S. Neural networks – A comprehensive foundation, 2nd edition; Prentice Hall: 
Upper Saddle River, US, 1999. 
[2] 
Hudson Beale M., Hagan, M.T., Demuth, H.B. Neural network design; University of 
Colorado, 1996. 
[3] 
Bulsari, A.B., Saxén, H. Implementation of a chemical reactor selection expert system 
in an artificial Neural Network. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 
1992, 5, 113-119. 
[4] 
Luxhøj, J.T. An artificial Neural Network for nonlinear estimation of the turbine flow-
meter coefficient. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 1998, 11, 723-
734. 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks to Energy and Buildings 
71
[5] 
Kuo, R.J. Intelligent diagnosis for turbine blade faults using Artificial Neural Networks 
and fuzzy logic. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 1995, 8, 25-34. 
[6] 
Pomerleau, D.A., Gowdy, J., Thorpe, C.E. Combining Artificial Neural Networks and 
symbolic processing for autonomous robot guidance. Engineering Applications of 
Artificial Intelligence, 1991, 4, 279-285. 
[7] 
Bulsari, A., Saxén, H., KrasŁawski, A. Fuzzy simulation by an artificial Neural 
Network. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 1992, 5, 401-406. 
[8] 
Miles, R.G., Sharpe, P.K., Pan, W., Fogarty, T.C. A comparative study of Artificial 
Neural Networks and rule-based techniques in the development of a computer-aided 
control system. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 1994, 7, 53-58. 
[9] 
Datta, D., Tassou, S.A. Artificial Neural Network based electrical load prediction for 
food retail stores. Applied Thermal Engineering, 1998, 18, 1121-1128. 
[10] Kalogirou, S.A., Bojic, M. Artificial Neural Networks for the prediction of the energy 
consumption of a passive solar building. Energy, 2000, 25, 479-491. 
[11] Yang, J., Rivard, H., Zmeureanu, R. On-line building energy prediction using adaptive 
artificial neural networks. Energy and Buildings, 2005, 37,1250-1259. 
[12] González, P.A., Zamarreño, J.M. Prediction of hourly energy consumption in buildings 
based on a feedback artificial Neural Network. Energy and Buildings, 2005, 37, 595-
601. 
[13] Karatasou, S., Santamouris, M., Geros, V. Modeling and predicting building's energy 
use with Artificial Neural Networks: Methods and results. Energy and Buildings, 2006, 
38, 949-958. 
[14] Sözen, A., Özalp, M., Arcaklioglu, E. Calculation for the thermodynamic properties of 
an alternative refrigerant (R508b) using artificial neural network. Applied Thermal 
Engineering, 2007, 27, 551-559. 
[15] Şencan, A. Performance of ammonia-water refrigeration systems using artificial neural 
networks. Renewable Energy, 2007, 32, 314-328. 
[16] Neto, A.H., Fiorelli, F.A.S. Comparison between detailed model simulation and 
artificial neural network for forecasting building energy consumption. Energy and 
Buildings, 2008, 40, 2169-2176. 
[17] Tan, C.K., Ward, J., Wilcox, S.J., Payne, R. Artificial neural network modelling of the 
thermal performance of a compact heat exchanger. Applied Thermal Engineering, 
2009, 29, 3609-3617. 
[18] Wang, J., Sun, Z., Dai, Y., Ma, S. Parametric optimization design for supercritical CO2 
power cycle using genetic algorithm and artificial neural network. Applied Energy, 
2010, 87, 1317-1324. 
[19] Wong, S.L., Wan, K.K.W., Lam, T.N.T. Artificial Neural Networks for energy analysis 
of office buildings with daylighting. Applied Energy, 2010, 87, 551-557. 
[20] Escrivá-Escrivá, G., Álvarez-Bel, C., Roldán-Blay, C., Alcázar-Ortega, M. New 
artificial Neural Network prediction method for electrical consumption forecasting 
based on building end-uses. Energy and Buildings, 2011, 43, 3112-3119. 
[21] Kialashaki, A., Reisel, J.R. Modeling of the energy demand of the residential sector in 
the United States using regression models and Artificial Neural Networks. Applied 
Energy, 2013, 108, 271-280. 

Cinzia Buratti, Domenico Palladino and Francesco Cristarella Orestano 
72
[22] Mavromatidis, G., Acha, S., Shah, N. Diagnostic tools of energy performance for 
supermarkets using Artificial Neural Network algorithms. Energy and Buildings, 2013, 
62, 304-314. 
[23] Fonseca, R.W.D., Didoné, E.L., Pereira, F.O.R. Using Artificial Neural Networks to 
predict the impact of daylighting on building final electric energy requirements. Energy 
and Buildings, 2013, 61, 31-38. 
[24] Buratti, C., Barbanera, M., Palladino, D. An original tool for checking energy 
performance and certification of buildings by means of Artificial Neural Networks. 
Applied Energy, 2014, 120, 125-132. 
[25] Paudel, S., Elmtiri, M., Kling, W.L., Corre, O.L., Lacarrière, B. Pseudo dynamic 
transitional modeling of building heating energy demand using artificial neural 
network. Energy and Buildings, 2014, 70, 81-93. 
[26] Kialashaki, A., Reisel, J.R. Development and validation of artificial Neural Network 
models of the energy demand in the industrial sector of the United States. Energy, 
2014, 76, 749-760. 
[27] Asadi, E., Silva, M.G.D., Antunes, C.H., Dias, L., Glicksman, L. Multi-objective 
optimization for building retrofit: A model using genetic algorithm and artificial Neural 
Network and an application. Energy and Buildings, 2014, 81, 444-456. 
[28] Li, K., Hu, C., Liu, G., Xue, W. Building's electricity consumption prediction using 
optimized Artificial Neural Networks and principal component analysis. Energy and 
Buildings, 2015, 108, 106-113. 
[29] Taghavifar, H., Anvari, S., Saray, R.K., Khalilarya, S., Jafarmadar, S., Taghavifar, H. 
Towards modeling of combined cooling, heating and power system with artificial 
neural network for exergy destruction and exergy efficiency prognostication of tri-
generation components. 
Applied Thermal Engineering, 2015, 89, 156-168. 
[30] Platon, R., Dehkordi, V.R., Martel, J. Hourly prediction of a building's electricity 
consumption using case-based reasoning, artificial neural networks and principal 
component analysis. Energy and Buildings, 2015, 92, 10-18. 
[31] Benedetti, M., Cesarotti, V., Introna, V., Serranti, J. Energy consumption control 
automation using Artificial Neural Networks and adaptive algorithms: Proposal of a 
new methodology and case study. Applied Energy, 2016, 165, 60-71. 
[32] Chae, Y.T., Horesh, R., Hwang, Y., Lee, Y.M. Artificial neural network model for 
forecasting sub-hourly electricity usage in commercial buildings. Energy and 
Buildings, 2016, 111, 184-194. 
[33] Ji, Y., Xu, P., Duan, P., Lu, X. Estimating hourly cooling load in commercial buildings 
using a thermal network model and electricity submetering data. Applied Energy, 2016, 
169, 309-323. 
[34] Moon, J.W., Chung, S.K. Development of a Thermal Control Algorithm Using 
Artificial Neural Network Models for Improved Thermal Comfort and Energy 
Efficiency in Accommodation Buildings. Applied Thermal Engineering, 2016, 103, 
1135-1144. 
[35] Paudel, S., Elmtiri, M., Kling, W.L., Corre, O.L., Lacarrière, B. Pseudo dynamic 
transitional modeling of building heating energy demand using artificial neural 
network. Energy and Buildings, 2014, 70, 81-93. 
[36] Ekonomou, L. Greek long-term energy consumption prediction using Artificial Neural 
Networks. Energy, 2010, 35, 512-517. 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks to Energy and Buildings 
73
[37] Jeong, K., Koo, C., Hong, T. An estimation model for determining the annual energy 
cost budget in educational facilities using SARIMA (seasonal autoregressive integrated 
moving average) and ANN (artificial neural network). Energy, 2014, 71, 71-79. 
[38] Kalogirou, S.A., Neocleous, C.C., Schizas, C.N. Artificial Neural Networks for 
modeling the starting-up of a solar steam-generator. Applied Energy, 1998, 60, 89-100. 
[39] Kalogirou, S.A., Panteliou, S., Dentsoras, A. Artificial Neural Networks used for the 
performance prediction of a thermosiphon solar water heater. Renewable Energy, 1999, 
18, 87-99. 
[40] Kalogirou, S.A. Applications of artificial neural-networks for energy systems. Applied 
Energy, 2000, 67, 17-35. 
[41] Kalogirou, S.A. Long-term performance prediction of forced circulation solar domestic 
water heating systems using Artificial Neural Networks. Applied Energy, 2000, 66, 63-
74. 
[42] Zmeureanu, R. Prediction of the cop of existing rooftop units using Artificial Neural 
Networks and minimum number of sensors. Energy, 2002, 27, 889-904. 
[43] Kalogirou, S.A. Optimization of solar systems using artificial neural-networks and 
genetic algorithms. Applied Energy, 2004, 77, 383-405. 
[44] Mohanraj, M., Jayaraj, S., Muraleedharan, C. Performance prediction of a direct 
expansion solar assisted heat pump using artificial neural networks. Applied Energy, 
2009, 86, 1442-1449. 
[45] Souliotis, M., Kalogirou, S., Tripanagnostopoulos, Y. Modelling of an ICS solar water 
heater using artificial neural networks and TRNSYS. Renewable Energy, 2009, 34, 
1333-1339. 
[46] Rosiek, S., Batlles, F.J. Modelling a solar-assisted air-conditioning system installed in 
CIESOL building using an artificial neural network. Renewable Energy, 2010, 35, 
2894-2901. 
[47] Yaïci, W., Entchev, E, Performance prediction of a solar thermal energy system using 
artificial neural networks. Applied Thermal Engineering, 2014, 73, 1348-1359. 
[48] Kalogirou, S.A., Mathioulakis, E., Belessiotis, V. Artificial neural networks for the 
performance prediction of large solar systems. Renewable Energy, 2014, 63, 90-97. 
[49] Fantozzi, F. Desideri, U. Simulation of Power Plants transients with Artificial Neural 
Networks. Application to an existing Combined Cycle. Journal of Power and Energy, 
1998, 212, 299-313. 
[50] De, S., Kaiadi, M., Fast, M., Assadi, M. Development of an artificial neural network 
model for the steam process of a coal biomass cofired combined heat and power (CHP) 
plant in Sweden. Energy, 2007, 32, 2099-2109. 
[51] Gueguim Kana, E.B., Oloke, J.K., Lateef, A., Adesiyan, M.O. Modeling and 
optimization of biogas production on saw dust and other co-substrates using Artificial 
Neural network and Genetic Algorithm. Renewable Energy, 2012, 46, 276-281. 
[52] Moradi, G.R., Dehghani, S., Khosravian, F., Arjmandzadeh, A. The optimized 
operational conditions for biodiesel production from soybean oil and application of 
artificial neural networks for estimation of the biodiesel yield. Renewable Energy, 
2013, 50, 915-920. 
[53] Chakraborty, R., Sahu, H. Intensification of biodiesel production from waste goat 
tallow using infrared radiation: Process evaluation through response surface 
methodology and artificial neural network. Applied Energy, 2014, 114, 827-836. 

Cinzia Buratti, Domenico Palladino and Francesco Cristarella Orestano 
74
[54] Mellit, A., Benghanem, M., Arab, A.H., Guessoum, A. An adaptive artificial neural 
network model for sizing stand-alone photovoltaic systems: Application for isolated 
sites in Algeria. Renewable Energy, 2005, 30, 1501-1524. 
[55] Al-Alawi, A., M Al-Alawi, S., M Islam, S. Predictive control of an integrated PV-
diesel water and power supply system using an artificial neural network. Renewable 
Energy, 2007, 32, 1426-1439. 
[56] Mellit, A., Benghanem, M., Arab, A.H., Guessoum, A. An adaptive artificial Neural 
Network model for sizing stand-alone photovoltaic systems. Application for isolated 
sites in Algeria. Renewable Energy, 2005, 30, 1501-1524. 
[57] Almonacid, F., Rus, C., Pérez, P.J., Hontoria, L. Estimation of the energy of a PV 
generator using artificial neural network. Renewable Energy, 2009, 34, 2743-2750. 
[58] Mellit, A., Saǧlam, S., Kalogirou, S.A. Artificial neural network-based model for 
estimating the produced power of a photovoltaic module. Renewable Energy, 2013, 60, 
71-78. 
[59] Almonacid, F., Fernández, E.F., Rodrigo, P., Pérez-Higueras, P.J., Rus-Casas, C. 
Estimating the maximum power of a High Concentrator Photovoltaic (HCPV) module 
using an Artificial Neural Network. Energy, 2013, 53, 165-172. 
[60] Ceylan, I., Gedik, E., Erkaymaz, O., Gürel, A.E. The artificial neural network model to 
estimate the photovoltaic module efficiency for all regions of the Turkey. Energy and 
Buildings, 2014, 84, 258-267. 
[61] Gunasekar, N., Mohanraj, M., Velmurugan, V. Artificial neural network modeling of a 
photovoltaic-thermal evaporator of solar assisted heat pumps. Energy, 2015, 93, 908-
922. 
[62] Kumar, R., Kaushik, S.C., Garg, S.N. Heating and cooling potential of an earth-to-air 
heat exchanger using artificial neural network. Renewable Energy, 2006, 31, 1139-
1155. 
[63] Esen, H., Inalli, M., Sengur, A., Esen, M. Artificial neural networks and adaptive 
neuro-fuzzy assessments for ground-coupled heat pump system. Energy and Buildings, 
2008, 40, 1074-1083. 
[64] Kurt, H., Kayfeci, M. Prediction of thermal conductivity of ethylene glycol-water 
solutions by using artificial neural networks. Applied Energy, 2009, 86, 2244-2248. 
[65] Kalogirou, S.A., Florides, G.A., Pouloupatis, P.D., Panayides, I., Joseph-Stylianou, J., 
Zomeni, Z. Artificial neural networks for the generation of geothermal maps of ground 
temperature at various depths by considering land configuration. Energy, 2012, 48, 
233-240. 
[66] Keçebaş, A., Yabanova, I. Thermal monitoring and optimization of geothermal district 
heating systems using artificial neural network: A case study. Energy and Buildings, 
2012, 50, 339-346. 
[67] Fannou, J.-L.C., Rousseau, C., Lamarche, L., Kajl, S. Modeling of a direct expansion 
geothermal heat pump using artificial neural networks. Energy and Buildings, 2014, 81, 
381-390. 
[68] Ferreira, P.M., Fariab, E.A., Ruano, A.E. Neural network models in greenhouse air 
temperature prediction. Neurocomputing, 2002, 43, 51-75.  
[69] Gouda, M.M., Danaher, S., Underwood, C.P. Application of an artificial neural 
network for modelling the thermal dynamics of a building's space and its heating 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks to Energy and Buildings 
75
system. Mathematical and Computer Modelling of Dynamical Systems, 2002, 8, 333-
344.  
[70] Soleimani-Mohseni, M., Thomas, B., Fahlén, P. Estimation of operative temperature in 
buildings using artificial neural networks. Energy and Buildings, 2006, 38, 635-640. 
[71] Ruano, A.E., Crispim, E.M., Conceição, E.Z.E., Lúcio, M.M.J.R. Prediction of 
building’s temperature using neural networks models. Energy and Buildings, 2006, 38, 
682-694. 
[72] Thomas, B., Soleimani-Mohseni, M. Artificial neural network models for indoor 
temperature prediction. Neural Computing and Applications, 2007, 16, 81-89.  
[73] Hakeem, M.A., Kamil, M., Arman, I. Prediction of temperature profiles using artificial 
neural networks in a vertical thermosiphon reboiler. Applied Thermal Engineering, 
2008, 28, 1572-1579. 
[74] Dombayci, OA., Gölcü, M. Daily means ambient temperature prediction using artificial 
neural network method: A case study of Turkey. Renewable Energy, 2009, 34, 1158-
1161. 
[75] Lu, T., Viljanen, M. Prediction of indoor temperature and relative humidity using 
neural network models: Model comparison. Neural Computing and Applications, 2009, 
18, 345-357. 
[76] Gossard, D., Lartigue, B., Thellier, F. Multi-objective optimization of a building 
envelope for thermal performance using genetic algorithms and artificial neural 
network. Energy and Buildings, 2013, 67, 253-260. 
[77] Almonacid, F., Pérez-Higueras, P., Rodrigo, P., Hontoria, L. Generation of ambient 
temperature hourly time series for some Spanish locations by artificial neural networks. 
Renewable Energy, 2013, 51, 285-291. 
[78] Moon, J.W., Yoon, S., Kim, S. Development of an artificial neural network model 
based thermal control logic for double skin envelopes in winter. Building and 
Environment, 2013, 61, 149-159.  
[79] Venkadesh, S., Hoogenboom, G., Potter, W., McClendon, R. A genetic algorithm to 
refine input data selection for air temperature prediction using artificial neural 
networks. Applied Soft Computing Journal, 2013, 13, 2253-2260.  
[80] Ashtiani, A., Mirzaei, P.A., Haghighat, F. Indoor thermal condition in urban heat 
island: Comparison of the artificial neural network and regression methods prediction. 
Energy and Buildings, 2014, 76, 597-604. 
[81] Buratti, C., Lascaro, E., Palladino, D., Vergoni, M. Building behavior simulation by 
means of artificial neural network in summer conditions. Sustainability, 2014, 6, 5339-
5353.  
[82] Buratti, C., Barelli, L., Moretti, E. Application of artificial neural network to predict 
thermal transmittance of wooden windows. Applied Energy, 2012, 98, 425-432. 
[83] Marvuglia, A., Messineo, A., Nicolosi, G. Coupling a neural network temperature 
predictor and a fuzzy logic controller to perform thermal comfort regulation in an 
office building. Building and Environment, 2014, 72, 287-299. 
[84] Dhanuskodi, R., Kaliappan, R., Suresh, S. Anantharaman, N., Arunagiri, A., 
Krishnaiah, J., Artificial Neural Networks model for predicting wall temperature of 
supercritical boilers. Applied Thermal Engineering, 2015, 90, 749-753. 
[85] Moon, J.W. Integrated control of the cooling system and surface openings using the 
artificial neural networks. Applied Thermal Engineering, 2015, 78, 150-161. 

Cinzia Buratti, Domenico Palladino and Francesco Cristarella Orestano 
76
[86] Mba, L., Meukam, P., Kemajou, A. Application of artificial neural network for 
predicting hourly indoor air temperature and relative humidity in modern building in 
humid region. Energy and Buildings, 2016, 121, 32-42. 
[87] Mozer, M. C. The Neural Network house: An environment that adapts to its 
inhabitants. Proc AAAI Spring Symp Intelligent Environments, 1998, 110-114. 
[88] Atthajariyakul, S., Leephakpreeda, T. Neural computing thermal comfort index for 
HVAC systems. Energy Conversion and Management, 2005, 46 (15-16), 2553-2565. 
[89] Moon, J.W., Yoon, S.H., Kim, S. Development of an artificial Neural Network model 
based thermal control logic for double skin envelopes in winter. Building and 
Environment, 2013, 61, 149-159. 
[90] Magnier, L., Haghighat, F. Multiobjective optimization of building design using 
TRNSYS simulations, genetic algorithm, and artificial Neural Network. Building and 
Environment. 2010, 45 (3), 739-746. 
[91] Moon, J.W., Kim, J.J. ANN-based thermal control models for residential buildings. 
Building and Environment. 2010, 45 (7), 1612-1625. 
[92] Ferreira, P.M., Ruano, A.E., Silva, S., Conceição, E.Z.E. Neural networks based 
predictive control for thermal comfort and energy savings in public buildings. Energy 
and Buildings, 2012, 55, 238-251. 
[93] Castilla, M., Álvarez, J.D., Ortega, M.G., Arahal, M.R. Neural network and polynomial 
approximated thermal comfort models for HVAC systems. Building and Environment, 
2013, 59, 107-115. 
[94] Asadi, E., Silva, M.G.D., Antunes, C.H., Dias, L., Glicksman, L. Multi-objective 
optimization for building retrofit: A model using genetic algorithm and artificial neural 
network and an application. Energy and Buildings, 2014, 81, 444-456. 
[95] Yuce, B., Li, H., Rezgui, Y., Petri, I., Jayan, B., Yang, C. Utilizing artificial Neural 
Network to predict energy consumption and thermal comfort level: an indoor 
swimming pool case study. Energy and Buildings, 2014, 80, 45-56. 
[96] Buratti C., Vergoni M., Palladino D. Thermal comfort evaluation within non-
residential environments: development of artificial Neural Network by using the 
adaptive approach data. Energy Procedia, 2015, 78, 2875-2880. 
[97] Kariminia, S., Motamedi, S., Shamshirband, S., Piri, J., Mohammadi, K., Hashim, R., 
Roy, C., Petković, D., Bonakdari, H. Modelling thermal comfort of visitors at urban 
squares in hot and arid climate using NN-ARX soft computing method. Theoretical 
and Applied Climatology, 2016, 124 (3-4), 991-1004. 
[98] von Grabe, J. Potential of Artificial Neural Networks to predict thermal sensation 
votes. Applied Energy, 2016, 161, 412-424. 
[99] Sofuoglu, S.C. Application of artificial neural networks to predict prevalence of 
building-related symptoms in office buildings. Building and Environment, 2008, 43 (6), 
1121-1126. 
[100] Xie, H., Ma, F., Bai, Q.G. Prediction of indoor air quality using Artificial Neural 
Networks. 5th International Conference on Natural Computation, 2009, 2, 414-418. 
[101] Alhanafy, T.E., Zaghlool, F., El Din Moustafa, A.S. Neuro fuzzy modeling scheme for 
the prediction of air pollution. Journal of American Science, 2010, 6 (12), 605-616. 
[102] Kim, M.H., Kim, Y.S., Lim, J.J., Kim, J.T., Sung, S.W., Yoo, C.K. Data driven 
prediction model of indoor air quality in an underground space. Korean Journal of 
Chemical Engineering, 2010, 27 (6), 1675-1680. 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks to Energy and Buildings 
77
[103] Skön, J-P., Johansson, M., Raatikainen, M., Leiviskä, K., Kolehmainen M. Modelling 
indoor air carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration using Neural Network. International 
Journal of Environmental Chemical ecological geological and geophysical 
engineering, 2012, 6 (1), 37-41. 
[104] Das, P., Shrubsole, C., Jones, B., Hamilton, I., Chalabi, Z., Davies, M., Mavrogianni, 
A., Taylor, J. Using probabilistic sampling-based sensitivity analyses for indoor air 
quality modeling. Building and Environment, 2014, 78, 171-182. 
[105] Challoner, A., Pilla, F., Gill, L. Prediction of indoor air exposure from outdoor air 
quality using an artificial Neural Network model for inner city commercial buildings. 
Int J Environ Res Public Health, 2015, 12 (12), 15233-15253. 
[106] Mok, K.M., Tam, S.C. Short-term prediction of SO2 concentration in Macau with 
Artificial Neural Networks. Energy and Buildings, 1998, 28, 279-286. 
[107] Zhou, H., Cen, K., Fan, J. Modeling and optimization of the NOx emission 
characteristics of a tangentially fired boiler with artificial neural networks. Energy, 
2004, 29, 167-83. 
[108] Sayin, C., Ertunc, H.M., Hosoz, M., Kilicaslan, I., Canakci, M. Performance and 
exhaust emissions of a gasoline engine using artificial neural network. Applied Thermal 
Engineering, 2007, 27, 46-54. 
[109] Sipöcz, N., Tobiesen, F.A., Assadi, M. The use of Artificial Neural Network models 
for CO2 capture plants. Applied Energy, 2011, 88, 2368-2376 
[110] Pahlavan, R., Omid, M., Akram, A. Energy input-output analysis and application of 
artificial neural networks for predicting greenhouse basil production. Energy, 2012, 37, 
171-176. 
[111] Khoshnevisan, B., Rafiee, S., Omid, M., Yousefi, M., Movahedi, M. Modeling of 
energy consumption and GHG (greenhouse gas) emissions in wheat production in 
Esfahan province of Iran using Artificial Neural Networks. Energy, 2013, 52, 333-338. 
[112] Roldán-Blay, C., Escrivá-Escrivá, G., Álvarez-Bel, C., Roldán-Porta, C., Rodríguez-
García, J. Upgrade of an artificial neural network prediction method for electrical 
consumption forecasting using an hourly temperature curve model. Energy and 
Buildings, 2013, 60, 38-46. 
[113] Joo, S., Yoon, J., Kim, J., Lee, M., Yoon, Y. NOx emissions characteristics of the 
partially premixed combustion of H2/CO/CH4 syngas using artificial neural networks. 
Applied Thermal Engineering, 2015, 80, 436-444. 
[114] Mohandes, M., Rehman, S., Halawani, T.O. Estimation of global solar radiation using 
Artificial Neural Networks. Renewable Energy, 1998, 14, 179-184. 
[115] Al-Alawi, S.M., Al-Hinai, H.A. An ANN-based approach for predicting global 
radiation in locations with no direct measurement instrumentation. Renewable Energy, 
1998. 14 (1-4), 199-204. 
[116] Dorvlo, A.S.S., Jervase, J.A., Al-Lawati, A. Solar radiation estimation using Artificial 
Neural Networks. Applied Energy, 2002, 71 (4), 307-319. 
[117] Reddy, K.S., Ranjan, M. Solar resource estimation using Artificial Neural Networks 
and comparison with other correlation models. Energy Conversion and Management, 
2003, 44 (15), 2519-2530. 
[118] Sözen, A., Arcaklioglu, E., Özalp, M., Kanit, E.G. Use of Artificial Neural Networks 
for mapping of solar potential in Turkey. Applied Energy, 2004, 77, 273-286. 

Cinzia Buratti, Domenico Palladino and Francesco Cristarella Orestano 
78
[119] Çam, E., Arcaklioglu, E., Çavuşoglu, A., Akbiyik, B. A classification mechanism for 
determining average wind speed and power in several regions of Turkey using 
Artificial Neural Networks. Renewable Energy, 2005, 30, 227-239. 
[120] Tymvios, F.S., Jacovides, C.P., Michaelides, S.C., Scouteli, C. Comparative study of 
Ångström’s and artificial neural networks’ methodologies in estimating global solar 
radiation. Solar Energy, 2005, 78, (6), 752-762. 
[121] Alam, S., Kaushik, S.C., Garg, S.N. Computation of beam solar radiation at normal 
incidence using artificial Neural Network. Renewable Energy, 2006, 31, 1483-1491. 
[122] Bilgili, M., Sahin, B., Yasar, A. Application of artificial neural networks for the wind 
speed prediction of target station using reference stations data. Renewable Energy, 
2007, 32, 2350-2360. 
[123] Mubiru, J. Predicting total solar irradiation values using Artificial Neural Networks. 
Renewable Energy, 2008, 33, 2329-233. 
[124] Wan, K.K.W., Tang, H.L., Yang, L., Lam, J.C. An analysis of thermal and solar zone 
radiation models using an Angstrom-Prescott equation and artificial neural networks. 
Energy, 2008, 33, 1115-1127. 
[125] Bosch, J.L., López, G., Batlles, F.J. Daily solar irradiation estimation over a 
mountainous area using artificial neural networks. Renewable Energy, 2008, 33, 1622-
1628. 
[126] Mubiru, J., Banda, E.J.K.B. Estimation of monthly average daily global solar 
irradiation using Artificial Neural Networks. Solar Energy, 2008, 82 (2), 181-187. 
[127] Jiang, Y. Computation of monthly mean daily global solar radiation in China using 
artificial neural networks and comparison with other empirical models. Energy, 2009, 
34, 1276-1283. 
[128] Fadare, D.A. Modelling of solar energy potential in Nigeria using an artificial neural 
network model. Applied Energy, 2009, 86, 1410-1422. 
[129] Şenkal, O., Kuleli, T. Estimation of solar radiation over Turkey using artificial neural 
network and satellite data. Applied Energy, 2009, 86, 1222-1228. 
[130] Alam, S., Kaushik, S.C., Garg, S.N. Assessment of diffuse solar energy under general 
sky condition using artificial neural network. Applied Energy, 2009, 86, 554-564. 
[131] Cadenas, E., Rivera, W. Short term wind speed forecasting in La Venta, Oaxaca, 
México, using artificial neural networks. Renewable Energy, 2009, 34, 274-278. 
[132] Azadeh, A., Maghsoudi, A.,Sohrabkhani, S. An integrated artificial neural networks 
approach for predicting global radiation. Energy Conversion and Management, 2009, 
50 (6), 1497-1505.  
[133] Benghanem, M., Mellit, A., Alamri, S.N. ANN-based modelling and estimation of 
daily global solar radiation data: A case study. Energy Conversion and Management, 
2009, 50 (7), 1644-1655.  
[134] Şenkal, O. Modeling of solar radiation using remote sensing and artificial neural 
network in Turkey. Energy, 2010, 35, 4795-4801. 
[135] Rahimikhoob, A. Estimating global solar radiation using artificial neural network and 
air temperature data in a semi-arid environment. Renewable Energy, 2010, 35, 2131-
2135. 
[136] Li, G., Shi, J. On comparing three artificial neural networks for wind speed forecasting. 
Applied Energy, 2010, 87, 2313-2320. 

Applications of Artificial Neural Networks to Energy and Buildings 
79
[137] Fadare, D.A. The application of artificial neural networks to mapping of wind speed 
profile for energy application in Nigeria. Applied Energy, 2010, 87, 934-942. 
[138] Behrang, M.A., Assareh, E., Ghanbarzadeh, A., Noghrehabadi, A.R. The potential of 
different artificial neural network (ANN) techniques in daily global solar radiation 
modeling based on meteorological data. Solar Energy, 2010, 84 (8), 1468-1480.  
[139] Leal, S.S., Tíba, C., Piacentini, R. Daily UV radiation modeling with the usage of 
statistical correlations and artificial neural networks. Renewable Energy, 2011, 36, 
3337-3344. 
[140] Janjai, S., Plaon, P. Estimation of sky luminance in the tropics using artificial neural 
networks: Modeling and performance comparison with the CIE model. Applied Energy, 
2011, 88, 840-847. 
[141] Liu, H., Chen, C., Tian, H.Q., Li, Y.-F. A hybrid model for wind speed prediction 
using empirical mode decomposition and artificial neural networks. Renewable Energy, 
2012, 48, 545-556. 
[142] Notton, G., Paoli, C., Vasileva, S., Nivet, M.L., Canaletti, J.L., Cristofari, C. 
Estimation of hourly global solar irradiation on tilted planes from horizontal one using 
artificial neural networks. Energy, 2012, 39, 166-179. 
[143] Philippopoulos, K., Deligiorgi, D. Application of artificial neural networks for the 
spatial estimation of wind speed in a coastal region with complex topography. 
Renewable Energy, 2012, 38, 75-82. 
[144] Guo, Z., Zhao, W., Lu, H., Wang, J. Multi-step forecasting for wind speed using a 
modified EMD-based artificial neural network model. Renewable Energy, 2012, 37, 
241-249. 
[145] Linares-Rodriguez, A., Ruiz-Arias, J.A., Pozo-Vazquez, D., Tovar-Pescador, J. An 
artificial neural network ensemble model for estimating global solar radiation from 
Meteosat satellite images. Energy, 2013, 61, 636-645. 
[146] Amrouche, B., Le Pivert, X. Artificial neural network based daily local forecasting for 
global solar radiation. Applied Energy, 2014, 130, 333-341. 
[147] Dahmani, K., Dizene, R., Notton, G., Paoli, C., Voyant, C., Nivet, M.L. Estimation of 
5-min time-step data of tilted solar global irradiation using ANN (Artificial Neural 
Network) model. Energy, 2014, 70, 374-381. 
[148] Hejase, H.A.N., Al-Shamisi, M.H., Assi, A.H. Modeling of global horizontal irradiance 
in the United Arab Emirates with artificial neural networks. Energy, 2014, 77, 542-552. 
[149] Papantoniou S., Kolokotsa D. Prediction of outdoor air temperature using neural 
networks: Application in 4 European cities. Energy and buildings, 2016, 114, 72-79.  
[150] Kazanasmaz, T., Günaydin, M., Binol, S. Artificial Neural Networks to predict 
daylight illuminance in office buildings. Building and Environment, 2009, 44 (8), 
1751-1757. 
[151] Wong, S.L., Wan, K.K.W., Lam, T.N.T. Artificial neural networks for energy analysis 
of office buildings with daylighting. Applied Energy, 2010, 87, 551-557. 
[152] Gao, Y., Lin, Y., Sun, Y. A wireless sensor network based on the novel concept of an 
I-matrix to achieve high-precision lighting control. Building and Environment, 2013, 
70, 223-231. 
[153] Pizzuti, S., Annunziato, M., Moretti, F. Smart street lighting management. Energy 
Efficiency, 2013, 6, 607-616. 

Cinzia Buratti, Domenico Palladino and Francesco Cristarella Orestano 
80
[154] Kialashaki, A., Reisel, J.R. Modeling of the energy demand of the residential sector in 
the United States using regression models and artificial neural networks. Applied 
Energy, 2013, 108, 271-280. 
[155] Mavromatidis, G., Acha, S. Shah, N. Diagnostic tools of energy performance for 
supermarkets using Artificial Neural Network algorithms. Energy and Buildings, 2013, 
62, 304-314. 
[156] Fonseca, R.W.D., Didoné, E.L. Pereira, F.O.R. Using artificial neural networks to 
predict the impact of daylighting on building final electric energy requirements. Energy 
and Buildings, 2013, 61, 31-38. 
[157] Wang Z., Tan, Y.K. Illumination control of LED systems based on Neural Network 
model and energy optimization algorithm. Energy and Buildings. 2013, 62, 514-521. 
[158] Tran D., Tan Y.K. Sensorless illumination control of a networked LED-lighting system 
using feedforward Neural Network. IEEE transactions on industrial electronics, 2014, 
61 (4), 2113-2121. 
[159] Şahin, M., Oguz, Y., Büyüktümtürk, F. ANN-based estimation of time-dependent 
energy loss in lighting systems. Energy and Buildings, 2016, 116, 455-467. 
[160] Kim, W., Jeon, Y., Kim, Y. Simulation-based optimization of an integrated daylighting 
and HVAC system using the design of experiments method. Applied Energy, 2016, 
162, 666-674. 
[161] Nannariello J., Fricke F. The prediction of reverberation time using neural network 
analysis. Applied Acoustics, 1999, 58, 305-325. 
[162] Nannariello, J., Hodgson, M., Fricke, F.R. Neural network predictions of speech levels 
in university classrooms. Applied Acoustics, 2001, 62, 749-767. 
[163] Fora-Moncada, A., Gibbs, B. Prediction of sound insulation at low frequencies using 
artificial neural networks, Building Acoustics, 2002, 9, 49-71. 
[164] Xu, J., Nannariello, J., Fricke, F.R. Predicting and optimising the airborne sound 
transmission of floor-ceiling constructions using computational intelligence. Applied 
Acoustics, 2004, 65, 693-704. 
[165] Mungiole, M., Wilson, D.K. Prediction of outdoor sound transmission loss with an 
artificial neural network. Applied Acoustics, 2006, 67, 324-345. 
[166] Too, G.P.J., Chen, S.R., Hwang, S. Inversion for acoustic impedance of a wall by using 
artificial neural network. Applied Acoustics, 2007, 68, 4, 377-389. 
[167] Li F.F., Cox T.J. A neural network model for speech intelligibility quantification. 
Applied Soft Computing, 2007, 7, 145–155. 
[168] Yoon J.H., Yang I.H., Jeong J.E., Park S.G., Oh J.E. Reliability improvement of a 
sound quality index for a vehicle HVAC system using a regression and neural network 
model. Applied Acoustics, 2012, 73, 1099-1103. 
[169] Torija, A.J., Ruiz, D.P., Ramos-Ridao, A.F. Use of back-propagation neural networks 
to predict both level and temporal-spectral composition of sound pressure in urban 
sound environments. Building and Environment, 2012, 52, 45-56. 
[170] Buratti C., Barelli L., Moretti E. Wooden windows: Sound insulation evaluation by 
means of artificial neural networks. Applied Acoustics, 2013, 74, 740-745. 
[171] Romero V.P., Maffei L., Brambilla G., Ciaburro G. Modelling the soundscape quality 
of urban waterfronts by artificial neural networks. Applied Acoustics, 2016, 111, 121-
128. 

In: Artificial Neural Networks: New Research 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-964-6 
Editor: Gayle Cain 
© 2017 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4  
 
 
 
APPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORK 
TO PREDICT BIODIESEL FUEL PROPERTIES  
FROM FATTY ACID CONSTITUENTS 
 
 
Solomon O. Giwa* 
Department of Agricultural and Mechanical Engineering,  
College of Engineering and Environmental Studies,  
Olabisi Onabanjo University, Ibogun Campus, Ifo, Ogun State, Nigeria 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Biodiesel is generally accepted as an alternative fuel to fossil-derived diesel and has 
been produced from numerous oil-based biological sources. Determination of fuel 
properties of biodiesel has mainly being experimental which in most cases is expensive, 
time consuming and strenuous. These fuel properties are strongly linked to fatty acid 
(FA) composition of the oil used in biodiesel production. This paper presents the 
application of artificial neural network (ANN) in predicting selected biodiesel fuel 
properties (cetane number (CN), flash point (FP), kinematic viscosity (KV) and density) 
from the FA compositions of the oils contained in raw materials employed in biodiesel 
production. ANNs are nonlinear computer algorithms which are widely and successfully 
applied in many fields of study in simulating complex problems. Palmitic, stearic, oleic, 
linoleic and linolenic acids were observed to be the principal FAs in oils gathered from 
58 feedstocks sourced from in literature. FAs outside the five prominent FAs were 
embedded into them based on their levels of saturation and unsaturation, and were used 
as inputs in training the networks. Neural network toolbox in MATLAB® (2013b) was 
employed in this study. Data of FAs and fuel properties were used in training CN, KV, 
FP and density networks based on back propagation algorithm. Levenberg–Marquardt 
algorithm, logsig (hidden layer) and purelin (out layer) were used as training algorithm 
and transfer functions, respectively. Different architectures (5-6-4 (CN and FP); 5-7-4 
(KV); 6-5-4 (density)) were employed in training the networks due to variation in the 
number of neurons in both the input (temperature as additional parameter) and hidden 
                                                           
* Corresponding Author Email: sologiwa2002@yahoo.com. 

S. O. Giwa 
82
layers. In this study, the networks achieved high accuracy for the prediction of CN, KV, 
FP and density with correlation coefficients of 0.962, 0.943, 0.987 and 0.985, 
respectively. This result indicates good agreement between the predicted results and the 
experimental values, and those of previous studies found in literature. Errors associated 
with the prediction performance of the networks were estimated using statistical methods 
and were found to be within satisfactory range of accuracy. Finally, this study shows that 
the networks via ANN modelling can be alternative methods in predicting CN, KV, FP 
and density from FA compositions outside the intricate and time-consuming standard test 
methods. 
 
Keywords: artificial neural network, fatty acids, biodiesel, model, fuel properties 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
The use of energy is a fundamental requirement for human existence and indeed the 
mainstay of industries, transportation fuel, electricity generation, food and agricultural 
production [1]. The major source of energy needs in the world is from petrochemical sources 
(coal, natural gases, hydroelectricity) and nuclear energy [2]. With the exception of 
hydroelectricity and nuclear energy, all other energy source is finite and can be totally 
consumed in the nearest future. Few countries of the world have crude oil deposits with the 
demand for this energy source increasing speedily. Petroleum fuel, which is fossil-based fuel 
is faced with the gradual depletion of petroleum reserve [1, 3], increase in the price of 
petroleum-based fuels, emission of more exhaust which is environmentally unfriendly, and 
increase in global warming [4]. Diesel fuel has significant and greater importance in the 
industrial, transportation and power generating sectors of the economy of developed and 
developing countries. 
Alternative source of fuels has been researched to limit the problems associated with 
petroleum-based fuel. Biodiesel has been considered as one of the alternative fuels to be used 
as a good replacement for diesel fuel [5, 6] in compression ignition engines for several 
reasons, among which is its production from a renewable source (vegetable oils (VOs) and 
animal fats). Some of the advantages of biodiesel usage in compression ignition engine 
compared to petro-diesel include; better lubricating property, higher flash point which makes 
it safer, it is biodegradable, non-toxic, lower exhaust emission, and very low or no sulfur 
content [2, 7]. 
Biodiesel is the mono-alkyl esters of long chain fatty acids (FAs) derived from renewable 
feedstocks for use in compression ignition engines [8, 9]. Simply put, it is the diesel produced 
from biological products. Biodiesel is prepared by the chemical reaction of oil-based material 
(majorly VO or animal fat) with an alcohol in the presence of a catalyst (sodium (NaOH) or 
potassium hydroxide (KOH)). Biodiesel can be used alone or blended with certain percent of 
diesel and can also be used as a low carbon alternative to heating oil. 
Of recent, the use of organic materials from biological origin has become more attractive 
because they are renewable resources and offer environmental benefits. Biodiesel is one 
alternative fuel that is made from VO or fats, and has to meet the quality standards 
established by both the American Society for Testing and Material (ASTM) D 6751 and 
European standard (EN 14214) [2, 7]. Biodiesel is accepted as a renewable and alternative 
fuel to petroleum-based diesel. Dr. Rudolf Diesel demonstrated in 1900, the concept of using 

Applications of Artificial Neural Network to Predict Biodiesel Fuel Properties … 
83
VO as an engine fuel when he started an engine at the World Exhibition in Paris using peanut 
oil as fuel [1]. Biodiesel is produced from various sources such as VOs (edible and non-edible 
oils), food processing waste (waste cooking oils, animal fat (tallow, lard, yellow grease, 
chicken fat)), industrial residues, algae, halophytes (Salicomia bigelovii), sewage sludge, 
etc.), which are renewable in nature [8, 10]. Some biodiesel feedstocks and their classification 
are given in Table 1. Experts refer to the process of biodiesel production as a closed loop 
carbon cycle (carbon neutral).  
 
Table 1. Select biodiesel feedstocks and their categories [12] 
 
Category  
Classification  
Feedstocks 
1. Oilseeds 
C: 
Soybean, rapeseed/canola, sunflower, palm, coconut 
A: 
False fax, safflower, sesame, marula, pumpkin, African 
peer sea, Sclerocarya birrea, Terminalia catappa L., 
yellow nut-sedge tuber, rice bran 
A: 
Jatropha, karanja, mahua, linseed, rubber seed, cotton 
seed, neem, camelina, putranjiva, tobacco, polanga, 
cardoon, deccan hemp, castor, jojoba, moringa, poon, 
koroch seed, desert date, eruca sativa gars, sea mango, 
pilu, crambe, syringa, milkweed, field pennycress, 
stillingia, radish Ethiopian mustard, tomato seed, kusum, 
cuphea, camellia, paradise, treminalia, michelia 
champaca, garcinia indica, zanthoxylum bungeanum 
2. Animal fats 
C: 
Beef tallow, pork lard 
 
A: 
Waste salmon, melon bug, sorghum bug, chicken fat  
3.Waste 
materials 
C: 
Cooking oil, frying oil 
 
A: 
Vegetable oil soap stocks, acid oils, tall oil, dried 
distiller’s grains (DDG), pomace oil 
4. Algae 
A: 
Botryococcus braunii, Chlorella sp., Chrolella vulgaris, 
Crypthecodiniu chonii, Cylindrotheca sp., Dunaliella 
primolecta, Dunaliella salina, Isochrysis sp., 
Haematococcus pluvialis, Monallanthus salina, 
Muriellopsis sp. Nannochloris sp., Neochloris 
oleoabundans, Nitzschia sp., Phaeodactylum tricornutum, 
Porphyridium cruentum Schizochytrium sp., Spirulina, 
Arthrospira platensis, Tetraselmis sueica 
Note: A = Alternative; C = Conventional. 
 
Biodiesel usually is produced by a process known as transesterification. It is basically the 
conversion of feedstock that contains oil into methyl or ethyl esters. Biodiesel is produced 
majorly by the chemical reaction of three compounds which are the triglycerides (oil) from 
the feedstock to be used, an alcohol which can be methanol or ethanol and a catalyst (acidic, 
alkaline or enzymic catalyst). In a transesterification or alcoholysis reaction, one mole of 
triglyceride reacts with three moles of alcohol (molar ratio of methanol to vegetable oil of 
3:1) to form one mole of glycerol and three moles of the respective FA alkyl esters [2, 11]. 
Figure 1 shows the chemical reaction of triglyceride and methanol to produce glycerol and 

S. O. Giwa 
84
fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs) known as biodiesel. The main purpose for its production is 
to serve as an alternative fuel to reduce the dependence of nations on petroleum which over 
the years has been the major source of energy to the world at large. Biodiesel is produced 
from the various feedstocks which are readily available in our immediate environment. The 
share of biodiesel production in the world is presented in Figure 2. Also, the 
transesterification process is presented in Figure 3. 
  
Triglyceride  +  ROH                                    diglyceride + RCOOR1                                     (1) 
 
Diglyceride  +  ROH                                     monoglyceride + RCOOR2                                (2) 
 
Monoglyceride  +  ROH                               glycerol + RCOOR3 
(3) 
Figure 1. Chemistry of transesterification [13]. 
 
 
Figure 2. The top five biodiesel producers in 2006 [14]. 
 
Figure 3. Alkaline transesterification [14]. 
VO contains 97% of triglycerides and 3% diglycerides and monoglycerides and FAs [15]. 
Triglycerides are esters of three FAs and one glycerol and contain substantial amounts of 
oxygen in its structure [16]. The FAs differ in their carbon chain length and number of double 
bonds which determine the physical characteristics of both FAs and triglycerides [2, 17]. 
Different types of VOs have different types of FAs. The properties of the triglycerides and the 

Applications of Artificial Neural Network to Predict Biodiesel Fuel Properties … 
85
biodiesel fuel are determined by the amounts of each fatty acid that is present in the 
molecules. FAs are designated by two numbers: the first number denotes the total number of 
carbon atoms in the FA and the second is the number of double bonds [18]. When the second 
number is zero (0) it means a saturated acid, otherwise, it is unsaturated. When the number is 
one (1) it is called monounsaturated, if 2 or 3, it is called polyunsaturated. For example, 
C18:1 designates oleic acid which has 18 carbon atoms and one double bond. Likewise, 
C16:0 denote 16 carbon atoms with no double bond, and C18:2 means 18 carbon with two 
double bonds. Table 2 shows the names of the common FAs, and their molecular formulas.  
It is an established fact that the chemical structures and compositions of FAs contained in 
oils significantly influence biodiesel fuel properties [2]. The physical and chemical fuel 
properties of biodiesel basically depend on the FAs distribution of the triglycerides used for a 
particular biodiesel production. The FA compositions in VOs result in the properties of 
biodiesels such as viscosity, flash point, high-heating values, etc. [19, 20]. The properties of 
the various individual fatty esters contained in a biodiesel determine the overall fuel 
properties of the biodiesel fuel [21]. The properties of the various fatty esters are determined 
by the structural features of the FA and the alcohol moieties that comprise a fatty ester. 
Structural features that influence the physical and fuel properties of a fatty ester molecule are 
chain length, degree of unsaturation, and branching of the chain [21]. 
 
Table 2. Chemical structure of some common fatty acids [18, 26] 
 
Fatty Acid  
Chemical Structure 
Caprylic (8:0)  
CH3(CH2)6COOH 
Capric (10:0) 
CH3(CH2)8COOH 
Lauric (12:0)  
CH3(CH2)10COOH 
Myristic (14:0)  
CH3(CH2)12COOH 
Palmitic (16:0) 
CH3(CH2)14COOH 
Palmitoleic (16:1)  
CH3(CH2)7CH=CH(CH2)5COOH 
Stearic (18:0)  
CH3(CH2)16COOH 
Oleic (18:1)  
CH3(CH2)7CH=CH(CH2)7COOH 
Linoleic (18:2) 
CH3(CH2)4CH=CHCH2CH=CH(CH2)7COOH 
Linolenic (18:3)  
CH3CH2CH=CHCH2CH=CHCH2CH=CH(CH2)7COOH 
Arachidic (20:0)  
CH3(CH2)18COOH 
Gadoleic (20:1)  
CH3(CH2)7CH=CH(CH2)9COOH 
Behenic (22:0)  
CH3(CH2)20COOH 
Erucic (22:1)  
CH3(CH2)7CH=CH(CH2)11COOH 
Gadolenic (22:2)  
CH3(CH2)4CH=CHCH2CH=CH(CH2)11COOH 
 
Various VOs and animal fats have been used in the production of biodiesel with different 
FA compositions which have led to the variation in their fuel properties. Standards have been 
set by different countries regarding the fuel properties of biodiesel that must be met before it 
can be used as fuel. The parameters used to define the quality of biodiesel can be divided in 
two groups. One of them is also used for mineral diesel while the other describes the 
composition and purity of fatty esters. The former includes, for example: density, viscosity, 
flash point, sulphur %, conradson carbon residue, sulphate ash %, cetane number, and acid 
number according to various biodiesel standards [22, 23]. The latter comprises, for example, 

S. O. Giwa 
86
methanol, free glycerol, total glycerol, phosphorus contents, water and esters content as well 
as others properties described. Fernando et al. [24] described complete reaction to mono-alkyl 
esters, removal of free glycerine, catalysts, alcohol, and FFAs in biodiesel as important issues 
of the quality control. Therefore, standards that limit the amount of contaminants in biodiesel 
fuel are necessary. At this point, it is worth noting that the type (chain length, degree of 
unsaturation and presence of other chemical functions) and concentration of fatty esters as 
well as the structure of the esters moiety derived from the alcohol have a significant effect on 
biodiesel properties, which also influences its storage and oxidation [21, 25]. 
The experimental methods are mostly used to determine fuel properties of biodiesel after 
they have been produced for usage in compression ignition engine. This experimental 
determination of biodiesel fuel properties has to be conducted in accordance with standard 
test methods which have been provided for in different standards world over. These properties 
differ from one biodiesel to another because they are produced from different feedstocks 
which have different FA compositions. These experimental methods provide good and high 
degree of accuracy results. However, different test methods are used for determining fuel 
properties experimentally.  
Owing to high cost, time constraints and availability of standard equipment to carry out 
biodiesel fuel properties in line with standard test methods, some researchers have developed 
mathematical models which can be used to a great extent coupled with a high level of 
accuracy in predicting the properties of biodiesel. This is based on the fact that there are very 
strong connections between the properties of biodiesel and the chemical constituents of the oil 
[2]. Several studies have reported the formulation of mathematical equations to establish that 
linear relationships exist between some fuel properties while some are non-linear. Demirbas 
[27] developed mathematical relationships between higher heating value (HHV) and 
kinematic viscosity (KV), KV and density, flash point (FP) and KV, HHV and density, and 
HHV and FP for VOs (22 feedstocks) and biodiesels (14 feedstocks) from experimental 
values of these properties. An empirical formula was developed by Krisnangkura et al. [28] 
for the prediction of biodiesel KV at various temperatures using the viscosity – 
thermodynamic parameters relationship which is FA composition dependent. Equations were 
established for short chain (C6:0 - C12:0), saturated (C12:0 - C18:0) and unsaturated FAMEs, 
respectively. Also, a study reported the use of empirical formulas for predicting six biodiesel 
fuel properties (viscosity, CN, FP, CP, PP and cold filter plugging point) from the fatty ester 
composition of biodiesel [29]. In addition, Nadai et al. [30] reported the use of ANN and 
multivatiate techniques in predicting CN from the fatty ester composition of biodiesel. ANN 
was found to predict with better accuracy than the multivariate methods. Wakil et al. [10, 31] 
can be checked for more mathematical equations for predicting fuel properties of various 
biodiesel feedstocks. 
The use of chemometrics (application of multivariate analysis in chemistry) to predict 
biodiesel fuel properties have been studied to an extent. Cheenkachorn [20] used statistical 
model and artificial neural network (ANN) to determine the viscosity and cetane number 
(CN) of biodiesel. The statistical model (regression) developed made use of best subset 
method to fairly predict viscosity and CN of biodiesels from their FA compositions. The 
viscosity prediction was from four unsaturated FA while the prediction of cetane number was 
from four FAs with stearic acid being the only saturated acid. Also, Bamgboye and Hansen 
[32] predicted the CN of biodiesel from the FAME composition of some VOs. The equation 
developed was able to predict CN with 88% accuracy, which is higher than the 62.6% 

Applications of Artificial Neural Network to Predict Biodiesel Fuel Properties … 
87
achieved by [20]. The performance of linear and non‐linear models for predicting biodiesel 
properties (density, kinematic viscosity, water content, and methanol content) using near 
infrared spectra was studied and ANN model was found to be superior to all the linear and 
remaining non‐linear techniques investigated [33]. Also, in a work to compare performance of 
16 selected approaches for the prediction of biodiesel fuel properties (density, viscosity, 
methanol content, and water concentration), response surface methodology and ANN were 
found to accurately predict the experimental results [34]. In addition, CN of biodiesel was 
predicted using different multivariate methods [30]. 
Artificial intelligence systems are extensively used as a technology for solving complex 
and ill-defined problems. Neural networks are types of artificial intelligence systems aimed at 
imitating the way the human brain works. They are nonlinear information processing devices, 
which are built from interconnected elementary processing devices (neurons). They can learn 
from examples or collected data, are fault tolerant in handling noisy and incomplete data sets, 
are able to solve non-linear problems or data sets and after being trained has the ability to 
predict and generalize at high speeds and accuracy [35].  
ANN has been applied to various areas of engine performance, emission, fuels 
(conventional and alternative) and vibrations. Dehkordi et al. [36] and Manieniyan and 
Sivaprakasam, [37] used ANN for vibration modelling of diesel engine with various 
proportion of bioethanol-diesel and biodiesel-diesel mix, respectively. Garg et al. [38] utilized 
ANN to optimize engine performance via reducing vehicle fuel consumption and emission. 
ANN modelling of a diesel engine to predict the torque, power, brake-specific fuel 
consumption, and pollutant emissions (carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, 
total hydrocarbons, and filter smoke number) was reported by [39]. Kumar et al. 2013 [40] 
employed ANNs to predict engine performance and emission characteristics of a single 
cylinder 4-stroke compression ignition engine using Honge oil methyl ester-diesel blends. 
Recently, numerous authors reported the prediction of several biodiesel and biodiesel-
diesel blend properties (kinematic viscosity, density, flash point, methanol content, ester 
content, cetane number, water content, iodine value, oxidative stability etc.), biodiesel 
production process, engine performance and emission characterization, and biodiesel 
feedstock using ANN [20, 33, 34, 40 – 45]. It was observed that most of these studies used 
experimental values to predict the desired variables using ANN while few predicted the target 
(experimental) parameters from the FA constituents of biodiesel. 
Subject to the aforementioned, Ramadhas et al. [43] have successfully developed a multi-
layer feed forward ANN to predict the CN of biodiesel using 10 feedstocks. ANN was 
employed to estimate the density of pure palm oil-based methyl ester biodiesel [46]. A study 
used ANN model (with 23 variables including 11 FAMEs and 10 feedstocks) to predict 
kinematic viscosity of biodiesel as a function of both temperature and chemical constituents 
[47]. They found that ANN was able to predict to high accuracy the relationship between 
biodiesel chemical composition and viscosity at different temperatures. Also, CN of biodiesel 
was predicted from fatty ester composition (10 FAMEs) of 63 feedstocks using ANN model 
and multiple linear regression (MLR) method [48]. Their result revealed that ANN model 
predicted CN from FA composition with better accuracy than that of MLR. De Sousa et al. 
[49] predicted iodine value of biodiesel from 98 samples of FA esters with 13 FAMEs as 
input parameters using ANN model. The model developed showed a very good correlation 
between the FA esters and iodine value. 

S. O. Giwa 
88
Despite the establishment of the fact that FA profile of biodiesel significantly dictates the 
fuel properties of biodiesel, studies on ANN model for predicting biodiesel properties are 
scanty, especially, the prediction of more than one fuel property of biodiesel from FA 
compositions. This paper presented the application of ANN modelling to predict four 
important biodiesel fuel properties (cetane number, kinematic viscosity, flash point and 
density) from their FA constituents. The five predominant FAs (stearic, palmitic, oleic, 
linoleic and linolenic) present in most oils were used as input variables in developing the 
predictive model. 
 
 
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
2.1. Data Collection and Selection 
 
Experimental data on fuel properties of biodiesel and their FA or FAME compositions 
from 58 feedstocks used in this work were collected from literature. Since the fuel properties 
of biodiesel is not affected by transesterification process (VO to esters), either the FA or 
FAME constituents of biodiesel were gathered from literature. It is worth noting that the 
experimental data gathered were those that satisfied relevant biodiesel standards. For 
biodiesel feedstocks that featured more than once in order to obtain a complete data, average 
values of the data collected for the FA/FAME composition and fuel properties were utilized 
in this study. 
Our personal observation of the entire data on FA/FAME profiles showed the prevalence 
of five constituents which are: palmitic (C16:0), stearic (C18:0), oleic (C18:1), linoleic 
(C18:2) and linolenic (C18:3) acids. The chain lengths of carbon for all these acids are 
eighteen except for palmitic acid with a carbon chain of sixteen. Both the palmitic and stearic 
acids are saturated acids while the other three are unsaturated as indicated by the bonds as 
provided in Table 2. Oleic is monounsaturated (single bond), linoleic acid is di-unsaturated 
(double bond) and linolenic is tri-unsaturated (triple bond).  
 
 
2.2. Modification of Fatty Acids  
 
In this study, the carbon chains of FAs garnered from literature were found to be in the 
range of 6 to 22 carbons. The list of feedstocks whose FA compositions have been modified 
for this present work is given in the Appendix. The modification of FAs is subject to the five 
predominant FAs earlier mentioned. In order to consider the FAs outside palmitic (C16:0), 
stearic (C18:0), oleic (C18:1), linoleic (C18:2) and linolenic (C18:3) acids, the values (in %) 
of all saturated acids with carbon chain less than 16 were added to the percent value of 
palmitic acid while the saturated acids with carbon chain more than 18 were added to that of 
stearic acid. Similarly, percent value of single bond acids with carbon chain more than 18 
were added to that of oleic acid and those with double and triple bonds were added to linoleic 
and linolenic acid, respectively. Also, the percent amounts of FAs with four, five and six 
bonds were added to those of oleic, linoleic acid and linolenic acid, respectively. 
 

Applications of Artificial Neural Network to Predict Biodiesel Fuel Properties … 
89
2.3. ANN Components and Architecture  
 
ANN model consists of three layers: input, layer and output layer. These layers are 
connected to each other with the input layer receiving the input data outside the network and 
sending it to the hidden layer. The hidden layer consists of interconnected transfer functions 
for adjusting the weights on the connections. Results from the hidden layer are sent to the 
output layer as the outputs. The three layers are connected to each other with the aid of 
neurons which contain several functions and variables such as weights, non-linear transfer 
functions, and methods of summing up all inputs and bias values. The sum of the products of 
all the inputs multiplying the weights and the bias values passes through a non-linear transfer 
function as the output of each neuron. The determination of neuron numbers in the input and 
output layer is subject to the nature of the problem. In this study, one input, one hidden and an 
output layer architecture was employed based on knowledge from previous work [45]. The 
topologies used were dependent on the variables to be predicted (output) using ANN. 
 
 
2.4. ANN Modelling 
 
The development and learning of the model were carried out using MATLAB® (2013b). 
The ANN used in this study is the feedforward backpropagation, which is popular and widely 
used in various fields with supervised learning pattern. 
 
2.4.1. Modeled Parameters 
For this study, the five input variables (palmitic, stearic, oleic and linoleic acids) and four 
output variables (CN, KV, flash point and density) were used. In modelling the density, 
temperature was used as an additional input variable to make its input variables six. After 
modification of the FAs, the input variables were linked to the output variables (fuel 
properties). Of the 58 feedstocks employed in this study, 43, 49, 34 and 23 feedstocks were 
used in modelling CN, KV, FP and density, respectively (see Appendix). 
 
2.4.2. ANN Training 
ANN are trained to learn simple and complex association between two or more variables 
or data sets. Training method is important in developing an ANN model as the weights and 
biases are adjusted to reduce the difference between the output (predicted) and the actual 
(experimental) values. The network is adjusted until the output matches its target. In order to 
monitor this process, the mean squared error (MSE) is usually used as the performance 
function. In this work, a back propagation learning algorithm was used to train the network. 
Logsig and purelin transfer functions were also used in the hidden and output layer, 
respectively, based on a previous study [45]. The transfer functions’ formula is given in 
Equations 1 and 2. A network with the least output error is adjudged to be the best and this 
involves varying the network parameters such as neuron, epoch, maximum failure, hidden 
layer etc. [45, 50]. Usually, in achieving a good network, many data sets (input/target pairs) 
are required in training the network. The determination of the optimum number of neurons in 
the hidden layer follows no definite rule but generally through trial and error [50]. 
The data available for each output parameter were randomly divided into three sets of 
data: training data (70%), validation data (15%) and testing data (15%). Each set of data was 

S. O. Giwa 
90
used for the specific purpose such as training, validation and testing. The prevention of over-
training on the training data is a key function performed by the validation data set. Both the 
training and validation data set errors are monitored concurrently as they normally decrease 
as the training proceeds. At the point when the ANN begins to over fit, the error on the 
validation data set starts increasing while the error on the training set continue to decrease. 
Customarily, the training is stopped when the error on the validation data set increases further 
for a predetermined number of iterations. For the test data set, it is usually treated as a hidden 
data set for final testing of the trained ANN. Considering the early stopping method, the 
achieved ANN would have an improved generalization. 
In this paper, the training was carried out using 1,000 epochs with a learning rate of 0.01 
while other parameters were set at default values in the MATLAB® environment. Four to 
eight neurons (for hidden layer) were used in training the networks of which 6, 6, 5 and 7 
neurons for CN, KV, FP and density, respectively, gave the best results. Due to the number of 
data set (feedstock samples) available for training each output variable, different architectures 
were obtained for developing the ANN models. The architecture of the ANN model for CN is 
illustrated in Figure 4.  
The results obtained from the network after training were used to estimate the prediction 
performance of ANN model developed using statistical methods. These include variance (R2), 
mean squared error (MSE), root mean squared error (RMSE), average absolute deviation 
(AAD) and maximum average percent error (MAPE). Formulas to calculate these error 
parameters are given by Equations 3 to 7. It is impressive to note that R and RMSE values 
imply the correlation between the outputs and targets of the networks. 
 
 
Figure 4. The architecture (5:6:4) of CN network. 
  
(1) 

Applications of Artificial Neural Network to Predict Biodiesel Fuel Properties … 
91
 
  
(2) 
 
  
(3) 
 
 
(4) 
 
 
(5) 
 
 
(6) 
 
 
(7) 
 
 
3. RESULT AND DISCUSSION 
 
3.1. Cetane Number Prediction 
 
CN is an important fuel quality parameter which is related to the ignition delay time and 
combustion quality of fuel. The shorter the ignition delay time, the higher the CN and vice 
versa. Engine performance parameters such as combustion, stability, driveability, white 
smoke, noise and emissions of CO and HC are greatly affected by CN. Biodiesel CN depends 
on the feedstock used for its production. The longer the FA carbon chains and the more 
saturated the molecules, the higher the CN [2, 51]. According to Knothe et al. [52], high CNs 
were observed for esters of saturated FAs such as palmitic (C16:0) and stearic (C18:0) acids 
and low CNs have been linked to more highly unsaturated FA components such as the esters 
of linoleic (C18:2) and linolenic (C18:3) acids. Biodiesel has higher CN than conventional 
diesel fuel, which results in higher combustion efficiency [53]. Standards (ASTM D613 and 
ISO 5165) have been established worldwide for CN determination. 
Forty three samples (biodiesel feedstocks) consisting of FA constituents and their 
corresponding experimental CN values were used in training the CN network (see Appendix). 
Of which, 30, seven and six samples are utilized for training, validation and testing, 
respectively. The architecture for training the CN network is 5-6-4 (see Figure 4). The 
regression plots obtained during network training of CN from the FA compositions is 
presented in Figure 5. For each plot, a linear relationship is observed between the predicted 
values (output) and experimental values (target). The coefficient of correlation (R) for the 
performance of CN network is 0.962. This is accompanied with R values of 0.979 (training), 
0.974 (validation) and 0.986 (testing). With the value of R for the CN network performance, 
this shows there is a very strong relationship between the predicted and experimental values 
of CN. The errors between the two sets of values (predicted and experimental) are better 
illustrated using the plot of both the experimental and predicted values of CN against the 

S. O. Giwa 
92
number of samples, as presented in Figure 6. Sample 23 is observed to have the highest 
absolute error (difference between the experimental value and the predicted value) as noticed 
in Figure 6. The comparison of the results (predicted values of CN) obtained from the 
network training with those of the experimental values shows a good relationship between the 
two sets of values (Figure 6).  
 
 
Figure 5. Regression plots for cetane number network. 
 
Figure 6. Predicted and experimental values for CN 
The error estimates associated with the prediction performance of CN network are 1.8892 
(MSE), 1.3745 (RMSE), 0.524 (AAD), R2 (92.54) and MAPE (1.55). These values indicate 

Applications of Artificial Neural Network to Predict Biodiesel Fuel Properties … 
93
that error is very minimal in predicting CN from the FA compositions. The coefficient of 
determination (R2 = 92.54) implies that over 92 percent of the data is used by the network in 
the prediction of CN. The R and R2 values obtained in this work are slightly higher than those 
of previous studies which reported R = 0.9211 and R2 = 85.94 (statistical method), and R = 
0.9563 and R2 = 91.46, (ANN modelling), respectively [32, 48]. This reveals a better 
prediction accuracy via the training of the network and that the results obtained are well in 
range of earlier studies on this subject. 
 
 
3.2. Kinematic Viscosity Prediction 
 
Viscosity is a key fuel property as it measures the ability of a material to flow. The 
atomization of fuel upon injection into the combustion chamber is largely affected by 
viscosity. Fuel with high viscosity has the tendency to cause problems in the engine [21]. The 
viscosity of transesterified oil (biodiesel) is an order of magnitude lower than that of the 
parent oil. KV of numerous FAMEs (pure) have been reported in literature [54]. The KV of 
biodiesel increases with chain length, types of bonding, double bond configuration and 
increasing degree of saturation [18]. ASTM D 445 provides a test method for determining the 
KV of biodiesel and should be between 1.9 and 6.0 mm2/s for the ASTM D6751 standard. For 
EN14214 biodiesel standard a KV range of 3.5-5.0 mm2/s at 40 °C is recommended.  
On modification of the FA composition, 49 feedstocks (including four pure FAs) were 
used in training the KV network. The data used in training this network are given in the 
Appendix and are all within the limits specified by biodiesel standards. 35 data set was used 
for training, seven for validation and seven for testing. The topology of the KV network is 5-
7-4. Figure 7 provides the regression plots for the data sets selected for training, validating, 
testing and performance of KV network. The correlation coefficients between the target 
(experimental) and the output (predicted) values for training, validation, testing and 
performance of the network are 0.968, 0.952, 0.939 and 0.943, respectively. These values 
indicate very strong relationships between the experimental and predicted values. For the 
performance, a regression coefficient of 0.9432 shows good correlation between the 
experimental and predicted values in training the network.  
Figure 8 shows the difference between the experimental values and the predicted values 
of KV as obtained from the network. A good correlation is observed between the 
experimental and predicted values implying an impressive prediction of KV from FA 
constituents of the feedstocks employed in this study. As seen in Figure 8, considerable 
differences (errors) are observed between sample number 5 and 10, and sample number 35 
and 40, of which maximum absolute error is noticed with sample number 8. The error 
associated with the prediction performance of KV network are estimated using statistical 
methods as earlier mentioned. For KV prediction, MSE, RMSE, AAD, R2 and MAPE are 
estimated to be 0.0077, 0.0877, 0.3110, 88.96 and 1.62, respectively. These values are 
relatively low, which is an indication that error is marginal in the prediction of KV from FA 
compositions, except that of R2. The value of R2 (coefficient of determination) seems 
moderately high as it indicates that close to 89 percent of the data is used in predicting KV. 
The R value achieved in this work is slightly lower than the value of 0.9774 recorded in a 
previous study [50]. In this paper, the values of MSE, RMSE and MAPE obtained are lower 
than 0.0099 [50], 0.257 and 5.27, respectively, found in literature [47]. However, the value of 

S. O. Giwa 
94
R2 reported in this paper is fairly lower than the numerical value of 97.8 reported by [47] for 
KV prediction using ANN. From the results aforementioned, the prediction of KV from FA 
compositions seems to be in good agreement with previous studies. 
 
 
Figure 7. Regression plots of kinematic viscosity network. 
 
Figure 8. Predicted and experimental values for KV. 
 

Applications of Artificial Neural Network to Predict Biodiesel Fuel Properties … 
95
 
Figure 9. Regression plots of flash point network. 
 
3.3. Flash Point Prediction 
 
FP is a fuel property defined as the temperature at which the fuel will ignite when 
exposed to a flame or spark. FP is an important parameter when safety of fuel storage and 
transportation is paramount. This temperature is strongly connected to fuel volatility, which is 
vital to starting and warming of an engine. Although the FPs of feedstocks are generally 
reduced via transesterification process, nevertheless they are higher than that of diesel 
irrespective of the nature of biodiesel feedstocks used. The FP of biodiesel can be determined 
using the ASTM D93 test method and should be at least 130°C, which it is higher than that of 
diesel fuel with a value of at least 52°C [24]. This implies that biodiesel is a safer fuel for 
transport purpose than diesel. 
Of the 34 data set (feedstock samples) utilized in training the FP network, 24 data set 
were used in training while five data set each were used for validation and testing (see 
Appendix). A 5-6-4 architecture is used in the FP network using logsig and purelin in the 
hidden and output layer, respectively. The regression plots for the FP network training, 
validation, testing and performance are provided in Figure 9. It can be noticed that a linear 
relationship fitting well into the best fit line exists in each of the regression plots, which 
signifies that a good correlation between the experimental and predicted values is in 
existence. Regression coefficients of 0.991, 0.986, 0.980 and 0.987 are obtained for training, 
validation, testing and performance of the network, respectively. These results are good as 
they reflect strong correlation between the experimental values and the predicted values in 

S. O. Giwa 
96
predicting FP from FA compositions. Figure 10 is presented to understand better the 
agreement between the experimental and predicted values. From Figure 10, the error between 
the values (experimental and predicted) for each sample used in the network training is 
clearly demonstrated and the maximum absolute error is link to sample 26. 
 
 
Figure 10. Predicted and experimental values for FP. 
 
Figure 11. Regression plots of density network. 

Applications of Artificial Neural Network to Predict Biodiesel Fuel Properties … 
97
Due to errors in the results (predicted values) when compared with the experimental 
values, statistical methods of MSE, RMSE, AAD, R2 and MAPE have been used for their 
estimation. In this study, values of 5.3515, 2.3133, 0.0285, 97.48 and 0.960 are calculated for 
MSE, RMSE, AAD, R2 and MAPE, respectively. The coefficient of determination (R2) is 
considerably high indicating that close to 98% of the data set are captured in predicting FP 
while other parameters are relatively low showing that error is largely reduced in the 
prediction of FP.  
 
 
3.4. Density Prediction 
 
Density is the ratio of mass to volume. Biodiesel density is determined experimentally 
using standard test methods (ASTM D1298 or EN ISO 3675/12185). The range of 860-
900kg/m3 is recommended by EN14214 standard for density of biodiesel. The density of 
diesel are slightly lower than that of biodiesel. The temperature at which density is required to 
be reported is 15°C. However, part of the data collected from literature documentation of 
density values reported outside 15°C. The aforementioned led to considering temperature as 
an additional input in predicting density from FA constituents. And this also influenced the 
topology (6-5-4) of the density network. 
The data set used for training the density network are given in the Appendix. Out of 23 
data set for training the network, 16 is for training, four for validation and three for testing. 
Fewer data set are used in training the density network compared to other networks (CN, KV 
and FP), this is due to the fact that most literature do not report density of biodiesel often 
compared to other properties such as KV, CN etc. The plots relating output (predicted) to 
target (experimental) for the training, validation, testing and performance of density network 
are provided in Figure 11. From each plot, a linear correlation is noticed between the output 
and target values, which is close to the best fit line. R values of 0.998 (training), 0.974 
(validation), 0.962 (testing) and 0.985 (performance) are achieved in the density network 
training. The value of R (0.985) for the prediction performance indicates a very good 
agreement between the predicted and experimental values (see Figure 11). This is clearly 
presented using Figure 12. The errors between the experimental values and those predicted 
using the density network are presented in Figure 12. The correlation between the 
experimental values and predicted values is found to be sufficiently good for the prediction of 
density. It can also be noticed in Figure 12 that sample 17 has the maximum error (absolute).  
The errors observed in Figure 12 between the experimental values and predicted values 
for density prediction are estimated using MSE, RMSE, AAD, R2 and MAPE. In this present 
paper, the results achieved are 3.3369 for MSE, 1.8267 for RMSE, 0.0016 for AAD, 97.00 for 
R2 and 0.15 for MAPE. The numerical values for MSE, RMSE, AAD and MAPE are 
relatively low, indicating that the error connected to the prediction of density is small to 
substantiate the high predictive capability of the network. The value of R2 shows that the 
network used 97% of the data set in predicting density from the FA compositions. A study 
reported 0.42 as RMSE, which is considerably lower than the value estimated for this work 
[33] while AAD value of 0.11% which is significantly higher than what this work achieved is 
obtained by [55]. This shows that the results obtained in this paper agrees well with previous 
studies. 
 

S. O. Giwa 
98
 
Figure 12. Predicted and experimental values for density. 
 
APPENDIX 
 
Table A1. Modified fatty acid compositions and cetane numbers of biodiesels [45] 
 
S/N 
Biodiesel 
C16:0 
C18:0 
C18:1 
C18:2 
C18:3 
CN 
1 
Peanut 
8 
7.5 
55.7 
28.4 
0.3 
53.0 
2 
Palm 
37.5 
7.2 
46.4 
8.6 
0.3 
61.0 
3 
Crude palm oil 
46.16 
4.44 
40.19 
8.94 
0.27 
62.4 
4 
Distilled palm oil 
44.3 
4.05 
40.77 
10.25 
0.25 
58.3 
5 
Sunflower oil 
5.5 
6.1 
21.4 
66.2 
0.8 
55.6 
6 
Sunflower  
6.5 
4.6 
25.6 
63.1 
0.2 
50.0 
7 
High-oleic sunflower 
4.8 
4.7 
62.9 
27.5 
0.1 
53.0 
8 
Rapeseed 
4.9 
1.6 
65.3 
20.4 
7.9 
55.0 
9 
Soybean oil 
11.3 
4 
25.6 
53 
6.1 
51.1 
10 
Jatropha oil 
14.2 
8.3 
43.1 
34.4 
0.5 
57.1 
11 
Guindilla 
9.2 
8.3 
73.1 
7.7 
0.8 
59.0 
12 
Olive 
11.6 
4 
76 
7.8 
0.6 
57.0 
13 
Grape 
7 
4.3 
19.1 
69.1 
0.3 
48.0 
14 
Almond 
10.4 
3.2 
78 
7.6 
0.8 
37.0 
15 
Corn 
6.5 
1.5 
66.4 
25.2 
0.1 
53.0 
16 
Okra oil 
32.53 
5.12 
30.44 
30.05 
0.38 
52.2 
17 
Karanja oil 
10.6 
18.6 
51.8 
19 
0 
55.1 
18 
G. abyssinica 
9.2 
10.1 
9 
71.7 
0 
57.0 
19 
Polanga oil 
9.8 
6.2 
72.2 
11.8 
0 
55.1 
20 
Cotton oil 
24.9 
2.92 
18.93 
53.14 
0 
54.3 
21 
Soap stocks 
17.2 
4.4 
15.7 
55.6 
7.1 
51.3 
22 
Dairy scum 
58 
15.76 
19.21 
0.48 
0.26 
60.0 
23 
Rice bran oil 
18.8 
3.1 
43.1 
33.2 
0.6 
63.8 
24 
Soybean 
14 
4 
24 
52 
0 
45.0 
25 
Tallow 
26 
25 
43 
3 
0 
58.8 

Applications of Artificial Neural Network to Predict Biodiesel Fuel Properties … 
99
S/N 
Biodiesel 
C16:0 
C18:0 
C18:1 
C18:2 
C18:3 
CN 
26 
Canola oil 
3.5 
0.9 
64.4 
22.3 
8.2 
55.0 
27 
Safflower oil 
6.85 
2.11 
14.2 
75.98 
0 
52.32 
28 
Pongami (Karanja) 
9.8 
6.2 
72.2 
11.8 
0 
55.1 
29 
Camelina oil 
6.9 
6.8 
32.1 
20.9 
33.4 
52.8 
30 
TME 
20.3 
9.2 
7.3 
15.7 
2.8 
57.2 
31 
Tobacco 
10.69 
3.34 
14.74 
69.49 
0.69 
51.0 
32 
Yellow grease 
25.67 
12.96 
48.11 
6.97 
0.67 
62.6 
33 
Melon bug oil 
33.3 
3.5 
57.3 
3.9 
0 
55.0 
34 
Sorghum bug oil 
12.3 
7.3 
41.9 
34.5 
0 
55.0 
35 
S. birrea oil 
14.3 
8.8 
67.5 
0 
0 
62.0 
36 
Pure palmitic acid 
100 
0 
0 
0 
0 
74.3 
37 
Pure stearic acid 
0 
100 
0 
0 
0 
75.6 
38 
Pure oleic acid 
0 
0 
100 
0 
0 
57.2 
39 
Pure linoleic acid 
0 
0 
0 
100 
0 
42.0 
40 
Pure linolenic acid 
0 
0 
0 
0 
100 
22.7 
41 
Corn 
11.2 
1.8 
23.8 
62.3 
0.9 
50.2a 
42 
Almond 
9.3 
1.8 
70 
18.2 
0.7 
58b 
43 
Egusi 
10.48 
9.72 
18.01 
61.41 
0.38 
53.7c 
Note: a[57]; b[7]; c[56]. 
 
Table A2. Modified fatty acid compositions and kinematic viscosities of biodiesels [45] 
 
S/N 
Biodiesel 
C16:0 
C18:0 
C18:1 
C18:2 
C18:3 
KV 
1 
Peanut 
8 
7.5 
55.7 
28.4 
0.3 
4.6 
2 
Palm oil 
37.5 
7.2 
46.4 
8.6 
0.3 
4.5 
3 
Crude palm oil 
46.16 
4.44 
40.19 
8.94 
0.27 
4.502 
4 
Distilled palm oil 
44.3 
6 
40.77 
10.25 
0.25 
4.415 
5 
Sunflower oil 
5.5 
6.1 
21.4 
66.2 
0.8 
4.1 
6 
Sunflower oil 
6.5 
4.6 
25.6 
63.1 
0.2 
4.2 
7 
High-oleic sunflower 
4.8 
4.7 
62.9 
27.5 
0.1 
4.4 
8 
Rapeseed 
4.9 
1.6 
65.3 
20.4 
7.9 
4.4 
9 
Soybean oil 
11.3 
4 
25.6 
53 
6.1 
4.2 
10 
Jatropha oil 
14.2 
8.3 
43.1 
34.4 
0.5 
4.4 
11 
Guindilla 
9.2 
8.3 
73.1 
7.7 
0.8 
4.867 
12 
Olive oil 
11.6 
4 
76 
7.8 
0.6 
4.5 
13 
Grape 
7 
4.3 
19.1 
69.1 
0.3 
4.1 
14 
Almond 
10.4 
3.2 
78 
7.6 
0.8 
4.2 
15 
Corn 
6.5 
1.5 
66.4 
25.2 
0.1 
4.4 
16 
Okra oil 
32.53 
5.12 
30.44 
30.05 
0.38 
4.01 
17 
Karanja oil 
10.6 
18.6 
51.8 
19 
0 
4.16 
18 
G. abyssinica 
9.2 
10.1 
9 
71.7 
0 
4.3 
19 
P. Pinnata oil 
9.8 
6.2 
72.2 
11.8 
0 
4.16 
20 
Cotton oil 
24.9 
2.92 
18.93 
53.14 
0 
4.07 
21 
Soap stocks 
17.2 
4.4 
15.7 
55.6 
7.1 
4.3 
22 
Scum 
58 
15.76 
19.21 
0.48 
0.26 
3.75 
23 
Soya bean 
14 
4 
24 
52 
0 
4.5 
24 
Tallow 
26 
25 
43 
3 
0 
5 
25 
Canola oil 
3.5 
0.9 
64.4 
22.3 
5 
5 
26 
Brassicca Carinata oil 
5.4 
0.2 
43.2 
36 
15.2 
4.83 

S. O. Giwa 
100
Table A2. (Continued) 
 
S/N 
Biodiesel 
C16:0 
C18:0 
C18:1 
C18:2 
C18:3 
KV 
27 
Croton Megalocarpus 
6.6 
3.8 
12.6 
72.9 
3.9 
4.56 
28 
Carmelia oleifera 
10.55 
10.76 
69.07 
8.42 
0.29 
4.54 
29 
Waste cooking oil 
14.35 
3.88 
46.25 
25 
5.04 
4.7 
30 
Maxim seed oil 
10.3 
11.9 
35.9 
24.8 
15.9 
4 
31 
Yellow horn oil 
7.12 
32 
45.65 
38.62 
0 
4.4 
32 
Used cooking oil 
12.26 
4.8 
26.56 
55.81 
0 
4.79 
33 
Polanga oil 
12.01 
12.95 
34.09 
38.28 
0.3 
3.99 
34 
Karanja oil 
11.65 
7.5 
51.59 
16.46 
2.65 
4.37 
35 
Polycarpa fruit 
15.06 
1.18 
12 
70.6 
1.1 
4.12 
36 
Pumpkin seed 
12.62 
5.43 
37.22 
43.72 
0.18 
4.41 
37 
Safflower oil 
6.85 
2.11 
14.2 
75.98 
0 
4.29 
38 
Pongami oil 
9.8 
6.2 
72.2 
11.8 
0 
4.16 
39 
Camelina oil 
6.9 
6.8 
32.1 
20.9 
33.4 
4.15 
40 
TME 
20.3 
9.2 
47.3 
15.7 
2.8 
4.42 
41 
Poultry fat 
21.82 
11.32 
36.59 
27.02 
1.78 
4.39 
42 
Terminalia 
35 
5 
32 
28 
0 
4.3 
43 
Pure palmitic acid 
100 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2.778 
44 
Pure stearic acid 
0 
100 
0 
0 
0 
2.986 
45 
Pure oleic acid 
0 
0 
100 
0 
0 
4.518 
46 
Pure linoleic acid 
0 
0 
0 
100 
0 
3.745 
47 
Pure linolenic acid 
0 
0 
0 
0 
100 
3.14 
48 
Corn 
11.2 
1.8 
23.8 
62.3 
0.9 
4.12a 
49 
Almond 
9.3 
1.8 
70 
18.2 
0.7 
4.23b 
50 
Egusi 
10.48 
9.72 
18.01 
61.41 
0.38 
3.83c 
Note: a[57]; b[7]; c[56]. 
 
Table A3. Modified fatty acid compositions and flash points of biodiesels [45] 
 
S/N 
Biodiesel 
C16:0 
C18:0 
C18:1 
C18:2 
C18:3 
FP 
1 
Peanut 
8 
7.5 
55.7 
28.4 
0.3 
176 
2 
Palm 
37.5 
7.2 
46.1 
8.6 
0.3 
176 
3 
Crude palm oil 
46.16 
4.44 
40.19 
8.94 
0.27 
174 
4 
Distilled palm oil 
44.3 
4.05 
40.77 
10.25 
0.25 
182 
5 
Sunflower oil 
5.5 
6.1 
21.4 
66.21 
0.8 
180 
6 
Sunflower 
6.5 
4.6 
25.6 
63.1 
0.2 
177 
7 
High oleic sunflower 
4.8 
4.7 
62.9 
27.5 
0.1 
174 
8 
Rape 
4.9 
1.6 
65.3 
20.4 
7.9 
170 
9 
Soybean oil 
11.3 
4 
25.6 
53 
6.1 
171 
10 
Jatropha curcas oil 
14.2 
8.3 
43.1 
34.4 
0.5 
166 
11 
Grape 
7 
4.3 
19.1 
69.1 
0.3 
175 
12 
Almond 
10.4 
3.2 
78 
7.6 
0.8 
172 
13 
Olive 
11.6 
4 
76 
7.8 
0.6 
178 
14 
Corn 
6.5 
1.5 
66.4 
25.2 
0.1 
170 
15 
Okra oil 
32.53 
5.12 
30.44 
30.05 
0.38 
156 
16 
G. abbysinica oil 
9.2 
10.1 
9 
71.7 
0 
157 
17 
Karanja oil 
10.6 
18.6 
51.8 
19 
0 
141 
18 
Cotton oil 
24.9 
2.92 
18.93 
53.14 
0 
150 

Applications of Artificial Neural Network to Predict Biodiesel Fuel Properties … 
101
S/N 
Biodiesel 
C16:0 
C18:0 
C18:1 
C18:2 
C18:3 
FP 
19 
Soap stocks 
17.2 
4.4 
15.7 
55.6 
7.1 
169 
20 
Soybean 
14 
4 
24 
52 
0 
178 
21 
Canola oil 
3 
0.9 
64.4 
22.3 
8.2 
170 
22 
Brassica Carinata oil 
5.4 
0.2 
43.2 
36 
15.2 
163 
23 
Croton Megalocarpus 
6.6 
3.8 
12.6 
72.9 
3.9 
189 
24 
Camelina oil 
10.55 
10.76 
69.07 
8.42 
0.29 
150 
25 
Waste cooking oil 
14.35 
3.88 
46.25 
25 
5.04 
141 
26 
Maxim seed oil 
10.3 
11.9 
35.9 
24.8 
15.9 
174 
27 
Used cooking oil 
12.26 
4.8 
26.56 
55.81 
0 
176 
28 
Polanga 
12.01 
12.95 
34.09 
38.28 
0.3 
140 
29 
Karanja 
11.65 
7.5 
51.59 
16.46 
2.65 
163 
30 
Polycarpa fruit oil 
15.06 
1.18 
12 
70.6 
1.1 
165 
31 
Pumpkin seed 
12.62 
5.43 
37.22 
43.72 
0.18 
174 
32 
Corn 
11.2 
1.8 
23.8 
62.3 
0.9 
158a 
33 
Almond 
9.3 
1.8 
70 
18.2 
0.7 
169b 
34 
Egusi 
10.48 
9.72 
18.01 
61.41 
0.38 
142c 
Note: a[57]; b[7]; c[56]. 
 
Table A4. Modified fatty acid compositions and densities of biodiesels [45] 
 
S/N 
Biodiesel 
C16:0 
C18:0 
C18:1 
C18:2 
C18:3 
Temp. 
Density 
1 
Kusum oil 
22.2 
26.91 
3.25 
6.22 
7.42 
30 
870 
2 
Moringa oleifera 
7 
12 
80 
1 
0 
20 
883 
3 
Croton Megalocarpus 
6.6 
3.8 
12.6 
72.9 
3.9 
15 
888.9 
4 
Tobacco 
10.69 
3.34 
14.74 
69.49 
0.69 
15 
886.8 
5 
Peanut 
8 
7.5 
55.7 
28.4 
0.3 
15 
883 
6 
Soybean 
14 
4 
24 
52 
0 
15 
885 
7 
Babassu 
74 
3 
15 
6 
1 
15 
875 
8 
Palm 
37.5 
7.2 
46.4 
8.6 
0.3 
15 
880 
9 
Sunflower 
5.5 
6.1 
21.4 
66.2 
0.8 
15 
860 
10 
Tallow 
26 
25 
43 
3 
0 
17 
877 
11 
Brassica Carinata oil 
5.4 
0.2 
43.2 
36 
15.2 
15 
888.8 
12 
Terminalia catappa oil 
35 
5 
32 
28 
0 
20 
873 
13 
Soybean 
11.3 
4 
25.6 
53 
6.115 
15 
885 
14 
Rapeseed 
3.49 
0.85 
64.4 
8.23 
21 
21 
882 
15 
Yellow grease 
25.67 
12.96 
48.11 
6.97 
0.67 
21 
873 
16 
Soap stock 
17.2 
4.4 
15.7 
55.6 
7.1 
21 
885 
17 
Jatropha oil 
14.2 
8.3 
43.1 
34.3 
0.5 
15 
880 
18 
Cotton seed 
20.9 
2.6 
19.2 
55.2 
0.6 
15 
875 
19 
Rice bran oil 
18.8 
3.1 
43.1 
33.2 
0.6 
15 
884 
20 
Roselle oil 
18.5 
4.09 
33.31 
38.17 
2.9 
15 
880.1 
21 
Okra oil 
32.53 
5.12 
30.44 
30.05 
0.38 
15 
876 
22 
Corn 
11.2 
1.8 
23.8 
62.3 
0.9 
15 
884a 
23 
Egusi 
10.48 
9.72 
18.01 
61.41 
0.38 
15 
883c 
Note: a[57]; c[56]. 
 
 

S. O. Giwa 
102
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Eweremadu, C.C., Mbarawa, M.M., 2009. Technical aspects of production and analysis 
of biodiesel from used cooking oil - A review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 13, 2205-
2224. 
[2] 
Ramos, M.J., Fernández, C.M., Casas, A., Rodríguez, L., Pérez, A., 2009. Influence of 
fatty acid composition of raw materials on biodiesel properties. Bioresour. Technol. 
100, 261-268. 
[3] 
Pramanik, K., 2003. Properties and use of jatropha curcas oil and diesel fuel blends in 
compression ignition engine. Renewable Energy 28, 239-248. 
[4] 
Demirbas, A., 2005. Biodiesel production from vegetable oils via catalytic and 
noncatalytic supercritical methanol transesterification methods. Prog. Energy Combus. 
Sci. 31, 466-87. 
[5] 
Achten, W.M.J., Verchot, L., Franken, Y.J., Mathijs, E., Singh, V.P., Aerts, R., Muys, 
B., 2008. Jatropha bio-diesel production and use - Review. Biomass Bioenergy 32, 
1063-1084.  
[6] 
El Diwani, G., Attia, N.K., Hawash, S.I., 2009. Development and evaluation of 
biodiesel fuel and by-products from jatropha oil. Int J. Environ. Sci. Tech. 6, 219-224. 
[7] 
Demirbas, A., 2009. Progress and recent trends in bidiesel fuels. Energy Convers. 
Mgmt. 50, 14-34.  
[8] 
Giwa, S., Ogunbona, C., 2014. Sweet almond (Prunus amygdalus “dulcis”) seeds as a 
potential feedstock for Nigerian biodiesel automotive project. Revista Ambiente and 
Agua 9, 37-45. 
[9] 
de Almeida, V.F., García-Moreno, P.J., Guadix, A., Guadix, E.M., 2015. Biodiesel 
production from mixtures of waste fish oil, palm oil and waste frying oil: Optimization 
of fuel properties. Fuel Processing Technology 133, 152-160. 
[10] Wakil, M.A., Kalam, M.A., Masjuki, H.H., Atabani, A.E., Rizwanul Fattah, I.M., 2015. 
Influence of biodiesel blending on physicochemical properties and importance of 
mathematical model for predicting the properties of biodiesel blend. Energy Conversion 
and Management 94: 51-67. 
[11] Abdullah, A.Z., Razali, N., Mootabadi, H., Salamatinia, B., 2007. Critical technical 
areas for future improvement in biodiesel technologies. Environmental Research 
Letters 2, 034001. 
[12] Soo-Young, N., 2011. Inedible vegetable oil and their derivaties for alternative diesel 
fuel in CI engines: A Review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Review 15, 131-
1449. 
[13] Murugesan, A., Umarani, C., Subramanian, R., Nedunchezhian, N., 2009. Bio-diesel as 
an alternative fuel for diesel engines - A review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 13, 653-
62. 
[14] Balat, M., Balat, H., 2008. Recent trends in global production and utilization of bio-
ethanol fuel. Applied Energy 86, 2273-2282. 
[15] Sharma, Y.C., Singh, B., 2008. Development of biodiesel from karanja, a tree found in 
rural India. Fuel 67, 1740-2.  
[16] Balat, M., 2007. Production of biodiesel from vegetable oils: a survey. Energy Sour. 29, 
895-913. 

Applications of Artificial Neural Network to Predict Biodiesel Fuel Properties … 
103
[17] Tippayawong, N., Wongsiriamnuay, T., Jompakdee, W., 2002. Performance and 
emissions of a small agricultural diesel engine fueled with 100% vegetable oil: effects 
of fuel type and elevated inlet temperature. Asian J. Energy Environ. 3, 139-58.  
[18] Canakci, M., Sanli, H., 2008. Biodiesel production from various feedstocks and their 
effects on the fuel properties. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 35, 431-441. 
[19] Mariod, A., Klupsch, S., Hussein, I.H., Ondruschka, B., 2006. Synthesis of alkyl esters 
from three unconventional Sudanese oils for their use as biodiesel. Energy Fuels 20, 
2249-2252. 
[20] Cheenkachorn, K., 2006. Predicting properties of biodiesels using statistical models and 
artificial neural networks. As. J. Energy Env. 7(2), 299‐306.  
[21] Knothe, G., 2005. Dependence of biodiesel fuel properties on the structure of fatty acid 
alkyl esters. Fuel Process. Technol. 86, 1059-1070. 
[22] Encinar, J.M., Gonzalez, J.F., Rodriguez, J.J., Tejedor, A., 2002. Biodiesel fuels from 
vegetable oils: transesterification of Cynara cardunculus L. oils with ethanol. Energy 
Fuel 16, 443-50.  
[23] Balat, M., 2006. Fuel characteristics and the use of biodiesel as a transportation fuel. 
Energy Sourc. 28, 855-64.  
[24] Fernando, S., Karra, P., Hernandez, R., Jha, S.K., 2007. Effect of incompletely 
converted soybean oil on biodiesel quality. Energy 32, 844-851.  
[25] Pinto, A.C., Guarieiro, L.L.N., Rezende, M.J.C., Ribeiro, N.M., Torres, E.A., Lopes, 
W.A., 2005. Biodiesel: an overview. J. Brazil Chem. Soc. 16, 1313-30.  
[26] Su, Z., Yuan-Gang, Z., Yu-Jie, F., Meng, L., Dong-Yang, Z., Thomas, E., 2010. Rapid 
microwave-assisted transesterification of yellow horn oil to biodiesel using a 
heteropolyacid solid catalyst. Bioresour. Technol. 101, 931-936. 
[27] Demirbas, A., 2008. Mathematical relationships derived from biodiesel fuels. Energy 
Sources, Part A 30, 56-69. 
[28] Krisnangkura, K., Yimsuwan, T., Pairintra, R., 2005. An empirical approach in 
predicting biodiesel viscosity at various temperatures. Fuel 85, 107-113. 
[29] Yung–Chieh, S., 2011. Selection of prediction methods for thermophysical properties 
for process modeling and product design of biodiesel manufacturing. Master of Science 
thesis. 
[30] Nadai, D.V., Simões, J.B., Gatts, C.E.N., Miranda, P.C.M.L., 2013. Inference of the 
biodiesel cetane number by multivariate techniques. Fuel 105, 325‐30. 
[31] Saxena, P., Jawale, S., Joshipura, M.H., 2013. A review on prediction of properties of 
biodiesel and blends of biodiesel. Procedia Engrg. 51, 395-402. 
[32] Bamgboye, A.I., Hansen, A.C., 2008. Prediction of cetane number of biodiesel fuel 
from the fatty acid methyl ester (FAME) composition. Int. J. Agrophysics 22, 21-29. 
[33] Balabin, R.M., Lomakina, E.I., Safieva, R.Z., 2011. Neural network (ANN) approach to 
biodiesel analysis: analysis of biodiesel density, kinematic viscosity, methanol and 
water contents using near infrared (NIR) spectroscopy. Fuel 90(5), 2007‐15. 
[34] Balabin, R.M., Smirnov, S.V., 2012. Interpolation and extrapolation problems of 
multivariate regression in analytical chemistry: benchmarking the robustness on 
nearinfrared (NIR) spectroscopy data. Analyst 137, 1604‐10. 
[35] Shivakumar, S.P.P., Shrinivasa, R.B.R., Samaga, B.S., 2010. Performance and emission 
characteristics of a 4 stroke C.I engine operated on honge methyl ester using artificial 
neural network. ARPN J. Engrg. Applied Sci. 5, 83-94. 

S. O. Giwa 
104
[36] Dehkordi, S.H., Almassi, H.F., Borghei, M., Beheshti, A.M., 2013. Simulation of small 
diesel engine vibration using artificial neural network. International Journal of 
Agriculture and Crop Sciences 5 (18), 2084-2090. 
[37] Manieniyan, V., Sivaprakasam, S., 2013. Artificial neural network based modelling for 
vibration characteristics of DI diesel engine using bio-diesel. International Journal of 
Advanced Research in Computer Science and Software Engineering 3(8), 634-638. 
[38] Garg, A.B., Diwan, P., Saxena, M., 2014. Artificial neural networks for internal 
combustion engine performance and emission analysis. International Journal of 
Computer Applications 87(6), 23 -27.  
[39] Ozener, O., Yuksek, L., Ozkan, M., 2013. Artificial neural network approach to 
predicting engine-out emissions and performance parameters of a turbo charged diesel 
engine. Thermal Science 17(1), 153-166. 
[40] Kumar, S., Srinivas, P.P., Shrinivasa, R.B.R., 2013. Influence of injection timings on 
performance and emissions of a biodiesel engine operated on blends of Honge methyl 
ester and prediction using artificial neural network. Journal of Mechanical Engineering 
Research 5(1), 5-20.  
[41] Betiku, E., Ajala, S.O., 2014. Modeling and optimization of Thevetia peruviana (yellow 
oleander) oil biodiesel synthesis via Musa paradisiacal (plantain) peels as 
heterogeneous base catalyst: A case of artificial neural network vs. response surface 
methodology. Industrial Crops and Products 53, 314-322. 
[42] Jahirul, M.I., Brown, R.J., Senadeera, W., O’Hara, I.M., Ristovski, Z.D., 2013. The use 
of artificial neural networks for identifying sustainable biodiesel feedstocks. Energies 6, 
3764-3806. 
[43] Ramadhas, A.S., Jayaraj, S., Muraleedharan, C., Padmakumari, K., 2006. Artificial 
neural networks used for the prediction of the cetane number of biodiesel. Renew. 
Energy 31, 2524-2533. 
[44] Marques, D.B., Filho, A.O.B., Romariz, A.R.S., Viegas, I.M.A., Luz, D.A., Filho, 
A.K.D.B., Labidi, S., Ferraudo, A.S., 2014. Recent developments on statistical and 
neural network tools focusing on biodiesel quality. International Journal of Computer 
Science and Application 3(3), 97-110.  
[45] Giwa, S.O., Adekomaya, S.O., Adama, K.O., Mukaila, M.O., 2015. Prediction of 
selected biodiesel fuel properties using artificial neural network. Front. Energy 9(4), 
433-445. 
[46] Baroutian, S., Aroua, M.K., Raman, A.A., Sulaiman, N.M., 2008. Estimation of 
vegetables oil‐based ethyl esters biodiesel densities using artificial neural networks. 
Journal of Applied Sciences 8(17), 3005‐11.  
[47] Jahirul, M.I., Senadeera, W., Brooks, P., Brown, R.J., Situ, R., Pham, P.X., Masri, A.R. 
An artificial neutral network (ANN) model for predicting biodiesel kinetic viscosity as 
a function of temperature and chemical compositions. 20th International Congress on 
Modelling and Simulation, Adelaide, Australia, 1–6 December 2013. 
[48] Piloto-Rodríguez, R., Sánchez-Borroto, Y., Lapuerta, M., Goyos-Pérez, L., Verhelst, S., 
2013. Prediction of the cetane number of biodiesel using artificial neural networks and 
multiple linear regression. Energy Conversion and Management 65, 255-261. 
[49] de Sousa, R.M., Labidi, S., Barros, A.K.D., Filho, A.O.B., Marques, A.L.B., 2015. 
Application and assessment of artificial neural networks for biodiesel iodine value 

Applications of Artificial Neural Network to Predict Biodiesel Fuel Properties … 
105
prediction. International Journal of Computer, Electrical, Automation, Control and 
Information Engineering 9(5), 1327-1331. 
[50] Meng, X., Jia, M., Wang, T., 2014. Neural network prediction of biodiesel kinematic 
viscosity at 313 K. Fuel 121, 133-140. 
[51] Bajpai, D., Tyagi, V.K., 2006. Biodiesel: Source, production, composition, properties 
and its benefits. J. Oleo Sci. 55,487-502. 
[52] Knothe, G., Matheaus, A.C., Ryan, T.W., 2003. Cetane numbers of branched and 
straight-chain fatty esters determined in an ignition quality tester. Fuel 82, 971-975. 
[53] Meher, L.C., Dharmagadda, S.S., Naik, S.N., 2006. Optimization of alkali catalyzed 
transesterification of Pongamia pinnata oil for production of biodiesel. Bioresourc. 
Technol. 97, 1392-7.  
[54] Moser, B.R., 2009. Biodiesel production, properties, and feedstocks. In vitro 
cell.dev.biol.-plant 45, 229-266.  
[55] Ramírez-Verduzco, L.F., Rodríguez-Rodríguez, J.E., Jaramillo-Jacob, A.R., 2012. 
Predicting cetane number, kinematic viscosity, density and higher heating value of 
biodiesel from its fatty acid methyl ester composition. Fuel 91, 102-111.  
[56] Giwa, S., Abdullah, L.C., Adam, N.M., 2010. Investigating “egusi” (Citrullus 
Colocynthis L.) seed oil as potential biodiesel feedstock. Energies 3(4), 607-618. 
[57] Giwa, S., Layeni, A., Ogunbona, C., 2012. Synthesis and Characterization of Biodiesel 
from Industrial Starch Production Byproduct. Energy and Environmental Engineering 
Journal 1(1), 45-51. 
 


In: Artificial Neural Networks: New Research 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-964-6 
Editor: Gayle Cain 
© 2017 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5 
 
 
 
APPLICATIONS OF ANN METHODS FOR  
SOLAR RADIATION ESTIMATION 
 
 
Gilles Notton1, Kahina Dahmani2, Rabah Dizene2,  
Marie-Laure Nivet1, Cyril Voyant1 and Christophe Paoli1,3 
1Laboratory Sciences for Environment, University of Corsica Pascal Paoli, UMR CNRS 
6134, Route des Sanguinaires, Ajaccio, France 
2Laboratory of Energy, Mechanic and Conversion Systems, Science and Technology 
University Houari Boumédiène, Algiers, Algeria 
3Galatasaray University, Computer Science Department Çırağan Cad. Ortaköy,  
Istanbul, Turkey 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The objective of this paper is show how ANN methods can be used for solar 
radiation estimation at short time-scale (5-min): firstly an ANN method was applied for 
estimating horizontal solar irradiation from other meteorological parameters more easily 
and frequently measured over the World and a second ANN model was developed for 
transforming horizontal solar irradiation into tilted irradiation. 
Only one thousand continental stations around the world measures solar radiation 
and often with a poor quality. We showed that 5-min solar irradiations can be estimated 
from more available, more readily measurable and cheaper data using Artificial Neural 
Networks (ANN). 7 meteorological parameters and 3 calculated parameters are used as 
inputs, thus 1023 combinations of inputs data are possible; the best combinations of 
inputs are pursued. The best ANN models have a good adequacy mainly with sunshine 
duration in the input set. The 6 and 10 inputs models have a relative root means square 
error (nRMSE) equal to 19.35% and 18.65% which is very good for such a time-step.  
Solar collector are rarely in horizontal position; However, solar radiation is always 
measured in a horizontal plane; converting measured horizontal global solar irradiance in 
tilted ones is a difficult task, particularly for a small time-step and for not-averaged data. 
Conventional methods (statistical, correlation, …) are not always efficient with time-step 
less than one hour; thus, we want to know if an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) is able 
to realize this conversion with a good accuracy when applied to 5-min solar radiation 

Gilles Notton, Kahina Dahmani, Rabah Dizene et al. 
108
data. nRMSE is around 8% for the optimal configuration, which corresponds to a very 
good accuracy for such a short time-step. 
These two successive studies show the applicability of ANN methods for the 
estimation of solar radiation; estimating solar radiation is particularly difficult because 
the sky diffuse component of solar radiation is anisotropic and the relations between 
parameters are rarely linear. 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Collecting and processing accurate solar data is essential for developing efficient solar 
applications. No solar project can be realized and developed without knowing first the solar 
potential of the site. If average values gives an overview of the energy potential of the site, 
daily or hourly values allow an accurate sizing, but simulating correctly the behaviour of the 
solar system and taking into account the small variations of production and consumption need 
to use sub-hourly data. For these reasons, many tools [1-3] have been recently implemented to 
simulate the system far away the dynamic behavior, using short-time data. Thus, knowing 
solar data at short time-step (5 or 10 min) is particularly useful for studies of solar system 
integration. 
Measures of solar radiation are sparse and inaccurate over the world; there are still large 
areas without any solar radiation observations [4]. Investments and maintenance costs for 
each measurement site are not negligible and even in industrialized countries, the national 
network often consists in a relative small number of solar radiation stations [5]. The amount 
of meteorological stations measuring solar irradiance through the world is difficult to count 
because various sources give different information [6]. Even so, we can consider that only 
one thousand continental stations around the world measure solar radiation [7]. 
A larger number of meteorological stations measures relatively easily and at relatively 
low cost, other meteorological parameters as ambient temperature, humidity, wind speed and 
direction or pressure. Thus, it seems interesting to elaborate relationships between these 
meteorological data and global solar irradiation. In others terms, our first objective is to 
calculate horizontal solar irradiations from more available, more easily measurable and 
cheaper data. 
At first, the measured meteorological data and calculated parameters will be presented. 
Then, in view to reach our first objective, determining horizontal global solar irradiation, 10 
inputs will be used and then 210- 1 = 1023 combinations of input data will be tested, from 10 
ANN architectures with only one input to one ANN architecture with all the inputs (10 
inputs). 
Rarely, solar panels are in horizontal position, excepted in equator and generally they are 
slightly tilted for avoiding dust or water accumulation. The tilted solar radiation is rarely 
measured and must be estimated from horizontal solar data; installing pyranometers with 
various inclinations is costly and seems impossible to achieve. Thus, it is useful to develop 
accurate methods for determining the solar radiation on tilted surface from only the measured 
horizontal global radiation, it will be the second objective of this paper. 
It is difficult to develop simple models for converting horizontal solar irradiation into 
inclined ones [8] because the radiation received by a tilted plane includes the radiation 
reflected by the ground and scattered by the sky; this last component is difficult to estimate; 

Applications of ANN Methods for Solar Radiation Estimation 
109
the sky diffuse radiation depends on the inclination or orientation of the collector, on the 
elevation and azimuth of the sun but also on the sky state with complex anisotropic effects [9-
10]. The larger the time-step is, the more this anisotropy decreases (time-averaging and 
compensating effect) and tends towards an isotropic distribution; the shorter is the time-step, 
the more it is difficult to realize this conversion with a good accuracy. The utilization of ANN 
methodologies will allow to determine accurate no-linear relations between horizontal and 
tilted solar irradiation at 5-min time-steps. 
 
 
2. METEOROLOGICAL DATA BASE 
 
The meteorological data used in this work were measured in the meteorological station 
belonging to the Renewable Energies Development Centre (CDER) situated in Bouzareah 
near Algiers (latitude: 36.8°N; longitude: 3.17°E) at an altitude of 347 m (Figure 1). This site 
is characterized by a Mediterranean climate with dry and hot summers and damp and cool 
winters. 
The data were measured in this station each second and stored each 5 minutes from April 
2011 to December 2013 (33 months of 5-min data). Global irradiances on horizontal and 
tilted surfaces (inclination = latitude = 36.8°) were measured by two EKO MS-410 
pyranometers. The Horizontal Global Solar Irradiation, HGSI, and Tilted Global solar 
Irradiation, TGSI, are then integrated on a 5-min period. The sunshine duration, S, is 
measured by an EKO MS-093 Sunshine duration sensor only sensitive to direct radiation 
component and providing a pulse output when the irradiance exceeds 120 W.m-2. Wind speed 
(WS) and direction (WD) are measured by a two dimensional ultrasonic anemometer 
WindSonic SDI. Pressure (p) is measured by a SETRA sensor; temperature (T) and relative 
humidity (H) by a HMP45C probe over the range of 0 to 100% RH for humidity and -40°  
to +60°C for temperature. A tipping bucket rain gauge SBS500H provides an automatic 
measure of precipitation.  
Each 5 minutes, three calculated parameters are added: horizontal extraterrestrial solar 
irradiation HESI, solar declination δ and zenith angle z.  
The declination  is the angle between the Sun’s rays and the Earth’s equatorial plane and 
depends on the day number dn [11]. 
 
 
Figure 1. Position of the meteorological station and solar instrument. 
 

Gilles Notton, Kahina Dahmani, Rabah Dizene et al. 
110









2
cos
006758
.0
sin
070257
.0
cos
399912
.0
006918
.0
)
rad
(
 






3
sin
00148
.0
3
cos
002697
.0
2
sin
000907
.0
 
(1) 
 
with  the day angle: 

365
/
1
d
2
n 



 
(2) 
 
z is the angle between the sun and a horizontal surface [11]; it influences the quantity 
and the quality of the sun radiation; when it is low, its cosines is maximal and the optical path 
is minimal, the incident radiation is less absorbed and the solar radiation maximum. 
 








cos
cos
cos
sin
sin
cos z
 
(3) 
 
with  the latitude (36.8°N) and  the hour angle in degree: 
 

t
12
15



 
(4)  
 
with t the true solar time. 
The zenith angle is calculated at the middle of the time period (5-min). 
The horizontal extraterrestrial solar irradiation HESI in Wh.m-2 is computed by 
integration of the extraterrestrial solar irradiance 
0I in W.m-2 on the time period. 
0I  is 
calculated by [11]: 
 
z
0
sc
0
cos
E
I
I


 
(5) 
 
where Isc is the solar constant (1367 W.m-2), E0 the eccentricity factor taking into account the 
variation of the earth-sun distance (dimensionless) [11]: 
 
 









sin
.
001280
.0
cos
.
034221
.0
000110
.1
r
r
E
2
0
0
 




2
sin
000077
.0
2
cos
000719
.0
 
(6) 
 
0I  is used as a reference (maximum solar irradiance). 
 
Table 1. Meteorological data from April 2011 to December 2013 
 
Data 
Symbol 
Unity 
Measured data 
Horizontal global solar irradiation  
HGSI 
Wh.m-2 
Tilted global solar irradiation (36.8°) 
TGSI 
Wh.m-2 
Ambient temperature 
T 
°C 
Relative humidity 
H 
% 
Wind speed 
WS 
m.s-1 
Wind direction 
WD 
degree 
Precipitation 
Pr 
mm 
Sunshine duration 
S 
minutes 
Atmospheric pressure 
p 
mbar 
Calculated data 
Horizontal extraterrestrial irradiation 
HESI 
Wh.m-2 
Solar declination  
 
degree 
Zenith angle  
z 
degree 

Applications of ANN Methods for Solar Radiation Estimation 
111
The data basis contains 12 5-min parameters, 9 measured and 3 calculated. Each data was 
previously verified in order to extract outlier ones [12]. Data corresponding to sunset or 
sunrise periods were also deleted for avoiding to have solar data influenced by a mask effect 
or a no-reliable response of pyranometers at high zenith angle [13]. Thus, we have 96971 
validated 5-min data for each parameter. Table 1 summarizes all the meteorological data 
available at a 5-min time step. 
 
 
3. ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORK (ANN) 
 
The ANN structure used in this work is the Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) with feed-
forward back propagation which is more often used in solar estimation and prediction [14-
15]. In a MLP structure, the input layer receives input data sent to one or several hidden 
layers, which are in turn connected to an output layer. A neuron receives signals from other 
neurons or input data unidirectionally for a feed-forward MLP configuration (Figure 2). A 
weight
j,k
w
, modified during the learning phase, is linked to each input
j,k
x
; the weighted 
sum 

p
1
j
j,k
j,k x
w
is called net. An activation function f is applied to the weighted sum net for 
producing an output O if this sum exceeds a given bias
k
. This output O is then distributed 
to other neurons. For activation functions, according to a bibliographical study, a sigmoid one 
for hidden layers and a linear one for the output layer have been chosen [16-17]. For the jth 
neuron of the layer (k+1), O is given by [18]: 
 












p
1
j
j,k
j,k x
w
f
net
f
O
 
 (7) 
 
wk,1 
wk,2 
wk,3 
wk,p 
. . . . 
. . . . 
xk,1 
xk,2 
xk,3 
xk,p 

f
xk+1,j 
net 
k
Threshold 
Activation 
function 
output 
Input 
signal
Synaptic 
weights 
Transfer 
function 
 
Figure 2. Architecture of an artificial neuron. 

Gilles Notton, Kahina Dahmani, Rabah Dizene et al. 
112
j,k
w
is the synaptic weight (k layer index, j neuron index).  
Several steps were applied in view to find the optimized MLP structure: 
Choose the number of hidden layers and hidden neurons per layer: a too small number of 
hidden neurons does not allow a good learning but an oversized number increases the training 
time with marginal improvement [19], need more data and moreover over-trains the ANN. In 
accordance with the principle of parsimony and with the literature, we used only one hidden 
layer. 
Determine the optimal number of neurons in the hidden layer: it is realized in testing 
various configurations and calculating the adequacy. Some empirical rules exist but their 
efficiency is not really proven: number of hidden neurons equal to the inputs number [20], to 
75% of it [21], to the square root of the product of the number of inputs and outputs [22]. The 
number of inputs in the first study varies from 1 to 10 for a number of outputs of 1 i.e., a 
number of hidden neurons between 1 and 11; for the second study, 5 inputs for 1 output i.e., 
between 2 and 5 hidden neurons (but the variation was from 1 to 8). Each MLP architecture 
was trained 8 times (8 epochs per architecture) in order to avoid random effects. 
Apply the training process consisting in modifying the weights wk,j until the gap between 
the actual and simulated outputs reaches a given accuracy. The Levenberg–Marquardt 
learning algorithm (LM) was chosen [17, 23]. 
Choose the proportion of data used for training and test. The experience has shown that 
more than 50% of data must be used for training [23], here 60% was taken for training and 
40% for testing. 
 
 
4. ACCURACY ESTIMATION 
 
Several parameters are used to estimate the models accuracy; yi and xi are the estimated 
and measured values and the respective average values are: 
 



N
1
i
i
x
x
 and 



N
1
i
iy
y
with N the data number 
(8) 
 
The Mean Absolute Error, MAE, and its normalized value, nMAE, are: 
 
N
x
y
MAE
N
1
i
i
i




 
x
N
x
y
nMAE
N
1
i
i
i




 
(9) 
 
The Mean Bias Error, MBE, and its relative value, nMBE, are: 
 

N
x
y
MBE
N
1
i
i
i




 


x
N
x
y
nMBE
N
1
i
i
i




 
(10) 
 
The Root Means Square Error, RMSE, and its Relative value, nRMSE, are: 
 

Applications of ANN Methods for Solar Radiation Estimation 
113


N
x
y
RMSE
N
1
i
2
i
i




 


x
N
x
y
nRMSE
N
1
i
2
i
i












  
(11) 
 
The Determination Coefficient, R², is: 
 







2
1
N
1
i
2
i
N
1
i
2
i
N
1
i
i
i
2
x
x
y
y
x
x
y
y
R


























 
(12) 
 
 
5. FIRST STUDY: DETERMINATION OF HORIZONTAL GLOBAL SOLAR 
IRRADIATION FROM OTHER METEOROLOGICAL DATA 
 
The objective of this study is see if it is possible to compute horizontal global solar 
irradiation from more available and cheaper meteorological data. The number of available 
meteorological data used as possible inputs (10, 7 measured, 3 calculated) is high; optimizing 
the MLP structure is long and arduous, with 10 inputs, 210- 1= 1023 combinations of inputs 
are possible, from 10 ANN architectures with only one input to one ANN architecture with all 
the inputs (10 inputs). Figure 3 shows the ANN structure with all the available inputs. 
The choice of the best combination of inputs is a prerequisite stage; the parsimony is a 
fundamental principle in ANN elaboration, essential for its generalization. It consists in 
elaborating the simplest ANN structure: a minimum of inputs, a minimum of hidden layers 
and hidden neurons while maintaining high performances. Some of the input variables bring 
little information about solar irradiation, sometimes no information at all, some inputs are 
redundant (they contain the same information), even worse, too many inputs can reduce the 
model performance. Moreover, an increase of the inputs number is accompanied by an 
increase of the number of hidden neurons and of computation time. 
 
O
U
T
P
U
T
I
N
P
U
T
Hidden layer
Ambient temperature
T
Relative humidity
H
Wind speed
WS
Wind direction
WD
Precipitation
Pr
Sunshine duration
S
Atmospheric pressure
p
Declination

Zenith angle
z
Horizontal extraterrestrial solar irradiation
HESI
Horizontal global
solar irradiation
HGSI
 
Figure 3. ANN structure. 
As it is impossible to present 1023 results, we showed in Tables the results for the two 
best and worst MLP models according to the number of inputs, in specifying the type of input 
data. The two best and the worst models are respectively the two ANN models with the 

Gilles Notton, Kahina Dahmani, Rabah Dizene et al. 
114
lowest and highest errors; if the values of the statistical parameters change according to the 
type of parameter, their rank is the same whatever the error type is. 
Table 2 presents the two best and worst configurations versus the number of inputs. 1 and 
0 indicate respectively that the variable is present or absent in the set of inputs. We classified 
the configurations in descending order of performance (rank); 1 is the first rank and 1023 the 
last one. RMSE (and nRMSE) and MAE (and nMAE) vary in a similar way; Thus, in figures, 
only nRMSE values are plotted; these parameters characterize the accuracy of the ANN 
architecture. MBE and nMBE indicate if the model over-estimates (MBE>0) or under-
estimates (MBE<0) the HGSI values. 
Figure 4 shows the average, minimum and maximum values of nRMSE and the standard 
deviation versus the number of inputs. The minimum nRMSE is obtained for the 10 inputs 
model with a value of 18.65% compared to 73.91% for the worst configuration (2 inputs: WD 
and WS). nRMSE increases from 13.33% (hourly) to 18.65% (5-min) and nMAE from 
12.72% to 15.50%, this increase is very small while the time step is reduced by a factor 12. 
 
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
nRMSE (%)
Number of inputs
Standard deviation
Average nRMSE
Minimum nRMSE
Maximum nRMSE
 
Figure 4. Average, minimum and maximum values of the nRMSE and its standard deviation versus the 
number of inputs for 5-min data. 
These comments can be made: 
 
 
The number of hidden neurons for the optimal configurations decreases when the 
number of inputs decreases which confirms the empirical rules specified in  
paragraph 3. 
 
Some models with a lower number of inputs can be better than models with a higher 
number of inputs. Thus, adding new inputs may decrease the model quality. 
However, we must keep in mind that calculated parameters (i.e., HESI, z and ) are 
always available and can be easily added in the set of inputs if, of course, this 
addition does not decrease the ANN quality. 

 
 
Table 2. Best and worst configurations according to the number of inputs 
 
Nb inputs 
Rank 

z 
T 
H 
p 
Pr 
WS 
WD 
S 
HESI 
MAE 
(Wh/m²) 
nMAE (%) 
MBE 
(Wh/m²) 
nMBE (%) 
RMSE 
(Wh/m²) 
nRMSE (%) 
R² 
Nb Hidden 
neurons 
Best configuration 
10 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5.08 
15.5 
-0.04 
-0.13 
6.12 
18.6 
0.966 
8 
9 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
5.083 
15.50 
0.011 
0.034 
6.115 
18.65 
0.9659 
7 
9 
3 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5.118 
15.61 
-0.034 
-0.105 
6.152 
18.76 
0.9655 
7 
8 
6 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5.199 
15.85 
-0.018 
-0.054 
6.234 
19.01 
0.9646 
6 
8 
7 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
5.209 
15.88 
-0.012 
-0.037 
6.245 
19.04 
0.9644 
6 
7 
15 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
5.285 
16.12 
-0.038 
-0.116 
6.323 
19.28 
0.9635 
5 
7 
24 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 
0 
5.358 
16.34 
-0.032 
-0.098 
6.399 
19.51 
0.9626 
5 
6 
18 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
5.306 
16.18 
-0.033 
-0.101 
6.345 
19.35 
0.9633 
5 
6 
32 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
5.415 
16.51 
-0.021 
-0.064 
6.457 
19.69 
0.9619 
4 
5 
108 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
5.723 
17.45 
0.018 
0.054 
6.775 
20.66 
0.9580 
3 
5 
117 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
5.756 
17.55 
-0.015 
-0.046 
6.809 
20.76 
0.9576 
3 
4 
196 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
6.066 
18.50 
-0.007 
-0.021 
7.128 
21.74 
0.9534 
2 
4 
226 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
6.213 
18.95 
-0.018 
-0.055 
7.280 
22.20 
0.9513 
2 
3 
360 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
7.162 
21.84 
-0.003 
-0.009 
8.257 
25.18 
0.9370 
1 
3 
363 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
7.245 
22.09 
-0.005 
-0.015 
8.343 
25.44 
0.9356 
1 
2 
372 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
7.389 
22.53 
0.003 
0.009 
8.491 
25.89 
0.9332 
1 
2 
379 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
8.086 
24.66 
0.062 
0.189 
9.209 
28.08 
0.9210 
1 
1 
753 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
13.762 
41.97 
0.062 
0.188 
15.058 
45.92 
0.7707 
1 
1 
754 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
13.780 
42.02 
-0.004 
-0.013 
15.076 
45.97 
0.7701 
1 
 
 
 

 
Table 2. (Continued) 
 
Nb inputs 
Rank 

z 
T 
H 
p 
Pr 
WS 
WD 
S 
HESI 
MAE 
(Wh/m²) 
nMAE (%) 
MBE 
(Wh/m²) 
nMBE (%) 
RMSE 
(Wh/m²) 
nRMSE (%) 
R² 
Nb Hidden 
neurons 
Worst configuration 
9 
382 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
9.354 
28.52 
-0.056 
-0.169 
10.52 
32.07 
0.8955 
7 
9 
144 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5.869 
17.90 
-0.026 
-0.079 
6.926 
21.12 
0.9560 
7 
8 
840 
1 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
16.639 
50.74 
0.105 
0.312 
18.02 
54.95 
0.8319 
6 
8 
766 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
15.355 
46.82 
-0.066 
-0.201 
16.70 
50.92 
0.7057 
6 
7 
871 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
17.204 
52.46 
-0.073 
-0.224 
18.60 
56.73 
0.6166 
5 
7 
783 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
15.869 
48.39 
-0.049 
-0.150 
17.23 
52.53 
0.6843 
5 
6 
1002 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
20.712 
63.16 
-1.966 
-5.994 
22.22 
67.75 
0.5837 
4 
6 
931 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
18.745 
57.16 
-0.147 
-0.448 
20.19 
61.57 
0.5196 
4 
5 
977 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
20.072 
61.21 
-0.179 
-0.546 
21.56 
65.74 
0.4093 
3 
5 
951 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
19.484 
59.41 
-0.155 
-0.472 
20.95 
63.89 
0.4622 
3 
4 
1009 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
21.544 
65.69 
-0.182 
-0.555 
23.08 
70.36 
0.1808 
2 
4 
992 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
0 
0 
20.402 
62.21 
-0.188 
-0.575 
21.90 
66.78 
0.3758 
2 
3 
1014 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
0 
0 
21.749 
66.32 
-0.175 
-0.534 
23.29 
71.01 
0.1578 
1 
3 
1012 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
21.674 
66.09 
-0.175 
-0.533 
23.21 
70.77 
0.1803 
1 
2 
1023 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1 
0 
0 
22.673 
69.14 
-0.124 
-0.377 
24.24 
73.91 
0.1141 
1 
2 
1021 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
21.938 
66.89 
-0.141 
-0.430 
23.48 
71.60 
0.0576 
1 
1 
1022 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
21.971 
67.00 
-0.109 
-0.334 
23.51 
71.70 
0.0993 
1 
1 
1020 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
21.917 
66.83 
-0.189 
-0.576 
23.46 
71.53 
0.1097 
1 
 
 
 
 

 
Table 3. Best and worst configurations without S according to the number of inputs 
 
Nb inputs 
Rank 

z 
T 
H 
p 
Pr 
WS 
WD 
HESI 
MAE 
(Wh/m²) 
nMAE (%) 
MBE 
(Wh/m²) 
nMBE (%) 
RMSE 
(Wh/m²) 
nRMSE (%) 
R² 
Nb 
Hidden 
neurons 
Best configurations 
9 
382 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
9.35 
28.5 
-0.05 
-0.17 
10.5 
32.07 
0.8955 
7 
8 
383 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
9.427 
28.75 
-0.003 -0.010 10.59 
32.29 
0.8940 
6 
8 
384 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
9.435 
28.77 
-0.058 -0.178 10.60 
32.32 
0.8938 
6 
7 
389 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
9.536 
29.08 
-0.058 -0.176 10.70 
32.64 
0.8915 
5 
7 
391 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
9.566 
29.17 
-0.010 -0.031 10.73 
32.73 
0.8909 
5 
6 
398 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
1 
9.661 
29.46 
-0.038 -0.115 10.83 
33.03 
0.8888 
4 
6 
399 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
1 
9.661 
29.46 
0.002 
0.007 
10.83 
33.03 
0.8887 
4 
5 
421 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
9.800 
29.88 
-0.008 -0.023 10.97 
33.47 
0.8856 
3 
5 
426 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
1 
1 
9.838 
30.00 
-0.013 -0.041 11.01 
33.58 
0.8848 
3 
4 
468 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
10.076 
30.73 
-0.042 -0.128 11.26 
34.34 
0.8792 
2 
4 
496 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
10.226 
31.18 
-0.029 -0.088 11.41 
34.80 
0.8751 
2 
3 
587 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
11.931 
36.38 
-0.016 -0.048 13.17 
40.16 
0.8303 
1 
3 
605 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
12.120 
36.96 
0.018 
0.056 
13.37 
40.75 
0.8247 
1 
2 
635 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
12.415 
37.86 
0.033 
0.100 
13.67 
41.68 
0.8157 
1 
2 
650 
0 
1 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
12.566 
38.32 
0.063 
0.191 
13.83 
42.16 
0.8110 
1 
1 
753 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
13.762 
41.97 
0.062 
0.188 
15.06 
45.92 
0.7707 
3 
1 
754 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
13.780 
42.02 
-0.004 -0.013 15.07 
45.97 
0.7701 
1 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Table 3. (Continued) 
 
Nb inputs 
Rank 

z 
T 
H 
p 
Pr 
WS 
WD 
HESI 
MAE (Wh/m²) 
nMAE (%) 
MBE (Wh/m²) 
nMBE (%) 
RMSE (Wh/m²) 
nRMSE (%) 
R² 
Nb 
Hidden neurons 
Worst configuration 
8 
561 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
11.413 
34.80 
-0.028 
-0.085 
12.64 
38.53 
0.8450 
6 
8 
417 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
9.768 
29.79 
-0.017 
-0.052 
10.94 
33.36 
0.8864 
6 
7 
871 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
17.204 
52.46 
-0.073 
-0.224 
18.60 
56.73 
0.6166 
5 
7 
641 
1 
1 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
12.468 
38.02 
-0.038 
-0.117 
13.72 
41.85 
0.8141 
5 
6 
931 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
18.745 
57.16 
-0.147 
-0.448 
20.19 
61.57 
0.5196 
4 
6 
903 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
17.957 
54.76 
-0.039 
-0.119 
19.38 
59.09 
0.5718 
4 
5 
977 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
20.073 
61.21 
-0.179 
-0.546 
21.56 
65.74 
0.4093 
3 
5 
951 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
19.484 
59.41 
-0.155 
-0.472 
20.95 
63.89 
0.4622 
3 
4 
1009 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
21.544 
65.70 
-0.182 
-0.555 
23.08 
70.36 
0.1808 
2 
4 
992 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
0 
20.402 
62.21 
-0.188 
-0.575 
21.90 
66.77 
0.3758 
2 
3 
1014 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
0 
21.749 
66.32 
-0.175 
-0.534 
23.29 
71.01 
0.1578 
1 
3 
1012 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
21.674 
66.09 
-0.175 
-0.533 
23.21 
70.77 
0.1802 
1 
2 
1023 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1 
0 
22.673 
69.14 
-0.124 
-0.377 
24.24 
73.91 
0.1141 
1 
2 
1021 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
0 
21.938 
66.89 
-0.141 
-0.430 
23.48 
71.60 
0.0567 
1 
1 
1022 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
21.971 
67.00 
-0.110 
-0.334 
23.51 
71.70 
0.0993 
1 
1 
1020 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
21.917 
66.83 
-0.189 
-0.576 
23.46 
71.53 
0.1097 
1 
 
 

Applications of ANN Methods for Solar Radiation Estimation 
 
119
Best models: same remarks than for hourly data: δ appears very shortly, WD and Pr never 
appear; S is always present and T, H, HESI and p are often present, these 5 inputs have a 
good correlation with solar irradiation.  
Worst models: S, z and HESI are preponderant (always absent in worst configurations); 
Humidity seems to play a non-negligible role. 
Without calculated inputs: if we don’t use calculated inputs (i.e., HESI, z and ), the 
best configuration is classified 684th (nRMSE = 43.58), then using any calculated inputs is a 
nonsense. Without  and
z
, the best ANN has an nRMSE of 19.25% (rank: 12); without  
and HESI, the best nRMSE is 19.64% (rank: 29); but, without 
z
and HESI, the best nRMSE 
is only 43.58% (rank: 684). In fact, extraterrestrial irradiation HESI is calculated using the 
cosine of 
z
 (equation (5)), 
z
 and HESI hold same information. At least, one of these 
parameters must be used as input. 
Without Sunshine duration: S is always present in the best configurations and 
“overwrites” other input data. The correlation between S and HGSI was very high. Without S, 
the best nRMSE drops to 32.07% compared with 18.65% for the best configuration with 10 
inputs. Table 3 shows the results for the best and worst configurations without S in the inputs 
set. 
Figure 5 shows the average, minimum and maximum values of the nRMSE and the 
standard deviation versus the number of input data for ANN model without S in the inputs 
set. 
 
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
nRMSE (%)
Number of inputs
Standard deviation
Average nRMSE
Minimum nRMSE
Maximum nRMSE
 
Figure 5. Average, minimum and maximum values of the nRMSE and its standard deviation versus the 
number of inputs for 5-min data and without S in input. 

Gilles Notton, Kahina Dahmani, Rabah Dizene et al. 
120
The best ANN architecture with 9 inputs has a nRMSE equal to 32.07% (nMAE = 
28.52%); this reliability is correct considering the 5-min time-step. nRMSE and nMAE vary 
slightly between ANN architecture with 9 and 6 inputs. The reliability of the ANN models 
does not vary too much as long as the number of inputs is higher than 4.  
Synthesis: for 5-min data, the reliability of ANN can be considered as correct particularly 
when S is in input. We noted that there is redundancy between HGSI and
z
. Pr and WD has 
a low influence on the solar irradiation estimation (low correlation with solar irradiation). 
nRMSE of the 6-inputs model 

HESI
,S
,
WS
,p
,
H
,
T
 is 19.35% compared with nRMSE of 10-
inputs model with 18.65%, this combination has good performance with a minimum of 
inputs. 
Estimated 5-min HGSI were plotted versus measured 5-min HGSI for 4 architectures in 
Figure 6: 
 
 
The ANN structure with 10 inputs; 
 
The ANN structure with 6 inputs; 
 
The ANN structure with 9 inputs without sunshine duration; 
 
The best ANN structure with 5 inputs (without sunshine duration). 
 
Few differences appear between the ANN structure with 10 and 6 inputs in term of 
reliability and data dispersion. Without S, it appears clearly a more important spread of data 
compared with the results obtained with ANN structure with S in the inputs set. The 
performances of best ANN structures without S for 5-min data are correct with a nMAE 
between 28.5% and 31% and a nRMSE between 32 and 35%. 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Estimated HGSI (Wh/m²)
Measured HGSI (Wh/m²)
5 inputs : T, H,p, Pr, HESI
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Estimated HGSI (Wh/m²)
Measured HGSI (Wh/m²)
10 inputs
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Estimated HGSI (Wh/m²)
Measured HGSI (Wh/m²)
6 inputs:T, H, p, WS, S, HESI 
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Estimated HGSI (Wh/m²)
Measured HGSI (Wh/m²)
9 inputs without S
 
Figure 6. Estimated 5-min HGSI versus measured 5-min HGSI for various ANN architectures. 

Application of ANN Methods for Solar Radiation Estimation 
121
6. SECOND STUDY: CONVERSION OF HORIZONTAL GLOBAL SOLAR 
IRRADIATION INTO TILTED ONE 
 
The conversion of horizontal solar irradiation to tilted solar irradiation is a complex issue 
often dealt within the scientific literature [9,24-28]. It is difficult or even impossible to 
develop a simple model for converting horizontal solar irradiation into inclined ones [8] 
because the radiation received by a tilted plane includes the radiation reflected by the ground 
and scattered by the sky; this last component is difficult to estimate. This conversion is not 
realized with a high reliability particularly with a small time-step. 
Artificial Neural Network (ANN) methods [12,29] generally realize the same conversion 
with an improved adequacy; nRMSE is 2.49% (45°) and 2.82% (60°) for hourly data and 
3.08% (45°) and 4.36% (60°) for 10-min data, i.e., 3 and 2 times less than with conventional 
methods applied to hourly data. These results confirm that, as noted in previous studies [30-
31], an ANN approach outperforms generally the traditional methods for this type of 
estimation. This is due to the inherent non-linearity in solar radiation data which makes the 
conventional statistical methods less sufficient.  
The accuracy values for the ANN are presented in Table 4 (calculated on the basis of 8 
epochs per architecture). The first column contains the number of neurons in the hidden layer. 
The mean values of nRMSE and its corresponding standard deviation are presented in 
Figure 8 as an error-bar graph. An improvement appears until reaching 4 hidden neurons, then 
nRMSE become almost constant and then no improvement is observed. The dash points 
define the 95% confidence interval of the prediction errors (calculated on the basis of 8 
simulations per architecture), the triangles and squares are the minimum and maximum 
observed errors, respectively. We observe the same trend for the variation of the nMAE. The 
best configuration is encircled. 
Thus, we will retain an ANN with 4 inputs and one hidden layer of 4 neurons which have 
an average nRMSE of 8.81%, the best simulation with this ANN structure conduced to an 
nRMSE of 8.27%. 
 
-
Zenith Angle z
5-min Horizontal 
Global 
Irradiation HGSI
5-min Horizontal 
Extraterrestrial
Irradiation HESI
Declination δ
5-min Tilted Global 
Irradiation TGSI
Input Layer
Hidden layer
(1-8 neurons)
Output Layer
Input measured data
Output researched data Input calculated data
 
Figure 7. The ANN model. 

Gilles Notton, Kahina Dahmani, Rabah Dizene et al. 
122
Table 4. Average statistical parameters (calculated with 8 simulations per architecture) 
between measured and estimated global solar 5 min-irradiation on a 36.8° tilted plane 
with 4 inputs: horizontal global and extraterrestrial 5-min irradiations, declination and 
zenith angles. The bold line is the results for the best architecture  
(here 4 hidden neurons) 
 
Hidden neurons number 
MAE 
nMAE 
MBE 
nMBE 
RMSE 
nRMSE 
R² 
Wh.m-2 
% 
Wh.m-2 
% 
Wh.m-2 
% 
1 
5.94 
16.32 
-0.97 
-2.67 
6.89 
18.93 
0.977 
2 
2.95 
8.12 
-0.29 
-0.80 
3.81 
10.48 
0.991 
3 
2.80 
7.71 
-0.50 
-1.39 
3.65 
10.04 
0.992 
4 
2.41 
6.63 
-0.31 
-0.85 
3.21 
8.81 
0.994 
5 
2.56 
7.04 
-0.80 
-2.20 
3.47 
9.54 
0.994 
6 
2.75 
7.56 
-1.14 
-3.14 
3.77 
10.36 
0.993 
7 
2.68 
7.38 
-1.09 
-3.00 
3.68 
10.12 
0.993 
8 
2.70 
7.43 
-1.12 
-3.09 
3.69 
10.14 
0.993 
 
To illustrate the good reliability of this optimized MLP, we plotted in Figure 9 the 
estimated data versus the experimental ones for data not used in the learning phases and we 
randomly drew a period of seven days unknown to the network with measured and calculated 
data (Figure 10). 
We see a good correspondence between modelled and experimental data whatever the 
state of the sky is (clear, partially cloudy and cloudy). 
 
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
nRMSE (%)
Number of hidden neurons
MAE=2.41 Wh/m² (6.63%)
MBE=-0.31 Wh/m² (-0.84%)
RMSE=3.21 Wh/m² (8.81%)
 
Figure 8. nRMSE evolution vs the number hidden neurons. 

Application of ANN Methods for Solar Radiation Estimation 
123
 
Figure 9. Modeled 5-min values versus experimental data. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
7
11
14
17
9
13
16
8
11
15
18
10
13
17
9
12
15
19
10
14
17
9
12
16
5-min Solar Irradiation (Wh/m²)
Time (hours)
Measured
Estimated
 
Figure 10. Validation of the Model for 7 randomly chosen days. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The objective of this paper was, in a first part, to show the feasibility of determination of 
horizontal global solar irradiation from other more available meteorological data, this 
feasibility seems to be proven for the Algiers climate but need to be confirmed for other sites 
subject to a wide variety of climatic conditions. 
The adequacy of the ANN model with experimental data can be considered as good, 
particularly in the case of 5-min time step, if sunshine duration belongs to the input set. The 

Gilles Notton, Kahina Dahmani, Rabah Dizene et al. 
124
nRMSE of the best 6-inputs model is 19.35% (nMAE = 16.18%) compared with nRMSE of 
10-inputs model with 18.65% (nMAE = 15.50%), this combination has good performance 
with a minimum of inputs. Without S in the inputs set, the performances are decreased; the 
previous model (5 inputs) has an nRMSE equal to 33.47% for a nMAE equal to 29.88%. 
This exhaustive study (1023 combinations) allows to have an order of magnitude of the 
model performance from available meteorological data. 
The second objective was to see whether the ANN models are able to estimate at a short 
time-step (5 minutes) solar global irradiation from horizontal global solar irradiation much 
more widely measured all around the World. The relative root means square error (nRMSE) 
is around 8% for the optimal configuration, which corresponds to a very good accuracy for 
such a short time-step.  
ANN methods are promising for the estimation of solar radiation and furthermore when 
the time step is small. There are very few conventional methods available to determine solar 
irradiation at subhourly scale. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 
We thank the Centre for Development of Renewable Energies (Bouzareah-Algeria) for 
providing the data used in this study. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Manz, D.; Miller, N. Data requirements for wind and solar integration studies. UWIG 
Solar Integration User Group Meeting, Portland, Oregon, April 14, 2010. 
[2] 
Corbus, D. (2011). Hawaii solar integration study technical review committee. RSWG, 
October 26, 2011, available at http://www1. eere.energy.gov. 
[3] 
Frank, J.D.; Brower, M.; Barton, M.; Beaucage, P. Solar photovoltaic power output data 
sets for grid-integration studies in Hawaii. ASES 2012, Denver, CO, 13-17 May 2012. 
[4] 
Atwater, M.A.; Ball, J.T. A numerical solar radiation model based on standard 
meteorological observations. Sol Energy 1978;21:163–70. 
[5] 
Hidalgo, F.G.; Martinez, R.F., Vidal, E.F. (2013). Design of a low-cost sensor for solar 
irradiance. Available at http://oceanoptics.com. 
[6] 
Paulescu, M.; Paulescu, E.; Gravila, P.; Badescu, V. Weather Modeling and Forecasting 
of PV Systems Operation, Green Energy and Technology, DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4471-
4649-0_2, Ó Springer-Verlag, London 2013. 
[7] 
WRDC. World Radiation Data Center, WRDC online archive, National Renewable 
Energy Laboratory, US Department of Energy, 2012. 
[8] 
Behr, H.D. Solar radiation on tilted south-oriented surfaces: Validation of transfer-
models. Solar Energy 1997;61:399–413. 
[9] 
Robledo, L.; Soler, A. Modelling irradiance on inclined planes with an anisotropic 
model. Energy 1998;23:193-201. 
[10] Padovan, A.; Del Col, D. Measurement and modeling of solar irradiance components 
on horizontal and tilted planes. Solar Energy 2010;84:2068-84. 

Application of ANN Methods for Solar Radiation Estimation 
125
[11] Iqbal, M. An introduction to solar radiation. Academic Press; Canada, ISBN 0-12-
373752-4, 1983. 
[12] Notton, G.; Paoli, C.; Ivanova, L.; Vasileva, S.; Nivet, M.L. Neural network approach 
to estimate 10-min solar global irradiation values on tilted plane. Renewable Energy 
2013;50:576-84.  
[13] De Miguel, A.; Bilbao, J.; Aguiar, R.; Kambezidis, H.; Negro, E. Diffuse solar 
irradiation model evaluation in the North Mediterranean belt area. Sol Energy 
2001;70:143-53. 
[14] Kalogirou, S.A.; Şencan, A. Artificial intelligence techniques in solar energy 
applications. Solar Collectors and Panels, Theory and Applications, Book edited by RI 
Manyala, 444 p., October 2010. 
[15] Mellit, A.; Pavan, A.M. A 24-h forecast of solar irradiance using artificial neural 
network: Application for performance prediction of a grid-connected PV plant at 
Trieste, Italy. Solar Energy 2010;84, 807–21. 
[16] Cybenko, G. Approximation by superposition of sigmoidal function. Math. Control 
Signals Systems 1989;2:303-14. 
[17] Reddy, K.S.; Manish, R. Solar resource estimation using artificial neural networks and 
comparison with other correlation models. Energy Convers Manage 2003;44:2519-30.  
[18] Abraham, A. Artificial Neural Networks. Handbook for Measurement Systems Design, 
Peter Sydenham and Richard Thorn (Eds.), John Wiley and Sons Ltd., 2005, London, 
ISBN 0-470-02143-8, 901-908. 
[19] Alam, S.; Kaushik, S.C.; Garg, S.N. Assessment of diffuse solar energy under general 
sky condition using artificial neural network. Applied Energy 2009;86:554–64. 
[20] Wierenga, B.; Kluytmans, J. Neural nets versus marketing models in time series 
analysis: a simulation study. Proc. 23th annual conference of the European marketing 
academy, 1994, pp. 1139-1153, Ed Maastricht: University of Limburg. 
[21] Venugopal, V.; Baets, W. Neural networks and statistical techniques in marketing 
research: A conceptual comparison. Marketing Intelligence and Planning 1994;12:30-8.  
[22] Shepard, R.N. Neural nets for generalization and classification: comment on Staddon 
and Reid. Psychol Rev 1990;97:579-80. 
[23] Dreyfus, G.; Martinez, J.; Samuelides, M.; Gordon, M.; Badran, F.; Thiria, S. 
Apprentissage statistique: Réseaux de neurones – Cartes topologiques - Machines à 
vecteurs supports, 3 éd. Eyrolles, 2008. 
[24] Wenxian, L.; Wenfeng, G.; Shaoxuan, P.; Enrong, L. Ratios of global radiation on a 
tilted to horizontal surface for Yunnan province. China. Energy 1995;20(8), 723-8. 
[25] Li, D.H.W.; Lau, C.C.S.; Lam, J.C. Predicting daylight illuminance on inclined surfaces 
using sky luminance data. Energy 2005;30:1649-65. 
[26] Cheng, C.L.; Chan; C.Y.; Chen, C.L. An empirical approach to estimating monthly 
radiation on south-facing tilted planes for building application. Energy 2006;31, 2940-
2957. 
[27] De Rosa, A.; Ferraro, V.; Kaliakatsos, D.; Marinelli, V. Calculating diffuse illuminance 
on vertical surfaces in different sky conditions. Energy 2008;33:1703-10. 
[28] Pandey, C.K.; Katiyar, A.K. A note on diffuse solar radiation on a tilted surface. Energy 
2009;34:1764-9. 

Gilles Notton, Kahina Dahmani, Rabah Dizene et al. 
126
[29] Dahmani, K.; Notton, G.; Dizene, R.; Paoli, C. Etat de l’art sur les réseaux de neurones 
artificiels appliqués à l’estimation du rayonnement solaire. Revue des Energies 
Renouvelables 2012;15:687-702. 
[30] Hontoria, L.; Aguilera, J.; Zufiria, P. Generation of hourly irradiation synthetic series 
using the neural network multilayer perceptron. Solar Energy 2002;72:441-6. 
[31] Jiang, Y. Computation of monthly mean daily global solar radiation in China using 
artificial neural networks and comparison with other empirical models. Energy 
2009;34:1276-83. 
 
 
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES 
 
Gilles Notton  
 
Name: Gilles Notton  
 
Affiliation: Laboratory Sciences for Environment – UMR CNRS 6134 -University of Corsica 
Pasquale Paoli, Ajaccio, France. 
 
Date of Birth: 23 January 1964 
 
Education: PhD degrees in Energy Engineering in 1992 from the University of Corsica 
(France). Accreditation to supervise research in 2002. 
 
Address: Scientific Centre Georges Peri – Route des Sanguinaires – F20000 Ajaccio- France  
 
Research and Professional Experience: Researcher and Teacher since 1984. Assistant 
Professor. 
 
Professional Appointments: He is working in the fields of renewable energy for over 30 
years. His research interests cover renewable energy sources estimations and prediction, 
Wind/PV hybrid systems, development of new concepts of solar collector with high 
building integration and problematic of the energy production in the islands. He belongs 
to the management committee of the COST action TU1205 Building Integration of Solar 
Thermal Systems (BISTS) and he is involved in the H2020 project “Promotion of 
Distributed Generation Community Storage through the Installation and Operation of a 
Renewable Energy Hybrid Storage Configuration on the Aegean Island of Tilos (TILOS). 
 
Publications Last Three Years:  
Over 90 international publications and 170 communications in international congresses. 
 
K. Dahmani, G. Notton, C. Voyant, R. Dizene, M.L. Nivet, C. Paoli, W. Tamas (2016). 
Multilayer Perceptron Approach for estimating 5-min and hourly horizontal global 
radiation from exogenous meteorological data in locations without solar measurements. 
Renewable Energy, 90, 267-82. 

Application of ANN Methods for Solar Radiation Estimation 
127
W. Tamas, G.Notton, C.Paoli, M.L.Nivet, C.Voyant (2015). Hybridization of air quality 
forecasting models using machine learning and clustering: an original approach to detect 
pollutant peaks. Aerosol and Air Quality Research, in press. 
Chr. Lamnatou, G. Notton, D. Chemisana, C.Cristofari (2015). The environmental 
performance of a building-integrated solar thermal collector, based on multiple 
approaches and life-cycle impact assessment methodologies. Building and Environment, 
87, 45-58. 
C. Cristofari, R.Norvaisené, J.L.Canaletti, G.Notton (2015). Innovative alternative solar 
thermal solutions for housing in conservation-area sites listed as national heritage assets. 
Energy and Buildings, 89, 123-31. 
G. Notton (2015). Importance of islands in renewable energy production and storage: The 
situation of the French islands. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews; 47, 260-9.  
G. Notton, S. Diaf (2015). Available solar energy for flat-plate solar collectors mounted on a 
fixed or tracking structure. International Journal of Green Energy, in press.  
Chr. Lamnatou, G. Notton, D.Chemisana, C.Cristofari (2014). Life Cycle Analysis of a 
Building-Integrated solar thermal collector, based on embodied energy and embodied 
carbon methodologies. Energy and Buildings; 84, 378-87. 
K. Dahmani, R. Dizene, G. Notton, C. Paoli, C. Voyant, M. L.Nivet (2014). Estimation of 5-
min time-step data of tilted solar global irradiation using ANN model. Energy. 70, 374-
81. 
G. Notton, F. Motte, C. Cristofari, J.L. Canaletti (2014). Performances and Numerical 
Optimization of a Novel Thermal Solar Collector for Residential Building, Renewable 
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 33, 60–73. 
S. Diaf, G. Notton (2013). Evaluation of electricity generation and energy cost of wind energy 
conversion systems in southern Algeria. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 23, 
379-90.  
S. Diaf, G. Notton (2013). Technical and economic analysis of large-scale wind energy 
conversion systems in Algeria. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 19, 37-51. 
F. Motte, G. Notton, C. Cristofari, J.L. Canaletti (2013). Design and Modelling of a New 
Patented Thermal Solar Collector with High Building Integration. Applied Energy, 102, 
631-9. 
G. Notton, C. Paoli, L. Ivanova, S. Vasileva, M.L. Nivet (2013). Neural network approach to 
estimate 10-min solar global irradiation values on tilted plane. Renewable Energy, 50, 
576-84. 
 
 
Kahina Dahmani  
 
Name: Kahina Dahmani  
 
Affiliation: Science and Technology University of Houari Boumédiène, USTHB, Algiers, 
Algeria 
 
Date of Birth: 08 August 1987 
 

Gilles Notton, Kahina Dahmani, Rabah Dizene et al. 
128
Education: PhD degrees in Energy Engineering in 2015 from Science and Technology 
University of Houari Boumédiène. 
 
Address: PoBox 32, EL ALIA, 16111 Bab Ezzouar, Algiers, Algeria 
 
Research and Professional Experience: Researcher and Teacher since 2016.  
 
Professional Appointments: She is working in the fields of renewable energy on renewable 
energy sources estimations. 
 
Publications Last Three Years:  
K. Dahmani, G. Notton, C. Voyant, R. Dizene, M.L. Nivet, C. Paoli, W. Tamas (2016). 
Multilayer Perceptron Approach for estimating 5-min and hourly horizontal global 
radiation from exogenous meteorological data in locations without solar measurements. 
Renewable Energy, 90, 267-82. 
K. Dahmani, R. Dizene, G. Notton, C. Paoli, C. Voyant, M.L. Nivet (2014). Estimation of 5-
min time-step data of tilted solar global irradiation using ANN model. Energy. 70, 374-
81. 
C. Voyant, G. Notton, C. Paoli, M.L. Nivet, M. Muselli, K. Dahmani. (2014) Numerical 
weather prediction or stochastic modeling: an objective criterion of choice for the global 
radiation forecasting. International Journal of Energy Technology and Policy. 
K. Dahmani, G. Notton, R. Dizene, C. Paoli (2012). Utilisation de réseaux de neurones 
artificiels pour l’estimation du rayonnement solaire en vue d’applications énergétiques. 
Revue des Energies Renouvelables, 15-4, 687-702  
G. Notton, K. Dahmani, R. Dizene, C. Voyant, M.L. Nivet, C. Paoli (2015). Estimating short 
time solar irradiation on a tilted plane from horizontal one using Artificial Neural 
Networks. 6th International Proc. Conference on Energy Efficiency and Agricultural 
Engineering, 11-12 Novembre 2015, Rousse, Bulgarie, pp. 380-92. 
C. Voyant, G. Notton, C. Paoli, M.L. Nivet, M. Muselli, K. Dahmani, P.Haurant (2013). The 
global radiation forecasting based on NWP or stochastic modelling: an objective criterion 
of choice. 1st Int. Conf. Nanoelectronics, Communications and Renewable Energy 
ICNCRE’13, Jijel, Algérie, 22-23/09/2013. 
K. Dahmani, G. Notton, C. Paoli, R. Dizene, C. Voyant, M.L. Nivet (2013). Estimation of 5-
min solar global irradiation on tilted plane by ANN method in Bouzareah, Algeria. 1st 
Int. Conf. Nanoelectronics, Communications and Renewable Energy ICNCRE’13, Jijel, 
Algérie, 22-23/09/2013. 
 
 
Rabah Dizene  
 
Name: Rabah Dizene  
 
Affiliation: Science and Technology University of Houari Boumédiène, USTHB, Algiers, 
Algeria 
  

Application of ANN Methods for Solar Radiation Estimation 
129
Date of Birth: 22 September 1955 
  
Education: Professor at USTHB University 
  
Address: PoBox 32, EL ALIA, 16111 Bab Ezzouar, Algiers, Algeria 
  
Research and Professional Experience: Researcher and Teacher since 1984 
  
Professional Appointments: PhD expertise and conferences; article review. 
  
Publications Last Three Years:  
K. Dahmani, G. Notton, C. Voyant, R. Dizene, M.L. Nivet, C. Paoli, W. Tamas (2016). 
Multilayer Perceptron Approach for estimating 5-min and hourly horizontal global 
radiation from exogenous meteorological data in locations without solar measurements. 
Renewable Energy, 90, 267-82. 
K. Dahmani, R. Dizene, G. Notton, C. Paoli, C. Voyant, M.L. Nivet (2014). Estimation of 5-
min time-step data of tilted solar global irradiation using ANN model. Energy. 70, 374-
81. 
M. Boumaza, F. Moretti, R. Dizene. (2014). Numerical simulation of flow and mixing in 
ROCOM facility using uniform and non-uniform inlet flow velocity profiles, Nuclear 
Engineering and Design, Nuclear Engineering and Design 280, 362–71,  
N. Belkheir, S. Khelladi, R. Dizene, F. Bakir. (2013). Numerical Simulation of Surface 
Roughness Effects on Dynamic Stall of Wind Turbine Blade’ Journal of Power and 
Energy Systems, 7-1, 1-17.  
A. Nouioua, R. Dizene (2014). Modeling of Flow around a wind rotor HAWT. Application to 
the Dynamic Stall’ Renewable and Sustainable Energy Conference (IRSEC) 2014 
International, pp: 827-830, IEEE Publisher. 
 
 
Marie Laure Nivet  
 
Name: Marie Laure Nivet  
 
Affiliation: Laboratory Sciences for Environment – UMR CNRS 6134 -University of Corsica 
Pasquale Paoli, Corte, France. 
 
Date of Birth: 21 July 1971 
Education: PhD degrees in Computer Sciences in 1999 from the University of Nantes 
(France). 
  
Address: SPE, University of Corsica, BP52, F20250 Corte- France  
 
Research and Professional Experience: Researcher and Teacher since 2001. Assistant 
Professor. 
 

Gilles Notton, Kahina Dahmani, Rabah Dizene et al. 
130
Professional Appointments: He is working in the fields of renewable energy in the field of 
temporal series prediction and artificial intelligence.  
 
Publications Last Three Years:  
K. Dahmani, G. Notton, C. Voyant, R. Dizene, M. L. Nivet, C. Paoli, W. Tamas (2016). 
Multilayer Perceptron Approach for estimating 5-min and hourly horizontal global 
radiation from exogenous meteorological data in locations without solar measurements. 
Renewable Energy, 90, 267-82.  
W. Tamas, G. Notton, C. Paoli, ML. Nivet, C. Voyant. (2015). Hybridization of air quality 
forecasting models using machine learning and clustering: an original approach to detect 
pollutant peaks. Aerosol and Air Quality Research, in-press.  
C. Voyant, C. Darras, M. Muselli, C. Paoli, ML. Nivet, P. Poggi (2014). Bayesian rules and 
stochastic models for high accuracy prediction of solar radiation. Applied energy, 114, 
218-26.  
C. Voyant, P. Haurant, M. Muselli, C. Paoli, ML. Nivet. (2014). Time series modeling and 
large scale global solar radiation forecasting from geostationary satellites data. Solar 
energy, 102,p131-42.  
C. Voyant, G. Notton, C. Paoli, M. L. Nivet, M. Muselli, K. Dahmani. (2014) Numerical 
weather prediction or stochastic modeling: an objective criterion of choice for the global 
radiation forecasting. International Journal of Energy Technology and Policy.  
W. Tamas, G. Notton, C. Paoli, C. Voyant, ML. Nivet, A. Balu (2014). Urban ozone 
concentration forecasting with artificial neural network in Corsica. Mathematical 
modelling in civil engineering, 1, 33-42.  
K. Dahmani, R. Dizene, G. Notton, C. Paoli, C. Voyant, M. L. Nivet (2014). Estimation of 5-
min time-step data of tilted solar global irradiation using ANN model. Energy. 70, 374-
81.  
C. Voyant, W. Tamas, ML. Nivet, G. Notton, C. Paoli, M. Muselli. (2014). Meteorological 
time series forecasting with pruned multi-layer perceptron and 2-stage Levenberg-
Marquardt method. International Journal of Modelling, Identification and Control, in-
press.  
C. Voyant, M. Muselli, ML. Nivet, G. Notton, C. Paoli (2014). Heterogeneous transfer 
functions MultiLayer Perceptron (MLP) for meteorological time series forecasting. 
International Journal of Modelling, Identification and Control, in-press.  
C. Voyant, M. Muselli, C. Paoli, ML. Nivet. (2013). Hybrid methodology for hourly global 
radiation forecasting in Mediterranean locations. Renewable energy, 53, 1-11.  
C. Voyant, C. Paoli, M. Muselli, ML. Nivet. (2013). Multi-horizon solar radiation forecasting 
for Mediterranean locations using time series models. Renewable and sustainable energy 
reviews, 28, 44-52.  
G. Notton, C. Paoli, L. Ivanova, S. Vasileva, M. L. Nivet (2013). Neural network approach to 
estimate 10-min solar global irradiation values on tilted plane. Renewable Energy, 50, 
576-584.  
 
 
 
 

Application of ANN Methods for Solar Radiation Estimation 
131
Cyril Voyant  
 
Name: Cyril Voyant  
 
Affiliation: Laboratory Sciences for Environment – UMR CNRS 6134 -University of Corsica 
Pasquale Paoli, Ajaccio, France. 
 
Date of Birth: 06 October 1977 
 
Education: PhD in Energy Engineering 
 
Address: Università di Corsica Pasquale Paoli; Laboratoire Sciences Pour l'Environnement 
(CNRS / Université de Corse)  
 
Research and Professional Experience: PhD in renewable energy and PV forecasting, 
forecasting with machine learning method 
 
Professional Appointments: ANN, ARMA, machine learning, PV prediction 
 
Publications Last Three Years:  
K. Dahmani, G. Notton, C. Voyant, R. Dizene, M. L. Nivet, C. Paoli, W. Tamas (2016). 
Multilayer Perceptron Approach for estimating 5-min and hourly horizontal global 
radiation from exogenous meteorological data in locations without solar measurements. 
Renewable Energy, 90, 267-82.  
W. Tamas, G. Notton, C. Paoli, ML. Nivet, C. Voyant. (2015). Hybridization of air quality 
forecasting models using machine learning and clustering: an original approach to detect 
pollutant peaks. Aerosol and Air Quality Research, in-press.  
C. Voyant, D. Julian, R. Roustit, K. Biffi, C. Lantieri. (2014). Biological effects and 
equivalent doses in radiotherapy: a software solution. Report of practical oncology and 
radiotherapy, 19-1, 47-55.  
C. Voyant, C. Darras, M. Muselli, C. Paoli, ML. Nivet, P. Poggi (2014). Bayesian rules and 
stochastic models for high accuracy prediction of solar radiation. Applied energy, 114, 
218-26.  
C. Voyant, P. Haurant, M. Muselli, C. Paoli, ML. Nivet. (2014). Time series modeling and 
large scale global solar radiation forecasting from geostationary satellites data. Solar 
energy, 102, 131-142.  
C. Voyant, G. Notton, C. Paoli, M. L. Nivet, M. Muselli, K. Dahmani. (2014) Numerical 
weather prediction or stochastic modeling: an objective criterion of choice for the global 
radiation forecasting. International Journal of Energy Technology and Policy.  
W. Tamas, G. Notton, C. Paoli, C. Voyant, ML. Nivet, A. Balu (2014). Urban ozone 
concentration forecasting with artificial neural network in Corsica. Mathematical 
modelling in civil engineering, 1, 33-42.  
K. Dahmani, R. Dizene, G. Notton, C. Paoli, C. Voyant, M. L. Nivet (2014). Estimation of 5-
min time-step data of tilted solar global irradiation using ANN model. Energy. 70, 374-
81.  

Gilles Notton, Kahina Dahmani, Rabah Dizene et al. 
132
C. Voyant, W. Tamas, ML. Nivet, G. Notton, C. Paoli, M. Muselli. (2014). Meteorological 
time series forecasting with pruned multi-layer perceptron and 2-stage Levenberg-
Marquardt method. International Journal of Modelling, Identification and Control, in-
press.  
C. Voyant, M. Muselli, ML. Nivet, G. Notton, C. Paoli (2014). Heterogeneous transfer 
functions MultiLayer Perceptron (MLP) for meteorological time series forecasting. 
International Journal of Modelling, Identification and Control, in-press.  
C. Voyant, M. Muselli, C. Paoli, ML. Nivet. (2013). Hybrid methodology for hourly global 
radiation forecasting in Mediterranean locations. Renewable energy, 53, 1-11.  
C. Voyant, C. Paoli, M. Muselli, ML. Nivet. (2013). Multi-horizon solar radiation forecasting 
for Mediterranean locations using time series models. Renewable and sustainable energy 
reviews, 28, 44-52.  
G. Notton, C. Paoli, L. Ivanova, S. Vasileva, M. L. Nivet (2013). Neural network approach to 
estimate 10-min solar global irradiation values on tilted plane. Renewable Energy, 50, 
576-84. 
 
 
Christophe Paoli  
 
Name: Christophe Paoli  
 
Affiliation: Computer Engineering Department of Galatasaray University / Laboratory 
Sciences for Environment, University of Corsica Pascal Paoli. 
 
Date of Birth: 26 September 1973  
 
Education: Accreditation to supervise research – 2013; Phd in computer sciences – 2001. 
 
Address: Galatasaray University, Computer Engineering Department, 34349 Ortaköy, 
İstanbul, Turkey  
 
Research and Professional Experience:  
Since September 2013, He is seconded at French Ministry of Foreign Affairs and 
International Development as International Technical Expert in Computer Science. He is 
assistant professor at Galatasaray University. His teaching activities include: algorithms 
and data structures, web programming, XML and associated technologies, compilation, 
theory of computation and machine learning. His laboratory research work focuses on 
two areas: decision support to assist policymakers and use of artificial neural networks to 
estimate and predict time series (energy, pollutants), in addition of an experience in high-
level test generation for hardware testing acquired during his doctorate.  
He also worked as a consultant in an international and multidisciplinary environment and 
shared his deep knowledge of the French universities informational system. As 
independent contractor, his activities cover training, teaching, business analysis and 
document analysis for public and private companies. 

Application of ANN Methods for Solar Radiation Estimation 
133
Professional Appointments: Assistant Professor at Galatasaray University - September 2013 
– Present; International Technical Expert at French Ministry of Foreign Affairs and 
International Development - September 2013 – Present. 
 
Publications Last Three Years:  
W. Tamas, G. Notton, C. Paoli, ML. Nivet, C. Voyant. (2015). Hybridization of Air Quality 
Forecasting Models Using Machine Learning and Clustering: An Original Approach to 
Detect Pollutant Peaks. Aerosol and Air Quality Research, in Press.  
K. Dahmani, R. Dizene, G. Notton, C. Paoli, C. Voyant, ML. Nivet. (2014). Estimation of 5-
min time-step data of tilted solar global irradiation using ANN model. Energy, 70, 374-
81.  
C. Voyant, P. Haurant, M. Muselli, C. Paoli, ML. Nivet (2014). Time series modeling and 
large scale global solar radiation forecasting from geostationary satellites data. Solar 
Energy, 102, 131-42.  
C. Voyant, C. Darras, M. Muselli, C. Paoli, ML. Nivet, P. Poggi. (2014). Bayesian rules and 
stochastic models for high accuracy prediction of solar radiation. Applied Energy, 114, 
218-26.  
C. Voyant, C. Paoli, M. Muselli, M-L. Nivet (2013). Multi-horizon solar radiation forecasting 
for Mediterranean locations using time series models. Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews 28, 44-52.  
C. Voyant, P. Randimbivololona, ML. Nivet, C. Paoli, M. Muselli. (2013). 24-hours ahead 
global irradiation forecasting using Multi-Layer Perceptron. Meteorological Applications.  
C. Voyant, M. Muselli, C. Paoli, ML. Nivet (2013). Hybrid methodology for hourly global 
radiation forecasting in Mediterranean area. Renewable Energy, 53, 1-11.  
G. Notton, C. Paoli, L. Ivanova, S. Vasileva, ML. Nivet (2013). Neural network approach to 
estimate 10-min solar global irradiation values on tilted planes. Renewable Energy, 50, 
576-84.  
 


In: Artificial Neural Networks: New Research 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-964-6 
Editor: Gayle Cain 
© 2017 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6 
 
 
 
THE USE OF IN SILICO METHODS TO DESIGN AND 
EVALUATE SKIN UV FILTERS 
 
 
Snezana Agatonovic-Kustrin1,* and David W. Morton2 
1Faculty of Pharmacy, Universiti Teknologi MARA (UiTM),  
Selangor, Malaysia 
2The School of Pharmacy and Applied Science, La Trobe University, Bendigo, 
Victoria, Australia 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Excessive exposure to sunlight is the major cause of progressive skin photo aging, 
sunburn and skin cancers. The UVB component of sunlight directly damages cellular 
DNA and leads to the formation of squamous cell carcinomas, while the UVA component 
of sunlight penetrates deeper into the skin causing DNA damage through generation of 
reactive oxygen species (ROS). UV filters are the active ingredients in sunscreen 
products, which protect skin from the dangerous effects of UV light by absorbing, 
reflecting, or diffusing UV radiation. In order to maintain effective UV protection, 
sunscreen filters should remain on the skin surface, accumulate in the stratum corneum, 
forming an effective barrier against UV radiation without transdermally penetrating into 
the systemic circulation. Further skin penetration significantly reduces their efficacy and 
may also cause phototoxic and photoallergic skin reactions. However, chemicals in 
contact with the skin have the potential to be absorbed into the skin and enter the 
systemic circulation, with several studies reporting that a number of organic filters 
significantly penetrate the skin. For assessment of dermal absorption, in vitro and in vivo 
methods are used, although in vitro tests are preferred for ethical reasons and feasibility. 
Therefore, it would be useful if the skin penetration of a sunscreen filter can be predicted 
from its chemical structure alone. Computational and QSAR based methods can be quite 
useful for development of skin permeability models and have been used to relate 
physicochemical parameters to dermal permeability to predict dermal penetration and 
absorption of chemicals. Skin penetration or partitioning like sorption processes are 
generally driven by hydrophobic effects, which are expected to correlate with molecular 
                                                           
* Corresponding author. Email: snezana0801@gmail.com. 

Snezana Agatonovic-Kustrin and David W. Morton 
136
size and lipophilicity, together with the various intermolecular interactions, which occur 
between the permeant and the skin. Hence, this study aimed to develop a QSAR using a 
heterogeneous data set based on published skin penetration data and then to use this 
established model to predict the skin penetration of UV sunscreen filter molecules. In 
order to overcome the limitations associated with linear modelling, artificial neural 
networks (ANNs) were used to build the QSAR model. Sensitivity analysis was also 
incorporated into the modelling process in order to establish the molecular requirements 
for the ideal sunscreen filter. The developed model provides insight into the molecular 
structural requirements that are important for an effective UV sunscreen filter, 
particularly in relation to dermal absorption. Producing sunscreens with limited dermal 
absorption of actives is a challenge for the cosmetic industry so the developed QSAR 
model should prove useful in developing more effective and safer sunscreen actives. 
 
Keywords: artificial neural network, dermal absorption, molecular descriptors, quantitative 
structural activity relationship, sensitivity analysis 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Exposure to UV radiation due to excessive sun exposure can give rise to a number of 
health issues. Small amounts have proven to be beneficial in providing us with a source of 
vitamin D, and can also be used to treat some diseases [1]. However, excessive exposure to 
sun UV radiation can lead to acute and chronic health conditions affecting the skin, eyes and 
immune system [2]. Excessive exposure to sunlight is a major factor in the aetiology of 
progressive photo aging and skin cancers. UV radiation is usually divided into three 
wavelength range categories; UVA, UVB, and UVC. The main type of UV radiation that 
reaches the Earth’s surface are the shorter wavelength UVB (280-315 nm) and longer 
wavelength UVA radiation (315-400 nm). While a small amount of exposure is beneficial, 
excessive exposure causes serious health issues in humans. UVB radiation causes 
inflammation of the skin (sunburn), while UVA radiation is the main cause of premature 
aging of the skin [3]. UVB in sunlight directly damages cellular DNA and is linked to the 
formation of squamous cell carcinomas. UVA penetrates deeper into the skin causing DNA 
damage through generation of radical oxygen species and is linked to the formation of 
melanomas. The Global Burden of Disease of Solar Ultraviolet Radiation report estimates 
that up to 60,000 deaths a year worldwide are caused by excessive exposure to UV radiation. 
Of those 60,000 deaths, an estimated 48,000 are caused by malignant melanomas, and 12,000 
by skin cancer [2]. As there is a direct correlation between exposure to sunlight and cancer, 
the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) has classified solar radiation as a 
human carcinogen [3]. Daily sunscreen use may reduce the incidence of squamous cell 
carcinoma but not the incidence of basal cell carcinoma [4]. The active ingredient is a 
sunscreen filter which provides a barrier to UV rays, by blocking, absorbing or scattering UV 
light, so it is important that it remains on the skin and also has limited penetration into the 
skin [5]. 
Modern sunscreen products provide broad-spectrum UV protection and may contain one 
or several UV filters. They are commonly found in the form of a cream, formulated as 
emulsions, microemulsions, or even aqueous gels [6]. A modern UV filter should be heat 
stable, photostable, water resistant, nontoxic, and easy to formulate. However, identification  

The Use of In Silico Methods to Design and Evaluate Skin UV Filters 
137
of a substance that meets these criteria is as difficult as discovering a new drug.  Because 
modern sunscreens are selected on the basis of their retention on and in the stratum corneum 
and are formulated as poorly penetrating emulsions, they generally have very low to 
negligible penetration rates. For sunscreens to be safe and effective, the lowest possible UV-
filter percutaneous absorption should be achieved. However, after application, sunscreen is 
absorbed by the skin relatively quickly and therefore requires frequent reapplication. As early 
as 20 minutes after application, typical sunscreens may begin to penetrate through the skin 
and lose their effectiveness. The extent of penetration is strongly influenced by the 
physicochemical properties of the active sunscreen filter and sunscreen formulation. Although 
measuring penetration of sunscreen filters using in vitro assays may be the first choice in the 
development of a better filter, advances in molecular 3D modelling have made in silico 
methods and QSARs a potentially powerful tool for prioritizing chemicals for further testing. 
On 18 December 2006, the European Council and European Parliament adopted 
legislation for a new chemical management system called REACH (Registration, Evaluation, 
Authorisation and Restriction of CHemicals) [7]. The purpose of REACH is to ensure a 
higher level of protection for human health and the environment, by promoting alternative 
(non-animal) methods such as structure-activity relationships (SARs) and quantitative 
structure-activity relationships (QSARs), for use in the assessment of substances most lacking 
in experimental data. 
Obtaining a good quality QSAR model depends on many factors, mostly on the quality of 
biological data, descriptor selection and statistical methods used. Most QSARs models are 
based upon a single homogenous, structurally similar data set. One of the problems with these 
models is that they attempt to extrapolate and interpolate from essentially the same chemical 
space. Hence, this study aimed to develop a QSAR using a heterogeneous data set based on 
skin penetration of fragrance/fragrance like molecules and to use the model to predict the skin 
penetration of sunscreen filter molecules. Skin absorption is a very important parameter for 
safety assessment, especially for topically applied fragrance materials. 
The aim of QSAR is therefore to describe the interactions between chemicals and 
biological systems through a quantification of specific structural characteristics of the 
investigated molecule. The behaviour of organic compounds, i.e., a sunscreen filter in this 
case with respect to skin penetration, is related to the inherent molecular properties of the 
molecule. In order to overcome limitations of linear modelling, we have used artificial neural 
networks (ANNs) to build the QSAR. ANNs are non-linear flexible models that provide good 
alternatives to conventional techniques, especially when the relationships are complex or 
unknown. The key strength of an ANN is its ability to handle both linear and non-linear 
relationships, without adding complexity to the model, and to estimate any mathematical 
functions using fewer parameters than other methods [8]. Thus, this type of approach seems 
to be exceptionally well suited for the development of QSARs [9]. 
 
 
ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS (ANNS) 
 
An ANN is a computerized model that is composed of interconnected neuron-like 
structures that solve specific problems, similarly to how neurons in the brain connect inputs  
 

Snezana Agatonovic-Kustrin and David W. Morton 
138
and outputs [10]. The true power and advantage of ANNs lies in their ability to represent both 
linear and non-linear relationships and the ability to learn these relationships directly from the 
data being modelled. Unfortunately, traditional linear models are simply inadequate when it 
comes to modelling data that contains non-linear characteristics [11]. However, neural 
networks have ability to derive meaning from complicated or imprecise data and can be used 
to identify complex patterns and trends in the data. The two most commonly used ANNs are 
multilayer perceptrons (MLP) and radial basis function networks (RBF). MLP networks use 
an algorithm known as back-propagation to train the network [12], while RBF networks 
identify patterns and relationships based on the distance between the input and output values. 
Several studies that have compared MLP and RBF appear to favor RBF networks due to their 
shorter training time and fewer errors [13]. RBF networks generally give better results than 
MLP networks because they are less affected by poor training sets, with the optimum network 
topology depending on the nature of the data.  
 
 
DATA SELECTION 
 
Most of the skin penetration data for 128 fragrance/fragrance like molecules was obtained 
from experimental data reported by Shen and co-workers [14] with other data obtained from 
literature sources (Table 1). Selected molecular structures were representative in terms of 
both structural diversity and skin penetration range. 
3D molecular structures for 128 fragrance/fragrance like molecules and 6 UV filters were 
drawn using Molecular Modeling Pro 6.1 (ChemSW Inc., Fairfield, CA, USA) and optimized 
to minimum energy conformation using the standard geometry minimization procedure MM2 
(full molecular mechanics). Each molecule was encoded with 103 calculated molecular 
descriptors including physicochemical descriptors (hydrophobic, electronic and steric 
properties), quantum-chemical descriptors (charges and orbital energies), topological 
descriptors (molecular shape) and functional group count. In order to develop an ANN model, 
the calculated molecular descriptors were used as independent variables (inputs) with skin 
penetration (%) as the output (a dependent variable). It was important to separate categorical 
input variables (functional group contribution) with discrete nominal values from the 
continuous independent variables (the rest of descriptors). Categorical inputs have discrete 
values that correspond to different categories or classes (e.g., the number of carbon or oxygen 
atoms present in a molecule). In this case, presence or absence of a certain functional group in 
a molecule may produce a discontinuous relationship between the input and output in an 
ANN, if categorical inputs are not clearly distinguished from continuous inputs [26]. Hybrid 
ANN models were constructed with additional inputs generated for every category of the 
categorical inputs [27]. A hybrid ANN is defined as an ANN which contains both categorical 
and continuous inputs and allows for better flexibility, generalization and model extrapolation 
[28]. 
 
 
 
 
 

The Use of In Silico Methods to Design and Evaluate Skin UV Filters 
139
Table 1. Experimental and predicted dermal absorption data for 128 
fragrance/fragrance like molecules 
 
 
 
Absorption/% 
Substance* 
ANN data set 
Litera-
ture 
Predi-
cted 
Musk ketone 
Train 
0.5 
9.0 
Benzyl salicylate 
Train 
15 
23.2 
Dipropylene glycol methyl ether 
Train 
0.32 
5.5 
Flutamide 
Train 
16.1 
4.3 
Hippuric acid 
Train 
1.2 
31.5 
Malathion 
Train 
4.48 
33.5 
4,4'-Methylene bis(2-chloroaniline) 
Train 
5.9 
14.3 
4,4'-Methylenedianiline (MDA) 
Train 
32.9 
17.3 
Methiocarb 
Train 
15.4 
15.9 
Methyl parathion 
Train 
8.99 
28.5 
Amyl salicylate 
Train 
10.3 
27.1 
Nicotinamide 
Train 
28.8 
23.1 
Nicotinic acid 
Train 
3.3 
39.9 
Nitrobenzene 
Train 
41.1 
27.3 
N-(2-Naphthyl)aniline 
Train 
0 
20.8 
n-Propoxyethanol 
Train 
3.3 
12.2 
o-Toluidine [15] 
Train 
49.8 
28.8 
Paraoxon 
Train 
15.52 
27.3 
Pentachlorophenol 
Train 
1.5 
20.2 
Phosmet 
Train 
2.15 
28.0 
Phoxim 
Train 
2.9 
16.4 
Progesterone 
Train 
0.71 
13.4 
Propoxur 
Train 
19.6 
17.0 
Propylene glycol 
Train 
13.8 
11.1 
Testosterone 
Train 
34.8 
25.9 
Theophylline 
Train 
16.9 
31.1 
Trichlorocarbanilide 
Train 
0.392 
11.9 
Trichloromethane 
Train 
8.2 
7.5 
Butyl salicylate 
Train 
17.1 
21.8 
Triclopyr 
Train 
1.65 
0.0 
Trimethylamine 
Train 
6 
10.7 
3-(3,4-methylenedioxyphenyl)-2-methylpropanal 
(ocean propanal) [16] 
Train 
42 
13.6 
Methyl dihydrojasmonate 
Train 
45.9 
30.7 
Safrole 
Train 
38.4 
37.2 
Isoeugenol 
Train 
38.4 
34.7 
2-Methoxy-4-vinylphenol 
Train 
38.4 
35.9 
Acetyl cedrene 
Train 
13.52 
16.8 
dl-Citronellol 
Train 
4.7 
16.3 
Eugenyl methyl ether 
Train 
49.7 
30.3 
Dihydromyrcenol 
Train 
5.67 
15.6 
 

Snezana Agatonovic-Kustrin and David W. Morton 
140
Table 1. (Continued) 
 
 
 
Absorption/% 
Substance* 
ANN data 
set 
Litera-
ture 
Predi-
cted 
Coumarin 
Train 
59.7 
60.8 
Benzyl acetate [17] 
Train 
49.3 
47.9 
Eugenol 
Train 
22.6 
31.9 
Cinnamic acid 
Train 
60.8 
58.3 
Diethyl malonate 
Train 
54.3 
31.5 
1-(1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8-Octahydro-2,3,8,8-tetramethyl-2-
naphthalenyl)ethanone 
Train 
16.51 
17.4 
Geraniol 
Train 
7.3 
17.5 
Linalool 
Train 
14.4 
17.2 
2-Hydroxybenzoic acid 
Train 
22.78 
22.8 
Benzyl alcohol 
Train 
14.97 
14.1 
3 and 4-(4-Hydroxy-4-methylpentyl)-3-cyclohexene-1-
carboxaldehyde 
Train 
36.4 
28.2 
6-Acetyl-1,1,2,4,4,7-hexamethyltetraline 
Train 
0.88 
9.5 
Geranyl nitrile 
Train 
5.05 
17.8 
Methyl atrarate 
Train 
20 
19.1 
Lactic acid 
Train 
10.12 
10.1 
2-Methyl-2-propanol 
Train 
2 
9.1 
Triethanolamine 
Train 
6.9 
7.9 
Diethyl maleate [18] 
Train 
54 
29.2 
1-Decanol 
Train 
0.02 
8.9 
Farnesol 
Train 
39.8 
19.2 
Octanoic acid 
Train 
1.77 
15.6 
Lauric acid 
Train 
0.164 
19.6 
Methyl 2-nonynoate 
Train 
5 
17.6 
Estragole 
Train 
17 
26.1 
1,6-Hexanediol diglycidyl ether 
Train 
37.8 
16.6 
17α-Hydroxyprogesterone [19] 
Train 
14.76 
16.3 
1-Methoxypropan-2-ol 
Train 
2.29 
11.0 
2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid 
Train 
1.2 
13.5 
2-Butoxyethanol 
Train 
27.39 
12.3 
2-iso-Propoxyethanol 
Train 
1.55 
10.7 
2-Methoxyethyl acetate 
Train 
5.37 
6.6 
2-Naphthylamine [15] 
Train 
54.1 
30.8 
2-Nitro-4-phenylenediamine 
Train 
21.7 
35.8 
2-Phenylphenol 
Train 
26.67 
30.2 
4-Amino-2-nitrophenol 
Train 
45.1 
26.2 
4-Aminobenzoic acid 
Train 
28.37 
39.4 
4-Aminophenol 
Train 
8.1 
31.9 
4-Cyanophenol [20] 
Train 
7.24 
23.9 
4-Dimethylaminoazobenzene 
Train 
21.57 
22.0 
4-Iodophenol 
Train 
28 
30.3 
4-Nitroaniline 
Train 
48 
37.2 
4-Nitrophenol 
Train 
41 
28.5 
4-Pentyloxyphenol 
Train 
29 
30.6 

The Use of In Silico Methods to Design and Evaluate Skin UV Filters 
141
 
 
Absorption/% 
Substance* 
ANN data 
set 
Litera-
ture 
Predi-
cted 
Acetylcysteine 
Train 
40.5 
31.3 
Androstenedione 
Train 
13.47 
17.0 
p-t-Butyl-α-methylhydrocinnamic aldehyde 
Train 
30 
11.2 
Aniline 
Train 
37.6 
21.7 
Atrazine 
Train 
3.5 
19.9 
Benzocaine 
Train 
48 
50.2 
β-Estradiol 
Train 
38 
26.2 
Butachlor 
Train 
4.4 
14.8 
Caffeine 
Train 
32.6 
31.9 
Carbaryl 
Train 
73.91 
55.2 
Catechol [21] 
Train 
53 
38.3 
Benzyl benzoate [18] 
Train 
54 
48.5 
Chloramphenicol 
Train 
2.9 
8.7 
Deoxycorticosterone 
Train 
12.55 
6.3 
DFP 
Train 
24.3 
8.0 
DHEA 
Train 
18.45 
25.9 
Diazinon 
Train 
14.1 
10.8 
Dimethylnitrosamine 
Train 
3.98 
9.9 
Dinitrochlorobenzene 
Train 
27.5 
29.0 
Lindane 
Test 
25.7 
13.7 
N,N-Diethyl-3-methylbenzamide 
Test 
27.7 
20.6 
o-Cresyl glycidyl ether 
Test 
10.2 
16.6 
d-Limonene 
Test 
5 
24.5 
Pirimicarb 
Test 
28.2 
23.9 
Thiourea 
Test 
3.4 
8.6 
2-Methoxy-4-propylphenol 
Test 
22.6 
31.8 
Dihydro-α-terpineol 
Test 
3.5 
14.1 
Methyl salicylate 
Test 
30.7 
23.6 
2-Phenoxyethanol [22] 
Test 
59.3 
20.9 
Phenylethyl alcohol 
Test 
7.6 
17.2 
Trichloromethyl phenyl carbinyl acetate 
Test 
5.0 
32.3 
2-Ethyl-1-hexanol 
Test 
5.2 
8.5 
Diethyl phthalate 
Test 
4.7 
29.8 
Galaxolide 
Test 
5.16 
18.6 
2-ethoxyethanol 
Test 
17.8 
12.5 
4-Acetamidophenol 
Test 
3.7 
23.8 
Heptyloxyphenol 
Test 
36 
31.7 
Acetylsalicylic acid 
Test 
31.2 
35.2 
Boric acid 
Test 
1.75 
8.0 
Cinnamyl anthranilate 
Test 
53.3 
33.1 
Dimethoate 
Test 
2.6 
0.2 
Benzoic acid [23] 
Validate 
36.2 
37.5 
Ethyl alcohol [24] 
Validate 
2.3 
11.1 
α-hexylcinnamaldehyde 
Validate 
9.54 
28.6 
Benzophenone [25] 
Validate 
10 
23.5 
* Literature absorption data are from reference [14] unless otherwise indicated. 
 

Snezana Agatonovic-Kustrin and David W. Morton 
142
The 128 data sets were randomly divided into training (80%) testing (15%) and 
validation (5%) before each training cycle. Training was performed iteratively, such that as it 
progresses, the ANN generates more accurate output predictions, establishing a closer 
relationship between input and output data. The training set was used for learning, while the 
testing set was used to optimize the network topology and avoid overtraining (or overfitting) 
by limiting the complexity of the model. An over trained model memorizes the training set 
rather than recognizing the underlying relationships and has therefore poor predictive 
performance [29]. A validation set was used to establish the predictive performance of a 
developed model. The developed model was then used to predict skin absorption of 6 
sunscreen UV filters (five organic molecules and zinc oxide).  
Since there is no a priori knowledge on how to determine an optimal network structure, 
training algorithms are run a number of times and the most accurate network topology is 
selected. The initial 250 ANN models included all calculated molecular descriptors, with the 
two best network topologies selected. Less meaningful inputs were systematically eliminated 
from the networks, through multiple training sets and sensitivity analyses. Sensitivity analysis 
was used to prune the number of inputs and to select input descriptors that best describe skin 
penetration of sunscreen filters. A large number of input variables may provide an accurate 
description of the studied issue, but results in complex models that are difficult to explain and 
require more computational time [30]. Sensitivity ratio is defined as the ratio in errors 
obtained with an optimal ANN model that does not contain a specific molecular descriptor, to 
the error obtained with an optimal model that includes the information from the specific 
molecular descriptor [31]. Sensitivity ratios less than one indicate that the descriptor does not 
provide useful information and can therefore be removed from the model. This process was 
repeated until the model consisted of the smallest subset of molecular descriptors that 
maintained the predictive ability of the network [32]. 
 
Table 2. Sensitivity ranking for the descriptors used in the developed ANN model 
 
Sensitivity ranking 
Molecular Descriptor 
1 
Number of Oxygen 
2 
Ester 
3 
Number of aromatic rings 
4 
6-membered aromatic rings 
5 
Surface area 
6 
Molecular weight 
7 
Number of carbon atoms 
8 
Log P (Crippen) 
9 
Phenyl group 
10 
Connectivity index 4 
11 
Amide 
12 
Tertiary carbon atom 
13 
Quaternary carbon atom 
14 
Nitro group (R = N = R) 
15 
Polar surface area 
16 
LUMO 
17 
Disubstituted carbon (CHHRR) 
18 
Carbonyl 
19 
Double bond 
20 
Monosubstituted double bond (R = CR) 
21 
Lactone 
22 
Disubstituted double bond (R = CRR) 

The Use of In Silico Methods to Design and Evaluate Skin UV Filters 
143
Selection of input descriptors that best describe the penetration of fragrance molecules is 
important for effective model development. An essential step in QSAR studies is the 
interpretation and biological explanation of the developed model. The use of only a few input 
variables will increase the ease of model interpretability. However, reducing the number of 
inputs might also decrease the ability of the model to explain a complex phenomenon such as 
partitioning through the skin. A large number of input variables results in a complex model 
that is difficult to describe, requires more data and longer computational time for effective 
modelling [26].  
Two network topologies were selected as best suited for this data set; a general regression 
neural network (GRNN) and a RBF. A GRNN is a special case of a RBF; a one-pass learning 
algorithm with a highly parallel structure. There are no training parameters such as learning 
rate and momentum, but there is a smoothing factor that is used when the network is applied 
to new data. The smoothing factor determines how tightly the network matches its predictions 
to the data in the training patterns. However, GRNN models are very complex and the 
number of inputs cannot be reduced without compromising the network performance. In this 
work, reducing the number of inputs was not possible, because predictions were poor with the 
smoothing factor set quite high in order to avoid overtraining and to obtain meaningful 
predictions. The GRNN method is a way of generalizing results when the number of data for 
training is extremely small. The RBF could not achieve high correlation between predicted 
and actual values for training, testing and validation sets but has better predictive 
performance.  
The QSAR model developed in this work relates physicochemical parameters to dermal 
permeability to predict dermal penetration and absorption of chemicals. However, it does not 
take into account the fate of the chemical once it permeates the dermal layer. The significant 
differences observed between predicted and observed absorption for some of the chemicals 
used may be due to a high rate of elimination of the chemical once it has been absorbed into 
the body. For o-cresyl glycidyl ether, the developed model predicted a significantly higher 
skin penetration value than the experimental value reported by Shen and co-workers [14]. 
Glycidyl ethers are important class of industrial chemicals that are considered to be 
potentially mutagenic. Studies have shown that during skin penetration, all glycidyl ethers are 
extensively metabolized to their corresponding diols [33]. However, a minimum of 10% of 
the applied dose of o-cresyl glycidyl ether may be present as unchanged material after 
absorption through the skin [34]. Therefore, since the model cannot take into account the 
amount of o-cresyl glycidyl ether that is metabolized, we have removed this compound from 
the data set.  
The structures and chemical names of the UV filters in this study are given in Table 3. It 
is clear from their structures and from their physicochemical properties (Table 4) that there is 
not a large difference in lipophilicity between them. The majority of substances used as 
sunscreens are extremely lipophilic in nature, with relatively high log P values. High log P 
values cause poor absorption or permeation, and are not expected to penetrate the skin to any 
great extent. However, application of sunscreens is often to large areas of skin so that even for 
those UV filter molecules with relatively high log P, there may be a significant amount 
absorbed.  
 
 
 

Snezana Agatonovic-Kustrin and David W. Morton 
144
Table 3. Molecular structure and log P (Crippen) for UV filters 
 
UV filter 
Structure 
Log P 
(Crippen) 
 
 
 
Avobenzone (butyl 
methoxydibenzoylmethane, 
BMBM) 
O
O
C
H3
CH3
C
H3
O
CH3 
4.11 
Ethylhexyl 
methoxycinnamate 
O
O
O
C
H3
CH3
CH3
 
3.87 
Ethyl hexyl salicylate 
O
OH
O
C
H3
CH3 
4.29 
Homosalate (3,3,5-
trimethylcyclohexyl 
salicylate) 
O
O
O
H
C
H3
C
H3
CH3
 
4.17 
Octyl methoxycinnamate 
(OMC) 
O
O
O
CH3
CH3
CH3
 
4.73 
Zinc oxide 
 
4.73 
 
Table 4. Molecular descriptor values for UV filters 
 
UV filter 
MW 
Surface 
area 
Log P 
Log P 
(Crippen) 
Polar 
surface 
area 
Connecti-
vity index 4 
LUM
O 
Avobenzone (butyl 
methoxydibenzoylmethane, 
BMBM) 
310.39 
15.50 
4.09 
4.11 
49.69 
5.69 
1.33 

The Use of In Silico Methods to Design and Evaluate Skin UV Filters 
145
UV filter 
MW 
Surface 
area 
Log P 
Log P 
(Crippen) 
Polar 
surface 
area 
Connecti-
vity index 4 
LUM
O 
Ethylhexyl 
methoxycinnamate 
290.40 
18.37 
4.99 
3.87 
38.69 
4.96 
5.57 
Ethylhexyl salicylate 
250.34 
15.23 
5.02 
4.29 
49.69 
3.95 
4.30 
Homosylate (3,3,5-
trimethylcyclohexyl 
salicylate) 
262.35 
13.90 
5.12 
4.17 
49.69 
5.61 
2.23 
Octyl methoxycinnamate 
(OMC) 
290.40 
17.65 
5.81 
4.73 
38.69 
4.16 
2.44 
Zinc oxide 
81.39 
2.12 
not available 4.73 
38.69 
0.00 
2.44 
 
QSAR models for skin penetration of fragrance/fragrance like molecules and UV filters 
were constructed using classic QSAR descriptors. QSAR models with reasonable predictive 
ability were built with RBF and GRNN network architectures.  
The final model was chosen as the model with the lowest number of inputs that produces 
a low error for prediction. The final model had a RBF topology with 22(142)-16-1 
architecture and 22 input descriptors (142 inputs with additional inputs were generated for 
every category of the categorical inputs). Correlations were good, indicating likeness of trend 
between actual and predicted values for skin penetration. Thus, skin absorption values for 
compounds in the validation set were representative of those in the training set with 
correlation values of 0.87 and 0.69 respectively. Validation performance that is better than 
randomized error (i.e., > 0.5) is regarded as representative of a robust and good quality QSAR 
model [35]. In the domain of QSAR studies, a q2 value above 0.5 makes a model to be 
predictive [36].  
The developed model suggests that there are distinct mechanisms of skin penetration 
which depend on the molecular structure and physicochemical properties of the penetrant 
molecules. Skin penetration is generally driven by hydrophobic effects, which are related to 
molecular size, polarity, and extent of molecular interactions between penetrating molecule 
and the skin. Molecular features (molecular descriptors) that were included in the final model 
are related to molecular size (molecular weight, surface area), solubility (log P), molecular 
shape (connectivity index 4, double bonds), electronic properties (LUMO), and bonding 
potential (number of oxygen atoms, aromatic rings, ester, lactone, phenyl, and amide groups). 
Due to the lipophilic nature of the stratum corneum, the skin has a reservoir capacity for 
compounds that are lipophilic in character. Thus, the solubility of the penetrant in the stratum 
corneum is an important factor to consider when predicting its percutaneous absorption. Early 
quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) studies to predict skin permeation of 
chemicals revealed that hydrophobicity correlated linearly with increasing permeability [37, 
38]. Although molecular lipophilicity was regarded as the major determinant of skin 
permeability in early QSAR models based on a small homologous series of compounds, our 
model did not find lipophilicity to be the most significant descriptor. In fact log P was ranked 
as 8th according to sensitivity analysis. The number of aromatic rings and 6 membered 
aromatic rings were ranked 3rd and 4th respectively. The flat aromatic molecules may interact 
in the solid form via π-π interaction. Therefore, the simultaneous presence of hydrogen bond 
donor and acceptor groups and the presence of aromatic rings generally reduce solubility. 
Molecular size (i.e., surface area and molecular weight ranked 5th and 6th respectively) was 
also shown to be important, as the presence of bulky side groups in molecules with similar 

Snezana Agatonovic-Kustrin and David W. Morton 
146
molecular weights reduces skin penetration. Therefore high penetration is seen with 
molecules having smaller molecular mass and higher surface area or larger molecular size and 
smaller surface area (Figure 1(a)).  
The interpretation of the effects of each descriptor is difficult because the model is 
complex and nonlinear. However, some insight into the degree of nonlinear behavior of 
continuous descriptors can be illustrated by plotting the surface of absorption as a function of 
a number of other descriptors in order to try and understand these complex relationships. The 
value of two input variables is varied through their range, while keeping the other descriptors 
constant and the network output is plotted against two input descriptors to generate a 
functional dependence surface. The resulting surface area indicates how the network output 
alters in response to two selected input variables. Figure 1 shows the functional dependence 
surfaces of selected continuous descriptors. Nonlinearity of inputs is clearly evident, 
suggesting a very complex relationship. 
Quantum chemical descriptors can be used to explain conformational stability, chemical 
reactivity and inter-molecular interactions. They include thermodynamic properties (system 
energies) and electronic properties (LUMO or HOMO energy). The HOMO and LUMO 
energies, indicate the ability of a molecule to form hydrogen bonds while the energy 
difference between them (ΔE) relates to molecular reactivity [39]. The LUMO energy level 
represents the electron affinity of a molecule or its reactivity as an electrophile. The 
compounds with low skin penetration have higher LUMO energies, a lower energy gap 
between HOMO and LUMO, and therefore lower electrophilic reactivity.  
Size usually dominates molecular physicochemical properties (e.g., the boiling point of n-
alkanes increases as a function of the number of carbon atoms in the molecule). The simplest 
descriptor for molecular size is the number of atoms (n) in a molecule. Most topological 
indices (e.g., the connectivity index) increase regularly with molecular size and hence, 
correlate well with properties that are size-dependent. Some indices, however, are not 
dependent on molecular size. The connectivity index, originally called the branching index, 
was introduced by Randic, and was soon after renamed as the connectivity index [40]. This 
descriptor is sensitive to molecular branching, and also incorporates size-dependence. The 
molecular connectivity index was designed to discriminate between bond types in a molecule, 
hence is sensitive to local molecular characteristics. The molecular connectivity is based on 
only the branching and bonding patterns of molecules. This means that connectivity does not 
take into account the physical properties that a structure may have, but it does take into 
account the space it occupies. Substructures for a molecular skeleton are defined by the 
decomposition of the skeleton into fragments of atoms (zero order), one bond paths (first 
order), two bond fragments (second order), three contiguous bond fragments (third order 
path), and so forth. Molecular connectivity indices can be seen as components of the 
molecular accessibility. The first- and second-order connectivity indices represent molecular 
accessibility areas and volumes respectively, whereas higher order indices represent 
magnitudes in higher dimensional spaces [41]. 

The Use of In Silico Methods to Design and Evaluate Skin UV Filters 
147
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 1. (Continued) 

Snezana Agatonovic-Kustrin and David W. Morton 
148
 
(c) 
Figure 1. Surface response graphs of (a) surface area and molecular weight; (b) LUMO and 
connectivity index; and (c) log P (Crippen) and polar surface area, against absorption. 
The model indicated that the addition of up to 6 double bonds increased skin penetration 
of a molecule. For molecules with double bonds greater than 6, the further increase in skin 
penetration was not as great. The formation of double bonds changes the electron cloud 
shape, molecular polarity, and the conformation of the carbon chain which affects the volume 
and electronic properties of the molecule. Adding substituent(s) to a double bond has the 
opposite effect; i.e., an increase in mono- and disubstituted double bonds decreases skin 
penetration, probably due to steric hindrance.  
 
 
EXTERNAL MODEL VALIDATION 
 
QSAR correlations can be observed not only because a causal relationship exists between 
a set of descriptors and a given property, but also due to statistical bias resulting from errors 
in determining structural descriptors, experimental errors in measuring the property, or even 
due to chance alone. Model validation is essential in order to distinguish between true and 
random correlations and to estimate the predictive power of the model. 
 
 
 
 
 

The Use of In Silico Methods to Design and Evaluate Skin UV Filters 
149
Table 5. Predictions obtained for UV filters with GRNN ANN models 
 
103 
55 
GRNN 
UV filter 
103(251)-
106-2-1 
55(55)-106-2-
1:1 
Average 
Avobenzene (butyl methoxydibenzoylmethane, 
BMBM) 
26.16 
27.06 
26.61 
Ethylhexyl methoxycinnamate 
21.17 
47.30 
34.23 
Ethylhexyl salicylate 
19.72 
14.23 
16.98 
Homosalate (3,3,5-trimethylcyclohexyl salicylate) 
27.05 
15.20 
21.13 
Octyl methoxycinnamate (OMC) 
22.85 
17.09 
19.97 
Zinc oxide 
13.98 
2.46 
8.22 
 
Sunscreens are designed for external topical application to the outermost layers of the 
skin [42]. The observation that sunscreens may cause dermatitis or allergies [43] and may 
penetrate the skin has initiated various toxicological studies. Preliminary investigations on 
animals indicate that some organic UV filters have significant estrogenic [44, 45] and anti-
thyroid [46] effects, although variations in the hormonal levels of human volunteers, 
following topical application of sunscreens, were insignificant [47]. 
The concern over the possible negative effects of UV filters has led to the provision of 
guidelines in order to minimize their negative impacts. Apart from efforts to design improved 
substances with low toxicity, maximum permitted concentrations have been regulated, trying 
to reach a compromise between adequate protection and minimal side effects for users. In 
most cases, concentrations of up to 10% of organic UV filters are allowed. The three main 
regulatory systems on cosmetics products over the world are the European Union (EU) 
Cosmetics Directive [48], the United States (US) Food and Drug Administration (FDA) [49], 
and the legislation in Japan [50]. 
 
Table 6. Predictions obtained for UV filters with different  
RBF ANN models  
 
92 
86 
27 
22 
17 
RBF 
UV filter 
92(249)-25-1 
86(229)-
50-1 
27(149)-
25-1 
22(142)-
16-1 
17(87)-
13-1 
Ave-
rage 
Avobenzene (butyl 
methoxydibenzoylmethane, 
BMBM) 
7.09 
4.17 
0 
11.08 
15.24 
7.15 
Ethyl hexyl methoxycinnamate 
13.4 
6.39 
17.16 
21.25 
17.26 
15.75 
Ethylhexyl salicylate 
7.67 
3.61 
18.02 
15.60 
21.88 
12.69 
Homosalate (3,3,5-
trimethylcyclohexyl salicylate) 
9.44 
5.24 
19.17 
19.78 
12.57 
12.22 
Octyl methoxycinnamate (OMC) 13.18 
10.44 
13.86 
21.75 
24.15 
16.43 
Zinc oxide 
9.32 
6.45 
8.83 
7.72 
6.59 
7.17 
 
UV filters are designed for external topical application on the outermost layers of the 
skin. An ideal sunscreen should exhibit a high skin accumulation of UV filters in the stratum 
corneum, but minimal permeation into the deeper part of the skin. There is clear evidence to 

Snezana Agatonovic-Kustrin and David W. Morton 
150
show that the human body can absorb through the skin some of the organic UV filters 
contained in sunscreen cosmetic formulations. However, recent studies have shown that some 
UV filters in certain formulation have the potential to be absorbed through the skin and reach 
the blood circulation [51]. Therefore, skin protection is reduced and the skin is exposed to the 
harmful effects of UV radiation [52]. This absorption may also result in serious adverse 
effects such as mutagenic or estrogenic effects [53, 45]. The observation that the human body 
can absorb some organic UV filters through the skin, have prompted researchers to study the 
disposition of these organic compounds in humans i.e., their percutaneous absorption and 
excretion [54].  
Octinoxate, also called octyl methoxycinnamate or (OMC), is a very frequently used UV 
filter in sunscreens and cosmetics, and is absorbed rapidly through skin.  Octinoxate has been 
detected in human urine, blood and breast milk, which indicates that humans are systemically 
exposed to this compound [55, 56]. OMC has been found in the human blood and urine [57] 
with residues of OMC detected in human breast milk of women [58] after topical application 
of OMC containing products on to the skin. Other studies have indicated that UV filter 
BMBM also has the potential to permeate into the skin, but its encapsulation into lipid 
microspheres may reduce percutaneous absorption, thereby maintaining efficacy and reducing 
possible toxicological effects [59]. 
 
Figure 2. Scatter-plot of predicted log10 (absorption) versus experimental log10 (absorption) for the 
developed model. Training ●, testing , and validation ▲. 
 
 

The Use of In Silico Methods to Design and Evaluate Skin UV Filters 
151
CONCLUSION 
 
In vitro and in silico predictions of absorption for various routes of exposure are still not 
refined enough to be used for accurate prediction. For example, in oral absorption, Lipinski’s 
rule of 5 might provide a convenient set of “rules of thumb" for heuristics prediction of 
absorption for chemicals of interest. Dermal permeability of a large group of compounds was 
analyzed by a simple model based upon permeant size (i.e., molecular volume (MV) or 
molecular weight (MW)) and octanol/water partition coefficient (Kow). However, despite the 
size and heterogeneous molecular structure (more than 90 compounds with MW ranging from 
18 to >750, and log K from −3 to + 6), the limiting value of permeability of highly lipophilic 
compounds could not be determined [60]. 
The ANN analysis presented in this study is an example of prediction of skin 
absorption/penetration of sunscreen filters solely on the basis of their physicochemical 
properties. The model is based on experimental skin penetration data for fragrance/fragrance 
like molecules, due to a lack of such information on sunscreen molecules. The extent to 
which topically applied sunscreen filters can penetrate the stratum corneum and access the 
underlying viable epidermis and the rest of the body is a great potential safety concern. This 
study describes the application of a mathematical model to predict the extent of transdermal 
absorption of UV-filters commonly used in sunscreen formulations. An ANN model based on 
128 fragrance/fragrance like molecules was used to predict skin permeability of 6 UV 
sunscreen filters. A complex relationship exists between structure of the penetrant and skin 
penetration indicating that the penetration of compounds through skin has a very complex 
mechanism and simple models based only on few descriptors cannot produce predicted values 
accurately.  
Percutaneous penetration of sunscreens has not been properly addressed in the literature 
and the model suggests that significant amounts of certain filters may penetrate the skin and 
enter the systemic circulation. The results indicate that further research in this area is 
necessary and in vitro experiments with human skin should be conducted with both current 
and new UV filters to quantify the degree of dermal penetration of these substances. 
An increasing number of neural network models for predicting physicochemical 
properties from their molecular structures have been previously published. The use of ANN 
modeling for predicting physicochemical properties is a relatively new method and is a viable 
alternative to conventional modeling techniques. They allow incorporation of literature and 
experimental data in non-testing approaches. In practice, non-testing approaches are used to 
fill specific data gaps in order to replace experimental testing, and to substantiate predictions 
of various properties for structurally related chemicals. A key assumption of non-testing 
approaches is that the property of a molecule with respect to how it will interact with a 
defined biological system, is inherent in its molecular structure. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Durand L, Habran N, Henschel V, Amighi K (2009) In vitro evaluation of the 
cutaneous penetration of sprayable sunscreen emulsions with high concentrations of 
UV filters. Int J Cosmetic Sci 31 (4):279-292. 

Snezana Agatonovic-Kustrin and David W. Morton 
152
[2] 
Lucas R, McMichael T, Smith W, Armstrong B (2006) Solar Ultraviolet Radiation; 
Global burden of disease from solar ultraviolet radiation. Environmental Burden of 
Disease Series, vol 13. World Health Organization, Public Health and the 
Environment, Geneva. 
[3] 
Commission E (2006) Commission recommentdation of 22 September 2006 on the 
efficacy of sunscreen products and the claims made relating thereto. Official Journal of 
the European Union L 265 (39):1-5. 
[4] 
Bouknight P, Bowling A, Kovach FE (2010) Sunscreen use for skin cancer prevention. 
Am Fam Physician 82 (8):989-990. 
[5] 
Montenegro L, Puglisi G (2013) Evaluation of sunscreen safety by in vitro skin 
permeation studies: effects of vehicle composition. Pharmazie 68 (1):34-40. 
[6] 
Wissing SA, Muller RH (2002) Solid lipid nanoparticles as carrier for sunscreens: in 
vitro release and in vivo skin penetration. J Control Release 81 (3):225-233. 
[7] 
Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing a 
European Chemicals Agency, amending Directive 1999/45/EC and repealing Council 
Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as 
Council Directive 76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 
93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC. Official Journal of the European Union (2006). Official 
Journal of the European Union L396:1-849. 
[8] 
Duprat AF, Huynh T, Dreyfus G (1998) Toward a principled methodology for neural 
network design and performance evaluation in QSAR. Application to the prediction of 
LogP. J Chem Inf Comp Sci 38 (4):586-594. 
[9] 
Wikel JH, Dow ER (1993) The Use of Neural Networks for Variable Selection in Qsar. 
Bioorg Med Chem Lett 3 (4):645-651. 
[10] Dayhoff JE, DeLeo JM (2001) Artificial neural networks: opening the black box. 
Cancer 91 (8 Suppl):1615-1635. 
[11] Vilovic I, Burum N, Sipus Z (2007) A comparison of neural network models for indoor 
field strength prediction. ELMAR 12:251-254. 
[12] Braspenning P, Thuijsman F, Weijters A (1995) Artificial Neural Networks. An 
Introduction to ANN Theory and Practice. Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 
[13] Wilkins MF, Morris CW, Boddy L (1994) A comparison of Radial Basis Function and 
backpropagation neural networks for identification of marine phytoplankton from 
multivariate flow cytometry data. Comput Appl Biosci 10 (3):285-294. 
[14] Shen J, Kromidas L, Schultz T, Bhatia S (2014) An in silico skin absorption model for 
fragrance materials. Food Chem Toxicol 74:164–176. 
[15] Luersen L, Wellner T, Koch HM, Angerer J, Drexler H, Korinth G (2006) Penetration 
of beta-naphthylamine and o-toluidine through human skin in vitro. Arch Toxicol 
80:644-646. 
[16] Api AM, Lapczynski A, Isola DA, Sipes GI (2007) In vitro penetration and subchronic 
toxicity of alpha-methyl-1,3-benzodioxole-5-propionaldehyde. Food Chem Toxicol 45 
(5): 702-707. 
[17] Garnett A, Hotchkiss SA, Caldwell J (1994) Percutaneous absorption of benzyl acetate 
through rat skin in vitro. 3. A comparison with human skin. Food Chem Toxicol 32 
(11):1061-1065. 

The Use of In Silico Methods to Design and Evaluate Skin UV Filters 
153
[18] Bronaugh RL, Wester RC, Bucks D, Maibach HI, Sarason R (1990) In vivo 
percutaneous absorption of fragrance ingredients in rhesus monkeys and humans. Food 
Chem Toxicol 28 (5):369-373. 
[19] Flynn GL (1990) Physicochemical determinants of skin absorption. In: Gerrity TR, 
Henry CJ (eds) Principles of Route-to-route Extrapolation for Risk Assessment: 
Proceedings of the Workshops on Principles of Route-to-Route Extrapolation for Risk 
Assessment Held March 19–21, 1990, in Hilton Head, South Carolina and July 10–11, 
1990, in Durham, North Carolina. Elsevier, New York, pp 93–127. 
[20] Romonchuk WJ, Bunge AL (2006) Permeation of 4-cyanophenol and methyl paraben 
from powder and saturated aqueous solution through silicone rubber membranes and 
human skin. J Pharm Sci 95 (11):2526-2533. 
[21] Jung CT, Wickett RR, Desai PB, Bronaugh RL (2003) In vitro and in vivo 
percutaneous absorption of catechol. Food Chem Toxicol 41 (6):885-895. 
[22] Roper CS, Howes D, Blain PG, Williams FM (1997) Percutaneous penetration of 2-
phenoxyethanol through rat and human skin. Food Chem Toxicol 35:1009–1016. 
[23] Nair B (2001) Cosmetic ingredient review expert panel. Final report on the safety 
assessment of benzyl alcohol, benzoic acid, and sodium benzoate. Int J Toxicol 
20(Suppl. 3):23-50. 
[24] Kramer A, Below H, Bieber N, Kampf G, Toma CD, Huebner N-O, Assadian O (2007) 
Quantity of ethanol absorption after excessive hand disinfection using three 
commercially available hand rubs is minimal and below toxic levels for humans. BMC 
Infect Dis 7:117. 
[25] Jiang R, Roberts MS, Collins DM, Benson HAE (1999) Absorption of sunscreens 
across human skin: an evaluation of commercial products for children and adults. Br J 
Clin Pharmacol 48:635–637. 
[26] Agatonovic-Kustrin S, Morton DW, Celebic D (2013) QSAR: An in silico approach for 
predicting the partitioning of pesticides into breast milk. Comb Chem High Throughput 
Screen 16 (3):223-232. 
[27] Brouwer RK (2002) A feed-forward network for input that is both categorical and 
quantitative. Neural Networks 15 (7):881-890. 
[28] Psichogios DC, Ungar LH (1992) A hybrid neural network-first principles approach to 
process modeling. AIChE J 38 (10):1499-1511. 
[29] Guha R, Jurs PC (2005) Interpreting computational neural network QSAR models: a 
measure of descriptor importance. J Chem Inf Model 45 (3):800-806. 
[30] Agatonovic-Kustrin S, Morton DW, Celebic D (2013) QSAR: An In Silico Approach 
for Predicting the Partitioning of Pesticides into Breast Milk. Comb Chem High T Scr 
16 (3):223-232. 
[31] Turner JV, Maddalena DJ, Agatonovic-Kustrin S (2004) Bioavailability prediction 
based on molecular structure for a diverse series of drugs. Pharm Res 21 (1):68-82. 
[32] Eriksson L, Jaworska J, Worth AP, Cronin MT, McDowell RM, Gramatica P (2003) 
Methods for reliability and uncertainty assessment and for applicability evaluations of 
classification- and regression-based QSARs. Environ Health Perspect 111 (10):1361-
1375. 
[33] Boogaard PJ, Denneman MA, Van Sittert NJ (2000) Dermal penetration and 
metabolism of five glycidyl ethers in human, rat and mouse skin. Xenobiotica 30 
(5):469-483. 

Snezana Agatonovic-Kustrin and David W. Morton 
154
[34] Bingham E, Cohrssen B, Powell CH (2001) Patty's Toxicology, vol 6. 5 edn. John 
Wiley and Sons, New York. 
[35] Schneider G (2000-2013) Modeling structure-activity relationships. Madame Curie 
Bioscience 
Database 
[Internet], 
Available 
from: 
http://wwwncbinlmnihgov/ 
books/NBK6353/. 
[36] Consonni V, Ballabio D, Todeschini R (2009) Comments on the definition of the Q2 
parameter for QSAR validation. J Chem Inf Model 49 (7):1669-1678. 
[37] Roberts MS, Anderson RA, Swarbrick J (1977) Permeability of human epidermis to 
phenolic compounds. J Pharm Pharmacol 29 (1):677-683. 
[38] Scheuplein RJ, Blank IH (1971) Permeability of the skin. Physiol Rev 51 (4):702-747. 
[39] Mazzatorta P, Benfenati E, Lorenzini P, Vighi M (2003) QSAR in ecotoxicity:  An 
overview of modern classification techniques. J Chem Inf Comput Sci 44 (1):105-112. 
[40] Kier LB, Hall LH (1976) Molecular Connectivity in Chemistry and Drug Research. 
Academic Press, New York. 
[41] Estrada E (2002) Physicochemical Interpretation of Molecular Connectivity Indices. J 
Phys Chem A 106 (39):9085-9091. 
[42] Benson HAE (2000) Assessment and clinical implications of absorption of sunscreens 
across skin. Am J Clin Dermatol 1 (4):217-224. 
[43] Schauder S, Ippen H (1997) Contact and photocontact sensitivity to sunscreens. 
Contact Dermatitis 37 (5):221-232. 
[44] Tinwell H, Lefevre PA, Moffat GJ, Burns A, Odum J, Spurway TD, Orphanides G, 
Ashby 
J 
(2002) 
Confirmation 
of 
uterotrophic 
activity 
of 
3-(4-
methylbenzylidine)camphor in the immature rat. Environ Health Persp 110 (5):533-
536. 
[45] Schlumpf M, Cotton B, Conscience M, Haller V, Steinmann B, Lichtensteiger W 
(2001) In vitro and in vivo estrogenicity of UV screens. Environ Health Persp 109 
(3):239-244. 
[46] Schmutzler C, Hamann I, Hofmann PJ, Kovacs G, Stemmler L, Mentrup B, Schomburg 
L, Ambrugger P, Grüters A, Seidlova-Wuttke D, Jarry H, Wuttke W, Köhrle J (2004) 
Endocrine active compounds affect thyrotropin and thyroid hormone levels in serum as 
well as endpoints of thyroid hormone action in liver, heart and kidney. Toxicology 205 
(1-2 SPEC. ISS.):95-102. 
[47] Janjua NR, Mogensen B, Andersson AM, Petersen JH, Henriksen M, Skakkebæk NE, 
Wulf HC (2004) Systemic absorption of the sunscreens benzophenone-3, octyl- 
methoxycinnamate, and 3-(4-methyl-benzylidene) camphor after whole-body topical 
application and reproductive hormone levels in humans. J Invest Dermatol 123 (1):57-
61. 
[48] Council Directive 76/768/CEE of 27 July 1976 on the approximation of the laws of the 
Member States relating to cosmetic products, and its successive amendments and 
adaptations (1976). Official Journal of the European Communities No L 262:169-200. 
[49] US Food and Drug Administration, Code of Federal Regulations, Title 21, Parts 700–
740 for Cosmetics (2006). U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring. 
[50] Japanese Ministry of Health and Welfare, Notification No. 331/2000, Standards for 
Cosmetics (2000). 
[51] Giokas DL, Salvador A, Chisvert A (2007) UV filters: From sunscreens to human body 
and the environment. TRAC-Trend Anal Chem 26 (5):360-374. 

The Use of In Silico Methods to Design and Evaluate Skin UV Filters 
155
[52] Durand L, Habran N, Henschel V, Amighi K (2009) In vitro evaluation of the 
cutaneous penetration of sprayable sunscreen emulsions with high concentrations of 
UV filters. Int J Cosmet Sci 31 (4):279-292. 
[53] Ma RS, Cotton B, Lichtensteiger W, Schlumpf M (2003) UV filters with antagonistic 
action at androgen receptors in the MDA-kb2 cell transcriptional-activation assay. 
Toxicol Sci 74 (1):43-50. 
[54] Gonzalez H, Farbrot A, Larkö O, Wennberg AM (2006) Percutaneous absorption of the 
sunscreen benzophenone-3 after repeated whole-body applications, with and without 
ultraviolet irradiation. Br J Dermatol 154 (2):337-340. 
[55] Axelstad M, Boberg J, Hougaard KS, Christiansen S, Jacobsen PR, Mandrup KR, 
Nellemann C, Lund SP, Hass U (2011) Effects of pre- and postnatal exposure to the 
UV-filter octyl methoxycinnamate (OMC) on the reproductive, auditory and 
neurological development of rat offspring. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 250 (3):278-290. 
[56] Darbre PD (2006) Environmental oestrogens, cosmetics and breast cancer. Best Pract 
Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 20 (1):121-143. 
[57] Janjua NR, Mogensen B, Andersson AM, Petersen JH, Henriksen M, Skakkebaek NE, 
Wulf HC (2004) Systemic absorption of the sunscreens benzophenone-3, octyl-
methoxycinnamate, and 3-(4-methyl-benzylidene) camphor after whole-body topical 
application and reproductive hormone levels in humans. J Invest Dermatol 123 (1):57-
61. 
[58] Hofkamp L, Bradley S, Tresguerres J, Lichtensteiger W, Schlumpf M, Timms B (2008) 
Region-Specific Growth Effects in the Developing Rat Prostate Following Fetal 
Exposure to Estrogenic Ultraviolet Filters. Environ Health Persp 116 (7):867-872. 
[59] Scalia S, Mezzena M, Ramaccini D (2011) Encapsulation of the UV Filters Ethylhexyl 
Methoxycinnamate and Butyl Methoxydibenzoylmethane in Lipid Microparticles: 
Effect on in vivo Human Skin Permeation. Skin Pharmacol Physiol 24 (4):182-189. 
[60] Potts RO, Guy RH (1992) Predicting skin permeability. Pharm Res 9 (5):663-669. 


In: Artificial Neural Networks: New Research 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-964-6 
Editor: Gayle Cain 
© 2017 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 7 
 
 
 
MODELING THE MILLING TOOL WEAR BY USING  
A MULTILAYER PERCEPTRON ARTIFICIAL  
NEURAL NETWORK FROM  
MILLING RUN EXPERIMENTAL DATA 
 
 
P. J. García Nieto1 and E. García-Gonzalo2 
1Department of Mathematics, University of Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain 
2Department of Electrical Engineering, Campus de Viesques,  
University of Oviedo, Gijón, Spain 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Milling cutters are important cutting tools used in milling machines to perform 
milling operations, which are prone to wear and subsequent failure. In this research work, 
a practical model based on the multilayer perceptron neural network (MLP) approach to 
predict the milling tool flank wear in a regular cut, as well as entry cut and exit cut, of a 
milling tool is proposed. Indeed, a MLP–based model was successfully used here to 
predict the milling tool flank wear (output variable) as a function of the following input 
variables: the time duration of experiment, depth of cut, feed, type of material, etc. 
Regression with optimal hyperparameters was performed and a correlation coefficient 
equal to 0.92 was obtained. To accomplish the objective of this study, the experimental 
dataset represents experiments from runs on a milling machine under various operating 
conditions. Data sampled by three different types of sensors (acoustic emission sensor, 
vibration sensor and current sensor) were acquired at several positions. The MLP–based 
model’s goodness of fit to experimental data confirmed the good performance of this 
model. Finally, conclusions of this work are exposed.  
 
Keywords: statistical machine learning techniques, multilayer perceptron artificial neural 
network (MLP), milling tool wear  
 
 

P. J. García Nieto and E. García-Gonzalo 
158
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Milling is the machining process of using rotary cutters to remove material from a 
workpiece advancing (or feeding) in a direction at an angle with the axis of the tool. It covers 
a wide variety of different operations and machines, on scales from small individual parts to 
large, heavy-duty gang milling operations [1-3]. It is one of the most commonly used 
processes in industry and machine shops today for machining parts to precise sizes and 
shapes. Milling can be done with a wide range of machine tools. The original class of 
machine tools for milling was the milling machine (often called a mill). After the advent of 
computer numerical control (CNC), milling machines evolved into machining centers 
(milling machines with automatic tool changers, tool magazines or carousels, CNC control, 
coolant systems, and enclosures), generally classified as vertical machining centers (VMCs) 
and horizontal machining centers (HMCs). The integration of milling into turning 
environments and of turning into milling environments, begun with live tooling for lathes and 
the occasional use of mills for turning operations, led to a new class of machine tools, 
multitasking machines (MTMs), which are purpose-built to provide for a default machining 
strategy of using any combination of milling and turning within the same work envelope. 
Milling is a cutting process that uses a milling cutter to remove material from the surface 
of a workpiece. The milling cutter is a rotary cutting tool, often with multiple cutting points. 
As opposed to drilling, where the tool is advanced along its rotation axis, the cutter in milling 
is usually moved perpendicular to its axis so that cutting occurs on the circumference of the 
cutter. As the milling cutter enters the workpiece, the cutting edges (flutes or teeth) of the tool 
repeatedly cut into and exit from the material, shaving off chips (swarf) from the workpiece 
with each pass. The cutting action is shear deformation. The metal is pushed off the 
workpiece in tiny clumps that hang together to more or less extent (depending on the metal 
type) to form chips. This makes metal cutting a bit different (in its mechanics) from slicing 
softer materials with a blade [1-3]. 
To fix ideas, the milling process removes material by performing many separate, small 
cuts. This is accomplished by using a cutter with many teeth, spinning the cutter at high 
speed, or advancing the material through the cutter slowly; most often it is some combination 
of these three approaches. The speeds and feeds used are varied to suit a combination of 
variables. The speed at which the piece advances through the cutter is called feed rate, or just 
feed; it is most often measured in length of material per full revolution of the cutter. There are 
two major classes of milling process [1-3]: 
 
 
In face milling, the cutting action occurs primarily at the end corners of the milling 
cutter. Face milling is used to cut flat surfaces (faces) into the workpiece, or to cut 
flat-bottomed cavities. 
 
In peripheral milling, the cutting action occurs primarily along the circumference of 
the cutter, so that the cross section of the milled surface ends up receiving the shape 
of the cutter. In this case the blades of the cutter can be seen as scooping out material 
from the work piece. Peripheral milling is well suited to the cutting of deep slots, 
threads, and gear teeth. 
 

Modeling the Milling Tool Wear by Using a Multilayer Perceptron … 
159
A high quality product often implies high quality surface finish and dimensional 
accuracy. Ideally, a sharp tool should be maintained at all times. A dull one deforms the 
surface to a greater depth and may tear the surface which in turn may lower the fatigue 
resistance. A worn tool also results in more friction which in turn results in higher cutting 
temperatures. Unwanted effects may arise from these temperatures, e.g., it may produce 
untempered martensite in heat treatable steel [4-6]. Therefore, the milling tool wear has to be 
controlled. In order to estimate the best conditions, i.e., the values of the most influential 
parameters in milling machines, as well as to predict the milling tool wear, flank wear was 
forecasted from the other parameters [4-6] by appliying multilayer perceptron artificial neural 
network (MLP) technique. The MLP technique is based on the statistical learning theory and 
is a new class of model that can be used to predict values in very different areas [7-10]. This 
study uses multilayer perceptron artificial neural network (MLP), a nonlinear and non-
parametric regression methodology, to build a milling tool wear forecasting model from 
experimental operation input data. Multilayer perceptrons using a backpropagation algorithm 
are the standard algorithm for any supervised learning pattern recognition process and the 
subject of ongoing research in computational neuroscience and parallel distributed 
processing. They are useful in research in terms of their ability to solve problems 
stochastically, which often allows one to get approximate solutions for extremely complex 
problems like fitness approximation [7-10]. In order to carry out the optimization mechanism 
corresponding to the optimal hyperparameters setting in the MLP training, the cross 
validation technique was used here with success. For the above-mentioned purpose, a MLP 
model was used as automated learning tool, training it in order to predict the milling tool wear 
from other parameters such as the time or duration of experiment, depth of cut, feed, kind of 
material, AC spindle motor current, DC spindle motor current, table vibration, spindle 
vibration, acoustic emission at table and acoustic emission at spindle (see Figure 1). 
According to previous research, the MLP technique has been proved to be an effective tool to 
predict natural parameters, being successfully used in a wide range of environmental fields: 
medical applications [11], hard chromium plating process [12], forest modeling [13], 
prediction of the air quality [14, 15], municipal wastewater studies [16] and so on. 
 
 
Figure 1. Vertical milling machine: (1) milling cutter; (2) spindle; (3) top slide or overarm; (4) column; 
(5) table; (6) Y-axis slide; (7)  knee; and (8) base. 

P. J. García Nieto and E. García-Gonzalo 
160
In summary, the present study is structured as follows: firstly, the materials, methods and 
dataset used are explained; secondly, the results of the MLP–based model trained are 
presented and discussed; and finally, the main conclusions of this research work are drawn. 
Therefore, the aim of this research work was to obtain a predictive model to forecast the 
milling tool wear as well as the contribution degree of each input parameter.  
 
 
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
2.1. Experimental Dataset 
 
The data in this set represents experiments from runs on a milling machine under various 
operating conditions. In particular, tool wear was investigated [5, 6] in a regular cut as well as 
entry cut and exit cut. Data sampled by three different types of sensors (acoustic emission 
sensor, vibration sensor, current sensor) were acquired at several positions. 
The data is organized in a 
167
1
matlab struct array with fields as shown in Table 1 
below. 
There are 16 cases with varying number of runs. The number of runs was dependent on 
the degree of flank wear that was measured between runs at irregular intervals up to a wear 
limit (and sometimes beyond). Flank wear was not always measured and at times when no 
measurements were taken, no entry was made. The 16 cases are enumerated in Table 2. 
The setup of the experiment is as depicted in Figure 2 
The basic setup encompasses the spindle and the table of the Matsuura machining center 
MC-510V. An acoustic emission sensor and a vibration sensor are each mounted to the table 
and the spindle of the machining center. The signals from all sensors are amplified and 
filtered, then fed through two RMS before they enter the computer for data acquisition. The 
signal from a spindle motor current sensor is fed into the computer without further 
processing.  
 
Table 1. Struct field names and description  
 
Field name 
Description 
case 
Case number (1-16) 
run 
Counter for experimental runs in each case 
VB (mm) 
Flank wear, measured after runs; Measurements for VB were not taken after 
each run. 
Time (mm) 
Duration of experiment (restarts for each case) 
DOC (mm) 
Depth of cut (does not vary for each case) 
Feed (mm/rev) 
Feed (does not vary for each case) 
material 
Material (does not vary for each case) 
smcAC 
AC spindle motor current 
smcDC 
DC spindle motor current 
vib_table 
Table vibration 
vib_spindle 
Spindle vibration 
AE_table 
Acoustic emission at table 
AE_spindle 
Acoustic emission at spindle 
 

Modeling the Milling Tool Wear by Using a Multilayer Perceptron … 
161
Table 2. Experimental conditions 
Case 
Depth of Cut 
(mm) 
Feed 
(mm/rev) 
Material 
1 
1.5 
0.5 
cast iron 
2 
0.75 
0.5 
cast iron 
3 
0.75 
0.25 
cast iron 
4 
1.5 
0.25 
cast iron 
5 
1.5 
0.5 
steel 
6 
1.5 
0.25 
steel 
7 
0.75 
0.25 
steel 
8 
0.75 
0.5 
steel 
9 
1.5 
0.5 
cast iron 
10 
1.5 
0.25 
cast iron 
11 
0.75 
0.25 
cast iron 
12 
0.75 
0.5 
cast iron 
13 
0.75 
0.25 
steel 
14 
0.75 
0.5 
steel 
15 
1.5 
0.25 
steel 
16 
1.5 
0.5 
steel 
 
 
Figure 2. Experimental setup. 
The matrix for the parameters chosen for the experiments were guided by industrial 
applicability and recommended manufacturer’s settings. Therefore, the cutting speed was set 
to 200 m/min which is equivalent to 826 rev/min. Two different depths of cut were chosen, 
1.5mm and 0.75mm. Also, two feeds were taken, 0.5 mm/rev and 0.25 mm/rev which 
translate into 413 mm/min and 206.5 mm/min, respectively. Two types of material, cast iron 
and stainless steel J45 were used and, as already mentioned earlier, with an inserts of type 

P. J. García Nieto and E. García-Gonzalo 
162
KC710. These choices equal 8 different settings. All experiments were done a second time 
with the same parameters with a second set of inserts. The size of the workpieces was 
51
178
483


mm. 
 
2.1.1. Data Acquisition and Processing 
As described in the previous section, the data were sent through a high speed data 
acquisition board with maximal sampling rate of 100 KHz. The sampled output of the data 
was used for the signal processing software. LabVIEW® [17] was used for this task. This 
software is a general purpose programming development system which uses a graphical 
language (G). With G, programs are created in block diagram form. The chosen layout 
allowed for data acquisition, storage, presentation, and processing. Data were stored to allow 
for real time simulation and also later analysis. 
Several sensor signals underwent preprocessing. In most cases, the signal was amplified 
to be able to meet threshold requirements of equipment. In particular, the signals from the 
acoustic emission sensors and from the vibration sensors were amplified to be in the range of 
±5V for maximum load, considering the maximum allowable range of the equipment. The 
signals were filtered by a high pass filter, the vibration sensor signals were additionally 
filtered with a low pass filter. Corner frequencies were chosen according to the noise that 
could be observed on an oscilloscope. Periodical noise of 180 Hz was observed on the 
oscilloscope for the vibration signal corresponding to the third harmonic of the main power 
supply. Therefore, the chosen corner frequency for the low pass filter was 400 Hz. For the 
high pass filter, 1 kHz was chosen. Above 8 KHz, the range of the acoustic emission sensor 
ends. That is, readings above that frequency cannot be attributed to any occurrence in the 
machining process. Since it clutters the signal unnecessarily, it was filtered out. Acoustic 
emission and vibration signals were fed through an RMS device. Its use smoothes the signal 
and makes it more accessible to signal processing. The root mean square (RMS) is a statistical 
measure of the magnitude of a varying quantity and it is proportional to the energy contents of 
the signal. The RMS of a function f for a period of time T

is defined by [5, 6]:    
 





T
dt
t
f
T
RMS
0
2
1
 
(1) 
 
where T

is time constant and t
f
the signal function. In this case, as the data is discrete the 
formula used was [5, 6]: 
 






n
k
kt
f
n
RMS
1
2
1
 
(2) 
 
where n is the number of samples. There are only a value of the variables case, run, VB and 
time per struct array. Furthermore, variables DOC, feed and material do not vary within each 
case. Additionally, variables smcAC, smcDC, vib_table, vib_spindle, AE_table and 
AE_spindle are curves with 9,000 points each one. The RMS has been obtained for each of 
these curves. 

Modeling the Milling Tool Wear by Using a Multilayer Perceptron … 
163
 
Figure 3. Tool wear VB as it is seen on the insert. 
2.1.2. Tool Wear 
Tool wear comes in different forms. Apart from the intuitive rounding of the cutting 
edge, crater wear on the rake face due to the abrasion of the sliding of the chip on the rake 
face and flank wear due to friction of the tool on the workpiece occur. Speed of cutting, more 
than other parameters, influence the rate of wear; depth of cut and feed rate also affect the 
tool life. In our experiments, we measured the flank wear VB as a generally accepted 
parameter for evaluating tool wear (see Figure 3) [1-6]. 
The flank wear VB is measured as the distance from the cutting edge to the end of the 
abrasive wear on the flank face of the tool. The flank wear was observed during the 
experiments. The insert was taken out of the tool and the wear was measured with the help of 
a microscope. 
 
2.2. Mathematical Model: Multilayer Perceptron Artificial Neural  
Network (MLP) 
 
A multilayer perceptron (MLP) is a feedforward artificial neural network model that 
maps sets of input data onto a set of appropriate outputs. An MLP consists of multiple layers 
of nodes in a directed graph, with each layer fully connected to the next one. Except for the 
input nodes, each node is a neuron (or processing element) with a nonlinear activation 
function. MLP utilizes a supervised learning technique called backpropagation for training the 
network. MLP is a modification of the standard linear perceptron and can distinguish data that 
are not linearly separable [7-9]. We can summarize its characteristics as follows: 
With respect to the activation function, if a multilayer perceptron has a linear activation 
function in all neurons, that is, a linear function that maps the weighted inputs to the output of 
each neuron, then it is easily proved with linear algebra that any number of layers can be 
reduced to the standard two-layer input-output model. What makes a multilayer perceptron 
different is that some neurons use a nonlinear activation function which was developed to 
model the frequency of action potentials, or firing, of biological neurons in the brain. This 
function is modeled in several ways. 
Indeed, the two main activation functions used in current applications are both sigmoids, 
and are described by: 
 


i
i
v
v
y
tanh

 
(3) 
 
or 

P. J. García Nieto and E. García-Gonzalo 
164


1
1




iv
i
e
v
y
 
(4) 
 
in which the former function is a hyperbolic tangent which ranges from
1
 to 1, and the 
latter, the logistic function, is similar in shape but ranges from 0 to 1. Here iy is the output of 
the ith node (neuron) and iv  is the weighted sum of the input synapses. Alternative activation 
functions have been proposed, including the rectifier and softplus functions. More specialized 
activation functions include radial basis functions which are used in another class of 
supervised neural network models.  
With respect to the layers, the multilayer perceptron (MLP) consists of three or more 
layers (an input and an output layer with one or more hidden layers) of nonlinearly-activating 
nodes and is thus considered a deep neural network. Since an MLP is a Fully Connected 
Network, each node in one layer connects with a certain weight
ij
w to every node in the 
following layer. Some people do not include the input layer when counting the number of 
layers and there is disagreement about whether
ij
w should be interpreted as the weight from i 
to j or the other way around. 
With respect to the learning, it occurs in the perceptron by changing connection weights 
after each piece of data is processed, based on the amount of error in the output compared to 
the expected result. This is an example of supervised learning, and is carried out through 
backpropagation, a generalization of the least mean squares algorithm in the linear 
perceptron. We represent the error in output node j in the nth data point (training example) by 



n
j
y
n
j
d
n
j
e


, where d is the target value and y is the value produced by the 
perceptron. We then make corrections to the weights of the nodes based on those corrections 
which minimize the error in the entire output, given by [7-16]: 
 




j
n
j
e
n
2
2
1

 
(4) 
 
Using gradient descent, we find our change in each weight to be.  
 




n
iy
n
j
v
n
n
ji
w







 
(5) 
where iy is the output of the previous neuron and  is the learning rate, which is carefully 
selected to ensure that the weights converge to a response fast enough, without producing 
oscillations. 
The derivative to be calculated depends on the induced local field
j
v , which itself varies. 
It is easy to prove that for an output node this derivative can be simplified to [7-16]: 











n
j
v
n
j
e
n
j
v
n


 
(6) 

Modeling the Milling Tool Wear by Using a Multilayer Perceptron … 
165
whereis the derivative of the activation function described above, which itself does not 
vary. The analysis is more difficult for the change in weights to a hidden node, but it can be 
shown that the relevant derivative is: 
 



















k
n
kj
w
n
k
v
n
n
j
v
n
j
v
n



 
(7) 
 
This depends on the change in weights of the kth nodes, which represent the output layer. 
So to change the hidden layer weights, we must first change the output layer weights 
according to the derivative of the activation function, and so this algorithm represents a 
backpropagation of the activation function.  
The term multilayer perceptron often causes confusion. It is argued the model is not a 
single perceptron that has multiple layers. Rather, it contains many perceptrons that are 
organised into layers, leading some to believe that a more fitting term might therefore be 
multilayer perceptron network. Moreover, these perceptrons are not really perceptrons in the 
strictest possible sense, as true perceptrons are a special case of artificial neurons that use a 
threshold activation function such as the Heaviside step function, whereas the artificial 
neurons in a multilayer perceptron are free to take on any arbitrary activation function. 
Consequently, whereas a true perceptron performs binary classification, a neuron in a 
multilayer perceptron is free to either perform classification or regression, depending upon its 
activation function. 
The two arguments raised above can be reconciled with the name multilayer perceptron 
if perceptron is simply interpreted to mean a binary classifier, independent of the specific 
mechanistic implementation of a classical perceptron. In this case, the entire network can 
indeed be considered to be a binary classifier with multiple layers. Furthermore, the term 
multilayer perceptron now does not specify the nature of the layers; the layers are free to be 
composed of general artificial neurons, and not perceptrons specifically. This interpretation of 
the term multilayer perceptron avoids the loosening of the definition of perceptron to mean 
an artificial neuron in general. 
 
2.2.1. The Goodness-of-Fit 
To estimate the flank wear from other operation input parameters it is important to select 
the model that best fits the experimental data. To measure the goodness–of–fit the criterion 
considered was the coefficient of determination
2
R [18, 19]. This ratio indicates the 
proportion of total variation in the dependent variable explained by the model (inside-bark 
volume in our case). A dataset takes values it , each of which has an associated modelled 
value 
iy . The former are called the observed values and the latter are often referred to as the 
predicted values. Variability in the dataset is measured through different sums of squares [18, 
19]: 
 
 






n
i
i
tot
t
t
SS
1
2 : the total sum of squares, proportional to the sample variance. 

P. J. García Nieto and E. García-Gonzalo 
166
 






n
i
i
reg
t
y
SS
1
2 : the regression sum of squares, also called the explained sum 
of squares. 
 






n
i
i
i
err
y
t
SS
1
2 : the residual sum of squares. 
 
In the previous sums, t is the mean of the n observed data: 
 



n
i
it
n
t
1
1
 
(9) 
 
Bearing in mind the above sums, the general definition of the coefficient of determination 
is: 
2
1
err
tot
SS
R
SS

 
(10) 
 
A coefficient of determination value of 1.0 indicates that the regression curve fits the data 
perfectly. 
Furthermore, it is well known that the MLP technique is strongly dependent on the 
following hyperparameters [7-16]. Some methods often used to determine suitable 
hyperparameters are [7, 8, 12-16]: grid search, random search, Nelder-Mead search, heuristic 
search, genetic algorithms, pattern search, etc.  
Therefore, a MLP–based model was applied to predict the flank wear (output variable) 
from the other nine remaining variables (input variables) studying their influence in order to 
optimize its calculation through the analysis of the determination coefficient 
2
R with success. 
The determination coefficient is a statistical measure of how well a regression curve 
approximates real data points. Furthermore, it is a descriptive measure ranging from zero to 
one, indicating how good one term is predicted by another one. Thus,
1
2 
R
 indicates the 
best approximation and 
0
2 
R
 the worst one. 
Cross validation was the standard technique used here for finding the real coefficient of 
determination (
2
R ) for the experimental dataset analyzed [20]. The dataset is randomly 
divided into l disjoint subsets of equal size, and each subset is used once as a validation set, 
whereas the other
1

l
subsets are put together to form a training set. In the simplest case, the 
average accuracy of the l validation sets is used as an estimator for the accuracy of the 
method. The combination of the hyperparameters with the best performance is chosen [7-16]. 
In this way, 10-fold cross-validation was used. 
As it has been previously pointed out, in order to guarantee the prediction ability of the 
MLP–based model, an exhaustive cross-validation algorithm was used [20]. The referred 
algorithm consists in splitting the sample into 10 parts and using 9 of them for training and 
the remaining one for testing. This process was performed 10 times using each of the parties 
of the 10 divisions for testing and calculating the average error. Therefore, all the possible 
variability of MLP–based model parameters has been evaluated in order to get the optimum 

Modeling the Milling Tool Wear by Using a Multilayer Perceptron … 
167
point, looking for those parameters that minimize the average error. With these optimal 
hyperparameters, the error criterion was calculated from the built model using 90% of the 
sample and tested with the remaining 10%. In this way, we are able to simulate as much as 
possible the real conditions under which the model would be built in order to later fit it to new 
observation data unrelated to the construction of the model. 
The regression modeling has been performed with Multivariate adaptive regression 
splines, using the WEKA Data Mining Software [21]. 
 
 
3. ANALYSIS OF RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
The operation input variables considered in this research work are shown in Table 3 [1-
6]. The total number of predicting variables used to build the MLP–based model was 9 (see 
Table 1). The output predicted variable is the flank wear (VB) is measured in mm. In this 
study, we do not use DC spindle motor current (smcDC) because it is highly correlated with 
AC spindle motor current (smcAC). Therefore, the final number of input variables used to 
predict the flank wear was nine. 
The VB missing values have been removed and 145 samples remain. The variable 
material is a categorical variable and it is not considered in the further fitting by using the 
MLP-based model. 
The matrix of linear correlation coefficients is represented in Figure 4. White and yellow 
stand for an important level of correlation. It can be seen that smcDC and smcAC are highly 
correlated. 
Additionally, the principal component analysis (PCA) chart is shown in Figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 4. Matrix of correlation coefficients. 
 
 

P. J. García Nieto and E. García-Gonzalo 
168
Table 3. Set of operation input variables used in this study 
 
Input variables 
Name of the variable 
Time (mm) 
Time 
DOC (mm) 
Depth of cut 
Feed (mm/rev) 
Feed 
Material 
Material 
smcAC 
AC spindle motor current 
smcDC 
DC spindle motor current 
vib_table 
Table vibration 
vib_spindle 
Spindle vibration 
AE_table 
Acoustic emission at table 
AE_spindle 
Acoustic emission at spindle 
 
 
Figure 5. First and second principal components of the variables. 
In this study, the MLP regression was performed with WEKA Data Mining Software 
[21]. A multilayer perceptron (MLP) has been fitted to the experimental data in order to 
predict the milling tool wear from milling run experimental data. In this sense, an artificial 
neural network (ANN) is typically defined by three types of parameters: the interconnection 
pattern between different layers of neurons (see Figura 6), the learning process for updating 
the weights of the interconnections, the momentum factor in order to avoid oscillating weight 
changes of the ANN and the activation function that converts a neuron’s weighted input to its 
output activation. In this research work, the ANN optimal parameters for the multilayer 
perceptron (MLP) are shown in Table 4. 

Modeling the Milling Tool Wear by Using a Multilayer Perceptron … 
169
 
Figure 6. Diagram of an MLP network with h neurons in the hidden layer, d neurons in the input layer 
and a single neuron in the output layer [7-16, 22, 23]. 
Table 4. The ANN parameters of the fitted multilayer perceptron (MLP) 
for the milling tool wear VB 
 
Parameters 
Values 
Number of hidden neurons 
12 
Learning rate 
0.2 
Momentum factor 
0.2 
Activation function 
Tangent sigmoid transfer function 
 
Additionally, Table 5 shows the determination and correlation coefficient for the MLP–
based model. An important goodness of fit, that is to say, a good agreement between the 
model and the experimental data can be infered from these results. 
The significance ranking for the input variables predicting the milling tool wear (output 
variable) in this highly nonlinear complex problem is shown in Table 6 and Figure 7. Thus, 
for the MLP model the most significant variable in flank wear prediction is the smcAC, 
followed by time, material2, vib_spindle, vib_table, DOC, feed, AE_table and finally 
AE_spindle. This model considers that smcDC values have no influence in the milling tool 
wear prediction. 
Finally, this study was able to predict the milling tool wear from flank wear values 
(output variable) as a function of the remaining input variables (time or duration of 
experiment, depth of cut, feed, AC spindle motor current, table vibration, spindle vibration, 
acoustic emission at table and acoustic emission at spindle) in agreement with the real 
experimental values of the flank wear observed with a huge accurateness (see Figure 8). 
Therefore, it seems appropriate the use of a MLP–based model in order to achieve a very 
effective approach to the nonlinearities present in this complex regression problem. 
 
Table 5. Coefficient of determination (
2
R ) and correlation coefficient (r) for  
the MLP–based model fitted in this study 
 
Model 
Coefficient of determination/correlation coefficient 
MLP 
0.85/0.92 
 
 

P. J. García Nieto and E. García-Gonzalo 
170
 
Figure 7. Relative importance of the input variables to predict the flank wear in the fitted MLP–based 
model. 
In attempting to model real-world problems or concepts using computational methods, 
the selection of an appropriate representation is of considerable importance [10-16, 22, 23]. 
The selection of features can have a considerable impact on the effectiveness of the overall 
resulting regression algorithm: the MLP model. The main purpose of this selection is to 
reduce the number of features used in regression maintaining an acceptable accuracy. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Comparison between the flank wear (VB) in mm measured and flank wear predicted by the 
MLP–based model in the prediction of the milling tool wear using the optimal hyperparameters 
(
92
.0

r
). 

Modeling the Milling Tool Wear by Using a Multilayer Perceptron … 
171
Table 6. Significance ranking for the variables involved in the best fitted MLP–based 
model for the flank wear prediction according to the weights’ Criterion 
 
Variable 
Weights 
smcAC 
2.5105 
AE_spindle 
1.3410 
Feed 
1.2686 
Time 
0.8150 
vib_table 
0.4309 
DOC 
0.2421 
AE_table 
0.1705 
vib_spindle 
0.1428 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The MLP model [7-16] is suitable tools in modelling and assessment of singular 
problems, such as the milling tool wear (flank wear in this case). The most important 
operation input variables were used to fully characterize the problem. 
A correlation coefficient r of 0.92 was obtained when the MLP technique was applied to 
the experimental data set. The results are consistent with previous studies. 
One of the main findings in this study was to set the significance order of the variables 
involved in the prediction of the milling tool wear. The first variable was the AC spindle 
motor current input variable. The second variable was the acoustic emission at spindle 
followed by the feed, time, table vibration, depth of cut, acoustic emission at table and spindle 
vibration. The results were in a good agreement with the operation observations [18, 19, 22, 
23]. 
With only eight parameters (time or duration of experiment, depth of cut, feed, AC 
spindle motor current, table vibration, spindle vibration, acoustic emission at table and 
acoustic emission at spindle) the milling tool wear, and consequenly, the flank wear of the 
milling machine could be predicted with success. The flank wear diagnosis can be accurately 
modeled (
92
.0

r
) by using this MLP–based model, as was previously postulated, 
confirming the hypothesis formulated (see Figure 8). Additionally, the significance order of 
the input variables involved in the prediction of the flank wear values could be set. From the 
obtained predicted results for the milling tool wear, we can suggest the use of the MLP 
approach for predicting the flank wear values taking into account its superior generalization 
capability compared to traditional regression techniques. The results verify that the MLP 
regression method significantly improves the generalization capability achievable with other 
classical regressors [18, 19, 22, 23]. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
The authors wish to acknowledge the computational support provided by the 
Departments of Mathematics and Electrical Engineering at University of Oviedo as well as 

P. J. García Nieto and E. García-Gonzalo 
172
the experimental dataset from NASA data repository (USA). Finally, we would like to thank 
Anthony Ashworth for his revision of English grammar and spelling of the manuscript. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Rolt, L.T.C. A Short History of Machine Tools. Cambridge, Massachusetts (USA): MIT 
Press; 1965. 
[2] 
Hall, H. Milling: A Complete Course. New York: Trans-Atlantic Publications; 2004. 
[3] 
Bray, S. Milling. Ramsbury, Marlborough (UK): Crowood Press; 2011. 
[4] 
Schey, J.A. Introduction to Manufacturing Processes. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1977. 
[5] 
Goebel, K. (1996). Management of Uncertainty in Sensor Validation, Sensor Fusion, 
and Diagnosis of Mechanical Systems Using Soft Computing Techniques, Ph.D. 
Thesis, Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California at Berkeley. 
[6] 
Agogino, A. and Goebel, K. (2007). BEST lab, UC Berkeley. Milling Data Set, NASA 
Ames Prognostics Data Repository (http://ti.arc. nasa.gov/project/prognostic-data-
repository), NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA. 
[7] 
Hassoun, M. Fundamentals of Artificial Neural Networks. Boston (MA): Bradford 
Book (MIT Press); 2003. 
[8] 
Hagan, M.T., Demuth, H.B., Beale, M.H., and De Jesús, O. Neural Network Design. 
New York: Martin Hagan; 2014.  
[9] 
Cybenko, G. (1989). Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. 
Mathematics of Control, Signals, and Systems, 2 (4), 303–314. 
[10] Haykin, S. Neural Networks: A Comprehensive Foundation. New York: Prentice Hall; 
1998. 
[11] Chou, S.–M., Lee, T.–S., Shao, Y.E., and Chen, I.–F. (2004). Mining the breast cancer 
pattern using artificial neural networks and multivariate adaptive regression splines. 
Expert Systems with Applications, 27 (1), 133–142. 
[12] Sánchez Lasheras, F., Vilán Vilán, J.A., García Nieto, P.J., and del Coz Díaz, J.J. 
(2010). The use of design of experiments to improve a neural network model in order to 
predict the thickness of the chromium layer in a hard chromium plating process. 
Mathematical and Computer Modelling, 52 (7-8), 1169–1176. 
[13] García Nieto, P.J., Martínez Torres, J., de Cos Juez, F.J., and Sánchez Lasheras, F. 
(2012). Using multivariate adaptive regression splines and multilayer perceptron 
networks to evaluate paper manufactured using Eucalyptus globulus. Applied 
Mathematics and Compututation, 219 (2), 755–763. 
[14] Singh, K.P., Gupta, S., Kumar, A., and Shukla, S.P. (2012). Linear and nonlinear 
modeling approaches for urban air quality prediction. Science of The Total 
Environment, 426, 244–255. 
[15] Hoi, K.I., Yuen, K.V., and Mok, K.M. (2013). Improvement of the multilayer 
perceptron for air quality modelling through an adaptive learning scheme. Computers 
and Geosciences, 59, 148–155. 
[16] Bagheri, M., Mirbagheri, M.A., Ehteshami, M., and Bagheri, Z. (2015). Modeling of a 
sequencing batch reactor treating municipal wastewater using multi-layer perceptron 

Modeling the Milling Tool Wear by Using a Multilayer Perceptron … 
173
and radial basis function artificial neural networks. Process Safety and Environmental 
Protection, 93, 111–123. 
[17] Essick, J. Hands-On Introduction to LabVIEW for Scientists and Engineers. New York: 
Oxford University Press; 2012. 
[18] Wasserman, L. All of Statistics: A Concise Course in Statistical Inference. New York: 
Springer; 2003. 
[19] Freedman, D., Pisani, R., and Purves, R. Statistics. New York: W.W. Norton and 
Company; 2007. 
[20] Picard, R., and Cook, D. (1984). Cross-validation of regression models. Journal of the 
American Statistical Association, 79 (387), 575–583. 
[21] Hall, M., Frank, E., Holmes, G., Pfahringer, B., Reutemann, P., and Witten, I.H. (2009). 
The WEKA Data Mining Software: An Update. SIGKDD Explorations, 11 (1), 10–18. 
[22] Engelbrecht, A.P. Computational Intelligence: An Introduction. New York: Wiley; 
2007. 
[23] Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R. and Friedman, J. The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data 
Mining, Inference, and Prediction. New York: Springer; 2009. 
 
 
Reviewed by Prof. Dr. Pedro Arias, Departament of Natural Resources and Environment, 
University of Vigo, 36310 Vigo, Spain. (Email: parias@uvigo.es) 
 


In: Artificial Neural Networks: New Research 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-964-6 
Editor: Gayle Cain 
© 2017 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 8  
 
 
 
PARAMETER EXTRACTION OF SMALL-SIGNAL 
AND NOISE MODELS OF MICROWAVE TRANSISTORS 
BASED ON ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS 
 
 
Zlatica Marinković1 *, Vladica Đorđević2, Nenad Ivković1,  
Olivera Pronić-Rančić1, Vera Marković1 and Alina Caddemi3 
1University of Niš, Faculty of Electronic Engineering, Niš, Serbia 
2Innovation Center of Advanced Technologies, Niš, Serbia 
3University of Messina, Department of Engineering, Italy 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Microwave transistors are among the key components of circuits used in modern 
communication systems. In computer aided design of these circuits it is necessary to use 
their accurate and reliable models in order to represent them properly. There are a plenty 
of models developed, but still the models based on a transistor equivalent circuit 
representation are the most widely used and preferred by the circuit designers. The 
parameters of equivalent circuit models are extracted from a set of measured 
characteristics of a transistor to be modeled. For certain models there are analytical 
approaches for model parameter extraction. However, optimizations in circuit simulators 
are dominantly applied. Optimizations take a certain amount of time, which is especially 
important when repeated iterations are needed to determine the model parameters under 
different transistor working conditions. Artificial neural networks have appeared to be a 
very convenient tool to develop efficient extraction procedures of device model 
parameters. In this chapter a comprehensive study of the developed neural network based 
extraction approaches is given, considering transistor small-signal and noise models. A 
short introduction on the microwave transistor models and frequently used extraction 
procedures is given at the beginning, followed by a description of the multilayered neural 
networks and procedures of their training and validation. The main part of the Chapter 
refers to several extraction approaches based on neural networks, starting from the 
                                                           
*University of Niš, Faculty of Electronic Engineering, Aleksandra Medvedeva 14, 18000, Niš, Serbia. Email: 
zlatica.marinkovic@elfak.ni.ac.rs. 

Zlatica Marinković, Vladica Đorđević, Nenad Ivković et al. 
 
176
development of the extraction procedure, through their validation and up to the final 
application. The advantages and possible limitations are discussed. Appropriate 
numerical results are included to illustrate and verify the presented procedures. 
 
Keywords: artificial neural networks, microwave transistors, modeling, extraction, small-
signal equivalent circuit, noise parameters 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Microwave transistors (MEtal Semiconductor FETs - MESFETs, High Electron Mobility 
Transistors – HEMTs, Heterojunction Bipolar Transistors – HBTs, etc.) are among the key 
components of circuits used in modern microwave communication systems (satellite 
communication 
systems, 
mobile 
systems, 
radio-relay 
links, 
etc.) 
Experimental 
characterization of microwave transistors requires complex and time consuming measurement 
procedures. Therefore, in computer aided design (CAD) of these circuits it is necessary to 
have accurate and reliable models in order to represent them properly in simulators.  
Small-signal models of microwave transistors represent a starting point for further 
development of noise models and large-signal models. During the years, plenty of work has 
been carried out in the field of small-signal/noise modeling of microwave transistors [1-37]. 
The physical transistor models are very accurate but quite complex and require many 
technological parameters to be known, which are often not available to the circuit designers. 
Therefore, they are not widely used in the microwave circuit design. The empirical models, 
mostly based on the equivalent circuit representation of a transistor, are most commonly used 
in microwave CAD. 
Microwave transistor noise models are often based on the equivalent circuit 
representation, consisting of a transistor small-signal equivalent circuit and assigned noise 
sources [28]. An empirical transistor noise model of microwave FETs proposed by 
Pospieszalski, [7], is widely used in commercial microwave circuit simulators. The 
Pospieszalski’s noise model is based on simple expressions for noise parameters of 
MESFET/HEMT intrinsic circuit as the functions of the transistor intrinsic circuit elements 
and equivalent gate and drain noise temperatures. At microwave frequencies, it is also very 
suitable to use the noise wave modeling approach for MEFETs/HEMTs since it allows the 
use of scattering parameters for noise computations [24-37]. In this approach, three noise 
wave temperatures are introduced as empirical noise model parameters and the noise 
parameters of transistor intrinsic circuit are calculated in terms of the noise wave 
temperatures. The wave approach is useful not only for noise modeling, but also for 
measurements of microwave FETs [3, 35]. 
The parameters of equivalent circuit models (ECPs) are extracted from a set of measured 
scattering (S-) parameters (and noise parameters in the case of noise models) of a transistor to 
be modeled. ECPs should be re-extracted from the measured data for each new bias point 
and/or different ambient temperature. For certain models there are analytical approaches for 
model parameter extraction, such as the one described in [12]. However, optimization in a 
circuit simulator is dominantly applied. Optimizations take a certain time, which can be very 
time consuming when repeated iterations are needed to determine the model parameters in a 
wide range of operating conditions (frequency, bias, ambient temperature). 

Parameter Extraction of Small-Signal and Noise Models … 
 
177
An alternative approach for avoiding repeated ECP extraction procedures is based on the 
application of artificial neural networks (ANNs). ANNs are mathematical structures built like 
natural nervous system, i.e., a system of interconnected units, called neurons, which have the 
ability of learning the dependence between datasets [38]. The process of ANN learning is 
called the ANN training. Properly trained ANNs are able to give an appropriate and accurate 
response even for values of the input parameters not seen during the training. This ability of 
ANNs, called generalization, is the main reason why they have found a lot of applications for 
modeling in different areas, among them in the field of microwaves [38-48]. Plenty of 
transistor models based on the ANN have been reported in the literature [49-75]. In this 
Chapter, the attention will be focused on ANN based extraction approaches, considering 
transistor small-signal models and noise models [61, 76-81]. 
The Chapter is organized as follows: After Introduction, a short description of microwave 
transistor small-signal and noise models is given. The basic background of the artificial neural 
networks is given in Section 3. The main part of the Chapter refers to the proposed ANN 
based extraction procedures. The extraction of small-signal model parameters and noise 
models parameters are presented in Section 4 and 5, respectively. Appropriate numerical 
results are included to illustrate and verify the presented ANN based extraction procedures. 
At the end the main concluding remarks are stated. 
 
 
2. MICROWAVE TRANSISTOR SMALL-SIGNAL AND NOISE MODELS 
 
Since microwave transistors are an essential part of low-noise communication devices, it 
is very important to have accurate knowledge of their characteristics. The complete 
characterization of those transistors includes measurement of both the scattering parameters 
(S-parameters) and noise parameters. For that purpose, microwave transistors can be 
considered as two-port linear networks, [28]. The S-parameters relate the complex amplitudes 
of the voltage waves incident on the ports to those reflected from the ports, [28, 72]. For the 
purpose of the characterization of microwave FETs in terms of noise, a set of four noise 
parameters describing inherent noise behavior of the transistor, independent of a connected 
circuit is used. The most commonly used set of noise parameters consists of: the minimum 
noise figure, 
min
F
, magnitude (
)
Mag( opt

) and angle (
)
Ang( opt

) of the optimum source 
reflection coefficient, 
opt

, and the equivalent noise resistance 
n
R . A normalized equivalent 
noise resistance 
0
/ Z
R
r
n
n 
 (
0
Z - normalizing impedance, typically 
0
Z  = 50 Ω)) is often 
used instead of 
n
R . 
The measurements of these parameters (especially noise parameters) are time-consuming 
and require very expensive equipment. Therefore, transistor characterisation by using their 
measured characteristics is quite impractical from the aspect of efficient microwave circuit 
design. Hence, microwave transistors are usually represented by appropriate models in 
microwave circuit simulators, as mentioned before. Empirical transistor noise models based 
on the equivalent transistor circuit are commonly used [3-7]. Two of the transistor noise 
models, considered to be very suitable for implementation into the standard commercial 
microwave circuit simulators, Pospieszalski’s noise model [7] and the noise wave model [24, 
31] will be shortly described here. 

Zlatica Marinković, Vladica Đorđević, Nenad Ivković et al. 
 
178
In Figure 2.1 small-signal equivalent circuit of packaged MESFETs/HEMTs is shown. 
The transistor intrinsic circuit, common to most microwave FETs, is embedded in a network 
representing the device parasitics. The extrinsic circuit may be different, depending on the 
included parasitic effects. The intrinsic circuit is enclosed within the box and shown 
separately in Figure 2.2. 
Noise effects can be included in equivalent circuits in different ways, [7, [28, 33]. 
Namely, any noisy linear two-port can be replaced by a noiseless two-port network and two 
additional noise sources that are generally correlated [31]. 
The intrinsic equivalent circuit including noise sources according to Pospieszalski`s 
approach is shown in Figure 2.3. The voltage noise source, 
gs
e
, and current noise source, ds
i , 
represent the effects of noise generating inside the device. The equivalent noise temperatures: 
Tg – gate noise temperature and Td – drain noise temperature are assigned to the voltage and 
current noise sources, respectively. These equivalent noise temperatures are empirical model 
parameters that are usually obtained by an optimization processing a circuit simulator. 
 
 
Figure 2.1.Small-signal equivalent circuit of packaged MESFETs/HEMTs. 
 
Figure 2.2.Intrinsic circuit of MESFETs/HEMTs. 

Parameter Extraction of Small-Signal and Noise Models … 
 
179
 
Figure 2.3.Intrinsic circuit of MESFETs/HEMTs including noise sources. 
The noise parameters of a transistor intrinsic circuit, 
int
N
, can be calculated from simple 
expressions as the functions of the noise equivalent circuit parameters (ECPs): transistor 
intrinsic circuit elements and gate and drain noise temperatures, and frequency as follows [7]: 
 
0
10log 1
min
mini
T
F
T








, 
(2.1) 
 
d
ds
gs
m
gs
m
d
ds
gs
gs
d
ds
g
gs
m
gs
min
T
G
R
g
C
g
T
G
R
C
T
G
T
R
g
C
T
2
2
2
 
2


















, 
(2.2) 
 


2
2
2
2
2
0
0
1
g
d
ni
gs
gs
gs
m ds
T
T
R
R
C R
T
g R T




, 
(2.3) 
 
0
0
opt
opti
opt
Z
Z
Z
Z




, 
(2.4) 
 
2
2
gs
ds g
m
opt
gs
gs
d
R
R T
g
R
R
C
T











, 
(2.5) 
 
1
opt
gs
X
C


,  
(2.6) 
 
where 0
T  = 290K is the reference noise temperature and 
0
50
Z 
. min
T
is the minimum noise 
temperature and 
opt
opt
opt
Z
R
jX


 is the optimum source impedance. 

Zlatica Marinković, Vladica Đorđević, Nenad Ivković et al. 
 
180
Once noise parameters of the intrinsic circuit are determined, the extrinsic circuit 
elements have to be added to the circuit with the aim to determine the noise parameters of the 
whole device, 
total
N
. The temperature of all resistive elements in the extrinsic circuit 
contributing to the total noise is assumed to be equal to the ambient temperature. It was 
shown [7] that the gate noise temperature can be considered as approximately equal to the 
ambient temperature, therefore, the Pospieszalski’s model can be treated as a single parameter 
noise model, i.e., only Td should be determined. 
As previously said, for microwave circuit applications, a wave interpretation of noise also 
seems to be very appropriate, [24, 26, 28], since the wave approach gives the possibility to 
treat the transistor noise in terms of incident and reflected waves, thus being compatible with 
the scattering matrix description of microwave networks. The scattering parameters used for 
performing the noise analysis are obtained with high accuracy by using vector network 
analyzer characterization, which contributes to the accuracy of noise analysis [36-37]. The 
wave approach has been successfully applied to the noise modeling of different transistor 
types, such as GaAs MESFETs, HEMTs [31-34] and recently to HEMTs in gallium nitride 
(GaN) technology [37]. 
For the purpose of noise modeling of microwave FETs a transistor intrinsic circuit is 
considered as a linear noisy two-port network represented by a noiseless two-port defined by 
the transfer scattering parameters [T] and two noise wave sources, incident an and reflected 
bn, referring to the input, as shown in Figure 2.4. The matrix equation describing this 
representation of the noisy two-port follows, [24]: 
 


















n
n
b
a
a
b
T
T
T
T
b
a
2
2
22
21
12
11
1
1
.  
(2.7) 
 
where ai and bi, i = 1, 2, are incident and output waves at thei-th port. 
 
[  ]
T
n
n
a
b
noiseless
two-port
1a
1b
2b
2
a
 
Figutre 2.4. Two port noisy network. 
The elements of the noise source vector are correlated and characterized by correlation 
matrix CT: 
 

Parameter Extraction of Small-Signal and Noise Models … 
 
181

















2
2
n
*
n
n
*
n
n
n
b
a
b
b
a
a
T
C
, 
(2.8) 
 
where  indicates time average of the quantity inside and * indicates complex conjugation. 
The noise wave model is characterized by the parameters called noise wave temperatures, [30]. 
The correlation matrix CT can be expressed in terms of noise wave temperatures as: 
 













b
j
c
j
c
a
T
e
T
e
T
T
f
k
c
c
T
C
,  
(2.9) 
 
wherek is the Boltzmann's constant and f is the noise bandwidth (f = 1Hz is assumed). In 
this way the noise performance of any two-port network can be completely characterized by 
two real temperatures 
a
T  and 
b
T and a complex correlation temperature c
T . The noise wave 
temperatures can be expressed in terms of the noise parameters of transistor intrinsic circuit  
(
mini
F
, 
opti

 and 
ni
R ) as follows [24], [30]: 
 
2
0
0
2
0
4
(
1)
1
ni
opti
a
mini
opti
R T
T
T
F
Z





,  
(2.10) 
 
0
0
2
0
4
(
1)
1
ni
b
mini
opti
R T
T
T
F
Z




, 
(2.11) 
 
0
2
0
4
1
ni
opti
c
opti
R T
T
Z



,  
(2.12) 
 
where 0
T  = 290K is the reference noise temperature and 
0
50
Z 
. 
It was shown that the accuracy of the noise wave model is higher in the case of the 
frequency dependent noise wave temperatures [32, 34]. Once the noise wave temperatures are 
calculated, the noise wave model of the considered transistor is extracted. The noise 
parameters of the complete circuit are computed after adding the parasitics. 
 
 
3. ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS 
 
Artificial neural networks (ANNs) can be characterized as computational models, 
consisting of a number of processing units, called neurons. One of the simplest structure of 
ANNs that is commonly used is a multi-layer perceptron (MLP), where neurons are grouped 
into input (layer 0), output (layer NL) and one/several hidden layers [38], Figure 3.1.  
 

Zlatica Marinković, Vladica Đorđević, Nenad Ivković et al. 
 
182
 
Figure 3.1.MLP neural network. 
Each neuron in one layer is connected to all neurons from the next layer, whereas there 
are no connections between neurons belonging to the same layer. As the MLP network is a 
type of feed-forward network, the information flows from the input to the output neurons. 
Therefore, neurons receive the signal from the neighbors or external sources, and send it over 
a large number of connections between them in only one direction. It should be mentioned 
that each neuron is characterized by its activation (transfer) function and each connection 
between neurons is weighted. 
Therefore, the l-th layer output is: 
 
)
(
1
l
l
l
l
F
B
Y
W
Y



 
 
(3.1) 
 
where
l
Y  and 
1

l
Y
 are outputs of l-th and (l-1)-th layer, respectively, 
l
W  is a weight matrix 
between (l-1)-th and l-th layer, 
l
B  is a bias matrix between (l-1)-th and l-th layer, and F is an 
activation function of each neuron. There are different types of neuron activation functions, 
and which one will be assigned to a neuron mostly depending on its position within the 
network structure. Usually, neurons within the input and output layers have linear and 
neurons within the hidden layers have sigmoid activation functions. Linear and sigmoid 
functions (log-sigmoid and tan-sigmoid) are given by equations (3.2), (3.3) and (3.4), 
respectively, and shown in Figure 3.2. 
 
( )
F u
u

, 
 
(3.2) 
 
)
1
/(
1
)
(
u
e
u
F



, 
 
(3.3) 
 
)
/(
)
(
)
(
u
u
u
u
e
e
e
e
u
F





.  
 
(3.4) 
 

Parameter Extraction of Small-Signal and Noise Models … 
 
183
 
 
(a)  
 
 
 
(b)  
 
 
 
(c) 
Figure 3.2. Typical activation functions of hidden neurons: (a) linear (b) log-sigmoid (c) tan-sigmoid. 
The values of network parameters (connection weights and neuron activation function 
thresholds (biases)) are adjusted during the process of neural network training, where ANN 
learns relationship among sets of input-output data (training sets). Therefore, as a neural 
model is developed from the source-response data, the knowledge about the physical 
characteristics of the dependence to be modeled is not needed. For the process of ANN 
training, different algorithms can be used. The most frequently used is the backpropagation 
algorithm, and its modifications with higher convergence order, like the Quasi-Newton and 
the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm [38], [39]. 
In many cases, as is it often the case in the field of microwaves, the ANN input and 
output parameters may have significantly different values. Therefore, since the most sensitive 
regions of log-sigmoid and tan-sigmoid neuron activation functions are [0,1] and [-1,1], 
respectively, it is recommended to scale the input and output data to avoid the neuron 
saturation. The scaling of data from the original range to the normalized range [0,1] or 
[-1,1], depending on the chosen neuron transfer function, is known as the pre-processing. 
Based on that, before the network training, the training set has to be pre-processed (the both 
input and target data have to be normalized). Further, in order to find a network response to 
an arbitrary test set, the test set input values have to be normalized using the same minimum 
and maximum input parameter values as the ones used for the training. An inverse operation 
to the pre-processing is the post-processing, which represents the process of de-normalization 
of output parameters. Therefore, since the outputs are in the normalized range, the 
corresponding de-normalization of the obtained network outputs should be performed. The 
pre-processing and post-processing are not obligatory, but are recommended in applications 
similar to the ones given in this Chapter. 
The first significant advantage of neural networks is that once developed neural models 
give responses almost instantaneously. This stems from the fact that the responses of neural 
networks are based on performing basic mathematical operations and calculating elementary 
mathematical functions. The second, and also the most significant advantage of neural 
networks is their ability to generalize, i.e., to determine response even for input combinations 
that were not used in the process of network training. Also, MLP ANNs can be described 
using a set of mathematical expressions and further easily implemented within microwave 
circuit simulators. 
 
 

Zlatica Marinković, Vladica Đorđević, Nenad Ivković et al. 
 
184
4. EXTRACTION OF SMALL-SIGNAL EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT 
PARAMETERS BASED ON ANNS 
 
Equivalent circuit parameters (ECPs) of microwave transistor models are usually 
determined in a circuit simulator by an optimization procedure with the goal to achieve a 
matching level of the simulated and measured (target) S-parameters as high as possible. A 
more accurate and yet followed approach is to apply analytical procedures to extract the ECPs 
from the measured S-parameters under some special conditions. Alternatively, the extraction 
can be performed by means of ANNs. This section shows two approaches for development of 
small-signal ECP extraction procedures based on artificial neural networks. After description 
of the procedures, their comparison on an example of a pHEMT is given. 
Both above mentioned conventional extraction approaches, optimization based approach 
and analytical approach, need to be repeated for any new combination of the transistor 
operating conditions. In order to make extraction procedure more efficient, ANN based 
extraction has been proposed to replace repeating optimizations and/or analytical procedures. 
Namely, as the ECPs depend on the transistor geometry and the operating conditions, ANNs 
are developed with the aim to model dependence of the ECPs on the operating conditions [51, 
61, 69, 76]. The general case is shown in Figure 4.1. One or more trained ANNs have at the 
inputs the considered operating conditions, whereas their outputs correspond to the modeled 
ECPs. Therefore, the number of neurons in the input layer is equal to the number of 
considered input parameters (n), and the number of output neurons is equal to the number of 
modeled ECPs (m). 
The procedure of the development of the ANN extraction procedure is as described 
below and illustrated in Figure 4.2. First, it is necessary to measure transistor S-parameters 
under different operating conditions. To build the ANN training set, for each measurement 
the corresponding ECPs are extracted in a conventional way (optimizations or analytical 
procedure). By using the built training set, several ANNs having different number of hidden 
neurons are trained, and the ANN showing the best training statistics is chosen as the final 
model. Properly trained, the chosen ANN can predict the small-signal ECPs not only for the 
operating conditions that are used for the ANN training but also for the values of operating 
conditions not seen during the training, but which belong to the considered range of operating 
conditions. In other words, once the ANN is trained, ECPs can be obtained instantaneously 
for any combination of the considered operating conditions without a need for any measured 
data and without a need for additional optimizations. The measured data and optimizations 
are only requested for a limited number of combinations of the considered operating 
conditions. Moreover, such developed ANNs can be assigned to the equivalent circuit in a 
circuit simulator, by introducing the mathematical expressions describing the developed 
ANNs through variable and expression blocks (VAR), making in that way the equivalent 
circuit model dependent on the considered bias conditions. 
 
 
Figure 4.1. Small-signal ECP extraction based on ANN modeling ECP dependence on operating 
conditions. 

Parameter Extraction of Small-Signal and Noise Models … 
 
185
 
Figure 4.2.Development of the small-signal ECP extraction procedure based on ANNs modeling ECP 
dependence on operating conditions. 
In the literature, there are application examples of the described approach to the 
extraction of microwave FET small-signal ECPs for different bias and/or temperature values. 
An extraction procedure considering transistor bias voltages (gate to source voltage, Vgs, and 
drain to source voltage, Vds) and the ambient temperature, T, is presented in [51], [76], and the 
corresponding ANN model is shown in Figure 4.3a. Therefore, the developed ANN has three 
input neurons, and the number of output neurons corresponds to the total number of the ECPs. 
For the ANN development, it is necessary to perform the S-parameter measurements and the 
ECP extraction for several combinations of the bias voltages under different ambient 
temperatures. Extraction of the ECPs for the device working under constant bias conditions 
but under different ambient temperatures can be done by using a single input ANN, as shown 
in Figure 4.3b. Such an approach is described in [61] in an extended form, as besides the 
small-signal ECPs, also the ECPs related to the Pospieszalski’s noise model are included as 
the ANN outputs. In that case the measurements of the transistor characteristics (the S- and 
noise parameters) and corresponding ECP extractions should be performed at several 
different ambient temperatures. 

Zlatica Marinković, Vladica Đorđević, Nenad Ivković et al. 
 
186
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
Figure 4.3. ANN models for ECP dependence on operating conditions. (a) bias and temperature 
dependent small-signal model [51], [76], (b) temperature dependent small-signal model [61], (c) bias 
dependent small-signal model of scaled devices [69]. 
This approach can be extended further to be applied to the devices differing in some 
geometrical parameters. An example is reported in [69] where the approach is applied to 
extraction of the small-signal ECPs of on-wafer scaled devices. Namely, devices have the 
same structure and different gate widths. Therefore, in order to develop the proposed 
approach, the gate width (W) should be included as an additional input to the ANNs. Actually 
there are two ANNs to be developed, as shown in Figure 4.3c. As the ECPs of the extrinsic 
circuit, ECP_extr, are bias independent, they are modeled by a single input ANN, 
corresponding to the gate width. The second ANN is trained to model the dependence of 
intrinsic ECPs, ECP_intr, on bias voltages and gate width. In the example shown in [69] the 
neural model of intrinsic ECPs consists of three ANNs, as two of the intrinsic parameters 
were modeled by separate ANNs to increase the modeling accuracy. The necessary 
measurements should be performed for different scaled devices working under different 
conditions. First, measurements required to extract extrinsic ECPs are to be performed 
(usually measurements under “cold” bias conditions [12]). Then, the intrinsic ECPs are 
determined from bias dependent measurements, either by optimization or by an analytical 
procedure. The developed ANNs can be used for instantaneous determination of ECPs for 
devices with different gate widths. As in the previous case, if the expressions describing the 
ANNs are assigned to the equivalent circuit schematic in a microwave circuit simulator, 
model becomes bias dependent and scalable. Therefore, analyses of scalable devices can be 
performed using a single model valid for several devices. 
This approach provides instantaneous determination of the small-signal ECPs for any 
combination of the considered operating conditions in the given range. As far as the accuracy 
is concerned, the accuracy of the S-parameters simulated by using the ECPs extracted in this 
way depends on the accuracy of the considered equivalent circuit and also on the accuracy of 
the extraction of the ECPs used for training of the ANNs. 

Parameter Extraction of Small-Signal and Noise Models … 
 
187
 
 
Figure 4.4 ANN modeling ECP dependence on S-parameters and frequency. 
 
Figure 4.5.Development of the small-signal ECP extraction procedure based on an ANN modeling ECP 
dependence on the S-parameters and frequency. 
Another ANN based extraction approach which does not require extractions of the ECPs 
prior to the training of ANNs aimed for extraction, thus eliminating influence of imprecise 
extractions of the ECPs used for training of the ANNs is reported in [57, 77]. This approach 
exploits the ANNs to map the dependence between the ECPs and the corresponding S-
parameters in the inverse way, i.e., to predict the ECPs for the given set of measured S-
parameters, as shown in Figure 4.4. Besides eight inputs corresponding to real and imaginary 
parts of the four S-parameters, the frequency, f, is included as an additional input, introducing 
the frequency dependence of the S-parameters (the same combination of the ECPs gives 

Zlatica Marinković, Vladica Đorđević, Nenad Ivković et al. 
 
188
different values of the S-parameters at different frequencies). The number of output neurons 
is equal to the number of ECPs in the considered small-signal equivalent circuit. It may be 
said that this ANN perform inverse function to the simulation of ECPs based on the 
considered equivalent circuit.  
To build the training set it is not requested to perform measurements nor to perform 
optimizations in a circuit simulator. Namely, training data are S-parameters simulated in a 
circuit simulator for several (random) combinations of the ECP values falling in their 
predefined ranges. The simulated S-parameters are used as the input training data, whereas 
the ECPs are used as the target output values. The procedure of the ANN development is 
illustrated in Figure 4.5. Once the ANN showing the best statistics is chosen, it can be used 
for determining the ECP values from the measured S-parameters. In general, one 
measurement of the S-parameters (at one frequency) is enough to determine the small-signal 
ECPs. However, in order to eliminate influence of possible fluctuations of the measured S-
parameters, it is recommended to calculate the ECPs from the S-parameters measured at 
several frequencies and then to make average for each of the ECPs, obtaining in that way a 
single frequency- independent value for each ECP, which has been examined in details in 
[77]. The procedure should be repeated for each new combination of operating conditions. 
 
 
4.1. Examples 
 
To illustrate the efficiency and the accuracy of the above described modeling approaches, 
the results obtained by applying the approaches to the pHEMT packaged HEMT type 
NE20283A, by NEC, working under different temperature conditions will be presented here. 
The measured small-signal S-parameters were available in the temperature range from 233 K 
to 333K, with the step 20 K. The measurements were performed in the frequency range from 
6 to 18 GHz. The small-signal equivalent circuit shown in the Section 2 has been adopted for 
the analysis. The ECPs extracted by optimizations in a microwave simulator were presented 
in [82] and they are used as the training data for the ANN model relating the small-signal 
ECPs and temperature, Figure 4.3b [61]. It should be mentioned that the developed ANN is 
also used for predicting the equivalent drain noise temperature. Therefore, it has one input 
corresponding to the temperature and twenty outputs (19 corresponding to the small-signal 
ECPs and one to the noise model parameter). The trained ANN has one hidden layer having 
eight neurons. Once trained, such an ANN can be used to determine the ECPs at any 
temperature in the considered range.In Figure 4.6 the ECPs determined in a microwave 
simulator by the trained ANN with the step of 0.5 K are shown (lines). The calculation lasted 
a few seconds, and what is more important, the ECP determination was done just by 
calculating the ANN response without a need either for measurements at the desired 
temperatures or for optimizations. As illustrated in Figure 4.6, the ANN learned training data 
very well, as there is a very good agreement between ECP values obtained by optimization 
(circles) and ECP values determined by ANN (lines). A comparison of the small-signal S-
parameters simulated based on the equivalent circuit with the ECPs extracted by the 
mentioned neural approach with the measured values at 273 K is given in Figure. 4.7a. A very 
good modeling accuracy can be observed. 

Parameter Extraction of Small-Signal and Noise Models … 
 
189
 
Figure 4.6. ECPs extracted by using: optimization (circles), approach shown in Figure 4.3b (lines) and 
approach shown in Figure 4.4 (crosses). 
Further, the second extraction approach based on the ANN relating the ECPs and the 
measured S-parameters was applied to extract the ECPs for different temperatures [77]. The 
training data was obtained in a microwave simulator, by simulating the S-parameters for a 
number of combinations of the ECPs. The final ANN has one hidden layers with thirty 
neurons. There are nine ANN inputs (eight corresponding to real and imaginary parts of the 
S-parameters and one corresponding to the frequency) and 19 outputs (corresponding to 19 
ECPs). 

Zlatica Marinković, Vladica Đorđević, Nenad Ivković et al. 
 
190
 
(a) 
 
 
 
      (b) 
Figure 4.7. S-parameters at 273 K obtained by using: (a) approach shown in Figure 4.3b (b) approach 
shown in Figure 4.4 (lines - simulations, symbols - measurements). 
The trained ANN was applied to extract the ECPs at the temperatures where the 
measured data were available. For each temperature the ECPs were calculated for each 
frequency at which the measured data were available, and the average values were calculated 
giving the final values of the ECPs for the considered temperature [77]. The extracted values 
are shown as crosses in Figure 4.6. It can be seen that this approach gave almost equal values 
as the optimization approach and the first mentioned neural approach, which confirms the 
validity of the approach. This is confirmed also by the S-parameter plots given in Figure 4.7b 
where the S-parameters obtained by using the extracted ECPs are shown (lines) and compared 
to the measured data (symbols). The plot refers to the temperature 273 K in the frequency 
range from 6 to 18 GHz. 
 
 
5. EXTRACTION OF NOISE MODEL PARAMETERS BASED ON ANNS 
 
The most frequently used microwave transistor noise models are based on the small-
signal equivalent circuit with assigned noise sources which are described by a certain number 
of parameters. As mentioned earlier, for the Pospieszalski’s noise model these parameters are 
the equivalent gate and drain noise temperatures, and in the case of noise wave models the 
equivalent noise wave temperatures. Let us refer to the noise model parameters as ECP_noise 
in the further text. 
The ECP_noise extraction approaches based on the ANNs are similar to the small-signal 
ECP extraction approaches described in the previous section. As in the case of small-signal 
ECP extraction, the first approach is to model the dependence of the ECP_noise on the 
considered bias conditions, as shown in Figure 5.1.  
 
 
 

Parameter Extraction of Small-Signal and Noise Models … 
 
191
 
Figure 5.1. Extraction of the noise model parameters based on ANN modeling ECP_noise dependence 
on operating conditions. 
In the relevant literature, it can be found that this approach has been applied to both the 
considered noise models for devices working under different temperatures. For the 
Pospieszalski’s noise model, the equivalent drain noise temperature dependence on the 
ambient temperature has been modeled simultaneously with the small-signal ECPs [61], 
Figure 5.2a. Therefore, among the ANN outputs, one corresponds to the equivalent drain 
temperature. As far as the wave model is concerned, in [79] there are reported the results of 
equivalent noise wave temperature modeling by adoption of a four-output ANN, as shown in 
Figure 5.2b. Moreover, this ANN has also the frequency as an input, since a better accuracy 
in noise modeling is achieved when the noise wave temperatures are considered as frequency 
dependent. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 5.2. ANN models for ECP_noise dependence on the ambient temperature. (a) Pospieszalski’s 
noise model (simultaneously with the small-signal ECPs) [61]. (b) noise wave model [79]. 
The procedure for developing the ANNs in the both cases assumes first, as in the case of 
extraction of the small-signal model, the extraction of the small-signal model ECPs for 
several operating conditions. Then, the extraction of the ECP_noise for the combinations of 
the operating conditions (i.e., ambient temperature in the cases shown in Figure 5.2), used for 
building the training set, is accomplished. The described procedure is shown in Figure 5.3. 
Once trained, the ANNs modeling ECP_noise on the operating conditions are ready to be 
used for a quick further extraction of the ECP_noise for the desired values of the operating 
conditions, avoiding the need for additional measurements and optimizations. The 
expressions describing the dependence of the noise model parameters on the operating 
conditions can be assigned to the equivalent circuit, through VAR blocks, together with the 
expressions for the small-signal ECPs, thus extending the range of model validity. 
 

Zlatica Marinković, Vladica Đorđević, Nenad Ivković et al. 
 
192
 
Figure 5.3.Development of the ECP_noise extraction procedure based on ANN modeling of the 
ECP_noise dependence on operating conditions. 
However, as in the case of extraction of small-signal ECPs, the accuracy of the 
ECP_noise extraction depends on how well the ECP_noise used for the ANN training are 
extracted. If the extraction is not good enough, this error will propagate to the final values of 
noise parameters simulated by using the extracted ECP_noise. Following the idea of the 
small-signal ECP extraction directly from the measured transistor characteristics, as 
illustrated in Figure 4.4 in the previous section, a similar approach has been developed for the 
ECP_noise extraction. In the following, some of the reported results will be mentioned. One 
of the first published works related to this approach is presented in [57], where it was 
proposed to train an ANN to model the dependence of the ECP_noise on the S-parameters 
and measured F50 (as a measure of noise characteristics) and the frequency, Figure 5.4. The 
approach was applied to the Pospieszalski’s noise model, therefore the ANN has only the 
equivalent drain noise temperature as the output (the equivalent gate noise temperature was 
assumed to be equal to the ambient temperature). 

Parameter Extraction of Small-Signal and Noise Models … 
 
193
 
Figure 5.4.ANN modeling dependence of the equivalent drain noise temperature on S-parameters, F50 
and frequency. 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 5.5. ANN aimed at extracting the noise model parameters from the measured noise parameters: 
(a) for constant temperature, (b) including temperature dependence. 
Although a good accuracy in noise modeling was reported, having the S-parameters as 
the input of ANNs does not assure a high accuracy of the noise modeling in all cases, because 
the drain temperature extracted by using the developed ANN will be assigned to the small-
signal equivalent circuit. In other words, if the small-signal ECPs are not extracted well 
(causing deviation of the simulated and measured S-parameters), although the drain noise 
temperature is accurately extracted from the measured S-parameters, the simulated noise 
parameters may deviate significantly from their measured values. Therefore, a modified 
approach was proposed, with the idea to replace the S-parameters at the ANN input with the 
extracted small-signal [80], as shown in Figure 5.5a. Moreover, as transistor datasheets 
usually provide the measured noise parameters, instead of the noise figure in 50 input 
impedance condition, F50, the measured noise parameters are introduced at the ANN inputs. 
The ANN outputs are the noise model parameters.  
In addition, as the contribution of the resistive ECPs to the noise parameters change with 
the temperature, in order to account for the temperature influence on the ECP_noise, the 
ambient temperature was proposed to be included among the ANN inputs, Figure 5.5b. When 
the noise analysis at a constant temperature is performed, then it is not necessary to include 

Zlatica Marinković, Vladica Đorđević, Nenad Ivković et al. 
 
194
the temperature. Thus the ANN shown in Figure 5.5a can be used. The development of the 
general ANN model for extracting the ECP_noise shown in Figure 5.5b is described in 
Figure 5.6. 
The training set for model development is built by using the noise parameters simulated 
for several random combinations of the ECPs and ECP_noise. When the ANN with the best 
response is selected, it is ready to be used for the ECP_noise extraction. To extract the 
ECP_noise by using the chosen ANN from the measured S- and noise parameters, it is 
necessary to extract first the small-signal ECPs from the measured S-parameters (by 
optimization, analytically or by ANN approach) and then to find the ANN response when the 
calculated small-signal ECPs and measured noise parameters are at the ANN inputs.  
 
 
Figure 5.6.Development of the ECP_noise extraction procedure from the measured noise parameters. 

Parameter Extraction of Small-Signal and Noise Models … 
 
195
Applications of this approach for the Pospieszalski’s noise model and the noise wave 
model are given in Figure 5.7. If the noise model parameters are considered constant over 
frequency for a particular combination of operating conditions (as it is the case of the 
Pospieszalski’s noise model), then it is recommended to calculate the noise model parameters 
for several frequencies in the considered range by the ANN and to use the averaged values as 
the final values of the ECP_noise. For the noise models where the ECP_noise are frequency 
dependent, for each desired frequency the ECP_noise are determined by calculating the ANN 
response to the noise parameters measured at the particular frequency. 
Having in mind that the noise models refer to the transistor intrinsic circuit and therefore 
provide expressions to calculate intrinsic noise parameters on the basis of small-signal and 
noise ECPs, in the case that these expressions have a closed-form inverse expressions (aimed 
at calculating the noise model parameters for given noise parameters of the intrinsic circuit), 
the approach shown in Figure 5.5b can be modified as shown in Figure 5.8a on the example 
of the noise wave model [83]. Namely, in this modified approach, instead of predicting the 
ECP_noise directly, the ANN serves to calculate noise parameters of the intrinsic circuit, Nint, 
which are further used as the input to the inverse noise model equations to calculate directly 
the noise model parameters, ECP_noise. The noise parameters of the whole circuit (measured 
ones) are denoted as Ntotal. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 5.7. ANN aimed at extracting the ECP_noise directly from the measured noise parameters: (a) 
Pospieszalski’s noise model [80], (b) Noise wave model [81]. 

Zlatica Marinković, Vladica Đorđević, Nenad Ivković et al. 
 
196
The mentioned modified approach can be applied also to the noise models where there 
are expressions relating ECP_noise and Nint, but where there are no explicit expressions for 
the reciprocal relationship. In that case, the inverse ECP_noise - Nint relationship is modeled 
by an additional ANN, as shown in Figure 5.8b on the example of Pospieszalski’s noise 
model [83]. The ANN 2 has as the inputs m1 intrinsic ECPs (ECPint) instead of all small-
signal ECPs, as the noise model refer only to the intrinsic circuit. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 5.8. Modification of the ECP_noise extraction approach shown in Figure 5.5b: (a) Noise wave 
model (b) Pospieszalski’s noise model. 
The data used for training the ANNs are obtained by simulation in the same way as in the 
original approach, i.e., for several combinations of ECPs and ECP_noise and temperature and 
frequency in the considered ranges, the noise parameters of the intrinsic circuits are 
determined, and then the contribution of the extrinsic circuit is added, giving the total noise 
parameters. All the simulations are done in a microwave circuit simulator. Neither 
measurements nor optimizations are required for preparing the training data. All observations 
regarding the use of the modified approach are the same as for the original approach 
illustrated in Figure 5.5. 
 
 
5.1. Examples 
 
To illustrate the described extraction approaches, a comparison of the extraction results in 
the case of Pospieszalski’s noise model and noise wave model for the NEC transistor type 
NE20283A working under different temperature conditions will be given below. The used 
small-signal equivalent circuit has been presented in Section 2. 
As a first step, the results for the Pospieszalski’s model obtained by the approaches 
shown in Figure 5.2a and 5.7a will be compared. As mentioned before, in the Pospieszalski’s 
noise model the equivalent gate noise temperature can be considered to be equal to the 

Parameter Extraction of Small-Signal and Noise Models … 
 
197
ambient temperature. Therefore, there is only one ECP_noise to be modeled, the equivalent 
drain noise temperature, Td. In [61] a model for predicting simultaneously the small-signal 
ECPs and Td for different working temperatures was developed. It is a one-input and 20 
output ANN, where one of the outputs corresponds to the drain noise temperature. The ANN 
has one hidden layer consisting of eight neurons. The Td values obtained in a microwave 
simulator by a standard optimization approach, which are used as the training Tdvalues are 
shown in Figure 5.9 as circles. The continuous response of the developed ANN is shown in 
the same figure as a solid line. It can be seen that there is a very good matching between the 
ANN output and the target values. Further, crosses in Figure 5.9 refer to the Td values 
extracted by the approach shown in Figure 5.7a. The ANN related to this approach has 25 
inputs (19 small-signal ECPs, four noise parameters, frequency and temperature) and one 
output. The final ANN has one hidden layer having 10 neurons. The 4500 randomly selected 
data samples were used for the training set, while validation set consisted of 500 data 
samples. More details about model development can be found in [80]. 
The extraction results show a certain difference of the drain noise temperature extracted 
by two mentioned approaches. This can be ascribed not only to the difference in the 
extraction procedures, but also to the differences in the used small-signal ECPs. The approach 
based on Td dependence on the temperature was combined with the ECPs obtained by the 
ANN trained to predict small-signal ECPs and Td [61], whereas in the second approach the 
used small-signal ECPs were obtained by the approach shown in Figure 4.4 [77]. Despite 
these differences, the final results in modeling the noise parameters by using the two 
approaches for the drain noise temperature extraction resulted in a very similar accuracy, as 
can be seen from Figures 5.10 and 5.11. In Figure 5.10 there is correlation plot between the 
noise figure measured at six ambient temperatures versus the values obtained by using the 
models. It can be seen that the level of deviations from the measurements is very similar in 
both models.  
This can be further justified by the noise figure plots versus frequency at two ambient 
temperatures, shown in Figure 5.11, where solid lines and dashed lines are very close, 
deviating by a similar amount from the measurements. It should be emphasized that the 
overall accuracy of the noise modeling depends not only on the quality of the ECP extraction 
but also on the accuracy of the model itself. A more detailed comparison of the two 
approaches can be found in [78]. 
 
 
Figure 5.9. Td extracted by using: optimization (circles), approach shown in Figure 5.2a (line), and 
approach shown in Figure 5.7a (crosses). 

Zlatica Marinković, Vladica Đorđević, Nenad Ivković et al. 
 
198
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 5.10. Correlation plots of simulated minimum noise figure versus measured values: (a) approach 
shown in Figure 5.2a (b) approach shown in Figure 5.7a. 
 

Parameter Extraction of Small-Signal and Noise Models … 
 
199
 
Figure 5.11. Minimum noise figure (lines) compared with measurements (symbols) at 253 K and 313 
K:approach shown in Figure 5.2a (dashed lines) and approach shown in Figure 5.7a (solid lines). 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 5.12. (Continued) 

Zlatica Marinković, Vladica Đorđević, Nenad Ivković et al. 
 
200
 
(c) 
 
(d) 
Figure 5.12. Frequency dependence of noise wave temperatures for six ambient temperatures obtained 
by the approach shown in Figure 5.2b: (a) Ta, (b) Tb, (c) |Tc|, (d) c. 
The two extraction approaches have been applied to the NE20283A noise wave model as 
well. In [79] the extraction based on the ANN giving dependence of the noise wave 
temperatures on the ambient temperature, as shown in Figure 5.2b, was presented. The 
developed ANN has one input, four outputs and one hidden layer with four neurons. More 
details about the model development and validation can be found in [79]. Besides not 
requesting the measured noise parameters for the extraction of the noise wave temperatures, 
one very important advantage of this extraction approach is that it includes the frequency 
dependence of the noise wave temperatures. For illustration, the frequency dependent curves 
of the noise wave temperatures for different ambient temperatures are reported in Figure 5.12. 
All the values needed to make these plots were obtained within a few seconds of data 
processing time, without the need for the measured noise parameters.  
 
 

Parameter Extraction of Small-Signal and Noise Models … 
 
201
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
Figure 5.13. (Continued) 

Zlatica Marinković, Vladica Đorđević, Nenad Ivković et al. 
 
202
 
(d) 
Figure 5.13. Frequency dependence of noise wave temperatures at 233K obtained by the approaches 
shown Figure 5.2b (lines) and Figure 5.7b (crosses):(a) Ta, (b) Tb, (c) |Tc|, (d) c. 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 5.14. Noise parameters at 233K (approach shown in Figure 5.2b - solid lines, approach shown in 
Figure 5.7b - dashed lines, measurements - symbols): (a) minimum noise figure and noise resistance, 
(b) optimum source reflection coefficient. 

Parameter Extraction of Small-Signal and Noise Models … 
 
203
The approach shown in Figure 5.7b was applied to the modeled transistor [80]. The ANN 
aimed at extracting the noise wave temperatures has, as in the case of the Pospieszalski’s 
noise model, 25 inputs (19 small-signal ECPs, four noise parameters, frequency and ambient 
temperature) and four outputs. It was found that 40000 randomly selected samples were 
enough for the training of an accurate ANN. The final ANN has two hidden layers, containing 
nine and 12 neurons.  
The further details about model development and validation are given in [80]. Here, for 
the purpose of illustration and the comparison with the previously mentioned approach, the 
noise wave temperatures obtained by two approaches at 233K are given in the plots shown in 
Figure 5.13. The noise wave temperatures extracted by the approach shown in Figure 5.2b are 
denoted by the solid lines, and the ones extracted by the approach shown in Figure 5.7b are 
denoted by crosses. It can be seen that there are very slight deviations between the values 
obtained by the two approaches. Furthermore, in Figure 5.14 the noise parameters simulated 
by using the noise wave temperatures obtained by the two approaches were shown and 
compared with measurements. In the plots one can see hardly see the difference between solid 
and dashed lines corresponding to the two approaches, they overlap almost completely, thus 
confirming the reliability of the extraction procedure. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
This Chapter discusses the ANN based approaches for the extraction of the equivalent 
circuit elements of small-signal and noise models. Namely, two main approaches can be 
identified. One is to develop an ANN (or several ANNs) to predict the dependence of the 
desired model parameters on the transistor operating conditions (let us call it here Approach 
1) and the second one (let us call it Approach 2) is based on the ANNs which relate directly 
the transistor measured characteristics (small-signal S-parameters and/or noise parameters) 
with the desired model parameters. In both cases optimizations that are usually done in 
microwave simulators for extracting the model parameters are replaced with optimizations of 
the ANNs and in both cases the model parameters are calculated directly by finding the ANN 
response, speeding up in that way the whole extraction procedure if repeated extractions are 
requested.  
By following the Approach 1, measurements are needed only for the ANN training and 
development, thus making further extractions based on the developed ANN veryfast. 
However, the accuracy of the extraction is influenced by the accuracy of the extraction of the 
ECPs used for the ANN training. On the other hand, the Approach 2 uses the data simulated 
in a circuit simulator for the model development. Therefore, there are no previous ECP 
extractions which might decrease the extraction accuracy. However, this approach needs the 
measured characteristics for any further extraction done after the ANN development. 
When developing the Approach 1, it should be known in advance which operating 
conditions are to be considered. If some operating conditions are included into consideration, 
then new ANNs with adjusted number of inputs are to be developed, assuming to build the 
new appropriate training sets. In the Approach 2, the same developed ANNs can be applied to 
different operating conditions, as far as the modeled parameters for new operating conditions 
are within the ranges of these parameters used for the training.  

Zlatica Marinković, Vladica Đorđević, Nenad Ivković et al. 
 
204
Both approaches have shown to be accurate. The accuracy of the S- and noise parameters 
modeled by using the parameters extracted by neural approaches, assuming that the ANNs are 
properly trained, in both cases dominantly depends on the accuracy of the chosen equivalent 
circuit model. Both approaches are very efficient and are recommended to beused when a 
high number of repeated extractions is required. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
The work supported by the Serbian Ministry of Education, Science and Technological 
development within the project TR-32052. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Pucel, R. A., Haus, H. A., Statz, H., “Signal and noise properties of gallium arsenide 
microwave field-effect transistors,” Adv. Electron. El. Phys., Vol. 38, 1975, pp. 195-
265. 
[2] 
Fukui, H., “Design of microwave GaAs MESFET's for broadband low-noise 
amplifiers,” IEEE T. Microw. Theory, Vol. 27, No. 7, 1979, pp. 643-650. 
[3] 
Podell, A., “A functional GaAs FET noise model,” IEEE T. Electron Dev., Vol. 28, No. 
5, 1981, pp. 511-517. 
[4] 
Cappy, A., Vanoverschelde, A., Schortgen, G., Versnaeyen, C., Salmer, G., “Noise 
modeling in submicrometer-gate two-dimensional electron-gas field-effect transistors,” 
IEEE T. Electron Dev., Vol. 32, No. 12, 1985, pp. 2787-2795. 
[5] 
Dambrine, G., Cappy, A., Heliodore, F., Playez, E., “A new method for determining the 
FET small signal equivalent circuit,” IEEE T. Microw. Theory, Vol. 36, No. 7, 1988, 
pp. 1151-1159. 
[6] 
Gupta, M. S., Pitzalis, O., Rosenbaum, S. E., Greiling, P. T., “Microwave noise 
characterization of GaAs MESFETs: evaluation by on-wafer low-frequency output 
noise current measurement,” IEEE T. Microw. Theory, Vol. 35, No. 12, 1987, pp. 1208-
1218. 
[7] 
Pospiezalski, M. W., “Modeling of noise parameters of MESFET and MODFET and 
their frequency and temperature dependence,” IEEE T. Microw. Theory, Vol. 37, No. 9, 
1989, pp. 1340-1350. 
[8] 
Berroth, M., Bosch, R., “Broad-band determination of the FET small-signal equivalent 
circuit,” IEEE T. Microw. Theory, Vol. 38, No. 7, 1990, pp. 891-895. 
[9] 
Rorsman, N., Garcia, M., Karlsson, C., Zirath, H., “Accurate small signal modeling of 
HFETs for millimeter-wave applications,” IEEE T. Microw. Theory, Vol. 44, No. 3, 
1996, pp. 432-437. 
[10] Caddemi, A., Donato, N., “Temperature-dependent characterization and modeling of on 
wafer microwave transistors,” Microelectron. Reliab., Vol. 42, No. 3, 2002, pp. 361-
366. 
[11] Jarndal, A., Kompa, G., “A new small-signal modelling approach applied to GaN 
devices,” IEEE T. Microw. Theory, Vol. 53, No. 11, 2005, pp. 3440-3448. 

Parameter Extraction of Small-Signal and Noise Models … 
 
205
[12] Crupi, G., Xiao, D., Schreurs, D. M. M.-P., Limiti, E., Caddemi, A., De Raedt, W., 
Germain, M., “Accurate multibias equivalent circuit extraction for GaN HEMTs,” IEEE 
T. Microw. Theory, Vol. 54, No. 10, 2006, pp. 3616-3622. 
[13] Crupi, G., Schreurs, D. M. M.-P., Caddemi, A., “On the small-signal modeling of 
advanced microwave FETs: a comparative study,” Int. J. RF Microw. C. E., Vol. 18, 
No. 5, 2008, pp. 417-425. 
[14] Caddemi, A., Crupi, G., Macchiarella, A., “On-wafer scaled GaAs HEMTs: direct and 
robust small-signal modeling up to 50 GHz,” Microw. Opt. Techn. Let., Vol. 51, No. 8, 
2009, pp. 1958-1963. 
[15] Zarate-de Landa, A., Zuniga-Juarez, J. E., Loo-Yau, J. R., Reynoso-Hernandez, J. A., 
Maya-Sanchez, M. C., del Valle-Padilla, J. L., “Advances in linear modeling of 
microwave transistors,” IEEE Microw. Mag., Vol. 10, No. 2, 2009, pp. 102-111. 
[16] Crupi, G., Schreurs, D. M. M.-P., Raffo, A., Caddemi, A., Vannini, G., “A new 
millimeter wave small-signal modeling approach for pHEMTs accounting for the 
output conductance time delay,” IEEE T. Microw. Theory, Vol. 56, No. 4, 2008, pp. 
741-746. 
[17] Liu, Z. H., Ng, G. I., Arulkumaran, S., “Analytical modeling of high-frequency noise 
including temperature effects in GaN HEMTs on high-resistivity Si substrates,” IEEE 
T. Electron Dev., Vol. 57, No. 7, 2010, pp. 1485-1491. 
[18] Crupi, G., Schreurs, D. M. M.-P., Caddemi, A., Raffo, A., Vanaverbeke, F., Avolio, G., 
Vannini, G., De Raedt, W., “In-deep insight into the extrinsic capacitance impact on 
GaN HEMT modeling at millimeterwave band,” Int. J. RF Microw. C. E., Vol. 22, No. 
3, 2012, pp. 308-318. 
[19] Crupi, G., Caddemi, A., Raffo, A., Salvo, G., Nalli, A., Vannini, G., “GaN HEMT noise 
modeling based on 50-Ω noise factor,” Microw. Opt. Techn. Let., Vol. 57, No. 4, 2015, 
pp. 937-942. 
[20] Shen, L., Chen, B., Gao, J., “An improved millimeter-wave small-signal modelling 
approach for HEMTs,” Int. J. RF Microw. C. E., Vol. 24, No. 4, 2014, pp. 464-469. 
[21] Alt, R., Marti, D., Bolognesi, C. R., “Transistor modeling: robust small-signal 
equivalent circuit extraction in various HEMT technologies,” IEEE Microw. Mag., Vol. 
14, No. 4, 2013, pp. 83-101. 
[22] Nguyen, T. T. L., Kim, S. D., “A gate-width scalable method of parasitic parameter 
determination for distributed HEMT small-signal equivalent circuit,” IEEE T. Microw. 
Theory, Vol. 61, No. 10, 2013, pp. 3632-3638. 
[23] Jarndal, A., “AlGaN/GaN HEMTs on SiC and Si substrates: A review from the small-
signal-modeling’s perspective,” Int. J. RF Microw. C. E., Vol. 24, No. 3, 2014, pp. 389-
400. 
[24] Meys, R. P., “A wave approach to the noise properties of linear microwave devices,” 
IEEE T. Microw Theory,Vol. 26, No. 1, 1978, pp. 34-37. 
[25] Hecken, R. P., “Analysis of liner noisy two-ports using scattering waves,” IEEE T. 
Microw. Theory, Vol. 29, No. 10, 1981, pp. 997-1004. 
[26] Wedge, S. W., Rutledge, D. B., “Wave techniques for noise modeling and 
measurement,” IEEE T. Microw. Theory,Vol. 40, No. 1, 1992, pp. 2004-2012. 
[27] Engberg, J., Larsen, T., Noise Theory of Linear and Nonlinear Circuits, J. Wiley and 
Sons, 1995. 

Zlatica Marinković, Vladica Đorđević, Nenad Ivković et al. 
 
206
[28] Dobrowolski, J. A., Computer-Aided Analysis, Modeling and Design of Microwave 
Networks-The Wave Approach, Artech House, 1996. 
[29] Werling, T., Bourdel, E., Pasquet, D., Boudiaf, A., “Determination of wave noise 
sources using spectral parametric modeling,” Proceedings ofIEEE MTT-S Int. Microw. 
Symp. Dig., Denver, CO, USA, 1997, pp. 1447-1450. 
[30] Pronić, O., Marković, V., Maleš-Ilić, N., “MESFET noise modeling based on noise 
wave temperatures,” Proceedings of TELSIKS Conference, Niš, Yugoslavia, 1999, pp. 
407-410. 
[31] Pronić, O., Marković, V., Maleš-Ilić, N., “The wave approach to noise modeling of 
microwave transistors by including the correlation effect,” Microw. Opt. Techn. Let., 
Vol. 28, No. 6, 2001, pp. 426-430. 
[32] Pronić-Rančić, O.,Marković, V., “Microwave transistors noise modeling by using 
variable noise wave temperatures,” Proceedings of TELSIKS Conference, Niš, 
Yugoslavia, 2001, pp. 313-316. 
[33] Pronić, O., Marković, V., “A wave approach to signal and noise modeling of dual-gate 
MESFET,” AEU-Int. J. Electron. C., Vol. 56, No. 1, 2002, pp. 61-64. 
[34] Marković, V., Pronić-Rančić, O., Marinković, Z., “Noise wave modeling of microwave 
transistors based on neural networks,” Microw. Opt. Techn. Let., Vol. 41, No. 4, 2004, 
pp. 294–297. 
[35] Pasquet, D., Bourdel, E., Quintanel, S., Ravalet, T., Houssin, P., “New method for 
noise-parameter measurement of a mismatched linear two-port using noise power wave 
formalism,” IEEE T. Microw. Theory, Vol. 56, No. 9, 2008, pp. 2136-2142. 
[36] Dobrowolski, J. A., Microwave Network Design Using the Scattering Matrix, Artech 
House, 2010. 
[37] Đorđević, V., Marinković, Z., Crupi, G., Pronić-Rančić, O., Marković, V., Caddemi, 
A., “Wave approach for noise modeling of gallium nitride high electron mobility 
transistors,” Int. J. Numer. Model. El., accepted, 2016.  
[38] Haykin, S., Neural Networks, IEEE, 1994. 
[39] Zhang, Q. J., Gupta, K. C., Neural Networks for RF and Microwave Design, Artech 
House, 2000. 
[40] Christodoulou, C., Gerogiopoulos, M., Applications of Neural Networks in 
Electromagnetics, Artech House, 2001. 
[41] Int. J. RF Microw. C. E., First Special Issue on Applications of Artificial Neural 
Networks to RF and Microwave Design, Vol. 9, No. 3, 1999. 
[42] Int. J. RF Microw. C. E., Second Special Issue on Applications of Artificial Neural 
Networks to RF and Microwave Design, Vol. 12, No. 1, 2002. 
[43] Zhang, Q. J., Gupta, K. C., Devabhaktuni, V. K., “Artificial neural networks for RF and 
microwave design - from theory to practice,” IEEE T. Microw. Theory,Vol. 51, No. 4, 
2000, pp. 1339-1350. 
[44] Rayas-Sánchez, J. E., “EM-based optimization of microwave circuits using artificial 
neural networks: the state-of-the-art,” IEEE T. Microw. Theory,Vol. 52, No. 1, 2000, 
pp. 420-435. 
[45] Patnaik, A., Mishra, R. K., “ANN techniques in microwave engineering,” IEEE 
Microw. Mag., Vol. 1, No. 3, 2000, pp. 55-60. 
[46] Kabir, H., Zhang, L., Yu, M., Aaen, P., Wood, J., Zhang, Q. J., “Smart modeling of 
microwave devices,” IEEE Microw. Mag., Vol. 11, No. 3, 2010, pp. 105-108. 

Parameter Extraction of Small-Signal and Noise Models … 
 
207
[47] Agatonović, M., Marinković, Z., Marković, V., “Application of ANNs in evaluation of 
microwave pyramidal absorber performance,” Appl. Comput. Electrom., Vol. 27, No. 4, 
2012, pp. 326-333. 
[48] Marinković, Z., Kim, T., Marković, V., Milijić, M., Pronić-Rančić, O., Vietzorreck, L., 
“Artificial neural network based design of RF MEMS capacitive shunt switches,” Appl. 
Comput. Electrom., accepted. 
[49] Litovski, V. B., Radjenović, J. I., Mrčarica, Ž. M., Milenković, S. L., “MOS transistor 
modeling using neural network,” Electron.Lett., Vol. 28, No. 18, 1992, pp. 1766-1768. 
[50] Wang, F., Zhang, Q. J., “Knowledge based neural networks for microwave design,” 
IEEE T. Microw. Theory,Vol. 45, No. 12, 1997, pp. 2333-2343. 
[51] Watson, P. M., Dunleavy, L. M., Creech, G. L., “Accurate and efficient small-signal 
modeling of active devices using artificial neural networks,” Proceedings of GaAs IC 
Symp. Dig., Atlanta, GA, USA, 1998, pp. 95-98. 
[52] Devbahaktuni, V. K., Xi, C., Zhang, Q. J., “Neural network approach to the modeling 
of heterojunction bipolar transistors from S-parameter data,” Proceedings of 28th 
European Microwave Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1998, pp. 306-311. 
[53] Gunes, F., Torpi, H., Gurgen, F., “Multidimensional signal-noise neural network 
model,” IEE P.-Circ. Dev. Syst.,Vol. 145, No. 2, 1998, pp. 111-117. 
[54] Joodaki, M., Kompa, G., “A systematic approach to a reliable neural model for pHEMT 
using different numbers of training data,” Proceedings of IEEE MTT-S Int. Microw. 
Symp. Dig., Seattle, WA, USA, 2002, pp.1105-1108. 
[55] Giannini, F., Leuzzi, G., Orengo, G., Albertini, M., “Small-signal and large-signal 
modeling of active devices using CAD-optimized neural networks,” Int. J. RF Microw. 
C. E.,Vol. 12, No. 1, 2002, pp. 71-78. 
[56] Munshi, K., Vempada, P., Prasad, S., Sonmez, E., Schumacher, H., “Small-signal and 
large signal modeling of HBT's using neural networks,” Proceedings of TELSIKS 
Conference,Niš, Serbia and Montenegro, 2003, Vol. 2, pp. 565- 568. 
[57] Caddemi, A., Donato, N., Xibilia, M. G., “Advanced simulation of semiconductor 
devices by artificial neural networks,” J. Comput. Electron., Vol. 2, No. 2-4, 2003, pp. 
301-307. 
[58] Caddemi, A., Catalfamo, F., Donato, N., “Cryogenic HEMT noise modeling by 
artificial neural networks,” Fluct. Noise Lett., Vol. 5, No. 3, 2005, pp. L423-L433. 
[59] Marković, V., Marinković, Z., “HEMT noise neural model based on bias conditions,” 
COMPEL, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2004, pp. 426-435. 
[60] Taher, H., Schreurs, D., Gillon, R., Vestiel, E., van Niekerk, C., Alabadelah, A., 
Nauwelaers, B., “Detecting variations of small-signal equivalent-circuit model 
parameters in the Si/SiGe HBT process with ANN,” Int. J. RF Microw. C. E., Vol. 15, 
No. 1, 2005, pp. 102-108. 
[61] Marinković, Z., Marković, V., “Temperature dependent models of low-noise 
microwave transistors based on neural networks,” Int. J. RF Microw. C. E., Vol. 15, 
No. 6, 2005, pp. 567-577. 
[62] Caddemi, A., Catalfamo, F., Crupi, G., Donato, N., “DC to microwave characterization 
and modeling of the cryogenic performance of low-Noise HEMT's,” Microwave 
Review, Vol. 12, No. 2, 2006, pp. 17-28. 

Zlatica Marinković, Vladica Đorđević, Nenad Ivković et al. 
 
208
[63] Marinković, Z., Stošić, A., Marković, V., Pronić, O., “ANNs in bias-dependent 
modeling of S-parameters of microwave FETs and HBTs,” Microwave Review, Vol. 12, 
No. 1, 2006, pp. 21-30. 
[64] Marković, V., Prasad, S., Stošić, A., “Noise modeling of HBTs using neural network 
approach,” Microw. Opt. Techn. Let., Vol. 49, No. 4, 2007, pp. 852-854. 
[65] Marinković, Z., Pronić, O., Marković, V., “Bias-dependent scalable modeling of 
microwave FETs based on artificial neural networks,” Microw. Opt. Techn. Let., Vol. 
48, No. 10, 2006, pp. 1932-1936. 
[66] Caddemi, A., Catalfamo, F., Donato, N., “A neural network approach for compact 
cryogenic modeling of HEMT’s,” Int. J. Electron., Vol. 94, No. 9, 2007, pp. 877-887. 
[67] Marinković, Z. D., Pronić, O. R., Ranđelović, J. B., Marković, V. V., “Artificial neural 
networks for temperature dependent noise modelling of microwave transistors,” Int. J. 
Electron., Vol. 94, No. 8, 2007, pp. 759-767. 
[68] Marinković, Z. D., Pronić-Rančić, O. R., Marković, V. V., “ANN applications in 
improved noise wave modeling of microwave FETs,” Microw. Opt. Techn. Let., Vol. 
50, No. 10, 2008, pp. 2512-2516. 
[69] Marinković, Z., Crupi, G., Caddemi, A., Marković, V., “Development of a neural 
approach for bias-dependent scalable small-signal equivalent circuit modeling of GaAs 
HEMTs,” Proceedings ofEuMIC Conference,Paris, France, 2010, pp. 182-185. 
[70] Marinković, Z., Crupi, G., Caddemi, A., Marković, V., “Comparison between analytical 
and neural approaches for multibias small-signal modeling of microwave scaled 
FETs,”Microw. Opt. Techn. Let.,Vol. 52, No. 10, 2010, pp. 2238-2244. 
[71] Marinković, Z., Marković, V., Caddemi, A., “Artificial neural networks in small-signal 
and noise modeling of microwave transistors,”Chapter 6 in Artificial Neural Networks 
edited by Seoyun J. Kwon, Nova Science Publishers Inc., 2011, pp. 219-236. 
[72] Marinković, Z., Crupi, G., Schreurs, D., Caddemi, A., Marković, V., “Microwave 
FinFET modeling based on artificial neural networks including lossy silicon substrate,” 
Microelectron. Eng., Vol. 88, No. 10, 2011, pp. 3158-3163. 
[73] Marinković, Z., Crupi, G., Schreurs, D. M. M.-P., Caddemi, A., Marković, V., 
“Multibias 
neural 
modeling 
of 
fin 
field-effect 
transistor 
admittance 
parameters,”Microw. Opt. Techn. Let., Vol. 54, No. 9, 2012, pp. 2082-2088. 
[74] Marinković, Z., Pronić-Rančić, O., Marković, V., “Artificial neural networks as a tool 
for improving microwave transistor empirical noise models,”Chapter 14 in Artificial 
Intelligence and Hybrid Systems edited by Claudio Rocha, iConcept Press Ltd., 2012. 
[75] Marinković, Z., Crupi, G., Caddemi, A., Avolio, G., Raffo, A., Marković, V., Vannini, 
G., Schreurs, D. M. M.-P., “Neural approach for temperature-dependent modeling of 
GaN HEMTs,” Int. J. Numer. Model. El., Vol. 28, No. 4, 2015, pp. 359-370. 
[76] Hayati, M., Akhlaghi, B., “An extraction technique for small-signal intrinsic parameters 
of HEMTs based on artificial neural networks,” AEU-Int. J. Electron. C., Vol. 67, No. 
2, 2013, pp. 123-129. 
[77] Marinković, Z., Ivković, N., Pronić-Rančić, O., Marković, V., Caddemi, A., “Analysis 
and validation of neural approach for extraction of small-signal models of microwave 
transistors,” Microelectron. Reliab., Vol. 53, No. 3, 2013, pp. 414-419. 
[78] Đorđević, V., Marinković, Z., Pronić-Rančić, O., Marković, V., “Extraction of 
Pospieszalski’s noise model parameters of microwave FETs based on ANNs,” 
Proceedings ofNEUREL Conference, Belgrade, Serbia, 2014, pp. 51-54. 

Parameter Extraction of Small-Signal and Noise Models … 
 
209
[79] Đorđević, V., Marinković, Z., Marković, V., Pronić-Rančić, O., “ Neural approach for 
temperature dependent modeling of microwave FET noise wave temperatures,” 
Proceedings of TELSIKS Conference, Niš, Serbia, 2015, pp. 98-101. 
[80] Marinković, Z., Ivković, N., Pronić-Rančić, O., Marković, V., Caddemi, A., “Novel 
neural approach for parameter extraction of microwave transistor noise models,” Int. J. 
Numer. Model. El., Vol. 28, No. 6, 2015, pp. 707-716. 
[81] Đorđević, V., Marinković, Z., Marković, V., Pronić-Rančić, O., “Extraction of 
microwave FET noise wave temperatures by using a novel neural approach,” COMPEL, 
Vol. 35, No. 1, 2016, pp. 339-349. 
[82] Caddemi, A., Di Paola, A., Sannino, M., “Microwave noise parameters of HEMTs vs. 
temperature by a simplified measurement procedure,” Proceedings of EDMO 
Conference, Leeds, UK, 1996, pp. 153-157. 
[83] Đorđević, V., Marinković, Z., Marković, V., Pronić-Rančić, O., “Development and 
validation of ANN approach for extraction of MESFET/HEMT noise model 
parameters,” submitted to Electrical Eng.  
 
 
Reviewed by Prof. BranimirReljin, University of Belgrade, Serbia, e-mail: reljinb@etf.rs 
 
 


In: Artificial Neural Networks: New Research 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-964-6 
Editor: Gayle Cain 
© 2017 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 9 
 
 
 
APPLYING ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS 
TO DEEP LEARNING AND PREDICTIVE ANALYSIS IN 
SEMANTIC TCM TELEMEDICINE SYSTEMS 
 
 
Wilfred W. K. Lin and Allan K. Y. Wong 
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, 
Kowloon, Hong Kong 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The study aims to establish a deep learning and predictive model in the semantic 
TCM telemedicine system using Artificial Neural Network Microsoft Azure Machine 
Learning. In Chinese Medicine diagnosis, four examination methods: Questioning/history 
taking, inspection, auscultation (listening) and olfaction (smelling), and palpation. Deep 
learning is an appropriate technique for the clinical decision support. The result is 
promising. Next step includs studying the herb-herb interaction. And when a model has 
been validated, it is easy to publish this as a web service with an auto-documented REST 
API, to be consumed by apps, and in future we deploy as SaaS and Integrative Medicine 
Model and using the Microsoft Azure and NVidia the state-of-the-art GPU Visualization 
Infrastructure and GPU Compute Infrastructure. 
 
Keywords: deep learning, predictive analysis, traditional Chinese medicine, telemedicine 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
The knowledge of Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) has been in existence for more 
than 4,000 years. TCM is practiced in various forms according to the constraints imposed by 
different geographical and environmental conditions. One of the earliest definitions of the 
notion of Telemedicine is given in the publication. The basic requirement is to make use of 
                                                           
 E-mail: wilfred.lin@gmail.com. 

Wilfred W. K. Lin and Allan K. Y. Wong 
 
212
the Internet to deliver medical care to every corner of the world. In this light any web-based 
medical system, independent of its size, has at least some telemedicine capability. 
Telemedicine systems can be broadly divided into different types with respect to their 
functions and goals as follows: 
 
a) Curative systems - medical practitioners use the system to achieve the diagnosis and 
treatment goals; 
b) Consultative systems - through the system interface the user can obtain needed 
information, such as information about named patent drugs, and addresses/expertise 
of medical practitioners in the region/vicinity; 
c) Medical information management systems in terms of data storage and retrieval (e.g., 
medical images);  
d) Decision support systems - this happens in various forms, for example, the physician, 
who is using a telemedicine system (e.g., the PuraPharm’s D/P (diagnosis/ 
prescription) system in a mobile clinic [1] may import biometric reports to aid the 
diagnostic decision/precision 
 
 
2. THE KNOWLEDGE CONSULTATION 
 
The aim is to let people including laymen and registered medical personnel consult and 
verify knowledge if necessary from the knowledge base. Yet, a knowledge base can be 
general purpose and similar to a dictionary in this sense. Or, it can be there to help experts to 
clarify doubts due to multi-representations owing to disparate national or regional 
conceptions of a medical phenomenon. A typical example in the Western/allopathic medicine 
area is the UMLS (Unified Medical Language System [2]), which was developed by the USA 
National Library of Medicine to resolve the differences in Western/allopathic clinical 
terminology due to regional and or national disparities. The UMLS is ontology-based. 
Another ontology based system is the disease and treatment ontology for Western Allopathic 
Medicine. By its nature the UMLS is not for frontline clinical application to allow computer-
aided diagnosis and treatment in contrast to the Nong’s TCM (Traditional Chinese Medicine) 
telemedicine mobile clinic (MC) system discussed later. The UMLS is consultative in nature. 
That is, it is not a clinical system but a consultation setup that people can interact with to sort 
out terminology problems. Therefore, its aim is to provide an interactive learning, reference, 
and bridging mechanism for knowledge gaps in a global sense. For example, in 
conventional/Western/allopathic medicine different countries may have different definitions 
for an observed phenomenon. In order to resolve the similarity and differences of various 
definitions, as well as language peculiarities on a global scale, meta-thesauri can serve as an 
effective means as shown by the ULMS (Unified Medical Language System [2]), developed 
by the US National Library of Medicine. 
 
 
 
 

Applying Artificial Neural Networks to Deep Learning … 
 
213
3. MAJOR ASPECTS OF THE ONTOLOGY BASE TCM 
TELEMEDICINE SYSTEM 
 
We focused on the scientific and engineering issues that underpin the building of a 
semantically-based clinical TCM telemedicine system successfully. It will address the 
following issues to a varying degree: a) the meaning of telemedicine b) the TCM ambit, c) 
usefulness of ontology in the building of computer-aided TCM systems, d) choice of the tool 
for modeling the ontology blueprint layout, d) TCM telemedicine infrastructure and mobile 
clinics, e) ontology myth and conceptualization, how telemedicine system building can be 
automated with quality assurance, and f) how a telemedicine prototype can be and deployed 
over the web. 
This requires that we address the following aspects: 
 
a) Ontology Modelling 
b) Ontology Implementation tool 
c) Internet capability 
d) Cross-layer logical transitivity 
e) Automatic system generation 
f) Pervasive support 
g) Ontology Evolution 
 
 
3.1. Ontology Modelling 
 
The design of the system begins with the ontology model blueprint layout followed by 
the consensus certification. The ontology includes the whole or part of the formalisms and 
knowledge in the relevant domain. In this sense, an ontology-based system is data/knowledge 
oriented. This model should be understandable both by TCM domain experts and system 
developers so as to facilitate evaluation and critiquing of the Ontology by the domain experts 
for correctness and completeness. 
 
 
3.2. Ontology Implementation Tool 
 
The tool is usually a high level language, which can relate all the concepts in the 
ontology into a logical subsumption hierarchy. The ontology modelling blueprint is mainly 
for human understanding, and the embedded subsumption hierarchy should be translated 
meticulously into the corresponding semantic net for machine understanding/processing/ 
execution. Therefore, it is necessary to choose a tool that has the support of ontology Model 
blueprint-to-semantic-net translation. It is better for the conversion process to be automatic 
[3]. In this light, the languages (or metadata models/systems) proposed by W3C (World Wide 
Web Consortium) [4, 5], namely, XML (Extensible Mark-up Language), RDF (Resource 
Description Framework), and OWL (Web Ontology Language) are good choices, for they 
have widespread automatic translation support.  
 

Wilfred W. K. Lin and Allan K. Y. Wong 
 
214
3.3. Internet Capability 
 
Telemedicine relies on the Internet to achieve different goals on the web. For example, 
the telemedicine system may send out miners to search the web for necessary information to 
support the system’s ontology evolution - the concept of a living ontology [6, 7, 8]. This is 
well exemplified by the 2nd generation of the PuraPharm D/P (diagnosis/prescription) 
telemedicine system that supports the YOT mobile clinics in Hong Kong. These vehicle-
based mobile clinics have been treating thousands of patients weekly in the past few years. 
 
 
3.4. Cross-Layer Logical Transitivity 
 
A practical telemedicine system should have a 3-layer architecture. The bottom layer is 
the knowledge/database that embeds the subsumption hierarchy that represents the logical 
relationships among the physical data items/entities included in the consensus-certified 
ontology. This subsumption hierarchy is also realized in the middle layer as the semantic net 
for machine understanding and execution. The top layer is the query system that implements 
the ontology for user understanding and manipulation. The user enters a query or command 
via the system interface. This query is then translated by the middle layer into the form 
understood by the semantic net, which executes the command and fetches the information for 
the user as the response. The three layers are logically clones of one another, and therefore 
they should have cross-layer semantic transitivity. With this transitivity any entity in any 
layer should have corresponding representations in the other two layers. 
It is useful here to compare our proposed architecture for the TCM Curative and Decision 
Support System with the 3 Layer Architecture of the UMLS consultation system. 
The UMLS is ontology-based and has three distinctive layers: i) the modularized query 
system (the modules are semantic groups) at the top level, ii) the middle logical semantic-net 
layer, which was constructed from the semantics embedded in the information of the bottom 
ontological layer, and iii) the bottom ontology is integrated by nature and normally has a 
subsumption hierarchy of various sub-ontologies of different origins]. 
There is, therefore, some similarity between the overall structures of the two systems 
even though one is used for Curative and Decision Support Purposes whilst this is used as a 
consultation system. 
 
 
3.5. Automatic System Generation 
 
Cross-layer semantic transitivity can be achieved correctly by automatic system 
generation or customization (ASG/C). This approach is, in fact, a new software engineering 
paradigm, which requires the user to provide the ontology blueprint layout. With support of 
the master ontology, where the ontology specification is either a part or the whole of it, the 
ASG/C mechanism generates/customizes the final ontology-based system in one shot  
 
 
 
 

Applying Artificial Neural Networks to Deep Learning … 
 
215
3.6. Pervasive Support 
 
A telemedicine system needs the support of a wireless-based pervasive computing 
infrastructure (PCI), which maintains the smart spaces for the collaborating systems. In the 
PuraPharm mobile-clinics environment, the collaborating systems are the mobile clinics. The 
essence of the PCI support is better explained by using the successful PuraPharm’s mobile-
clinic (MC) based telemedicine D/P (diagnosis/prescription) system depicted. The PCI 
maintains the smart spaces, which is each occupied by a mobile clinic. The mobile clinic than 
communicates with the central system, as well as its peers, via the wireless means provided 
by the PCI. The MC operation is semi-autonomous because the physician can treat the patient 
at the spot, but the case history of the patient may have to be downloaded from the central 
computer that runs the fast network. The MC has to inform the central system of its updated 
local drug inventory. The central system also collects the necessary MC statistics on-line for 
proactive planning and action. If the MC physician needs help in the diagnostic process, the 
central system would solicit the relevant information from other friendly sites via the Internet.  
 
 
3.7. Ontology Evolution Approach 
 
Here we will utilize a text mining approach together with a controlled update of a wiki 
which is a duplicate of the current master ontology. The Data and text mining approach 
suggests changes to the ontology wiki image of the TCM ontology. The proposed changes to 
the ontology are then subject to consensus certification and only those changes that are 
approved by this consensus certification are then included into the master TCM ontology. 
 
 
4. OVERVIEW OF THE ONTOLOGY-BASED 
AUTOMATIC SYSTEM GENERATION (ASG/C) 
 
It is useful to provide an overview of the ontology-based automatic system generation 
here so that the reader can get a better appreciation of the approach. The 3-layer architecture 
of the TCM System sheds light on how a practical ontology-based system should be built 
because of the following arguments:  
 
a) If the bottom ontological layer is the “required” knowledge by consensus 
certification, then the system created for the specification provided by a semantic 
group (top layer) only needs to be supported by the relevant portion, which is part of 
the master ontology. The portion, in effect, is isolated as the “local” ontology for the 
target system as specified. This isolation process is basically customization. 
b) If the specification by a semantic group is logically correct, then the corresponding 
error-free target system can be customized in one shot by using an appropriate 
automatic mechanism such as the EOD-ISD (Enterprise Ontology Driven 
Information System Development) paradigm. The customization automation cuts the 
development costs and ensures customer satisfaction by its short development cycle. 

Wilfred W. K. Lin and Allan K. Y. Wong 
 
216
c) If the “total” ontological knowledge could be drawn as a network or DOM 
(document object model - a synonym of the W3C for semantic net) tree, the isolated 
“local” ontology for the target system should have its local parser to work on it. The 
parser finds the answer for the query at the syntactic semantic group level (or query 
level) by inference. It traces out the unique operation or semantic path in the DOM 
tree or semantic net in a suitable manner for the input parameter set. Machine 
processing in the ontological context is parsing. 
 
From the literature, the only software engineering paradigm that can support the ASG/C 
process is the EOD-ISD (enterprise ontology-driven information system development). The 
core idea of this paradigm is to generate cognate system variants from the same TCM onto-
core master automatically. For example, all the PuraPharm’s D/P systems are customized 
from the proprietary master/enterprise TCM onto-core by applying the EOD-ISD paradigm. 
Similar to the UMLS a D/P system always has three layers: i) the bottom layer - the portion 
of the consensus-certified master ontology known as the local onto-core for the target system; 
ii) the middle parsing mechanism that works with the semantic subsumption hierarchy (i.e., 
semantic net) embedded in the local onto-core; and iii) the query system that enables the user 
to interact with the system.  
 
 
5. DEEP LEARNING AND PREDICTIVE ANALYSIS 
 
In Chinese Medicine Diagnosis approach, the filter based feature selection is adopted in 
the processing of the input attribute. Filter Based Feature Selection uses different statistical 
tests to determine a subset of features with the highest predictive power. 
 
 
Figure 1. The Microsoft Azure Machine Learning Studio. 

Applying Artificial Neural Networks to Deep Learning … 
 
217
 
Figure 2. The model is constructed in the Machine Learning Studio. 
 
Figure 3. The Deep Learning and Predictive Model. 

Wilfred W. K. Lin and Allan K. Y. Wong 
 
218
 
Figure 4. The score model of the trained NN. 
 
Figure 5. The score model of the trained NN. 

Applying Artificial Neural Networks to Deep Learning … 
 
219
 
Figure 6. The True Positive Rate vs the False Positive Rate. 
A trainable classifier is developed for the model. A machine learning approach called 
multiclass neural network provides options for customizing the structure and behavior of the 
neural network, either by using the parameters and options in the designer. 
A neural network can be as a weighted directed acyclic graph. The nodes of the graph are 
arranged in layers and are connected by weighted edges to nodes in the next layer.  
In the case of a multiclass model, the number of nodes in the output layer should be equal 
to the number of classes. The remaining layers are called hidden layers. To compute the 
output of the network on a given input example, a value is calculated for each node in the 
hidden layers and in the output layer. Experiments using Microsoft Azure Machine Learning 
is conducted to evaluate the performance of the prototype. 
The experimental result of cough is demonstrated in this paper. The training set is 
included 100 clinical cases. The reported symptoms are normalized in each row of the case. 
The training epoch is 1000 cycles. The results show that the positive correlation among the 
reported symptoms against the cough. The accuracy of the model is 77%. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
We propose to use deep learning and predictive analysis in Sematic TCM Telemedicine 
Systems using Microsoft Azure Machine Learning. The result is promising. Next step 

Wilfred W. K. Lin and Allan K. Y. Wong 
 
220
including studying the herb-herb interaction. And when a model has been validated, it is easy 
to publish this as a web service with an auto-documented REST API, to be consumed by 
apps, and in future we deploy as SaaS and Integrative Medicine Model [9, 10]. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Jackei Ho Kei Wong, PhD Thesis: Web-based Data Mining and Discovery of Useful 
Herbal Ingredients, Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 
2010. 
[2] 
UMLS, http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/. 
[3] 
Wilfred W. K. Lin, Jackei Ho Kei Wong, Allan K. Y. Wong: A Novel Real-Time 
Traffic Sensing Model to Improve the Performance of Web-Based Industrial 
Ecosystems. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics 58(6): 2147-2153 (2011). 
[4] 
W3C, Ontology Definition MetaModel, 2005, http://www.omg.org/docs/ad/05-08-
01.pdf#search=’Ontology%20 Definition%20Metamodel. 
[5] 
W3C, Web Service Architecture (Working Paper), http://www.w3.org/TR/ws-arch/. 
[6] 
Jackei H. K. Wong, Tharam S. Dillon, Allan K. Y. Wong and Wilfred W. K. Lin, Text 
Mining for Real-time Ontology Evolution, Data Mining for Business Applications, 
Springer, 2008, ISBN: 978-0-387-79419-8, pp. 143-150. 
[7] 
Wilfred W. K. Lin, Jackei H. K. Wong, Artificial Neural Network Based Chinese 
Medicine Diagnosis in Decision Support Manner and Herbal Ingredient Discoveries, 
Data Analytics for Traditional Chinese Medicine Research, Springer, 2012, pp. 123-
132. 
[8] 
Allan K. Y. Wong, Jackei H. K. Wong, Wilfred W. K. Lin, Tharam S. Dillon, Elizabeth 
Chang, Semantically Based Clinical TCM Telemedicine Systems. Studies in 
Computational Intelligence 587, Springer 2015, ISBN 978-3-662-46023-8, pp. 1-152. 
[9] 
Warrington Wen Qiang Hsu, Esther Wai Yin Chan, Zhang Jin Zhang, Zhi Xiu Lin, 
Zhao Xiang Bian, Yingfen Hsia, Ian Chi Kei Wong, A survey to investigate attitudes 
and perceptions of Chinese medicine professionals in health information technology in 
Hong Kong, European Journal of Integrative Medicine, Volume 7, Issue 1, February 
2015, pp. 36-46. 
[10] Warrington Wen Qiang Hsu, Esther Wai Yin Chan, Zhang Jin Zhang, Zhi Xiu Lin, 
Zhao Xiang Bian, Ian Chi Kei Wong, Chinese medicine students’ views on electronic 
prescribing: A survey in Hong Kong, European Journal of Integrative Medicine, 
Volume 7, Issue 1, February 2015, pp. 47-54. 
[11] Wilfred W. K. Lin et al., AI for relating herbal ingredients to illnesses classified in 
traditional Chinese medicine/TCM using probabilities and a relevance index, US 
9275327 B2. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEX 
 
A 
acetylcholinesterase, 16 
acid, vii, ix, 13, 15, 81, 83, 84, 85, 86, 88, 98, 99, 
100, 101, 102, 103, 105, 139, 140, 141, 153 
acoustics, viii, 45, 46, 53, 57, 68, 70 
action potential, 163 
active compound, 10, 154 
adaptations, 32, 154 
adsorption, vii, 1, 2, 12, 14, 15, 18, 19, 21, 22, 
36, 44 
Advanced Control, 29, 32 
air quality, 57, 63, 65, 66, 70, 76, 77, 127, 130, 
131, 159, 172 
air quality model, 77, 172 
air temperature, 53, 61, 62, 64, 65, 66, 67, 74, 75, 
76, 78, 79 
alcoholysis, 83 
Algeria, 74, 107, 124, 127, 128, 129 
algorithm, ix, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 18, 32, 35, 36, 
37, 41, 42, 46, 47, 50, 51, 52, 59, 68, 70, 71, 
72, 75, 76, 80, 81, 89, 112, 138, 143, 159, 164, 
165, 166, 170, 183 
amino acids, 37 
anaerobic digesters, 42 
anaerobic digestion, 32, 61 
anisotropy, 109 
annealing, 36, 43 
aqueous solutions, 12, 19, 21 
aromatic rings, 142, 145 
artificial intelligence, 14, 30, 87, 130 
Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), v, viii, ix, x, 
1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 
25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35, 36, 37, 
38, 39, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 49, 50, 51, 
52, 53, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 
66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 75,76, 77, 78, 
79, 80, 81, 86, 87, 89, 90, 93, 94, 103, 104, 
107, 108, 109, 111, 112, 113, 114, 119, 120, 
121, 123, 124, 125, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 
133, 137, 138, 139, 140, 142, 149, 151, 152, 
168, 169, 172, 175, 177, 181, 183, 184, 185, 
186, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 
195, 196, 197, 200, 203, 206, 207, 208, 209 
assessment, x, 63, 64, 66, 67, 68, 70, 105, 127, 
135, 137, 153, 171 
atomization, 10, 93 
atoms, 85, 138, 142, 145, 146 
auscultation, xi, 211 
authenticity, 37 
automation, 64, 72, 215 
axons, 3 
B 
backpropagation, 6, 27, 31, 36, 37, 41, 47, 80, 89, 
138, 152, 159, 163, 164, 165, 183 
basal cell carcinoma, 136 
base, ix, 31, 32, 42, 47, 66, 74, 81, 82, 87, 104, 
153, 159, 211, 212 
benchmarking, 104 
benefits, 64, 82, 105 
bias, 4, 50, 67, 89, 111, 148, 176, 182, 184, 185, 
186, 190, 207, 208 
Biodiesel, v, vii, ix, 12, 37, 44, 73, 81, 82, 83, 84, 
85, 86, 87, 88, 91, 93, 95, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 
102, 103, 104, 105 
biofuel, 14 
biological activity(ies), 13, 14, 15 
biological systems, 12, 30, 137 
biomass, 60, 61, 73 
biotechnology, 9, 29, 30 
blends, 87, 102, 103, 104 
blood circulation, 150 
bonding, 93, 145, 146 
bonds, 85, 88, 145, 146, 148 
boreholes, 61 
brain, 2, 7, 26, 36, 46, 87, 137, 163 
branching, 85, 146 
breast cancer, 10, 155, 172 

Index 
 
222
breast milk, 150, 153 
C 
CAD, 176, 207 
calibration, 34, 35, 37, 44 
cancer, 10, 17, 19, 136, 152, 155, 172 
capillary, 36, 44 
carbon, 13, 16, 31, 41, 77, 82, 83, 84, 85, 87, 88, 
91, 127, 138, 142, 146, 148 
carbon atoms, 85, 142, 146 
carbon chain length, 84 
carbon dioxide (CO2), 13, 16, 65, 66, 71, 77, 87 
carbon monoxide, 87 
carbon neutral, 83 
carcinogen, 136 
carcinoma, 136 
case study(ies), 53, 57, 58, 65, 72, 74, 75, 76, 78 
catalyst, 82, 83, 103, 104 
category b, 36 
causal relationship, 148 
cell body, 2, 3 
cell line, 10, 17 
ceramic, 13, 20 
ceramic materials, 13 
cerebral cortex, 7 
cerebrum, 7 
certification, 58, 59, 72, 213, 215 
cetane number, ix, 81, 85, 86, 87, 88, 91, 92, 98, 
103, 104, 105 
chemical, vii, viii, x, 2, 3, 9, 10, 13, 14, 16, 17, 
18, 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 33, 35, 38, 
39, 42, 43, 56, 66, 70, 82, 83, 85, 86, 87, 105, 
135, 137, 138, 143, 145, 146, 151 
chemical engineering, vii, viii, 9, 16, 17, 25, 26, 
27, 28, 29, 33, 38, 39 
chemical properties, 18, 21 
chemical reactivity, 146 
chemical structures, 85 
chemistry, vii, viii, 13, 25, 33, 34, 35, 37, 38, 86, 
104 
chemometric techniques, 35 
chemometrics, viii, 16, 25, 86 
chromatography, 17, 20, 29, 31, 33, 35, 37, 44 
chromium, 159, 172 
circulation, x, 73, 135, 150, 151 
classification, 5, 6, 9, 29, 30, 33, 34, 35, 36, 42, 
48, 53, 78, 83, 125, 153, 154, 165 
clay minerals, 17, 19 
climate, 76, 109, 123 
clinical application, 212 
clustering, 127, 130, 131 
clusters, viii, 46 
coal, 61, 66, 73, 82 
coastal region, 79 
Code of Federal Regulations, 154 
combustion, 66, 77, 91, 93, 104 
combustion quality, 91 
commercial, 72, 77, 153, 176, 177 
communication, xi, 175, 176, 177 
communication systems, xi, 175, 176 
comparative analysis, 67 
composition, ix, 14, 29, 32, 35, 80, 81, 85, 86, 87, 
88, 93, 102, 103, 105, 152 
compounds, vii, 1, 10, 11, 13, 16, 31, 34, 41, 83, 
137, 145, 146, 150, 151, 154 
compression, 10, 14, 31, 82, 86, 87, 102 
compression ignition engine, 82, 86, 87, 102 
computation, viii, 25, 26, 113, 132 
computing, 3, 26, 27, 39, 76, 215 
conceptualization, 213 
conditioning, 31, 64, 73 
conference, 21, 125 
configuration, x, 60, 68, 74, 93, 108, 111, 114, 
115, 116, 118, 119, 121, 124 
conjugation, 181 
connectivity, 145, 146, 148 
consensus, 213, 214, 215, 216 
conservation, 127 
constituents, vii, 35, 86, 87, 88, 91, 93, 97 
construction, vii, 1, 3, 30, 167 
consumption, vii, viii, 1, 14, 15, 20, 22, 23, 45, 
56, 57, 58, 59, 61, 64, 66, 68, 69, 71, 72, 76, 
77, 87, 108 
contact time, 12 
convergence, 183 
copper, 19, 20, 21, 22 
correlation, ix, x, 11, 28, 31, 33, 34, 35, 61, 65, 
67, 77, 82, 87, 90, 91, 93, 95, 97, 107, 119, 
120, 125, 136, 143, 145, 157, 167, 169, 171, 
180, 181, 197, 206, 219 
correlation coefficient, ix, x, 11, 67, 82, 93, 157, 
167, 169, 171 
correlation function, 28, 34 
correlations, 31, 36, 79, 148 
cortex, 7 
cosmetic, x, 31, 41, 136, 150, 154 
cosmetic industry, x, 31, 136 
cosmetics, 29, 30, 149, 150, 155 
cost, 12, 26, 29, 64, 73, 86, 108, 124, 127 
cross-validation, 166 
CRR, 142 
crude oil, 32, 42, 82 
cyclodextrins, 19, 23 
cytometry, 152 

Index  
 
223
D 
data set, x, 35, 62, 87, 89, 90, 93, 95, 97, 124, 
136, 137, 139, 140, 142, 143, 171 
data structure, 132 
deaths, 136 
decomposition, 79, 146 
deconvolution, 13, 35 
deep learning, xi, 211, 219 
deficiency, 19, 20 
deformation, 158 
degradation, 11, 16 
dendrites, 2, 3, 46 
density, ix, 7, 37, 44, 81, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 
96, 97, 98, 101, 103, 105 
density values, 97 
Department of Energy, 124 
dependent variable, 138, 165 
depolymerization, 20 
deposits, 82 
depth, x, 157, 159, 163, 169, 171 
derivatives, 51 
dermatitis, 149 
designers, xi, 175, 176 
destruction, 72 
detection, 9, 29, 32, 33, 39, 43 
developing countries, 82 
deviation, 11, 90, 114, 119, 121, 193 
diesel engines, 102 
diesel fuel, 66, 82, 91, 95, 102 
diffuse reflectance, 31, 41 
diffusion, 13 
digestion, 32, 61 
direct measure, 77 
discordance, 43 
discriminant analysis, 13 
disinfection, 153 
distillation, 29, 32, 35, 38, 39, 42, 43 
distillation columns, 29, 32, 39, 42 
distribution, 7, 10, 17, 35, 37, 53, 85, 109 
district heating, 74 
diversity, 138 
DNA, x, 135, 136 
DNA damage, x, 135, 136 
DOC, 160, 162, 168, 169, 171 
double bonds, 84, 145, 148 
drug discovery, 10, 15 
drug release, 31, 41 
drugs, 10, 13, 18, 19, 41, 153, 212 
drying, 10, 15 
E 
economic development, 23 
economic growth, 66 
elaboration, 46, 47, 49, 70, 113 
electricity, vii, 1, 59, 66, 72, 82, 127 
electron, 44, 146, 148, 204, 206 
electrophoresis, 36, 44 
emission, xi, 77, 82, 87, 104, 157, 159, 160, 162, 
168, 169, 171 
emulsions, 136, 151, 155 
encapsulation, 150 
energy, vii, viii, 1, 9, 14, 15, 19, 20, 21, 22, 26, 
29, 31, 41, 42, 45, 52, 53, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 
61, 64, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 76, 
77, 78, 79, 80, 82, 84, 108, 124, 125, 126, 127, 
128, 130, 131, 132, 138, 146, 162 
energy consumption, viii, 14, 15, 20, 45, 52, 53, 
56, 57, 58, 59, 61, 64, 66, 68, 69, 71, 72, 76, 
77 
energy efficiency, 56, 59 
engineering, vii, viii, 9, 16, 17, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 
33, 38, 39, 45, 46, 49, 51, 52, 56, 59, 69, 70, 
77, 130, 131, 206, 213, 214, 216 
environment, 4, 5, 9, 22, 47, 59, 64, 76, 78, 84, 
90, 132, 137, 154, 215 
environmental conditions, 211 
environmental quality, 60 
environmental variables, 64 
environments, viii, 31, 45, 64, 76, 80, 158 
epidermis, 151, 154 
epilepsy, 10 
equilibrium, 18 
equipment, 11, 86, 162, 177 
ESI, 21, 109, 110, 119 
ester, 85, 86, 87, 103, 104, 105, 145 
ethanol, 11, 83, 102, 103, 153 
ethers, 143, 153 
ethylene, 58, 74 
ethylene glycol, 58, 74 
European market, 125 
European Parliament, 137 
European Union, 149, 152 
evolution, 33, 122, 214 
excretion, 150 
execution, 213, 214 
experimental design, viii, 11, 19, 20, 21, 23, 25, 
34, 41, 44 
expertise, 129, 212 
exposure, x, 77, 135, 136, 151, 155 
extraction, vii, xi, 1, 2, 11, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19, 
20, 21, 23, 36, 44, 175, 176, 177, 184, 185, 

Index 
 
224
186, 187, 189, 190, 191, 192, 194, 196, 197, 
200, 203, 205, 208, 209 
F 
fat, 82, 83, 100 
fatty acid(s), vii, ix, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 98, 99, 
100, 101, 102, 103, 105 
fatty acids, 82, 85 
fatty esters, 85, 105 
fault detection, 9, 32, 33, 39, 43 
fault diagnosis, 32, 42, 43 
fault tolerance, viii, 25 
faults detection, 29, 32, 43 
feature selection, 216 
feedstocks, ix, 33, 81, 82, 83, 84, 86, 87, 88, 89, 
90, 91, 93, 95, 102, 103, 104, 105 
filters, vii, x, 135, 136, 138, 142, 143, 144, 145, 
149, 151, 154, 155 
flank, vii, x, 157, 159, 160, 163, 165, 166, 167, 
169, 170, 171 
flash point, ix, 81, 82, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 95, 100 
flexibility, 27, 138 
fluctuations, 14, 188 
fluid extract, 16 
fluorescence, 37 
food, 9, 12, 29, 30, 37, 38, 41, 44, 57, 71, 82, 83 
Food and Drug Administration FDA,149, 154 
food chain, 12 
Food industry, 30, 29, 41 
force, 30, 31 
forecasting, 31, 67, 71, 72, 77, 78, 79, 127, 128, 
130, 131, 132, 133, 159 
forecasting model, 67, 127, 130, 131, 159 
formation, x, 18, 135, 136, 148 
formula, 86, 89, 162 
fragments, 146 
France, v, 23, 45, 107, 126, 129, 131, 208 
friction, 30, 159, 163 
fuel consumption, 66, 87 
fuel properties, vii, ix, 81, 82, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 
102, 103, 104 
G 
gallium, 180, 204, 206 
gas sensors, 31, 41 
geographical origin, 43 
geometrical parameters, 186 
geometry, 138, 184 
geothermal heat pump, 74 
global scale, 212 
global warming, 82 
glucose, 13 
glycerol, 83, 84, 85 
glycol, 58, 74, 139 
graph, 121, 163, 219 
greenhouse, 56, 61, 66, 74, 77 
greenhouse gas (GHG), 56, 66, 77 
gross domestic product, 59 
Guangzhou, 67 
guidance, 71 
guidelines, 149 
H 
health, 9, 29, 65, 136, 137, 220 
health condition, 136 
health information, 220 
heat pumps, 74 
heat transfer, 31, 58 
heating oil, 82 
heavy metals, 12 
heterogeneous systems, 22 
high-heating values, 85 
historical data, 32 
hormone levels, 154, 155 
human, 2, 7, 10, 20, 26, 36, 46, 66, 82, 87, 136, 
137, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 213 
human body, 150, 154 
human brain, 2, 26, 36, 46, 87 
human existence, 82 
human health, 137 
human skin, 151, 152, 153 
humidity, 61, 64, 65, 67, 75, 76, 108, 109, 110 
hybrid, 27, 30, 39, 40, 79, 126, 138, 153 
hydrocarbons, 87 
hydrogen, 145, 146 
hydrophobicity, 145 
hydroxide, 82 
hypothesis, 171 
I 
ICS, 73 
ideal, x, 136, 149 
identification, 13, 30, 33, 43, 136, 152 
ignition delay time, 91 
ill-defined problems, 87 
illumination, 68, 80 
immune system, 136 
impact assessment, 127 
in vitro, x, 135, 137, 151, 152 
in vivo, x, 135, 152, 153, 154, 155 

Index  
 
225
incidence, 78, 136 
independent variable, 9, 11, 138 
individuation, 68 
industrial chemicals, 143 
industrialized countries, 108 
industry(ies), vii, x, 1, 14, 22, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 
32, 39, 41, 82, 136, 158 
inflammation, 136 
information processing, viii, 2, 25, 46, 87 
information technology, 8, 220 
infrared spectroscopy, 37 
infrastructure, 213, 215 
ingredients, x, 10, 135, 153, 220 
insulation, 64, 68, 80 
intangible parameters, 29, 30 
integration, 108, 110, 124, 126, 158 
intelligence, 7, 14, 30, 80, 87, 125, 130 
interaction effects, 9 
interface, 212, 214 
intermolecular interactions, x, 135 
interpretability, 143 
investment, 60 
iodine, 87, 105 
ionization, 13 
ions, 12, 19, 22, 36 
irradiation, ix, 66, 78, 79, 107, 108, 109, 110, 
113, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 
127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 155 
isolation, 11, 17, 20, 22, 215 
issues, viii, 45, 46, 56, 57, 68, 69, 70, 86, 136, 
213 
Italy, 45, 67, 125, 175 
iteration, 50, 51 
K 
kinematic viscosity, ix, 37, 44, 81, 86, 87, 88, 94, 
103, 105 
kinetics, 13, 18 
KOH, 82 
Kohonen networks, 35 
L 
laboratory tests, 69 
larvae, 37 
learning, vii, viii, xi, 2, 5, 7, 8, 25, 26, 27, 36, 38, 
47, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 55, 57, 58, 60, 61, 70, 
89, 90, 111, 112, 122, 127, 130, 131, 132, 142, 
143, 157, 159, 163, 164, 168, 172, 177, 211, 
212, 219 
learning process, 2, 5, 47, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 55, 
57, 58, 60, 61, 70, 168 
LED, 68, 80 
legislation, 15, 20, 137, 149 
light, x, 12, 18, 68, 135, 136, 211, 213, 215 
lignin, 30 
linear function, 5, 12, 163 
linear model, x, 86, 136, 137, 138, 205 
linear modeling, 205 
linoleic acid, 88, 89, 99, 100 
liquid chromatography, 17 
lithology, 61 
M 
Macedonia, 22 
machine learning, 127, 130, 131, 132, 157, 219 
magnitude, 4, 93, 124, 162, 177 
malignant melanoma, 136 
management, 9, 64, 79, 126, 137, 212 
management committee, 126 
manipulation, 214 
manufacturing, 103 
mapping, 5, 9, 26, 29, 37, 66, 67, 68, 77, 79 
mass spectrometry, 31, 37 
materials, vii, ix, 1, 12, 13, 19, 22, 30, 40, 56, 81, 
82, 83, 102, 137, 152, 158, 160 
matrix, 13, 28, 31, 33, 41, 47, 51, 79, 161, 167, 
180, 181, 182 
measurements, 2, 13, 29, 30, 36, 43, 69, 77, 108, 
126, 128, 129, 130, 131, 160, 176, 177, 184, 
185, 186, 188, 190, 191, 196, 197, 199, 202, 
203, 204, 205, 206, 209 
mechanical properties, 30, 43 
medical, 9, 159, 211, 212 
medical care, 211 
medicine, 211, 212, 220 
Mediterranean, 22, 67, 109, 125, 130, 132, 133 
Mediterranean climate, 109 
melanoma, 136 
melon, 83 
melt, 10, 17, 30, 32, 40 
membranes, 153 
memorizing, 36 
MEMS, 207 
metabolism, 65, 153 
metabolized, 143 
methanol, 37, 44, 83, 85, 87, 102, 103 
methodology, viii, 12, 14, 17, 18, 21, 22, 35, 37, 
43, 45, 49, 51, 57, 68, 70, 72, 73, 87, 104, 130, 
132, 133, 152, 159 
methylene blue, 13, 15, 22 
microscope, 163 

Index 
 
226
microspheres, 150 
microwaves, 177, 183 
Ministry of Education, 14, 204 
mixing, 10, 17, 129 
modelling, ix, x, 71, 74, 78, 82, 87, 88, 89, 93, 
104, 128, 130, 131, 136, 137, 138, 143, 171, 
172, 204, 205, 208, 213 
models, vii, viii, ix, x, xi, 2, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 17, 
26, 27, 29, 30, 31, 38, 39, 46, 47, 53, 58, 60, 
61, 67, 68, 70, 71, 72, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 80, 
86, 90, 103, 107, 108, 112, 113, 114, 119, 120, 
124, 125, 126, 127, 130, 131, 132, 133, 135, 
137, 138, 142, 143, 145, 149, 151, 152, 153, 
164, 173, 175, 176, 177, 181, 183, 184, 186, 
190, 191, 195, 196, 197, 203, 207, 208, 209, 
213 
modifications, 183 
molecular formulas, 85 
molecular mass, 146 
molecular structure, 41, 138, 145, 151, 153 
molecular weight, 32, 145, 148, 151 
molecules, x, 3, 13, 31, 85, 91, 136, 137, 138, 
139, 142, 143, 145, 146, 148, 151 
momentum, 26, 143, 168 
monounsaturated, 85, 88 
Montenegro, 152, 207 
Moon, 59, 61, 72, 75, 76 
Multi-Layer Perceptron, 27, 133 
multiple linear regression, 37, 87, 105 
Multipurpose Processes, 29, 31 
multivariate, viii, 8, 25, 26, 34, 35, 36, 37, 86, 
103, 104, 152, 172 
multivariate analysis, 86 
multivariate calibration, 34, 35 
N 
nanocomposites, 31 
nanoparticles, 14, 15, 16, 31, 152 
nanotechnology, 9, 29, 31 
nanotube, 31, 41 
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 124 
natural resources, 20 
negative effects, 149 
nervous system, 36, 46, 177 
neural network, vii, viii, ix, x, xi, 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 
9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 
25, 26, 27, 30, 31, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 
41, 42, 43, 44, 53, 57, 61, 66, 71, 72, 73, 74, 
75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 86, 103, 104, 
105, 125, 126, 130, 131, 132, 136, 137, 138, 
143, 151, 152, 153, 157, 159, 163, 164, 168, 
172, 173, 175, 176, 177, 181, 182, 183, 184, 
206, 207, 208, 219 
Neural Network Model, 39, 72 
neural system, 2, 4 
neurons, ix, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, 26, 27, 35, 36, 46, 
47, 48, 49, 50, 53, 55, 62, 65, 81, 87, 89, 90, 
111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 121, 
122, 137, 163, 165, 168, 169, 177, 181, 182, 
183, 184, 185, 188, 189, 197, 200, 203 
neuroscience, 159 
neurotransmitter, 3 
Nigeria, 67, 78, 79, 81 
NIR, 44, 103, 104 
nitrogen, 66, 87 
Nitzschia, 83 
nodes, 2, 3, 5, 6, 163, 164, 165, 219 
nuclear engineering, 33 
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR), 13, 18, 39 
nucleus, 3, 46 
O 
oil, ix, 11, 14, 29, 30, 40, 42, 73, 81, 82, 83, 86, 
87, 93, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105 
oleic acid, 85, 88, 99, 100 
olfaction, xi, 211 
operations, x, 33, 36, 46, 157, 158, 183 
optimization, vii, 1, 2, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 17, 18, 
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 29, 32, 33, 36, 42, 43, 
64, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 80, 104, 159, 
176, 178, 184, 186, 188, 189, 190, 194, 197, 
206 
organic compounds, 41, 137, 150 
organism, 20 
overlap, 203 
overtraining, 142, 143 
oxidation, 86 
oxygen, x, 13, 84, 135, 136, 138, 145 
P 
paclitaxel, 19 
palm oil, 87, 98, 99, 100, 102 
palpation, xi, 211 
parallel, 2, 26, 46, 143, 159 
parallelism, 2, 26 
partial least squares regression, 35, 37 
pattern recognition, viii, 9, 25, 33, 34, 35, 36, 39, 
70, 159 
PCA, 10, 16, 167 
PCR, 35, 37 
permeability, x, 135, 143, 145, 151, 155 

Index  
 
227
permeation, 143, 145, 149, 152 
permittivity, 13 
Perugia, 45 
pervasive computing, 215 
petroleum, 9, 82, 84 
pH, vii, 1, 11, 13, 32 
phage, 13, 17 
pharmaceutical, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 
29, 30, 31, 38 
pharmaceutical industry, 14, 29, 31 
pharmaceuticals, 29, 31 
phenolic compounds, 154 
phosphorus, 85 
photodegradation, 21 
physical characteristics, 84, 183 
physical properties, 146 
physicochemical properties, 13, 15, 102, 137, 
143, 145, 146, 151 
phytoplankton, 152 
plants, viii, 10, 29, 32, 42, 43, 46, 47, 52, 53, 56, 
57, 58, 61, 66, 77 
PLS, 35, 37 
polarity, 34, 145, 148 
policymakers, 132 
pollutant(s), 12, 65, 87, 127, 130, 131, 132 
polydispersity, 32 
polymer, 9, 17, 18, 21, 29, 30, 31, 32, 40 
polymer composites, 30, 40 
Polymer industry, 29, 30, 32 
polymer melts, 30, 40 
polymerization, 30, 32 
polymerization reactor, 32 
polypropylene, 32 
polyunsaturated, 85 
positive correlation, 219 
postnatal exposure, 155 
potassium, 82 
preparation, 10, 17, 27 
principal component analysis, 10, 72, 167 
principal component regression, 35, 37 
process control, 14, 33, 38 
process safety, 33 
product design, 103 
professionals, 220 
prognosis, 31 
programming, 27, 64, 132, 162 
project, 14, 102, 108, 126, 172, 204 
propagation, ix, 7, 8, 10, 16, 31, 37, 41, 80, 81, 
89, 111, 138 
protection, x, 21, 135, 136, 137, 149, 150 
proteins, 13, 17, 30 
proteome, 17 
prototype, 60, 213, 219 
pulp, 30, 33, 39, 43 
pulp and paper industry, 30, 39 
Q 
quality assurance, 213 
quality control, 31, 86 
quality standards, 82 
quantification, 20, 44, 80, 137 
quercetin, 20, 21, 23 
query, 214, 216 
R 
radiation, vii, ix, x, 31, 53, 60, 61, 62, 66, 67, 73, 
77, 78, 79, 107, 108, 109, 110, 121, 124, 125, 
126, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 135, 136, 
150, 152 
radiotherapy, 131 
Raman spectroscopy, 13 
raw materials, ix, 81, 102 
reactive oxygen, x, 135 
real time, 29, 63, 64, 162 
reasoning, 72 
receptors, 155 
reciprocal interactions, 12 
recognition, viii, 9, 25, 31, 33, 34, 35, 36, 159 
recovery, 30, 40 
redundancy, 120 
reflectance spectra, 31 
regeneration, 12 
regression, viii, 25, 35, 37, 58, 67, 71, 75, 80, 86, 
87, 91, 93, 95, 104, 105, 143, 153, 159, 165, 
166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173 
regression method, 35, 37, 75, 159, 171 
regression model, 58, 67, 71, 80, 167, 173 
regulations, 58 
regulatory systems, 149 
reinforcement, 47 
reinforcement learning, 47 
rejection, 7 
relevance, 8, 220 
reliability, 70, 120, 121, 122, 153, 203 
remote sensing, 78 
renewable energy, viii, 31, 42, 45, 46, 53, 57, 60, 
126, 127, 128, 130, 131 
requirements, x, 72, 80, 82, 124, 136, 162, 211 
RES, xi, 53, 211, 220 
researchers, 56, 57, 63, 69, 86, 150 
residue(s), 83, 85, 150 
resistance, 65, 159, 177, 202 
resolution, viii, 16, 25, 29, 34, 35, 46, 47, 51, 69 

Index 
 
228
resources, vii, viii, 1, 14, 20, 45, 70, 82 
response, viii, 5, 8, 9, 12, 14, 17, 18, 21, 22, 25, 
27, 28, 29, 33, 34, 35, 43, 60, 73, 87, 104, 111, 
146, 148, 164, 177, 183, 188, 194, 195, 197, 
203, 214 
resveratrol, 20, 36, 44 
retail, 57, 71 
rheology, 29 
rhizome, 10 
rice husk, 13, 15 
root, ix, 10, 11, 60, 67, 90, 107, 112, 124, 162 
rotation axis, 158 
rules, 26, 36, 112, 114, 130, 131, 133, 151 
S 
SaaS, xi, 211, 220 
safety, 9, 28, 29, 32, 33, 95, 137, 151, 152, 153 
SAR, 153 
saturated acid, 85, 86, 88 
saturation, ix, 81, 93, 183 
scattering, 136, 176, 177, 180, 205 
self-organization, 26 
semantics, 214 
semen, 12, 17, 20 
semiconductor, 207 
sensation, 59, 65, 76 
sensitivity, 53, 61, 62, 77, 136, 142, 145, 154 
sensor, xi, 29, 30, 31, 33, 39, 41, 43, 64, 68, 73, 
79, 109, 124, 157, 160, 162 
sensor network, 64, 79 
shear deformation, 158 
signals, 3, 4, 8, 9, 35, 43, 111, 160, 162 
simulation, 11, 31, 38, 39, 41, 57, 58, 60, 71, 75, 
76, 121, 122, 125, 129, 162, 190, 188, 196, 
207 
skeleton, 10, 146 
skin, vii, x, 23, 61, 75, 76, 135, 136, 137, 138, 
142, 143, 145, 146, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 
153, 154, 155 
skin cancer, x, 135, 136, 152 
sludge, 39, 83 
smoothing, 143 
sodium, 31, 82, 153 
soft sensors, 29 
software, 43, 46, 47, 58, 131, 162, 214, 216 
Solar collector, ix, 57, 107, 127 
solar radiation estimation, vii, ix, 107 
solar system, 60, 73, 108 
solar thermal energy, 73 
solid state, 16 
solubility, 23, 31, 41, 145 
solution, 5, 9, 11, 12, 13, 15, 22, 26, 31, 44, 131, 
153 
sorption process, x, 135 
Spain, 22, 60, 67, 157, 173 
species, x, 31, 37, 135, 136 
spectrophotometric method, 11 
spectroscopy, 13, 35, 37, 44, 103, 104 
spindle, 159, 160, 162, 167, 168, 169, 171 
squamous cell carcinoma, x, 135, 136 
stability, 87, 91, 146 
standard deviation, 114, 119, 121 
state, xi, 16, 27, 30, 33, 40, 42, 61, 64, 109, 122, 
206, 211 
statistics, 35, 184, 188, 215 
steel, 14, 159, 161 
stochastic model, 128, 130, 131, 133 
storage, 22, 29, 86, 95, 127, 162, 212 
stroke, 87, 104 
structural characteristics, 137 
structural protein, 13, 17 
structure, x, 2, 10, 12, 13, 16, 18, 20, 21, 26, 31, 
35, 41, 42, 57, 84, 85, 86, 103, 111, 112, 113, 
120, 121, 127, 135, 137, 142, 143, 144, 145, 
146, 151, 153, 154, 181, 182, 186, 219 
substrate(s), 32, 61, 73, 205, 208 
sucrose, 13 
surface area, 142, 144, 145, 146, 148 
suspensions, 18, 21 
Sustainable Development, 22 
sustainable energy, 21, 130, 132 
Sweden, 39, 61, 73 
symptoms, 76, 219 
synaptic strength, 3 
synthesis, 104 
T 
target, 5, 7, 10, 27, 47, 50, 58, 64, 65, 67, 69, 78, 
87, 89, 91, 93, 97, 164, 183, 184, 188, 197, 
215, 216 
techniques, viii, 5, 8, 11, 13, 14, 25, 35, 36, 37, 
40, 71, 79, 86, 87, 103, 125, 137, 151, 154, 
157, 171, 205, 206 
technology(ies), 8, 10, 23, 56, 87, 102, 132, 180, 
205, 220 
temperature, vii, ix, 1, 10, 11, 12, 30, 43, 53, 59, 
60, 61, 62, 64, 65, 66, 67, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 
79, 81, 87, 89, 95, 97, 103, 105, 108, 109, 110, 
176, 178, 179, 180, 181, 185, 186, 188, 190, 
191, 192, 193, 196, 197, 200, 203, 204, 205, 
208, 209 
temperature dependence, 191, 193, 204 
tensile strength, 30 

Index  
 
229
testing, 30, 63, 67, 89, 91, 93, 95, 97, 112, 132, 
137, 142, 143, 150, 151, 166 
thermal energy, 22, 73 
thermal properties, 61 
thermal resistance, 65 
thermodynamic parameters, 86 
thermodynamic properties, 58, 71, 146 
thermolysis, 11 
thermoplastics, 30 
thyroid, 149, 154 
thyrotropin, 154 
time constraints, 86 
time series, 75, 125, 130, 132, 133 
topological design, 27 
topology, 31, 33, 41, 93, 97, 138, 142, 145 
torsion, 13, 18 
toxicity, 10, 16, 149, 152 
training, ix, xi, 8, 9, 11, 27, 33, 35, 37, 43, 47, 49, 
51, 52, 53, 57, 58, 61, 62, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 
81, 89, 90, 91, 93, 95, 97, 112, 132, 138, 142, 
143, 145, 159, 163, 164, 166, 175, 177, 183, 
184, 186, 187, 188, 189, 191, 192, 194, 196, 
197, 203, 207, 219 
trajectory, 43 
transactions, 80 
transesterification, 83, 84, 88, 95, 102, 103, 105 
transistor, xi, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181, 
184, 185, 190, 192, 193, 195, 196, 203, 207, 
208, 209 
translation, 213 
transmission, 48, 80 
transport, 95 
transportation, 82, 95, 103 
treatment, vii, 2, 19, 20, 39, 212 
trial, 89 
triglycerides, 83, 84, 85 
troubleshooting, 26 
Turkey, 61, 66, 67, 74, 75, 77, 78, 107, 132 
U 
ultraviolet irradiation, 155 
United States (USA), 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 38, 39, 
71, 72, 80, 138, 149, 172, 206, 207, 212 
universities, 132 
urban, 20, 75, 76, 80, 172 
UV light, x, 135, 136 
UV radiation, x, 79, 135, 136, 150 
V 
validation, xi, 11, 20, 21, 27, 43, 66, 72, 89, 91, 
93, 95, 97, 142, 143, 145, 148, 150, 154, 159, 
166, 173, 175, 197, 200, 203, 208, 209 
valuation, 53, 80 
variables, vii, viii, x, 1, 8, 9, 10, 11, 17, 25, 26, 
29, 30, 35, 36, 64, 87, 88, 89, 113, 138, 142, 
143, 146, 157, 158, 162, 166, 167, 168, 169, 
170, 171 
variations, 33, 51, 108, 149, 207 
vector, 5, 35, 180 
vegetable oil, 37, 44, 82, 83, 102, 103 
velocity, 52, 129 
vibration, xi, 87, 104, 157, 159, 160, 162, 168, 
169, 171 
Viscosity, ix, 30, 32, 37, 44, 81, 85, 86, 87, 88, 
93, 94, 103, 104, 105 
visualization, 59 
vitamin D, 136 
volatility, 95 
W 
wall temperature, 75 
waste, 39, 70, 73, 83, 102 
waste water, 12, 39, 159, 172 
water, 12, 16, 19, 22, 23, 31, 37, 39, 44, 58, 60, 
64, 66, 71, 73, 74, 85, 87, 103, 108, 136, 151 
water heater, 73 
wavelet, 32, 37, 42, 44 
wear, vii, x, 30, 157, 159, 160, 163, 165, 166, 
167, 168, 169, 170, 171 
web, xi, 132, 211, 213, 214, 220 
web service, xi, 211, 220 
World Health Organization, 152 
worldwide, 31, 91, 136 
Z 
zinc, 19, 21, 142 
zinc oxide, 142 
 

