Article Writing
Secrets
Brought to you by
Qsncph_wgsk9'

 
Legal Notice: 
 
While all attempts have been made to verify information 
provided in this publication, neither the Author nor the 
Publisher assumes any responsibility for errors, omissions, 
or contrary interpretation of the subject matter herein. 
 
This publication is not intended for use as a source of 
legal or accounting advice. The Publisher wants to stress 
that the information contained herein may be subject to 
varying state and/or local laws or regulations. All users 
are advised to retain competent counsel to determine what 
state and/or local laws or regulations may apply to the 
user's particular business. 
 
The Purchaser or Reader of this publication assumes 
responsibility for the use of these materials and 
information. Adherence to all applicable laws and 
regulations, federal, state, and local, governing 
professional licensing, business practices, advertising, 
and all other aspects of doing business in the United 
States or any other jurisdiction is the sole responsibility 
of the Purchaser or Reader. 
 
The Author and Publisher assume no responsibility or 
liability whatsoever on the behalf of any Purchaser or 
Reader of these materials. 
 
Any perceived slights of specific people or organizations 
are unintentional. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Introduction 
 
Writing articles to make money. It’s one of 
the hottest topics on the internet.  And 
it’s true, articles are an awesome and easy 
way to make money online.  
 
Some folks feel intimidated about the 
thought of putting pen to paper, but I’m 
going to tell you about some easy ways to 
write quality articles.  You’ll be cranking 
them out in no time. 
 
What good are articles?  Well, with them you 
can… 
 
• generate free traffic to your website 
(where you’re selling something) 
 
• send traffic to websites you are 
promoting as an affiliate (via your link, 
of course!) 
 
• provide quality content on a basic 
adsense site 
 
• use several of them to quickly create 
your own e-books and sell them on their 
own mini sites, or even sell resell 
rights to these e-books.  
 
 

 
Turning Your Articles into 
Income 
 
When folks are curled up in bed with your 
book, you have some literary license. You 
can talk about scenery and feelings and pave 
the way for character development. 
 
But when people are reading on the internet, 
they’re wanting fast facts.  They don’t want 
additional fluff.  Easy to understand 
information.  That’s the goal. 
 
When you want to learn something, you want 
to learn it as quickly as possible.  
Everyone looks for a shortcut so they can 
start applying what they’ve learned.  That’s 
why you want to be brief and to the point in 
your articles for the web. 
 
 
 
The Fastest And Easiest Way 
To Write Great Articles 
 
Now, with as many tip websites as there are 
and as many online forums, there’s no need 
to come up with all the content off the top 
of your head. 
 
 

Now here’s something vitally important – you 
must never take another person’s words for 
your article.  Not one sentence.  Not one 
phrase.  It’s illegal and can get you 
jailed. 
 
 
But you can certainly learn from their 
content and write your own article. Find 
three or four articles on your topic, read 
them carefully, and write your own article 
in your own words based on what you’ve just 
learned. 
 
Where To Find Good Info 
 
If I wanted to write an article on 
“unschooling”, I’d search Google for 
“unschooling forums” or “unschooling 
discussion boards”. 
 
 
All I then do is look for what folks are 
talking about, read their responses and use 
them to help write my own article. 
 
If you find a great info-product on 
Clickbank for gardeners, do a search for 
garden forums.  See what kinds of questions 
folks are asking and write an article to 
answer. 
 
You can also find Frequently Asked Questions 
at FAQ.org and Groups.google.com. 

Remember, you’re keeping your article short 
and to the point.  Use helpful tips 
throughout.  
 
I remember one article I read about 
searching for a fitness club.  One of the 
tips went like this.  “In order to find the 
best fitness club for you, you must go out 
and look for one.” 
 
Well, duh!   For crying out loud, that’s 
idiotic.  Of course you have to look for 
one.  That’s a piece of totally useless 
information. 
 
Steer clear of stating the very obvious.  
Give unique, helpful suggestions.  That’s 
what your readers want. 
 
Writing Your Article Title 
 
Like a headline, this is what gets folks to 
decide to read your article or pass it by. 
 
People want articles with helpful tips they 
can use immediately.  Your title must convey 
what you’re offering in your article. 
 
“Reaching Your Goal” – kind of boring 
“Making It” – too abstract, this could be a 
title for baking cakes or any number of 
things 
 
““7 Proven Steps to Reaching Any Goal That 
You Can Implement Right Now!”” – much better 

 
 
You can use personal anecdotes in your 
article.  These add flavor and help hold 
your reader’s interest. People love a story! 
 
 
Editing Your Article  
 
Any professional writer will tell you how 
difficult it is to proof your own work.  
Because you know in your head exactly what 
the page is supposed to say, it’s easy for 
your brain to skip over little errors. 
 
You can read your article aloud to help 
check for flow.  But also have another pair 
of eyes look over your work and see if the  
article makes complete sense. 
 
Don’t forget to check for spelling errors.  
Too many of these and your article will 
likely not be accepted/published. 
 
 
 
 
For the best Private Label Rights article re-writer program… 
 
Check out 
 http://www.SecretArticleConverter.com  
 
With this program, you can change Private Label Articles into 
usable, unique content. 
 
It’s inexpensive, and it works! 

 
Earning Money with your 
Articles 
 
 
You have your 5 articles on Reaching Your 
Goals ready. Your resource box includes your 
name, autoresponder link (so they could sign 
up for your free course on goal setting), 
and your affiliate link. 
 
Now it’s time to start submitting articles.  
Don’t skip this vital step! I can’t tell you 
how many articles sat on my computer for 
months because I was “too busy” to submit 
them! 
 
http://www.freelancemom.com/submitarticles.htm  
 
http://eclaunchsite.com/ECLarticlesubmissionsites.htm  
have a ton of places to submit articles 
 
 
In your autoresponder series, don’t forget 
to give folks the opportunity to buy another 
product!  
 
As other people begin to promote your 
articles, your name will end up in numerous 
search engine results!   
 
Go for two tier affiliate programs when you 
can and reap the benefits of others’ work! 
 

Those five little articles ended up giving 
you tons of free advertising and residual 
income! 
 
Now don’t stop there!  Find another niche 
and info product, write and submit some 
additional articles, and watch your income 
grow! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Articles and Adsense 
 
 
Adsense is definitely the talk of the town. 
It’s been the impetus behind automatic 
website generators and portal sites galore. 
 
Right now, many marketers are leaning in the 
direction of providing valuable content 
(your articles) on their adsense pages. 
The thought is, no search engine in their 
right mind would ban or delete a valuable 
content site. 
 
Put your adsense boxes on every page of your 
content site. 
 
When it comes to Adsense, you have to think 
like your website visitor. What is it they 
are looking to buy? Don’t stick something on 
your site about “making money with your 
gardening passion” because the advertisers 
with Adsense are selling garden tools and 
equipment, not money making opportunities. 
 
You need to make your content fit into the 
Adsense ads for the best results. 
 
 
Now, write articles! 10, 20, 50 – keep 
writing and promoting your content site. 
 
 
 

 
Advertise your website in the resource box. 
 
For example 
 
"For a complete checklist on the best shade 
loving plants, visit slp.com" 
 
By following this format, you should make 
money from Google Adsense fairly quickly.  
Plus you’re building tons of quality content 
over time and you will have hundreds of 
articles all over the Internet working for 
you around the clock! That means your site 
will do better in the search engines due to 
all the incoming links! 
 
This is one of those money machines that 
will make you money on demand pretty much 
for the life of the Internet.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Using Articles To Profit From 
Affiliate Programs 
 
 
You don’t even need a website! 
 
To combine articles and affiliate programs,  
all you have to do is create a free 
autoresponder series, then advertise it 
directly with ezines, etc. 
 
Select 3 Affiliate Programs 
 
To make this work and not be a one hit 
wonder, you will need to select THREE 
affiliate programs to join. The criteria to 
selecting these programs are a little 
different than going out and selecting the 
affiliate program with the biggest 
commission, even though this does play a 
role. 
 
Of course, all the affiliate programs you 
promote will have to be on the one subject. 
For instance, say your first affiliate 
program is an ebook on Mini Sites, then your 
second affiliate program you sell could be a 
members only site based on Mini Sites and 
your third affiliate program could be a 
service where someone creates a network of 
Mini Sites for your customers.  
  
The first affiliate program you promote will 
be one which pays a larger than normal 

commission on the first sale. Do not accept 
anything less than 40% commission for your 
first affiliate program. The reason for this 
is because we want to make a profit on the 
first affiliate program. By selling any 
product that does not make you at least $20 
per sale, you will not profit straight away. 
The main aim of this is to really build up 
your Opt-in Mailing list. 
 
If you break even, don't be discouraged. 
Breaking even is an amazing result, and if 
you have built your list up, then you will 
be profiting for years to come.  
 
So for your first affiliate program, choose 
a product that sells for around $40 to $50 
and where you still get at least 40% of the 
total profits.  
 
Your second affiliate program you join will 
be in the category of what we call "Residual 
Income". 
 
This is an affiliate program that pays you 
every month someone stays signed up for the 
product or service. For example, if you were 
to promote a web hosting company, and they 
charged $25 a month, you would get around 
$10 a month for as long as that person stays 
signed up for web hosting.  
 
These are great programs to promote because 
all they require is a little hard work up 
front and you're set for months, even years. 

That's why I recommend promoting this type 
of program once you have a large list of 
names to email to. 
 
Of course you will still be promoting your 
free course to other people, but this is a 
way to make back end sales from your current 
list. Don't think if you've advertised to 
these people once, that's all they are good 
for. It takes some folks several times to 
respond to a message, so keep reminding them 
of what you have to offer. 
 
You can find a large list of Residual Income 
affiliate programs at  
 
LifeTimeCommissions.com  
 
Now your third affiliate program will also 
be a program that you will promote to your 
current subscriber list. This program should 
pay you a large lump sum of money. This type 
of program will have a lower conversion 
rate, but you should be making $80 to $150 
commission per sale. 
 
If you would like to find a directory of 
affiliate programs, visit  
 
AssociatePrograms.com 
 
Create A Free Report Series 
 
Don’t overlook this step! It’s vital to your 
affiliate success. I will go as far as 

saying that if you create a responsive Opt-
In list, 75% of your work is done for you 
already. That goes for anything you're doing 
online. 
 
This free report will be promoting the first 
affiliate program you chose from step 1. It 
should be priced around $40 or $50 and pay 
you around $20 to $25 per sale.  
 
Creating your free report is easy. Either 
find 5 articles on your subject that you're 
allowed to use, or create 5 articles 
yourself. They don't have to be long, only 
around 500 words. Then send them out to your 
prospects over 5 days using your 
autoresponder. Make sure these reports are 
full of useful information, not just blatant 
advertising. You do however get a chance to 
advertise to them directly later.  
 
How I create an autoresponder series is by 
writing 5 to 10 articles on the topic of my 
affiliate program. For instance, if I were 
writing a report on search engine ranking, I 
would create the following articles. 
 
1. The Tools Of The Search Engine Specialist 
2. Meta Data, Yes Or No? 
3. How Mini Sites Can Generate Thousands In 
Extra Visitors 
4. Getting Listed In Yahoo! The Easy Way 
5. Creating Keywords Relevant To Your Site 
6. Search Engine Ranking On A Budget 
7. The Biggest Search Engine Myths 

 
And so on.. 
 
One tip I have for writing articles is to 
jot down points, and use those points to 
build your article. For instance, when 
writing "How Mini Sites Can Generate 
Thousands In Extra Visitors", I would jot 
down points like this. 
 
* Choosing A Domain Name 
* Finding Cheap Web Hosting 
* Using Keywords Throughout The Web Site 
* Submitting To Search Engines  
* Tracking Hits 
* Doing This All Over Again 
 
I would then write 100 to 200 words per 
point and voila! There's your first 
article/report for you to use. 
 
Now when sending out your free report with 
your autoresponder, it should be set up 
something like this. 
 
When the person signs up, they get part 1, 
then for the next 4 days they get parts 2, 
3, 4 and 5. In these messages, you will get 
a chance to advertise to them in the first 
and last sections of your message. Here's an 
example of an autoresponder message you can 
send out. 
 
 

 
 
Hi [[firstname]], 
 
I would like to thank you for requesting our free report 
"How To Become A Super Affiliate And A Digital Information 
Millionaire On A Budget". 
 
My name is Your Name, and I recently quit my job and I'm 
now working from home as both a Super Affiliate And A 
Digital Information Marketer. In this free report, I am 
going to show you how you also can work from home selling 
your own and other people's products, for amazing profits. 
 
Not only that, I'm going to show you how you can do it ON A 
BUDGET with the power of Mini Sites. 
 
And I will show you exactly what product I'm selling as my 
own, but did not create. It really is a great business to 
be in.  
 
This course is written in plain English, and is very easy 
to read, however, if you have any questions or comments, 
then please feel free to contact me at  
 
email@addresshere.com 
http://www.websitehere.com 
P.S, [[firstname]], for a very limited time only I'm 
offering to everyone who buys Master Reprint Rights to 
Killer Mini Sites from my site, www.websitehere.com a 
special bonus of SIX MONTHS worth of email consultation 
FREE.  
 
That's right, ask me any questions anytime.  
 
Not only will you get your own product/business to market 
online, I will help you do it in the process. 
 
-----------------------------------------------------------
------ 
Part 1, Becoming A Super Affiliate On A Budget With Mini 
Affiliate Sites 
-----------------------------------------------------------
------ 
 
Earning a good income from Affiliate Programs is not as 
hard as everyone make's it out to be.  

 
The figure's are that 95% of all affiliates never earn 
enough to warrant a check. And of those 5% only 1 to 2% 
earn enough to live off their commissions. 
 
That's not good news for the "average" Joe Affiliate is it?  
 
But I'm telling you now, it does not have to be that hard. 
All you need is a simple formula that work's over and over 
again. It really is that simple.   
 
 
-----------------------------------------------------------
------ 
The 5 Step's To Becoming A Super Affiliate On A Budget 
-----------------------------------------------------------
------ 
 
******* Step 1 ******* 
 
1. Create A 1 Page Free Report Web Site With A Simple 
Subscribe Form 
 
Before we get into creating your Mini Affiliate Site we 
need to select an Affiliate Program to promote. If you 
already have one you want to promote, move on, if not read 
on :) 
 
When selecting your first Affiliate Program for your Mini 
Affiliate Site, I suggest you go for a product with a 
rather large price tag, so you can make profits from day 
one. Of course the big money comes from you backend, which 
we will talk about later. 
 
I alway's suggest you promote a product you have used and 
trust before anything else.  
 
Don't just promote an Affiliate Program because of the 
commissions, as that's a sure fire way to fail. 
 
If you're looking for a directory of Affiliate Programs to 
join instantly, I suggest you look at Allan Gardyne's 
AssociatePrograms.com. 
 
Setting up a web site now has never been easier. A few 
years ago, domain names sold for $35 for 1 year, and 
webhosting was about the same for 1 month. Now it's so very 

inexpensive. 
 
You can purchase domains names for $13.50 at 000domains.com 
and even cheaper at godaddy.com. 
 
The last time I checked they were selling dot com, net, org 
names for only $8.95. 
 
As I speak, there's a new hosting company that specialises 
in hosting Mini Sites. They are www.bizminisites.com and 
for only $9.95 you get 3 months of quality web hosting. 
 
If you would like an example of a very effective Mini Site 
have a look at the following sites.  
 
http://www.philwiley.com/ 
http://www.track-your-ads.com/
 
http://www.sohohelper.com/ 
http://www.ebooksnbytes.com/ 
 
You can find a lot of really good web site templates at 
www.freesitetemplates.com.  
 
That's it for Part 1 today. You will get the second, third 
and fourth parts in a few days. 
 
If you can't wait until then, you can always visit our site 
http://www.websitehere.com and get all the information you 
need. 
 
Best Regards 
Your Name 
email@here.com 
http://www.websitehere.com 
 
As you can see, I've got my web site address 
and special offers throughout the report. 
But I was telling people to go to my 
website. If you don't have a web site, you 
would put a little advertisement for your 
affiliate program at the start and at the 
end of your reports. 
 

If writing emails to keep in contact with 
your list seems overwhelming, check out the 
Instant Niche Email program at 
http://www.instantnicheemails.com .  With a 
little work, you can have a year’s worth of 
messages created in less than a day.  Plus 
you can use the software for as many niches 
as you like. 
  
If your prospect hasn't purchased from you 
after your free reports have been sent out, 
don't worry. The next part is where you will 
get most of your sales. Considering there 
are so many other affiliates promoting the 
same or similar product you are, you have to 
make them want to buy from you.  
 
How do you do this? Easy- you overdeliver 
by giving them more than what they expected.  
I offer them something else if they purchase 
from the affiliate program I'm promoting. 
For instance, I give away consultation free, 
where I help them with any problems they 
might have.  
 
Here's an example of using a report to get 
readers into the buying mode. 
 
 
 
Hi Firstname, 
 
I have a secret for you that will hopefully make you very 
excited.  
 
As you know, Killer Mini Sites is selling from my web site 
for $22.70, $79.95 and $249.95. If you're confused about 

the different options, let me explain. 
 
For $22.70, you get a copy of the book Killer Mini Sites 
and you can resell the book to your web site visitors for 
$24.95. But remember, this option is full of my Affiliate 
Links, where I'm earning money from your hard work. 
 
For $79.95 you get a fully branded copy of Killer Mini 
Sites that you can sell for $24.95 with your Affiliate 
Links that will earn you residual income constantly. 
 
For $249.95 you get a fully branded copy of Killer Mini 
Sites that you can sell for $24.95, you also get to sell 
the customization rights for $79.95 and the big profit 
puller is you can sell the MASTER RIGHTS for a massive 
$249.95 per sale.  
 
But, here's the best bit. I'm offering, for a very limited 
time only, the MASTER RIGHTS to Killer Mini Sites for ONLY 
$150. I'm slashing $100 dollars off the price and I'm 
throwing in FREE Consultation with me via email any time 
you need help.  
 
That's right, you get your own Internet Publishing Business 
complete with website sales letter and branding utilities, 
and FREE consultation that I sell elsewhere for $147.00.  
 
To be honest, I don't know what you're waiting for, this 
offer will not be around for long. 
 
You can purchase the MASTER RIGHTS Today by clicking the 
link below. Remember, this link is for the $150 MASTER 
RIGHT option. 
 
http://www.clickbank.net/sell.yourlink 
 
I can tell you now, the book is selling like hot cakes and 
if you purchase today, I will give you my secret tactic 
that makes 1 in every 45 people purchase this product. 
 
I will also show you how to get unlimited email leads for 
you to advertise to constantly without spamming. 
 
If this is not a big enough motivator to purchase today, I 
don't know what is. 
 
If you would like more information about the book, which in 

itself is amazing, visit my web site at 
 
http://www.websitehere.com 
 
or email me at 
 
email@here.com - This is my home account, you email will 
get priority status. 
 
To your success and may your clicks come often 
 
Your Name 
http://www.websitehere.com 
 
P.S, If you don't order today, please email me and tell me 
what’s stopping you so I can sweeten the deal.  
 
This got an amazing response. It was sent 2 
days after the free course was over. The 
pull here was that I will give them $100 off 
the price of the product, plus still give 
them free consultation for 6 months.  
 
The options are limitless. 
 
Of course this would not be the end of your 
contact with them. If the prospect still 
hasn't purchased the first affiliate program 
you're promoting that's OK. The lifetime 
value of a prospect is a lot more than just 
a one time sale. 
 
That's why you selected three affiliate 
programs to promote. Instead of trying to 
get the prospect to buy the one product over 
and over again, offer them something fresh. 
With this in mind, I recommend offering them 
a residual income affiliate program, like a 
membership site.  

 
Then create another report and start all 
over again. An Opt-in list is a continuous 
stream of money. 
 
Of course, when people purchase from you, 
they should be taken off the prospect list, 
and added to your customer list. This list 
is your most important asset. It's 10 times 
as important as your prospects list because 
these people showed they were willing to buy 
from you.  
 
Some affiliate programs don't allow you to 
see the email addresses of people who buy 
from you, so that's why when you're giving 
away your special offer in conjunction with 
your affiliate program. 
 
Ask them to send you an email when they have 
purchased, then you will give them whatever 
bonus you were offering. 
 
(Remember, when your prospect buys something 
from you, they become a customer, so do not 
forget to take them off your prospects 
list.)  
 
With these people, you will want to give 
them other special deals not available to 
your prospect list. The first email sent to 
them should be thanking them for their 
purchase, and letting them know how they can 
receive their free bonus and how they can 
contact you at anytime.  

 
The second email sent to them should be sent 
a few days later giving them another free 
bonus they were not expecting. I love it 
when people do this for me, and I suggest 
you do this for your customers. 
 
The third email you send them should be sent 
out about 7 days after they purchase from 
you. This email should offer them a backend 
product, for instance your residual income 
affiliate program. If you can, see if you 
can talk to the affiliate program manager 
and get a special discount rate on the 
product, or maybe the first month for $1, 
just for your customers. I doubt any 
affiliate program manager would reject a 
sure fire way to make even more money. 
 
In the mid to long term, this will build a 
nice on going lifelong income for you. 
 
About 7 days after your third email was 
sent, send them another discount product, 
but make sure this product is in the high 
commission range. This is where you will 
make most of your income. 
 
The information business is truly the best 
business to be in. I get excited when I'm 
writing books and thinking about the 
possibilities. It's great meeting new people 
and making new friendships.  
 
Make sure you keep in contact with your 

customer base and offer them free reports 
and other special offers every month or two. 
Just make sure you don't over do it.  
 
There are not too many autoresponders that 
can handle this sort of work load for a 
cheap price, however, I have found one that 
will do this and more. It's called 
Aweber.com and you can get a free trial for 
30 days. Then after that it's only $19.95 
per month. They give you unlimited 
autoresponders and other great options. You 
won’t find anything else like it. If you're 
after a residual income affiliate program to 
promote, I recommend these people. 
 
Considering you have no web hosting bills 
like nearly everyone else on line, you can 
afford to pay a little bit more for your 
autoresponder.  
 
Now how many businesses do you know of that 
can run on a mere $19.95 investment every 
month? 
 
You could also produce free reports every 
month, and advertise them to your current 
list, while still advertising your first 
affiliate program report. Imagine having an 
around the clock sales machine sending out 
free reports to thousands, while promoting 
your affiliate programs and building a name 
for yourself. 
 
 

Advertise Your First Affiliate Program Via 
Your Free Report 
 
This is the easier step, yet the step most 
people have trouble with. Creating an 
excellent free report is A LOT harder than 
advertising your free report. It's just a 
matter of coming up with a list of good 
ezines and discussion boards to advertise 
on. Signature files are a surprise add-on 
here, but they really do work.  
 
You will need to generate a list of ezine 
publishers so you can send them articles to 
use for their ezine.  
 
Ezine advertising would have to be my 
favourite option, as it's quick and easy. 
The only hard part is writing the ad copy 
for your ads, and finding ezines to 
advertise in.  
 
Two of the top ezine directories are  
topezineads.com and directoryofezines.com. 
There is a cost to use these, but they will 
be your lifeline until you generate a list 
of ezines yourself. 
 
The whole aim of this advertising campaign 
is to generate leads for your free report, 
so you really want to advertise anywhere you 
think people might be interested in your 
report. Since you’re not going for a direct 
sale straight off the bat, this somewhat 
allows you to be a little less worried about 

how targeted your audience is. 
 
If you're running low on money, I recommend 
classified advertising. It's so inexpensive 
that I advertise Internet marketing products 
in humour ezines and still pull a good 
response rate for the amount of money I put 
in. 
 
You can get classified ads for around $2 per 
ad, which is extremely cheap. I highly 
recommend Partneon.com and Twodollarads.com 
for any classified advertising you're going 
to do. Of course if you search through ezine 
directories you will find a lot of other 
places to advertise cheaply. 
 
Writing classified ads has turned into 
somewhat of an art form. There are literally 
hundreds of books on the subject of writing 
successful classified ads, yet most over 
complicate it too much.  
 
So what makes a good classified ad?  
 
1) An attention grabbing headline 
 
FREE REPORT 
SECRETS REVEALED 
HOW TO  
 
2) A promise 
 
Become A Millionaire Overnight 
Earn $1200 In Two Weeks 

 
FREE REPORT: Secrets Of The Super Affiliates 
Revealed 
How To Become A Super Affiliate On A Tight 
Budget 
 
3) A call to action 
 
For More Information 
Be Quick Or You Will Miss Out 
FREE REPORT: Secrets Of The Super Affiliates 
Revealed How To Become A Super Affiliate On 
A Tight Budget For More Information, Send A 
Blank Email To Your@autoresponderhere.com  
 
Once you've found a few good ezines, keep 
advertising with them. After you think 
you've got the most out of their classified 
ad section, start using sponsorship ads. 
 
While this will be quite a steep climb in 
costs compared to classified ads, the 
results will be quite dramatically 
different. Top sponsorship ads can cost 
anywhere between $15 to $300 dollars 
depending on where you're advertising.  
 
I recommend using top sponsorship ads if you 
don't want to spend a lot extra on 
purchasing a solo ad. However if you can 
purchase a solo ad for an extra $50 or so, I 
would definitely go for the solo ad. 
Sponsorship ads also give you an idea of how 
well the ezine pulls and whether or not it's 
worth the time and money to buy a solo ad. 

 
Don't get carried away with figures when you 
purchase a solo ad. When I first started 
out, I advertised a product directly via my 
solo ad. The ad went out to 12,000 people 
and going on the figures of 1% buying my 
product, I thought this Internet Marketing 
thing wasn't that hard. 
 
I did my research, I was told this ezine was 
good, which it is, and I went for it. The 
commission I was going to receive for every 
sale was $20. So 120 were supposed to buy, 
time $20 per sale came to $2400.  
 
How much money did I actually make from this 
ad? $20! That's right, I only made $20. Why? 
 
A) Because I advertised the affiliate 
program directly 
B) I did not know the affiliate program had 
been advertised about 10 times before 
C) I didn't even have a way to capture email 
addresses 
 
It was a total flop and I was very put off 
from trying again.  
 
That lasted about 4 hours! That night I was 
re-reading the information that got me into 
this mess to start with. I followed exactly 
what the affiliate program manager said to 
do, and it didn't work. Luckily for me, at 
that time I stopped listening to affiliate 
managers and started thinking for myself. 

 
Have a look around any ezines you've joined, 
and try and remember if you read any of the 
ads. If so, which ones and why? Did you sign 
up for what they were offering? If no, Why? 
This is the best way to find ezine ads that 
work. If you read the ad and signed up for 
what they were offering, other people 
probably did, too. 
 
Another method of free advertising I like to 
use is discussion board posting. 
 
Discussion board posting is very effective, 
especially if the message board is inside a 
members-only site where you pay to join.  
 
The idea here is not to spam the message 
board, but to actually add some content. 
Only answer questions you know a lot about. 
Don't try and be an expert on a topic you’re 
not. I'm not an expert at copywriting, so I 
very rarely give people expert advice on 
this. I help people with basic questions, 
but no more unless I really know what I'm 
talking about. This is the best way to ruin 
your reputation before you're even lucky 
enough to create one. 
 
Here's a sample posting which I think is the 
perfect 
 
Posted by Elizabeth Sinclair on Sat, Oct 27,  4:11 pm, in 
response to Ebook Covers.... Recommendations, please!, 
posted by Julie Jordan Scott  
 
I have several free ebook cover templates at 

http://www.onlinewebcreations. All you need to do is add 
your own text. Otherwise, you can check out my Ebook 
gallery to see the custom ebook covers I have created.  
 
Thanks,  
Elizabeth  
 
The reason this is a good post is simply put 
is because it answers the person’s question 
while still advertising their web site, with 
out it looking like a blatant plug. The 
answer told the person exactly what she 
wanted to know. 
 
Here's the post it was in response to. 
 
Ebook Covers....Recommendations, please!  
 
Posted by Julie Jordan Scott on Sat, Oct 27, , 3:24 pm 
 
Happy Weekend One and All!  
 
I am looking for an Ebook Cover Designer. I know that many 
folks here are ebook authors or are ebook cover designers.  
 
I am in the market for some covers and am looking for 
recommendations.  
 
Please share any positive recommendations, or email me with 
cautions.  
 
Thanks a bunch, everyone, all of a sudden I am on warped 
speed here in Bakersfield.....  
 
With Purpose and Passion,  
 
JULIE JORDAN SCOTT  
 
(That was taken from http://www.ablake.net 
message board, which is highly recommended.) 
 
I must admit, I don't use the following 

advertising method as much as I should 
because it can really boost traffic over 
time.  
 
Signature files are little blurbs of text 
either after a post in a message board or at 
the bottom of your email. The most notable 
use of a signature file would have to be 
hotmail.com. Hotmail originally relied on 
its own customers to promote their service 
as each email message they sent contained a 
direct link to Hotmail's sign-up website.  
 
This viral marketing strategy generated 
hundreds of thousands, very possibly 
millions of new users for their free 
service.  
 
The idea of signature files is to make them 
as short and as compelling as possible. 
Let's say I just finished writing a post to 
a message board and I was just talking about 
affiliate programs. 
 
This is what I write after my message board 
post to advertise my website. 
 
"Discover How To Generate Thousands Without 
A Web Site Or A Product Of Your Own"  
 
And I would link that to my sales page. A 
good idea is to also use a separate tracking 
system to track how many hits your message 
board postings are receiving.  
 

If you were answering a question on creating 
a well written sales letter, you could use 
your signature file to promote an affiliate 
program like instantsalesletters.com . It's 
that simple. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Writing Articles To Generate 
A Monthly Viral Income 
 
Here's the idea. 
 
We've all been taught to create free viral 
ebooks to either promote our products or 
affiliate products and submit them to free 
ebook directories. This was sound advice, 
but I've found an even better way to make 
this work. 
 
Create your own free ebook directory full of 
your own free viral ebooks! 
 
Think Clickbank.com but with free ebooks on 
all subjects that you own, promoting 
affiliate programs 24/7. 
 
People go to this site, download the free 
book they want, they pass it around, and 
there ya go, automated affiliate income. 
 
But how do you go about creating these free 
ebooks so they produce the best sales 
possible? I've found by creating an FAQ list 
(frequently asked question) on a certain 
subject and then converting it into PDF, my 
affiliate sales have soared. 
 
I'm not trying to heavily sell them in the 
book, they are getting very useful free 
information and I then point them to a paid 

resource to get more information if they 
want to. 
 
I also ask them to pass the book around as 
much as they like.  
 
Want an example of an FAQ list? Go here  
 
http://www.faqs.org/faqs/body-
building/hardgainer-faq/  
 
This FAQ list is quite big and detailed. 
Your free books only need to be 5 or so 
pages long. 
 
Here is an article I wrote on creating a 
viral ebook. It really doesn't have much to 
do with the business idea in general, but 
will give you an idea of what I'm talking 
about at least: 
 
“… but if you want more information on 
creating Ebooks, You can find it at 
http://www.7dayebook.com. It's a one off fee 
for $27 and it comes in Ebook format 
ironically enough.”  
 
Now, back to my explanation.  
 
Whether you like it or not, having your own 
product gives you more flexibility in your 
online advertising AND believe it or not, 
compiling an Ebook is no more then a week’s 
work part time if done correctly. IF you do 

it this way the profits will come in for 
life.  
 
I have checks coming in still from work I 
did 2 years ago, thanks to the power of 
residual income affiliate programs and viral 
marketing Ebooks.  
 
Ok, let’s get down to the nitty gritty. What 
is a viral marketing Ebook and why should 
you create one?  
 
A viral marketing Ebook is a book which sole 
purpose is to be spread around the Internet 
quickly, by any means possible. It's not 
meant to make you money on the front end. 
You want other people selling it and giving 
it away to as many people as possible.  
 
Why? 
 
Because the inside of that book is full of 
affiliate links to other peoples products 
and every time someone gives away your book 
or sells it, (depending on how you want to 
do it) more people will be seeing your 
affiliate links, and this is costing you 
what? NOTHING? Exactly!  
 
The best examples I could give you of this 
process would be by Yanik Silver. He created 
2 marketing books that spread over the 
Internet like wildfire. He gave everyone who 
purchased the book for $19 or $17 (depending 
on the book) the rights to sell it or give 

it away to their customers.  
 
Needless to say, thousands of people 
starting selling it and promoting it all 
over the Internet. To this day, he is still 
earning good money from that book, plus he 
became one of the most well known Internet 
Marketers.  
 
So how do you go about creating your own 
viral marketing Ebook?  
 
Here are the steps.  
 
1) Come up with a product idea based on your 
affiliate program you've already chosen and 
are already promoting.  
 
Coming up with ideas isn't hard. For 
example, and I know I use this example a 
lot, BUT, if you are going to be promoting a 
sports betting affiliate program, why not 
create a book on becoming a successful 
punter. Then throughout the book, you can 
recommend your favorite sports betting 
affiliate program.  
 
101 Insider Secrets To Sports Betting 
How To Bet With Other Peoples Money  
 
A good way to come up with ideas is to look 
at what others are already selling and mimic 
that. You don’t need to recreate the wheel 
here, so PLEASE don't make things harder 
than they have to be. 

 
2) Get the tools you need to succeed  
 
You are going to need a few tools here.  
 
A) A domain name  
 
I register all my domain names with 
http://www.namecheap.com for under $9 a 
domain name, which to me is pretty darn 
cheap. You want a fairly short domain name 
that describes the content of your book 
fairly well.  
 
Here's an example for you people promoting 
sport betting affiliate programs.  
 
http://www.sportsbettingaffiliates.com  
http://www.sportsoddbetting.com  
http://www.betforfree.com   
  
etc.... 
 
B) Webhosting 
 
Let me say first, you get what you pay for. 
This has never been more true than with 
webhosting. YOU NEED a good reliable 
webhosting company with 24/7 technical 
support. If your site goes down and you 
can't contact anyone to help you get it back 
up, you will lose sales and a lot of them.  
 
  
C) Autoresponder 

 
You will need this so you can contact your 
prospects who don't purchase straight away. 
This is where you will give away your free 
course to entice them to give you their 
email address so you can contact them 
periodically.  
 
D) Credit card processor  
 
Clickbank.com is your fast and easy answer. 
They will let you accept all major credit 
cards and start an affiliate program for a 
one time setup fee of under $50. They do 
take a percentage of every sale, but this is 
so much cheaper then getting your own 
merchant account.  
 
Just about everyone selling Ebooks online is 
using Clickbank.  
 
E) Ebook Software  
 
You will more than likely want to create 
your book in PDF format so everyone can read 
it. (PC and mac users alike) 
 
F) Graphic Design Software  
 
If you are anything like me, your artistic 
abilities peaked at age 7. So instead of 
busting my hump to create my Ebook covers 
and website graphics I use folks who are 
more gifted in this area.  Check into 
various marketing forums for good 

recommendations. 
 
3) Outline your book chapters into articles  
 
Writing a whole book in one sitting is hard, 
and trying to write a book without outlining 
the chapters is nearly impossible. My first 
book took me over 6 months, but now most of 
my books take me less than a week to finish 
and that is with a sales letter and website 
up.  
 
All you have to do is think up 12 to 15 
article topics in sequence and write about 
them. Each page should be around 700 to 1000 
words, full of useful information, not 
information people could get for free.  
 
 
 
4) Write your content 
 
Like I said just before, you need original 
content. There are too many books out there 
now where people are just regurgitating 
information others can get for free and this 
lowers the value of your book, which means 
less people will pass it around and even 
less will read it.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
For the best article re-writer program… 
 
Check out 
 http://www.SecretArticleConverter.com  
 
With this program, you can change Private Label Articles into
usable, unique content. 
 
It’s inexpensive, and it works! 
 
  
The best way to get a good amount of 
original information without writing it 
yourself is to interview experts in the 
field. For instance, if you were writing a 
book about improving your golf handicap, I'm 
sure it wouldn't be too hard to find some 
local experts who you could grill in person, 
over the phone or even via the Internet and 
you can then put all that information in the 
book. It's also a good selling point.  
 
Also remember when you’re writing what the 
point of this book is. The point of the book 
is to earn you an on going commission with 
affiliate programs, so don't feel like you 
can't throw some affiliate links in, because 
you can, but make sure it's tactful and in 
place.  
 
Another good idea would be to put a 
"Subscribe to my newsletter" section in your 
book as well, so not only will you make 
commissions on sales, but also generate 
leads without doing any extra work.  

 
Make sure you clearly state in the front of 
the book, that the buyer can sell this book 
as his own. State that he has Resell Rights 
to the product and can sell it or give it 
away if he chooses.  
 
5) Create your sales letter 
 
This is where you will be selling your book 
and is critically crucial to your success.  
 
Creating a sales letter takes a lot of work, 
especially if you’re new to the whole thing. 
The best way is to mimic successful sales 
letters.  
  
If for some reason you think you can't do 
this by yourself, you have 2 options.  
 
1) Use software that helps put together your 
sales letter  
 
and 
 
2) Hire a copywriter  
  
If you want to hire a professional 
copywriter, you’re looking at thousands of 
dollars, plus royalties from your book 
sales.  
 
Remember that you’re selling this book with 
reprint rights, which means when they buy 
the book they can sell it as well. This is a 

huge selling point for you. You will also be 
giving them your Ebook cover, website 
graphics and sales letter to use to sell 
your product.  
 
6) Plug in your free 5 day autoresponder 
series  
 
The best way to write your free 5 day course 
that your prospects get via your pop up 
window is to take chapters out of your book 
and put them in as a free teaser.  
 
Remember to emphasize urgency. You want to 
make these prospects that don't buy straight 
away, feel like they are missing out on an 
opportunity of a life time and considering 
the low price of the book, if they don't 
buy; more than likely they weren't really 
interested or were freebie seekers from the 
start. 
 
7) Advertise!  
 
Depending on your topic, you will want to 
target different people. However, no matter 
what topic you’re selling on, there is one 
market who will want your book for the sole 
purpose of selling it, and that's the 
Internet Marketing group.  
 
Your book could be on Hippos but all they 
care about is the fact they can sell it as 
their own. This is why this type of book 
always does well.  

 
The key is to target people in your market 
and then the Internet Marketing crowd.  
 
 
 
 
Other Ways To Profit From 
Articles 
 
 
Being an affiliate is a hard enough job at 
the best of times, but have you ever tried 
to get your article published in a large 
ezine publication? It can be a nightmare 
sometimes. It's even harder if you try and 
work your affiliate link into the article.  
 
Articles are a great way to get free 
exposure for your web site and your 
affiliate program. Hopefully your web sites 
goal will be to get Opt-In email addresses 
and you have some sort of free report system 
working. 
 
However, I have been testing an idea for 
quite awhile now that I think really works 
and I guarantee you that you will get your 
article published 100% more than you do now. 
This works especially well if you're running 
an Opt-In mailing list which I recommend you 
do.  

 
 
Ezine publishers receive hundreds of 
articles for publishing a week, so why 
should they publish yours? You might think 
you have the best article ever written, and 
you might, but ezine publishers have to make 
money too you know. My idea not only will 
increase your chances of getting published 
but you will also be helping ezine 
publishers make more money, which in the 
long run they will remember and will be more 
receptive to your articles in the future.  
 
Here's the idea. 
 
When you write your article, try and work an 
affiliate link into it. Make sure it's in 
context and not just a blatant advertisement 
as that's why most ezine publishers refuse 
to publish affiliate members articles.  
 
As I was saying, write your article and in 
that article put a link to an affiliate 
program you're promoting in context in your 
article. It helps when doing this that you 
can say that you honestly use that product 
or service. I guarantee you a personal 
endorsement in your article will double the 
sales you would get with out an endorsement.  
 
The twist here is that the affiliate link 
you put in will be changed by the ezine 
publisher. You will be letting the ezine 
publisher change your affiliate link in your 

article so they can earn commissions from 
your article and therefore increasing the 
chances of getting your article published. 
This has never failed for me and I'm sure it 
won't fail for you. 
 
So how do you make money from this? Well if 
you have your own autoresponder free report 
series set up, you can use that in your 
article by-line. You would make more sales 
from this than from commissions from the 
article. Your goal in any affiliate exercise 
is to get as many Opt-In email addresses as 
possible and as cheaply and quickly as 
possible. 
 
Make sure your article by-line is something 
that catches the reader’s attention. Here’s 
a by-line I used when promoting an article 
on Mini Sites. You can see I use a tracker 
to show how many people click on my link. 
 
”Your Name” has been helping people succeed 
online for over X years. Visit his web site 
to find out how you can create mini sites 
that sell like crazy. Go to his website at 
http://www.websitehere.com 
 
However, if you wanted to promote your free 
autoresponder report series I would use 
something like this,  
 
”Your Name” has been helping people succeed 
online for over X years. Find out how to 
earn a full time automated income with 

affiliate programs on a budget by sending a 
blank email to your@autoresponderhere.com 
 
(I have many variations of this by line) 
 
This is the most effective way to use your 
article. Going for the one off sale is 
ridiculous and risky to your online 
business.  
 
 
Best Places To Submit Your 
Articles For Massive 
Exposure 
 
There are many pieces of software that will 
submit your article to directories, or you 
can hire a high school kid to do it for you. 
 
You can also hire services like 
Submityourarticle.com and Phantomwriters.com 
to submit your articles for you, but this 
gets very costly if you are writing lots and 
lots of articles at once. 
 
Really, it’s no big deal to do it yourself. 
 
Here are list of article directories I 
submit my articles to. 
 
http://www.GoArticles.com     
http://www.EzineArticles.com  

http://www.ArticleCity.com  
http://www.Isnare.com  
http://www.Ideamarketers.com  
http://www.ArticleCentral.com  
http://www.ArticleHub.com  
http://www.ArticleWarehouse.com  
http://www.AuthorConnection.com  
http://www.Zongoo.com  
http://www.ContentDesk.com  
http://www.Article-Emporium.com  
http://www.ArticleHub.com  
http://www.ReprintArticles.com  
 
 
Yahoo Groups 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/aabusiness/ 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/aageneral/ 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/aainet/ 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/articles4you2use4prom
otion/ 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/articlesubmission/ 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/articles_archives/ 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/article_announce 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/article_announce_list
/ 
 

groups.yahoo.com/group/epub 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/ezinezone 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/Free-Content/ 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/Free-Reprint-Articles 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/freeezinearticles 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/freelance_promotion/ 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/FreeWrites 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/freezinecontent 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/Free_eContent/ 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/hersmallbusiness 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/I_Need_Content/ 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/netwrite-publish-
announce 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/PromoteYourArticle/ 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/publisher_network 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/qc_reprint_articles 
 
groups.yahoo.com/group/ReprintArticles-
Paradise 
 

There are more directories and other places 
to submit your articles, but the above list 
is great for getting started and will get 
your article the exposure it deserves. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Words 
 
Any way you look at it, writing articles can 
be a very profitable online business 
venture. And being able to quickly generate 
your own helpful articles is a huge PLUS in 
today’s world of internet marking. 
 
Several membership sites for PLR articles 
are springing up now.  If you want articles 
written cheaply, check out 
http://www.secretarticleconverter.com/go/100 
You can get 100 private label articles sent 
to you each month for nine bucks (plus they 
are giving out 25 free PLR articles right 
now). 
 
You can even receive free private label 
articles at: 
http://www.NicheArticlePackages.com/freestuff  

 
Put them into Secret Article Converter, and 
create your own article empire! 
 
 
 
 
 
For the best article re-writer program… 
 
Check out 
 http://www.SecretArticleConverter.com  
 
With this program, you can change Private Label Articles into
usable, unique content. 
 
It’s inexpensive, and it works! 
 

