Augmented Reality Law, 
Privacy, and Ethics
Law, Society, and Emerging 
AR Technologies
Brian D. Wassom
Allison Bishop, Technical Editor
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG
LONDON • NEW YORK • OXFORD
PARIS • SAN DIEGO • SAN FRANCISCO
SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Syngress is an Imprint of Elsevier

Acquiring Editor: Chris Katsaropoulos
Editorial Project Manager: Benjamin Rearick
Project Manager: Surya Narayanan Jayachandran
Designer: Matthew Limbert
Syngress is an imprint of Elsevier
225 Wyman Street, Waltham, MA 02451, USA
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and 
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek 
permission, further information about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements 
with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, 
can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the 
Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience 
broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical 
treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in 
evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In 
using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of 
others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, 
assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products 
liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, 
instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
ISBN: 978-0-12-800208-7
For information on all Syngress publications  
visit our website at http://store.elsevier.com/

To the two mentors who had the most meaningful influence  
on the first 15 years of my professional career. The Honorable 
Alice M. Batchelder personifies integrity and excellence, 
and taught me to respect the legal system. Herschel P. Fink, 
Esq. taught me to love the law I practice, and to practice 
the law I love. Both gave me amazing opportunities to serve 
in ways that fundamentally shaped my career. I hope to pay 
forward to others all that I can never repay to them.

xv
Endorsements
“Any techie that follows Augmented Reality knows that AR continues to surge un-
der Moore’s law. Brian Wassom is the indisputable, top legal expert in the realm of 
Augmented Reality. His perspective and legal lens continues to focus on AR and its 
journey to revolutionize technology. This book is a must read for any person looking 
to delve into the augmented world and absorb the rapidly changing legal and ethical 
landscape of cutting-edge high technology and its influence on society. This book 
is an unmatched AR resource that yields a powerful comprehension of an evolving 
mass medium.”
–Joseph Rampolla – Cyber-crime expert/Augmented Reality Dirt Podcast cre-
ator/Co-author of Augmented Reality: An Emerging Technologies Guide to AR book
“Brian D. Wassom is my go-to resource on anything having to do with how Aug-
mented Reality and emerging technology relates to legal issues. His writing is clear, 
impactful, and highly accessible regarding complex legal and technical issues. His 
book Augmented Reality Law, Privacy, and Ethics provides compelling evidence as 
to why Augmented Reality will drastically change culture over the next few years 
and how people need to prepare for what lies ahead. Brian’s wisdom, humor, and 
insights make Augmented Reality Law, Privacy, and Ethics a pleasure to read, and a 
must-have resource for anyone wishing to understand how our vision of the future 
will be perceived through the lens of Augmented Reality.”
–John C. Havens, Contributing writer for Mashable, Slate, and author of Hacking 
H(app)iness – Why Our Personal Data Counts and How Tracking it Can Change the 
World.
“We’re at the precipice of the next, visual era, with smart glasses that will forever 
change how we look at the world. More than just a comprehensive look at the related 
legal, social, and ethical issues, this book will get you thinking about the full impact 
of what’s to come.”
–Dave Lorenzini, CEO of Arc
“As the mass-media industries adapt to the newest mass medium, Augmented Real-
ity, the combined abilities of digital, mobile, social, and virtual, all produce a quag-
mire of challenges and threats – as well as opportunities. Brian’s groundbreaking 
book is an invaluable guide to the treacherous ground that media owners, content 
creators, talent, news organizations, and others will face as they rush to stake their 
claims in the AR world. A must-read and invaluable resource for the next ten years.”
–Tomi T. Ahonen, author of 12 books including “Mobile as 7th of the Mass 
­Media.”

xvi
Endorsements
“Brian Wassom is the world’s leading expert on augmented reality (AR) law. Was-
som’s research pioneered the field of AR law and currently defines the way it is 
understood by developers. His writing points out the heart of the salient issues facing 
the rapidly growing field of AR. Wassom’s texts are required reading for my Mobile 
AR graduate course at NYU.”
– Mark Skwarek, a full-time faculty member at New York University (NYU) and 
the director of the Mobile AR Lab at NYU.
“Brian Wassom brilliantly illuminates some of the tricky issues of privacy, law, and 
ethics that will determine whether ­Augmented Reality results in an enhanced or de-
graded future for humanity.”
–Tish Shute, Head of Product Experience at Syntertainment and cofounder and 
chief content officer of Augmented World Expo.
“Wassom thoroughly highlights most of the key issues facing AR today while estab-
lishing a clear path for analysis in the future. From advertising, to smart cars, to the 
augmented criminal organisations of the future, Augmented Reality Law, Privacy, 
and Ethics is must read for anyone looking to become deeply involved in AR over 
the next decade.”
–Brendan Scully, Senior Business Development Manager, Metaio, Inc.     

xvii
Author Biography
Brian D. Wassom litigates disputes and counsels clients from Fortune 50 companies 
to startups concerning copyright, trademark, publicity rights, privacy, and related in-
tellectual property and advertising issues. He is a partner in the law firm of Honigman 
Miller Schwartz and Cohn LLP, and chairs the firm’s Social, Mobile and Emerging 
Media Practice Group. Brian authors a popular blog on emerging media at Wassom.
com that features the section Augmented Legality®, the first regular publication de-
voted to the law governing augmented reality. Brian presents regularly to industry 
groups, legal education seminars, and conferences across the country on intellectual 
property, digital media, and related topics.

xix
Technical Editor Biography
Allison Bishop is a highly experienced criminal reviewer with 10 years experience 
reviewing cases, criminal research, and criminal activity. Allison also works as a 
paralegal performing tasks such as briefing cases and reviewing case law and the 
working within the legal process. As an editor, Allison enjoys reviewing and editing 
works based on criminal justice, legal studies, security topics, and cybercrime. When 
Allison is not entrenched in studies, she loves to exercise, cook, and travel.

xxi
Acknowledgments
I am indebted to those who assisted in editing this manuscript, including Brian Coe 
and Karen Larson. My thanks as well to all those whose input shaped my outlook on, 
and understanding of, the augmented reality industry and all of the potential it holds, 
including Brian Mullins, Gaia Dempsey, Jay Wright, Joseph Rampolla, Ori Inbar,  
Tish Shute, Will Wright, Dave Lorenzini, John C. Havens, Trak Lord, Brendan 
­Scully, Daniel Suarez, Dr. Mark Billinghurst, Dr. Steve Mann, Keiichi Matsuda, 
Mark Skwarek, Bruno Uzzan, Eric Mizufuka, Dima Kislovskiy, Cecilia Abadie, 
Brian Selzer, Robert Rice, Pete Wassell, Steven Petersen, Brad Waid, Drew Minock, 
the members of the AR Detroit Meetup Group, and so many more.
All thoughts, speculation, and analysis in this book – and especially any errors 
in fact or logic – are mine alone. This work is not intended as legal advice or a 
­solicitation for legal representation, and does not reflect the views of my law firm or 
its clients. Moreover, although this book mentions several actual products and com-
panies in the course of explaining augmented reality and related technologies, noth-
ing herein is intended as a criticism of, or suggestion of wrongdoing involving, any 
mentioned product or company. To the contrary, this book is meant as a celebration 
of the technological advances that these pioneers represent, and to prepare society to 
better understand the world that such developments will usher in.

3
CHAPTER
Augmented Reality Law, Privacy, and Ethics﻿
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• The “horizontal” nature of studying augmented reality law
• The inevitability of augmented reality technology
• The economic significance of augmented reality technology
WHAT IS “AUGMENTED REALITY LAW”?
One of the joys of writing the first book on a topic is having the freedom to frame 
the discussion however seems best to me. The topics of discussion in the following 
chapters are the ones that I find the most important to explore based on my own ex-
perience practicing law and spending time with members of the augmented reality 
(or “AR”) industry.
But there are also downsides to a project like this. Among those is the need to 
justify the book’s existence before convincing anyone to read it. In the case of AR 
law, I am often required to explain to listeners what “AR” even is before I can broach 
the subject of why the law governing it is distinct and significant enough to require 
its own book.
That is the function of this chapter and the next. Here, I will attempt to persuade 
you that the AR industry is one to take seriously, and that it will be important to un-
derstand (and to help shape) the law governing the use of AR technology. Assuming 
that you remain sufficiently open to these conclusions to follow me to Chapter 2, I 
will explain in greater detail the nature of AR and its related technologies. From that 
foundation, the rest of the book will survey a number of different legal and ethical 
topics that are likely to be, or are already being, implicated by AR.
I hope you will stick with me to the end, and agree that it was worth the ride.
A HORIZONTAL STUDY
If you are a student, then you are likely accustomed to studying one concept – such 
as contract law, chemistry, or grammar – at a time. Even in professional settings, in-
dividuals and entire companies often find themselves, consciously or unconsciously, 
thinking and operating within defined tasks, categories, or industrial segments, to the 
What is “Augmented 
Reality Law,” and Why 
Should I Care?
1

4
CHAPTER 1  What is “Augmented Reality Law,” and Why Should I Care?
exclusion of all other subjects. We frequently refer to these areas of concentration as 
“silos” or “verticals,” implying that the people inside them may build up quite a bit 
of knowledge of, or experience in, the given topic, but have relatively little idea how 
that topic relates to anything else. For example, an automotive engineer may spend 
years, even an entire career, immersed in the inner workings of a particular subsys-
tem of a car, with no understanding or concern as to how that subsystem relates to 
or affects the rest of the vehicle. Similarly, many legal and medical professionals 
develop highly specialized (and expensive) skills in a niche practice area, but would 
not have the first clue how to help a random client who walks in off the street with a 
basic, everyday problem.
This is not such a study. “Instead of a deep ‘vertical’ look at one legal doctrine, 
this [book] will survey several disparate topics ‘horizontally.’1 In the current profes-
sional vernacular, it cuts across several verticals. Put another way, this book takes as 
its starting point one particular industry – the companies and innovators developing 
AR and related technologies – and surveys the various legal issues that members of 
that industry are likely to encounter. This approach has the advantage of being enor-
mously more useful for the members of that industry and the professionals (like me) 
who would serve them, but it can be a bit disorienting (at least at first) for students 
accustomed to more abstract analysis.
That is not to say, by any means, that vertical studies of legal principles do not 
have their place in academia, or that students should avoid reading a book like this 
one. To the contrary, courses in basic legal doctrines provide the building blocks nec-
essary for applying the law to complex problems. Horizontal exercises like this one 
can be ideal vehicles for transitioning from book learning to the ability to counsel 
clients in real-life situations. That is one reason why horizontal studies like this one 
are not uncommon during the third year of law school.
Perhaps the most direct audience for this book, however, is the growing ranks 
of those business people and technological dreamers who are out there, even now, 
literally building a new world around us all by means of what we currently call “AR” 
or “augmented world” technology. I have been privileged to meet and interact with 
scores of these innovators who are rapidly forming an industry out of concepts that 
were pure science fiction mere months earlier. They have the foresight to recognize 
just how much our world will change when we finally master the art of interweaving 
our digital and physical means of experiencing the world.
When I speak at AR conferences and events or counsel clients in this industry –  
usually after the audience has already heard from several entrepreneurs who cast 
grandiose visions of what can be done with the technology – I sometimes joke that 
it is my job as the lawyer in the group to crush their dreams and bring them back 
down to earth. Yet my actual intention (both there and here) is quite the opposite. 
1I borrow this description from another exercise in horizontal legal analysis, the excellent e-casebook 
Advertising & Marketing Law: Cases & Materials, by Rebecca Tushnet and Eric Goldman. Rebecca 
Tushnet & Eric Goldman, Advertising & Marketing Law: Cases & Materials, 1 (July 2012) 
(available at: http://blog.ericgoldman.org/archives/2012/07/announcing_a_ne.htm).

5
What is “Augmented Reality Law”?
These innovators’ dreams are so inspiring because they actually have a chance at be-
ing realized. But if AR entrepreneurs are going to successfully bring their visions to 
fruition, they need informed guidance from advisors who understand the realities and 
requirements of the legal and business worlds. These advisors must shepherd the in-
novators through the tricky landscapes and potential pitfalls of regulatory checklists, 
investment deals, IP protection, and all of the minutiae on which visionaries ought 
not spend too much of their time. I want more members of this industry to recognize 
their need for such guidance for the legal services industry to be better prepared to 
provide it.
This leads to two more currents that are important for me to mention at the outset. 
First, this book cannot, and does not attempt to, provide legal advice. Consult a law-
yer directly before making business decisions. Second, the laws discussed herein are 
almost exclusively those of the United States. Although the AR community is truly 
worldwide and many legal and ethical principles cross national boundaries, it is the 
American legal system in which I practice and that forms the context for my analysis.
THE LAW OF THE HORSE
Today, there is almost no one who could honestly be called an “AR lawyer.” This 
will remain true for some time, even as the industry begins to mature. One reason 
for this is that “AR law” is a concept much like a term I learned in my law school 
days: “the law of the horse.” This phrase illustrates the difference between vertical 
and horizontal legal studies. The idea behind it is that there is no such thing as “horse 
law.” Rather, if I own a horse and have a problem with the jockey, for example, I 
would seek counsel from an employment lawyer. If my shipment of hay doesn’t ar-
rive, I should consult a commercial transactions attorney. And if my neighbor com-
plains about the smell of horse ranch, I might consult an attorney experienced in 
nuisance law.
Each of these lawyers would be practicing some aspect of “horse law,” in some 
colloquial sense, but you would not call any of them a “horse lawyer,” because law-
yers do not usually hold themselves out in that manner. Lawyers typically market 
their services according to particular categories of legal doctrine or practice. Histori-
cally, relatively few lawyers have packaged their services according to the needs of a 
particular industry, even though it might be more efficient for our hypothetical horse 
owner to find a lawyer or law firm specializing in “horse law” than to seek counsel 
from different specialists on each issue.
I first heard this “law of the horse” analogy applied to “Internet law,” to make the 
point that there was no such thing. Rather, the Internet and its use implicate virtually 
every legal vertical, depending on the context. “Internet law” is a horizontal subject 
(and thus not worthy of study in a law school, or so was the implication when I first 
heard the term used).
In the same way, “AR law” is also like the law of the horse. Defined literally, 
“AR law” encompasses all of those fields of legal practice that AR companies will 
encounter – including corporate, tax, intellectual property, real estate, litigation, and 

6
CHAPTER 1  What is “Augmented Reality Law,” and Why Should I Care?
personal injury, among others. Indeed, if AR reaches even half of its potential, it is 
poised to revolutionize society at least as much as the Internet itself has done. It is 
inevitable, therefore, that such a sea change in how we conduct ourselves on a daily 
basis would also influence the laws governing that behavior and how they are ap-
plied. Yet, even today, we still see relatively few lawyers marketing their expertise in 
“Internet law,” and virtually none have yet grasped the significance of AR as such.
Today, more lawyers and law firms recognize the value of organizing their ser-
vices according to clients’ needs rather than by traditional categories of practice. 
This, in part, is why many law firms have assembled “industry teams” focused on the 
needs of particular types of companies and comprising a number of specialists from 
relevant legal disciplines. Practice groups like these are one way in which legal pro-
fessionals can more comprehensively and efficiently serve the needs of horse owners 
or any other given industry. Working within a general practice firm composed of 
lawyers working in dozens of different focus areas is another.
As only one such example, I help to lead my firm’s “Social, Mobile and Emerg-
ing Media Practice Group,” so named so as to encompass both the social media that 
presents today’s most pressing digital media issues and tomorrow’s emerging media 
such as AR. For several years now, I and other members of this team have gotten to 
know professionals within the AR industry and – together with other members of our 
general practice firm – helped them solve the issues they encounter across a broad 
spectrum of legal disciplines. It gratifies me to say that I am not personally aware of 
any other legal practice group as focused on the AR sector. As the inevitability of AR 
becomes more apparent, however, I expect that we’ll see more such teams intended 
to serve this important industry.
WHY STUDY AR LAW?
If you are not already as enamored of the AR industry as I am, you may not yet be 
convinced that AR law is worth your time to study. In that case, allow me to recount 
some of the reasoning that led me to conclude that this field will be so important.
INEVITABILITY
In this chapter I have already used the word “inevitable” to describe the increasing 
prominence and impending ubiquity of AR. That is because I see AR not so much as 
a brand-new concept that will someday suddenly emerge onto the scene, but rather 
as a medium that has existed for decades and that is beginning to manifest itself with 
increasing speed as we finally see the development of the technology that can make 
it happen.
There are dozens of factors fueling the inevitability of widespread AR. Since 
consonance makes things more memorable, however, I will summarize them as the 
three C’s of convenience, creativity, and capability.

7
Why Study AR Law?
Convenience
Not many years ago, humanity’s best means of reading and recording data was on 
two-dimensional pieces of paper, which we stitched together and stored in books. 
When that data began to migrate onto computers, we displayed it on monitor screens, 
and books became files and folders. Over time, the screens became incrementally 
more aesthetically pleasing – flatter, higher-resolution, and more mobile – and even 
displayed some digital images that had the illusion of three-dimensionality. But the 
context in which these displays have appeared – the computer screen – has always 
been a two-dimensional rectangle.
AR is a unique step forward in the way we experience digital data, because it 
liberates that data from its two-dimensional box to make it truly appear (as far as hu-
man senses can perceive) to be three-dimensional. Granted, there will almost always 
be some medium (such as eyewear, a window, or a mobile device) through which we 
experience the display, and those media will remain two-dimensional for the foresee-
able future. But AR creates the illusion that the display is present among, and even 
interacting with, our physical surroundings. Perception is reality, as the saying goes, 
and it is the perception of this illusion that we call “AR.”
One fundamental reason that there will always be an impetus to experience data 
in this format is that physicality is intuitive to us. As children we have to learn to 
read and write, but playing with physical objects comes naturally. The less work our 
brains need to do in order to translate and process data, the more readily our minds 
will embrace it.
Take, for example, the yellow line of scrimmage and the blue first-down line that 
appear in most televised football broadcasts these days (Fig. 1.1 ). The technology to 
FIGURE 1.1
NFL broadcasts contained some of the earliest examples of mass-market AR.

8
CHAPTER 1  What is “Augmented Reality Law,” and Why Should I Care?
create this illusion is actually one of the earliest forms of AR in mass media. Today 
it is even more sophisticated, with all manner of game statistics appearing as if they 
were on the football field itself. And the images themselves are so high-resolution 
and rendered so fluidly that the illusion of physicality is complete. The result has 
been to make it significantly easier for viewers not schooled in the rules of the game 
to comprehend the action. It’s one thing to say “the offense needs to carry the ball 15 
more yards to the 30-yard line”; it’s another thing entirely to say “they need to reach 
that blue line.” One statement takes significantly less mental processing to under-
stand, which, for some viewers, is the difference between enjoying the broadcast and 
changing the channel. Indeed, I have heard from several people who attended their 
first live football game and were disappointed by the experience of trying to follow 
the game without the digital overlays on the field. For some children who have never 
watched a game on television without those overlays, the effect is jarring; they had 
never considered the fact that the lines weren’t actually there!
For the same reasons, there is a certain level of understanding about a thing that 
we as humans cannot reach unless we experience the thing physically. In my line of 
work, when young litigation attorneys are arguing a case involving a specific place 
or product, they learn the value of actually visiting the place or holding the product in 
their hands. That experience does not always reveal more quantifiable data about the 
thing, but there is a qualitative level of understanding that the attorney gains. They 
feel as if they understand the thing better, and are therefore often better able to form 
and express arguments about it.
The Iron Man movies offer another example of the same truth. In each of the four 
films in which Robert Downey, Jr.’s version of the Tony Stark/Iron Man character 
has appeared to date, we see him use AR to design complex machinery, architec-
ture, or landscapes (Fig. 1.2).2 Whatever it is that he’s studying, Stark views digital 
FIGURE 1.2
The Iron Man films are among the most popular depictions of AR.
2See, e.g., Iron Man (Paramount Pictures, 2008).

9
renderings that are projected into the space in front of him. By means of poorly ex-
plained but fantastically acute holographic and motion-sensing equipment, he physi-
cally grasps, manipulates, and alters the data as easily as he would a physical object. 
(Actually, it’s even easier, since a real physical object would offer resistance and 
could not hang motionless in empty space.) When Stark needs to study an object 
more closely, he sweeps his arms in broad gestures to expand the display to hundreds 
of times its original size. If Stark needs to walk among the digital objects as if they 
were surrounding him on all sides, he can do that.3 Each such cinematic sequence 
comes at a point in the plot in which Stark needs to overcome a design problem or 
gain new insight that he could not grasp merely by reading lines of code or digital 
images on a computer screen. And each time, it works.
Despite all of the entertaining, fast-paced action and gee-whiz effects of the Iron 
Man movies, these AR design sequences have so stirred viewers’ imaginations that 
they remain some of the most memorable scenes in the films. Perhaps that is because 
this way of interacting with data just feels so natural to so many people – and also 
so tantalizingly plausible that we wonder why we don’t already have such devices in 
our own offices and living rooms.
No less than Elon Musk feels the same way. Musk is the billionaire entrepreneur 
behind Tesla Motors, SpaceX, and the proposed Hyperloop train that could carry 
passengers from Los Angeles to New York in half an hour. As such, he is already the 
closest thing that our actual reality has to Tony Stark. He cemented that parallel on 
August 23, 2013, when he tweeted: “Will post video next week of designing a rocket 
part with hand gestures & then immediately printing it in titanium.” Iron Man direc-
tor Jon Favreau responded, “Like in Iron Man?” Musk replied, “Yup. We saw it in the 
movie and made it real. Good job!” (See Fig. 1.3.)
Why Study AR Law?
FIGURE 1.3
Elon Musk acknowledged Iron Man as the inspiration for his own AR system.
3See, e.g., Tony Stark Makes an Atom, YouTube.com (July 22, 2010), available at: http://www.youtube. 
com/watch?v=6W8Q6wJ_TT8.

10
CHAPTER 1  What is “Augmented Reality Law,” and Why Should I Care?
The next week Musk followed through, demonstrating on YouTube how SpaceX 
engineers were combing such devices as the Leap Motion gesture sensor, the Oculus 
Rift virtual reality headset, and a 3D projector to design rocket parts more or less 
exactly the way that Tony Stark would.
The point of this exercise was not merely to emulate Iron Man (or any of the 
other Hollywood films that depict AR being used in such a utilitarian manner, such 
as Terminator, Serenity, Mission: Impossible – Ghost Protocol, and G.I. Joe: The 
Rise of Cobra, just to name a few). Rather, Musk explained in his YouTube video 
that designing three-dimensional objects using “a variety of 2-D tools … doesn’t 
feel natural. It doesn’t feel normal, the way you should do things.”4 Interacting with 
digital objects that appear to be real, on the other hand, only requires a designer to 
“understand[] the fundamentals of how the thing should work, as opposed to figuring 
out how to make the computer make it work.”5 “Then,” Musk said, “you can you can 
achieve a lot more in a lot shorter period of time.”6 In the terminology of this chapter, 
the AR experience becomes a more convenient way to interact with the data.
Notice the importance of feelings in Musk’s explanation of the technology. His 
premise is that if an interaction feels normal and natural on an intuitive level, it will 
be a more efficient and effective interaction. And that is a difficult premise with 
which to argue. The fact that interacting with data in this manner just feels right is 
one reason that humanity will inevitably design its technology to function in pre-
cisely that manner.
Creativity
Another fundamental characteristic of human nature is the need to express ourselves 
as individuals. The unique potential of AR to fuel such creative expression also con-
tributes to the technology’s inevitability.
When a medium of expression is more convenient and intuitive to use – in other 
words, when we don’t have to think about how to use it, but can focus more on what 
we want to do with it – the medium will be an effective means of expressing our-
selves. At the same time, the depth of what we can express is also limited in many 
ways by our chosen medium. For example, coloring, pointing, screaming, and grunt-
ing all come to young children more naturally than actual words. But one reason kids 
soon turn to language is because they quickly reach the limits of how much they can 
express with these other forms of communication. On the other end of the spectrum, 
I have a good friend who is a master violinist. His instrument gives him a “voice” that 
can express emotion to a depth that mere words cannot reach. But only through years 
of rigorous training did that means of expression become natural enough for him that 
he could use the violin to express actual music, as opposed to the painful shrieks the 
instrument would emit if I tried to use it.
4The Future of Design, YouTube.com, available at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xNqs_ 
S-zEBY#t=18.
5Id.
6Id.

11
In a similar way, digital imagery has become a rich medium for creative expres-
sion. And although two-dimensional rendering still requires a significant amount of 
training and skill to do well, the means to create it is becoming cheaper and easier 
to use all the time. As we add more dimensions to those images, the potential for 
creative expression goes up, but so do the practical barriers to entry. High-quality 
three-dimensional imagery is still difficult to do well; just witness the difficulties that 
movie companies faced getting audiences to accept 3D movies, despite the constant 
pressure to make them commercially viable. Taking those three-dimensional images 
and making them appear to be physical objects that persist and adapt to human inter-
action over time – what some in the AR industry refer to as “4D” – remains an even 
tougher nut to crack.
The cornucopia of creative expression that awaits when the public at large is able 
to experience AR is a big part of what keeps innovators working on the technol-
ogy. To illustrate the qualitative difference between creative expression in standard 
2D versus 3D or 4D, picture (the original) General Zod and his Kryptonian cohorts 
taking bodily form again as they escaped their two-dimensional “Phantom Zone” 
prison in the 1980 movie Superman II (Fig. 1.4). Or, even more aptly, consider the 
“Space Liberation Manifesto” advocated by science fiction author and Wired col-
umnist Bruce Sterling at the 2011 Augmented Reality Event in Santa Clara, Califor-
nia. There, as part of his keynote address, Sterling arranged for a group of “rebels” 
dressed in faux-futuristic jumpsuits to “hijack” the speech to spread flyers advocat-
ing a populist agenda for this new “blended reality.” The manifesto – which Sterling 
promptly published in his Wired blog – read, in part:
The physical space we live in has been divided, partitioned and sold to the highest 
bidder, leaving precious little that is truly a public commons. The privatization 
of physical space brings with it deep social, cultural, legal and ethical implica-
tions. Private ownership of physical space creates zones of access and trespass, 
Why Study AR Law?
FIGURE 1.4
The two-dimensional Phantom Zone prison in Superman II.

12
CHAPTER 1  What is “Augmented Reality Law,” and Why Should I Care?
participation and exclusion. Private use of physical space becomes an appropria-
tion of our visual space, through architecture, so-called landscape design, and 
ubiquitous advertising whose goal is to be seen well beyond the boundaries of 
privately owned property. Simultaneously, private space becomes the preferred 
canvas for street artists, graffiti writers and other cultural insurgents whose works 
seek the reclaimation [sic] of our visual space, the repurposing of private political 
and commercial space for their alternative cultural messages.
The nature of SPACE is changing. In the past, space primarily meant physical 
space – the three dimensional cartesian world of people and places and things. 
Networked digital computing brought us the notion of cyberspace – an ephemeral 
“consensual hallucination” that nonetheless appeared to have an almost physi-
cal sense of place, a separate and parallel universe alongside the physical world. 
Today, as computing and connectivity become pervasive and embedded into the 
world and digital information infuses nearly every aspect of the physical environ-
ment, space has become an enmeshed combination of physical and digital – a 
‘blended reality’. Cyberspace has everted; reality is enspirited.
This new physical+digital SPACE brings new characteristics, new affordances, 
new implications for culture. Its physical dimensions are finite, measurable, sub-
ject to ownership and control, but its digital dimensions are essentially infinite, 
subjective, and resistant to centralized control or governance. The new SPACE 
opens tremendous opportunities for access, expression and participation, but also 
for commercialism, propaganda, and crushing banality.7
Prolixity aside, this passage does a good job of foretelling the “tremendous op-
portunities” for creative expression in a world where the digital and physical can  
be combined in a meaningful, perceptible way. The manifesto’s example of graf-
fiti illustrates the point well. When people are limited to physical means to express 
themselves, one person’s artistic appropriation of a given object (such as a brick 
wall) necessarily conflicts with the interests of others who would use that object for 
different purposes (such as the landowner). With AR, a potentially infinite number  
of people could superimpose their own expression on the same physical wall without 
changing anything about the wall in “real” space. As Sterling notes, this explosion of 
creative democracy will, over time, have profound implications not only for our art 
but for our culture as well.
Capability
Before society at large can experience the medium of AR, it first needs the technologi-
cal capability to do so. The fact that we are now beginning to cross that practical thresh-
old is what makes the future potential of AR an important consideration for the present. 
Sterling’s manifesto is right to note that “computing and connectivity [have] become 
pervasive and embedded into the world,”8 because it is that development that will lay 
7Bruce Sterling, Augmented Reality: Space Liberation Manifesto, Wired.com (May 19, 2011), available 
at: http://www.wired.com/beyond_the_beyond/2011/05/augmented-reality-space-liberation-manifesto/.
8Id.

13
the groundwork for ubiquitous AR. The sheer amount of computational ability that we 
all carry with us each day has reached a critical mass that enables some truly amazing 
experiences. And by application of Moore’s law, which holds that processing power 
doubles roughly every 2 years, we can expect that potential to grow exponentially.
We are at the point where each step forward in computational ability promises 
an entire new layer of digital–physical interaction. Brian Mullins, president and co-
founder of the industry-leading company Daqri, has often noted in his public presen-
tations that it was the addition of a compass, accelerometer, and enhanced processing 
power to the iPhone 4 that allowed AR apps to make the jump from simply detecting 
QR codes and other 2D markers to recognizing three-dimensional objects and over-
laying data onto them in four dimensions.
That device hit the market in June 2010 – 3 short years before this writing. Now 
Apple considers the iPhone 4 too antiquated to sell any longer. Virtually all of the 
devices the Elon Musk used in his Iron Man-esque YouTube video – e.g., the Leap 
Motion sensor and the Oculus Rift headset – have been introduced in the interim. If 
we have gone from relatively simple iPhone apps to gesture-controlled rocket design 
in 3 years, what will be possible in another year? In 3? Ten?
FOLLOW THE MONEY
The progression of digital technology to date and the multiple visions of our aug-
mented future from people who understand the technology are persuasive evidence 
of AR’s imminence. But these are not the only indicators. Investors and market 
watchers are also increasingly placing their bets on AR.
SmarTech Markets Publishing’s revenue forecasts
In 2013, SmarTech Markets Publishing released a report called Opportunities for 
Augmented Reality: 2013–2020. Despite identifying a number of practical hurdles 
that must still be overcome, “SmarTech believes that there is enough in this analysis 
to suggest a strong and profitable future for AR.”9 Some of the reasons SmarTech 
offered for this conclusion include that:
• 
The “mobile industry” is already “huge” and “sophisticated.”
• 
“AR is already out there as a deployed technology to some extent.”
• 
“It also fits in well with other important trends such as the rise of tagging/RFID, 
NFC, location-based services, image recognition, and visual search.”
• 
“Strong business cases can be made for AR using today’s technology.”
• 
“Many of today’s backers are firms with deep pockets.”10
The report lists several well-known companies in the AR industry that had already  
received recent venture capital investments of between $1 and 14 million, includ-
ing Layar, Tonchidot, Total Immersion, Ogmento, Ditto, Wallit, Flutter, GoldRun, 
Why Study AR Law?
9Smartech Markets Publishing, Opportunities for Augmented Reality: 2013–2022 [this 
should be a page number if you have access to the actual source] (2013).
10Id.

14
CHAPTER 1  What is “Augmented Reality Law,” and Why Should I Care?
­CrowdOptic, Blippar, and Wikitude.11 In June 2013, shortly after the release of 
SmarTech’s report, Daqri announced $15 million in private investment to support its 
own AR platform.12
These funds are called “investments” for a reason; the people making the invest-
ments expect a return on their money. The SmarTech report gives good reason to 
expect one. It forecasts revenue in the AR industry to exceed $2 billion by 2020, and 
to surpass $5 billion just 2 years later.13
Tomi Ahonen’s predictions on AR usage
SmarTech is not the only prognosticator to talk in numbers of this magnitude. Tomi 
Ahonen is an oft-quoted consultant and author of 12 books on the mobile industry. 
He characterizes AR as the “Eighth Mass Medium” of human expression, following 
print, recordings, cinema, radio, television, Internet, and mobile.14 He has followed 
the growth rates of these technologies, and come up with his own forecasts for the 
rate at which society will adopt AR. Ahonen predicts 1 billion users of AR across 
the globe by 2020, with that number climbing to 2.5 billion by 2023 (Fig. 1.5). Trans-
lated into revenue, these figures are more optimistic than SmarTech’s prediction.
Even more notable, however, is the similar exponential growth curve in both 
charts. Whether expressed in terms of dollars or users, both forecasters see the tech-
nology catching on first with a core market, and then taking off like wildfire from 
there. The experience of the Internet and mobile industries over the last few decades 
lends credence to these predictions.
Gartner’s estimations concerning workplace efficiency
In November 2013, the information technology research and advisory company 
Gartner estimated that digital eyewear had the potential to net field service compa-
nies $1 billion in savings by 2017.15 “The greatest savings in [this field] will come 
from diagnosing and fixing problems more quickly and without needing to bring 
additional experts to remote sites,”16 it said. But the report also saw “potential to 
improve worker efficiency in vertical markets such as manufacturing, field service, 
retail and healthcare.”17 Numbers like these are certain to catch the attention of pro-
fessionals from several industries.
13Smartech Markets Publishing, supra, note 9, at [page number].
14Tomi Ahonen, Augmented Reality—The 8th Mass Medium, Ted Talks (June 12, 2012), available 
at: http://tedxtalks.ted.com/video/TEDxMongKok-Tomi-Ahonen-Augment;search%3Atag%3A%22 
tedxmongkok%22.
15“Gartner Says Smartglasses Will Bring Innovation to Workplace Efficiency,” Nov. 6, 2013, available 
at: http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2618415.
16Id.
17Id.
11Id. at [page number].
12Nick Summers, DAQRI Raises $15M to Develop Its Augmented Reality Platform, Will Support 
Google Glass at Launch, TheNextWeb.com (June 4, 2013), available at: http://thenextweb.com/
insider/2013/06/04/daqri-raises-15m-to-develop-its-4d-augmented-reality-platform-will-support-
google-glass-at-launch/.

15
Conclusion
CONCLUSION
If you’ve read this entire chapter, the chances are good that you are becoming as 
convinced as I already am that the AR is poised to be a major force in American and 
global industry over the coming decade. If so, then follow me to Chapter 2 to learn in 
a little detail more about what the “AR” medium looks like.
FIGURE 1.5
Tomi Ahonen’s predictions on AR usage.

17
CHAPTER
Augmented Reality Law, Privacy, and Ethics﻿
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Defining terms
• Augmenting each of the senses
• Supporting technology
• Levels of adoption
INTRODUCTION
The goal of the previous chapter was to persuade you that augmented reality (AR), 
and the multiple ways in which it will intersect the law, are important. This chapter is 
meant to help you understand what AR actually is. After all, most good legal analyses 
begin by defining their terms.
More precisely, I want you to understand what I and the sources I will cite mean 
when we talk about AR, because the term means significantly different things to 
different people. Indeed, there are many within the AR community who do not 
care for the term “augmented reality” at all, believing that it sounds too stilted and 
artificial to ever be meaningful to the general public. Others have invented slightly 
different terms to refer to specific types of, or approach to, what could be consid-
ered AR.
Further, complicating this discussion is the fact that AR is not an island unto 
itself. If technologies that squarely fit within the definition of “augmented real-
ity” are ever going to fully manifest themselves in society, they will require sup-
port from, and need to work in harmony with, panoply of related technologies that 
do not, in and of themselves, fit entirely within the “AR” box. A proper discussion 
of AR’s role in society, therefore, must take these technologies into account as 
well.
Recognizing this fact, the industry’s leading conference changed its name in 
2013, from the “Augmented Reality Event” to the “Augmented World Expo.” Fol-
lowing that lead, this book will likewise use the term “augmented world” to mean 
the full range of devices and technologies that work together to digitally enhance 
everyday life.
A Summary of AR 
Technology
2

18
CHAPTER 2  A Summary of AR Technology
DEFINING OUR TERMS
AUGMENTED REALITY
Let’s begin with the phrase “augmented reality”. The subject of the phrase is “real-
ity”. That’s the thing being “augmented” by AR technology. So, what do we mean by 
“reality” in this context? Obviously, we could answer that question in several ways. 
For example, when asked recently to give an example of “augmented reality” that 
the general public could easily understand, one commentator responded (perhaps 
jokingly): “drugs”.
That’s not what the emerging AR industry has in its mind. It doesn’t encompass 
the dream worlds of such films as Inception or Sucker Punch, or a drug-enhanced vi-
sion quest. Poetic license aside, we’re not talking about mental, emotional, spiritual, 
or metaphysical “reality” when we discuss the latest AR app. Instead, we mean the 
actual, physical world we all inhabit.
What, then, does it mean to “augment” that reality? Starting again with what it 
doesn’t mean, it’s important to note the distinction between AR and virtual reality, or 
VR. This, more familiar term describes a completely self-contained, artificial environ-
ment. Think Tron or The Lawnmower Man, or the web-based worlds of Second Life 
and World of Warcraft. The Oculus Rift headset that debuted in 2013 is another ex-
ample of virtual reality because the display completely covers the user’s eyes (Fig. 2.1). 
FIGURE 2.1
Oculus Rift is a contemporary example of virtual, not augmented, reality.1
1© Flickr user Sergey Galyonkin, used under CC BY-SA 2.0 license. See https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-sa/2.0/

19
﻿ Defining our Terms
The user’s actual, physical surroundings don’t enter into the experience. (That said, 
several developers have begun equipping the Oculus Rift with external, forward-facing 
sensors capable of incorporating the user’s surroundings into their virtual environment, 
thereby enabling a true AR experience through the device.2)
AR, then, is a blend of VR with plain old physical reality. The American Heri-
tage Dictionary defines the verb “augment” as “to make (something already devel-
oped or well under way) greater, as in size, extent, or quantity.”3 That’s what AR 
does. It uses digital information to make our experience of actual, physical reality 
“greater.” It doesn’t create a brand new, standalone plane of existence; it simply 
adds to the information we already process in the physical world. (This is an 
objective description, of course: whether AR makes our experience subjectively 
“greater” or promises to be a fascinating and very context-specific debate.) This 
book will frequently use the word “virtual” to describe the digital information 
displayed by AR devices. This is an accurate use of the word “virtual” – which 
means “existing or resulting in essence or effect, though, not in actual fact, form, 
or name”4 – because AR often creates the illusion that digital information exists 
in, and interacts with, physical reality. But do not confuse the usage with “virtual 
reality.”
Tying this understanding of “AR” with the word “reality” shows why it’s im-
portant to define our terms. How does this technology increase the “size, extent, or 
quantity” of our physical reality? To answer that question, we need to recall how it is 
that we experience the physical world. And the answer, of course, is through our five 
senses: sight, smell, touch, taste, and hearing. “AR,” therefore, is a technology that 
gives us more to see, smell, touch, taste, or hear in the physical world than we would 
otherwise get through our non-augmented faculties.
Again, it is important to recognize that even this definition of AR does not com-
mand universal consensus. When I first proposed the foregoing formulation in 
ONLY FIVE SENSES?
Technically, biologists identify anywhere between nine and 21 separate physical “senses” in 
humans. Those outside the classical five sense understanding include pressure, itch, proprioception 
(body part location), nociception (pain), equilibrioception (balance), thirst, hunger, magnetoception, 
and time, among others.59 An exploration of how these senses could also be digitally augmented 
would (and likely will) be fascinating, but is beyond the scope of this book.
59 “How Many Human Senses are There?” wiseGEEK, available at http://www.wisegeek.org/how-many-human-senses-are-
there.htm (last visited September 13, 2014).
2See, e.g., wizapply, “Augmented reality device for the Rift : Trial production,” Oculus VR 
Developer Center, June 27, 2013, available at https://developer.oculusvr.com/forums/viewtopic.
php?f=29&t=2042
3American Heritage DictionAry (4th ed. 2000).
4Id.

20
CHAPTER 2  A Summary of AR Technology
March 2011, Bruce Sterling, the science fiction author and Wired columnist who has 
headlined several AR industry conferences and earned the nickname “The Prophet of 
AR,” responded that he preferred a definition first articulated by Dr. Ronald Azuma, 
computer science professor at the University of North Carolina Chapel Hill. This 
definition “formally insists on some real-time interactivity with an augment in a reg-
istered 3D space.” Otherwise, Sterling explained, “you get into trouble with adjunct 
technologies like 3D movies, digital billboards or projections. They have the AR 
wow factor, but, they’re not using the core techniques of the field i.e. real-time pro-
cessing of real 3D spaces.”5
Sterling’s point is a fair one. If we define our subject matter so broadly as to 
encompass too many commonplace technologies, then we dilute the significance of 
our conversation about AR, and we detract from the innovation currently underway 
in the AR field. At the same time, however, Sterling also admitted that, “in practice, 
these academic distinctions aren’t gonna slow anybody down much.”6 We have laid 
out a sufficient understanding of what AR is to appreciate and what makes it special.
SYNONYMS
As I mentioned, some of the most prominent names in the AR industry do not care 
for the term “augmented reality” at all. For some, the concern is the one expressed 
above – that the phrase encompasses too many disparate technologies to be mean-
ingful. To others, the term is such a mouthful that it shuts down conversation. Still 
others find “augmented reality” too reminiscent of “virtual reality,” which they feel 
already lacks mainstream credibility, or else has too much of a science fiction ring to 
it. Underlying all of these views is the fear that, by using the wrong terminology, the 
AR industry will scare off too many potential consumers and unnecessarily stunt 
the technology’s growth and its mainstream adoption.
For example, some commentators use such terms as “enhanced reality” or “reality 
with benefits.”7 As time goes by, assuming that AR experiences continue to become 
more prevalent, we may just call it another aspect of “reality,” and leave it at that way. 
After all, twenty years ago, it was in vogue to refer to the internet as the “information 
superhighway,” and the verbal imagery of on- and off-ramps was everywhere. No one 
speaks in such terms today.
VARIATIONS ON THE THEME
Some phrases that sound similar to “augmented reality” actually have a sufficiently 
different meaning to merit discussion. One such example is “augmediated” or simply 
“mediated” reality, terms preferred by University of Toronto professor and wearable 
6Id.
7See KTP Radhika, Reality, With Benefits, Financialexpress.com (May 3, 2013) http://computer.fi-
nancialexpress.com/features/1272-reality-with-benefits.
5Brian Wassom, Defining Terms: What is Augmented Reality?, Wassom.com (March 30, 2011)  
http://www.wassom.com/defining-terms-what-is-augmented-reality.html

21
﻿ Defining our Terms
computing pioneer Dr. Steve Mann. “[C]onsidered by many to be the world’s first cy-
borg,”8 Mann has worn one version or another of his EyeTap digital glasses for more 
than 20 years. In a 2012 interview, Mann said that “augmented reality doesn’t make 
sense. Augmented reality just throws things on top, and you get a certain amount of 
information overloaded. We call it mediated reality.” (See Fig. 2.2.)9
Mann expounded on the difference during his keynote address at the “2013 Aug-
mented World Expo.” As opposed to simply adding digital content, Mann’s “augme-
diated reality” enhances things that are dark and filters out bright lights to allow the 
user to see the physical world more completely. For example, he used this technology 
to weld steel without wearing a conventional mask. He also gave the real-life exam-
ple of standing in the headlight beams of an oncoming car and being able to see both 
the license plate and the driver’s face. Of course, both examples fall neatly within 
FIGURE 2.2
Steve Mann.10
10© Steve Mann. Used under CC BY-SA 3.0 license. See http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:SteveMann_self_portrait_for_LinkedIN_profile_picture_from_dsc372b.jpg.
8Nick Bilton, One on One: Steve Mann, Wearable Computing Pioneer, The New York Times, August 
7, 2012, available at < http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/08/07/one-on-one-steve-mann-wearable-
computing-pioneer/?smid=tw-share&_r=0 >.
9Id.

22
CHAPTER 2  A Summary of AR Technology
our definition of augmented reality as “making greater” one’s visual perception of 
the world, even though the additional content that Mann perceived was physical 
rather than digital. His perception was nevertheless “augmented” and it was ac-
complished by digital means. Nevertheless, some people do use “AR” in the same 
narrow sense that Mann does, and it is valuable to understand the distinctions. If 
anyone has earned the right to be heard on the subject of how we speak about digi-
tal eyewear, it is Steve Mann.
Moving in the opposite direction, we encounter the phrase “diminished” or 
“decimated” reality. These terms refer to the use of AR technology to decrease the 
amount of content we perceive. Mann has used this term when describing a feature 
of his “EyeTap” device that filters out visual ads for cigarettes.11 This, too, fits our 
working definition of “AR,” if we think of such filters as making our perception of 
the world qualitatively greater. Will Wright, creator of the SimCity, Sims, and Spore 
video game franchises and another keynote speaker at the “2013 Augmented World 
Expo,” spoke favorably of diminished reality as a means of lessening the amount of 
unwanted visual distractions in our lives. He encouraged the developers present to 
“add beauty to the world rather than using it as another way to browse the internet.” 
Diminished reality will play a large role in this book’s discussion of trademark law 
and civil society, among other things.
RELATED VOCABULARY
A few terms pop up often and uniquely enough in discussions of AR that are worth-
while to point out their meanings here. I’ll introduce several during the course of the 
book, but a few are worth pointing out at the outset.
Chief among these is the concept of “immersion” or “immersiveness.” This refers 
to the degree to which a user’s mind subconsciously accepts a digital illusion as be-
ing physically real. Even when the user objectively understands that the digital rep-
resentation is not tangible, their visceral experience of the content can still feel that 
way. The more immersive an “AR” experience is, the more effectively it has done its 
job. (Little wonder then, that one of the oldest companies in the AR field is named as 
“Total Immersion.”)
“Geolocation” is a fairly self-explanatory term, but “geofencing” may not be. 
This refers to the establishment of invisible boundaries in real space, the crossing 
of which triggers a digital response. For example, the owners of a sports stadium 
may establish a “geofence” around the stadium’s perimeter, allowing only those who 
cross inside to access exclusive content about the game. Advertisers establish “geo-
fences” within a certain radius around a particular store to trigger advertisements to 
passersby.
“Digital eyewear” is a generic term I prefer, but that is not yet widely adopted in 
the mainstream press. “Smart glasses” have become a more popular synonym. Both 
11Id.

23
﻿ A Technology for all Senses
terms are meant to include all forms of head-worn devices that directly intersect and 
digitally alter a user’s field of view. Such generic language also sidesteps the debate 
about whether a particular device is truly “AR,” and to avoid devoting a lopsided 
amount of attention to any one particular manufacturer or product. This is especially 
helpful now, when most mainstream press uses “Google Glass” as a stand-in for, or 
segue to, the entire AR field. “Google Glass” is ahead of the pack in terms of getting 
to market and in stirring conversation. But there is disagreement over whether it is 
truly “AR” (it isn’t marketed as such), and it is only one limited expression of what 
digitally enhanced eyewear can achieve.
A TECHNOLOGY FOR ALL SENSES
Although we usually think of the visual sense when discussing and creating AR, our 
definition of the term encompasses digital enhancement of all five senses. Therefore, 
to round out our understanding of AR, let’s survey some examples of how each sense 
could be, or is being, augmented.
VISION
A picture is worth a thousand words, and by some estimates, the brain processes 
visual imagery up to 60,000 times faster than text alone.12 So, it is not surprising 
that most AR research has focused on how to augment the sense of sight. Yet this 
may also be the most difficult sense to augment well. Because our eyes perceive so 
acutely, it is difficult to trick them into accepting digital content as physically real. 
That is especially true because, with the exception of true holographic projections, 
digital displays must remain two-dimensional, and rely on some form of intermedi-
ary filter to create the illusion of three- (or four-, if you like) dimensionality.
AR developers are experimenting with several media to create this illusion. The 
earliest and simplest was the television screen. Leaving aside the academic debate of 
whether this truly fits the definition of AR, the digital scrimmage and first down lines 
that appear on the screen in every NFL broadcast are some of the earliest and most ef-
fective examples of digital content intermixed with physical reality in a way that our 
minds accept as real. As mentioned in Chapter 1, I personally know several people 
(most, but not all, of whom were children) who attended a professional football game in 
person, for the first time, only to feel cheated and disappointed that the lines were not 
actually there on the field. Their habit of reliance on this digital enhancement made 
it much harder to follow the action of the non-augmented game.
One of the earliest ways that actual AR was first distributed was through comput-
er webcams. Programs running on desktops or laptops use the webcam to recognize 
a certain “target” – usually a printed code or special image, although it could also 
12Media Education Center, Using Images Effectively in Media, available at < http://oit.williams.edu/
files/2010/02/using-images-effectively.pdf > (citing research by 3M).

24
CHAPTER 2  A Summary of AR Technology
include particular body parts such as a hand or face – and then display digital content 
atop that target on the computer screen. Early examples included a promotion for the 
Transformers movies called We Are Autobots, which superimposed a robot’s head 
over the user’s, moving the image along with the user’s in real-time video to create 
the illusion that he or she was really wearing the mask. (Fig. 2.3) Retailers have used 
a similar line of “virtual try-on” websites to allow users to see themselves on-screen 
wearing such products as rings, watches, eyeglasses, or clothes. In fact, as discussed 
in Chapter 5, these applications have been some of the first to spur patent infringe-
ment disputes related to AR.
The Lego company installed this same technology into in-store kiosks to promote 
its toys. A customer holding a Lego® box up to such a kiosk would see animated 
versions of the toys that could be constructed using the bricks in the box, moving 
around in three dimensions as if they were physically standing atop the actual box. 
Larger versions of the same concept have been installed on billboard-sized screens 
to promote various goods or causes.
Most AR available today exists in apps available for download and use on a mo-
bile device. These perform a variety of functions, from displaying digital content 
on two-dimensional images, to augmenting physical objects recognized in the real 
world, to displaying walking directions directly atop the sidewalk a user sees through 
their device’s video camera.
Navigation is also a prominent motivator for augmenting vehicle windshields, 
another potential medium for augmented displays. Pioneer has already launched its 
first version of an AR navigational aid, and more are sure to come. Several automo-
tive companies have announced that they are developing technology for displaying 
driving directions over a driver’s field of view, or for enhancing safety by highlight-
ing roads in foggy weather or calling attention to road signs. A scene from Mission 
Impossible: Ghost Protocol even shows a car windshield with a proximity detector 
FIGURE 2.3
The “We are autobots” promotion.

25
﻿ A Technology for all Senses
that displays the heat signatures of pedestrians in the vehicle’s path. Toyota has 
also discussed the concept of augmenting the view for backseat passengers with all 
manner of entertainment content.13 These applications are discussed more fully in 
Chapter 7.
The technology known as “projection mapping” also deserves mention here. This 
is the use of precisely positioned and timed digital projections to create the illu-
sion of altering the illuminated object.14 There are many who would not consider it 
AR, including Bruce Sterling in the above-mentioned quote. But, when done well 
(YouTube hosts a number of fine examples), projection mapping creates as complete 
an illusion of digital reality as any device I have seen. Adding to that, a projection 
mapping system currently under development at the University of Tokyo is capable 
of tracking fast-moving objects so precisely that it can project an advertisement on a 
bouncing tennis ball without missing a frame,15 and I believe it accurate to describe 
the technology as “augmented reality.”
Digital eyewear, however, is the real holy grail of visual AR. Users can only hold 
a mobile device out in front of themselves to see the augmented overlay in its video 
feed for so long before developing the feeling of exhaustion that AR developer Noah 
Zerkin aptly calls “gorilla arms.”16 Webcams and windshields are effective media, but 
not portable. Combining the best of both worlds requires a medium that is always in 
our field of vision, but that doesn’t require any extra work or thought to stay there. 
Only digital eyewear fits that bill.
Unsurprisingly, developers have been working on such eyewear for at least three 
decades – as Steve Mann demonstrated in 2013 through his traveling exhibit of 
30 years’ worth of AR headwear. (Fig. 2.4) Now, several companies are poised to 
begin selling digital eyewear that is aesthetically acceptable and affordable enough to 
be enjoyed by the public at large – including Meta, a company Mann helps run. Most 
of the digital eyewear devices announced as of this writing are aimed at the consumer 
market. In September 2014, however, Daqri announced the “DAQRI Smart Helmet,” 
a hardhat-like device designed to be used in industrial settings. “It has a transpar-
ent visor and special lenses that serve as a heads-up display, along with an array of 
cameras and sensors that help users navigate and gather information about their en-
vironment.”17 Once it hits the market, this device could help field service and similar 
13See Dave Banks, Toyota’s “Window to the World” Offers Backseat Passengers Augmented Reality, 
Wired (July 29, 2011) available at http://www.wired.com/geekdad/2011/07/toyotas-window-to-the-
world-offers-backseat-passengers-augmented-reality/
14See Definition of Projection Mapping, VJForums (January 17, 2012) http://vjforums.info/threads/
definition-of-projection-mapping.37607/ for a healthy debate on the meaning of this phrase and its 
relationship to AR.
15See < http://www.wimp.com/trackingcamera/>.
16Dan Farber, The Next Big Thing in Tech: Augmented Reality, C-Net (June 7, 2013) http://www.cnet.
com/news/the-next-big-thing-in-tech-augmented-reality/
17Don Clark, “Augmented Reality Experts Unveil Hardhat 2.0,” Wall Street Journal September 5, 2014, 
available at http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2014/09/05/augmented-reality-experts-unveil-hardhat-2-0/.

26
CHAPTER 2  A Summary of AR Technology
industries that would begin to realize the cost savings predicted by the Gartner report 
discussed at the end of Chapter 1 (Fig. 2.5).
TOUCH
Technology that enhances the sense of touch is better known as “haptic.” After visual 
technology, this field has the most promise for delivering meaningful AR experi-
ences. The Finnish company Senseg has been developing technology to turn touch 
screens into “feel” screens that generate any number of artificial textures, edges, or 
vibrations. It accomplishes this illusion through the use of touch pixels, or “Tixels™ ,” 
that employ Coloumb’s force, the principle of attraction between electrical charges. 
By passing an ultra-low electrical current into the insulated electrode, Senseg says 
that its “Tixels” create a small attractive force to finger skin. Modulating this attrac-
tive force generates artificial sensations.18
Scientists at the University of Tokyo have gone one step further and developed “a 
flexible sensor thinner than plastic wrap and lighter than a feather.”19 When overlaid 
19John Pugh,New E-Skin Brings Wearable Tech to the Next Level, PSFK, (August, 14, 2013) available 
at http://www.psfk.com/2013/08/e-skin-university-of-tokyo.html
18See A New Solution for Haptics, Senseg.com, http://senseg.com/solution/senseg-solution (last vis-
ited May 27, 2014).
FIGURE 2.4
Steve Mann’s traveling exhibit showcasing 30 years’ worth of digital eyewear.

27
﻿ A Technology for all Senses
on human skin, it creates an “e-skin” that is as persistent and imperceptible as mod-
ern AR eyewear is to the eye.
At 2013’s ISMAR and Inside AR conferences, Disney introduced a different 
sort of haptic technology called “AIREAL.” It uses precisely timed puffs of air to 
create physical sensations at defined points in open space.20 And on September 9, 
2014, Apple’s announcement of the Apple Watch advanced the general public’s 
understanding of what is possible with haptic feedback. “Right now, phones 
can provide physical feedback in one way: they buzz. But the Apple Watch can 
provide different kinds of haptic feedback and buzzing directionally to provide 
subtle directions or tapping lightly when a friend wants to say hello ….”21 Apple 
also promised an eccentric feature that transmits the wearer’s heartbeat to another 
person.
HEARING
Aural AR gets less attention, and would appear to hold less potential for innovation. 
Hearing aids, after all, have been digitally enhancing our aural sense for many years.
Yet there are those doing important work in this field. One of the most interesting- 
looking projects is run by Dr. Peter B.L. Meijer called “vOICe.” This technology aims 
FIGURE 2.5
The DAQRI smart helmet.
20See Rajindwer Sodhi et al., AIREAL: Interactive Tactile Experiences in Free Air (2013) 
available at http://www.disneyresearch.com/project/aireal/
21Alexis Madrigal, “What Apple’s New Products Say About the Future,” The Atlantic, September 9, 
2014, available at http://m.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/09/what-apples-new-products-
say-about-the-future/379907/.

28
CHAPTER 2  A Summary of AR Technology
to use and adapt sound waves into “synthetic vision through auditory video represen-
tations”22 that allow totally blind individuals to effectively “see.”
Others are working on next-generation hearing aids for use by people even with 
normal hearing. These would allow users to focus on a particular conversation in a 
crowded room, or automatically block sudden, unexpected loud noises. As of this 
writing, a start-up called Intelligent Headset is preparing to ship a pair of headphones 
by the same name with a type of aural AR it calls “3D sound,” together with a variety 
of AR apps designed for gaming, education, and tourism.23
Meanwhile, some developers in the “quantified self” effort to collect even-
more-detailed information about individuals’ physical health have discovered that 
the ear is a much better location on the body for taking measurements than the wrist, 
where most present-day fitness devices are worn.24 If this spurs manufacturers to 
sell, and users to wear, more ear-based devices, it is logical to expect that this will 
increase the demand to give these devices additional capabilities that actually effect, 
and augment, our hearing.
TASTE AND SMELL
Neither of these two related senses has ever offered much room for digital enhance-
ment, but some work toward this end has been done. “The ‘Tongueduino’ is the 
brainchild of MIT Media Lab’s Gershon Dublon. It’s a three by three electrode pad 
that rests on your tongue … [and] connects to one of several environmental sensors. 
Each sensor might register electromagnetic fields, visual data, sound, ambient move-
ment – anything that can be converted into an electronic signal. In principle, this 
could allow blind or deaf users to ‘see’ or ‘hear’ with their tongues, or augment the 
body with extra-human senses.”25
The most prominent work in augmented taste is being done by Dr. Adrian Cheok 
and his students at the Mixed Reality Lab at Keio University. “Smell and taste are 
the least explored areas because they usually require chemicals,”26 Dr. Cheok told 
an interviewer. But “we think they are important because they can directly affect 
emotion, mood, and memory, even in a subconscious way. But, currently its difficult 
because things are still analog. This is like it was for music before the CD came 
along.”27 Eventually, Dr. Cheok hopes to simulate smells in a digital manner, such as 
through magnetic stimulation of the olfactory bulb. The Mixed Reality Lab has even 
22Peter B.L. Meyer, Augmented Reality for the Totally Blind, available at http://www.seeingwithsound.
com/(last visited October 5, 2013).
23See https://intelligentheadset.com/.
24Rachel Metz, “Using Your Ear to Track Your Heart,” MIT Technology Review, August 1, 2014, avail-
able at http://www.technologyreview.com/news/529571/using-your-ear-to-track-your-heart/
25Tim Carmody, Trick out your tongue and taste the sensory-augmented world with Tongueduino, The 
Verge) February 21, 2013) available at http://www.theverge.com/2013/2/21/4014472/trick-out-your-
tongue-taste-the-world-with-tongueduino.
26Rick Martin, The Next Step in Augmented Reality: Electrify Your Taste Buds, SD Japan (June 21, 
2013) available at http://www.startup-dating.com/2013/06/mixed-reality-lab-electric-taste
27Id.

29
solicited papers for a workshop dedicated to augmenting the lesser-explored senses 
of touch, taste, and smell.28
Not far from this program, at the University of Singapore, another team of re-
searchers is “trying to build a ‘digital lollipop’ that can simulate taste.”29 The group’s 
leader, Dr. Nimesha Ranasinghe, says “a person’s taste receptors are fooled by vary-
ing the alternating current from the lollipop and slight but rapid changes in tempera-
ture.”30 If the technology were perfected for commercial use, “[a]dvertisers might 
include the taste of a product in an add on your computer or television. Movies 
could become more interactive, allowing people to taste the food an actor is eating. 
[P]eople with diabetes [could] taste sugar without harming their actual blood sugar 
levels.”31 The team even hopes video game designers will offer players taste-based 
rewards and penalties in response to gamer’s performance.32
EXTRA-SENSORY AR
Just when I thought I understood the boundaries of AR, I encountered the latest 
technology being developed by Daqri. The New York Times recently covered an ap-
plication Daqri calls “MindLight,” which detects a user’s brainwaves using wireless 
EEG sensors connected to digital eyewear. 33 When the sensors detect that the user is 
concentrating on a light bulb, the bulb turns on or off. Think “The Clapper,” but with 
brainwaves (Fig. 2.6).
﻿ A Technology for all Senses
FIGURE 2.6
Daqri’s MindLight.
28Bruce Sterling, Augmented Reality: Touch, Tast, & Smell: Milti-Sensory Entertainment Workshop, 
Wired, (August 17, 2013) available at http://www.wired.com/beyond_the_beyond/2013/08/augment-
ed-reality-touch-taste-smell-multi-sensory-entertainment-workshop/
29Nick Bilton, “Getting to the Bottom of a Digital Lollipop,’ New York Times, November 22, 2013, 
available at http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/11/22/getting-to-the-bottom-of-a-digital-lollipop/.
30Id.
31Id.
32Id.
33Quentin Hardy, Thinking About the Next Revolution, New York Times (September 4, 2013)  
available at http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/09/04/thinking-about-the-next-revolution/?_r=2.

30
CHAPTER 2  A Summary of AR Technology
Flipping light switches, however, is the least impressive application of this revo-
lutionary development. Daqri envisions “[t]his system increas[ing] the efficiency of 
industrial processes many fold by pointing workers toward targets for action in a 
specific sequence, measuring their concentration at critical junctures, and enabling 
pre-visualization of each action to reduce mistakes.”34 At the 2013 Augmented World 
Expo, CEO Brian Mullins demonstrated that the system could learn the brainwaves 
associated with many different images, allowing the images to be displayed as soon 
as the user thinks of them. The potential ramifications of this technology are simply 
astounding.
SYNTHETIC SYNTHESIS
Of course, the greatest potential in these separate means of augmentation lies in their 
combination. Just as we need all five senses working together with each other in or-
der to fully appreciate our physical reality, so too will the effect and utility of AR be 
exponentially increased when multiple senses are augmented simultaneously. Such 
augmented experiences would be, in a word, far more real.
The initial teaser videos for the Daqri Smart Helmet provide a glimpse of one 
type of this interactivity between devices. The company intends that “users will 
have the ability to touch and control the interface through integration with new 
form factors, such as smart watches.”35 The video shows a worker viewing an aug-
mented display hovering over his wrist, through which he can scroll by swiping his 
watch (Fig. 2.7).
FIGURE 2.7
Device interactivity through the Daqri Smart Helmet.
34Gaia Dempsey, Controlling Objects Through Thought: 4d And EEGs, Daqri Blog http://daqri.
com/2013/09/mindlight-controlling-objects-through-through-4d-and-eegs/#.UlG5LIash8E (last visited  
October 5, 2013).
35Daqri, Smart Helmet Features, available at http://hardware.daqri.com/smarthelmet/features.

31
﻿ Supporting, or “Augmented World,” Technologies
SUPPORTING, OR “AUGMENTED WORLD,” TECHNOLOGIES
Any discussion or implementation of AR also necessarily involves a variety of tech-
nologies that are not, in and of themselves, AR, but without which an augmented 
experience would not be possible. As explained above, I will refer to these as “aug-
mented world” technologies.
MESH NETWORKING AND THE PANTERNET
I have come to believe that certain types of augmentation will not be practical on a 
mass scale until devices become much more autonomous, capable of sensing and 
interacting with each other, rather than relying on a single cloud server – or even 
a single internet – to provide all of the necessary data. This leads into a discus-
sion of what is called the Internet of Things (“IOT”), an already emerging eco-
system in which digitally networked physical devices talk to each other and can 
register their geopositions in real time. At current rates, it will not be long before 
virtually every physical object we encounter on a daily basis will be hooked into  
the IOT.
But the concept I am aiming at here is also broader than the IOT. It also includes 
mesh networks – digital infrastructures “in which each node (called a mesh node) 
relays data for the network [and a]ll nodes cooperate in the distribution of data in the 
network.”36 Applied to AR, this means that an individual’s wearable devices will be 
able to perceive and interact with networked devices the person encounters without 
having to rely on a connection to a central internet. This sort of infrastructure would 
greatly shorten the distance that data has to travel in order to become available to the 
user, and increase the number of pathways that data can take to get to the user, thus 
reducing potential lag time in transmission and eliminating devices’ reliance on a 
steady Wi-Fi or LTE signal. In this environment, augmented user interfaces would be 
more reliable, and hence more likely to be adopted.
The slowly unfurling infrastructure to support networked automobiles is likely to 
spur development of this sort of technology. Networked vehicles will be expected 
to interact with fixed, roadside nodes in order to exchange data with a traffic control 
system. They will also be designed to communicate with other vehicles in order to 
reduce traffic accidents. Neither type of interaction can afford to be dependent on a 
strong Wi-Fi signal or a central cloud server.
Another step in this direction came in the form of the “goTenna,” a phone-sized 
device that emits a wireless signal to create its own closed network, allowing par-
ticipating devices to connect with each other. After another decade or so of minia-
turization, one could imagine a similar capability being built into tiny, perhaps even 
microchip-sized devices and distributed broadly, allowing every business, family, or 
36“Mesh networking,” Wikipedia, available at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mesh_networking (last vis-
ited September 13, 2014).

32
CHAPTER 2  A Summary of AR Technology
social group to create its own ad hoc network independent of the internet.37 Already, 
in September 2014, Sequans Communications and Universal Scientific Industrial an-
nounced their plans to release to market an all-in-one modem module capable of 
equipping IOT devices with the ability to transmit an LTE wireless signal.38
A related development is the steady progression toward universal, high-speed 
access to the internet at all points on Earth – what I will call the “Panternet.” Both 
Facebook (through its Internet.Org project and a fleet of “drones, lasers and satel-
lites”) and Google (through “Project Loon, [an] effort [to] launch[] Internet-beaming 
antennas aloft on giant helium balloons”), among others, are working toward this 
goal.39 That sort of infrastructure would also alleviate much of the connectivity is-
sues that stand in the way of an always-on, instantly responsive infrastructure for the 
exchange of data in augmented form. It would still rely on a central network, and 
thus not be as robust and responsive as mesh networking, but it could support and be 
a backstop to such networks.
MECHANICAL VISION AND SENSORS
Mechanical vision is obviously important to the performance of AR eyewear because 
the devices must be able to detect that something is there before they can augment it. 
By the same token, the more advanced the eyewear becomes, the better it will need 
to be at tracking the movements of the user’s eyes. Orienting displays so that they 
appear to overlap a particular physical object is notoriously difficult. To do it well, 
the device will need to know where the user is looking.
Location-sensing data will be important to the delivery of augmented content. 
Today’s devices are mainly limited to using GPS signals, but those are only accurate 
to within a few feet and do not travel well through walls. Newer devices use near-
field communication (NFC) or Bluetooth low-energy (BLE) sensors to detect loca-
tion more precisely and indoors.
TAGGANTS FOR PINPOINT-ACCURATE PERCEPTION
My time involved with the AR industry has educated me on the enormous difficulty 
that computer vision applications have in precisely identifying the exact location, 
edges, depth, and identity of a three-dimensional object in uncontrolled environ-
ments, especially when the object (or sensor) is or is poorly lit. That is why even the 
most impressive vision-based AR devices rely on controlled environments, ample 
37Jordan Crook, “The GoTenna Will Let You Communicate Without Any Connectivity,” Tech Crunch, 
July 17, 2014, available at http://techcrunch.com/2014/07/17/the-gotenna-will-let-you-communicate-
without-any-connectivity/.
38“New LTE Module for IoT,” Connected World, September 11, 2014, available at http://connected-
world.com/new-lte-module-for-iot/.
39“Facebook launches lab to bring Internet everywhere,” Yahoo! News, March 27, 2014, available at 
http://news.yahoo.com/facebook-launches-lab-bring-internet-everywhere-221915445--finance.html.

33
lighting, and a high number of pre-programmed details about the image or object 
being recognized. These make for impressive displays under the right conditions, but 
not necessarily for robust AR applications suited for everyday use.
Nor is this a minor hurdle. Some of the best computer vision scientists in the 
world have been working on this problem for decades, and the technology still has 
an awfully long way to go in this respect.
This is why I have suggested that digital eyewear and other vision-based AR de-
vices will soon rely on micro- or even nano-scale taggants to assist in locating physi-
cal objects.40 As counter-intuitive as it may seem at first, it may actually turn out to 
be less practical to design computer vision sensors capable of perceiving the world as 
accurately as the human eye does than it would be to simply paint the entire world 
with location-aware dots that a machine could locate much more easily. “Taggants,” 
according to one company that makes them, “are microscopic or nano materials that 
are uniquely encoded and virtually impossible to duplicate – like a fingerprint. They 
can be incorporated into or applied to a wide variety of materials, surfaces, prod-
ucts and solutions.”41 Some of the taggants available today can be detected from a 
distance; it is logical to expect that methods of remotely locating taggants will only 
continue to diversify and miniaturize.
Applied in a way designed to enhance visual AR, taggants might work in a way 
analogous to present-day radio frequency identification (RFID) tags, but a much 
smaller. RFID tags already “are tracking consumer products worldwide,” reports the 
website HowStuffWorks.42 “Many manufacturers use the tags to track the location 
of each product they make from the time it’s made until it’s pulled off the shelf and 
tossed in a shopping cart. Outside the realm of retail merchandise, RFID tags are 
tracking vehicles, airline passengers, Alzheimer’s patients and pets. Soon, they may 
even track your preference for chunky or creamy peanut butter.”43 A British design 
student even called for “[i]ncorporating small, edible RFID tags embedded in your 
food.”44 Such a system would allow tracking food products along the entire food 
chain, from production to digestion, and even enable such devices as “smart plates” 
that scan your meal via Bluetooth and alert you to potential food allergens.
According to a 2011 L.A. Times article, “the Air Force asked for proposals on 
developing a way to ‘tag’ targets with ‘clouds’ of unseen materials sprayed from 
quiet, low-flying drones.”45 The paper quoted the president of one company that’s 
﻿ Supporting, or “Augmented World,” Technologies
45W.J. Hennigan Pentagon seeks mini-weapons for new age of warfare, Los Angeles Times (May 30, 
2011) available at http://articles.latimes.com/2011/may/30/business/la-fi-mini-drones-20110531.
40“A Trillion Points of Light? Taggants as Ubiquitous AR Markers – Part 1,” http://www.wassom.
com/a-trillion-points-of-light-taggants-as-ubiquitous-ar-markers-part-1.html (June 2, 2011).
41Microtrace, Taggant Technologies, http://www.microtracesolutions.com/taggant-technologies/?gclid= 
CL7asN_Ok6kCFZQbKgod22OSdw(last visited November 29, 2013).
42Kevin Bonsor & Wesley Fenlon, How RFIS Works, http://electronics.howstuffworks.com/gadgets/
high-tech-gadgets/rfid.htm (last visited June 8, 2014).
43Id.
44Kyana Gordon, Nutrismart: Edible Food Tags That Track Food Down the Supply Chain, (June 1, 2011) 
http://www.psfk.com/2011/06/nutrismart-edible-rfid-tags-that-track-food-down-the-supply-chain.html

34
CHAPTER 2  A Summary of AR Technology
developing such nano taggants as saying that tagging, tracking and locating “is a 
hot topic in government work. It isn’t easy tracking somebody in a crowded urban 
environment like what is seen in today’s wars.”46
According to that company’s website, its “nano crystal taggants are deployable in 
solvents, inks/paints, and aerosols, allowing them to be easily integrated into various 
[military] applications. .. and customized for the unique needs of other operations [as 
well].” 47 It already makes “nano crystal security inks that can be incorporated directly 
into clear laminates, plastics, or appliqués[,] … and dye- and pigment-based inks 
(including black inks) for use in banknotes, concert tickets, lottery tickets, or CDs – 
and even in varnishes and lacquer finishes.” The transparent, “nanophotonic” taggants 
are optically clear, but can be designed to respond to a specific range of UV radiation.
Add these trends together, and what do you get? A technology capable of liter-
ally painting the world with AR markers. Micro- or nano taggants baked into paint, 
plastics, asphalt, ink, or even dust would be invisible to the naked eye, but capable 
of marking all manner of 3-D objects in a way that appropriately equipped AR optics 
could potentially be designed to recognize.
These technologies are especially exciting for those developing what AR en-
thusiasts call a “clickable world,” in which a person can physically interact with a 
physical object and get a digital response. Just as a real estate developer needs an in-
frastructure of water pipes and power lines in order to build a subdivision of houses, 
so too will software developers need an infrastructure of geolocation-aware similar 
sensors in place before the augmented world truly takes shape.
HAND AND GESTURE TRACKING
One of the most important augmented world technologies is gesture tracking. Hand 
gestures and other physical movements are likely to become the most common way 
of interacting with digital objects that appear to be physical, if only because it is 
the most natural way to interact with physical things. As but one example, in 2012 
Google obtained U.S. Patent No. 8179604 B1, titled “Wearable Marker for Passive 
Interaction.” The patent describes “[a] wearable marker [in] the form of a ring, a 
bracelet, an artificial fingernail[, a fingernail decal,] or a glove, among other possible 
wearable items.”48 Sensors in a user’s digital eyewear would “function together to 
track position and motion of the wearable marker via reflection, and by doing so can 
recognize known patterns of motion that correspond to known hand gestures.”49 For 
many, this means of interacting with digital data calls to mind scenes from Minority 
Report and similar sci-fi films (Fig. 2.8).
Closely related to tracking gestures is the ability of digital eyewear to register 
where the user’s hand touches. In May 2014, German AR company Metaio, one 
46Id.
47<http://voxtel-inc.com/> .
48U.S. Patent No. 8,179,604 B1 (filed May 15, 2012)
49Id.

35
﻿ Supporting, or “Augmented World,” Technologies
of the most prominent companies in the industry, demonstrated a prototype of the 
“Thermal Touch” technology it is developing.50 “Consisting of an infrared and stan-
dard camera working in tandem and running on a tablet PC, the prototype registers 
the heat signature left by a person’s finger when touching a surface.”51 Digital eye-
wear equipped with such technology “could turn any surface into a touch-screen.”52 
Still very much in early stages of R&D, however, Metaio projects the technology to 
be ready for widespread use in 5–10 years.53
FACIAL RECOGNITION
Facial recognition technology will be another important augmented world technol-
ogy. To date, industry-leading companies have shown remarkable restraint in imple-
menting such features. Google has disallowed facial recognition apps on its Glass 
headset, and Facebook has refrained from rolling out the technology to the degree 
FIGURE 2.8
Illustration from Google’s patent on a gestural interface device.
50Metaio, “Press Release: Metaio unveils thermal imaging R&D for future use in wearable augmented 
reality headsets,” May 22, 2014, available at http://www.metaio.com/press/press-release/2014/ 
thermal-touch/
51Id.
52Id.
53Id.

36
CHAPTER 2  A Summary of AR Technology
that it could. But, as AR hardware proliferates, it will be impossible to keep this 
genie in the bottle. The potential commercial applications are just too numerous and 
profitable to expect such restraint from all service providers. AR concept videos are 
chock full of examples in which digital data – including links to their social media 
profiles, dating service information, even whether they’re a registered sex offender – is  
seen hovering in the air over a person’s head. As noted in Chapter 8, the law enforce-
ment community is particularly eager to implement this technology. Facial recogni-
tion is by far the easiest and most direct means by which to associate such displays 
with a particular person.
LEVELS OF ADOPTION
The analysis in this book largely presumes a world that does not quite yet exist. Al-
though the pieces for realizing a fully augmented world are either in place or about 
to be, there is still progress to be made before the technology penetrates all levels 
of society and reaches its full potential. I will occasionally contrast these various 
levels of adoption when discussing AR’s legal ramifications, but it might be helpful 
to consider at the outset what these various stages might look like. These are only 
predictions, of course, and they get fuzzier the further out we go. But they are based 
on years of interaction with the people at the forefront of this industry.
NOW: EMERGENCE
The real world at the time of this writing is one in which AR is beyond its infancy, 
but not quite yet at its adolescence. There are hundreds of AR apps available for our 
mobile devices, and thousands of marketing campaigns have used the technology. 
Dozens of start-up companies are touting various AR innovations, and a few of those 
have received significant funding. Tech columnists write eager words about what’s 
just around the corner in this field. Although AR concepts have shown up in main-
stream entertainment for decades, the public is just starting to grasp the idea that this 
technology is real, thanks in large part to the buzz about Google Glass and a handful 
of other products.
THE NEAR FUTURE: LEGITIMACY
One of the primary themes at the 2014 Augmented World Expo was the industry’s 
shift in emphasis from the consumer market to enterprise applications. Large com-
panies like Daqri, Raytheon, and the Newport News Shipbuilding Company, among 
many others, have shown that AR can solve real problems and generate revenue. 
Investment from this sector will allow the technology to improve without being lim-
ited by the aesthetic whims and cost constraints of the consumer market. Within the 
next few years, AR technology should be able to cross the threshold from gimmicky 
marketing technique to an everyday method of consuming data used by a large seg-
ment of the general public.

37
﻿ Levels of Adoption
At time of this writing, the most recent prediction of when we may see this tran-
sition is contained in the 2014 Gartner Hype Cycle. Gartner Hype Cycle provides a 
graphic representation of the maturity and adoption of technologies and applications.55 
The graph on emerging technologies charts the progression of various innovations 
through the phases of development that experience and collective wisdom have dem-
onstrated virtually all technological developments to pass through. These have come 
to be known as “Innovation Trigger,” “Peak of Inflated Expectations,” the “Trough of 
Disillusionment,” the “Slope of Enlightenment,” and the “Plateau of Productivity.” In 
the annual chart released in August 2014, augmented reality ranked within the middle 
phase, “the Trough of Disillusionment.” In this phase, the buzz of expectation has 
begun to wear off as some promising early innovations failed to deliver, and unpro-
ductive start-ups begin to fold. “Investments continue only if the surviving providers 
improve their products to the satisfaction of early adopters.”56 (Fig. 2.9)
As the graph suggests, however, this is an inevitable, even healthy period for any 
new technology to pass through. Next comes the “Slope of Enlightenment,” in which 
“more instances of how the technology can benefit the enterprise start to crystallize 
and become more widely understood. Second- and third-generation products appear 
from technology providers. More enterprises fund pilots; conservative companies re-
main cautious.”57 Finally, on the Plateau of Productivity, mainstream adoption starts 
to take off. Criteria for assessing provider viability are more clearly defined. The 
FIGURE 2.9
The Gartner Hype Cycle.54
54Used under CC BY-SA 3.0 license. See http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/.
55Gartner, “Hype Cycles,” available at http://www.gartner.com/technology/research/methodologies/
hype-cycles.jsp (last visited September 13, 2014).
56Wikipedia, “Hype Cycle,” available at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hype_cycle (last visited September 
13, 2014).
57Id.

38
CHAPTER 2  A Summary of AR Technology
technology’s broad market applicability and relevance are clearly paying off.”58 Gart-
ner’s 2014 chart includes an additional notation that it will likely be 5 to 10 years 
before the technology reached the “Plateau of Productivity.”
Once AR begins to approach the Plateau of Productivity, digital eyewear will 
have become a mainstream product category, available from half-dozen manufactur-
ers or more. Indeed, these will be the centerpiece of the already emerging ecosystem 
of connected, wearable devices, including subtle gestural controls. Sales of mobile 
phones will begin to decrease as more consumers come to expect the data they con-
sume to exist in midair rather than on a flat screen.
In this stage of AR’s development, entertainment and advertising companies will 
have begun creating content intended to be consumed in augmented form. Consum-
ers will expect to discover content this way, and the real world will begin to look like 
a vast, unused canvas ready to be digitally painted. That canvas will include people, 
as facial recognition and other biometric data become widespread means of identify-
ing each other and associating people with digital content. There will be plenty of 
debate about when it is appropriate to augment certain people, places, and things, and 
who has the right to do so. Privacy, intellectual property and obscenity debates will 
be common (and are previewed in subsequent chapters of this book).
AR will also have become an indispensable tool in a variety of industrial settings, 
where AR can cut down on production and worker training costs. For the same rea-
sons, augmented methods of teaching will be the hottest trend in educational circles 
as well. The word “augmented,” though, will become less common, as people begin 
to think of AR as the natural way to consume digital data. But the technology will 
still have its kinks, in light of how difficult it is to precisely augment moving physical 
objects. People will complain of motion sickness, and visual augmentations will still 
rely on various forms of targets and assists to improve image quality, such as location 
sensors, tags, and projection mapping.
THE MEDIUM TERM: UBIQUITY
At this stage, no one uses “phones” anymore, and two-dimensional screens of any 
type are used only in rare, special-purpose applications. This will be celebrated as 
an aesthetic advancement, since physical signage is less necessary, but the virtually 
nil cost of digital advertising will mean that there is far more clutter in our field 
of view. AR starts to become reliable enough that, especially in combination with 
the now-commonplace self-driving cars, even traffic signs have started to become 
digital-only.
Most social interaction and consumer experiences will have an augmented digital 
component to them. Visual augmentation will finally have gotten to an acceptable 
level of acuity, and companies will be experimenting with prototypes of augmented 
contact lenses.
58Id.

39
﻿ Levels of Adoption
There will also be a significant digital divide between those using the latest AR 
technology and those who cannot afford it or who are prevented from enjoying it by 
physical disabilities. We already hear talk of a “digital divide” today, but the implica-
tions of the inequality will grow into a full-fledged social justice issue as reliance on 
the augmented medium grows. Chapter 10 explores this issue from the perspectives 
of ethics and social science.
THE LONG TERM: MATURITY
At this stage – decades from now – AR is old hat. All digital data comes in aug-
mented form, and we are so accustomed to receiving input by digital means through 
all five senses that to communicate by any other means will seem quaint. By then, so-
ciety will be on to the next big thing, whatever that might be. Meanwhile, the ability 
to interact in this manner will have shaped our societal norms and ethics to a degree 
that is difficult to foresee. Our society may not be one that people living today would 
recognize or be comfortable in.
But enough about the far-flung future. Let us now begin to examine the legal 
principles that will govern the use of AR technology over the next few years.

43
CHAPTER
Augmented Reality Law, Privacy, and Ethics﻿
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Sources of privacy law
• Privacy concerns raised by AR
• How AR can enhance privacy
INTRODUCTION
Privacy is a hot topic these days, especially in connection with any sort of communi-
cations technology. In part, this is due to the lightning-fast pace at which information 
technology is developing. The less people understand how the technology works and 
how it can be used to gather information about them, the more apprehensive they 
are likely to feel about it. Privacy is as much about emotional reactions as it is about 
legal doctrine, and it is still a very amorphous concept from either perspective. There 
is much disagreement about just what the word means, what sort of rights it should 
include, and where those rights come from.
That said, however, there are various laws and court decisions that define and 
protect different types of privacy rights. Many of these are likely to be implicated by 
the development and implementation of augmented world technologies.
SOURCES OF PRIVACY LAW
BACKDROP: THE FIRST AMENDMENT
One basic reason that privacy is such a difficult concept to define and protect in the 
United States is that it runs counter to our fundamental commitment to free and open 
speech. Our country was founded on the expression of dissent, personal liberty, and 
the ability of each individual to participate in the political system. The American 
legal system still reflects those values in its hesitance to give government the power 
to prevent a citizen from saying whatever he or she chooses to say – or, putting it 
more precisely in light of modern communications technology, conveying whatever 
information he or she may choose to convey.
In the American legal system, virtually all laws concerning the conveyance of in-
formation are limited in their application, to some degree, by the First Amendment to 
the United States Constitution. This bedrock provision prohibits governments from 
Privacy
3

44
CHAPTER 3  Privacy
“abridging the freedom of speech … or of the press.”1 After more than two centu-
ries of interpretation by the courts, this simple statement has been fleshed out into 
a fundamental principle of free expression that undergirds our entire framework of 
participatory democracy. As long as the subject of one’s speech has any arguable 
connection to issues that affect the well-being or interests of more than just those in-
volved in the conversation – what the law calls “matters of public concern” – then the 
right to express that view will almost always be protected by the First Amendment. 
By contrast, “matters of private concern” are those that the law recognizes as not 
being the legitimate business of anyone other than those directly affected by them. 
These – and, for the most part, only these – issues the law will protect as “private.”
The following excerpt from a 2011 Supreme Court opinion gives a concise sum-
mary this bedrock legal doctrine:
Speech on matters of public concern is at the heart of the First Amendment’s 
protection. The First Amendment reflects a profound national commitment to the 
principle that debate on public issues should be uninhibited, robust, and wide-
open. That is because speech concerning public affairs is more than self-expression; 
it is the essence of self-government. Accordingly, speech on public issues occupies 
the highest rung of the hierarchy of First Amendment values, and is entitled to 
special protection.
Not all speech is of equal First Amendment importance, however, and where 
matters of purely private significance are at issue, First Amendment protections 
are often less rigorous. That is because restricting speech on purely private mat-
ters does not implicate the same constitutional concerns as limiting speech on 
matters of public interest. There is no threat to the free and robust debate of public 
issues; there is no potential interference with a meaningful dialogue of ideas; and 
the threat of liability does not pose the risk of a reaction of self-censorship on 
matters of public import.2
The fact that this summary of the law preceded an opinion in which the Court 
ultimately upheld the right of radical protesters to display hateful messages at funer-
als illustrates the breadth of the phrase “matters of public concern.” Any arguable 
connection to public affairs imbues speech with a nearly inviolable legal protection, 
no matter how controversial a particular speaker’s point of view may be.
One corollary of this principle is that information in the public domain is free 
for all to use. In this context, data is more or less presumed to be public; it is a sig-
nificant burden to prove that something should be free from public scrutiny. Even if 
information was once legally private, that privacy is gone for good after it is lost. For 
example, in the 2001 decision Bartnicki v. Vopper,3 the United States Supreme Court 
1U.S. Const. amend I. The actual text of the First Amendment applies only to Congress, but the courts 
have long ago established that the Fourteenth Amendment’s guarantee of due process resulted in the 
same restrictions being applicable against state and local governments as well.
2Snyder v. Phelps, 131 S. Ct. 1207, 1215-16 (2011) (internal quotations, citations, and alterations omitted).
3Bartnicki v. Vopper, 532 U.S. 514 (2001).

45
﻿ Sources of Privacy Law
refused to punish a newspaper for publishing video footage, even though a third party 
had obtained it in the first instance by illegal eavesdropping.4 And in the famous Pen-
tagon Papers cases of 1971,5 the Supreme Court refused to prevent newspapers from 
publishing leaked classified military documents about the Vietnam War, even though 
the government warned that disclosure would lead to the death of Americans abroad. 
That is how sacrosanct the First Amendment principle against what the courts call 
“prior restraint” on publication has become.
This also explains why what some call the “right to be forgotten” is unlikely to 
ever take root in the United States as it is beginning to do in Europe. Various groups 
have advocated different types of legal proposals to give people a legal mechanism 
to have embarrassing information about them removed from the public record – 
particularly internet search engines – and to get others to stop repeating it, even if 
it was once newsworthy. Some American legal commentators have said that this 
“sweeping new privacy right … represents the biggest threat to free speech on the 
Internet in the coming decade.”6 In 2013, California became the first American juris-
diction to grant a legal right to have personal information deleted from the internet, 
although the statute applies only to minors and is riddled with uncertainty as to how 
it will work.7 But even if the statute survives legal challenge, First Amendment ju-
risprudence will not permit American regulators to run very far with this idea. The 
Supreme Court has struck down on free speech grounds more than one law intended 
to prevent child pornography, for example, and even refused to restrain newspapers 
from publishing the names of rape victims, so long as the information was legally 
acquired.8
That is why the First Amendment remains the elephant in the room during 
any discussion of American privacy law, even though the provision itself restricts 
only the government and not private citizens. It explains, for example, why pri-
vacy laws cannot prevent individuals from collecting and repeating information 
that is freely available in public places – such as overheard sights and sounds – 
including by recording them. The freedom of speech also explains why the pen-
alties for even a bona fide invasion of privacy sometimes seem so anemic; the 
offender may be punished, but the ill-gotten information typically remains in 
the public sphere.
This is also why it has been so difficult to find a legal path toward a third category 
of information between “public” and “private.” For example, philosophy professor 
Evan Selinger of the Rochester Institute of Technology in New York has proposed 
formalizing the idea of “obscurity” as a legal category for information that, while not 
4Id. Similarly, on April 20, 2010, the Supreme Court held in United States v. Stevens that the government 
cannot hold criminally liable someone who distributes a tape of an illegal act (in this case, animal “snuff” 
films) that he/she was not complicit in committing. United States v. Stevens, 559 U.S. 460 (2010).
5New York Times Co. v. United States, 403 U.S. 713 (1971).
6Jeffrey Rosen, The Right to Be Forgotten, 64 Stan. L. Rev. Online 88 (February 13, 2012).
7See Cal. Business and Professions Code § 22580–82 (West 2014).
8Florida Star v. B.J.F., 491 U.S. 524 (1989).

46
CHAPTER 3  Privacy
entirely private, must still remain difficult to access.9 Despite the attractiveness of 
this proposal, it is difficult to envision how obscurity could be lawfully enforced in a 
legal framework that forbids government restrictions on speech.
All of this said, however, the law will restrict some speech on some subjects un-
der some circumstances. Exceptions to the freedom of speech are just as important 
to the healthy functioning of our democratic system as is the freedom itself. Certain 
types of information are so unrelated to the public concern, and some methods of 
expressing it are so disruptive to the public order, that some regulation by the courts 
is permitted. Moreover, we need spaces in our lives for private discourse, where we 
can actively explore our opinions with others without fear of public recrimination. 
Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff reminded the United States government of this 
point in the midst of news reports that the NSA had tapped her communications. 
“Without the right of privacy,” she said, “there is no real freedom of speech or free-
dom of opinion, and so there is no actual democracy.”10
Under most circumstances, however, government protection of individual privacy 
over free speech remains the exception rather than the rule. As a result, instead of 
having a single “right of privacy” in the United States, we have one central freedom 
of speech, together with a mismatched patchwork of state and federal laws occupy-
ing the spaces between and surrounding the boundaries of that freedom.
THE COMMON LAW RIGHT TO BE LEFT ALONE
Federalism is another reason for the lack of a uniform “law” of privacy in the United  
States. Our legal system is one historically based on limiting the powers of the na-
tional government, with all other powers of government being reserved for the states. 
The power to regulate and protect information about individual citizens was not one 
of the traditional powers of the Federal government, and (with narrow exceptions 
discussed below) the affirmative limitations on government power in the Bill of 
Rights do not have much to say on preventing encroachment on personal privacy. 
Traditionally, therefore, most of the laws protecting personal privacy have come from 
state legislatures – which retain the general power to pass virtually any law they 
choose within the very loose boundaries established by the Constitution – and from 
state courts, which have the inherent authority to go beyond the written statutes and 
declare principles of judge-made “common law.”
The modern era of American privacy protection began in 1960 with the publi-
cation of a law review article by Dean William L. Prosser.11 He summarized what 
11William L. Prosser, Privacy, 48 Calif. L. Rev. 383 (1960).
9Woodrow Hartzog and Evan Selinger, Obscurity: A Better Way to Think About Your Data Than “Pri-
vacy”, The Atlantic (January 17, 2013) http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2013/01/
obscurity-a-better-way-to-think-about-your-data-than-privacy/267283/.
10Colum Lynch, Brazil’s president condemns NSA spying, Washington Post http://www.washing-
tonpost.com/world/national-security/brazils-president-condemns-nsa-spying/2013/09/24/fe1f78ee-
2525-11e3-b75d-5b7f66349852_story.html (Sept. 24, 2013).

47
by then was a burgeoning but chaotic body of common law decisions from courts 
across the country and distilled them into four distinct torts that have henceforth 
become the foundation of privacy law in virtually every state. Three of the four torts 
amount to variations on what is commonly called “the right to be left alone.” They 
are as follows:
• 
Intrusion into Seclusion. This common law tort occurs when someone 
intentionally intrudes upon the private space, solitude, or seclusion of a person, 
or the private affairs or concerns of a person, if the intrusion would be highly 
offensive to a reasonable person. The classic example is a secret video camera 
installed in a changing room or bedroom. The tort occurs upon recording; no 
publication of the recorded footage is necessary.
• 
Publication of Private Facts. This separate cause of action arises when someone 
publicly disseminates little-known, private facts that are not newsworthy, not 
part of public records, public proceedings, not of public interest, and would be 
offensive to a reasonable person if made public. Typical examples here include 
private health matters and intimate sexual information.
• 
False Light. This cause of action is similar to the tort of defamation (also 
known as libel or slander), which punishes the unprivileged publication of 
demonstrably false assertions of fact that injure a person’s reputation. The tort 
of false light is also designed to protect a person’s reputation, but it deals with 
the publication of information that, while potentially true in some respects, 
is communicated in a manner that conveys something false. It requires a 
publication made with actual malice that places the plaintiff in a false light and 
would be highly offensive to a reasonable person.12
One common thread running through each of these causes of action is a prereq-
uisite that the aggrieved party have a “reasonable expectation of privacy” under the 
circumstances alleged. The word reasonable is a legal term of art loaded with mean-
ing. For one thing, it is an objective measurement. Although courts will often re-
quire a plaintiff to have subjectively expected privacy as well, the law does not deem 
something private just because someone wants it to be. A reasonable expectation of 
privacy is also one that is constrained by the boundaries of what other laws – such 
as the First Amendment – make public. A court will determine what the average, 
reasonable person would have expected under the circumstances, and judge the case 
according to that standard.
﻿ Sources of Privacy Law
12Prosser also articulated a fourth means of invading someone’s privacy—namely, by “misappropria-
tion of [the person’s] likeness” for commercial gain. Since then, however, the interest protected by this 
body of law has evolved to look much more like property that an individual can own, license and com-
mercialize rather than simply a means to avoid unwanted attention. Today it is more commonly known 
as the “right of publicity,” a phrase recognizing it as a power held by its owner, rather than by the phrase 
“misappropriation of likeness,” which emphasizes the negative result of what the infringer takes away. 
For that reason, many treatises and courts treat the right of publicity as a matter of intellectual property 
rather than of privacy, and this book will do the same.

48
CHAPTER 3  Privacy
Although Prosser and others like him did much to bring order to the common law 
of privacy, it remains an inherently decentralized, flexible concept that evolves each 
time a court applies time-tested principles to the facts of a new case.
EAVESDROPPING AND WIRETAPPING STATUTES
Eavesdropping laws protect the right not to be surreptitiously recorded. More specifi-
cally, eavesdropping involves making an audio or video recording of other people 
under circumstances in which those persons had a reasonable expectation of privacy. 
Eavesdropping is prohibited by statute in virtually every state, and much of the same 
subject matter is covered by federal wiretapping statutes as well. It can be punished 
as a tort, a crime, or both, depending on the jurisdiction. The most recent and highly 
publicized example of eavesdropping through emerging digital media was the case of 
now-former Rutgers student Dharun Ravi, who was sentenced to 30 days in jail for 
using his webcam to secretly record and broadcast his roommate’s intimate encoun-
ter – an invasion that ultimately led the roommate to take his own life.13
The boundaries of prohibited activity vary somewhat between states; for exam-
ple, some punish only audio recording and not video. Some are “one party consent” 
jurisdictions, in which the recording is lawful as long as one participant in the con-
versation agreed to the recording. By contrast, “two party consent” states consider 
the recording to be eavesdropping unless all participants consent. And in both types 
of jurisdictions, defining “consent” is rarely a simple task.
ELECTRONIC PRIVACY LAWS
There is no one statute, court decision, or other authority that establishes the bound-
aries between public and private realms online. Instead, we have a patchwork quilt of 
various statutes intended to address distinct areas of concern. For example, the Elec-
tronic Communications Privacy Act14 and the Stored Communications Act15 created 
barriers to both the government and private citizens obtaining the emails of others. 
The latter statute has since been interpreted to apply to other types of electronic mes-
sages that were intended by their senders to be private, such as texts and Facebook 
direct messages.
Both federal and state authorities have also taken various actions to regulate the use 
of customers’ personal information by the owners of commercial websites and mobile 
applications. Various federal agencies, including the Federal Trade Commission, Fed-
eral Communications Commission, and the National Telecommunications and Infor-
mation Administration, have all issued their own set of “recommended” guidelines for 
protecting such interests. The FTC occasionally takes legal enforcement action against 
1418 U.S.C. §§ 2510–2522 (2012).
1518 U.S.C. §§ 2701–2712 (2012).
13See New Jersey v. Dharun Ravi,Wikipedia (June 5, 2014)http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_
Jersey_v._Dharun_Ravi.

49
companies who violate these guidelines in a manner that it considers to be an “unfair” 
commercial practice.
Meanwhile, the absence of binding legislation from Congress on these issues has 
led numerous states to pass their own laws regulating other aspects of online privacy. 
By far, California leads the pack in this respect. In the last few years alone, it has ad-
opted rules on mandatory disclosures of data breaches, requirements for mobile app 
privacy policies, the ability of minors to get their information taken down, and the 
responsibility to respect user requests not to have their web usage tracked.
SUBJECT-SPECIFIC PRIVACY LAWS
The foregoing laws protect privacy in broad strokes by establishing general boundar-
ies for behavior or regulating who has access to particular communications media 
and under what circumstances. There are also laws aimed at safeguarding specific 
categories of information. For example, the Health Insurance Portability and Ac-
countability Act of 1996 (HIPAA)16 significantly increased protection for individuals’ 
personal health information. The Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998 
(COPPA)17 regulates the collection and use of information from children younger 
than 13. The Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act of 199918 governs the disclosure of financial 
data. Various other laws on the federal and state level govern the collection and use 
of social security numbers and other discrete types of information.
LIMITATIONS ON GOVERNMENT INTRUSION INTO PRIVACY
For the most part, the authorities described above limit how private individuals can 
collect and use information about other individuals. Our legal system also contains 
fundamental restrictions on the ability of governmental authorities to collect pri-
vate information. The most basic of these is the Fourth Amendment to the United 
States Constitution, which restricts the government from invading “the right of the 
people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreason-
able searches and seizures.”19 From this comes the prerequisite that law enforcement 
officials obtain a judicial warrant based “upon probable cause” before intruding into 
any place in which a person has a reasonable expectation of privacy. In June 2014, 
the Supreme Court re-affirmed the importance of this provision in the digital age by 
holding that the Fourth Amendment requires a warrant before police may examine 
data on a detained person’s mobile device.20
﻿ Sources of Privacy Law
16Pub.L. 104–191, 110 Stat. 1936 (1996)(codified as amended at 29 U.S.C. § 1181 et seq. and scattered 
sections of 42 U.S.C.).
1715 U.S.C. §§ 6501–6506 (2012) Pub.L. 105–277, 112 Stat. 2581-728(1998).
18(Pub.L. 106–102, 113 Stat. 1338)(1999).
19U.S. const. amend. IV.
20Riley v. California, No. 13-132 (June 25, 2014), available at http://www.supremecourt.gov/
opinions/13pdf/13-132_8l9c.pdf.

50
CHAPTER 3  Privacy
Of course, subsequent developments such as the USA Patriot Act21 and NSA sur-
veillance scandals of recent years may call into question the efficacy of these limi-
tations on government power. And to be sure, the opportunities for data collection 
presented by augmented reality and its supporting technologies will sorely tempt law 
enforcement agencies to find new ways to monitor and collect individuals’ electronic 
data.
With this legal framework in mind, then, let’s consider how AR-related technolo-
gies are likely to test the boundaries of American privacy laws.
PRIVACY CONCERNS RAISED BY AR
FACIAL RECOGNITION AND OTHER BIOMETRIC DATA
The importance of facial recognition in an augmented world
There is nothing inherent to augmented reality that requires the collection of bio-
metric data. It is ingrained in human nature, however, to seek interaction and com-
panionship with other people, which explains how social media has so quickly be-
come the single most popular function of the internet, and why we invent so many 
devices for calling, texting, tweeting, poking, tagging, friending, following, and 
liking each other. That is also why we have already seen several real and imag-
ined apps that bring social networking into the augmented medium. It is safe to 
say, therefore, that we will use AR technologies for new forms of social media and 
­interpersonal interaction.
In order for any AR device to interact directly with a person, the device first needs 
to recognize who and where the person is. At present, there is no realistic alternative 
for accomplishing that task in a social setting other than by facial recognition. Retina 
and fingerprint scans do and will most certainly have their place, but they require the 
subject to get a little too up close and personal with the scanner to be comfortable in 
most settings. By contrast, faces can be recognized passively and at a distance.
Even social technology that we use today demonstrates the inevitability of wide-
spread facial recognition. The capability to implement facial recognition on a broad 
scale has existed for years, but has been held back. As of this writing, for example, 
Google still prohibits any app for its Glass eyewear that recognizes faces.22 These 
companies are leery of sparking a privacy backlash – which is exactly what has hap-
pened each time Facebook has expanded its use of the technology. For example, in 
2012 Congressional hearings, Sen. Al Franken grilled Facebook officials about their 
intentions for the use of these “faceprints.”23 In August 2013, Facebook changed its 
Statement of Rights and Responsibilities to give it the authority to add individuals’ 
21Pub. L. 107-56m 115 Stat. 272 (2001).
22Charles Arthur, Google ‘Bans’ Facial Recognition on Google Glass - But Developers Persist, The 
Guardian (June 3, 2013) http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jun/03/google-glass-facial-
recognition-ban.
23Id.

51
﻿ Privacy Concerns Raised by AR
profile photos to its facial recognition database.24 This move was met with probes 
from various European regulators and promises of additional scrutiny from Sen. 
Franken.
Yet Facebook continues to roll out facial recognition applications, bit by bit, and 
has refused Sen. Franken’s invitation to promise that they won’t use it even more 
widely in the future. It isn’t alone. “Businesses foresee a day when signs and bill-
boards with face-recognition technology can instantly scan your face and track what 
other ads you’ve seen recently, adjust their message to your tastes and buying history 
and even track your birthday or recent home purchase.”25 This prospect became eerily 
real for me aboard a cruise ship in the Fall of 2012. It used to be that ship photogra-
phers had to post their photos in a massive onboard gallery that patrons spent hours 
browsing through, trying to pick out the pictures in which they appeared. No more. 
This time, my digital folder was updated in near-real time with new photos every 
day, using software that had tagged my face or even the faces of others in my party. 
Chances are that I signed something at some point allowing the ship to do this, al-
though I’m not sure US privacy laws would hold much sway in international waters 
anyway. But it brought the technology’s power home in a visceral way.
It is more than commercial pressures driving the technology, however; criminal 
acts like the Boston Marathon bombing stoke the demand for law enforcement to 
have better facial recognition capability. “The FBI and other U.S. law enforcement 
agencies already are exploring facial-recognition tools to track suspects, quickly 
single out dangerous people in a crowd or match a grainy security-camera image 
against a vast database to look for matches.”26 Even more likely to gain public sup-
port are apps such as Baby Back Home, an AR app in China that uses facial rec-
ognition to allow average citizens to locate and identify missing and kidnapped 
children.27
Or it may be far more simple and personally gratifying applications that finally 
win the public over. Forbes contributor Tim Worstall recently echoed28 an argument 
that I have made for years – that the real “killer app” for AR eyewear will be one 
that recognizes faces and calls to the user’s field of view everything the user knows 
about that person – their name, the names of their spouse and children, and so on – 
all in order to avoid embarrassment at cocktail parties.
25Sarah Freishtat, Just a Face in a Crowd? Scans Pick Up ID, Personal Data, The Washington Times 
(July 26, 2013) http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2012/jul/26/just-a-face-in-a-crowd-scans-
pick-up-id-personal-d/#ixzz2lR6KFeSs.
26Id.
27Face-Recognition App Lets You Identify Kids That Might be Missing, Advertising Age (May 31, 2013) 
http://adage.com/article/creativity-pick-of-the-day/face-recognition-app-lets-identify-kids-missing/ 
241813/.
24Meghan Kelly, Facebook May Use Your Profile Photo in its Facial Recognition Tech,”Venture Beat 
(August 29, 2013) http://venturebeat.com/2013/08/29/facebook-facial-recognition/.
28Tim Worstal, The Killer Google Glass App That Google Won’t Let You Have, Forbes (November 20, 
2013) 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/timworstall/2013/11/20/the-killer-google-glass-app-that-google-
wont-let-you-have/ .

52
CHAPTER 3  Privacy
Whatever vector the technology takes, the more such sympathetic and socially 
redeeming applications of facial recognition gain acceptance, the more inured and 
less apprehensive the public will be toward the technology. Businesses will then 
encounter less resistance to using it for more commercial purposes. At that point, 
society will grapple in earnest with the boundaries that privacy law can and should 
impose on facial recognition.
Regulating facial recognition
Of course, as mentioned above, regulatory agencies are not waiting until facial 
recognition becomes ubiquitous before they begin to regulate the technology. On  
October 22, 2012, the Federal Trade Commission released a report entitled “Facing 
Facts: Best Practices for Common Uses of Facial Recognition Technologies.”29 The 
FTC has had its eye on this technology for a long time–at least since the workshop 
it held on the subject in December 201130–aware that it is being implemented by a 
wide variety of industries.
Among the privacy issues that concerns the FTC most is “the prospect of iden-
tifying anonymous individuals in public.”31 One fundamental consequence of First 
Amendment jurisprudence, however, is that there are no “anonymous individuals in 
public [places];” being publicly visible pretty well eliminates any expectation of legally 
protectable privacy one might hold. Indeed, even before facial recognition technology 
was dreamed up, the law never recognized a general right to remain an anonymous face 
in a crowd. This is an example of the proposed right to “obscurity” discussed above.
If anything, it has been the opposite; the law has recognized faces as an important 
means of identification. For decades, police have used line-ups to identify suspects’ 
faces, and taken mug shots as a means of recording detainees’ identities. Although 
the recent rise of websites that catalogue these mug shots for shaming and extortion 
purposes has caused some agencies to clamp down on their distribution, most courts 
still protect the public’s right to access these files as public records. And in 2003, a 
Florida judge refused to allow a Muslim woman to obtain a driver’s license unless 
she agreed to remove her veil and be photographed, ruling the state “has a compel-
ling interest in protecting the public from criminal activities and security threats,” 
and that photo identification “is essential to promote that interest.”32 Therefore, we 
are unlikely to see any significant regulation on the gathering and use of facial rec-
ognition information in public places, unless public outcry results in significant new 
privacy legislation.
29Federal Trade Commission, Facing Facts: Best Practices for Common Uses of Facial Recog-
nition Technologies (2012).
30The Federal Trade Commission, Face Facts: A Forum on Facial Recognition Technology (December 
8, 2011).
31Federal Trade Commission, FTC Recommends Best Practice for Companies that Use Facial Recog-
nition Technologies, FTC.gov (October 22, 2012) available at http://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-
releases/2012/10/ftc-recommends-best-practices-companies-use-facial-recognition.
32Peter Cosgrove, Muslim Woman Cannot Wear Veil in Driver’s License Photo, USA Today (June 6, 
2003) http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/news/nation/2003-06-06-license-veil_x.htm.

53
Such regulation may have a greater chance of surviving judicial scrutiny, howev-
er, to the extent that it targets purely commercial activity. As the Supreme Court has 
explained, commercial messages receive less vigorous protection than other speech, 
at least if they have the effect of misleading the public or fostering illegal activity:
The First Amendment’s concern for commercial speech is based on the informa-
tional function of advertising. Consequently, there can be no constitutional objec-
tion to the suppression of commercial messages that do not accurately inform the 
public about lawful activity. The government may ban forms of communication 
more likely to deceive the public than to inform it or commercial speech related 
to illegal activity.33
This is why courts are able to hear such causes of action as trademark infringe-
ment, unfair competition and false advertising – all of which involve activities that 
are, at their core, speech. Because unfair commercial activity is exactly the sort of 
activity that the FTC exists to regulate, it is a logical starting place for conversations 
about the use of facial recognition in commerce.
The FTC sees this as the perfect time to publish its expectations “to ensure that 
as this industry grows, it does so in a way that respects the privacy interests of con-
sumers while preserving the beneficial uses the technology has to offer.”34 The FTC 
Facing Facts report does not have the force of law, but you can bet that it will in-
fluence the decision-making processes of FTC administrative law judges and oth-
ers evaluating novel allegations of “deceptive advertising practices” involving facial 
recognition.
Although the report characterizes its recommendations as “best practices,” it does 
not do much to actually reduce its discussion to practice. Rather, the report loosely 
follows the theme of the following three “principles”:
1.	 Privacy by Design: Companies should build in privacy at every stage of product 
development.
2.	 Simplified Consumer Choice: For practices that are not consistent with the 
context of a transaction or a consumer’s relationship with a business, companies 
should provide consumers with choices at a relevant time and context.
3.	 Transparency: Companies should make information collection and use practices 
transparent.
These “principles” strike me as so vague as to almost be counterproductive. 
They are intuitive to anyone making a modicum of effort to incorporate privacy 
concerns into a facial recognition application. As a result, this recitation is not 
likely to encourage anything more than a modicum of effort to protect privacy. The 
technology itself is so young that efforts to guide it remain purely speculative at 
this point.
﻿ Privacy Concerns Raised by AR
34Federal Trade Commission, supra note 29, at 21.
33Central Hudson Gas & Elec. Corp. v. Public Serv. Comm’n of NY, 447 US 557, 563-64 (1980) (cita-
tions and quotations omitted).

54
CHAPTER 3  Privacy
I am not alone in being uncomfortable with this report. The FTC committee be-
hind the report adopted it on a 4-1 vote. The dissenting commissioner, J. Thomas 
Rosch, wrote that “the Report goes too far, too soon.” He made three points. First, 
he thinks that the report fails to identify any “substantial injury” threatened by facial 
recognition technology. Second, he finds it premature because there is no evidence 
that any abuses of the technology have yet occurred. Third, he believes the recom-
mendation to provide consumers with “choices” anytime that the technology doesn’t 
fit the “context” is impossible, given the difficulty in assessing consumer expecta-
tions. As a result, he says, this amounts to an overly broad “opt-in” requirement.
In the months since this report was released, politicians have not gotten any more 
specific as to how they would regulate facial recognition technology. Even Senator 
Franken’s November 2013 pronouncement complaining about Facebook says only 
that he “will be exploring legislation to protect the privacy of biometric information, 
particularly facial recognition technology” and supports “conven[ing] industry stake-
holders and privacy advocates to establish consensus-driven best practices for the 
use of this technology.”35 Likewise, in December 2013, President Obama announced 
that his administration would be “looking into” these concerns, but offered no more 
specifics than Sen. Franken did.
In January 2014, the National Information and Telecommunications Adminis-
tration convened the industry stakeholder meetings called for by Sen. Franken. Its 
goal is to articulate consensus guidelines for the application of the President’s Bill 
of Rights to facial recognition technology. I had the opportunity to personally par-
ticipate in many of these sessions on behalf of the AR industry. As of this writing, 
those guidelines have not been finalized, and their ultimate utility remains unclear 
(Fig. 3.1).
The FTC report also expressed worry about facial recognition “data [being] col-
lected [that] may be susceptible to security breaches and hacking.”36 These same 
concerns have already been expressed about electronic databases of all kinds, and 
we have seen the consequences of banks, credit card companies, and retailers hav-
ing their information hacked. As a result, there are already several laws on the books 
(mostly at the state level) regulating the privacy of commercial databases and spell-
ing out proper procedures to follow when that privacy has been compromised. The 
FTC also treats the failure of companies to adequately secure customers’ personally 
identifying information as an unfair commercial practice, and occasionally brings 
related enforcement actions. For example, in May 2014, it settled charges it brought 
against Snapchat for failing to provide the advertised level of data security to users 
of its mobile video messaging app.37
36Federal Trade Commission, supra note 29, at 7.
37FTC, “Snapchat Settles FTC Charges That Promises of Disappearing Messages Were False,” May 8, 
2014, available at http://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-releases/2014/05/snapchat-settles-ftc-charg-
es-promises-disappearing-messages-were.
35Letter from All Franken, Chairman of Subcom. on Privacy, Technology, and the Law, to Lawrence E. 
Strickling, Assistant Secretary for Communications and Information, U.S. Department of Commerce (No-
vember 21, 2013) available at www.franken.senate.gov/files/documents/131131NTIAFacebookLetter.pdf.

55
Indeed, one plausible scenario is that governmental agencies and courts will be-
gin to treat the recognizable dimensions of one’s face as another facet of the “person-
ally identifiable information” that is already regulated by a variety of laws. Other 
examples of such sensitive data include Social Security numbers, mailing addresses, 
ZIP codes, phone numbers, and IP addresses. Under today’s laws, businesses are not 
forbidden from asking for or collecting such information, but they must post privacy 
policies listing the information they collect and how it is used. They must also dis-
close when websites deposit “cookies” on users’ computers that allow the user to be 
tracked by advertisers as he or she moves between various websites. Some effort is 
underway to legally regulate the use of cookies and enforce “do not track” protocols, 
but they have not been very successful to date.
DATA ENHANCEMENT
Mid-air augmented displays of virtual information also create new privacy concerns. 
Concept art of near-future AR applications is rife with examples of augmented data 
being displayed as hovering over or nearby individual people. In some cases this is 
social networking or other self-disclosed information about the person, or even digital 
advertising associated with the individual’s apparel. In other cases, though, it is data 
about the person that is stored in a variety of disparate databases with varying degrees 
of public accessibility, and collected by the AR device into one unified display. These 
include credit scores, transactional information drawn from IOT-connected devices, 
﻿ Privacy Concerns Raised by AR
FIGURE 3.1
One of the NTIA’s industry stakeholder meetings on the regulation of commercial facial 
recognition technology.

56
CHAPTER 3  Privacy
political affiliations, and even whether the person appears on sexual offender regis-
tries. In these concepts, such displays are made possible by recognizing the person’s 
facial features and using that identification to query other databases for information 
about the person.
The FTC has previously raised concerns about practices like these, which it calls 
“data enhancement.”38 It began by noting the vast amount of facial data already 
collected by social media companies, and that could easily be gathered by other 
commercial face recognition applications. The FTC then went on to cite a study 
by researchers at Carnegie Mellon University, which combined readily available fa-
cial recognition software with data mining algorithms and statistical identification 
techniques to determine an individual’s name, location, interests, and even the first 
five digits of their Social Security number.39 Powered by AR, this capability could 
ultimately make available to everyone virtually every fact known by anyone about 
someone, just by looking at that person. The ability to socially reinvent one’s self 
at any point in life, already under threat by social media, would be essentially lost.
To address this concern, the FTC suggested such basic steps as reducing the 
amount of time that companies retain facial information and disclosing to the con-
sumer how their data may be used. Aside from being difficult to enforce, however, 
these suggestions do very little to address the practice or policing of such data en-
hancement. If copious amounts of personal information ever become visible through 
the mere act of seeing someone’s face, we can be certain that the resulting public out-
cry will lead to practical and legislative steps to curb abuses of this practice similar to 
the steps described elsewhere in this chapter to address similar concerns in analogous 
circumstances.
For the foreseeable future, then, the most productive avenue for protecting the 
privacy of one’s face in public may be more practical than legal. There are already a 
variety of software products that purport to shield users from being tracked online. 
The free market will certainly meet the same demand with regard to facial recog-
nition. Already, several innovators have proposed various types of camouflage and 
countermeasures to throw off facial recognition software. These include off-center 
masks, makeup, clothing covered in face-prints, and hats containing infrared lights 
that confound video cameras.
Software engineer Greg Vincent has even suggested the development of a wear-
able protocol similar to the robots.txt files that prevent certain websites from be-
ing indexed by search engines.40 (Fig. 3.2) Using this protocol, says Vincent, “I can 
40Google Glass: What are Some Potential Solutions to Issues Regarding Google Glass and Privacy? 
Quora (June 6, 2014, 7:08 PM) <http://www.quora.com/Google-Glass-4/What-are-some-potential-
solutions-to-issues-regarding-Google-Glass-and-privacy> (March 12, 2013); see also Robots.txt for 
Your Face, (March 23, 2013) http://stopthecyborgs.org/2013/03/23/robots-txt-for-your-face/>.
38Federal Trade Commission, Protecting Consumer Privacy in an Era of Rapid Change, 
45-46 (March 2012) available at http://ftc.gov/os/2012/03/120326privacyreport.pdf.
39The report was called “Faces of Facebook: Privacy in an Age of Augmented Reality” and authored 
by Alessandro Acquisti. It appears to no longer be available at the location to which the FTC’s report 
cites, or on any other website that this author has located. But a lecture by Acquisti on a similar topic 
is available here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kcz0hUtYVXc.

57
­request that our conversation not be shared with anyone other than you and I … [or] 
that I not be recorded for later use, that you not photograph me, that you not use facial 
recognition technology on me, or that you not record my voice.”41 As long as society 
retains its anxiety about facial recognition and the law remains unable to assuage that 
concern, we can expect the fashion and consumer electronics industries to fill the gap.
SURVEILLANCE AND SOUSVEILLANCE
All eyes on everything
Privacy advocates have long worried about “Big Brother” governmental agencies us-
ing advanced technology to spy on citizens. Such surveillance activity is inevitable, 
﻿ Privacy Concerns Raised by AR
41Google Glass, supra note 36.
FIGURE 3.2
Greg Vincent’s rough sketch of a robots.txt file for your face.

58
CHAPTER 3  Privacy
as the 2013 NSA spying scandal has reminded us. It is already a given that surveil-
lance cameras are everywhere in modern-day public life, from stores to gas stations 
to street corners to traffic lights. Those are so small as to be barely visible anymore, 
and we rarely even think about them. Indeed, in November 2013, even the City of 
Las Vegas – that self-proclaimed haven of anonymity – announced plans to install 
“Intellistreets” street lights that, among other things, have the ability to record sound 
and shoot video.42 Knowledge is power, and it is the nature of governments to collect 
all the knowledge available to them.
But we are also entering an era where personal, wearable video recording de-
vices are about to become ubiquitous. Wearable technology empowers individuals to 
record the words and deeds of themselves and others far more pervasively than any 
government could reach. Digital eyewear pioneer Steve Mann has coined the word 
“sousveillance” to describe such “recording of activity by a participant in the activ-
ity,” or “inverse surveillance.”43
We have already come to accept that everyone we meet is likely to be carrying 
a video-equipped cell phone that they can pull out at any moment. But the newest 
recording devices are ones that we wear on our persons. Among the earliest of these 
is the Looxcie, an over-the-ear camera that doubles as a Bluetooth headset. More 
recently, GoPro has launched a range of similar wearable cameras. Both companies’ 
devices come with companion mobile apps that can transfer recordings to Facebook, 
or broadcast what a user sees to his friends, live.
The earliest forms of digital eyewear, such as Google Glass and Recon’s ski gog-
gles, represent a transitional species of device between simple digital cameras and 
true AR devices. They offer a heads-up display of information, but are not currently 
designed to truly augment our perception of the physical world by superimposing on 
our vision interactive digital images with the illusion of physicality. Photo and video 
capability are, however, an important part of their functionality, and they make it 
remarkably easy to record on the fly.
All wearable devices are designed to be comfortable, which can cause the wear-
er to forget they’re there. California Lieutenant Governor Gavin Newsom wore the 
Glass prototype during a television interview. Newsom later told Wired, “You can 
easily forget you have them on, and sense the capacity of use in the future,” adding 
the headset felt incredibly light, comfortable and inconspicuous on his head.44
Wearable devices are intended to let technology get out of your way so you can 
record life while still participating in it. This has fantastic upsides, and is some-
thing I have already enjoyed; I’ve made great, hands-free videos of my kids with my  
Looxcie and my Glass while continuing to play with them, rather than pull out my 
42Chris Matyszczyk, Street lights to spy on everything that happens in Vegas? C|NET (November 9, 
2013) http://news.cnet.com/8301-17852_3-57611630-71/street-lights-to-spy-on-everything-that-hap-
pens-in-vegas/ .
43See Torin Monahan, Surveillance and Security: Technological Politics and Power in Everyday Lief 
158 (2006)
44Roberto Baldwin, Sergey Brin Finally Lets Someone Else Where Google Glass, Wired (May 29, 
2012) http://www.wired.com/2012/05/sergey-brin-finally-lets-someone-else-wear--google-glass/.

59
camera and separate myself from the experience. But there are also easily foresee-
able downsides to forgetting you’re wearing a video camera on your head. I wore my 
Looxcie during a 2012 augmented reality conference, to underscore the talks I gave 
there about (among other things) this very subject. Even in that crowd–who are the 
movers and shakers in the industry that will produce these devices–I got a number of 
odd looks, turned heads, and derailed conversations.
And accidents do happen. While wearing my Looxcie, even I – someone who was 
keenly interested in the device’s impact on privacy – forgot I was wearing it at times, 
and I ended up accidentally recording (and later deleting) at least one conversation 
that was supposed to be private, along with a couple inherently private situations. 
What if I had forgotten I was wearing the camera when I walked into a public bath-
room, and recorded myself or someone else in a compromising position? Or worn 
it (accidentally or intentionally) into any other setting in which people expected pri-
vacy, such as a family home, bedroom, or church confessional? Or read a confidential 
document or email? And worse, what if, instead of being set to merely record, my 
device was live-streaming to Facebook or some other audience?
At present, this is much more of a concern with a device like the Looxcie, which 
has a battery life of approximately five hours and is designed for continuous recording, 
than with the earliest digital eyewear. As of this writing, for example, Glass has a battery 
life of only 30 minutes when recording video,45 and it lights up conspicuously when 
running – not to mention that activating the recorder requires a hand gesture or voice 
command. In other words, it is not at all a device designed for surreptitious recording.
But these are the types of concerns we will encounter in droves once true AR 
eyewear goes mainstream. Most of the buzz surrounding these devices centers on the 
digital images that they overlay onto the user’s field of view. Less discussed so far, 
however, is the fact that, in order to truly augment the user’s vision, the eyeglasses 
need to also see (and recognize) what the user sees. Thus, every prototype of AR eye-
wear we have seen to date includes an integrated, forward-facing video camera. They 
have to. The earliest of these devices record only when necessary to run a particular 
app in order to conserve power. But as the augmented experience becomes more ro-
bust, these cameras will need to remain on constantly in order to make the discovery 
of digital content more organic, spontaneous, and useful.
There are also audio-only devices that pose similar concerns. In October 2013, a 
wristband-like audio recording device call Kapture accomplished its fundraising goal 
on Kickstarter. Here’s how the creators described its function:
Kapture functions as a 60-second buffered loop. The loop continuously overwrites 
itself until you tap the device to save a clip. The saved file is downloaded to your 
smartphone where the duration can be shortened and you can name, tag, filter, 
and even share it. Simple!46
﻿ Privacy Concerns Raised by AR
45Saul Berenbaum, Google Glass Explorer Edition has a 30-minute battery life while shooting video, 
Digital Trends (April 25, 2013) http://www.digitaltrends.com/mobile/google-glass-30-minute-
videobattery/#ixzz2lb9DqSYX.
46Kapture, Kapture: The Audio-Recording Wristband. Kickstarter (October 3, 2013) http://www.
kickstarter.com/projects/1483824574/kapture-the-audio-recording-wristband.

60
CHAPTER 3  Privacy
Basically an audio-only version of Looxcie, Kapture’s founders foresee it being 
used to preserve unrepeatable moments with kids or friends, or to record an epiphany 
while the user is driving.
But once the devices are in consumers’ hands, there will be no way to limit the 
purposes for which they are used or the subject matter they are used to record. Even 
the users themselves are not likely to realize everything they’re recording, even when 
they’re subjectively aware that a recording is being made. The human ear has a mar-
velous ability to pick one voice out of a crowd and focus on it, ignoring all other con-
versations. Recording devices, on the other hand, pick up everything within earshot, 
even the confidential conversations that someone wearing the device may not even 
realize they’re hearing.
Sousveillance and invasion of privacy
Wearable sousveillance technologies will prove enormously useful in many circum-
stances. Their use is not inherently incompatible with personal privacy. Nevertheless, 
they will make possible eavesdropping and common-law invasions of privacy on an 
unprecedented scale, to the point where these technologies will eventually force a 
redefinition of what the common law recognizes as private.
From a privacy standpoint, the biggest concern will be the devices that are always 
on and always recording, such as the Looxcie and the Kapture. Because these are 
designed to keep recording even without conscious intervention by the user, it be-
comes virtually inevitable that the user will wear them into situations where he or she 
would not otherwise think to pull out a recording device, and where he or she would 
not record if they had been thinking about it. Here I am referring to private conversa-
tions and intimate surroundings. The fact that these devices record over their buffers 
every so often is irrelevant from a liability perspective; it is the act of recording that 
constitutes eavesdropping and/or intrusion into seclusion. Taking the next step and 
broadcasting that recording to third parties – which, again, at least some of these 
devices can be set to do with or without conscious intervention – risks additional li-
ability for causes of action such as publication of private facts or, depending on the 
context, false light.
Although other mobile AR devices could be used to make surreptitious record-
ings, the prospect does not seem materially greater than with the smartphones and 
other mobile recording devices already on the market. As long as the onus is on the 
user to manually activate the recording feature, they are functionally equivalent to 
any other form of recording device. Indeed, head-worn recording devices actually 
have less capacity for surreptitious recording, since they require the user to con-
stantly look at the subject of the video recording and to be within earshot to hear the 
audio being recorded.
Privacy concerns can also be at least partially mitigated to the extent that the de-
vice in question makes it reasonably clear to third parties that it is recording. Eaves-
dropping and privacy rules generally cover surreptitious recordings, not those made 
with the knowledge of the person being recorded. The Looxcie, for example, turns 
on a small red light when it is recording. It is unclear as of this writing whether the 

61
Kapture wristband or the various digital eyewear in production give any such warn-
ing. Of course, whether such warnings are sufficient to give fair warning of the re-
cording, or whether users have made efforts to obscure them, will depend on the 
facts of each individual dispute, and may require litigation to sort out. The trouble is, 
going through all of the procedural steps necessary to sort out the facts of a case can 
be a long, complicated, and expensive process. I was once involved in an eavesdrop-
ping lawsuit that lasted for eight years, and one of the central questions throughout 
the case was whether the video cameras used to make the recording at issue, and the 
warning lights on them, were visible or not.
Over time, as wearable recording technology becomes more commonplace, the 
average person’s expectations – and, therefore, the law’s definition of a reasonable 
expectation – of privacy will change. Thirty years ago, shoppers in retail stores would 
not have expected to be filmed as they browsed the aisles. Now one cannot walk into 
the typical big-box store without being captured from every angle on hundreds of 
obscure security cameras. Twenty years ago, spies and oddballs were the only people 
we would expect to carry recording devices on their person, and to publish such foot-
age in real time across the planet was unfathomable. Today, it’s odd to meet someone 
who doesn’t carry a device with all of those capabilities. We have accepted those 
developments, and our expectations of privacy have adjusted accordingly. Those ex-
pectations will continue to evolve along with our technology.
Surveilling the sousveillers
People in view of those wearing digital eyewear are not the only ones who can be 
recorded by the devices. Wearable devices are already being used to keep tabs on 
their users as well.
This potential will become especially apparent once eyewear becomes truly ca-
pable of augmenting our vision with data that overlays specific physical objects and 
places. To accomplish that feat, the devices will need to know not only where the 
object or place is, but also where the user’s eyes are pointed, in order to maintain 
the illusion that the digital data is in a fixed physical location. Eye-tracking data is 
already of great interest to retailers and advertisers, who crave to know what draws 
customers’ attention. If our digital devices can store and transmit that data, you can 
bet that advertisers will be clamoring to get their hands on it.
Similarly, employers will be keen to know how much attention their employees 
are paying to their assigned tasks at any given time. Being able to monitor employ-
ees’ eye movements would offer a tempting means of measuring productivity and 
efficiency. Still other examples of potential uses for this data abound, as do other 
means of gathering it. As facial recognition technology improves, for example, retail 
displays will know not only who we are, but also what we’re looking at. Thus will we 
fully enter into the commercial experience depicted by the groundbreaking futurist 
film Minority Report, in which augmented displays personalize shopping experi-
ences based primarily on retinal data.
Following the movements of our eyes will not be the only way that a fully con-
nected, internet of things economy will be able to track us, however.
﻿ Privacy Concerns Raised by AR

62
CHAPTER 3  Privacy
PASSIVE DATA COLLECTION THROUGH THE INTERNET OF THINGS
The phrase “going off the grid” was coined to describe a lifestyle that intentionally 
avoids interacting with technology that leaves a trace of one’s activities. As depicted 
by characters in popular fiction, this has heretofore been accomplished mainly by 
paying for things with cash instead of credit, using a false name, and talking on pay-
as-you-go mobile phones. But how can one stay off the grid when every single physi-
cal device in existence has the capacity to gather and transmit digital data?
The IOT’s sense of touch: beacons and taggants
As of this writing, Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) technology is just starting to roll 
out to the public, most notably in the “iBeacon” feature of Apple’s iOS7. It has been 
seen as a rival to Near Field Communication (NFC) technology (which iOS8 also 
embraces), or as a convenient way to pipe coupons into your phone. But history 
will look back at BLE as a major step forward in manifesting the Internet of Things 
(IOT), and in eroding any remaining illusions of privacy we have in our physical 
whereabouts.
BLE is a means of transferring data. “Beacons” – devices that use BLE – are tiny, 
wireless sensors that transmit data within a 10-meter range. At present, they support 
only low data rates and can only send (and not receive) small data packets, but these 
are perfect for interacting with iPhones and wearable computing devices such as 
smart watches and fitness trackers.47 In light of the current proliferation in such de-
vices, therefore, it’s safe to say that in the near future we may carry a half-dozen 
devices or more that are equipped with BLE or similar technology.
One of the most obvious applications of BLE is micro-location geofencing. GPS 
technology is great for determining your approximate location to within a few feet, 
but it relies on satellites that can’t see into buildings very well. A mobile device run-
ning BLE technology, however, can interact with nearby beacons to determine its 
precise location, even indoors.
Set up around a store, they can detect shoppers entering and exiting, and send 
them coupons (customized to your unique shopper profile) or even internal direc-
tions – Minority Report without the retinal scans. You will soon be able to even pay 
for goods without ever pulling out your phone, just like the newest vehicles will open 
their doors even when your key stays in your pocket. PayPal is already developing 
just such an app using BLE.
The real potential of BLE lies not in coupons, but in the IOT–the burgeoning 
trend towards making physical objects internet-connected and digitally interactive. 
Just like humans cannot meaningfully interact with the world around them without 
their five senses, so too will IOT-enabled objects lack interactivity without some 
means of sensing and communicating with their surroundings. BLE beacons are a 
major step toward providing that ability.
47Elyse Betters, “Apple’s iBeacons explained: What it is and why it matters,” Pocket-Lint, September 
18, 2013, available at http://www.pocket-lint.com/news/123730-apple-s-ibeacons-explained-what-it-
is-and-why-it-matters/

63
In all likelihood, some improved version of BLE technology, or its next-gen-
eration replacement with even broader capabilities, will be available either when 
this book is released, or shortly thereafter. Moreover, as discussed in Chapter 2, 
the need for digital sensors to precisely locate physical objects may lead to the 
deployment of beacons or taggants on the micro- or even nano-scale. Each of these 
devices – including present-day beacons and RFID tags as well as taggants and 
other future technologies – will be able, in theory, to have its own unique IP ad-
dress on the internet. The migration begun in 2012 of the Internet Protocol address 
system from IPv4 to IPv6 increased the total number of IP addresses from a mere 
4.3 billion – a number we’ve already reached – to 340 undecillion (i.e., 340 tril-
lion trillion trillion). Now, literally every Barbie doll, toilet paper roll, and random 
chatski can have its own unique IP address on the internet. Each becomes a data 
point capable of reporting its exact physical location on a real-time, global map. 
Once more people are using this infrastructure, its consequences will become more 
apparent.
Aggregating our interactions with the IOT
Digitizing our physical interactions will create a digital record of our movements and 
whereabouts that had never previously existed. For advertisers and retailers, this will 
be a goldmine of information just like social media was before it–a brand-new trove 
of personal data that can be used to send out even more precisely targeted commer-
cial solicitations. Without doubt, those providing IOT services will want not only to 
recognize who we are, but also to remember where we’ve been.
And just like we do online now, many users will consent to their information 
being collected in this manner. The convenience factor will be huge. Just as internet 
browsers use cookies and browsing histories to remember who I am without forc-
ing me to re-type my password every time I re-visit a website, so too will I want my 
clothing store to remember my size, my restaurant to remember my favorite meals, 
my grocery store to remember the location of my favorite items, and the news feeds 
that I’ll see projected everywhere to remember my favorite topics.
But others will be remembering that data as well. Thanks to Edward Snowden 
and others like him, the world is already aware of how much information private 
companies and the government collect about our emails and other online interac-
tions. Law enforcement already does all it can to track a suspect’s physical move-
ments, whether through cellular towers, IP addresses, or GPS trackers. In the near 
future, the government will likely have access to high-resolution, constantly updat-
ed digital maps of the entire planet’s surface; the Pentagon’s National Geospatial-
Intelligence Agency is already at work on an “orthorectified image skin” that would 
provide the base layer for a next-generation map.48 Just like GPS and the internet 
itself, it will only be a matter of time before the private sector gets its hand on this 
geolocation data (Fig. 3.3).
﻿ Privacy Concerns Raised by AR
48Ray Locker, Pentagon Agency Creating Digital Map of the World, USA Today (October 26, 2013) 
http://www.usatoday.com/story/nation/2013/10/25/nga-digital-map-world-updated/3189781/.

64
CHAPTER 3  Privacy
When the government and the private sector have access to high-fidelity geoloca-
tion data and a geolocation-aware sensor infrastructure, merely walking down the 
street with one or more sensor-enabled devices on our persons will leave behind so 
much data about our physical location that it may well become possible to create 
precise maps of our every step going back hours, days, or even longer. Add to that 
the digital data we’ll leave behind in each of the physical objects with which we in-
teracted along the way. Everything we touch – the toothbrush we use in the morning, 
our clothing, doors through which we pass, the pavement we step on, even the plas-
tic fork from the street-side falafel stand – could potentially be capable of not only 
recording their interactions with us, but also transmitting that data to one or more 
servers, which then collect, collate, and make the data available for reporting out.
Even this possibility could one day seem tame if a system of trackable nanotag-
gants ever truly becomes reality. With that technology, it could become possible for 
the first time to literally destroy the possibility of privacy altogether–at least when 
it comes to concealing your physical location. Consider: the nanotaggants that the 
military is reportedly developing are intended to be sprayed onto enemy combatants 
so they can be tracked in situations where direct surveillance is impossible, such as 
urban combat. Because these devices exist on a micro or nano scale, they’re invisible 
to the human eye. Ideally, the soldier won’t even know he’s been tagged, let alone be 
FIGURE 3.3
The defense agency working on next-generation digital maps.

65
able to find or remove all of the devices. The same technology could be used to track 
anyone. Even if you knew you were tagged, could you remove them all? A human 
skin pore is 200∼250 nanometers wide, which easily allows nano-scale products to 
be absorbed into the skin. What if you inhaled or ingested them? Like Lady Macbeth, 
you’d wash and wash, but never get the damned nano-spot out.
Privacy regulations and IOT
Government regulators are only beginning to draw lines of privacy around data ac-
cumulated by the IOT. Certainly, where networked devices are used to surreptisously 
record the words and actions of third parties, existing causes of action for eavesdrop-
ping and common law invasion of privacy will be enforced, just as they are now 
with the “Peeping Tom” cameras that seem to regularly find their way into changing 
rooms, bedrooms, and other unambiguously private places.
In September 2013, the FTC took its first enforcement action related to IOT-
collected information. TRENDnet, a company that markets video cameras designed 
to allow consumers to monitor their homes remotely, settled FTC charges that its lax 
security practices exposed the private lives of hundreds of consumers to public view-
ing online.49 According to the FTC, TRENDnet marketed its numerous products as 
being “secure” when, in fact, the cameras had faulty software that left them open to 
online interception. The complaint further alleged that, in January 2012, a hacker ex-
ploited this flaw and made it public, and, eventually, hackers posted links to the live 
feeds of nearly 700 of the cameras. The feeds displayed babies asleep in their cribs, 
young children playing, and adults going about their daily lives. Once TRENDnet 
learned of this flaw, it uploaded a software patch to its website and sought to alert its 
customers of the need to visit the website to update their cameras.
“The Internet of Things holds great promise for innovative consumer products 
and services. But consumer privacy and security must remain a priority as com-
panies develop more devices that connect to the Internet,” said FTC Chairwoman 
Edith Ramirez.50 Under the terms of its settlement with the Commission, TREND-
net was prohibited from misrepresenting the security of its devices or network, and 
was required to establish a comprehensive information security program designed to 
address security risks that could result in unauthorized access to or use of the com-
pany’s devices. The company also was required to obtain third-party assessments of 
its security programs every two years for the next 20 years.
This first foray into protecting privacy in the IOT – which came only a month be-
fore the FTC hosted its first public seminar about the IOT – signaled that the FTC is 
likely to continue following its existing practices in this new technological field. That 
is, it will take a proactive role of facilitating public conversations on the topic, while 
at the same time reacting to the worst offenders in the field in order to set examples 
﻿ Privacy Concerns Raised by AR
49Edward Wyatt, F.T.C. Says Webcam;s Flaw Put Users’ Lives on Display, The New York Times 
(September 4, 2013) available at www.nytime.com/2013/09/05/technology/ftc-says-webcams-flat-
put-users-lives-on-display.html?_r=0.
50Id.

66
CHAPTER 3  Privacy
for the rest of the industry. The FTC has done the same thing in recent years with 
social media endorsements and other fields that catch its interest.
There is every indication that regulators will continue to have plenty of opportu-
nities to punish lax security practices in the IOT space. A 2014 study by researchers 
at Hewlett-Packard “identified an alarmingly high number of vulnerabilities” in the 
most popular IOT devices.51 These insecurities ranged “from issues that could raise 
privacy concerns to serious problems like lack of transport encryption, vulnerabili-
ties in the administration Web interface, insecure firmware update mechanisms and 
weak or poorly protected access credentials.”52 Sixty percent of the devices were 
vulnerable to common hacking attacks, while 70% used unencrypted networks and 
80% used extremely weak passwords. 53 This reflects “the current nature of online 
services [to] provide[] few mechanisms for individuals to have oversight and control 
of their information, particularly across tech-vendors.”54 At some point, certain unfair 
practices may become so prevalent that Congress will feel the need to step in with 
new legislation.
The IOT will also implicate subject-specific privacy laws. Without question, IOT 
advancements will allow a greater range of devices to do such things as storing per-
sonal health information or sending messages that are intended to be private. When 
they do, new questions will arise about applying existing, subject-specific privacy 
laws like HIPAA and the Stored Communications Act. For example, the refrigerator 
is a device that many IOT enthusiasts talk about being networked. They often cite 
such advantages as the fridge being able to tell you when you’re out of a particular 
item, or what other ingredient you might need for a recipe. But what if an insurance 
company sought access to our fridges’ data logs to determine how healthy our diets are 
before determining what our health insurance premiums should be? The same could 
be asked of the panoply of health statistic-monitoring wearable devices that are now 
all the rage. In light of how strict many of the current regulations concerning health in-
formation already are, it would not be surprising to see the government severely limit 
who can access such information. The counter-argument will be made, however, that 
insurers should have access to this data in order to set rates that are fair to everyone.
Geolocation privacy
Geolocation data is something the courts have been trying to wrap their arms around 
for a few years now, with no clear boundary lines yet emerging. In January 2012, 
the United States Supreme Court decided United States v. Jones,55 in which it unani-
mously ruled that the attachment of a GPS tracking device to an individual’s vehicle 
51Lucian Constantin, “Popular Internet-of-Things devices aren’t secure,” Computerworld, July 30, 
2014, available at http://www.computerworld.com/article/2490587/networking/popular-internet-of-
things-devices-aren-t-secure.html
52Id.
53Id.
54“The internet of things - the next big challenge to our privacy,” The Guardian, July 28, 2014, available 
at http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jul/28/internet-of-things-privacy.
55565 US ___, 132 S.Ct. 945 (2012),

67
by police, and subsequent use of that device to monitor the vehicle’s movements on 
public streets, constituted a “search or seizure” within the meaning of the Fourth 
Amendment. Contrary to many news reports at the time of the decision, however, 
the Jones Court reached no conclusion on whether that search was unreasonable, 
or whether it required a warrant. The case produced three opinions from overlap-
ping groups of Justices, some of whom found any degree of GPS tracking without a 
warrant legally dubious, while others would limit only long-term tracking, and still 
others so no problem with collecting such data as long as the police committed no 
physical “trespass” onto the person’s property. This mish-mash of views illustrates 
the difficulty in applying eighteenth century legal principles to twenty-first century 
technology.
At least with regard to data collected by mobile phones, then, courts have gen-
erally concluded that “[u]nder existing law, … a user does not have a reasonable 
expectation of privacy as to geolocation data.”56 This is because, unlike the police-
imposed “tracking devices” at issue in Jones, consumers carry mobile phones with 
themselves voluntarily, and are presumed to agree to their carriers’ privacy policies 
that allow collection and sharing of this data. Presumably, mobile AR devices will 
come with the same broad policy provisions, and the same legal principles will apply 
to the data they collect.
Regulatory bodies are also paying attention to geolocation data privacy. On May 
25, 2012, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) released a report with 
the opaque title “Location-Based Services: An Overview of Opportunities and Other 
Considerations.”57 The report outlines the growing use of location-based services 
(LBS) in navigation, tracking, social networking, gaming, retail, real estate, advertis-
ing, news, weather, device management, and public safety applications, and govern-
ment and industry efforts to address the privacy issues surrounding such services. It 
stemmed from a June 2011 workshop that the FCC hosted on the subject.
Like the FTC’s efforts, this FCC report offered more general principles than con-
crete rules. In this case, the report highlighted “notice and transparency,” “meaning-
ful consumer choice,” “third party access to personal information,” and “data se-
curity and minimization” as its primary concerns. The FCC ended its report with a 
warning that it will “continue to monitor industry compliance with applicable statu-
tory requirements and evolving industry best practices,” and that “additional steps 
may be necessary if privacy issues are not met as effectively and comprehensively as 
possible or within reasonable time frames.”58
What will be more interesting, though, is determining expectations of privacy 
in our digital interactions with IOT-connected physical devices. It is one thing to  
﻿ Privacy Concerns Raised by AR
58Id. at 2.
57Federal Communications Commission, Location-Based Services: An Overview of Oppor-
tunities and Other considerations (May 2012) available at http://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/­
attachmatch/DOC-314283A1.pdf.
56In re Smartphone Geolocation Data Application, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 62605, at *45 (E.D.N.Y. 
May 1, 2013); see also United States v. Caraballo, Case No. 5:12-cr-105 (D. Ver. August 7, 2013) 
(collecting cases).

68
CHAPTER 3  Privacy
follow the legal fiction that everyone visiting a website or opening a particular soft-
ware program reads and agrees to its terms of use, including the privacy policy that 
allows personal data to be collected. It will be another thing to apply that presumption 
to random devices we encounter in the physical world. Expecting every BLE-enabled 
beacon we will encounter on the sidewalk or within stores to carry a privacy policy that 
consumers can be expected to read and consent to seems impractical. The companies 
that provide service to our AR devices will likely seek to obtain from users a blanket 
consent to data collection on the front end, but even that consent cannot meaningfully 
apply to every party who will eventually have access to our interactions with the IOT.
USING AR TO ENHANCE PRIVACY
A new approach will need to be found. Here, in addition to new questions, AR also 
offers potential solutions.
Wearable technology in general has the potential to change individual users’ at-
titudes toward data privacy. On today’s internet, the providers of content and services 
do not go out of their way to offer individuals an opportunity to understand, much 
less control, how their data is collected or used. In most circumstances, any such ef-
fort is only the result of cajoling by regulators, and comes in the form of a dense pri-
vacy policy that offers little or no more information beyond what is legally required. 
After years of operating in this environment, users have become accustomed to the 
idea that controlling data privacy is beyond their reach.
With wearable and “pervasive computing, [however,] much of the technology be-
comes tangible and familiar. This makes issues of privacy more readily apparent to 
users. … If you can physically witness aspects of data collection, it short-circuits 
what has traditionally been a long feedback loop between privacy risk and cumulative 
effect. The hope is that the increased awareness inspires action.”59 Moreover, as wear-
able devices make computing a more personalized experience, “it could also be used 
to provide individuals with the opportunity to take control of their personal data.”60
By truly allowing users to see the data they exchanges, AR interfaces could go one 
step further than other wearable devices in bringing about this shift in users’ mindset 
about their data. Because augmented display technologies will allow us to see large dis-
plays of virtual data floating in mid-air, rather than relying on size-constrained physical 
monitors, privacy warnings and dialogues can be made easier to notice. They will also 
be made easier to understand if they are displayed in physical proximity to the device 
being warned of, rather than on a remote, two-dimensional privacy document. So, for 
example, if the manufacturer of my refrigerator wishes to warn me that it will remem-
ber all of the food items I place inside the fridge, it can be programmed to display in 
my AR eyewear a large, red box containing this warning and floating in mid-air in front 
59“The internet of things - the next big challenge to our privacy,” The Guardian, July 28, 2014, available 
at http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jul/28/internet-of-things-privacy.
60Id.

69
﻿ Using AR to Enhance Privacy
of the refrigerator door. By gesturing a hand (which, at that point, will likely also be 
equipped with location-aware transmitters for just such a purpose as this) through the 
dialogue box, I can indicate my assent to this data collection and go about my busi-
ness. Similarly, as I walk down the sidewalk, my AR eyewear could be programmed to 
display the geographic boundary lines around each store’s BLE sensor network. These 
could be highlighted in predetermined colors, or annotated with the appropriate warn-
ing language, to indicate that by stepping over the line, the store’s network will register 
my physical presence there and be permitted to digitally interact with me. In both 
examples, the consumer is able to make a decision that is orders of magnitude more 
informed than anything allowed by present-day digital privacy practice.
Software coder Sander Veenhof has actually already published the first attempt at 
a digital eyewear application that attempts to enhance an individual’s privacy. Called 
“Watch Your Privacy,”61 the app “visualises nearby privacy intrusions based on open 
data about surveillance cameras worldwide.”62 It also claims to map the real-time geo-
location of other digital eyewear wearers who are using the app. In both cases, the 
goal is to inform the user as to the location of video cameras (both stationary and 
wearable) so that the user can make an informed choice as to whether or not they wish 
to be filmed. The screen capture included here as Fig. 3.4 demonstrates an augmenta-
tion showing red and yellow circles, indicating areas where a camera is or could be 
pointed, and green areas that are not being surveilled. Presumably, the same approach 
could be applied to beacons and other sensors capable of reading NFC, Bluetooth, 
Wi-fi, or other signals. Of course, this early implementation has a number of practical 
limitations; its database of camera locations will necessarily be incomplete, and the 
augmentations are likely only approximate. As a proof of concept, however, Veenhof’s 
creation is a marvelous sneak peek at what AR could do to enhance personal privacy.
61“Watch Your Privacy,” available at http://sndrv.com/watchyourprivacy/.
62Id.
FIGURE 3.4
“Watch Your Privacy” by Sander Veenhoff.

71
CHAPTER
Augmented Reality Law, Privacy, and Ethics﻿
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• AR’s use in advertising and marketing
• Unfair competition
• Disclaimers and disclosures
• Mobile commerce
INTRODUCTION
As augmented reality grows in importance as a medium, it will be used more heavily 
for advertising. That is an assertion so obvious as to hardly require support, but copi-
ous amounts of evidence can be found both in the prevalence of ad-supported content 
online and on the air, as well as the accelerating trend of AR ads already underway.
Less certain, however, is how the various laws and regulatory bodies governing 
commercial scruples will react to these innovations. Federal regulators have already 
been invited to limit the use of AR in advertising, but to date have refused to do so. 
As with web-based advertising before it, though, it can only be a matter of time until 
we see the development of new norms for fair advertising in the new medium of AR. 
Moreover, recent precedents in the regulation of internet marketing offer clues as to 
how AR is likely to be policed.
AR’s USE IN ADVERTISING AND MARKETING
HOW AR IS CURRENTLY USED
Printed targets
For several years now, printed advertisements have contained “targets” that trigger 
augmented content on a computer screen when held up to a computer webcam or 
mobile device. The first of these usually took the form of Quick Response (QR) bar-
codes. The fact that these blocky boxes stood out from the surrounding text proved to 
be both an advantage and disadvantage; although they made it (relatively) clear to au-
diences that an interactive experience was available (once the public caught on to 
what QR codes were, that is), they were not the most aesthetically pleasing content 
to include in valuable print space.
Advertising, Marketing, 
and eCommerce
4

72
CHAPTER 4  Advertising, Marketing, and eCommerce
Therefore, even though you will still find QR codes on printed advertise-
ments today, it is much more common for augmented content to be triggered by 
images already present in the ads themselves. One early example of this tech-
nique was the newspaper ads that Universal ran in the January 28, 2010 issue 
of USA Today for its new “Wizarding World of Harry Potter” theme park.1 The 
ad contained a two-dimensional sketch of the park. When held up to a webcam 
or mobile device, the park came alive, allowing readers to explore it in three 
dimensions.
Interactive print
This term describes an interactive, augmented experience with the pages of printed 
books, magazines, and promotional flyers. The concept is materially identical to the 
earliest print advertisements designed for webcams, except these are optimized for 
mobile devices and typically offer a wider range of real-time interaction and utility 
for the reader. Examples of this type of experience include:
• 
Science textbooks with molecules that appear to hover over the page, allowing 
the reader to physically interact with them;
• 
Products that hover in space above their print ads, allowing shoppers to inspect 
the device in three dimensions, make it move, and even hear audio of what the 
product sounds like when used;
• 
Two-dimensional floor plans that spring to life in three dimensions, allowing 
readers to look through virtual windows and to test how various light sources 
would illuminate a room;
• 
Instruction manuals that display assembly directions step by step, with three-
dimensional animations;
• 
Handouts at automotive shows that show consumers three-dimensional models 
of cars that can be explored from every angle;
• 
Videos that appear to play on top of a printed page;
• 
Digital buttons that “pop out” from a physical page, allowing users to select new 
digital content by touching their finger to that portion of the page; and
• 
Pages that become the anchor for a broader digital display, such as by placing 
a page on a floor and stepping back for broader perspective, allowing the user’s 
device to show what a life-sized piece of furniture, machinery, or floor tiling 
would look like in that space.
By taking advantage of the ever-increasing processing power of mobile devices 
and of the environment in which the typical user will encounter the printed material, 
interactive print represents a qualitative improvement in user experience over first-
generation augmented advertisements.
1Augmented reality map of Wizarding World of Harry Potter available in “USA Today”, Orlando 
Attractions, (January 22, 2012), available at http://attractionsmagazine.com/augmented-reality-
map-of-wizarding-world-of-harry-potter-available-in-usa-today/#sthash.AAqvMcLy.dpuf.

73
Augmented products
The concept of interactive “print” can be, and has been, applied to three-dimensional 
objects as well as the printed page. Starbucks was one of the first retail brands to 
include augmented content on product packaging. During the holiday-themed pro-
motions, customers using a branded app could view select coffee cups to see one 
of several different characters emerge and perform various actions.2 Absolut did 
something similar with their “Absolut Truths” app, which encouraged consumers to 
locate targets on specially marked bottles to launch videos that “[e]xplore the un-
necessary lengths we go to, to make our vodka good.”3 In 2014, McDonald’s used 
Qualcomm’s Vuforia AR software to augment its french fry containers. The associ-
ated app turned the containers into an interactive soccer game to promote the World 
Cup tournament.
Increasingly, AR apps are being launched in connection with toys. These differ 
from the aforementioned promotional campaigns in that the app is designed for re-
peated use by the consumer after purchase, rather than solely as an inducement to 
make the purchase. For example, Disney offers a “Magic Mirror” app that offers 
children the chance to discover a wide range of augmented experiences when used in 
connection with the “Disney Princess Ultimate Dream Castle.”4 (Fig. 4.1) Although 
AR’s Use in Advertising and Marketing
FIGURE 4.1
A child making and displaying augmented content with the “Disney Princess Ultimate 
Dream Castle.”
2Starbucks, Starbucks Cup Magic, Youtube (November 8, 2011) http://www.youtube.com/
watch?feature=player_embedded&v=RWwQXi9RG0w.
3Absolut Vodka, Absolute Truths (September 21, 2012) https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/absolut-truths/
id492665840?mt=8.
4Disney, Disney Magic Mirror (September 23, 2013) https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/disney-magic-
mirror/id591987216?mt=8.

74
CHAPTER 4  Advertising, Marketing, and eCommerce
nominally sold for $1.99, the castle toy comes with a code for a free download. At the 
2014 Augmented World Expo, Qualcomm demonstrated a toy military vehicle that 
children could scan with a mobile device in order to “import” the toy into a digital 
universe. This is a variation on the Skylanders and Disney Infinity products that also 
feature physical toys that affect digital game play.
Offerings such as this turn AR into “added value” that makes the physical prod-
uct more attractive to would-be purchasers – often at very little marginal cost to the 
manufacturer.
In-store kiosks
Lego pioneered the concept of importing the at-home webcam experience into retail 
stores (Fig. 4.2). Shoppers in select Lego Stores will find kiosks to which they can 
hold up certain boxes of Lego toys. When they do, the webcam displays a three-di-
mensional, animated depiction of the toy that the box of bricks is designed to create –  
and projects that depiction as if it is actually present on top of the box the customer 
is holding. Rotating the box allows customers to view the toy from multiple angles. 
In this case, the imagery already present on one entire face of the box serves as the 
target that triggers the augmented display. And although the application is limited to 
one, immobile device, it works instantly without the need for customers to pull out a 
mobile device or download a specific app. Therefore, although such kiosks perform 
only one function, they do it very well.
Public installations
Lego is not the only entity to make creative use of AR in a fixed physical space. 
Iowa’s Simpson College drew attention by hanging a banner inside a local mall, 
then encouraging teens to view the banner through a custom app that augmented 
FIGURE 4.2
The Lego store kiosk.

75
it with digital graphics, sound and video.5 Several brands, including National Geo-
graphic6 and the BBC7, have set up billboard-sized video walls inside shopping 
malls that display the pedestrians in front of the wall, along with digital animals 
with which the shoppers can interact – not unlike a giant version of the Kinectimals 
game for the Microsoft Xbox Kinect8 (which itself was an impressive step forward 
in mass-market AR). (Fig. 4.3) Victoria’s Secret9 and Disney10 have done the same 
with augmented characters, while Nokia11 and Ford Motor Company12 have set up 
similar, somewhat smaller interactive mall displays.
Even non-commercial entities have taken advantage of AR’s unique capacity for 
messaging. (Fig. 4.4) Apparently, public employees in the Netherlands frequently 
AR’s Use in Advertising and Marketing
FIGURE 4.3
National Geographic AR installation in a shopping mall.
5Karine Joly, Beyond the boring #highered ad banner: Augmented reality done right by Simpson College, 
College Web Editor (Mar. 25, 2013) http://collegewebeditor.com/blog/index.php/archives/2013/03/25/
beyond-the-boring-highered-ad-banner-augmented-reality-done-right-by-simpson-college/
6David Kiefaber, National Geographic Lets You Pet Dinosaurs at the Mall: Augmented Reality 
Goes Jurassic (November 17, 2011) http://www.adweek.com/adfreak/national-geographic-lets-you-
pet-dinosaurs-mall-136591.
7Yi Chen, BBC Augmented Reality Brings Artic Animals to Life in Local Malls, (June 1, 2012) http://
www.psfk.com/2012/06/bbc-arctic-augmented-reality.html
8See Xbox Marketplace, Kinnectimals Now With Bears!, Xbox.com (October 1, 2011) http://marketplace. 
xbox.com/en-US/Product/Kinectimals/66acd000-77fe-1000-9115-d8024d5308b3#/Home.
9Malory Russell, 11 Amazing Augmented Reality Ads, (January 28, 2012) available at http://www.
businessinsider.com/11-amazing-augmented-reality-ads-2012-1?op=1.
10Disney Parks, Disney Villans Take Over the Streeds of New York City, Youtube (December 9, 2011) 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=CGzkbx4EMR0.
11Xath Cruz, Nokia’s Augmented Reality Experience Hits Malls, Creative Guerilla Marketing (No-
vember 29, 2012) http://www.creativeguerrillamarketing.com/augmented-reality/nokias-augmented-
reality-experience-hits-malls/.
12Aden Hepburn, Ford C-Max Augmented Reality Billboards, Digital Buzz Blog (February 28, 
2011) http://www.digitalbuzzblog.com/ford-c-max-augmented-reality-digital-billboards/.

76
CHAPTER 4  Advertising, Marketing, and eCommerce
encounter resistance – and sometimes even violence – while attempting to assist 
other citizens. Making matters worse, in several such incidents, passersby chose 
not to intervene on the public servants behalf. To combat this “bystander effect,”13 
the Dutch government took the creative approach of installing interactive video 
billboards over heavily trafficked public streets in Amsterdam and Rotterdam. The 
screens played pre-recorded scenes of public servants being attacked on the streets 
just below the signs, and overlaid onto these scenes real-time video from the same 
location, so that those watching the display could see themselves in the midst of the 
disturbing scene, yet doing nothing to stop the violence. The video was not inter-
active, so there was nothing these passersby could actually do about the violence. 
Nevertheless, viewers gained a unique perspective on just how out of place a passive 
onlooker appears in that situation. “Whether or not it’s achieving its higher pur-
pose,” wrote Popular Science magazine, “the technology is turning some heads on 
the street. It appears that being injected into an augmented reality without warning 
is just as jarring as it sounds.”14
Projection mapping
As discussed in Chapter 2, projection mapping may not meet some people’s defini-
tion of “augmented reality.” But when done well, its effect is every bit as immersive 
and impressive as any other form of digital augmentation.
FIGURE 4.4
Dutch billboard using AR for public shaming.
14Clay Dillow, Video: Augmented Reality Billboard Installed in Amsterdam, to Educate and Shame 
Passers-By, Popular Science (April 29, 2010) available at http://www.popsci.com/technology/
article/2010-04/dutch-psa-uses-augmented-reality-shame-citizens-not-helping-their-countrymen.
13The “bystander effect,” or “Genovese syndrome,” is hardly unique to the Netherlands; it has been 
studied at least since the infamous 1964 murder of Kitty Genovese in New York, when thirty-eight 
neighbors heard the crime take place but took no action. See Murder of Kitty Genovese, Wikipedia, 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Murder_of_Kitty_Genovese (last visited June 9, 2012)

77
Advertisers have taken notice. Hyundai used projection mapping to spectacular 
effect to advertise their new Accent sedan. The company suspended an actual vehicle 
on the side of a building, then used projection mapping to make it appear as if the 
building itself moved and morphed into various roadways on which the car trav-
eled.15 Nike, BOX, the Tokyo City Symphony, Volkswagen, Nissan, Gillette, Sam-
sung, Sony, Chevrolet, and Lamborghini, among others, have all employed similar 
technology for marketing spectacles.16
HOW AR IS LIKELY TO BE USED FOR ADVERTISING IN THE FUTURE
All of the foregoing technology will continue to have its place in marketing efforts, 
while at the same time continuing to evolve as advancing capabilities and new imagi-
nations open the door to greater innovation. Each method currently shares the at-
tribute of being new and unusual, which makes it easy for them to draw customer 
attention and increase engagement. That, in turn, translates into easily quantifiable 
results for advertising agencies that they can then use to convince more retailers to 
use the same concepts. As these methods become commonplace, however, something 
more than easy digital gimmicks will be necessary to capture consumers’ attention.
The following seem like safe predictions to make regarding AR in near-future 
advertising.
More interactivity in more places
There are millions of static, flat surfaces waiting to be augmented, in the form of the 
exterior walls on buildings all around the world that generally do not change signifi-
cantly over time. Billboards and other wall-sized advertisements are similarly dura-
ble flat surfaces that, although they change periodically, last long enough to structure 
a promotional campaign around them. The only thing keeping augmented advertise-
ments from appearing (or, more precisely, being available to be made to appear by 
the viewer) on them is a lack of adoption by retailers and advertisers – which, in turn, 
is probably mostly attributable to inertia and the absence of a sufficiently attractive 
business model to overcome that inertia.
Insufficient adoption of wearable technology is another contributing factor. It is 
notable that many of the most impressive uses of AR in advertising discussed above 
employed large, static displays that allow viewers to interact with the digital content 
without needing to hold up a mobile device to view it, much less download a specific 
app for that device. Mobile AR will not create that same hands-free, immersive inter-
action until we no longer need to use our hands to operate the hardware.
Hardware capabilities also limit the range of immersive experiences a retailer can 
generate. Current digital AR technology looks for pre-determined “target” images on 
AR’s Use in Advertising and Marketing
15Discover Hyundai, Hyundai Accent 3D Projection Mapping, Youtube (April 5, 2011) http://www.
youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=tu0TRA6a21Q.
16See Digital Buzz Blog http://www.digitalbuzzblog.com/tag/3d-projection-mapping/ (last visited 
June 9, 2014).

78
CHAPTER 4  Advertising, Marketing, and eCommerce
which to display its content, and those images are often deliberately placed indoors, 
where lighting and position can be controlled. As sensors become better able to rec-
ognize a wider range of objects under less controlled conditions, advertisers will have 
a wider range of surfaces at their disposal to augment – including people walking 
down an outdoor sidewalk, moving vehicles, and the like.
Biometrics
Along with immersiveness, personalization is another characteristic that makes 
marketing more effective. The 2002 Steven Spielberg film Minority Report already 
showed us the path forward to hyper-personalized marketing: biometrics. Although 
we are not much closer to using retinal scans or fingerprints for mass-market com-
mercial purposes, facial recognition technology is poised for widespread adoption. 
As discussed at length in Chapter 3, retailers are already implementing facial rec-
ognition technology in various settings and industries to remarkable effect, and this 
trend will only grow as the public becomes more inured to the attendant privacy 
implications. Accurate sensing and reproduction of other bodily features is similarly 
advancing. The combination of these technologies will not only allow for “magic 
mirror”-type augmented displays to sell apparel, but also make it easier for market-
ers to store and remember an individual’s preferences and shopping history across 
multiple locations and platforms (again, as popularized by Minority Report).
Recent advancements have also suggested futures that even Spielberg did not 
foresee. For example, Google created a buzz in mid-2013 by receiving a patent17 on 
“pay-per-gaze” advertising – a method that crosses the current “pay-per-click” model 
of online ads with the mobile AR enabled by Glass and other wearable devices. It 
would allow advertising service providers to charge an advertiser each time someone 
looked at their ad for a certain period of time through their wearable device.
But wait – there’s more! The same patent described a similar payment model, ex-
cept gauged on the viewer’s emotional reaction, rather than on mere viewing. “Pupil 
dilation can be correlated with emotional states, (e.g., surprise, interest, etc.),” the 
patent notes, and a wearable device that tracks such reactions can also transmit them 
to the advertiser for analytic purposes.18
Other biometric data would likewise be available for tracking user reaction to 
advertisements. Chapter  2 explained recent developments in using head-mounted 
sensors to track a user’s brain waves and correlate them with certain digital content. 
Similar sensors could correlate certain brain activity with particular advertising, cre-
ating a virtually foolproof record of the ad’s true effectiveness. Researchers are al-
ready exploring the use of brain waves as a replacement for passwords;19 commercial 
spin-offs of this technology would not be far behind.
17U.S. Patent No., 8,510,166, (filed May 11, 2011), available at <http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser
?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=36&p=1&f=G&l=
50&d=PTXT&S1=%2820130813.PD.+AND+Google.ASNM.%29&OS=ISD/20130813+AND+AN/
Google&RS=%28ISD/20130813+AND+AN/Google%29> .
18Id.
19Kate Freeman, Are Brain Waves and Heartbeats the Future of Passwords? [VIDEO], Mashable 
(April 24, 2012) available at http://mashable.com/2012/04/24/brain-waves-passwords/.

79
Location-based advertising
One attribute that, by definition, differentiates AR from other digital experiences is 
its interaction with the physical world. A necessary corollary of that feature is that 
virtually all devices providing AR experiences will constantly know their geoloca-
tion. The market research firm Forrester Research has already issued a report noting 
“that [such a] device’s location-based technologies and services could be especially 
useful to advertisers that are attempting to develop more targeted campaigns”.20
But ads are likely to target factors even more specific than mere coordinates. 
Google has even received a patent on a method for delivering “advertising based on 
environmental conditions.”21 Using this method, an advertiser “may obtain informa-
tion on the environment (e.g., temperature, humidity, light, sound, air composition) 
from sensors [in the user’s mobile device].) Advertisers may specify that the ads are 
shown to users whose environmental conditions meet certain criteria.”22 Those “en-
vironmental” conditions could even include the ambient noise at the user’s location.
User-generated parody videos have already portrayed a world filled with a comi-
cally large degree of advertisements. (Fig.  4.5) Keiichi Matsuda’s concept video 
AR’s Use in Advertising and Marketing
FIGURE 4.5
A parody depicting augmented sponsored advertising.
20Stephen Vagus, Google Glass could serve as a new mobile commerce platform, Mobile Commerce 
Press (July 1, 2013) http://www.mobilecommercepress.com/google-glass-could-serve-as-a-new-
mobile-commerce-platform/857436/.
21U.S. Patent No. 8,138,930(filed January 22, 2008), available at http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/ 
nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO1&Sect2=HITOFF&d=PALL&p=1&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsrchnum.
htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&s1=8,138,930.PN.&OS=PN/8,138,930&RS=PN/8,138,930.
22Id.

80
CHAPTER 4  Advertising, Marketing, and eCommerce
Augmented (hyper)Reality: Domestic Robocop depicted a daily life literally satu-
rated by augmented advertising (both visual and aural).23 (Fig. 4.6) Real life may not 
end up looking like either of these depictions, but it seems certain that AR will cause 
the typical person’s interaction with advertising to be fundamentally different than 
what we are used to.
With this understanding of how the advertising industry is likely to employ AR 
technology, we can explore some of the legal issues most likely to be raised.
FALSE ADVERTISING AND UNFAIR COMPETITION
SOURCES OF LAW
“Unfair competition” is a catch-all term for a wide variety of legal claims challenging 
deceptive or misleading commercial behavior. It encompasses such causes of action 
as false advertising, false designation of origin, false suggestion of sponsorship, and 
the like. The primary legal authority creating the right to sue for such actions is the 
Federal Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C. §§1101 et seq. – the same statute that regulates the use 
of trademarks. In particular, Section 43(a) of the Act (15 U.S.C. §1125) provides:
1.	 Any person who, on or in connection with any goods or services, or any 
container for goods, uses in commerce any word, term, name, symbol, or 
device, or any combination thereof, or any false designation of origin, false or 
misleading description of fact, or false or misleading representation of fact, 
which
a.	 is likely to cause confusion, or to cause mistake, or to deceive as to the 
affiliation, connection, or association of such person with another person, 
23See Keiichi Matsuda, Augmented (hyper)Reality: Domestic Robocop Youtube (January 6, 2010) 
www.youtube.com/watch?v=fSfKlCmYcLc.
FIGURE 4.6
Keiichi Matsuda’s vision of a world saturated with augmented advertising.

81
False Advertising and Unfair Competition
or as to the origin, sponsorship, or approval of his or her goods, services, or 
commercial activities by another person, or
b.	 in commercial advertising or promotion, misrepresents the nature, 
characteristics, qualities, or geographic origin of his or her or another 
person’s goods, services, or commercial activities, shall be liable in a 
civil action by any person who believes that he or she is or is likely to be 
damaged by such act.24
A cause of action for unfair competition may be brought by a regulatory agency 
or by a private party whose interests may be negatively affected by the challenged 
activity. The Federal Trade Commission, for example, has wide latitude to take ac-
tion against marketing techniques that it deems misleading or deceptive, even if they 
are not explicitly prohibited by law. Although the immediate harm being alleged is 
customer confusion, the ultimate interest that the Lanham Act protects is the ability 
of businesses to compete with each other without undue advantage.
In addition to the Lanham Act, which can be asserted in either state or Federal 
courts, many states have consumer protection laws or common law that create similar 
or even greater protections. These include such causes of action as business defama-
tion, which is a libel or slander claim as applied to a business or product rather than an 
individual.
FALSE ADVERTISING AND UNFAIR COMPETITION IN AR
With the various descriptions of AR technology given so far in this book, one can 
easily imagine a number of ways in which one could assert an unfair competition 
claim based on AR advertising.
False advertising
One likely candidate is a lawsuit alleging “false advertising” or some similar cause 
of action under Section 43(a)(1)(A) of the Lanham Act. As noted above, this includes 
“any false designation of origin, false or misleading description of fact, or false or 
misleading representation of fact, which … in commercial advertising or promotion, 
misrepresents the nature, characteristics, qualities, or geographic origin of his or her 
or another person’s goods, services, or commercial activities.”25
In order to prevail, a plaintiff must prove that the defendant made a false or mislead-
ing statement of fact about a product or service, and that this statement was likely to 
influence a customer’s purchasing decisions. In reality, though, defendants responding 
to such complaints end up shouldering an expensive burden to show that their state-
ments (or implications) were true and not misleading. Quite a few of these cases have 
been brought over the years. As of this writing, Prof. Rebecca Tushnet’s 43(B)log,26 one 
2415 U.S.C. §1125 (2012).
25Id.
26Rebecca Tushnet, Rebecca Tushnet’s 43(B)log, http://tushnet.blogspot.com/ (last visited June 9, 
2014).

82
CHAPTER 4  Advertising, Marketing, and eCommerce
of the leading resources on this area of law, is up to over 1360 entries under the “false 
advertising” category (and more in related categories).
How might AR be used to “misrepresent the nature, characteristics, [or] qualities” 
of goods or services? To answer that question, let’s phrase it another way: how might 
representations made via AR get the facts wrong?
One obvious answer is “mistakenly.” AR remains an emerging technology with 
a lot of developing yet to do. And there are currently a lot more ideas about how to 
apply the technology than there is hardware capable of implementing those ideas. It 
may seem to the general public that the camera capabilities of smartphones and tab-
lets are maturing rapidly, but to AR developers waiting for markerless object recogni-
tion, millimeter-precise GPS, and stereoscopic machine vision capabilities, they’re 
moving at a snail’s pace.
Consequently, some over-ambitious AR apps may try to convey or recognize 
more data than they are able to – resulting in blocky, choppy, imprecise output. Un-
der the wrong set of circumstances, that might end up conveying information that is 
false and has a material impact on a consumer (Fig. 4.7).
Another answer is “by cutting corners” or “over-polishing.” Take, for example, 
the incident in the Summer of 2012 in which British regulators banned L’Oreal from 
running ads containing two photos of Julia Roberts and Christy Turlington. L’Oreal’s 
marketers digitally enhanced both photos to the point that it could not prove to the 
regulators’ satisfaction that the advertised makeup products were able to produce 
results like the ones shown. Fashion companies are also lambasted on a regular basis 
for altering photos of clothing models to give them physical features so extreme as to 
be anatomically impossible. The difficulty of precise 3D rendering – not to mention 
the same commercial and societal pressures that lend to the photo alterations – could 
likewise result in augmented ads that are similarly unrealistic.
By definition, digitally enhancing physical reality is a fundamental element of 
what AR does. This type of situation, therefore, is one that AR marketers could very 
FIGURE 4.7
The L’Oreal ads banned by U.K. regulators.

83
easily get themselves into if they are not careful (and if they do not run their content 
by trained lawyers first.)
Ad replacement
Television broadcasts (especially of sporting events) are increasingly using “digital 
billboard replacement” technology to overlay advertisements in the physical world 
with digital ads from other companies. 27 Presumably, the companies that purchased 
the rights to depict the replaced physical banners bought only rights to the physical 
sign and not to broadcasts as well. And with the advent of such replacement technol-
ogy, more stadia are likely to sell the two sets of display rights separately.
The ability to replace physical ads on a broad scale in other public venues, how-
ever, has not existed until now. And the first effort to implement it was driven not by 
commercial interests, but by anti-commercialism. The New York-based organization 
“Public Ad Campaign” believes “that public space and the public’s interaction with 
that space is a vital component of our city’s health, [and considers] outdoor advertis-
ing [to be] the primary obstacle to open public communications.”28 Its mission is to 
“air our grievances in the court of public opinion and witness our communities regain 
control of the spaces they occupy.”29
One of Public Ad Campaign’s several attempts to further this goal was a project 
called the “AR Ad Takeover.” This smartphone/tablet app used feature tracking to 
recognize particular print advertisements that were then prominent across New York 
City. The app then superimposed original art on top of those ads, essentially replac-
ing their commercial message with an expression of the Campaign’s choosing. In 
April 2011, BC Biermann, founder of The Heavy Projects and one of the Public Ad 
Campaign’s partners, launched a similar app that hijacked the movie poster for the 
film Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides. The app morphed the face of “Cap-
tain Barbossa” (played by Geoffrey Rush) into that of Goldman Sachs CEO Lloyd 
Blankfein – who BC calls “the real pirate.”
Each of these is a step in an “iterative process” toward an overall “philosophical” 
goal in mind with these efforts, said Biermann in an interview.30 It is two-fold: first, 
to change the way people think about public space and second, to democratize the 
way public spaces are used for communication. Or, as BC Biermann says, “eradicat-
ing the last bastions of common space that you can’t control.” “AR can democratize 
messaging in public space,” Biermann says. “I’m not against commercial messaging 
per se, but I’m opposed to commercial dominance.”31 Like most of us who write 
False Advertising and Unfair Competition
27See Miikka Kukkosuo, Supponor gets EUR 6M in Series A funding, Arctic Startup (September 2, 
2008) available at http://www.arcticstartup.com/2008/09/02/supponor-gets-eur-6m-in-series-a-funding.
28Mission, Public Ad Campaign, http://www.publicadcampaign.com/mission.html (last visited June 9,  
2014).
29Id.
30Brian Wassom, [Interview] BC “Heavy Biermann: Taking Back Public Spaces With AR, Wassom.
com (January 31, 2012) http://www.wassom.com/interview-bc-heavy-biermann-taking-back-public-
spaces-with-ar.html.
31Id.

84
CHAPTER 4  Advertising, Marketing, and eCommerce
about the future of AR, Biermann envisions a world where people wear AR-pow-
ered eyewear that superimposes digital data atop our field of vision in a seamless, 
effortless manner. But for Biermann, the “killer app” for such hardware would be an 
“open environment platform that allows users to filter their environment according 
to their interests.” Users of such a platform would not see the billboards and other 
commercial messaging that now occupy so much of our public space unless they 
chose to.
Just like the hundreds of stores selling “Occupy Wall Street” t-shirts, however, 
commercial interests will inevitably find ways to profit from this egalitarian ad re-
placement technology as well. Indeed, with digital eyewear now reaching the market, 
it is only a matter of time until ad replacement apps are available for these devices. 
Chapter 5 will explore the ramifications of these apps under the trademark-specific 
portions of the Lanham Act, but those inevitable trademark infringement claims will 
certainly be accompanied by allegations of unfair competition as well. Advertisers 
who thought they were getting a guaranteed degree of exposure by renting large, 
expensive billboards will receive a rude awakening when large numbers of digital 
eyewear users no longer see that content. This could occur in any number of ways. 
The users themselves could install apps that replace the physical advertising with 
other content, or that simply block them out. Or, the companies providing internet 
service to those devices could contract with other advertisers to overlay digital ads 
atop physical ones. Alternatively, owners of those physical spaces – the buildings and 
billboards housing the physical ads – could follow the example of sports stadia, and 
sell the rights to physical and digital advertising separately. (Such digital advertis-
ing would actually be subdivided even further, since users will have a theoretically 
limitless choice of channels through which to view the physical space, in the same 
way that there are a limitless number of websites on the internet.) The most realistic 
scenario is that some combination of all of these methods will occur.
Regardless, those with established business models do not appreciate having 
those models disrupted, and often resort to litigation in an attempt to preserve their 
interests. Expect to see disgruntled owners of physical advertisements sue to recover 
the value of their “lost” visibility, and to enjoin the further digitization of their sig-
nage.
False suggestions of endorsement or sponsorship
The ability to project meaningful, interactive digital content anywhere and every-
where will be both the biggest advantage and largest headache of AR. On occasion, 
the mere proximity of augmented content will itself be problematic. Allegations of 
false endorsement or sponsorship under the Lanham Act typically arise when two 
parties’ trademarks or other distinctive content appears so near each other, or one 
party’s content is used by a person not authorized to do so, that a question is raised 
in a viewer’s mind as to whether the two parties have some sort of partnership, li-
censing agreement, or other formal relationship. Claims are brought by parties who 
do not wish to be associated with the other party, and who accuse the other party of 
free-riding on their goodwill.

85
Those sorts of boundaries are difficult enough to draw when dealing with physi-
cal materials or even websites. The democratic nature of AR content creation and 
projection, though, will allow anyone to locate their digital content literally any-
where in physical space that they choose, including directly on top of someone else’s 
signage or commercial establishment. The fact that this content will be viewable only 
through certain devices will make it that much more difficult for the owner of the 
physical space to police the digital data associated with his property. These circum-
stances create a fertile breeding ground for claims of false suggestion of endorsement 
or sponsorship.
Allegedly deceptive advertising methods
The broad, flexible nature of unfair competition law was proven by the fact that the 
first actual legal complaint filed against an augmented reality advertising campaign 
was one that nobody saw coming.
On October 19, 2011, four consumer advocacy groups (The Center for Digital 
Democracy, Consumer Action, Consumer Watchdog, and The Praxis Project – to 
which I’ll refer collectively as “CDD” – filed a complaint and Request for Investiga-
tion with the Federal Trade Commission against PepsiCo and its subsidiary, Frito-
Lay. The complaint called on the FTC to investigate and bring action against these 
companies for allegedly “engaging in deceptive and unfair marketing practices in 
violation of Section 5 of the FTC Act.” Together with their complaint, the CDD is-
sued a press release and a detailed collection of case study videos – apparently from 
the advertisers themselves – explaining the challenged ad campaigns.
The CDD objected to several aspects of Frito-Lay’s online ad campaign for its 
“Doritos Late Night” line of products. The ultimate point of the complaint was to ar-
gue that Frito-Lay’s campaign deceives teens into eating too many unhealthy snacks, 
thereby contributing to the childhood obesity problem. For support, the complaint 
relied on a “scientific” report called “Digital Food Marketing to Children and Ado-
lescents,” conducted by National Policy & Legal Analysis Network to Prevent Child-
hood Obesity (NPLAN).32 The report (non-coincidentally released on the same day 
as the complaint) began from the unstartling premise that “contemporary marketing 
practices are increasingly multidimensional” and rely on social and relational meth-
ods rather than hard-sell advertising.33
The report and the complaint went on to call out five specific forms of outreach 
to which teens are “uniquely susceptible.” At the top of that list are “Augmented 
reality, online gaming, virtual environments, and other immersive techniques that 
can induce ‘flow,’ reduce conscious attention to marketing techniques, and foster 
impulsive behaviors.”34 The CDD’s reasoning, therefore, was not limited to what 
Frito-Lay did. Rather, it indicted the very concept of using AR to market to teens. 
False Advertising and Unfair Competition
32National Policy & Legal Analysis Network to Prevent Childhood Obesity, Digital Food 
Marketing to Children and Adolescents (October, 2011).
33Id. at 4.
34Id.

86
CHAPTER 4  Advertising, Marketing, and eCommerce
The complaint did, however, single out the Doritos campaign as “particularly prob-
lematic” (Fig. 4.8).
At least one, and arguably two, aspects of this campaign qualified as AR. Most 
notable is the “Late Night Concert” featuring the band Blink-182. Here’s how the 
complaint describes it:
The Late Night music experience utilized “augmented reality,” an immersive mar-
keting technique featuring a vivid interactive experience that can be personalized 
for individual users. Bags of Doritos Late Night chips were printed with a special 
symbol to serve as a “ticket” for the concert. Flashing that symbol at their web-
cams would create the appearance of the stage popping out of the bag of chips.35
The CDD also called out a related feature involving the music video for Rihanna’s 
song, “Who’s That Chick.” The producers filmed two versions of the video with iden-
tical camera angles and choreography. The only difference is that the default video 
is shot with “daytime” lighting and costumes, while the “Late Night” version has a 
“darker” backdrop and wardrobe. Holding a Doritos Late Night bag up to a webcam 
while the video is playing will “unlock” the Late Night version and automatically 
switch between the two. By at least some definitions, this, too, is augmented reality.
The Doritos Late Night campaign appears to have been a success. According 
to the complaint and the video case studies, it cites, the website received almost 
100,000 hits in its first week, with an average visit length of 4.5 minutes.
The CDD’s complaint was not a lawsuit. Rather, what the CDD did was to gather 
all of the data it could find to support its argument, packaged the data in what it thinks 
is the most persuasive manner, and laid it all at the FTC’s doorstep, asking the FTC 
FIGURE 4.8
The Doritos Late Night AR ad campaign.
35Complaint and Request for Investigation at 26, Center for Digital Democracy, et al. before the Fed-
eral Trade Commission (October 19, 2011) available at http://digitalads.org/how-youre-targeted/case-
studies/ftc-complaint

87
to do something about it. The FTC has no legal obligation to respond to such com-
plaints. It can choose simply to do nothing. The FTC is “empowered and directed” by 
Section 5 of the FTC Act “to prevent persons, partnerships, or corporations … from 
using unfair methods of competition in or affecting commerce and unfair or decep-
tive acts or practices in or affecting commerce.”36 In this context, “unfair practices” 
are defined as follows:
An act or practice is unfair where it:
• causes or is likely to cause substantial injury to consumers;
• cannot be reasonably avoided by consumers and;
• is not outweighed by countervailing benefits to consumers or to competition.
Public policy, as established by statute, regulation, or judicial decisions may be 
considered with all other evidence in determining whether an act or practice is 
unfair.
An act or practice is deceptive where:
• a representation, omission, or practice misleads or is likely to mislead the con-
sumer;
• a consumer’s interpretation of the representation, omission, or practice is con-
sidered reasonable under the circumstances and;
• the misleading representation, omission, or practice is material.37
But it is up to the FTC itself to decide whether such methods are being used, and 
if they are, whether “a proceeding by it in respect thereof would be to the interest of 
the public.”38
To reach that decision, the FTC usually conducts an investigation first. Even if 
the FTC does act, there is no deadline for action. It has been known in some cases to 
let investigations lie dormant for years, only to pick them up again and take action 
months or years later. After investigating, if the FTC decides to act, it has two options 
under Section 5. First, it can file a lawsuit in federal court against the allegedly de-
ceptive marketers, seeking an injunction against the unlawful practices and penalties 
of up to $10,000 “for each violation.” Second, it can hold an administrative hearing, 
in which the FTC files a complaint and the marketer may defend itself before the 
Commission itself. Any interested third party (e.g., the CDD) may petition to inter-
vene and offer testimony. That process can also result in an order that the marketer 
cease the objectionable practice. In either scenario, the ruling may be appealed to a 
U.S. Court of Appeals.
Meanwhile, PepsiCo has little it can do but wait, and to parry the CDD’s PR blitz. 
“We are aware of the filing to the FTC and believe it contains numerous inaccuracies 
and mischaracterizations,” Frito-Lay spokesperson Aurora Gonzalez was quoted as 
False Advertising and Unfair Competition
3612 U.S.C. § 45(a)(2) (2012).
3715 U.S.C. § 45
3812 U.S.C. § 45(b) (2012).

88
CHAPTER 4  Advertising, Marketing, and eCommerce
saying. “PepsiCo and its Frito-Lay division are committed to responsible and ethical 
marketing practices. Our marketing programs, which are often innovative, comply 
with applicable law and regulations.”39 As of this writing – nearly three years after 
the complaint was filed – there is no indication that the FTC has taken, or is inclined 
to take, any action concerning the Doritos Late Night campaign.
Those in the AR industry will recognize Doritos’ webcam-based AR advertising 
model as entirely commonplace. Although the production values for the campaign 
appear quite high, the technique of holding a marker up to a webcam to activate con-
tent on a desktop monitor – even video content – is first-generation AR marketing. 
In other words, there is nothing about the technical aspects of this specific campaign 
that make it any more “problematic” than any other campaign of its genre. Rather, 
the CDD is on a mission to reduce the consumption of junk food by teens. This cam-
paign used AR to sell teens such food, so the CDD attacked AR. Presumably, if the 
Ad Council were using AR to lower teens’ inhibitions against quitting smoking, the 
CDD would not object.
But Doritos Late Night is far from the only campaign on the CDD’s radar. At the 
same time the CDD filed this complaint, the CDD made it known that it was “likely 
to file other complaints in the next year or so.”40 The CDD’s website about the com-
plaint lists some specific examples of other campaigns it objects to. Some of the ex-
amples on that list were also successful AR campaigns. Although it has yet to file ad-
ditional AR-related complaints, a CDD representative confirmed to me in February 
2014 that the CDD still plans to file them.
The reasoning behind the CDD complaint doesn’t stop at foods, either. Consider 
this passage from the complaint about the ills of “immersive” environments:
Frito-Lay’s ability to disguise its marketing efforts is further enhanced by the use 
of “immersive” techniques. Immersive marketing is designed to foster subjective 
feelings of being inside the action, a mental state that is frequently accompanied 
by “intense focus, loss of self, distorted time sense, effortless action.” Immersive 
environments can also induce a state of “flow,” causing individuals to lose any 
sense of the passage of time. Immersive environments use augmented reality tech-
niques to deliberately blur the lines between the real world and the virtual world, 
making the experience even more compelling, intense, and realistic. In such an 
emotional environment, a teen is even less likely to recognize that the game or 
concert event is marketing for the reasons discussed above.41
The same reasoning could be applied to adults, and to the use of immersive AR 
to sell virtually anything. If the CDD or some other group makes any headway with 
this argument in fighting snack sales, who will use it next against some other use of 
41Complaint and Request for Investigation, supra note 39, at 35-36
39Sheila Shayon, PepsiCo Refutes Consumer Watchdog’s Deceptive Marketing Complaint, Brand 
Channel (October 20, 2011), http://www.brandchannel.com/home/post/2011/10/20/PepsiCo-Frito-
Lay-Refutes-Complaint-102011.aspx.
40Id.

89
AR? “Immersion” is the sine qua non of AR. The CDD’s line of attack, if successful, 
could pose a potentially existential threat to a large portion of the AR industry as we 
know it.
Even if this CDD complaint goes nowhere – which, by now, seems likely – it 
demonstrates that AR is on the radar of consumer watchdog groups. They see “im-
mersive” as a code word for “deceptive.” As a result, any AR advertising campaign 
targeting teens or other groups that are arguably more vulnerable to suggestion 
should be particularly wary of attacks by such groups. Future legal challenges, how-
ever, may not be limited to just this demographic.
This lesson also demonstrates that marketers should take care in how they de-
scribe their own campaigns. The CDD’s complaint and website are chock full of 
quotes and excerpts from the Doritos advertisers’ own case studies. Be aware that 
someone may try to use your own words against you. At the same time, starting 
AR marketers would do well to keep notes not only on how effective their methods 
are at influencing consumer decisions, but also about how the use of AR benefits 
consumers and the public. Above all, get legal advice about what constitutes “un-
fair and deceptive practices” while you are designing your campaign, not after it 
is over.
BUSINESS DEFAMATION AND PRODUCT DISPARAGEMENT
Advertisements sometimes depict more than the advertiser’s own product, which can 
lead to more than just false advertising liability. The law of defamation (a.k.a. libel 
or slander) provides a cause of action against anyone who publishes a demonstrably 
false statement of fact that injures another’s reputation. We usually think of this cause 
of action in terms of a slander against an individual’s reputation. But businesses can 
also bring defamation claims against those whose false statements injure the repu-
tation of their products or services. (Some courts recognize a distinction between 
“defamation” and “disparagement” of a business or its products,42 but this book will 
use the terms interchangeably.) Therefore, inaccurate augmented representations of a 
product could potentially be alleged to defame that product’s manufacturer, in addi-
tion to creating an unfair commercial advantage, if the augmented version is signifi-
cantly less appealing than the real thing.
Imagine, for example, a scenario in which a business hopes to create a splash by 
being one of the first to use AR for comparative advertising – a type of ad in which 
the advertiser’s product is compared side-by-side with a competitor’s. In theory, this 
is a legitimate form of advertising, as several courts have decided over the years. But 
also suppose that the digital artists recreating the two products as three-dimensional 
digital objects did not replicate them precisely. Perhaps they cut corners, or the tech-
nology simply was not robust enough to render the exact dimensions of the products. 
The images are good enough to tell what the products are, but are not photo-realistic 
by any means. Moreover, let’s assume that the artists creating the images are going 
False Advertising and Unfair Competition
42See U.S. Healthcare, Inc. v. Blue Cross of Greater Phila., 898 F.2d 914, 924 (3d Cir. 1990).

90
CHAPTER 4  Advertising, Marketing, and eCommerce
to pay more attention to detail on the product of the client paying them, as opposed 
to the competitor.43
This all-too-realistic scenario is a recipe for an allegation of business defamation 
(in addition to one of more Lanham Act theories). The aggrieved competitor would 
claim that the sloppy representation of its product created an unfairly negative im-
pression of its product in the minds of consumers, especially as compared to the ad-
vertiser’s product. Comparative ads are already an inherently confrontational method 
of advertising, and they have often provoked lawsuits from competitors chagrined 
by the ads’ descriptions of their products.44 The inevitable consumer buzz that will 
accompany the first uses of AR for this type of advertising will bring with it an equal 
degree of scrutiny by competitors targeted in such ads, making a lawsuit that much 
more likely. Regardless of who ultimately prevails, the answer will very likely not 
be obvious, and it will probably require quite a bit of expensive litigation to resolve.
ADVERTISING DISCLOSURES
DISCLOSURES REQUIRED AND ENFORCED BY THE FEDERAL TRADE 
COMMISSION
As mentioned above, the FTC is charged with policing the marketplace for advertis-
ing practices that deceive and potentially mislead consumers. In recent years, the 
FTC has given particular attention to digital marketing practices. In 2009, it created 
a stir across the blogosphere by announcing stricter rules requiring the disclosure 
of any “material connection” between a retailer and any online author – including 
average, everyday bloggers – who endorse the retailer’s product, even as simple of a 
connection as receiving a free product to review. The idea was to make sure that the 
consuming public understood the potential for bias in an online review. In reality, 
the FTC’s enforcement of this rule focused much less on individual bloggers than on 
the corporate interests that supplied them, but the announcement did much to edu-
cate online marketers and the blogging public about the importance of disclosing to 
online consumer all information that could be material to their purchasing decision.
In March 2013, the FTC released a new instructional guide called .com Disclo-
sures: How to Make Effective Disclosures in Digital Advertising.45 As explained 
43I imagined a similar scenario in the first piece I published related to AR law—the short story “The 
More Things Change,” published in 2007 by the State Bar of Michigan. See Brian Wassom, The 
More Things Change (2007) available at http://www.honigman.com/media/site_files/1606_the%20
more%20things%20change.pdf.
44See, e.g., Southland Sod Farms v. Stover Seed Co., 108 F. 3d 1134 (9th Cir. 1997) (litigating over 
ads comparing competing varieties of sod); US Healthcare v. Blue Cross of Gr. Phila., 898 F. 2d 
914 (3rd Cir. 1990) (litigating over claims about competing health plans); Procter & Gamble Co. v. 
Chesebrough-Pond’s Inc., 747 F.2d 114 (2d Cir. 1984) (litigating over comparative advertising of hand 
and body lotions); American Home Products Corp. v. Johnson & Johnson, 577 F. 2d 160 (2d Cir. 1978) 
(litigating over alleged differences in the performance of pain medication).
45Federal Trade Commisison, .com Disclosures:How to Make Effective Disclosures in 
Digital Advertising (March, 2013).

91
﻿ Advertising Disclosures
therein, “[t]his FTC staff guidance document describes the information businesses 
should consider as they develop ads for online media to ensure that they comply 
with the law.”46 Because the following summary succinctly captures the advice in the 
entire document, it is reprinted here with only minor editing:
1.	 The same consumer protection laws that apply to commercial activities in other 
media apply online, including activities in the mobile marketplace.
2.	 When practical, advertisers should incorporate relevant limitations and 
qualifying information into the underlying claim, rather than having a separate 
disclosure qualifying the claim.
3.	 Required disclosures must be clear and conspicuous. In evaluating this point, 
advertisers should consider the disclosure’s proximity to the relevant claim; the 
prominence of the disclosure; whether it is unavoidable; whether other parts of 
the ad distract attention from the disclosure; whether the disclosure needs to be 
repeated at different places on a website; whether disclosures in audio messages 
are presented in an adequate volume and cadence; whether visual disclosures 
appear for a sufficient duration; and whether the language of the disclosure is 
understandable to the intended audience.
4.	 To make a disclosure clear and conspicuous, advertisers should:
• 
place the disclosure as close as possible to the triggering claim; take account 
of the various devices and platforms consumers may use to view advertising 
and any corresponding disclosure; design the disclosure to prevent the ad 
from being misleading when viewed on any of the devices or platforms from 
which it may be viewed.
• 
When a space-constrained ad requires a disclosure, incorporate the 
disclosure into the ad whenever possible. However, when it is not 
possible to make a disclosure in a space-constrained ad, it may, under 
some circumstances, be acceptable to make the disclosure clearly and 
conspicuously on the page to which the ad links.
• When using a hyperlink to lead to a disclosure, make the link obvious; 
label it appropriately to convey the importance, nature, and relevance 
of the information it leads to; use hyperlink styles consistently, so 
consumers know when a link is available; place the hyperlink as close as 
possible to the relevant information it qualifies and make it noticeable; 
take consumers directly to the disclosure on the click-through page; 
assess the effectiveness of the hyperlink by monitoring click-through 
rates and other information about consumer use and make changes 
accordingly.
• 
Preferably, design advertisements so that “scrolling” is not necessary in 
order to find a disclosure. When scrolling is necessary, use text or visual 
cues to encourage consumers to scroll to view the disclosure.
• 
Keep abreast of empirical research about where consumers do and do not 
look on a screen.
46Id. at i.

92
CHAPTER 4  Advertising, Marketing, and eCommerce
• 
Recognize and respond to any technological limitations or unique 
characteristics of a communication method when making disclosures.
• 
Display disclosures before consumers make a decision to buy, e.g., before they 
“add to shopping cart.” Also recognize that disclosures may have to be repeated 
before purchase to ensure that they are adequately presented to consumers.
• 
Repeat disclosures, as needed, on lengthy websites and in connection with 
repeated claims. Disclosures may also have to be repeated if consumers have 
multiple routes through a website.
• 
If a product or service promoted online is intended to be (or can be) 
purchased from “brick and mortar” stores or from online retailers other than 
the advertiser itself, then any disclosure necessary to prevent deception or 
unfair injury should be presented in the ad itself – that is, before consumers 
head to a store or some other online retailer.
• 
Necessary disclosures should not be relegated to “terms of use” and similar 
contractual agreements.
• 
Prominently display disclosures so they are noticeable to consumers, and 
evaluate the size, color, and graphic treatment of the disclosure in relation to 
other parts of the webpage.
• 
Review the entire ad to assess whether the disclosure is effective in light of 
other elements – text, graphics, hyperlinks, or sound – that might distract 
consumers’ attention from the disclosure.
• 
Use audio disclosures when making audio claims, and present them in a 
volume and cadence so that consumers can hear and understand them.
• 
Display visual disclosures for a duration sufficient for consumers to notice, 
read, and understand them.
• 
Use plain language and syntax so that consumers understand the disclosures.
5.	 If a disclosure is necessary to prevent an advertisement from being deceptive, 
unfair, or otherwise violative of a Commission rule, and it is not possible to 
make the disclosure clearly and conspicuously, then that ad should not be 
disseminated. This means that if a particular platform does not provide an 
opportunity to make clear and conspicuous disclosures, then that platform 
should not be used to disseminate advertisements that require disclosures. 
Negative consumer experiences can result in lost consumer goodwill and erode 
consumer confidence. Clear, conspicuous, and meaningful disclosures benefit 
advertisers and consumers.47
AR marketers will be held to those same standards.
MAKING APPROPRIATE DISCLOSURES IN THE AR SPACE
As noted above, whenever digital content recreates or augments a physical object, 
there is an opportunity for inaccuracy or exaggeration in that depiction. This, in turn, 
can cause consumer confusion. To prevent these circumstances from being deemed 
47See id, at i–iii.

93
unfair business practices and survive FTC scrutiny, advertisers will need to include 
certain disclaimers and disclosures in their augmented ads. But the medium will 
present unique challenges in this regard.
Including disclaimers in or with the claim
The FTC’s .com Disclosures manual repeatedly emphasizes the importance of in-
cluding required disclosures in the same context as the potentially misleading ad-
vertisement – to the point of suggesting that when Twitter posts require disclosures, 
some degree of disclosure must appear in the tweet itself, even though it is limited 
to 140 characters. Other authorities in this field have reached similar conclusions. 
In 2012, an arbitration panel of the Better Business Bureau’s National Advertising 
Division took Nutrisystem to task for posting weight loss testimonials on Pinterest, 
but publishing the necessary “results are not typical”-type disclaimers on the page 
hyperlinked to the “pins,” rather than in the pins themselves. Although ­additional 
information may be provided elsewhere, at least some degree of disclosure must 
generally be included directly adjacent to the potentially misleading content.
How this will work with augmented advertising remains to be seen. Consider ads 
that feature a digital object, such as a car or a washing machine that emerges from an 
interactive print publication. Regardless of how well-rendered these complex objects 
are, they are exceedingly unlikely to be photo-realistic using contemporary technol-
ogy. If the discrepancies between the image and the real thing are material – that 
is, an attribute that would be important to a consumer’s purchasing decision – then 
the potential for confusion should be remedied by an appropriate disclaimer. Which 
feature is material in any given circumstance will depend on the thing being depicted 
and why it matters to the consumer. If I’m using an interactive print object as an 
anchor to assess how a particular piece of furniture will fit in a room, for example, 
I will be primarily concerned with replicating the item’s exact physical dimensions. 
On the other hand, if I’m shopping for a car, a three-dimensional image would be 
most helpful in judging its aesthetic appearance and interior layout.
The most liberal, straightforward interpretation of the FTC’s guidelines would 
require annotations in the 3D image itself warning users about the potential material 
inaccuracies. But it is difficult enough to render a digital image in a way that cre-
ates some degree of illusion that it is a tangible, three-dimensional object. Inserting 
additional text boxes that explain each shortcoming in the image could disrupt the 
effect and mar the image so much as to make the ad worthless, or at the very least 
unappealing.
Of course, the same objections have probably been made by every advertiser in 
every media, yet the legal requirements remain the same. Necessity births innovative 
ways to incorporate disclosures without detracting from the message. It seems likely, 
for example, that disclaimers such as “objects may not be to scale,” if necessary, will 
be displayed for only a finite period of time, probably while the image is loading. 
The messages could also be incorporated into an image’s background; for example, 
if I see a virtual car driving on a moving road, the disclaimer text may appear as 
text painted on the “road” that disappears after the car drives “past” it. A persistent 
disclosure could also be printed on the physical target of an augmented display, even 
﻿ Advertising Disclosures

94
CHAPTER 4  Advertising, Marketing, and eCommerce
though that message would presumably be eclipsed once the augmented display be-
gins. Or a dialog box could appear persistently in the user’s field of view, and be 
designed to expand when selected to reveal more detailed disclosure information. 
This would be the closest AR analog to the current internet’s use of hyperlinks to 
convey more disclosure data than can realistically fit within the advertisement itself.
Some limitations of the medium will be sufficiently obvious that no disclaimer 
is necessary. When I encounter 8-bit graphics of the kind employed in the Minecraft 
game, for example, I understand that any depiction of an actual object I see is going 
to be only the roughest imitation. Paradoxically, it is only as digital imaging technol-
ogy improves enough that it can depict things accurately that the law will impose 
upon advertisers the responsibility to be more accurate.
It is also worth remembering that the assessment of when a disclosure is neces-
sary, and how prominent it must be, is inherently subjective, and varies in importance 
depending on the nature of the transaction occurring. Many of the augmented mar-
keting techniques employed to date are indirect, in that they generate consumer inter-
est, build goodwill, and convey information rather than directly inducing a purchase. 
Even those that advertise a particular product rarely have the capability to make 
a direct sale; at best, they contain links to an ecommerce website. As augmented 
advertisements become more robust and directly commercial, the more important 
disclosures and disclaimers will become.
Moreover, just as was mentioned in Chapter  3’s privacy discussion, AR may 
prove to be a boon, rather than hindrance, to accurate commercial disclosures. Color-
coded objects or displays could communicate basic messages in immediate and non-
jargonized ways, and customers could be required to indicate assent by physically 
interacting with the displays. Touching a virtual display could trigger an augmented 
call-out box that ties a particular warning or message to a specific portion of an image 
that has drawn the customer’s attention. Unbounded by the size limitations of a par-
ticular device, advertisers could have more physical area in which to communicate 
messages so that consumers do not miss them in the fine print. Indeed, augmented 
displays could prove to be such an effective means of educating consumers that these 
methods could easily become the norm, and then become a legal requirement.
At the same time, advertisers should not get so carried away with the ability to 
display content beyond the physical page or object that the necessary disclaimer is 
placed so far away as to be unnoticed. The concept of “fine print” at the bottom of a 
2D advertisement was born out of the advertisers’ desire to meet the legal obligations 
while being as inconspicuous as possible. On websites, we see the same phenomenon 
when disclaimers appear in smaller print, different columns, in page footers, or on 
the other end of a hyperlink. The FTC’s .com Disclosures called out a few of these 
examples, and warned that such placements are unlawful if they do not occur in the 
same cell or screen as the associated ad text. In AR, this could mean that ad copy 
visible through one’s mobile device must make any disclaimers visible in the same 
field of view, instead of requiring the user to tilt their device in a different direction 
to see the disclaimer.

95
Distractions
Even if proper disclaimers of otherwise-sufficient prominence are included in an ad-
vertisement, they can fail to accomplish their purpose if the remainder of the display 
is so engaging that a user’s attention is distracted (Fig. 4.9). On this point, the FTC’s 
.com Disclosures gives the example of disclaimer text that appears in the correct 
place and size for a typical webpage, only to become obscured (and therefore inef-
fective) when the website owner employs a virtual shopping assistant who “walks” 
across the screen to interact with the user.
This example from the FTC was a bit novel as applied to the vast majority of 
websites, but is prescient in the context of AR. The very point of AR is to create the 
illusion of interacting with digital objects as if they were physical. This means that 
neither advertisers nor regulators can continue thinking about ad text as if it were 
merely words on a two-dimensional screen. Instead, ad composition will begin to 
look more like choreography than copy editing. To judge whether a particular ele-
ment is sufficiently visible, one will need to consider the placement and movement 
of all elements of the three-dimensional, moving image, as well as the physical 
location and perspective of the viewer at any given time. If one digital image gets 
in the way of a user’s view of required disclaimer text, that could render the entire 
ad unlawful.
﻿ Advertising Disclosures
FIGURE 4.9
Distractions will be an inherent challenge with AR displays.

96
CHAPTER 4  Advertising, Marketing, and eCommerce
A scene from the epic sci-fi film Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan illustrates the 
point. The movie’s antagonist is a brilliant military tactician, but he is a transplant 
from the twentieth century and therefore accustomed to conflict on the flat surface of 
a planet, rather than the starship battle in which he finds himself. The twenty-third 
century heroes, who are used to space-based vehicles that travel in three dimensions, 
are therefore able to outwit their foe. Mastering the art of displaying ads and dis-
claimers in augmented reality will be a bit like that; those who learn to think in terms 
of all the medium has to offer will be more successful in using it to communicate 
effectively.
Empirical research and analytical data
One of the requirements listed in the FTC’s .com Disclosures guide is that ad-
vertisers “[k]eep abreast of empirical research about where consumers do and do 
not look on a screen.”48 The results of such studies are often displayed as heat 
maps illustrating the parts of a screen to which users’ eyes are drawn – such as the 
studies demonstrating that readers almost totally ignore banner ads on websites.49 
This FTC guidance does not directly require advertisers to conduct such research 
themselves.
Once again, however, the easier that certain steps become through advanced 
technology, the more likely they are to eventually become mandatory. One of the 
most attractive elements of augmented reality campaigns to retailers is not only the 
level of customer engagement they inspire, but also the richly detailed analytics 
they allow advertisers to gather. Many AR campaigns require precise geolocation, 
accelerometer information, and cloud-based content (among other data) to func-
tion properly, and all of that data can be tracked and aggregated to reveal quite a bit 
of insight into the consumer base viewing the promotion. At present, such data is 
competitive intelligence, and if regulators think about it at all, they do so in terms 
of user privacy, as discussed in Chapter 3. But it may become so commonplace that 
the FTC instead begins to require advertisers to collect it and study it in order to 
better understand how effectively certain disclosures are being communicated to 
users.
Physical injury
It seems doubtful that many, if any, digital advertisers have ever worried that a con-
sumer might hurt themselves while viewing their ad. But what turns digital content 
into augmented content is its interactivity with physical places and things. So, as 
advertising moves into the augmented medium–especially if it includes “game” me-
chanics that require users to go looking for digital objects in physical space–market-
ers will need to pay close attention to the surroundings into which they ask consum-
ers to go. Chapter 7 will explore this topic in greater detail.
48Id. at ii.
49Banner Blindness: Old and New Findings, Neilsen Norman Group, August 20, 2007, available at < 
http://www.nngroup.com/articles/banner-blindness-old-and-new-findings/>

97
﻿ Conducting Commerce
CONDUCTING COMMERCE
THE EMERGING ABILITY TO CONDUCT MONETARY TRANSACTIONS IN 
THE AR MEDIUM
Point-of-sale payments in the United States are still carried out almost exclusively in 
cash or by credit or debit cards. As of this writing, mobile electronic payments via 
near-field communication (NFC) technology – although popular in many countries –  
had not yet caught on to any significant degree. That is likely to change very soon 
in light of Apple’s September 2014 announcement that its next generation of de-
vices would support NFC payments, and that a number of major retailers had already 
signed on to support such transactions. This is likely to jumpstart the development 
of an NFC payment infrastructure that other devices will be able to take advantage 
of as well.
Digital eyewear and other augmented world devices will benefit from such de-
velopments. Forrester Research has already suggested that AR technology “can be 
used … with Google Glass, allowing consumers to shop for products with Glass 
acting as a sort of virtual shopping assistant. Moreover, Google’s strong interest in 
mobile commerce may herald the introduction of mobile payment services that are 
specifically designed for Glass.”50 Glass already allows users to take a photo simply 
by winking an eye. In the short film Sight,51 a character wearing AR contact lenses 
pays for a meal at a restaurant by looking at the virtual representation of a bill and 
winking at it (Fig. 4.10).
50Stephen Vagus, Google Glass could serve as a new mobile commerce platform, Mobile Commerce 
Press (July 1, 2013) http://www.mobilecommercepress.com/google-glass-could-serve-as-a-new-
mobile-commerce-platform/857436/.
51Patrick Bateman, Sight, Youtube (July 23, 2012) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fSU0lTCMTZw.
FIGURE 4.10
Augmented commerce in Sight.

98
CHAPTER 4  Advertising, Marketing, and eCommerce
As mentioned above, in 2013, Google obtained a patent for “pay per gaze” and 
“pay per emotion” systems. Although these are described as methods for ISPs to 
charge advertisers based on a consumer’s reaction to the ad, they could just as eas-
ily be adapted to take payments from consumers in order to access the advertising 
or other content. In February 2014, the company EAZE unveiled such a system. 
Dubbed “Nod to Pay,” it enabled Google Glass wearers to pay merchants in Bitcoins 
by nodding their heads twice.52 Similarly, in August 2014, British grocery chain Tes-
co released an app for Glass that allows individuals to scan the barcode of a product 
at home and use the app to purchase the product, which is then delivered straight to 
the user’s home.53 (Fig. 4.11)
CONSUMER PROTECTION AND CONTRACT LAW
The convenience of such payment methods and the fact that precursors already exist 
in today’s technology make it highly likely that future devices will provide this pay-
ment option. Care will need to be taken, however, to avoid unintentional transactions. 
Experience has already demonstrated that unintentional winks can result in unintended 
photographs, so there will need to be some sort of additional safeguard where money 
is involved. This could be as simple as a virtual “Are you sure?” call-out box at which 
the user must wink for a second time. Even more ideally, it would involve a second 
source of input, such as making a hand gesture. Still – as in a public auction where 
bids can be placed by nodding, waving, or similar gestures – it seems inevitable that a 
certain percentage of individuals will end up challenging the legitimacy of a purchase 
registered by an augmented app, arguing that the app misinterpreted the user’s gesture.
FIGURE 4.11
Purchasing milk through the Tesco Google Glass app.
52See https://paywitheaze.com/.
53Jacob Kleinman, “New Google Glass App Lets You Order Groceries by Looking at Them,” Techno-
Buffalo, August 10, 2014, available at http://www.technobuffalo.com/2014/08/10/new-google-glass-app-
lets-you-order-groceries-by-looking-at-them/?utm_content=buffer7857d&utm_medium=social&utm_
source=twitter.

99
﻿ Conducting Commerce
However these hurdles are overcome, it seems certain that payments through pa-
per and plastic will wane. Augmented interfaces offer not only convenience, but also 
additional security, as they can easily be tied to the user’s biometric data as well.
The issue of proper disclosures to customers is also pertinent to monetary trans-
actions conducted in the AR space. Various consumer protection laws in various ju-
risdictions require all manner of information to be made conspicuously available to 
consumers, such as price, warranty information, return policies, dispute resolution 
procedures, shipping options, taxes, ingredients, and the like. On today’s internet, 
many retailers accomplish these disclosures through lengthy, dense, written policies 
that the vast majority of customers never read. As discussed above, the augmented 
medium offers a much wider range of options for displaying such data, but the infor-
mation itself is still likely to be lengthy and dense.
Some disgruntled purchasers challenge documents like these as “contracts of 
adhesion” that are “unconscionable” – legal terms of art for provisions that are so 
one-sided, unfair, and/or poorly disclosed that it would be fundamentally unfair to 
enforce them against a consumer with no bargaining power of their own. Occasion-
ally, such arguments prevail, but not often. Instead, in the digital context, courts are 
likely to enforce even the most obscure contractual terms of purchase as long as 
the purchaser gave some indication of their assent to them. Typically this consent 
is conveyed by clicking a box that says “I agree.” Hence, such provisions are called 
“click-wrap” contracts (a derivative of the “shrinkwrap” licenses that used to be 
printed on a sealed box, and that were deemed agreed to once a consumer opened 
the seal). Their antithesis is the “browsewrap” contract, which purports to be en-
forceable merely because a user visited a website, even if they never viewed the 
“contract” itself. Such terms are often not enforced unless it can be shown that the 
user assented to them.
What level of assent will be necessary to consummate a contract in the aug-
mented medium? On the low end of the spectrum, the augmented equivalent of 
an unenforceable browsewrap agreement might be called a “glancewrap” – terms 
that purport to be enforced on an individual merely because they looked at a dialog 
box through their digital eyewear. A slightly more affirmative indication of assent 
would be the nodding, blinking, or waving used by the various apps mentioned 
above. Whether any or all of these gestures prove to be enforceable indications 
of assent will depend on the circumstances. Even more direct forms of agreement 
might include air-signing one’s name, or speaking the words “I Agree” into one’s 
wearable device.
In terms of the information available to consumers, however, at least one commen-
tator has argued that AR54 will substantially level the playing field between retailers 
54Peppet uses the term “augmented reality” much more generically than this book does, to mean “the 
convergence of digital and physical space generally, not merely in the real-time augmentation of digital 
video.” Scott Peppet, “Freedom of Contract in an Augmented Reality: The Case of Consumer Con-
tracts,” ___ UCLA L. REV. ____ (2012), Working Paper Number 11-14 at 2 n.9 (August 29, 2011), 
available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1919013. Nevertheless, his insights 
are still relevant to the AR medium as it is more commonly understood.

100
CHAPTER 4  Advertising, Marketing, and eCommerce
and purchasers. Scott Peppet is a professor at the University of Colorado Law School. 
As a result of today’s digital media, he argues, “[h]uge amounts of new information 
is now available to consumers, but it is not perfectly comprehensive. If information 
about a given product or contract is unavailable, consumers’ ability to sort decreases 
and firms’ temptations to include oppressive terms in their contracts increases.”55
AR, however, makes it easier for businesses to convey more information to 
consumers. Peppet identifies at least four reasons why sellers will use AR to bet-
ter explain their contractual terms. “First, firms can cheaply distribute text, audio, 
graphical, or video explanations to consumers at the point of sale…. Second, this 
distribution scale permits firms to centralize such legal explanation[,] … [allowing] 
corporate counsel [to] control the message … as it scales. [Third] … in an augmented 
reality, firms can give consumers choice about whether to watch a given explanation 
of a product or contract term…. [Fourth], augmented reality gives sellers the abil-
ity to prove that consumers in fact watched their explanation.”56 Taking advantage 
of these opportunities would protect businesses from later assertions by a customer 
that they were deceived, by making it easier to prove that the customer got all of 
the information they needed to make an informed choice. The more effective such 
methods of disclosure prove to be, the more likely it is that courts and regulator will 
begin to require them, or at least apply extra scrutiny to retailers who do not use these 
methods.57
CONCLUSION
The augmented medium provides a broad range of options for communicating in-
formation. Commercial retailers will be among the first to use this medium as a new 
way to sell their goods and services. There will, however, be a transitional period 
in which retailer, regulators, and courts attempt to adapt existing standards of pro-
priety to the new medium. In the end, the fundamental goal of commercial speech 
regulations and consumer protection laws will be the same as it is now – to protect 
individual consumers from being unfairly manipulated or deceived.
55Id. at 36.
56Id. at 38.
57See id. at 42.

101
CHAPTER
Augmented Reality Law, Privacy, and Ethics﻿
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Patents
• Trademark
• Copyright
• Publicity Rights
INTRODUCTION
Intellectual property laws protect ideas, creative expression, commercial good-
will, and other intangible concepts. Although they cannot be seen or touched, these 
concepts have become some of the most valuable assets in our contemporary, knowl-
edge-driven economy. They will remain just as important, if not more so, in a world 
with ubiquitous augmented reality.
PATENTS
THE NATURE OF PATENT PROTECTION
A patent conveys a property right to the inventor(s) of an invention. In the language 
of the statute and of the patent registration itself, the right granted by a U.S. patent 
is “the right to exclude others from making, using, offering for sale, or selling” the 
invention in the United States or “importing” the invention into the United States. To 
get a U.S. patent, an application must be filed in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Of-
fice (USPTO). Patent protection lasts for up to 20 years from the date of application, 
subject to the payment of appropriate maintenance fees for a utility patent.
Utility patents are the type of patents most relevant to AR. These may be granted 
to anyone who invents or discovers any new and useful process, machine, article of 
manufacture, or compositions of matters, or any new useful improvement thereof. 
In order to receive protection, the inventor must describe the method by which his 
or her invention would work. Until 1880, the USPTO required that inventors submit 
working models of their inventions.1 Since that time, however, an applicant need only 
Intellectual Property
5
1Teresa Riordan, Patents; Models that were once required in the application process find a good 
home, The New York Times (February, 18, 2002) available at http://www.nytimes.com/2002/02/18/
business/18PATE.html?pagewanted=all.

102
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
describe their concept in the patent application in order to receive protection; they 
need not actually create something in order to have invented it.
United States law also no longer entitles the one who first invents something to 
the patent protection on it. It used to be that even if someone else beat you to the 
punch in applying to register an invention, you could undo their patent by proving 
that you invented it first. No longer, thanks to the America Invents Act that President 
Obama signed into law on September 16, 2011. As of 2013, it is now the “first to 
file,” not the “first to invent,” who wins. That is the system that Europe and virtually 
the entire rest of the world already used.
PATENT PROTECTION IN AR INVENTIONS
Tangible, consumer-level AR applications have only recently begun to emerge be-
cause we have only recently devised the hardware and software required to make 
them commercially feasible. Many of these developments, however, have been an-
ticipated for quite some time, which means that many creative minds have already 
had plenty of time in which to obtain patents on AR-related inventions.
On July 7, 2011, the USPTO published Apple’s patent application US 
2011/0164163 A1, for “Synchronized, Interactive Augmented Reality Displays for 
Multifunction Devices (Fig. 5.1).” 2 This news, and the accompanying drawings de-
picting AR at work on an iPad, caused quite a stir in the blogosphere and among AR 
enthusiasts, who took it as an indication that the era of mass-market AR was finally 
about to begin.
FIGURE 5.1
Apple’s 2011 patent application showing AR on an iPad.
2U.S. Patent No. 8,400,548 (filed January 5, 2010) available at https://docs.google.com/
viewer?url=patentimages.storage.googleapis.com/pdfs/US8400548.pdf.

103
﻿ Patents
FIGURE 5.2
Additional excerpts from AR-related patents.

104
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
But AR has been in the process of “emerging” for years now – plenty long enough 
for all sorts of companies and inventors to get their ideas registered with the USPTO. 
These registered inventions include augmented tattoos, advertising on flying foot-
balls, and adding virtual displays to live sporting events (Fig. 5.2).
There is, of course, still plenty of room for innovation in the augmented reality 
field – just not quite as much room as some might assume. As of Dec. 10, 2011, a 
search for “augmented reality” in the Google Patents search engine returned about 
11,100 hits. In January 2014, that number was up to 160,000.
Moreover, as anyone reading the tech headlines in the past decade realizes, patent 
litigation is all the rage nowadays. Anyone and everyone with a patent, it seems, is 
suing or being sued by a competitor with a similar patent or product. In 2012, over 
5,000 patent infringement lawsuits were reportedly filed – a spike of over 30% from 
the year before – and this trend “shows no signs of cooling off, either as a means of 
generating revenue or of protecting competitive advantage.”3
This is especially true with respect to smartphones and tablets4 – precisely the plat-
forms on which consumer AR is just starting to take off. Therefore, we can expect patent 
litigation to be one of the first areas in which AR-related legal disputes arise in earnest.
THE FIRST AR PATENT INFRINGEMENT CASE: TOMITA V. NINTENDO5
As ominous as the trends of patent litigation can appear from a macro level, the facts 
of any particular case often seem entirely ordinary, even mundane. That was the case 
with the earliest recorded litigation activity related to AR.
On June 26, 2012, a judge of the U.S. District Court for the Southern District 
of New York issued what appears to be the first substantive decision in an AR-re-
lated patent infringement case. The device in question was one of the most popular 
AR-capable units then on the market: the Nintendo 3DS portable game console. 
Although the case had been first filed in June 2011, this was the first substantive 
decision from the court on the merits of the case, and the first to mention AR.
Plaintiffs (“Tomita”) were the owners of U.S. Patent No. 7,417,664, issued in 
August 2008 and titled “Stereoscopic image picking up and display system based 
upon optical axes cross-point information.” As described by the court, “the ’664 patent 
attempts’ to provide a stereoscopic video image pick-up and display system which is 
capable of providing the stereoscopic video image having natural stereopsis even if 
the video image producing and playback conditions are different.”6
3Chris Barry, et al., 2013 Patent Litigation Study: Big Cases Make Headlines, While Pat-
ent Cases Proliferate, available athttp://www.pwc.com/en_US/us/forensic-services/publications/
assets/2013-patent-litigation-study.pdf.
4See Topics, Patent Lawsuit, Mashable, http://mashable.com/category/patent-lawsuit/ (last visited 
June 10, 2014) for articles discussing articles discussing patent disputes between major phone and 
tablet makers.
5Tomita Techs. USA, LLC v. Nintendo Co., Ltd., No. 11-Civ-4256 (JSR), 2012 WL 2524770,(S.D.N.Y. 
2012)
6Id. at *1.

105
﻿ Patents
Tomita alleged that the 3DS infringes this patent. The June 26, 2012 opinion re-
jected Nintendo’s motion to dismiss the case. The court determined instead that there 
was enough evidence to allow the case to proceed to a jury.
Most of the discussion in the parties’ arguments and the court’s opinion focuses 
on how the 3DS’s cameras work to capture 3D images. The patent describes a “means 
for measuring cross-point (CP) information on the CP of optical axes of [the] pickup 
means.” The two cameras built into the 3DS are arranged in parallel, but the parties 
and their experts disagreed over whether the optical axes of these cameras would 
nevertheless intersect. The court agreed with Tomita that they would.
In addition, as described by the court and the parties, the system described by 
‘664 patent includes a “manual entry unit” through which the viewer can change “the 
operation condition of the display control circuit.” The 3DS has at least two modes: 
“Camera” mode and “AR games” mode. And it has two means of adjusting the three-
dimensional image it displays: a circle pad and a “3D depth slider.” In both the 
camera application and the AR games application, the 3DS’s 3D depth slider only 
changes the display from a two-dimensional image (turning the three-dimensional 
display “off”) to a three-dimensional one (turning the three-dimensional display 
“on”). The dispute over this feature was whether, by turning three-dimensional view-
ing on or off, the 3D depth slider operates as a “manual entry unit” within the offset 
presetting means’ structure. To infringe the ‘664 patent, “the relevant structure” in 
the 3DS must “perform the identical function recited in the claim.”7
The court found that “a reasonable jury could find that the 3DS’s 3D depth slider 
constitutes a component of the offset presetting means’ structure,” performing one 
aspect of the identical function recited in the claim. “Specifically,” it continued, the 
‘664 patent notes that the “manual entry unit may be [a] switch.. . which is actuated 
by the viewer depending upon user’s preferences for changing the operation condi-
tions of the display control circuit.” Both parties acknowledge that the 3D depth 
slider functions in the AR Games application as a “switch,” allowing the user to ex-
ercise control over the display control circuit’s operation conditions. Specifically, the 
3D depth slider allows the viewer to determine whether the display circuit presents 
an offset at all. Thus, a reasonable jury could find that the manual entry unit, along 
with the circuits described in the ‘664 patent, performs the function of “offsetting 
and displaying” video images by allowing the user to determine whether the circuits 
will display an offset.8
On this basis, the court allowed Tomita to pursue its claim that, because the unit’s 
3D depth adjustment switch allows users to adjust the 3D image they see while in 
“AR Games” mode, the 3DS allegedly infringes the ‘664 patent.
On March 13, 2013, the jury returned a verdict in Tomita’s favor, and awarded 
it $30.2 million in damages although the judge in the case had decided as a matter 
of law that Nintendo had not infringed the patent willfully. Both sides filed motions 
seeking to adjust these rulings. Nintendo prevailed on one important argument – the 
7Id. at *3.
8Id. at *7.

106
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
amount of the damages award, which was based on the estimated value of a reason-
able royalty payment by Nintendo to Tomita for use of the technology. The jury had 
apparently based its figures on the testimony of Tomita’s expert, who used the “entire 
market value” of the 3DS as the royalty base for calculating the reasonable royalty 
rate. This led the jury to a rate of just under 3% of the 3DS’s sale price.
In an August 14, 2013 opinion, the judge found this rate “intrinsically excessive,” 
for a number of reasons. For one thing, the 3DS itself was not profitable. Nintendo 
makes its money on the sale of 3DS games, but the evidence showed that “the vast 
majority of games designed for the 3DS do not require or even utilize the technology 
covered by the ‘664 patent.” It also struck the judge as unfair to consider the entire 
value of the 3DS game market when “the ‘664 patent’s technology was used only in 
two features – the 3D camera and the AR games application – and thus was in some 
sense ancillary to the core functionality of the 3DS as a gaming system.”9 In other 
words, the court found as a matter of law that any AR functionality in the 3DS is an 
add-on, rather than a core feature, of the console.
As a result, the judge gave Tomita two choices – either accept a 50% cut in the 
jury’s award, reducing it to $15.1 million, or else conduct a whole new trial on dam-
ages. The legal term of art for this ruling is “remittur.”
I have reproduced the details of this litigation to demonstrate what patent in-
fringement litigation looks like. Obviously, it hinges on the tiniest of details in the 
subject inventions and challenged products. Moreover, the ultimate decisions will be 
rendered by a judge or jury who is unlikely to be knowledgeable in the art, so much 
depends on how well the issues are explained to them. And in the end, the amount 
of money at stake in even the most inconsequential AR patents may be significant.
PATENTS AS WEAPONS OF COMPETITION: 1-800-CONTACTS V. 
DITTO TECHNOLOGIES
Ditto Technologies launched in 2012 as an innovative leader in “virtual try-on” tech-
nology for eyewear. It employed webcam-based AR to show consumers what a par-
ticular pair of glasses would look like on them.
This apparently caught the attention of its more-established competitor, 
1-800-Contacts. According to the Electronic Frontier Foundation, which came to 
Ditto’s defense, “1-800-Contacts’ CEO went onto Ditto’s website the very day it 
launched, presumably to investigate the upstart competitor’s new technology. Hav-
ing seen Ditto’s product, 1-800-Contacts then went out and purchased a patent from 
a defunct company that claims to cover selling eyeglasses over a network using a 
3D model of a user’s face.” 10 At the time the lawsuit was filed, 1-800-Contacts still 
10Daniel Nazer & Julie Samuels, UPDATED: Help Stop 1-800-Contacts from Abusing Patents to 
Squelch Competition, Electronic Frontier Foundation (April 17, 2013) https://www.eff.org/
deeplinks/2013/04/1-800-contacts-buys-patent-squelch-competition.
9Tomita Technologies USA, LLC v. Nintendo Co., Ltd., No. 11-cv-4256 (JSR), 2013 WL 4101251, at 
*10 (S.D.N.Y. August 14, 2013)

107
﻿ Patents
did not offer a competing service, but said that it intended to launch one soon on its 
Glasses.com site. That app was eventually released for iOS and Android in January 
and February of 2014, respectively.
What angered the EFF even more was what it perceived to be the strategy behind 
the lawsuit. Rather than seeking a royalty from Ditto, said the EFF, 1-800-Contacts 
“seems determined to put Ditto out of business. Period.”11 1-800-Contacts disputes 
EFF’s characterizations, and claims it has tried to settle the case.12 The parties ac-
tively litigated the case for several months, but in November 2013 it was stayed pend-
ing the result of Ditto’s request that the U.S. Patent Office re-examine the patent’s 
legitimacy – a long-shot procedural tactic available to defendants in these situations.
The attention given to this dispute contributed to the already active conversation 
about whether litigation like this and the patents underlying them threaten to squelch 
innovation in software development. No one entity has done more to raise alarm bells 
on that issue within the AR community, however, than Lennon Image Technologies, 
LLC.
THE FIRST AR PATENT TROLL: LENNON IMAGE TECHNOLOGIES
Lennon is what the patent world calls a “non-practicing entity,” or NPE – more com-
monly referred to as a “patent troll.” Such companies own patent rights, but do not 
use them to make or do anything; rather, their only business is to sue other compa-
nies for (allegedly) infringing the patents. The patent troll phenomenon is one of the 
primary drivers behind the explosion in patent infringement litigation; one report 
found NPEs responsible for more than half of the patent lawsuits file in 2012, com-
pared to less than a quarter in 2007.13 Yet only 16% of the cases actually decided by 
a court were filed by NPEs, “reveal[ing] a much higher tendency for NPE actions 
to be resolved without a formal court decision.”14 This corresponds to the anecdotal 
experience that most companies have with patent trolls; they leverage the threat of 
infringement liability and the steep expense of patent litigation to coerce an early, 
favorable settlement out of those they sue.
On July 16, 2012, Lennon filed six separate patent infringement lawsuits, all in 
the U.S. District Court for Delaware. Each is nearly identical to the other, and is 
based on the same patent: US 6,624,843 B2, issued Sep. 23, 2003.15 The title of the 
patent is “Customer Image Capture and Use Thereof in a Retailing System.” The 
abstract describes an AR “virtual try-on” experience very similar to what we see on 
websites from Ditto and several other retailers (Fig. 5.3):
11Id.
12Anthony Ho, “Ditto Defeats Patent Claim After Teaming Up With A ‘Troll’,” TechCrunch, October 
12, 2013, available at http://techcrunch.com/2013/10/12/ditto-wins-defeats-patent-claim-after-team-
ing-up-with-a-troll/
14Id. at 3
15U.S. Patent No. 6,624,843 (filed December 8, 2000).
13Chris Barry, et al., Patent Litigation Study, supra note 3, at 3.

108
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
FIGURE 5.3
An image from Lennon’s patent.

109
﻿ Patents
In a retailing system, an image capture system is provided and used to capture refer-
ence images of models wearing apparel items. At a retailer’s place of business, an 
image capture system substantially identical to that used to capture the reference 
images is also provided. A customer has his or her image captured by the image 
capture system at the retailer’s place of business. Subsequently, when the customer 
is in close proximity to an image display area within the retailer’s place of busi-
ness, a composite image comprising the customer’s captured image and one of the 
reference images may be provided. The composite image may comprise full motion 
video or still images. In this manner, the customer is given the opportunity to virtu-
ally assess the selected merchandise without actually having to try on the apparel.16
Of course, one important difference between this abstract and what these defen-
dants do is that current virtual fitting experiences happen online, rather than “within 
the retailer’s place of business.” One wonders if that will make a difference in the 
litigation.
Each of Lennon’s complaints specifies a specific website using analogous virtual-
fitting technology. Among these is Mattel’s BarbieDreamCloset.com, which an AR 
company named Zugara designed and launched. This was the only complained-of 
site that remained active in the days immediately following Lennon’s suits, perhaps 
because Zugara had recently obtained its own patent17 for similar technology. Len-
non’s other lawsuits targeted jewellery-fitting sites run by Boucheron, Forevermark, 
De Beers, and Tatler Magazine; a watch-fitting site run by Swatch’s Tissot brand; 
and Skullcandy’s headphone-fitting site. On each of these sites, the “virtual try-on” 
features were removed shortly after the companies behind them were sued (Fig. 5.4).
This illustrates another tactic commonly employed by patent trolls – suing 
the end user of the technology, rather than the software company that designed  
FIGURE 5.4
The Boucheron virtual try-on site shut down by Lennon Image Technologies’ lawsuit.
16Id. at 1.
17See U.S. Patent No. 8,711,175 (filed August 12, 2011) bool.html&r=1&f=G&l=50&co1=AND&d=P
TXT&s1=8,275,590&OS=8,275,590&RS=8,275,590

110
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
the website.18 In each of these cases, the AR technology behind the virtual try-on 
component of the website was supplied by a relatively small software company, yet 
only the big-name brands publicly using the sites were named. The reason is sim-
ple: economics. Not only are these brands more likely to be able to afford to pay a 
monetary settlement, but they also have far less motivation to fight back against the 
lawsuit. To them, after all, these AR features were merely interesting but one-off 
promotional experiments. Losing them prematurely was inconvenient, but hardly 
significant to the retailers’ overall bottom line. It made much more economic sense 
to pay an early settlement than to invest in defending costly litigation over another 
company’s technology.
The AR companies, however, rely on the software they sell for their very exis-
tence, and are generally more likely to be start-ups without the liquid funding nec-
essary to defend such litigation. Some of them may have settled, but if they could 
afford to fight, they would have been much more likely to resist the litigation to the 
bitter end and potentially defeat Lennon’s asserted patent rights. None of that would 
have made economic sense for Lennon. So instead, Lennon delivered these compa-
nies a double whammy – not only did the lawsuits put an end to the AR companies’ 
existing customer relationships, but they also likely scared away many potential cli-
ents who would not risk patent litigation.
And, of course, once the first round of defendants pay their settlement money, this 
gives the trolls cash on hand to fund another round of lawsuits. That is exactly what Len-
non did in March 2013, filing six more identical lawsuits, this time in the U.S. District 
Court for the Eastern District of Texas. These lawsuits name Macys Inc., Bloomingda-
les, Fraimz LLC, Lumondi Inc., Luxottica Retail North America Inc., Safilo America 
Inc., and Tacori Enterprises. Again, the allegations revolve around “virtual try-on” and 
“magic dressing room” technology used by these retailers to give customers at home a 
chance to see on their computers in three dimensions what a product would look like on 
them. Just as happened after the prior round of lawsuits, the defendants appear to have 
deactivated the features on their websites as a precaution. Whether they launch again 
will likely depend on how the lawsuits resolve.
This sort of litigation activity is worrisome for the nascent augmented reality in-
dustry, which is still made almost exclusively of small, ambitious start-ups. “Magic 
mirror” and “virtual dressing room” technology has been a staple of early AR in-
novations, and (as these lawsuits demonstrate) has really begun to catch on with 
retailers and customers alike. On the other hand, developments like this were easy to 
anticipate. As AR starts to attract real money, we can expect it to give rise to at least 
as many patent fights as the mobile phone industry is currently dealing with.
Ditto became a poster child for this phenomenon. In a tragic twist of fate, in ad-
dition to its dispute with 1-800-Contacts, Ditto was also one of the companies sued 
by Lennon. This was one of the lawsuits studied in a subsequent study by Catherine 
Tucker, a professor of marketing at MIT’s Sloan School of Business that attempted 
18See Dennis Crouch, Patent Trolls by the Numbers, PatentlyO Patent Blog (March 14, 2013) http://
patentlyo.com/patent/2013/03/chien-patent-trolls.html.

111
﻿ Trademarks
to quantify the economic impact of patent troll litigation on the economy. Accord-
ing to Tucker’s study, even though Ditto eventually resolved Lennon’s lawsuit, “the 
company was still being valued at $3 to $4 million less than it would be otherwise, 
and it was forced to lay off four of its 15 employees to pay legal expenses.”19 In total, 
Tucker estimated that lawsuits, the most active patent trolls, cost the U.S. economy 
more than $21 billion. Let us hope that litigation like this does not unnecessarily 
deter developers from pushing AR technology forward.20
TRADEMARKS
Although AR-related patent infringement has already begun, it is in the area of trade-
mark law where I expect AR to begin breaking new ground in intellectual property 
law. Hundreds of innovators have already anticipated and sought patent protection 
for AR inventions, but the technology is only now entering into the consciousness of 
consumer-level retailers and marketing professionals.
TRADEMARK BASICS
A trademark is “a word, phrase, symbol, and/or design that identifies and distinguishes 
the source of the goods of one party from those of others.”21 Technically, a mark that 
distinguishes services rather than goods is called a “service mark,” although the term 
“trademark” is often used to refer to both,22 as it will be here. A mark need not explicitly 
identify the source of the goods or services – it may be suggestive, as many logos are – 
but the mark must be distinct enough to indicate one source and no other. In this way, 
trademarks perform an important role in our consumer-driven society, by providing con-
sumers an efficient means to locate products from the providers they trust, and by allow-
ing businesses to protect the integrity of, and goodwill in, their commercial identities.
A person or entity infringes upon the trademark rights of another by interfering 
with the trademark’s ability to signify the goods or services of its owner. This can 
happen by adopting a mark that is so similar to a pre-existing mark that consumers 
are confused as to which mark signifies which source, or by using someone else’s 
trademark in an unapproved manner. Courts assess whether trademark infringement 
has occurred by measuring the “likelihood of confusion” presented by the facts of a 
19Joe Mullin, “New study suggests patent trolls really are killing startups,” Ars Technica, June 11, 
2014, available at http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2014/06/new-study-suggests-patent-trolls-really-
are-killing-startups/.
20On September 15, 2012, a request was filed with the U.S Patent & Trademark office to re-examine 
Lennon’s patent. As of this writing, that request had not yet been acted on. Meanwhile, several of the 
cases in Delaware and Texas remained ongoing.
21United State Patent and Trademark Office, Trademark, Patent, or Copyright, USPTO.gov (January 
18, 2013) http://www.uspto.gov/trademarks/basics/definitions.jsp.
22See Id.

112
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
particular case. The particulars of this test vary from court to court, but they always 
involve some variation of the following:
1.	 The similarity or dissimilarity of the marks in their entireties as to appearance, 
sound, connotation, and commercial impression.
2.	 The similarity or dissimilarity and nature of the goods. .. described in an 
application or registration or in connection with which a prior mark is in use.
3.	 The similarity or dissimilarity of established, likely-to-continue trade channels.
4.	 The conditions under which and buyers to whom sales are made, i.e. 
“impulse” vs. careful, sophisticated purchasing.
5.	 The fame of the prior mark.
6.	 The number and nature of similar marks in use on similar goods.
7.	 The nature and extent of any actual confusion.
8.	 The length of time during and the conditions under which there has been 
concurrent use without evidence of actual confusion.
9.	 The variety of goods on which a mark is or is not used.
10.	 The market interface between the applicant and the owner of a prior mark.
11.	 The extent to which applicant has a right to exclude others from use of its 
mark on its goods.
12.	 The extent of potential confusion.
13.	 Any other established fact probative of the effect of use.23
Not all of these factors may be relevant or of equal weight in a given case, and any 
one of the factors may control a particular case.
One obtains trademark rights by using the mark in commerce, but registering the 
mark with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office gives the owner an even broader 
range of protection. Trademarks are governed on the Federal level by the Lanham 
Trademark Act of 1946, as amended,24 as well as a variety of state laws. In a conflict 
between two trademarks, the one that began to be used (or was registered) first has 
priority over the other.
Not all trademarks receive the same degree of protection by the courts. In general, 
the more distinctive the mark is, the more protection it is afforded. In some cases, 
even a mark which is not by itself distinctive can still be protected because it has ac-
quired “secondary meaning” in the market – in other words, a mark that is indistinct 
in the abstract can come to be generally understood as signifying a particular source. 
Courts place marks on a sliding scale of distinctiveness, generally dividing that spec-
trum into the following five categories:
• 
Fanciful: These receive the highest protection available under the Lanham Act. 
They have no logical meaning or alternative meaning and were invented solely 
to identify goods. Examples include KODAK and XEROX.
23See, e.g., In re E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co., 476 F.2d 1357 (C.C.P.A. 1973).
2415 U.S.C. §§ 1051–1141n.

113
﻿ Trademarks
• 
Arbitrary: Slightly less protected than fanciful marks, but still considered 
a strong mark. These marks have no logical relation to the goods they 
are identifying. Examples include APPLE (as applied to computers), 
BLACKBERRY (for phones), and LOTUS (for software).
• 
Suggestive: Weaker than arbitrary marks, but still inherently distinctive. 
These marks evoke a characteristic of the good it identifies, but the viewer 
must make a mental inference to connect the mark to the product. Examples 
include CHICKEN OF THE SEA (for tuna), GREYHOUND (for buses), and 
COPPERTONE (for suntan lotion).
• 
Descriptive: Weaker than suggestive marks because they merely describe a 
characteristic of the product or service with no mental inference required. They 
are not protected as trademarks unless they have acquired a “secondary meaning” 
over time. Examples include SUDSY SOAP, ALL BRAN and VISION CENTER.
• 
Generic: These marks can never be protected as trademarks and are free to be used 
by anyone because they are basic, common descriptors for the category into which 
the product or service fits – such as “tape,’ “shirts,” or “computers.” Some marks 
that were once distinctive can become generic – and therefore unprotectable – by 
becoming publicly used as a generic term. Examples of words that were once 
trademarks but became generic include ASPIRIN and CELLOPHANE.
We can be certain that, as digital content gets published in augmented media, 
trademark-laden commercial content will follow. Perhaps the most extreme (and 
disturbingly plausible) depiction of “sponsored” augmented reality can be found in 
Keiichi Matsuda’s short video Augmented (hyper)Reality: Domestic Robocop.25 The 
FIGURE 5.5
The user-modulated AR ads in Keiichi Matsuda’s video short, Domestic Robocop.
25Keiichi Matsuda, Augmented (hyper) Reality: Domestic Robocop, Youtube (January 6, 2010)_ 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fSfKlCmYcLc.

114
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
AR user in this video sees literally every flat surface in his modest kitchenette digi-
tally plastered with branded advertisements. At one point he even manually raises the 
“advertising level” of his eyewear, suggesting that he’s receiving micropayments or 
subsidized services for each ad he sees (Fig. 5.5).
With that consumer-facing communication come inevitable questions of how 
commercial goodwill is being used to attract consumer attention. That is the realm 
of trademark law. Because AR will enable various forms of communication that 
have not previously been seen, many of the related trademark questions will also 
be novel.
EXPANDING TRADEMARK LAW BY AUGMENTING NEW SENSES
Anything that distinguishes the source of a good or service can be a trademark. Al-
though trademarks are often thought of as words or graphical designs, the term is 
also defined to include “symbols,” which can encompass almost anything. Such ex-
otic marks as such as scents, sounds, and colors have been registered in the past. 
Examples include the lion’s roar at the beginning of MGM films, the sound a Harley 
Davidson motorcycle makes when it starts, and the tones at the end of an Intel com-
mercial.
Emerging AR technologies have already inspired a wide variety of conventional 
trademarks, including words, logos, and phrases. Soon, though, technologies that aug-
ment our sense of touch may lead to a rush of trademark applications seeking to 
protect a wide variety of artificial textures. As discussed in Chapter 2, a number of 
companies from Senseg to Disney to Apple are experimenting with different means 
of tricking the mind into thinking one’s skin is perceiving whatever haptic sensation 
a content provider wishes to convey. The potential of AR will never be fully realized 
until users can reach out and touch virtual objects through haptic interfaces. One way 
this technology seems likely to (literally) get into the hands of consumers is through 
retailers using haptic technology to further enhance the “feel” of their products. When 
that begins to happen, I believe we will witness a resurgence of interest in haptic 
trademarks. (Other trademark practitioners have called these “tactile,” “texture,” or 
even “touch” marks, but I prefer the more definitionally sound and technologically 
consistent term “haptic.”)
Of the less-conventional trademarks, haptic marks are among the least common. 
Those commentators who have broached the subject in recent years26 have only iden-
tified a handful of such federally registered marks. They include a registration by 
American Wholesale Wine & Spirits for “a velvet textured covering on the surface 
of a bottle of wine”27–specifically, its Khvanchkara brand of wine. In the course of 
26See Steve Baird, Touch Trademarks and Tactile Brands With Mojo: Feeling the Strength of a Velvet, 
Turgid, Touch Mark?, Duets Blog (July 13, 2009) http://www.duetsblog.com/2009/07/articles/trade-
marks/touch-trademarks-and-tactile-brands-with-mojo-feeling-the-strength-of-a-velvet-turgid-touch-
mark/.
27U.S. Trademark Application Serial No. 76,634,174 (Filed March 23, 2005) available at http://
tsdr.uspto.gov/-caseNumber=76634174&caseType=SERIAL_NO&s.

115
﻿ Trademarks
convincing the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office to register this mark, American 
Wholesale distinguished its “velvety covering” from that of the more iconic Crown 
Royal bag by noting that Khvanchkara is “tightly encased within the fabric,” and that 
the “FEEL of a LIMP bag is quite different from the FEEL of a TURGID velvety 
surface attached to a wine bottle.”28 Similarly, Touchdown Marketing has registered a 
trademark in the “pebble-grain texture” and “soft-touch feel” of its basketball-shaped 
cologne dispenser, and Fresh, Inc. has registered the “cotton-textured paper” that 
wraps its soap products.
Conceptually, a distinctive touch ought to be just as protectable by trademark law 
as any other unique indicator of source. Indeed, in 2006, the International Trademark 
Association (INTA) adopted “a resolution supporting the recognition and registra-
tion of ’touch” marks.”29 In practice, however, it is very difficult to separate the way 
something feels with the function that texture performs – and to come up with a 
texture that is truly “distinctive” of one product as opposed to other brands within the 
same category of products.
That is where haptic AR technologies like the ones proposed by Senseg and 
other companies come in. The ability to coat the surface of any product with a 
transparent layer of “tixels” capable of mimicking any arbitrary texture the manu-
facturer chooses would finally break the connection between a product’s feel and 
the function it performs. Consider, for example, a book cover that feels wet, or a 
plastic squirt gun that feels metallic. There is no necessary correlation between what 
these products are or what they do, and the way they feel. There should, therefore, 
be no conceptual barrier to those manufacturers seeking trademark protection in 
those textures.
Of course, not every artificial texture will automatically be eligible for trademark 
protection. Many haptic enhancements may still be chosen for functional reasons. 
The maker of an automotive steering wheel or a baseball, for example, might choose 
to make their products artificially sticky to enhance performance. A cell phone might 
be designed to get warmer in one’s pocket as it rings, in order to catch the user’s at-
tention.30 And it could be that certain haptic enhancements still do not rise to the level 
of being sufficiently distinctive of a particular source to serve as a trademark. Still, 
by promising the ability to manipulate the sensation of touch independently from 
other aspects of a product, haptic AR technologies open up a new and exciting world 
of trademark possibilities. Consumers may soon reach out and touch … whatever 
retailers want them to.
28Response to Office Action, U.S. Trademark Application Serial No. 76,634,174 (April 17, 2006) 
available at http://tsdr.uspto.gov/documentviewer?caseId=sn76634174&docId=ROA2006041812151
4#docIndex=4&page=1
29Report of the World Intellectual Property Organization, Standing Committee On The Law Of Trade-
marks, Industrial Designs And Geographical Indications, Sixteenth Session, Geneva, November 13 to 
17, 2006 at 10-11 (2006).
30Technically, as noted in Chapter 2, the ability to discern heat is distinct from the sense of touch. For 
simplicity’s sake, however, this book will follow the popular approach of treating them as the same.

116
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
KEYWORD ADVERTISING IN THE AUGMENTED MEDIUM
The growth of the commercial internet over the past 20 years has been funded pre-
dominately by advertising revenue. We as consumers get to browse free content on 
millions of web pages and on various search engines in large part because advertisers 
have paid good money to insert their ad next to whatever we’re reading. Odds are 
good that this funding model will continue well into the future.
The primary purpose of all commercial advertising is to draw potential customers 
to the advertised business or product, and away from its competitors. Moreover, as 
mentioned in Chapter 4, comparative advertisements – those that compare a product 
to its competition – have been around for decades. Courts have had opportunities to 
draw some basic lines between what is okay to say in such advertisements, and what 
is “deceptive” advertising. In a nutshell, it is permissible to describe your competi-
tor’s goods and compare one product to another, but you cannot say things that are 
likely to confuse customers into believing that you are your competitor. You cannot 
say something materially false or misleading about your competitor or your own 
product. And you cannot do anything to confuse reasonable consumers into mistak-
enly believing there’s some sort of connection, sponsorship, affiliation, or endorse-
ment between your companies or products.
These boundaries are not always easy to apply, however, and there are several 
contexts in which the courts have not been able to agree on how they apply. For 
example, the battle over “keyword advertising”–i.e., using an algorithm to display a 
“sponsored” ad whenever a user types a given term into a search engine–is still being 
fought, more than a decade after the practice began.
Google explained its own keyword advertising system, called “AdWords,” this 
way:
Google AdWords is Google’s advertising program. AdWords lets you create sim-
ple, effective ads and display them to people already searching online for informa-
tion related to your business. So how is it possible to show your ads only to the 
most relevant audiences? The answer is keyword-based advertising.
When a searcher visits Google and enters a query – say, good beginner guitars –  
Google displays a variety of relevant search results, such as links to articles containing 
guitar purchasing advice, or websites dedicated to novice musicians. Google also 
displays AdWords ads that link to online businesses selling guitars, music lessons, 
or other products and services related to the query.
For example, imagine that you own a music store carrying a large selection of 
guitars. You could sign up for an AdWords account and create ads for entry-level 
guitars in your inventory. For each of your ads, you might select keywords (single 
words or phrases related to your ad’s message) such as beginner guitars or entry-
level guitars.31
31See Google AdWords, http://www.google.com/adwords/learningcenter/text/18911.html (last visited 
March 23, 2009).

117
﻿ Trademarks
Company A potentially implicates trademark law when it purchases a search term 
that is also a trademark belonging to Company B. The fact that Company A’s adver-
tising appears when a user searches for Company B’s trademark raises questions of 
whether Company A is “using” that trademark “in commerce” (most courts have 
said yes), and whether this use creates a likelihood that consumers will be confused 
regarding the potential association or sponsorship between the two companies or as 
to the source of Company B’s goods or services.
Answers to this latter question have been mixed. Some courts over the past decade 
have found that ads triggered by a trademarked keyword search cause a likelihood 
of confusion – especially when the resulting ad also incorporates the trademarked 
term,32 but even occasionally when it does not.33 On the other hand, several recent 
cases have rejected the proposition that merely purchasing a competitor’s trademark 
as a search term in and of itself creates confusion.34
This may suggest that the potential for confusion in many situations has decreased 
as online sponsored ads have become more commonplace.
Where the potential for confusion exists, though, the question of who is respon-
sible for it also remains open. Rosetta Stone is one of several companies to sue a 
search engine for allowing competitors to use its marks in keyword ads. As most 
other courts had done in similar cases, the trial court dismissed the suit as a matter 
of law, finding that Rosetta Stone could not prove that the search engine was liable. 
But in April 2012, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit overturned that 
holding, finding it possible that the search engine’s policy on the use of keywords 
in sponsored ads could amount to direct infringement, contributory infringement, 
or trademark dilution.35 Other cases have likewise gone either way on liability de-
pending on how the particular trademark at issue appeared in the header or text of 
a sponsored ad. But it is fascinating that, even as recently as 2013, one study found 
that more than 40% of search engine users were not able to distinguish sponsored 
ads from organic search results,36 suggesting that the potential for confusion remains 
even more than a decade after this advertising model was adopted.
32See, e.g., Storus Corp. v. Aroa Mktg., Civ. No. 06-2454-MMC; 2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 11698, at *12-
13 (N.D. Cal. February 15, 2008) (finding infringement where defendant’s sponsored ad was triggered 
by and incorporated plaintiff’s trademarked “smart money clip”).
33See, e.g., Edina Realty, Inc. v. Themlsonline.com, Civ. 04-4371JRTFLN; 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 
13775 (D. Minn. March 20, 2006) (finding liability where “Defendant purchases search terms that 
include the Edina Realty mark to generate its sponsored link advertisement”); Fin. Express LLC v. 
Nowcom Corp., 564 F. Supp. 2d 1160, 1177 (C.D. Cal. 2008) (holding that defendant’s purchase of 
keywords that “are identical or strikingly similar to the trademarks held by plaintiff” along with its of-
fer of “services and products which are highly related to those offered by plaintiff” and “simultaneous 
use of the Web as a marketing channel” may result in consumer confusion).
34See, e.g., 1-800-Contacts, Inc. v. Lens.com, Inc., 722 F.3d 1229 (10th Cir. 2013).
35See Rosetta Stone LTD. v. Google, Inc., 676 F.3d 144 (4th Cir. 2012)
36Graham Charlton, 40% of Consumers are Unaware that Google Adwords are Adverts, Econsul-
tancy Blog (February 28, 2013) http://econsultancy.com/blog/62249-40-of-consumers-are-unaware-
that-google-adwords-are-adverts.

118
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
Augmented reality will take this jostling for position between advertisers to a 
new level. We already see this happening in TV broadcasts of certain sports games, 
in which “digital billboard replacement” technology is used to superimpose digital 
ads on top of the ones that are physically present in the stadium. The Public Ad Proj-
ect and the Heavy Projects have demonstrated similar concepts on mobile devices 
by sponsoring campaigns that replace physical billboards with artistic images when 
viewed through a mobile device (Fig. 5.6).
But what happens when AR eyewear becomes ubiquitous, and digital ad re-
placement becomes commonplace? Will advertisers pay AR service providers for 
the ability to superimpose their ads on top of what consumers see? If the past 
20 years of e-commerce is any indication, then the answer is “absolutely”–and in 
a number of creative ways. So, for example, a business may pay to superimpose 
its logo on top of signs advertising a competitor’s products, completely blocking 
the physical ad from view. Or, the mere act of looking at Company A’s ad through 
your AR eyewear may trigger a virtual ad for Company B to pop up somewhere 
else in your field of vision. The example of this that I typically give is of looking 
at a McDonald’s sign through your digital device and instantly seeing a Burger 
King advertisement superimposed upon it.
Similarly, your decision to look at something may prompt suggestions for goods 
and services relating to the thing you’re looking at. Self-described “pop culture 
hacker” Jonathan McIntosh captures all of these ideas in his parody video “AD-
mented Reality.”37 The video depicts a world in which every glance triggers another 
advertisement in one’s digital eyewear, to the point where reality itself become ob-
scured in a sea of sponsored content (Fig. 5.7).
FIGURE 5.6
A campaign by the Public Ad Project and the Heavy Projects.
37Jonathan McIntosh, Admented Reality, Youtube (April 5, 2012) http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_
mRF0rBXIeg&feature=kp.

119
﻿ Trademarks
Other commentators have also foreseen augmented advertising and the legal is-
sues they will raise. John C. Havens discussed some of them his insightful piece 
for Mashable called “Who Owns the Advertising Space in an Augmented Reality 
World?”38 Noting that Google had already applied for a patent for digitally replacing 
physical ads within the Street View feature of Google Maps, Havens wrote that “the 
importance of virtual real estate may quickly supplant actual signage for advertis-
ers. This is especially true when virtual signage could be switched dynamically for 
individual eye traffic depending on a viewer’s preferences.”39 He went on to quote 
Gabe Greenberg, director of social and emerging media at Microsoft, as saying that, 
“if the experience presents the ads in a way that makes sense for the augmented real-
ity experience and the user’s intention, this could be a powerful advertising tool for 
tomorrow’s marketplace.”40
These predictions are persuasive. As discussed in Chapter 6, I take issue with the 
idea of applying the law of real property to this scenario. That is not necessarily 
the end of the conversation, however, because the laws governing trademarks and 
unfair competition are not about property ownership. They are aimed at protecting 
commercial goodwill and avoiding confusion among consumers about the relation-
ships between different products and businesses. Sponsored ads on search engines, 
FIGURE 5.7
“ADmented Reality” Glass Parody.
38John Havens, Who Owns the Advertising Space in an Augmented Reality World?, Mashable, (June 
6, 2011) http://mashable.com/2011/06/06/virtual-air-rights-augmented-reality/
39Id.
40Id.

120
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
for example, do not do anything to obscure the results displayed on a search engine; 
they are merely displayed adjacent to that content. When Company A displays a 
sponsored ad next to Company B’s trademark, it is not interfering with Company B’s 
ownership of that mark. But – depending on the content of the ad, how it is displayed, 
and how it comes to appear on the page – Company A might be misleading consum-
ers into believing there is some relationship between Company A and that trademark. 
This potential for confusion is what injures Company B and triggers the protections 
of trademark law.
The potential remains, therefore, that causing Company A’s augmented ad to 
appear in a certain physical place – for example, on top of or next to Company B’s 
physical billboard, place of business, or trademarked logo – may create a likelihood of 
confusion in the minds of consumers. It will be possible, therefore, for augmented 
advertising to infringe trademark rights.
At least in the short term, that result seems unlikely, if only because of the limited 
context in which AR experiences are currently available. Today, having an AR expe-
rience requires a user to download and open a particular, branded app on their device. 
These apps also usually offer only a very limited range of options in a predetermined 
number of situations. So, for example, as of this writing, the only way a user will 
see a Burger King ad atop the Golden Arches would be by using an app (or user-
generated layer with an app like Junaio, Aurasma, or Layar) designed specifically 
for that purpose. In this situation, a trademark owner could object to the way that its 
trademark is being “used in commerce,” and the way in which the app is portrayed 
could conceivably be confusing. Assuming that the user understands where the app 
is coming from, however, one can hardly expect the user to be surprised or confused 
by what they see through it.
The potential for confusion will come within digital services in which consumers 
expect to see advertising content from a variety of authentic sources within a view-
point-neutral environment. One does not approach billboards, telephone directories, 
television commercial breaks, or internet banner ads as such with a predetermined 
expectation of the message those media will contain. Instead, one bases their deter-
mination about the source of a particular advertisement within those media based on 
the content and context of the ad itself.
For example, merely opening my internet browser tells me almost nothing about 
what sort of banner advertising I might encounter; I know by virtue of having surfed 
the internet that I will be served such ads by any random company that may have paid 
to place them there. But if I’m discerning, I will notice that certain types of websites 
are more likely to serve up advertisements from a particular point of view, and that 
the behavioral advertising cookies in my browser will sometimes deliver ads based 
on my prior online activity. Similarly, to the extent that anyone still reads telephone 
directories, they ought to expect to see advertisements for local businesses (espe-
cially personal injury lawyers) rather than for those located elsewhere.
When we have multi-user, viewpoint-neutral augmented reality browsers is when 
we should expect to see allegations of trademark infringement arise in earnest. The 
existing ability to digitally replace physical signs within mapping programs such as 

121
﻿ Trademarks
Bing and Google Maps offers a glimpse of what such a world will be like. Ubiqui-
tous, always-on AR will feel very much like moving around within a three-dimen-
sional version of those contemporary mapping programs. Once we find ourselves 
there, what expectations will we have about the advertising we see? More than likely, 
we will realize that at least some of the augmented content we encounter is provided 
by the service provider itself (whichever company that turns out to be), while some 
is triggered by our personal activities and preferences. Just as with behavioral adver-
tisements on the internet today, no two users of the service are likely to encounter all 
of the same ads.
Unlike the current web, however, augmented ads will necessarily correspond to 
physical places. It will be those relationships between digital and physical content 
that raise new and unique questions of when a likelihood of confusion may exist. 
Sticking with the fast food example, then, will it be permissible in this context for 
Burger King to deliver users an ad every time they look in the direction of a Mc-
Donald’s restaurant or sign? If so, will the law of trademarks and unfair competition 
place limits on how obtrusive these ads can be? In other words, may they appear 
only in the periphery of a user’s vision? May they hover in space next to the Golden 
Arches, or even be superimposed over them? Moreover, the degree to which a service 
provider makes these decisions – or allows users to adjust such settings – could well 
determine whether the service provider may be held jointly liable for any resulting 
infringement.
Courts deciding AR advertising cases in these contexts will apply the lessons 
learned in pre-existing media, including the reasoning of the search engine key-
word cases with which today’s courts are wrestling. Just as search engine algo-
rithms use particular terms as keywords that prompt an ad to appear, so too can 
the physical objects that prompt similar virtual ads in AR devices be thought of 
as “keywords.” Whether it’s a billboard, logo, or some other trigger, any object 
that prompts an algorithm to display an ad is performing the same function that 
keywords do today.
A determination of whether that ad creates a likelihood of confusion will depend 
on how the likelihood of confusion factors apply to the particular case at hand. As 
with existing case law on sponsored advertising, moreover, courts are likely to be all 
over the map in how they decide such cases at first, until the model becomes more 
commonplace and a consensus forms about what boundaries it is fair to expect ad-
vertisers to observe in this space.
FAIR USE AND FREE SPEECH
Trademark ownership is not a complete monopoly on any and all uses of the word 
or symbol that forms the trademark. Although trademark rights are broad, they exist 
only to protect consumers from confusion and to safeguard business’s goodwill. As 
restrictions on the rights of others’ speech, moreover, trademark laws always exist 
in an uneasy tension with the First Amendment to the United States ­Constitution. 

122
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
“Because overextension of Lanham Act restrictions in the area of [artistic ­expression] 
might intrude on First Amendment values,” wrote the Second Circuit Court of Ap-
peals in the frequently quoted opinion Rogers v. Grimaldi, “[courts] construe the Act 
narrowly to avoid such a conflict.”41 That case stands for the proposition that artists 
can freely refer to trademarked goods and services by name in the titles of their 
songs, films, and other creative expressions. Such issues will inevitably arise in the 
context of augmented works just as they do elsewhere. There are at least a couple 
situations, however, in which augmented content will stretch these legal principles 
in new ways.
Incorporating third-party trademarks into augmented content
Trademarks frequently show up inside of artistic works – especially in video games 
that attempt to create a realistic world in which players can immerse themselves. 
For the most part, courts uphold these uses as free speech, due in no small part to 
the United States Supreme Court’s decision in 2011 that video games deserve First 
Amendment protection.42
Games and other immersive augmented reality environments will attempt to cre-
ate similarly realistic digital worlds. In so doing, there will inevitably be some AR 
applications that recreate actual trademarks in the name of authenticity.
The one fundamental difference between the AR medium and traditional digital 
expression, however, is that AR content is inherently tied to real physical locations. 
This distinction adds a layer of risk to replicating someone else’s trademark in AR 
because associating that trademark with a real place or object could, in many fore-
seeable circumstances, heighten the likelihood that someone will draw a connection 
between the trademark and the physical place or object with which it is digitally as-
sociated. For example, players may see the mark digitally displayed on the wall of a 
business not associated with the trademark owner, or the mark may appear (wither 
physically or digitally) on a real object designed to serve as a target within the AR 
app. In either circumstance, the mark is no longer confined within a virtual, fictional 
word created by the artist, but instead is being associated with real objects or places 
that may be businesses or products with which the trademark owner does not wish 
to be associated.
This could, in some cases, satisfy enough of the likelihood of confusion factors 
to add up to a real headache for both the trademark owner and the designer of the AR 
environment. Of course, it is equally possible – again, depending on the circumstanc-
es of the particular case – that the choice to make that particular association between 
trademark and physical place or thing could, in and of itself, be a creatively expres-
sive decision that merits First Amendment protection. Regardless of result, however, 
use of trademarks within AR content will inherently raise an additional dimension of 
legal complexity beyond that found in other digital works.
42See Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Ass’n, 1313 S.Ct. 2729 (2011).
41Rogers v. Grimaldi, 875 F. 2d 994, 998 (2d Cir. 1989).

123
﻿ Trademarks
Unauthorized augmentation of trademarks
For the first few years in which AR has been used in advertising, the technology re-
quired to create the experience has been more or less limited to corporations, agencies, 
and startups with substantial budgets, sophisticated software, and coding expertise. 
Even the first publicly accessible tools for creating user-generated AR contents have 
been slow to catch on, and required a significant learning curve. As this book nears 
completion during 2014, however, more user-friendly and robust creative tools are 
hitting the public market, democratizing AR even further. Before long, user-generated 
commentary is likely to be as ubiquitous in augmented form as video commentary 
currently is on YouTube.
When the subject matter of user-generated AR content relates to a particular 
brand, no object will be more tempting to serve as the trigger for that content than 
the very trademark that the brand owner uses to represent its goodwill to the public. 
Indeed, this has already happened at least once. In 2010, Professor Mark Skwarek 
(of the NYU Polytechnic School of Engineering and, most recently, the creative lead 
behind the Kickstarter-funded app PlayAR) released the iPhone app “The Leak in 
Your Home Town” (Fig. 5.8). Through this app, one could view a physical sign bear-
ing the BP logo at a local gas station, and see superimposed on that logo a digital 
FIGURE 5.8
Mark Skwarek’s “The Leak in Your Home Town” app.

124
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
broken pipe spewing oil, exactly like the one responsible for the then-current spill in 
the Gulf of Mexico.
These existing media also teach us that a sizeable portion of that commentary 
will be directed back toward the brands who advertise to us. For almost as long as 
companies have been setting up shop at <Company.com > , there have been detrac-
tors posting vitriol at <CompanySucks.com > . In today’s social media, popular 
sites such as Ripoff Report and Pissed Consumer base their entire business models 
on naming and shaming commercial brands.
Although some early judicial decisions blocked these sites’ ability to reproduce 
the trademarks of the companies they criticize, most courts and other trademark dis-
pute resolution organizations recognize such content as fair commentary that trade-
mark holders cannot prevent.43 For example, in 2011, the United States District Court 
for the Eastern District of New York rejected a trademark infringement lawsuit that 
challenged the use of a reviewed company’s trademarks in the sub-URLs, metada-
ta, and text of PissedConsumer.com.44 Despite copious use of the plaintiff’s marks 
throughout the website, the court found it implausible that any reasonable person 
would believe the site’s critical commentary to be sponsored by or associated with 
the trademark owner.
These are the types of precedents courts will look to when trademark owners 
begin to grapple with augmented repurposing of trademarks. They provide a strong 
basis for predicting that using corporate trademarks as triggers for AR content 
that criticizes the trademark owner will, in many cases, be permissible under U.S. 
43See, e.g., Taubman Co. v. Webfeats, 319 F.3d 770, 777-78 (6th Cir. 2003) (no Lanham Act violation 
where gripe site with domain name taubmansucks.com that provided editorial on conflict between web-
site creator and plaintiff corporation did not create any possibility of confusion); Taylor Bldg. Corp. of 
Am. v. Benfield, 507 F.Supp.2d 832, 847 (S.D.Ohio 2007) (gripe site with domain name taylorhomes-
ripoff.com that served as forum for criticizing home builder did not create any likelihood of confusion 
“because [n]o one seeking Taylor’s website would think — even momentarily — that Taylor in fact 
sponsored a website that included the word ‘ripoff’ in its website address”); Bally Total Fitness Hold-
ing Corp. v. Faber, 29 F.Supp.2d 1161, 1163-64 (C.D.Cal.1998) (gripe site with domain name www.
compupix.com/ballysucks dedicated to complaints about Bally’s health club did not create likelihood of 
confusion because no reasonable visitor to gripe site would assume it to come from same source or think 
it to be affiliated with, connected with, or sponsored by Bally’s); MCW, Inc. v. Badbusinessbureau.com, 
L.L.C., No. 02 Civ. 2727, 2004 WL 833595, at *16 (N.D.Tex. April 14, 2004) (Lanham Act unfair com-
petition claims against consumer review websites called “ripoffreport.com” and “badbusinessbureau.
com” that used plaintiff’s trademarks in connection with allegedly defamatory posts dismissed because 
no visitor to websites would believe that plaintiff markholder endorsed the comments on sites); Whitney 
Inf. Network, Inc. v. Xcentric Ventures, No. 2:04-cv-47-FtM-34SPC, 2005 WL 1677256 (M.D.Fla. July 
14, 2005) (unpublished memorandum and order) (dismissing trademark infringement and false desig-
nation of origin claims against “ripoffreport.com” because plaintiff mark holder, a seller of education 
courses, was involved in different field than defendant, who sold advertising space on site and helped 
aggrieved consumers reclaim lost money, and because no consumer would “be confused by a consumer 
watch-dog type website that is not selling any real estate investment course”); Cintas Corp. v. Unite 
Here, 601 F.Supp.2d 571 (S.D.N.Y. 2009), aff’d 355 Fed.Appx. 508 (2d Cir. 2009) (per curiam) (reject-
ing assertion by Cintas that the website < cintasexposed.com>, run by a labor union and dedicated to 
criticizing the company’s labor practices, could cause customer confusion).
44Ascentive, LLC v. Opinion Corp., 842 F. Supp. 2d 450 (E.D.N.Y. 2011).

125
﻿ Copyright
trademark law. This conclusion is bolstered by considering the similarity between 
AR targets and hyperlinks, which will be considered in Chapter 6.
Of course, every rule has its exception. The circumstances of each situation will 
be different, and those differences will sometimes make a material impact on the 
outcome of a trademark infringement analysis. In cases where the augmented con-
tent that one associates with another’s trademark is more akin to the competitive 
advertising discussed above than to critical consumer speech, the question of wheth-
er that content causes a likelihood of confusion will be much closer. Nor has this 
discussion taken into account the concept of trademark dilution, a cause of action 
that challenges the use of a famous mark in ways that diminish its distinctiveness or 
tarnish its goodwill, even in ways that do not cause a likelihood of confusion. The 
application of that doctrine to AR content will also vary widely depending on the 
circumstances.
What does seem clear, however, is that policing the use of trademarks in aug-
mented reality will be significantly more complex than it first appears.
COPYRIGHT
AR-related copyright issues may not lead to litigation as quickly as patent and trade-
mark disputes will. In the long run, however, I believe that AR is likely to raise a 
broader range of copyright matters than any other type of intellectual property issue. 
After all, the realm of copyright law is creative expression, an activity that (unlike 
innovation or the creation of commercial goodwill) is potentially available to all. AR 
is a medium in which all manner of creative ideas will be expressed.
COPYRIGHT BASICS
United States copyright law is a state-sanctioned, limited monopoly granted to the 
authors of creative expression. These authors receive the right to control some of 
the ways in which their works are used. In exchange, ownership of the work reverts to 
the public domain upon the expiration of the copyright term.
The U.S. Copyright Act specifies eight broad categories of creative “works” to 
which copyright protection applies:
1.	 Literary works;
2.	 Musical works, including any accompanying words;
3.	 Dramatic works, including any accompanying music;
4.	 Pantomimes and Choreographic works;
5.	 Pictorial, Graphic, and Sculptural works;
6.	 Motion pictures and other audiovisual works;
7.	 Sound recordings; and
8.	 Architectural works.45
4517 USC §102 (2012).

126
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
One could easily conceive of how each of these types of works could be ex-
pressed by augmented means.
United States copyright law affords to creators five basic rights with respect to 
their copyrighted work–the rights to control its reproduction, adaptation, distribu-
tion, public display, and public performance. These broad categories cover most, but 
not all of the uses one can make of copyrighted works. The copyright statute also 
carves out various categories of use over which the copyright owner should not have 
control. Chief among these is the doctrine of “fair use,” which describes a range of 
activities that benefit society too much to allow copyright owners to squelch them.
OBTAINING COPYRIGHTS
Fixation in a tangible medium
Nothing inherent to the AR medium will prevent augmented content from receiving 
copyright protection. To qualify for copyright protection, the work must be “fixed in 
a tangible medium,” meaning it must have some definite, perceptible form rather than 
just being evanescent sounds or an inchoate conception floating in someone’s head. 
This requirement provides a measure of objectivity in the application of copyright 
law, without which society would not be getting anything in exchange for the legal 
monopoly it grants to a copyright owner. That said, this “fixation” requirement is a 
loose one. Storing an image in software form is enough; even projecting an image 
digitally onto a screen or loading software into temporary random-access memory 
is sufficient.46 This is what allows digital representations to be copyright-protected 
in conventional two-dimensional media, and the same principle will apply when the 
same content is visualized by three-dimensional, augmented means. Even though 
augmented images are not actually in the physical environments in which they are 
made to appear, they nevertheless reside in a digital intermediary that is sufficiently 
“tangible” – such as on the lens of a head-mounted mobile device or in a cloud-based 
computer server. The “tangible fixation” element requires only that the works be 
stored in a media “from which they can be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise com-
municated, either directly or with the aid of a machine or device.”47 The specific type 
of device used to perceive the content is irrelevant.
A decision issued in September 2013 by the U.S. District Court for the Southern 
District of New York gives a preview of how AR copyright cases are likely to look. 
In Firesabre Consulting LLC v. Sheehy,48 middle school technology teacher Cindy 
Sheehy purchased a set of islands within the virtual world Second Life for use in 
teaching students. Each island in the simulation starts off as a flat green rectangle, 
and the user can then change the topography and landscape of the island (known as 
46For example, “all portions of [a video game] program, once stored in memory devices anywhere in 
the game, are fixed in a tangible medium.” Stern Elecs., Inc. v. Kaufman, 669 F.2d 852, 855 n.4 (2d 
Cir. 1982).
4717 USC §102 (2012).
48Firesabre Consulting LLC v. Sheehy, No. 11-CV-4719 (CS), 2013 WL 4520977 (S.D.N.Y. September 
26, 2013).

127
﻿ Copyright
“terraforming”) using a series of interactive tools provided by Linden. Firesabre – a 
consulting firm specializing in the educational use of virtual worlds – performed vari-
ous terraforming services for Sheehy on those islands, including a train station, a café, 
music shops, and a volcano. When the relationship between the parties broke down, 
Firesabre claimed copyright ownership in all of the terraformed content. Allegedly, 
Sheehy continued to display the content within Second Life and copied some of it to 
another virtual world, all of which Firesabre asserted to be copyright infringement.
The court denied Sheehy’s motion for judgment as a matter of law, holding in-
stead that Firesabre had alleged plausible allegations of infringement. First, the court 
decided that the works had been “fixed in a tangible medium” because they existed 
on Linden’s data servers and were visible within Second Life for a sufficient period 
of time to be perceived by the students who interacted with the islands.
Second, the court saw no reason to deny copyright protection to the terraformed 
works simply because others could come along later and modify them. “In this re-
gard,” the judge wrote, “I see no distinction between the terraforming designs and 
a drawing created on a chalkboard or a sculpture created out of moldable clay. That 
someone else could come along and, with or without permission, alter the original 
piece of art does not mean the art was too transitory to be copyrighted in the first 
place.”49 Therefore, even dynamic AR content will spark copyright law controversies.
Originality and the idea/expression dichotomy
Not every expressive work is automatically eligible for copyright protection. Both 
the U.S. Constitution and the Copyright Act require that the expression within the 
work be original to its author.50 Originality is therefore said to be the “sine qua non 
of copyright.” As explained by the U.S. Supreme Court, the word “original” in this 
context does not mean novelty (as is required by patent law), but rather that the work 
was independently created by the author as opposed to copied from other works, and 
that it possessed at least some minimal degree of creativity.51 The author “must have 
made some contribution to the work which is irreducibly his own.”52
A copyright is not a reward for mere effort or toil. A work that merely copies or 
compiles facts or the expression of others – no matter how much skill and effort that 
copying or compilation may require – cannot be copyrighted. This “idea/expression 
dichotomy” is the heart and soul of copyright law. That does not mean, however, 
that the expression must have any degree of artistic or aesthetic merit. As the U.S. 
Supreme Court held more than a hundred years ago, even “a very modest grade of 
art has in it something irreducible, which is one man’s alone. That something he may 
copyright.”53 All that is needed is some creative spark, “no matter how crude, humble, 
or obvious.”54
49Id.
50See Feist Pub’lns, Inc. v. Rural Tel. Serv. Co., 499 U.S. 340, 346 (1991); 17 U.S.C. § 102 (2012).
51Feist Pubs., Inc. v. Rural Tel. Serv. Co., Inc., 499 U.S. 340, 345-46 (1991)
52Todd v. Montana Silversmiths, Inc., 379 F. Supp. 2d 1110, 1112 (D. Colo. 2005).
53Bleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing Co., 188 U.S. 239, 250 (1903)
54Feist, 499 U.S. at 345.

128
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
FIGURE 5.9
The digital wireframes at issue in Meshwerks v. Toyota Motors Sales USA, Inc.

129
﻿ Copyright
The application of these principles to augmented reality were foreshadowed in the 
2008 case Meshwerks v. Toyota Motors Sales USA, Inc.,55 which applied the age-old 
principle of originality to the relatively new technology: digital modeling (Fig. 5.9). 
In 2003, Toyota and its marketing partners decided to begin creating digital models 
of Toyota’s vehicles for use on Toyota’s website and in various other media. This 
approach offered significant cost savings over the prior method of obtaining vehicle 
images, which required a new photo shoot of entire fleets of vehicles each time even 
the smallest design element changed. Digital images, by contrast, can be edited with 
a few mouse clicks.
Toyota’s marketing partners subcontracted with a company called Meshwerks to 
conduct the first two initial steps of the project – digitization and modeling. Mesh-
werks began this process by collecting hundreds of physical data points from the 
vehicles to be portrayed. Based on these measurements, modeling software (such 
as Maya) generated a digital “wire frame” image. Meshwerks personnel then fine-
tuned the lines on screen to resemble each vehicle as closely as possible. According 
to Meshwerks, approximately 90 percent of the data points contained in each final 
model were adjusted by a person. Some areas of detail – including the wheels, head-
lights, door handles, and Toyota emblem – could not be mechanically measured and 
instead were added by hand.
When Toyota and its partners later used these wire frame images in ways to which 
Meshwerks objected, Meshwerks sued, claiming that it owned a copyright in the 
images. Both the district court and the court of appeals, however, disagreed, holding 
that the wire frame models were merely copies of Toyota’s products, and not suf-
ficiently original to warrant copyright protection. The courts stressed that, despite 
the significant amount of effort Meshwerks invested in creating the images, it had 
never intended to create something original. To the contrary, its express intention was 
to replicate, as exactly as possible, the image of certain Toyota vehicles. That is the 
only way in which the images would have been useful to Toyota as substitutes for 
photographs of real vehicles.
Several other courts have likewise denied copyright protection in analogous cas-
es, involving digital copies of physical facts and prior works of art. For example, 
in Sparaco v. Lawler, Matusky, Skelly, Engineers LLP,56 the court denied copyright 
protection to the elements of an architectural drawing that conveyed “the existing 
physical characteristics of the site, including its shape and dimensions, the grade 
contours, and the location of existing elements, [because this portion] sets forth facts, 
[and] copyright does not bar the copying of such facts.”57 Other cases have denied  
copyright protection to catalog illustrations of transmission parts “copied from 
­photographs cut out of competitors’ catalogs,”58 and to high-quality photocopies of 
56Sparaco v. Lawler, Matusky, Skelly, Engineers LLP, 303 F.3d 460, 467 (2d Cir. 2002)
57Id. at 467
58ATC Distr. Group, Inc. v. Whatever It Takes Transmissions & Parts, Inc., 402 F.3d 700, 712 (6th Cir. 2005).
55Meshwerks v. Toyota Motors Sales USA, Inc. 528 F. 3d 1258 (10th Cir. 2008).

130
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
paintings.59 They have also denied protection to other examples of the “dimensional 
shifting” that Meshwerks did replicating a three-dimensional object in two dimen-
sions. For example, courts have held that three-dimensional plastic toys60 and cos-
tumes61 based on pre-existing, two-dimensional cartoon characters were not original.
Anticipating the negative reaction to its decision that did, in fact, come from 
several sources, the Meshwerks court went out of its way to stress that “[d]igital 
modeling can be, surely is being, and no doubt increasingly will be used to create 
copyrightable expressions.”62 It even suggested “that digital models can be devised 
of Toyota cars with copyrightable features, whether by virtue of unique shading, 
lighting, angle, background scene, or other choices. The problem for Meshwerks in 
this particular case is simply that the uncontested facts reveal that it wasn’t involved 
in any such process, and indeed contracted to provide completely unadorned digital 
replicas of Toyota vehicles in a two-dimensional space.”63
Another example of the same issue is the recreation of real people. This is not hy-
pothetical; there are already several companies publishing or working on augmented 
entertainment content that involves the replication of actual celebrities and historical 
figures. To the extent that these “characters” merely replicate the attributes of an 
actual person, they will not contain original, copyrightable content.
These cases illustrate the fine line between originality and reproduction for digital 
imitations of reality. Because AR content is meant to be perceived in conjunction 
with physical objects – often in a manner intended to create the illusion that the 
digital content is itself physical – we will be more likely to find digital content that 
straddles this line in AR than we are in other digital contexts. This will be increas-
ingly true as the technology improves, creating higher-resolution images and more 
stable displays. (The fact that eligibility for copyright protection would decrease as 
the quality of the image increases understandably strikes some as a perverse result, 
but it is entirely consistent with the purposes of copyright law, as courts have repeat-
edly explained.) This could result in augmented environments that intentionally bear 
slight, digitized differences from their real-life inspirations – such as, for example, 
the flora and buildings in the Second Life islands in the Firesabre case – solely for 
the purpose of preserving original expression and therefore copyright protection. In 
other cases, though, it will simply mean that content creators will need to rely on 
other compensation models to reward them for their effort.
There may also come a day when augmented digital objects are so utilitarian that 
we come to think of them as functional tools rather than expressive works. Consider, 
for example, the menu layouts of most word processing programs, or the graphics 
used to symbolize such functions as “power on/off,” “play,” and “pause.” If there 
were only one software program in existence that employed these arrangements and 
graphical works, they may well be considered copyrightable. In reality, however, 
62Meshwerks v. Toyota Motors Sales USA, Inc., 528 F. 3d 1258, 1269 (10th Cir. 2008).
63Id. at 1269-70.
59Bridgeman Art Library, Ltd. v. Corel Corp., 36 F.Supp.2d 191, 197 (S.D.N.Y. 1999)
60Durham Indus., Inc. v. Tomy Corp., 630 F.2d 905, 910 (2d Cir. 1980).
61Entm’t Research Group, Inc. v. Genesis Creative Group, Inc., 122 F.3d 1211, 1221-24 (9th Cir. 1997).

131
﻿ Copyright
they merely represent methods of organization that are commonplace and critical 
to the function of thousands of programs. Although there is some room for minute 
variations in how these user interfaces are expressed, that room is so narrow that 
such variances will not be considered sufficiently original for copyright protection. 
(This is what copyright law calls the “merger doctrine.” Both it and a related doc-
trine known as scenes a faire, or scenes that must be done, describes elements of an 
expression that are so common to its genre that they can no longer be considered 
original.) In an augmented world, we may come to rely on all sorts of augmented 
user interface designs that then become standardized scenes a faire, thereby depriv-
ing them of the ability to be protected by copyright.
REPRODUCTION AND DERIVATIVE WORKS
The foregoing section imagined augmented environments so similar to real-world 
objects that they cannot be protected by copyright. Much more frequently, however, 
augmented expression will reproduce other, pre-existing creative works – and there-
fore infringe their copyrights.
Duplicating copyrighted works
In order to prove infringement, a copyright owner must show a “substantial similar-
ity” between the copyrightable expression in the two works. When one work entirely 
copies another that is an easy showing to make. Because so many AR applications 
will rely on video technology – particularly wearable devices with video recording 
capability – replicating copyrighted expression will always be a concern. After all, 
before digital eyewear is able to add digital content to our view of the world, the 
devices must first be able to know what we’re looking at.
One of the earliest examples of this concern occurred on January 18, 2014 in 
Columbus, Ohio. That’s when Federal agents from the Department of Homeland 
Security and local law enforcement officials allegedly yanked a customer out of a 
movie at AMC Theaters and interrogated him for several hours. His crime? Wearing 
Google Glass in a movie theater. The moviegoer was released only after demonstrat-
ing that he had not activated the recording function of the device during the film.64
Of course, this concern is by no means unique to wearable technology. In all like-
lihood, more than 90% of the other patrons in the theater were carrying smartphones, 
any one of which had both video recording capability and enough battery power to 
last throughout the film – something Glass definitely does not have. There was no 
word on how many of them were interrogated. Nevertheless, the emerging revolution 
in wearable and Internet of Things technologies will certainly multiply the number 
of recording devices in the wild, and with that will come concerns that copyrighted 
works are being reproduced.
64Julie Streitelmeier, AMC movie theater calls ‘federal agents’ to arrest a Google Glass user, The 
Gadgeteer (January 20, 2014) http://the-gadgeteer.com/2014/01/20/amc-movie-theater-calls-fbi-to-
arrest-a-google-glass-user/.

132
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
Other exact replicas of copyrighted works may be deliberate. In order to create an 
immersive augmented experience of a far-away place, for example – as some com-
panies are already contemplating – the location will need to be exactly duplicated. 
That would likely include any copyrighted artwork that may be visible in the scene.
Even transferring a work from one medium to another, without more, is a mere 
reproduction (and hence infringement) of the copyrighted expression in the origi-
nal. In Meshwerks, the thing being copied was not a copyrighted work, so the only 
consequence of this copying was that the new work lacked originality. Where the 
thing being copied is copyrighted, however, the reproduction is an infringement of 
that copyright. A U.S. Court of Appeals reached a very similar conclusion in Gay-
lord v. United States.65 There, the U.S. Postal Service issued a (two-dimensional) 
stamp depicting the (three-dimensional) Korean War Veterans Memorial in D.C. 
The creator of that sculpture successfully argued that the stamp merely copied his 
expression and reproduced it in a different medium.
Many artists will see AR as a medium in which they can “bring to life” existing 
works, especially those that currently only exist in two dimensions. If they are not 
careful to add their own expression to those recreations, however, a court may find 
them to be mere reproductions – infringements – of the copyright in the existing work.
Adding to existing works
Substantial similarity becomes more challenging to demonstrate when the copies are 
not exact. “[T]he copying [must be] quantitatively and qualitatively sufficient to support 
the legal conclusion that infringement (actionable copying) has occurred. The qualita-
tive component concerns the copying of expression, rather than [non-protectable ele-
ments].... The quantitative component … must be more than ‘de minimis.’66 Neither 
threshold is particularly high, but it is ultimately a subjective determination by the court.
The exclusive right to make “derivative works” is closely related to the idea of 
making an inexact, but substantially similar, reproduction. A derivative work is sim-
ply the addition of new expression to an existing work. In either case, a substantial 
portion of the original work exists in the new one, and the copyright owner’s rights 
have been infringed.
Since the very definition of “augment” is “to make greater,” augmented real-
ity tools carry with them an inherent risk of creating derivative works. In its most 
straightforward form, visual AR involves overlaying digital data on top of physical 
things in order to add content to it or change its appearance.
A few examples capture the point:
• 
In the books Daemon and FreedomTM by Daniel Suarez, a character nicknamed 
“The Burning Man” is memorialized by a statue. To the naked eye, it appears to be 
a conventional sculpture. Viewed through AR glasses, however, it become wreathed 
in three-dimensional flames, and studded with links to videos and tributes.
66Castle Rock Entm’t v. Carol Publ’g Grp., 150 F. 3d 132, 138 (2d Cir. 1998).
65Gaylord v. United States, 595 F. 3d 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

133
﻿ Copyright
• 
As part of their 2011 Re + Public collaboration, the Heavy Projects and the 
Public Ad Campaign used AR to “filter” outdoor advertising and replace it 
with original street art. Looking through an AR app, outdoor commercial 
advertisements were overlaid with political or artistic messages. One such 
pointed message caused the image of “Captain Barbossa” in the poster for 
Pirates of the Caribbean 4 to morph before a user’s eyes into the face of 
Goldman Sachs CEO Lloyd Blankfein conveying the artist’s message that he is 
the “real pirate” (Fig. 5.10). Similar projects have superimposed digital content 
onto public murals in a form of augmented graffiti.
• 
Artist Amir Baradaran published a mobile app called “Italicizing Mona Lisa.” 
It is designed to display on your phone as you hold it up to a physical version 
of the iconic painting, creating the video illusion that the woman depicted there 
wraps herself in the Italian flag.
• 
“Projection mapping” uses three-dimensional video to animate stationary 
objects, usually the sides of buildings. When done well, projection mapping 
creates the powerful illusion of a building actually coming to life and moving in 
three dimensions.
Do these digital animations infringe the copyright of the physical art they augment?
In the typical “augmented substitution” scenario, in which content on a mobile 
screen simply overlays or complements the existing work, no infringement is likely. 
That is because the digital content is not actually doing anything to the original work. 
It is not making a copy of or altering the original. Even though the physical display 
acts as a trigger for the digital content, and even though the user’s mobile device 
causes the digital content to appear as if it exists in the real world in place of the 
FIGURE 5.10
From Pirates of the Caribbean to “the Real Pirate.”

134
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
original, it doesn’t actually exist there. It’s an effective illusion for creating an im-
mersive experience, but it’s an illusion nonetheless. The content stays on the mobile 
screen, where it is a separate digital work that exists apart from the physical display.
But the question gets more complicated when the digital content actually makes 
the physical display appear to morph, as in the Pirates of the Caribbean and Mona 
Lisa examples. That is because, more likely than not, the AR software has already 
stored a reference copy of the original and altered versions of the physical work. In 
other words, the programmer may have created a reproduction and a derivative of 
the physical work long before anyone uses the program to interact with the physical 
artwork. In order to create the illusion of movement in the physical painting, the AR 
programmer first reproduced the artwork, then created a digital alteration of it. That 
doesn’t raise any copyright concerns with public domain works like the Mona Lisa, 
but artists who digitally copy and morph copyrighted works are taking a risk.
Augmented architecture
Projection mapping and other means of augmenting architectural works add another 
layer of nuance. Today, this technology is confined to elaborate, after-dark advertise-
ments on the sides of buildings. After AR becomes ubiquitous, however, I doubt that 
there will be many buildings that are not animated in one way or another. Unlike 
contemporary projection mapping, the effect will be superimposed by the user’s AR 
viewer, instead of light being physically projected onto the surface of the building. 
Those who design these experiences will no longer be limited to the actual physical 
dimensions of the brick-and-mortar edifice. Instead, you could find a building actu-
ally wrapping its (simulated) arms around you, or see (virtual) flames spewing from 
its windows, or any other effect one can imagine. All of which leads a curious IP 
attorney to wonder: could any of this activity infringe the architectural copyrights of 
the person who designed the building?
One type of creative expression in which copyright may inhere is an “architec-
tural work”–i.e., “the design of a building as embodied in any tangible medium of 
expression, including a building, architectural plans, or drawings.”67 But Congress 
also recognized that allowing architects to fully enforce all five of the basic copyright 
rights could cause all manner of logistical nightmares throughout society. So it pared 
back some of the protections available in architectural works. Specifically, Section 
120 of the Copyright Act68 allows people to make, distribute, and display pictures of 
public buildings. It also lets the owners of a building alter or destroy the building, if 
they so choose, without needing to first get the architect’s permission.
With these things in mind, let’s consider whether projection mapping impermissi-
bly adapts (or, in copyright parlance, “creates a derivative work of”) the architectural 
work embodied in the building being projected upon.
The short answer, in my view, is “no.” With the caveat, the outcome of any 
particular case depends on the specific facts at issue. It is difficult to imagine a real-
istic scenario in which projection mapping (as it’s currently done) would create an 
6717 USC §101 (2012).
6817 U.S.C. § 120 (2012).

135
﻿ Copyright
infringing derivative work. At least two reasons come to mind. First, nothing is ac-
tually being done to the architectural work (i.e., the building design) itself. Instead, 
the presentation involves two separate “works”–the building, and the video. Yes, 
the video is designed to take advantage of the unique design of the specific build-
ing that it’s being projected upon. Its effect would be far less impressive if it were 
projected onto any other surface. And that effect is meant to create the illusion that 
the building design is changing. But it’s only an illusion. No actual alteration to the 
architectural work ever occurs.
Second, even if a creative litigation attorney argued that simply creating the per-
ception of a morphing building was enough to create a derivative of the building de-
sign, such an “alteration” should fall within Section 1209s exception. Although there 
is very little case law interpreting Section 120, one court accurately observed that 
“Section 120(b) does not expressly contain any limitation upon the manner or means 
by which a [building owner] may exercise his right to alter the structure. Presumably, 
no such limitations were intended by Congress, else they would be expressed in [that 
section].”69 The one catch here is that, as written, this statutory exception allows only 
the “owner” of a building, not anyone else, to authorize an alteration to the building. 
So the projection mappers would need to have the owner’s permission; guerilla mar-
keters would not have this statutory defense. Again, though, there would not appear 
to be any actual alteration made in the first place.
But would the result be the same if the illusion of an animated building were 
accomplished through AR smartphone/eyewear instead of an actual video presenta-
tion? Yes–for the most part. Whether the video image is actually projected on a build-
ing or only overlaid over the viewer’s perception via AR, there is still no alteration of 
the actual building occurring.
There is a potential catch, however, depending on how the AR effect is accom-
plished. If the data superimposed on the building consists solely of original imagery 
designed to overlay the building, that’s conceptually equivalent to existing projection 
mapping. But what if the AR designer copies the actual building design into virtual 
space, then alters that design, in order to create the end result? That would compli-
cate things from a copyright perspective. An architectural work can be embodied 
either in 2-D written drawings or in a 3-D manifestation. Making a copy of the de-
sign is infringement, unless an exception applies. Section 120 allows people to make 
“pictures, paintings, photographs, or other pictorial representations of the work.” A 
virtual recreation may very well fit that description. But the statute does not expressly 
allow the person who makes that pictorial representation to then alter the picture. 
Arguably, that could be creating a derivative work.
Even under those circumstances, potential defenses are available. For example, 
at least one court70 has found within Section 120 an implied right to copy and alter 
a building’s plans for the purpose of creating an owner-approved alteration to the 
69Javelin Investments, LLC v McGinnis, CA H-05-3379, 2007 US Dist Lexis 21472 (S.D. Tex. January 
23, 2007).
70Id.

136
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
building. Otherwise, the court reasoned, an architect hired by a homeowner to reno-
vate a home would be forced to do so without the benefit of written plans–a danger-
ous prospect. A similar argument could be made in the AR space, depending on the 
purpose of the alteration. A different court,71 however, has disagreed that any such 
implied right to copy plans for the purpose of altering a building exists.
PUBLIC DISPLAY AND PERFORMANCE
Public display and performance rights will also be at issue, in sometimes novel ways. 
Because most AR content will be experienced through individual mobile devices, 
one might presume those experiences to be private, rather than public, displays and 
performances. But AR programs that are aware of a user’s geolocation and that are 
designed to portray content as being physically manifest at that location challenge 
that presumption. For example, the British Museum released a mobile app designed 
to show users historical London photos in the actual, public location where they were 
taken. The photo itself never leaves the confines of the mobile device, but its display 
is triggered by the user’s physical location.
The same issue is presented by performances of location-aware video content. 
In 2011, tech news outlets reported on a man who had tattooed on his arm a target 
marker image used by a Nintendo 3DS game to represent an animated dragon. To the 
outside world, the tattoo was simply an uninteresting, approximately square-shaped 
symbol. When viewed through the 3DS device, however, it came to life as a three-
dimensional, moving dragon.
Is that a “public” display and performance? And if so, has the app developer or 
end user acquired from the copyright owner the appropriate license rights for that 
public display? The case of the dragon tattoo seems likely to have exceeded what-
ever license may have come with the 3DS device for displaying the content. Entire 
industries were forced to confront the limitations of their licenses when the internet be-
came a new medium for republishing old content; AR will present similar challenges. 
User-generated content and social media will guarantee that works get publicly dis-
played in all sorts of unanticipated ways. Such questions will grow in importance as 
our surroundings become populated with triggers for all sorts of digital data.
MORAL RIGHTS
The collection of rights known as “moral rights” are quasi-copyright protections enti-
tling the creator of an artistic work to protect the integrity of their creation, regardless of 
who may come to own the work. This is primarily a European concept not recognized 
in U.S. law, and therefore is beyond the scope of this book. A form of moral rights, 
however, can be found in the Visual Artists Rights Act, which, among other things, gives 
artists a limited right “to prevent any intentional distortion, mutilation, or other modi-
fication of that work which would be prejudicial to his or her honor or reputation.” 72
7217 USC 106A (2012).
71Guillot-Vogt Associates, Inc. v. Holly & Smith, 848 F.Supp. 682 (E.D. La. 1994)

137
﻿ Copyright
Whether the VARA or similar rights will ever apply to AR content remains to be 
seen. Case law interpreting this right is scarce, and by its very nature it cuts against 
the grain of the Copyright Act’s design. United States copyright law places the power 
to control a work in the hands of whomever owns its copyright, as opposed to the 
original artist who created the work and then only within the five exclusive rights of 
a copyright holder. Moreover, digital augmentations of a physical work typically will 
not alter the actual physical work. Nevertheless, the foregoing Mona Lisa example 
illustrates how convincingly a physical work of art can digitally be made to appear 
as if it is being distorted. It is easy to foresee a visual artist taking umbrage to such 
augmentation, and resorting to every creative legal means available to enjoin it.
FAIR USE
Each of the foregoing examples of scenarios that may be considered copyright in-
fringement are subject to affirmative defenses that may defeat the claim under par-
ticular circumstances. Among those is the defense of fair use. The Copyright Act 
identifies certain activities that are presumptively permissible under this doctrine – 
including “criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching (including multiple copies 
for classroom use), scholarship, or research.”73 This list of preferred activities derives 
directly from First Amendment case law, as each of these is an example of speech 
that contributes in one way or another to conversation about issues of public impor-
tance. It is a recognition that free speech rights ought to trump intellectual property 
protections in some circumstances.
Unlike most statutory exceptions to copyright infringement liability, however, 
whether any particular use is “fair” under any given set of circumstances can only be 
determined on a case-by-case basis by applying four subjective principles:
1.	 The purpose and character of the use, including whether such use is of a 
commercial nature or is for non-profit educational purposes;
2.	 The nature of the copyrighted work;
3.	 The amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the copyrighted 
work as a whole; and
4.	 The effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the copyrighted work.74
In practice, most fair use cases center on the first and fourth factors. Many courts 
tend to cast the first factor in terms of whether or not the challenged use somehow 
“transforms” the purpose or character of the original work. Some of the foregoing 
examples, such as the augmentation of the Pirates of the Caribbean poster, have 
an obvious political message, which is a presumptively preferred “purpose and 
character” of use. Another popular (although not always successful) line of argu-
ment is that a use “transforms” the original by “mashing” it up in a display with 
multiple other works. For example, Cariou v. Prince75 involved relatively crude and 
7317 USC 107 (2012).
7417 USC 107 (2012).
75Cariou v. Prince, 714 F.3d 694 (2d Cir. April 25, 2013).

138
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
simplistic ­physical augmentations made to photographs. The iconic example from 
that case involved a guitar and psychedelic face mask that the defendant slapped on 
top of the photo of a Jamaican man. The Second Circuit held that even these simple 
additions were sufficient to fairly transform the original. Similarly, in June 2014, 
the Second Circuit held that Google’s massive project to scan books into an enor-
mous, searchable database was a fair, “transformative” use of the books because the 
originals were not capable of being searched. If these decisions hold as precedent 
for future cases, they could open the door to all manner of digital augmentations to 
other works.
The fourth factor – which assesses the impact of the defendant’s work on the 
original’s commercial value – will be difficult to ascertain, especially in early cases. 
The medium of AR is so nascent, and there are so few business models based on it, 
that there will be very few reliable facts from which a court can draw a conclusion. 
This uncertainty will cut both ways. In some cases, the lack of evidence will lead a 
court to conclude that there is no market for the original in the AR medium. Other 
courts, however, will reach the opposite conclusion, afraid that the defendant’s use 
will have foreclosed the plaintiff’s ability to exploit the limitless possibilities avail-
able for creating value in this yet-to-be-defined market.
The most significant drawback of the fair use defense is always its uncertainty. 
Someone proposing to use another’s copyright work without permission cannot reli-
ably determine ahead of time whether the use is fair; instead, the decision may only 
be made by a judge or jury in response to a copyright infringement lawsuit. There-
fore, although fair use is commonly invoked to justify all manner of uses, it is never 
a reliable safeguard.
AUGMENTED COPYRIGHT ENFORCEMENT
Copyright enforcement will also be a major challenge in the AR medium. The mass 
lawsuits of the past two decades against file-sharers and signal pirates have required a 
significant amount of detective work and discovery to connect individual users to al-
legedly infringing downloads. Pursuing legal action against those who share infring-
ing content in the augmented medium will not differ categorically from these efforts. 
After all, augmented content only appears to exist in three dimensions; in reality, it 
will still reside in a hard drive, device, or server somewhere that can be located and 
tracked. Indeed, the earliest versions of digital eyewear available now have relatively 
little on-board memory or processing power, and only connect to the internet by 
means of a connection (some hard-wired, some wireless) to a mobile phone, and 
many of their apps reside in the cloud.
As augmented content proliferates across the Internet of Things – and especially the 
types of distributed, ad hoc mesh networks described in Chapter 2 – the substance and 
sources of data will become that much harder to track. The entire world will eventually 

139
﻿ Copyright
FIGURE 5.11
Excerpts from A Read-Only Future.

140
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
become a giant peer-to-peer sharing network; think of AR channels as bit torrent sites 
that users can walk through, see, and touch. So-called “darknets” – sealed digital com-
munities with no visible connection to the internet – will become much more common.
One can imagine that it will become even more difficult to prove that a particular 
user viewed a particular work when the “display” occurred entirely within a mobile 
headset. As discussed in Chapter 10, I expect that many litigators will soon be con-
ducting “v-discovery,” in which they must determine not only the device to which 
virtual data was routed, but also where individual users were located, and in what 
direction they were looking, when the data was displayed.
On the other hand, AR eyewear could also be used as a copyright enforcement 
mechanism. The YouTube video A Read-Only Future76 depicts life through the eyes 
of someone wearing digital eyewear that is regulated by the entertainment industry 
(Fig. 5.11). His glasses recognize copyrighted content in the user’s field of view or 
range of hearing – such as a photo hanging on the wall or a song being played on the 
sidewalk – and obscures it unless he agrees to a micro-license payment. Just as in con-
cept videos for actual digital headsets, the eyewear in this video is able to share content 
directly to Facebook, but these will refuse to do so if they detect unlicensed content. 
They even alert the authorities if the user stumbles across an unauthorized reproduc-
tion published by someone else. Excerpts from copyright skeptic Larry Lessig feature 
prominently in A Read-Only Future, which plays out as if it was Lessig’s nightmare.
This scenario is entirely plausible in light of how most AR apps function today. 
A mobile device scans the ambient world looking for one of the targets it is pre-
programmed to recognize. Each time it captures a view, the device sends that image 
to the cloud to check against the portfolio of targets. If a match is found, the cloud 
server sends back the digital content associated with that target. Several non-AR 
apps operate in a similar way; for example, the popular mobile app Shazam listens 
to ambient music and identifies it in real time, allowing users to purchase a copy of 
the song or follow along to the lyrics. A few months before this book went to print, 
Shazam became available on Glass.
It would be child’s play to simply add a roster of copyrighted works to a cloud-
based catalog of targets. Every time the cloud server recognizes one of the protected 
files in its database, it could be set to trigger a request for micropayment, or obscure 
the work, or even issue a warning to law enforcement or the copyright owner itself. 
The fine print in our mobile app stores already prohibits us from using the apps to 
commit copyright infringement; this would be going one step further to turn mobile 
devices into the eyes and ears of the copyright police.
Such an enforcement mechanism could potentially be so effective, and offer 
such a unique functionality not available by any other means, that the company 
able to provide it would be foolish not to monetize it. Today, mobile devices (in-
cluding digital eyewear) receive their internet connections through such providers 
as AT&T, Verizon, Sprint, and the like. In the near future, we may instead get on-
line directly through the “panternet” mass wireless signals emitted by Google or 
76A Read-Only Future, Youtube (March 16, 2013) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f8bDg2qewFA.

141
﻿ Copyright
Facebook and discussed in Chapter 2. Whichever company provides that service 
could easily sell to copyright owners the ability to police copyright compliance 
through the network of AR-capable devices they serve. Internet service provid-
ers (ISPs) would then become analogous to the performance rights organizations 
(PROs) of today – ASCAP, BMI, and SESAC – which rely on human investigators 
to overhear unlicensed public performances of copyrighted music. Indeed, these 
PROs could contract directly with ISPs to enforce their entire catalogs – deputizing 
every AR app user as investigators.
With such an arrangement in place, ISPs might even share the wealth in order to 
incentivize users to cooperate. Imagine if AR users received a micropayment each 
time they used their device to report an observed copyright infringement. Knowing 
that anyone you meet is a potential copyright cop would certainly be a powerful dis-
incentive to would-be casual infringers. Five years from now, instead of movie the-
aters detaining and interrogating digital eyewear users, they may be rewarding them.
LICENSING
As with anything else, copyrights can be enforced through either carrots or sticks 
(or a combination of the two). If the aggressive enforcement action described above 
is the stick, then the carrot would be offering licensed content. In the early 2000s, 
digital music piracy was rampant, and CD sales were in free-fall. Not because the 
internet and digital music were inherently unlawful, but because the traditional pub-
lishers of copyrighted music offered no satisfactory alternative to meet the demand 
for digital music. Not until Apple introduced iTunes in 2003 did consumers finally 
have a digital marketplace robust enough to meet their needs. Since then, digital 
distribution (through iTunes, more often than not) has become the default means of 
obtaining new music.
It remains to be seen how much of a problem copyright piracy will be in the 
AR medium. Establishing an infrastructure for lawfully obtaining a wide variety of 
desirable content, however, will still be the means by which content creators will be 
able to make money from AR. In October 2013, NYU Polytechnic professor Mark 
Skwarek (who also created the “Leak in Your Home Town” app described in the 
foregoing trademark discussion) introduced the first augmented Halloween masks 
(Fig. 5.12).77 Trick-or-treaters wearing a four-inch target in their hat or hair would 
be seen by users of Skwarek’s AR app as if they were wearing giant, virtual masks. 
Once enough devices are in place to make the ability to perceive such content suf-
ficiently ubiquitous, companies could easily begin selling entire lines of virtual Hal-
loween costumes. The same infrastructure would allow sales of augmented clothing  
year-round, along with augmented ornaments, décor, signage, toys, games indeed, a 
digital analog of almost anything that exists physically.
77Mark Skwarek, Still Wearing a Real Mask this Halloween?, Polytechnic School of Engineer-
ing (October 28, 2013) https://engineering.nyu.edu/press-release/2013/10/28/still-wearing-real-mask-
halloween.

142
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
Copyright owners could also license the right to make particular uses of augment-
ed content. Today, for example, owners of musical works sell “sync” or “soundtrack” 
licenses to filmmakers, which convey the right to “sync” a particular song with video 
content into an audio-visual film. There is no logical reason why copyright owners 
could not likewise license the ability to sync their works with any physical object 
via the augmented medium. Want passersby to see a copyrighted dragon image on 
your arm (as in the foregoing example of the man with the tattoo of a Nintendo 3DS 
FIGURE 5.12
Prof. Mark Skwarek’s Augmented Halloween Mask.

143
The Right of Publicity ﻿
marker)? Pay the license fee. Are you a University of Michigan fan and you want 
other drivers (using augmented windshields) to see your car as if it were a giant, 
blue-and-maize-wearing wolverine? Pay the license fee. Want to see Mickey Mouse 
ears on the moon each time it rises? The list of examples is limited only by one’s 
imagination.
On today’s internet, copyright enforcement blends with licensing in the form 
of paywalls – websites that cannot be accessed without making a micropayment or 
purchasing a subscription. When it comes to augmented content, we could easily 
encounter similar paywalls – including some that we perceive as actual, physical 
walls – literally everywhere we go. Digital entertainment and other content could 
be made available floating in mid-air, on the side of a building, or anywhere else 
– but only accessible for a micropayment. As discussed earlier, the infrastructure 
for such payments is already being constructed. In 2013, Google obtained a patent 
for “pay per gaze” and “pay per emotion” systems. Although these are described 
as methods for ISPs to charge advertisers based on a consumer’s reaction to the 
ad, the concept could just as easily be adapted to take payments from consumers 
in order to access the advertising or other content. Chapter 4 described multiple 
ways in which companies are already beginning to explore such “commARce” 
solutions.
Of course, too much reliance on such business models could have adverse 
social consequences. Retailers have always known the power of “impulse pur-
chases,” as well as how to position and price their content attractively enough to 
entice users to buy. It is a profitable model for retailers, but not exactly conducive 
to consumers maintaining a disciplined budget. If large quantities of copyrighted 
content – news reports, public art, television shows, and the like – became avail-
able only behind AR paywalls, it could deprive society as a whole of valuable ex-
periences and encourage excessive spending. At this point, however, these remain 
only long-term, hypothetical concerns. How the new economic models shake out 
remains to be seen.
THE RIGHT OF PUBLICITY
Just as trademarked objects can easily serve as triggers for digital content, so too can 
the physical characteristics of individual people. The simmering debate over facial 
recognition technology and privacy summarized in Chapter 3 is a preview of the 
concerns we are likely to face when a large segment of the population is wearing 
eyewear capable of recognizing the faces of others.
The main concern voiced about this technology to date has been “privacy,” al-
though society in general seems to have no consensus about what that word actually 
means. But I also expect that the right of publicity – that weird, state-law transitional 
species between the common law of privacy and intellectual property – will play an 
increasingly prominent role in this debate going forward.

144
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
THE BASICS OF PUBLICITY RIGHTS
The right of publicity is a state-law right that emerged from the common law of pri-
vacy to become more or less recognized as a form of intellectual property. It is the 
fourth of Dean Prosser’s four causes of action for invasion of privacy discussed in 
Chapter 3. Although the particulars vary slightly from state to state, it is essentially 
the right of an individual to control the commercial exploitation of his or her like-
ness. The best summary of the right of publicity as generally understood across the 
United States comes from the Restatement (Third) of Unfair Competition section 46: 
“[o]ne who appropriates the commercial value of a person’s identity by using without 
consent the person’s name, likeness, or other indicia of identity for purposes of trade 
is subject to liability.” Each clause of this definition holds legal significance.
Commercial value
The “commercial” aspect of this right is intentional. It is what distinguishes the use 
of someone’s likeness in creative expression like a movie or song – which is gen-
erally free speech privileged by the First Amendment – from commercial speech 
designed to advertise and sell goods or services, which is more akin to a trademark, 
and hence within the realm of governmental regulation and property rights. In or-
der to prevail on a publicity rights claim, therefore, a plaintiff must generally prove 
that her identity has “commercial value” – i.e., that there is reason to believe that 
her identity would be worth something to an advertiser, or that a customer might 
be more likely to pay attention to a product because the plaintiff’s identity was as-
sociated with it.
For that reason, courts had long ruled that the right of publicity was only available 
to “celebrities,” and not the rest of us. Today, the rise of digital (and especially social) 
media makes it entirely realistic to argue that we can all attain commercial value in 
some context. One argument for establishing “commercial value” in social media is 
the value of personal relationships. On many social media sites, the identity of the 
person with whom one interacts in social media both incentivizes people to partici-
pate in the site and adds qualitatively significant value to the experience. And the 
more such interactions that occur on a particular social media site, the more benefit 
the owner of that site derives (in terms of advertising revenue, search engine tie-ins, 
or whatever the site’s business model may be).
Therefore, in a very direct and measurable way, some would argue, digital (and 
especially social) media is a context in which literally every user’s identity has poten-
tial commercial value. Two judicial decisions stemming from lawsuits filed against 
Facebook in recent years have given some credence to this view,78 as did a lawsuit 
over a banking executive’s LinkedIn profile.79
78Cohen v. Facebook, Inc., 798 F. Supp. 2d 1090 (ND Cal. 2011) and Fraley v. Facebook, Inc., 830 F. 
Supp. 2d 785 (ND Cal. 2011).
79Eagle v. Morgan, No. 11-4303. (E.D. Penn. 2013)

145
The Right of Publicity
Likeness
In this context, one’s “likeness” typically takes the form of one’s physical appear-
ance, name, signature, or voice. The restatement expressly lists two examples of 
ways in which a person’s identity can be “indicated”: their “name” (which typically 
includes both the name itself and the person’s signature) and their “likeness,” or 
personal appearance. But the common law includes in that term any other “indicia 
of identity.” So a famous race car driver’s likeness was infringed by using a picture 
of his distinctive car, and Johnny Carson’s right of publicity was infringed by the 
product name “Here’s Johnny Portable Toilets” because the phrase “Here’s Johnny” 
had come to be associated with Carson.
FACIAL RECOGNITION AS INFRINGING THE RIGHT OF PUBLICITY
Before long, someone is going to file a lawsuit arguing that facial recognition tech-
nology infringes the publicity rights of the person being scanned. I am actually sur-
prised that, as of this writing, no one seems to have yet made this argument in court. 
Right of publicity law regulates the commercial exploitation of a person’s identity, 
which is generally thought to include at least their physical appearance. The same 
commercial forces that guarantee the expansion of facial recognition will also pro-
vide plenty of evidence demonstrating the commercial value of the data. It will not 
take a scholar to connect the dots and argue that the people scanned should recoup a 
portion of any money made from their biometric data.
Whether this argument gains any traction is another matter. Biometric data is 
already widely used for entirely utilitarian (and especially security) purposes – wit-
ness, for example, the fingerprint scanner introduced in the iPhone 5S. Entire social 
networks and other user-generated content may come to rely on the ability to use 
facial recognition to identify specific individuals. As facial recognition capability 
becomes more democratized, allowing not only corporations to scan and store such 
data, the First Amendment may come to protect an individual’s right to identify and 
annotate their knowledge of others in this manner. Allowing people to own intellec-
tual property rights in that data might complicate matters too much for that technol-
ogy to remain useful, to the detriment of society as a whole.
THREE-DIMENSIONAL CAPTURE OF ENTIRE BODIES: SEX APPEAL 
AND THE RIGHT OF PUBLICITY
Traditional biometric indicators may not be the only way in which augmented tech-
nologies catalog and exploit individuals’ physical attributes. Mass-market devices 
like Microsoft’s Kinect are already designed to recognize entire bodies. A few 
years ago, artists in Spain set up a booth that used three Kinect cameras to scan 
individuals from head to toe. That data was relayed to a 3D printer in order to make 
a personalized figurine of the person right there on the street. Today, there are com-
panies simultaneously using more than 60 sensors more precise than the Kinect to 
digitally render individuals in real time with amazing accuracy. Moreover, the year 

146
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
2014 saw the introduction of the Kickstarter-funded Structure Sensor – an iPad ac-
cessory that allows the device’s camera to capture three-dimensional imagery from 
its surroundings in real time – and Google’s Project Tango, an experimental depth 
sensor that also renders ambient surroundings in 3D.
AR applications will take advantage of such capabilities in order to superimpose 
digital data on a person’s entire body. Many of these will be benign; entire markets 
will develop for virtual clothing and accessories, for instance. Security profession-
als already scan entire bodies for contraband, and have made progress in identifying 
individuals based on their gait as well.80
Other applications, however, will go beyond merely analyzing images of bodies 
to storing and repurposing those images. In an age where sexting is an epidemic 
among teens and states like California are forced to outlaw the salacious repurposing 
of such content (i.e., “revenge porn”), it does not require much imagination to con-
ceive of the unsavory uses to which 3D personal imaging technologies could be put. 
(I would be surprised if, by the time this book sees print, there have not already been 
instances of three-dimensional sexting.) To date, in courts across the country, one of 
the most frequent reasons for invoking the right of publicity has been to enjoin the 
prurient use of girls’ and women’s images, which are often recorded unwittingly. It 
is logical to expect the same laws to be applied when those images are collected and 
manipulated by new digital media.
How effective this right will be in these new augmented realms remains to be 
seen. The right of publicity has always existed in tension with the First Amendment’s 
protection of free speech, and often finds itself pre-empted by the Copyright Act as 
well. Both of these more-established bodies of law are likely to keep publicity rights 
from expanding too broadly. But there is still quite a bit of conduct that falls within 
the gray area between these areas of law, where the boundaries have yet to be de-
finitively drawn.
“Profiting directly from their sex appeal”
In 2009, a 22-year-old college student calling herself Natalie Dylan sold her virginity 
to raise money for grad school. The bidding, conducted online for services to be ren-
dered in Nevada, where prostitution is legal, went as high as $3.8 million. While her 
decision received a fair amount of criticism and moral approbation, she was also con-
gratulated by the CEO of a Fortune 500 company for her “entrepreneurial gumption.”
Explaining her decision, Dylan wrote: “it became apparent to me that idealized 
virginity is just a tool to keep women in their place. But then I realized something 
else: if virginity is considered that valuable, what’s to stop me from benefiting from 
that?… I took the ancient notion that a woman’s virginity is priceless and used it as 
a vehicle for capitalism.”81
81Natalie Dylan, Why I’m Selling My Virginity, The Daily Beast (January 23, 2009) http://www.
thedailybeast.com/articles/2009/01/23/why-im-selling-my-virginity.html.
80“Gait biometrics shows promise,” Homeland Security News Wire, September 8, 2011, available at 
http://www.homelandsecuritynewswire.com/gait-biometrics-shows-promise

147
The Right of Publicity
“I might even be an early adopter of a future trend,” Dylan predicted. “These 
days, more and more women my age are profiting directly from their sex appeal.”82 
She was right. The following year, the UK press profiled an 18-year-old Romanian 
girl who sold herself in exactly the same manner (but for far less money), citing 
Dylan as inspiration. Search engines reveal hordes of similar copycats. Still, Dylan 
concluded that “society isn’t ready for public auctions like mine – yet.”83
She’s right about that, too. But are we moving in the direction of women com-
modifying themselves in order to “profit directly from their sex appeal,” as Dylan 
suggests? There are reasons to believe we are – and that the right of publicity is 
providing the legal framework in which it can happen.
Publicity rights as shields against prurient publications
Several courts have used the right of publicity to stop others from using plaintiff’s 
image in a sexually suggestive manner. For example, Bret Michaels and Pamela 
Anderson won a lawsuit to block publication of their sex tape on this and other 
grounds.84 More recently, Kim Kardashian argued that a sex doll bearing a striking 
resemblance to her violated her right of publicity.85
In 2004, Catherine Bosley, a local newscaster in Ohio, sued when a video of her 
participating in a wet t-shirt contest found its way online and went viral.86 She won, 
but the reasoning the court used to reach that result raises some questions. For rea-
sons I’ve discussed elsewhere in more depth, the logical implication of the court’s 
holding is that, despite her pre-existing status as a “regional celebrity,” Bosley’s com-
mercial value had nothing to do with her unique, personal “identity,” as right of 
publicity case law has traditionally required. Rather, it came solely from the prurient 
value associated with her taking her top off. Several cases involving “Girls Gone 
Wild”-type situations have reached similar results. The implication of each ruling is 
that commercial value came from the plaintiff’s body, not her identity.
In my home jurisdiction of Michigan, these questions were raised in the case of 
Arnold v. Treadwell.87 There, a young aspiring model in Detroit posed for a photo 
shoot with local photographers, then sued them after some of those pictures (several 
of which were racy to begin with) ended up in a racy magazine, allegedly without 
her permission. She lost in the state trial court. But the Michigan Court of Appeals 
reversed, reasoning that the evidence could show “that there is value in associating 
an item of commerce with plaintiff’s identity.” The evidence supporting that finding? 
That “plaintiff has contracted to model clothing in a fashion show, to play an extra in 
82Id.
83Id.
84Michaels v. Internet Entm’t Grp., Inc., 5 F. Supp. 2d 823 (C.D. Cal. 1998)
85Lisa Prince, Keeping Up With The Kardashians: Kim Kardashian Reacts To Sex Toy Doll, Reality 
TV Magazine (September 22, 2010)http://realitytvmagazine.sheknows.com/2010/09/22/keeping-up-
with-the-kardashians-kim-kardashian-reacts-to-sex-toy-doll/.
86Bosley v. WildWett. Com, 310 F. Supp. 2d 914 (N.D. Ohio 2004).
87Arnold v. Treadwell, No.2007-080617-CZ, 2009 WL 2136909 (Mich Ct. App. July 16, 2009) 
­(unpublished opinion)

148
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
a music video, and to work as an exotic dancer”88–all activities that involve exploit-
ing her body, not her identity.
Only days after this ruling, a local Federal judge likewise refused to dismiss Ar-
nold’s parallel “false endorsement” claims under the Lanham Act.89 The court’s rea-
soning was slightly different than the state court’s. The court only went so far as to 
note that Arnold had “a present intent to commercialize her identity.” In other words, 
as long as Arnold had opened the door to commercially exploiting her own appear-
ance, she would be allowed to make her case that her identity did, in fact, have com-
mercial value. Nevertheless, there was still no discussion of the distinction between 
“likeness” and “identity.”
Taken together, therefore, these cases demonstrate that the right of publicity (and 
related claims) can be an effective basis for attractive people to prevent others from 
publishing prurient images of them without permission. The means of achieving that 
result, however, is to think of those plaintiffs’ bodies in purely commercial terms, and 
to legally equate their physical appearance with their identity as people.
My body, my intellectual property
I am not necessarily suggesting that these cases were wrongly decided based on legal 
precedent, or even that their results are inevitably bad for society. To the contrary, 
judges have understandably latched onto publicity rights as one of the few effective 
mechanisms for putting an end to revenge porn and other exploitative content. It is 
an easier solution than copyright law, since copyrights vest by default in the person 
taking the picture, rather than the person depicted in the picture. Until we have better 
laws, or better judicial precedents, to rely on, the right of publicity may remain the 
best tool courts have for combatting revenge porn and other unquestionably destruc-
tive behavior.
But I do want to raise the question of whether, in the long run, using this doctrine 
in this way creates precedents that will ultimately make it easier for individuals – 
primarily young women – to exploit themselves in ways they will later come to 
regret. Admittedly, this is not an entirely new concept. Sex sells. That’s a basic fact 
of human nature. Advertising a product by associating it with an attractive model is 
Marketing 101. Thousands of people have pursued modeling as a career, and there is 
nothing inherently questionable about that.
What rights should modeling get someone? Arnold was no supermodel – peo-
ple who, in today’s culture, are “celebrities” in every sense of the word. Rather, 
she had appeared in one, very local modeling show, as an extra in a music video, 
and as an exotic dancer. No one reading the magazine she sued over had any idea 
who she was; they only saw what she looked like. But the mere fact that she (and 
the plaintiffs in each of the other cases discussed above) was attractive enough to 
appear in a magazine (or video) gave her legally enforceable rights to profit from 
the publication of her image.
88Id.
89Arnold v. Treadwell, 642 F. Supp. 2d 723 (E.D. Mich. 2009).

149
The Right of Publicity
With that principle established, the right of publicity increasingly forms the basis 
of a reliable business model for any reasonably attractive person looking to “profit di-
rectly from their sex appeal.” And they don’t even have to go as far as Natalie Dylan 
did in selling her actual body; images will do just fine. The right of publicity has been 
in the news a lot lately, thanks to pop stars like Kim Kardashian and Lindsey Lohan, 
actors like Sandra Bullock, Julia Roberts, and George Clooney, and the estates of 
Tupac Shakur, Elvis, and Marilyn Monroe. Especially in the face of high youth un-
employment and a sagging economy, how long until more young people start putting 
two and two together, like Natalie Dylan or the protagonists of The Full Monty did?
Of course, whether and how much this happens depends on a lot more than intel-
lectual property laws. It’s a product of moral and ethical norms, societal attitudes, 
and much more. But having the legal mechanism in place to guarantee a profit may 
make it easier.
VIRTUAL ASSISTANTS AS INFRINGEMENT
Apple has Siri. Microsoft has Cortana. Google has the yet-to-be-anthropomorphized 
Voice Search. The Oscar-nominated film Her featured Samantha, while Ender Wig-
gins (in the sequels to Ender’s Game) had Jane. Vital to each iteration of the starship 
Enterprise was the Computer.
Futurists have long anticipated the day when humans could interact with comput-
ers using the same conversational speech we normally reserve for other people. In 
order to offer truly two-way interaction his type, however, the programs need to be 
able to respond in kind. In other words, they need to seem more human. The virtual 
assistants available as of this writing are beginning to approximate that experience. 
Siri has already reached its second generation, and some of its original creators are 
already at work on a next-generation competitor named “Viv” that is intended to be 
“blindingly smart,” “infinitely flexible,” “omnipresent,” and “embedded in a plethora 
of Internet-connected everyday objects.”90
But users and UX designers alike crave a more human-like interaction. AR will 
offer a unique avenue for achieving this goal by adding visual (and perhaps other 
sensory) elements to our digital companions. In the very near future, we will have 
available Siri-like assistants that we can actually see and communicate with face-
to-face, via our digital eyewear. This sort of synthetic companion raises a variety of 
issues, some of which we will revisit in Chapters 7 (re personal safety) and 13 (re 
pornography). Here, however, I want to suggest that those designing virtual people 
will inevitably mimic real people, and that this will potentially infringe the publicity 
rights of their muses.
The simple case in this hypothetical is the company that offers the likenesses of 
recognizable celebrities as “skins” for a virtual assistant. (This is already beginning 
to happen; in November 2013, the company behind the crowdsourced navigation app 
90Steven Levy, “Siri’s Inventors Are Building a Radical New AI That Does Anything You Ask,” Wired, 
August 12, 2014, available at http://www.wired.com/2014/08/viv/.

150
CHAPTER 5  Intellectual Property
Waze announced a deal with Universal Pictures to allow the app to give directions 
in a celebrity’s voice. The first such voice made available was that of comedian and 
actor Kevin Hart.91) That would amount to a commercial exploitation of an identity 
with defined monetary value, a straightforward infringement. But what if the real-life 
inspiration behind the program is less recognizable, the similarity is less than exact, 
or the imitation is unauthorized?
These questions were explored in (of all places) Drop Dead Diva, a legal dram-
edy on the Lifetime Network. The June 2012 episode “Freak Show” begins with the 
premise of a woman named Olivia, who is bitter over the fact that her husband has 
been preoccupied with “Eve,” the virtual assistant program that he created and is 
about to bring to market (Fig. 5.13). Eve runs on a tablet computer and is clearly in-
spired by Apple’s Siri. When Olivia fails to convince a judge that this amounts to infi-
delity, her lawyers then realize that Eve is programmed with a variety of biographical 
details–including her birth date, her hometown, her highest level of schooling – that 
all correspond to the Olivia’s.
Olivia then uses these details to allege that Eve infringes her right of publicity. 
She cites the actual 1992 decision in White v. Samsung Electronics America, Inc.,92 in 
which a Samsung commercial depicted a future Wheel of Fortune game show involv-
ing a faceless robot wearing a blond wig turned the letters. Vanna White prevailed 
on a claim that the robot misappropriated her likeness, even though the robot was an 
allusion to Vanna’s occupation rather than her personal identity (Fig. 5.14).
FIGURE 5.13
Olivia holding “Eve.”
92White v. Samsung Elec. Am., Inc. 971 F. 2d 1395 (9th Cir. 1992).
91“Waze debuts new feature where celebrities give you driving directions,” VentureBeat, November 23, 
2013, available at http://venturebeat.com/2013/11/23/waze-debuts-celebrity-voice-navigation-feature/.

151
The Right of Publicity
As it happens, White v. Samsung represents the outer boundaries of publicity 
rights law. In a vocal and well-reasoned dissent, Judge Kozinski lamented that “ev-
ery famous person now has an exclusive right to anything that reminds the viewer of 
her.” Both the Sixth and Tenth Circuits have explicitly rejected, and refused to follow, 
White’s logic. So its value as a basis for evaluating new technologies is questionable 
at best. Moreover, the facts of “Olivia v. Eve” would almost certainly fail to pass 
muster even under White’s version of the right. Even conceding that Eve could cap-
ture Olivia’s “essence” even without mimicking her physical appearance, the overlap 
would have to be enough to at least suggest Olivia’s identity to a rational consumer. 
Yet the only “data points” we’re told of that match up are what even Olivia’s intrepid 
lawyers describes as “totally random stats.” No one other than Olivia and her lawyers 
are likely to ever make the connection between Eve and Olivia. Nor does the episode 
give any reason to believe that Olivia’s identity has any commercial value to speak 
of.
Nevertheless, digital avatars will be fertile grounds for right of publicity claims. 
These theories are likely to have greater resonance with respect to virtual assistants 
because of the commercial, utilitarian nature of the function that they perform. To 
be sure, similar issues will arise in more artistic contexts as well. In fact, we’ve al-
ready seen several analogous claims in recent years, involving “holograms” of such 
deceased celebrities as Tupac Shakur, Marilyn Monroe, Amy Winehouse, Freddie 
Mercury, and Michael Jackson. Publicity rights objections by Winehouse’s heirs in 
2014 put a stop to her hologram before it began. College athletes in both New Jersey 
and California won publicity rights lawsuits against video game manufacturers that 
incorporated the players’ likenesses into football games. And several celebrities, in-
cluding Bette Midler, Tom Waits, the Romantics, and Arnold Schwarzenegger, have 
asserted publicity rights claims against those with sound-alike voices. Nevertheless, 
these artistic expressions raise much more convincing First Amendment defenses 
than non-expressive uses of celebrity identities.
FIGURE 5.14
Vanna White and her alleged doppleganger.

153
CHAPTER
Augmented Reality Law, Privacy, and Ethics﻿
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Whether owners of real property can, or should be able to, control the augmented 
content associated with their property
• The intersection of free speech and property rights in AR
• AR’s effect on trespass, nuisance, easement, and environmental protection 
principles
INTRODUCTION
The primary question considered in this chapter is this: can an owner of real property 
stop someone else from creating an augmented layer associating digital content with 
that property? At first blush, this question seems to present issues of property law. 
Because the content being overlain upon this property is both expressive and intan-
gible, however, we cannot answer the question without also considering the law of 
free speech.
We will also briefly consider additional ways in which augmented world tech-
nologies may impact other real property rights, including in the areas of trespass, 
nuisance, easements, and environmental protection.
THE BASIC RIGHTS AT ISSUE
A BRIEF OVERVIEW OF REAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
In light of the various ways in which this book uses the word “real,” it may be 
helpful to note that “real property” is the term of art that distinguishes a physical 
parcel of land from other sorts of property, such as portable objects (personal 
property) or abstract, intangible expression (intellectual property). From a legal 
perspective, ownership of real property is the right to possess and exclude others 
from a parcel of land. Such rights may be complete or limited in some respect.
Real Property Rights
6

154
CHAPTER 6  Real Property Rights
In modern society, ownership rights in most parcels of land are limited by 
a variety of “nonpossessory interests,” which are rights to make certain uses 
of the land (or to limit use by others) without actually physically occupying it. 
Centuries ago, for example, property rights were understood to extend from the 
land upwards all the way into space and down to the center of the earth. This 
legal concept is captured in the Latin maxim Cuius est solum, eius est usque ad 
caelum et ad inferos (“For whoever owns the soil, it is theirs up to Heaven and 
down to Hell”), which dates back to medieval Roman law and continued to be 
followed by English courts well into modern times. The latter half of this prin-
ciple is what allows land owners to sell mining rights to the earth underneath 
their property.
The first half of that maxim – what can generally be called “air rights” – be-
came a source of conflict soon after the development of aviation technology; land-
owners began demanding the right to exclude aircraft from flying over their prop-
erty, or to at least charge them for doing so. Faced with a balkanization of airspace 
that would have made development of an aviation industry impossible, Congress 
passed the Air Commerce Act of 1926, later replaced by the Federal Aviation Act 
of 1958. The latter Act provides that “[t]he United States Government has ex-
clusive sovereignty of airspace of the United States,”1 and that “[a] citizen of the 
United States has a public right of transit through the navigable airspace.”2 Cur-
rently, the general rule is that aircraft must fly high enough so that, in the event of 
an engine failure, the pilot can land the plane without undue hazards to persons 
or property on the ground. Specifically, in congested areas, aircraft must remain 
1,000 feet higher than any obstacle within a 2,000 feet radius of the aircraft. In 
non-congested areas, or over bodies of water, the pilot must remain at least 500 
feet from any person, vehicle, vessel, or structure. These requirements are reduced 
during take-off and landing. Thus, the demands of modern society have reduced 
the individual’s historical sovereignty over their property. (“Some nations still 
assert a similar principle when objecting to satellites entering the orbital space 
above them.”3)
Air rights became a source of profit in urban centers when those who owned 
relatively short or underground structures realized they could sell to others the rights 
to construct buildings on top of theirs. Railroad companies in particular have made 
significant amounts of money selling the rights to build on top of railroad stations. 
The Madison Square Gardens arena, for example, is built above New York City’s 
Pennsylvania Station (Fig. 6.1).
149 U.S.C. § 40103(a)(1).
249 U.S.C. § 40103(a)(2).
3Moreover, the tragic downing of a Malaysian Airlines jet over Donetsk, Ukraine – which occurred 
as this chapter was being finalized – is a stark reminder that not all groups share the same respect for 
common access to the skies.

155
﻿ The Basic Rights at Issue
This idea of alienating one’s air rights has also contributed to the idea of the “Trans-
fer of Development Rights” (“TDR”),5 a concept within zoning law. There are several 
forms of TDR, but as applied to air rights, it describes a system in which a municipality 
sets an arbitrary cap on how high structures can be. A developer may exceed that cap, 
however, by purchasing from other landowners the right to develop the space between 
their existing buildings and the cap. The purchaser may then exceed the cap by the 
amount of purchased space. Therefore, although the height of individual buildings will 
vary, the average height of all structures remains below the cap. In contemporary urban 
life, people are often referring to TDR when they use the phrase “air rights.”
The law provides various remedies for violations of a landowner’s rights. If a per-
son enters onto someone else’s land without permission or privilege to do so, for ex-
ample, they have committed trespass, and the owner could bring a cause of action to 
eject the trespasser and recover any damage that may have been caused. On the other 
hand, a landowner owes certain duties to protect the well-being of those who enter his 
property. Those duties vary based on how much of a right the person has to be there. 
Logically, trespassers are the group least entitled to the owner’s protection. Neverthe-
less, under some circumstances, even someone who is injured while trespassing may 
still sue the owner for negligence (a concept discussed in more detail in Chapter 7).
Property rights may also be infringed without ever stepping foot on the land. That is 
because property ownership is also understood to include the right of “quiet and peaceful 
FIGURE 6.1
Madison Square Gardens.4
4© flickr user russavia, used under CC license.
5Rutgers University – New Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station, What Is a Transfer of Development 
Rights (TDR) Program? Available at http://njaes.rutgers.edu/highlands/tdr.asp (last visited August 29, 
2014).

156
CHAPTER 6  Real Property Rights
enjoyment” of the land. A substantial and unreasonable interference with this right is 
called a “nuisance,” and landowners may bring a cause of action in court to remedy it.
THE FREEDOM OF SPEECH
As touched upon in Chapter 5, the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution forbids 
Federal, state, and local governments6 from “abridging the freedom of speech, or 
of the press.” There has never been consensus, however, on the precise meaning of 
these words.
Over the more than 200 years in which courts have been interpreting these phrases, 
they have relied on various rationales to explain the First Amendment’s role in American 
society. Some argue that speech must not be restrained because “the best test of truth 
is the power of the thought to get itself accepted in the competition of the market”7 – 
what’s called the “marketplace of ideas” theory. Other rationales focus on the vital role 
that the free flow of ideas plays in a democratic society: “[T]o decide matters of public 
policy … voters … must be made as wise as possible. [And] this, in turn, requires that 
so far as time allows, all facts and interests relevant to the problem shall be fully and 
fairly presented to the meeting [so] that all the alternative lines of action can be wisely 
measured in relation to one another.”8 Still others argue instead that “[the] value of free 
expression … rests on its deep relation to self-respect arising from autonomous self-
determination without which the life of the spirit is meager and slavish.”9 Regardless 
of its exact purpose, however, modern courts have agreed on one thing: the freedom of 
speech is one of the most cherished, fundamental principles in our legal system.
That is why, even though some limits on expression will be “permitted for appropri-
ate reasons,”10 those limits will be defined narrowly, and justifying a limitation on speech 
requires meeting a high burden of proof. Some established exceptions include content-
neutral rules that curb the “time, place, and manner” in which expression may occur, and 
words that pose a clear and present danger of “inciting or producing imminent lawless 
action.”11 Some classes of expression have been deemed to have no First Amendment 
value at all, such as disclosures of purely private facts and obscenity. Similarly, commer-
cial speech – i.e., advertising that proposes a commercial transaction – has been held to 
have less societal importance than most other speech. Therefore, courts are more willing 
to allow governments to regulate advertising than speech on political or personal ideas. 
This explains why trademark, false advertising, and similar laws are constitutional, and 
will also impact the regulation of commercial speech in the augmented medium.
10Elrod v. Burns, 427 U.S. 347, 360 (1976).
11Brandenburg v. Ohio, 395 U.S. 444 (1969).
6The text of the amendment, as written in the eighteenth century, applies only to “Congress.” Subse-
quent interpretation by the courts and expansion of the right to due process of law by the Fourteenth 
Amendment, however, have made clear that this principle applies equally to state and local authorities 
as well.
7Abrams v. United States, 250 U.S. 616, 630 (1919) (Holmes, J.).
8A. Meiklejohn, Free Speech and Its Relation to Self-Government 15-16 (1948).
9Richards, Free Speech and Obscenity Law: Toward a Moral Theory of the First Amendment, 123 U. 
Pa. L. Rev. 45, 62 (1974).

157
﻿ AR: Where Property Rights and Free Speech Collide
AR: WHERE PROPERTY RIGHTS AND FREE SPEECH COLLIDE
AUGMENTED ADVERTISING – AND MORE – IS COMING TO REAL 
ESTATE NEAR YOU
As mentioned in Chapter 5, the augmented medium will allow advertisers to post 
commercial messages literally anywhere the eye can see. The past generation has 
already seen commercial sponsorship creep into such unlikely venues as grocery 
store floors and car wraps. Advertising dollars have largely underwritten much of the 
public internet’s growth, including the rise of Google, the internet’s most prominent 
titan. Google itself has told the government that the industry will soon be displaying 
ads in such novel places as refrigerators, automotive dashboards, and thermostats,12 
which represents a quantum leap in the pervasiveness of commercial messaging be-
yond what we experience today.
But that discussion is still about advertising that is physically transmitted by 
digital pixels and screens. Augmented advertising will enable commercial messages 
to appear as if they are physically present on top of almost any surface, without 
anything physical needing to change about that surface. Recall Keiichi Matsuda’s 
“Domestic Robocop” visualization, discussed in the prior chapters, in which an in-
dividual wearing AR eyewear sees advertising plastered on nearly every flat surface 
within his apartment kitchen – and is even able to manually adjust the density of the 
messages to make the physical objects on those surfaces more or less visible amidst 
the digital clutter.
Now apply that same mechanism to the world outside that kitchen, and you have 
a sense of what augmented advertising could become. A person walking down a city 
sidewalk wearing AR eyewear could be shown advertising digitally plastered over 
every surface within view – sidewalks, buildings, park benches, passing cars, lamp 
posts, the clothing of passersby. City life is already thought of as dominated by com-
mercial advertising because of the number of ads on billboards and building faces, 
yet such a physical infrastructure for commercial advertising will seem painfully 
quaint and outdated – not to mention expensive to maintain – in an augmented world.
This sort of urban experience will take time to manifest, and there will be step-
ping stones along the way. Current models of digital eyewear, for example, do a poor 
job (compared to the human eye, anyway) of recognizing the physical world around 
them, so visual messages are more like heads-up displays at optical infinity rather 
than “augmentations” that appear as if they are overlain on the plane of actual physi-
cal surfaces. Over time, the devices will catch up to where other mobile AR apps 
are now, able to recognize more pre-programmed surfaces in the physical world so 
long as those objects appear in just the right lighting and orientation. Those targets 
are likely to be mostly commercial symbols because the technology will need fund-
ing in order to expand. (And, as discussed in Chapter 5, these interactions will lead 
12Rolfe Winkler, Google Predicts Ads in Odd Spots Like Thermostats, Wall Street Journal (May 21, 
2014), available at http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2014/05/21/google-predicts-ads-in-odd-spots-like-ther-
mostats/ (last visited August 29, 2014).

158
CHAPTER 6  Real Property Rights
to squabbles between brands, such as when the coupon triggered by one company’s 
logo is for a competitor’s product.) Ubiquitous, on-the-fly augmentations of anything 
and everything are still several years away. But it is coming because it is the logical 
conclusion of all of the various trends we see today in digital technology and adver-
tising models.
PROPERTY-BASED MODELS OF CONTROLLING LOCATION-BASED 
MESSAGES BREAK DOWN IN AR
Before the advent of AR, if I wanted an advertisement to appear above a certain 
piece of land or the side of a particular building, I had only one option: to erect a 
physical sign there. That sign could take the form of a poster, a billboard, or a digital 
screen, but it would need to be a physical object located on the parcel of land. For 
that, I would need the landowner’s permission. (For night-time-only ads, I could 
also project them against a physical surface on the parcel from afar, but that is only 
a temporary solution and may also infringe the landowner’s rights in some cases.)
In the augmented medium, however, all I need to cause a digital message to ap-
pear as if it is plastered on a particular building or place is the right software and 
mobile hardware. No intrusion onto the physical space itself ever occurs, so the land-
owner’s right to exclude me from his property is never triggered. Nor am I entering 
the airspace above the building, even if the digital message appears to be there, so 
air rights are not being violated. Nevertheless, AR is designed to create the illusion 
of physical presence, and ads virtually plastered onto physical places may feel like 
an intrusion, so resort to the law of property to regulate them is an understandable 
impulse.
Other commentators have also foreseen augmented advertising and the legal is-
sues they will raise. John C. Havens, for example, discussed them and some of the 
legal issues they raise in his insightful piece for Mashable called “Who Owns the 
Advertising Space in an Augmented Reality World?”13 Noting that Google had al-
ready applied for a patent for digitally replacing physical ads within the Street View 
feature of Google Maps, Havens wrote that “the importance of virtual real estate may 
quickly supplant actual signage for advertisers. This is especially true when virtual 
signage could be switched dynamically for individual eye traffic depending on a 
viewer’s preferences.” He went on to quote Gabe Greenberg, director of social and 
emerging media at Microsoft, as saying that, “if the experience presents the ads in a 
way that makes sense for the augmented reality experience and the user’s intention, 
this could be a powerful advertising tool for tomorrow’s marketplace.”
These predictions are persuasive. As discussed in Chapter 4, advertisers will 
absolutely make use of the augmented space to customize and expand upon their 
messaging. This medium will offer so much more functionality than physical sig-
nage that it is likely to quickly become the dominant means of advertising, even 
13John C. Havens, “Who Owns the Advertising Space in an Augmented Reality World?”, Mashable, 
June 6, 2011, available at http://mashable.com/2011/06/06/virtual-air-rights-augmented-reality/.

159
﻿ AR: Where Property Rights and Free Speech Collide
more quickly than digital billboards have begun to overtake the printed variety. 
Where my view diverges from this article’s (or headline’s, anyway) approach, how-
ever, is in tying this means of augmented advertising to air rights. As discussed 
above, air rights are a subset of real property rights used to determine who may 
occupy the airspace immediately above a particular parcel of land. When (as in the 
scenario painted by the Mashable article) the land owner permits the advertising, 
air rights are not implicated. They only come into play when a third party seeks 
to impose its content on someone else’s airspace. May the property owner control 
that type of advertising?
In my view, such questions will not typically be determined according to who 
owns the air rights. Applying air rights to control third-party augmented content 
would reflect a particular assumption – specifically, that the physical location in 
which the augmented ad appears to the consumer should determine who gets to con-
trol the content of that ad. In other words, an owner of real property should get to 
determine which, if any, digital advertisements that users can see projected upon 
their property. An advertiser could not build a physical billboard on a plot of land 
without the landowner’s permission, after all; this viewpoint applies the same think-
ing to augmented ads.
This means of conceptualizing augmented advertising has been common in my 
experience because it parallels the laws that apply to the current media with which 
we are familiar. As the market for augmented advertising develops, however, I think 
it will become clear that an approach based on the law of real property does not work 
in this context. Property ownership is the right to exclude people and things from 
occupying a particular space. This model is logical – even necessary – when applied 
to physical objects because only one object can occupy a given physical space at any 
particular time.
But that model breaks down when applied to augmented content. Unlike a phys-
ical billboard, augmented content does not actually occupy the physical space in 
which it appears. AR is, in this respect, a mere illusion. Regardless of how convinc-
ingly the user’s mobile device conveys the impression that a tangible, three-dimen-
sional object exists in a particular physical place, it is not actually there. A limitless 
number of mobile apps can be programmed to display an infinitely diverse range of 
content on top of the same physical space. The digital content does nothing to inter-
fere with the property owner’s use or enjoyment of the physical property in which it 
appears to exist.
Therefore, property law does not help us think accurately about the AR experi-
ence. Rather, when my digital device recognizes a person, place, or thing and is 
triggered to augment my view of it with digital information, the experience is much 
more like clicking a hyperlink on a web page – except that the “web page” is the 
physical world around me, and the hyperlinked “text” is the person, place, or thing 
that triggered the display. And just as with a web page, there is someone responsible 
for writing the short piece of link code, for choosing to associate it with that person, 
place, or thing in the program being run by the digital eyewear, and for determining 
what information the link code will deliver to me.

160
CHAPTER 6  Real Property Rights
IN MANY CASES, FREE SPEECH RIGHTS WILL PREVAIL
Consider the possibility, then, that the choices a coder makes in associating digital 
content with a tangible object is itself speech protected by the First Amendment’s 
prohibition of laws that “abridg[e] … the freedom of speech, or of the press.” We 
can get a sense of how courts will answer this question by thinking like judges do – 
in analogies. When courts encounter unique factual circumstances (what they call 
“cases of first impression”), they draw from cases dealing with the most analogous 
facts they can find, and from there new case law emerges.
A good way to understand the three-dimensional “clickable world” is by anal-
ogy to the two-dimensional World Wide Web with which we interact every day. The 
United States Supreme Court has long recognized the internet as a “dynamic, multi-
faceted [medium] of communication.” Its 1997 decision Reno v. ACLU14 struck down 
part of the Communications Decency Act of 1996 for infringing online free speech 
rights. In that case, the Court drew its own analogy to underscore the importance of 
online speech when it observed that, online, “any person … can become a town crier 
with a voice that resonates farther than it could from any soapbox. Through the use 
of Web pages, mail exploders, and newsgroups, the same individual can become a 
pamphleteer.” Soapboxes and pamphlets are historic forms of political expression 
that were sacrosanct to those who wrote the First Amendment.
The Court’s use of these analogies conveyed its conviction that digital speech 
should receive just as much protection as any form of communication. Hyperlinks 
are a key mechanism by which internet users convey information. Whereas an activist 
250 years ago would have stood at the street corner handing out written pamphlets, 
today’s activist conveys his message by posting a tweet containing a hyperlink to 
a page with more information. By pointing internet users to another publication, a 
hyperlink says, “look here for evidence that supports what I’m saying.” It is little 
wonder, then, that people have long viewed hyperlinks as key tools for expression. 
Tim Berners-Lee, the father of the Internet, said it best in 1997: “[t]he ability to refer 
to a document (or a person or anything else) is in general a fundamental right of free 
speech to the same extent that speech is free. Making the reference with a hypertext 
link is more efficient but changes nothing else.”15
Although courts have not addressed the First Amendment’s application to hyper-
links as often as one might expect (perhaps because the conclusion is obvious), there 
is judicial support for the proposition.16 The form of augmented reality I am consid-
ering in this chapter (in which viewing certain physical places triggers the display 
15Tim Berners-Lee, Links and Law: Myths, W3C (April 1997), available at http://www.w3.org/Desig-
nIssues/LinkMyths.html (last visited August 29, 2014)
16For example, a federal court in Washington affirmed a student’s right under the First Amendment to 
criticize a teacher by posting a link to a YouTube video about the teacher. Requa v. Kent Sch. Dist. No. 
415, 492 F. Supp. 2d 1272, 1283 (W.D. Wash. 2007); see also Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Corley, 
273 F. 3d 429, 449-50 (2d Cir. 2001) (holding that “computer code conveying information is ‘speech’ 
within the meaning of the First Amendment,” but also that such speech may be regulated in a content-
neutral manner by intellectual property laws, just like any other form of speech).
14521 U.S. 844 (1997).

161
﻿ AR: Where Property Rights and Free Speech Collide
of pre-determined digital content) is little more than a system of three-dimensional 
hyperlinks – the World Wide Web stretched into a genuine webbing over the world. 
How users “click” on these links will vary. The first smartphone-based AR apps used 
QR codes as the physical “markers” that trigger the automatic display of digital con-
tent. Today’s AR technology no longer relies solely on QR codes; “markerless AR” 
looks for any pre-programmed shape or pattern and displays the appropriate digital 
content when it recognizes the object. Visions of an AR-infused world have long 
included scenes in which one can walk down the street wearing AR eyewear and 
seeing digital objects blended into the real world just by looking around. Exactly as 
with two-dimensional hyperlinks, however, what a user sees through her AR eyewear 
when looking at a physical “trigger” depends entirely on the coder’s choice of digital 
information with which to “link” it.
In most conceivable circumstances, that choice will involve some level of expres-
sive “speech” – especially because the person writing the code can choose from liter-
ally any content in the world when making that connection. More often than not, the 
coder will intend to communicate some sort of message through his choice of digital 
content and in his choice of who or what to associate that content with. For example, 
as part of their 2011 Re + Public collaboration, the Heavy Projects and the Public 
Ad Campaign used AR to “filter” outdoor advertising and replace it with original 
street art. Looking through an AR app, outdoor commercial advertisements were 
overlaid with political or artistic messages. One such pointed message, as discussed 
in Chapter 5, caused the image of “Captain Barbossa” in the poster for a Pirates of 
the Caribbean movie to morph before a user’s eyes into the face of Goldman Sachs 
CEO Lloyd Blankfein – conveying the artist’s message that he is the “real pirate”.
We will see plenty of user-generated content associated with, and displayed on 
top of, physical places as well. Much of this will be a mere extension of today’s so-
cial media. For example, the current Foursquare app keeps track of my location via 
GPS and pushes me user reviews of establishments when I arrive at them. (Fig. 6.2) 
Adding AR to that app would simply provide another way to display the data (and 
perhaps use the geofencing infrastructure of an AR network to trigger the alerts more 
accurately.)
Of course, this technology could (and will) be implemented in creepy, offensive 
and invasive ways, as well. For example, popular illustrations of our augmented fu-
ture have shown facial recognition technology and AR being used to convey messages  
about people such as “Don’t trust this guy!” or “Slutty Ex-Girlfriend.” (Fig. 6.3) 
A scene from Daniel Suarez’s novel FreedomTM has characters using AR glasses to 
see credit scores and banking information floating over the heads of everyone around 
them. Others have depicted geotags used by thieves to indicate when residents are 
away from home or have just purchased something worth stealing.
But the possibility that speech rights can be abused is why the courts have never 
applied the First Amendment’s command that there be “no law” abridging the free-
dom of speech in an absolutely literal way. The law has continued to regulate expres-
sive activity that goes beyond the bounds of what we recognize as “free speech,” 
including defamation, false advertising, criminal conspiracy, and infringement of 

162
CHAPTER 6  Real Property Rights
intellectual property rights. The same legal boundaries that have governed speech in 
pamphlets and Twitter feeds will continue to apply in the augmented space. So to an-
swer the question of whether the First Amendment will protect the right to augment 
reality, the answer must be “yes – to the same extent that it protects speech in any 
other format.” In order to make sure we use the right legal principles and afford the 
FIGURE 6.2
Foursquare already provides location-based user-generated content.17
17© flicker user dennis crowley, used under CC BY 2.0 license. See https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/2.0/.

163
﻿ AR: Where Property Rights and Free Speech Collide
proper level of protection to augmented content, it will be important to think clearly 
about that content and recognize it for what it is: speech.
ONE COLLATERAL BENEFIT FOR LAND OWNERS: DIGITAL GRAFFITI
Another Re + Public campaign highlights a potential upside to AR for land owners 
and the public alike: digital graffiti.
There is a wall at Houston & Bowery Street in New York City that has been the 
site of street art for decades. The first mural was painted there in 1982, but soon af-
terwards it was overrun with advertisements and graffiti. In 2008, however, the owner 
collaborated with a number of artists to create a new series of murals. In June 2012, 
as part of the Re + Public collaboration, the Heavy Projects used augmented reality 
to create a virtual history of the famous mural site, allowing users to view each piece 
as it originally appeared.18
The Bowery Wall project highlights several aspects of augmented public art that 
could be beneficial for all involved. First, it demonstrates a way to add value to a 
FIGURE 6.3
An illustration of potential ways in which real-time augmented data will be associated with 
places and people.
18The Heavy Projects, heavy project, available at http://theheavyprojects.com/projects (last visited 
August 29, 2014).

164
CHAPTER 6  Real Property Rights
building at relatively low expense – even (and perhaps especially) those that are 
otherwise nondescript and out of the way. The promise of “hidden” art could draw 
foot traffic to a location that translates into additional revenue for the business within.
Second, an artist working in AR has options that were never before available. He 
doesn’t need to worry that his work will be lost the next time someone else comes 
and paints over the wall. If the work is created and preserved digitally, it will remain 
available, as long as it is associated with the appropriate physical cues necessary to 
trigger the experience. What’s more, he has three-dimensional and perpetually mov-
ing elements at his disposal that cannot be achieved with mere paint. Several of the 
Heavy Project’s murals, for example, depict imagery floating in the air and pouring 
out of the augmented wall (Fig. 6.4).
Third, AR allows graffiti artists to mark up a wall to their hearts’ content without 
ever changing its physical appearance. Those who don’t wish to experience the imag-
ery won’t ever need to see it. Those who do, however, may enter into one of several 
available digital experiences in the same location. In either event, unlike traditional 
graffiti, the art does nothing to impinge upon the property rights of those who own 
the physical surfaces.
Indeed, augmented graffiti could conceivably contribute to better preservation of 
physical walls because more people will have a stake in preserving them. Consider: 
as long as AR apps require a visually recognizable surface to trigger an augmented 
display (and that will be true for some time), then none of the AR artists whose 
content is visible on a particular wall will have their art seen if the wall becomes so 
altered that the AR app being used can no longer recognize it. In other words, one 
vandal can ruin the expectations of a limitless number of other street artists, not to 
mention the landowner. Therefore, each one of those stakeholders will have an in-
terest in preventing undesirable physical graffiti on that wall. The more people who 
have that motivation, the less likely it will be that the wall gets physically “tagged.”
FIGURE 6.4
A screenshot from the Heavy Projects’ Driskill Hotel Takeover.

165
﻿ Scarcity in Augmented Real Estate
SCARCITY IN AUGMENTED REAL ESTATE
Property values are driven by scarcity. As the old maxim goes, land is one thing “they 
ain’t making any more of.” Although the following observations do not deal with real 
property rights per se, they illustrate how the same principle will work in AR.
WHEN EVERYONE WANTS TO USE THE SAME PLATFORM
So far, this discussion has assumed that anyone who wants to will be able to create 
their own digital experience on the same physical surface or geolocation. Techni-
cally, that will always be true because someone can always create a new app (or a 
new “channel” within an app such as Layar, junaio, or Aurasma) in which to deliver 
their content. That is the predominate model for today’s nascent AR market.
As more people begin to consume AR content, there will inevitably be consoli-
dation around a finite number of more popular apps. That is human nature. For ex-
ample, according to Nielsen, the average U.S. home now receives 189 television 
channels, a record-high number that has jumped up from 129 in 2008. But the aver-
age number of TV channels watched is 17.19 Humans simply cannot handle choosing 
between too many options.
We see a similar phenomenon online. No matter how many generic top-level 
domains are added to the Web, companies still fight for access to the “.com” associ-
ated with their name – because that is still where customers instinctively look first. 
And despite the fact that almost every commercial website seems to have some social 
functionality to it nowadays, people still conduct the vast majority of their online 
interactions through a select few social media sites. (As of this writing, those are 
primarily Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, and Pinterest). Which of those are the most 
popular at any given time may change rapidly in a short amount of time, but again, 
people can only handle so many options to choose from. Moreover, most of these 
sites need a sufficiently large user base before any one user can truly get the most out 
of the experience. By necessity, only a select number of sites will attract that many 
users.
The same will be true in AR. Although the same piece of property could be aug-
mented by thousands of bespoke apps and channels, that will almost never happen – 
because no one will use the vast majority of them.
Current AR apps vary in how they manage overlapping content. In some, targets 
are available for augmentation on a first-come, first-served basis. All users (or, at 
least, all those who don’t pay for more options) see their content through the same 
app. If one person associates digital content with a particular physical place or thing 
first, that target is no longer available to other users through that app. Other apps 
offer a visual discovery function that will display each of the available options for 
19Andrew Burger, Nielsen: Despite Hundreds of Choices, Average Number of TV Channels Watched 
is 17, telecompetitor (May 9, 2014), available at http://www.telecompetitor.com/nielsen-average-num-
ber-of-tv-channels-watched-is-17/ (last visited August 29, 2014).

166
CHAPTER 6  Real Property Rights
objects that have been augmented more than once. In the current version of Layar, for 
example, a list of layers and campaigns that have augments on top of the same target 
will be shown first after the visual search. Users can choose which layer or campaign 
they would like to see from the results and launch it separately.20
Either way, viewing options within individual apps will be limited. And with 
limitations come conflict. How will we decide who has the right to augment a par-
ticular place or thing through a particular app? And how will we regulate the digital 
“land rush” within those platforms, particularly if any of those platforms are publicly 
owned?
The analogy to domain names suggests potential solutions. When domain names 
became available to the general public, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names 
and Numbers (ICANN) created the Uniform Dispute Resolution Policy (UDRP). 
This procedure, which most domain name registrants agree to as part of the terms 
and conditions of their registration, offers a relatively inexpensive means of combat-
ting cybersquatters – those who rush to buy the “.com” or “.net” version of a name 
in order to sell it to the person to whom it rightfully belongs. Congress also passed 
the Anti-cybersquatting Consumer Protection Act in 1999,21 designed to give rights 
holder clearer protection online. Of course, these mechanisms are designed to protect 
intellectual property (primarily trademark rights), rather than real property interests. 
But the analogy to “squatting” on “land” has always been apt.
Whether similar protections will be needed or useful in virtual space depends on 
how the market for such content, and the means of distributing it, unfolds. If AR con-
tinues to be just one of many forms of digital content delivered via the internet, then 
it will continue to be governed by the same rules that apply to any online content. As 
long as AR stays within the walled gardens of private apps, the policies for determin-
ing who gets to augment what and how will remain up to the app’s owner – at least 
until the point where a particular augmentation infringes on someone else’s intellec-
tual property or other rights. For example, as of this writing, virtually every business 
in the developed world wants to have its own Facebook page. Facebook is free to 
adopt its own means of policing (or not policing) how its Page names are allotted, 
and it has experimented with allowing trademark owners to reserve Pages under their 
respective names. Ultimately, though, in order to stop someone from using a name, 
it is up to a trademark owner to prove that their mark is being infringed, whether that 
occurs on Facebook or anywhere else.
The rules will get more complicated when (as I think is inevitable) AR becomes 
a “mesh” experience, combining content from the internet along with signals gener-
ated by wearable devices and the Internet of Things infrastructure. In that scenario, 
those who own the land or equipment from which the signals are generated may 
retain some ability to control how those signals are used. Even at that point, however, 
20Layar, Layar Vision FAQs, available at https://www.layar.com/documentation/browser/howtos/layar-
vision-doc/layar-vision-faqs/#can-i-augment-several-parts-of-the-same-reference-image (last visited 
August 29, 2014)
2115 U.S.C. §1125.

167
legal limitations on the content will depend on what basis others have to claim rights 
in what someone else is doing. How that applies to such a hypothetical mesh network 
remains to be seen.
Only to the extent that the public comes to depend on a common network for 
delivering AR content will the rules governing the triggering of that content come to 
resemble today’s governance of internet domain names. And such a system may very 
well become tied to real property rights in interesting ways. For example, imagine 
all governmental AR information being distributed on a network called “.gov.ar,” 
except that what comes before the “.gov” portion is not a trademark or other name, 
but rather a physical address. So, for example, residents jogging through New York 
City’s Central Park might use the “centralpark.nyc.gov.ar” channel to visualize direc-
tions to all available pedestrian paths, while the same “.gov.ar” channel might display 
property tax information over your home or the details of local ordinances whenever 
you cross municipal boundaries. Switch to “.social.ar” in any of those venues, how-
ever, and you might see the past and present locations of your friends, along with the 
virtual tags they’ve left for each other. “PublicSafety.ar,” on the other hand, might 
visualize crime statistics for any given address.
The actual content and number of channels would be limited only by bandwidth, 
funding, and imagination. Within each channel, it would then be necessary to adopt a 
means of arbitrating who has the rights to associate virtual content with a particular 
physical location.
SACRED GROUND: WHEN (AUGMENTED) WORLDS COLLIDE
For a brief time several years ago, I got to be part of a legal team helping a Native 
American tribe attempt to protect a particular piece of land. This land was the site 
of an impressive rock formation (Fig. 6.5). To the company who owned the min-
eral rights to that land, that rock was the most convenient place to drill an access 
tunnel to the mine underneath. But to the tribe, it was sacred. Their ancestors had 
performed religious ceremonies on that particular rock formation for centuries. The 
culture and beliefs that the tribe held dear required that the ceremonies continue to 
be held there. To them, this location was irreplaceable, and neither side saw room 
for compromise.
Although augmented uses of physical places are not likely to have the same depth 
of religious or cultural significance anytime soon, I do expect many analogous dis-
putes to arise as a result of AR, and that some of them will be contested with similar 
intensity. One of the defining characteristics of AR is its interconnectedness with 
physical places and things. In addition, AR’s early adopters still constitute a subcul-
ture defined by their shared passion for the medium, which reinforces their collective 
sense of identity. These factors can combine to create intense loyalties to a shared 
AR experience.
The best example of this phenomenon that I’ve seen to date in the augmented 
space is the passionate community that has built up around the sci-fi themed AR 
game Ingress. Players’ social media posts are constantly updated with comments and 
﻿ Scarcity in Augmented Real Estate

168
CHAPTER 6  Real Property Rights
developments within the game. “Factions” of players exist all over the world, cross-
ing generational, gender, and ethnic boundaries. I’ve heard first-hand tales of how 
the game’s requirement to get out and physically interact with virtual “objects” has 
contributed to in-person meet-ups and genuinely enriched human relationships. It is, 
by all accounts, a vibrant community.
Imagine, then, what would happen if another AR game with a completely dif-
ferent vibe and culture were to superimpose itself over the same physical locations 
used by Ingress players. (This is actually a realistic possibility, as “the developers 
of Niantic Labs intend to implement a whole platform for Ingress augmented real-
ity games. Their plan is to use a variety of operating time and the elements to create 
a series of Ingress API, through which third-party developers can create their own 
game projects.”23) If two overlapping games – say, a techno-thriller mystery and a 
Dance Dance Revolution-esque flash mob – require players to show up at the same 
times and places, clashes of personality are bound to ensue.
FIGURE 6.5
Sacred ground.22
22© flickr user thecombjelly; used under CC BY-SA 2.0 license. See https://creativecommons.org/li-
censes/by/2.0/
23Saroi Kar, Google’s Ingress Platform Paves the Way for Other AR Games, Silicon Angle (December 
20), available at http://siliconangle.com/blog/2013/12/30/googles-ingress-platform-paves-the-way-
for-other-ar-games/ (last visited August 29, 2014)

169
﻿ Other Intersections between Property Rights and AR
Now multiply that scenario by a dozen, a hundred, or even a thousand. The beauty 
of AR is that an infinite series of digital experiences can be overlain atop the same 
physical place, but that will sometimes prove to be its bane as well. Like loquacious 
moviegoers, the way in which some people enjoy one augmented experience in a 
place may be inherently disruptive to someone else’s ability to appreciate a different 
digital experience in the same place.
One solution to this problem will be in the hands of those who own the physical 
property on which the experience takes place. To varying degrees, they will have the 
power to prescribe rules of conduct, and to eject those who refuse to follow those 
rules. If a particular location proves to be a popular locale for augmentation, owners 
may require all comers to quietly respect all others, or else make it easier for mem-
bers of a particular group to enjoy their own augmented experiences over others. Of 
course, unless the owner is also the experience provider, they will expect compensa-
tion for their efforts, and will likely coordinate them so as to maximize foot traffic 
to any businesses located on the property. Before long it may become customary for 
a parcel of commercial real estate to have both physical and digital developers, and 
those may not be the same people.
Ingress and other games tend to locate their digital objects in public places. This 
brings its own limitations on personal conduct, as well as on the government’s ability 
to prohibit expression based on its content. Could we soon see a First Amendment 
lawsuit challenging censorship of augmented activity on public land?
Ultimately, the most effective solution in cases of conflict between different aug-
mented uses of a place will come down to common courtesy. As we’ll explore further 
in Chapter 11, though, the basis for such norms will lose some of their “common-
ality” the more our experiences of the physical world become digitized. At least 
when two people are together in the same physical place – without digital distrac-
tions – they innately recognize on some level the concept of shared experience and, 
hopefully, responsibility. They recognize that both will suffer if one person does 
something destructive to the shared space, and, conversely, that respecting the other 
person’s interests will likely lead them to reciprocate.
We lose some of that sense when our attention is given over to a digital world 
that is ours alone to control and experience. This phenomenon is already evident 
with mobile phones and game consoles, so we can expect it to multiply when groups 
of people are competing to digitize the same space. This does not mean that civility 
is impossible, but it does mean that acting civilly will become more of a conscious 
choice and less of an instinct.
OTHER INTERSECTIONS BETWEEN PROPERTY RIGHTS AND AR
AN INVITATION TO TRESPASS?
The flip side of “digital developers” and planned AR gaming activities is when peo-
ple congregate on someone’s property for the same activities uninvited. Physically 
entering land that someone else has the right to possess is called trespass. Once a 

170
CHAPTER 6  Real Property Rights
trespasser is on someone else’s land, they are liable for any damage resulting from 
their presence. Avoiding those circumstances is very likely one of the major reasons 
why Ingress and other AR experiences drive their users to publicly owned lands. 
Although the person trespassing would be the one most directly responsible for tres-
passing onto private property, it is not difficult to imagine circumstances in which 
an AR experience designer is held jointly liable for the trespass (and any resulting 
damage) because the AR experience led users to onto the private property.
Designers should also keep in mind how users are likely to access an intended 
destination, even if it is located in a public or otherwise permissible location. If the 
only, or the best, way to access the destination is by crossing private property, or if 
it’s reasonable to expect that more people will arrive than the destination can accom-
modate, then trespasses are bound to occur.
Trespasses can pose legal risks for land owners too, in narrow circumstances. For 
example, a landowner may be held liable when he knows people are trespassing on 
his property and that there are hidden dangers they might encounter, but does nothing 
about it. This may be a particular concern if, instead of chasing AR-using kids off 
his lawn, a property owner instead provides digital content from his own location. If 
the augmentation is inviting enough, yet masks hidden dangers or otherwise poses 
risks that minors may not recognize, then it could pose what’s called an “attractive 
nuisance.”
The prevailing view of the attractive nuisance doctrine is set out in Section 339 of 
the Restatement (Second) of Torts. Under that standard, a possessor of land is liable 
for physical harm to trespassing children where the injury is caused by an artificial 
condition on the land if:
a.	 The place where the condition exists is one on which the possessor knows or 
has reason to know that children are likely to trespass;
b.	 The condition is one of which the possessor knows or has reason to know and 
which he realizes or should realize will involve an unreasonable risk of death or 
serious bodily harm to such children;
c.	 The children, because of their youth, do not discover the condition or realize 
the risk involved in intermeddling with it or in coming within the area made 
dangerous by it;
d.	 The utility to the possessor of maintaining the condition and the burden of 
eliminating the danger are slight as compared with the risk to children involved; 
and
e.	 The possessor fails to exercise reasonable care to eliminate the danger or 
otherwise to protect the children.
To put this in context: I recently experienced “artificial conditions” that had “at-
tractive nuisance” (figuratively) written all over them. Walking through a public gar-
den area in a major American downtown, I saw steep cement walls with narrow steps 
just begging to be climbed (Fig. 6.6). There were small, obligatory signs warning 
people not to do so, of course, but nothing that a minor would recognize. Likewise, 
the same park featured expansive retaining pools that certainly looked like swim-

171
ming pools, although the water was little better than sewer runoff. Again, the tiny 
signs nearby did nothing to stop hordes of young people from wading right in.
How might this doctrine apply in an augmented world? That depends entirely 
on how its digital infrastructure develops. I’ve included this discussion, however, 
because it’s easy to picture circumstances in which large visualizations of digital 
signage, game elements, characters and other displays are made to appear over land 
that isn’t meant to be physically entered – the middle of a road or a construction site, 
for example – but that nevertheless pique the curiosity of children beyond the point of 
resistance. In those circumstances, land owners would be well-advised to take stock 
of potential dangers and use reasonable care in preventing injury.
NUISANCE
Nuisance is an intentional or wrongful act that substantially and unreasonably inter-
feres with a land owner’s use and enjoyment of a property. Typically, this takes the 
forms of sound, light, vibrations, or even smells that disturb people on a particular 
parcel, even though nothing tangible invades the property in a way that would con-
stitute a trespass. Substantial interference is easy to find when it can be shown to 
diminish the market value of the land, but it can also occur when residents persuade a 
judge that it prevents them from conducting regular activities on their property (like 
sleeping and socializing) as they used to do.
Where I live, it’s often difficult to get to sleep at night during the summer because 
people are always setting off large fireworks – the classic definition of a nuisance. 
It’s easy to picture digital content also causing disturbances on adjacent properties, 
especially if there is an audio component to the augmentation that can be overheard, 
or if it draws large groups of people nearby or at odd hours. Even if the augmented 
﻿ Other Intersections between Property Rights and AR
FIGURE 6.6
A public water garden.24
24© Andreas Praefcke / GNU License.

172
CHAPTER 6  Real Property Rights
experience itself is personal and evanescent, the hardware that creates it may not be. 
The infrastructure of an augmented world could conceivably create hums, eyesores, 
vibrations, and other nuisances to neighbors.
Light may also constitute a nuisance, especially at night. If the augmentation con-
sists of projection mapping or other plainly visible displays, that light could easily 
spill into unwanted places. In the still-distant future, when AR technology matures 
and becomes an integral part of everyday life, we could even see things become 
nuisances because they diminish or interfere with digital, rather than physical, enjoy-
ment of a property – such as by causing signal interference that impairs a home’s 
virtual assistant, or by overtaxing the local digital infrastructure so that property 
owners can’t get the content they need.
Whether any interference with the enjoyment of land is sufficiently “substantial” 
and “unreasonable” to constitute actionable nuisance is a case-by-case determina-
tion. Interference with an owner’s interest is unreasonable if the seriousness of the 
harm outweighs the utility of the defendant’s actions.
PHYSICAL AND VIRTUAL EASEMENTS
Although the concept of a landowner having complete dominion over their property 
is simple in theory, in practice people often need to make certain uses of land be-
longing to others. That’s where easements come in. An easement is a limited right 
to make use of someone else’s land. Typically, these arise by private agreements, 
but they can also be implied by circumstances in situations of strict necessity. Once 
granted, easements typically become part of the rights that “run with the land,” mean-
ing that subsequent owners will be bound by them.
In contemporary American life, by far the most prevalent examples of easements 
are those granted to cable companies and utilities to run wires, pipelines, and similar 
infrastructure through, over, or under a property. Those “affirmative” easement rights 
may also impose “negative” easement restrictions on the landowner, such as not be-
ing able to plant trees near an underground pipeline.
The augmented world will see its share of these sorts of easements. Work is 
already underway in places like Oakland County, Michigan to construct the infra-
structure necessary for connected vehicles to communicate with each other and with 
a central, public network. That infrastructure will likely consist of digital devices 
placed at regular intervals along county roads, not unlike the road signs and traffic 
lights already present. As the applications for augmented municipal and commer-
cial services grow, these networks will need to be expanded. To the extent such 
infrastructure needs to be installed on, through, or under private property, ease-
ments will need to be obtained (or, in the case of public projects, imposed through 
condemnation).
Similarly, to the extent that the industry adopts the micro and nanotaggant devic-
es I have predicted (in which tiny machines that serve as signal routers and pinpoint 
accurate location beacons become implanted in virtually everything), the property 
law implications will get especially interesting. More than likely, permission will be 

173
﻿ Other Intersections between Property Rights and AR
needed from every landowner in the entire area where such devices are installed. De-
pending on how easy it is to detect and control such devices, however, it may be very 
difficult to control their distribution. And if the digital communications networks of 
tomorrow become as dependent on such microscopic devices as today’s systems are 
dependent on the internet’s backbone of transoceanic cables and server farms, then 
property law may lose its ability to regulate such devices, just like it lost its control 
over airplanes plying overhead.
It will also be interesting to see if property law will ever allow or require vir-
tual easements for the display of digital information over a particular piece of land. 
Much of this chapter has already been dedicated to establishing the proposition that 
augmented digital information does not occupy the physical space in which it is 
depicted, and thus is outside the bounds of real property law. If (and only if) spe-
cific augmented information became so important and universally relied upon – the 
equivalent of today’s traffic control system for automobiles, for example – could the 
prospect of applying real property law to digital information ever make sense. Only 
in that case would one particular display of digital information in a certain physical 
location displace, and be mutually exclusive with, the display of any other digital 
content in the location. In effect, the law may actually treat such digital content as 
if it were just as physical as it pretended to be. Even in that case, however, our legal 
system would need to moderate its perspective of digital content as expressive speech 
rather than as a utilitarian object. That would be a doctrinal sea change, and thus is 
unlikely anytime soon.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION LAWS
The foregoing discussion mentioned the property law implications of ubiquitous me-
chanical taggants of microscopic or even nano-scale size, distributed throughout the 
physical environment. Such a system would implicate more than just property law, 
however. It is also far too easy to imagine the potential effects that such devices 
would have on human health and the natural environment.
Indeed, even though AR-capable nanotaggants may accelerate the problem, 
there are already enough nanodevices in use for people to be talking about these is-
sues. This is actually an area where, for once, the government is ahead of the game. 
In 2000, it created the National Nanotechnology Initiative,25 which “serves as the 
central point of communication, cooperation, and collaboration for all Federal agen-
cies engaged in nanotechnology research.” In 2008 and 2011, the NNI published a 
Nanotechnology Environmental, Health, and Safety Research Strategy,26 which is 
intended to provide a research framework in the core areas of human exposure, the 
25See National Nanotechnology Institute website, available at http://nano.gov (last visited August 29, 
2014).
26National Nanotechnology Institute, Environmental, Health, and Safety Issues, available at http://
www.nano.gov/you/environmental-health-safety (last visited August 29, 2014).

174
CHAPTER 6  Real Property Rights
environment, human health, and measurement tools, and risk assessment and risk 
management, along with research needs in predictive modeling.
Nevertheless, experts already see a lot of nanotech litigation coming.27 “Product 
liability and toxic exposure attorneys,” says Ronald Wernette, author of the Nanotort 
Law Blog, “suggest that the first civil tort suits will be filed within the next five years. 
They anticipate a variety of claims, including consumer claims based on the fear of 
future physical harm. At issue could be whether manufacturers of consumer products 
appropriately tested nanomaterials, whether the government approved the product, 
and whether the potential harms were adequately disclosed. … Employees of nano-
material manufacturers are likely to bring exposure claims, and … theories applied to 
nanotechnology claims will include defective design, defective manufacturing, and 
failure to warn claims.”28
This could all actually be positive news for companies thinking about construct-
ing a nanotaggant network; maybe by the time the taggants are ready for prime time, 
either the NNI or the courts will have established some helpful guidelines for avoid-
ing liability.
Even when digital information masquerades as physical, it is important to remind 
ourselves of the important differences between the two. This chapter has explored 
one of those reasons – namely, that certain legal principles apply only to real prop-
erty. The next chapter discusses another difference – namely, the fact that only physi-
cal objects can hurt you.
27Peter E. Masaitis, Not Such a Small Thing: The Litigation Risks of Nanothechnology, Industry Week 
(September 18, 2009), available at http://www.industryweek.com/companies-amp-executives/not-
such-small-thing-litigation-risks-nanotechnology (last visited August 29, 2014).
28Ron Wernette, The Rise of Nanotech Litigation from the Winter 2010 Issue of the ABA Section of 
Litigation magazine, Litigation News – “The Rise of Nanotech Litigation,” Nanotort Law Blog (Febru-
ary 3, 2010), available at http://www.nanotortlaw.com/2010/02/03/the-rise-of-nanotech-litigation/ (last 
visited August 29, 2014).

175
CHAPTER
Augmented Reality Law, Privacy, and Ethics﻿
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Intentional torts
• Negligence
• Products liability
• Automotive safety
INTRODUCTION
This chapter addresses the different ways in which augmented reality experiences 
could contribute to, or help avoid, individuals becoming physically injured. When 
injuries happen, civil lawsuits, known as “torts,” often follow. Although “some torts 
are also crimes punishable with imprisonment, the primary aim of tort law is to 
provide relief for the damages incurred and deter others from committing the same 
harms.”1
Torts are generally subdivided into three general categories, according to the 
mental state of the person committing them. “Intentional” torts are exactly what they 
sound like: unlawful acts done on purpose and designed to injure another person. 
There are also “strict liability” torts, which are imposed upon those who commit 
them regardless of the defendant’s mental state or even awareness that they were do-
ing something unlawful. Copyright infringement, for example, is a strict liability tort; 
it isn’t necessary to prove that the infringer intended to copy the copyrighted work.
The most common, however, are torts of negligence – in which a defendant is 
held liable for an injury even though they did not intend to cause it. This type of 
liability is imposed when, in the eyes of the law, the defendant should have both 
foreseen the risk of injury and done something to prevent it. These sorts of torts take 
various forms, including slip-and-fall incidents, automobile crashes, and product lia-
bility. This chapter will primarily focus on these types of claims. The unique manner 
in which the medium of augmented reality blends digital and physical data together 
is likely to lead to all manner of unintended – yet logically foreseeable – accidental 
injuries of each variety.
Torts and Personal Injury 7
1Cornell University Law School, Legal Information Institute, Tort, available at http://www.law.cornell.
edu/wex/tort (last visited August 29, 2014).

176
CHAPTER 7  Torts and Personal Injury
INTENTIONAL TORTS
Before diving in to the many ways in which AR might accidentally lead to injury, it 
is worth considering whether it could be done on purpose.
ASSAULT
In common speech, the word “assault” is almost never heard apart from the term 
“battery.” We use them together in a phrase to describe a physical attack on a person. 
Because AR deals with the non-corporeal, it may seem strange to suggest that one 
could use digital imagery to commit an assault.
Between the two terms, however, only “battery” actually describes a physical 
touching. “Assault” is an act intended to, and which directly or indirectly does, cause 
a person to reasonably apprehend an imminent harmful or offensive contact. In other 
words, it is the act of causing someone to fear they are about to be hurt. Raising my 
fist at someone is an assault; actually punching them is a battery.
Understood in this way, we can begin to see how an illusion projected in AR 
could startle someone into believing they are about to be harmed. For this theory to 
work, however, the context would have to be just right. That is because the victim’s 
fear of imminent contact must be a “reasonable” one. “Reasonable” is a legal term 
of art indicating an objective, not simply subjective, standard. A silly, impaired, or 
inattentive person might fear an 8-bit Minecraft character that appears to be jumping 
out of a screen, but a reasonable person would not.
In order to create a reasonable fear of contact, then, the illusion would have to be 
both believable and unexpected. The graphical resolution must be sufficiently high 
that the image could pass, at least for a moment, as for being physically tangible. 
That is exactly the degree of realism that most creators of AR content strive for, so it 
is reasonable to expect a fair amount of such content to be available, hardware allow-
ing. It must also be unexpected because it would not be reasonable to be startled by 
something you already know is coming.
Both of these requirements could be met by an experience that is sufficiently 
immersive. And unlike other forms of digital imagery, immersion is exactly the type 
of experience that AR is intended to create. By definition, a user immersed in an 
augmented experience subjectively loses touch with the distinction between the digi-
tal and physical aspects of his experience. It is in that state when the user could be 
expected to mistake a digital object coming at him as something capable of inflicting 
physical harm. But the immersion would need to be complete for a tort claim to have 
any credibility. It is difficult to foresee a circumstance in which a digital object seen 
only through a mobile phone or tablet could reasonably be mistaken for something 
real; more than likely, digital eyewear or a physical installation would be required.
“Intent” is another important element of this claim. Creators of augmented ex-
periences should not take undue comfort in their lack of subjective intent to assault 
anyone. Tort law distinguishes between the intent to do an act from the intent to 
cause the resulting harm. Here is where foreseeability comes into play. If someone 
does something on purpose, and should have known that it would cause a harmful 

177
﻿ Intentional Torts
consequence, that person can be held liable for an intentional tort. In this context, 
therefore, if an experience designer programs a digital creature to jump out in front 
of a user, and should have known that this would cause a reasonable user to believe, 
even if just for a moment, that they were in danger of physical harm, the creator could 
be exposed to liability for the intentional tort of assault.
The types of applications most likely to include such content – for example, 
Halloween-themed haunted house augmentations or a ghost storybook2 – are also 
those in which the user is most likely to see it coming, or at least to have taken 
upon themselves the risk of being frightened. But humor being what it is, spooks 
and scares often crop up in the most unlikely places. Take, for example, the viral 
“fake ad” videos easily found on YouTube. These follow the common theme of 
peaceful music playing over a bucolic scene – often a car driving through rolling 
plains – for several seconds, which is suddenly and jarringly interrupted by a ghost 
or other scary figure jumping up in the foreground and shrieking. Many of these 
are so well-designed that it’s difficult not to at least jump, even when you know 
what’s coming (Fig. 7.1).
Similar humor has already emerged in the augmented medium. For example, 
in March 2014, one major retail brand secretly installed video augmentation in the 
transparent glass sidewall of a London bus stop. A popular online video shows fall-
en meteorites, alien attacks, sea monsters rising out of the sewers, and pouncing 
Bengal tigers – along with the predictably startled pedestrians waiting inside. Some 
of the scenes, like the laser-blasting robot walking down the street, are obviously 
FIGURE 7.1
Screenshot from a Ghost-in-the-Ad video.3
2See, e.g., “Scary Ghosts Come To Life In New Augmented Reality App From Goosebottom Books,” 
Social Times, September 4, 2012 http://socialtimes.com/scary-ghosts-come-to-life-in-new-augmented-
reality-app-from-goosebottom-books_b177104

178
CHAPTER 7  Torts and Personal Injury
fantastical,3 but others are not so easy to discern. According to a report in the London 
Mirror, “With the regular street appearing ‘as normal’ through the glass passersby 
have no reason to suspect a Kraken emerging from the sewers isn’t real. The brilliant 
stunt seemed to fool some, with many of the reactions downright hilarious.”4 Indeed, 
some pedestrians are shown literally jumping out of their seats and running from the 
apparent danger (Fig. 7.2).
Moreover, ads designed to surprise pedestrians have already led to physical injury 
and legal claims. In 2013, a woman using a staircase in New York City’s Grand Central  
Station fell and broke her ankle, allegedly because a spooky advertisement on the  
front-facing portions of the steps startled her. The poster was a close-up of “Dexter” 
star Michael C. Hall with cellophane covering his face. According to her lawsuit, 
Ajanaffy Njewadda was distraught as she descended the staircase looking for her 
husband, from whom she had gotten separated. When she turned around to go back 
up the stairs, the advertisement frightened her. She lost her balance and fell, resulting 
in a broken ankle and a concussion.5
With augmentation of physical installations becoming more common, similarly 
shocking AR ads are bound to start popping up. Whether any of them are so immersive 
FIGURE 7.2
Screenshot from the augmented bus shelter.
5James Fanelli, Woman Scared by ‘Dexter’ Ad Sues MTA for Subway Fall, DNAinfo New York, (June 
25, 2014), available at http://www.dnainfo.com/new-york/20140625/midtown/woman-scared-by-
dexter-ad-sues-mta-for-subway-fall (last visited August 29, 2014).
3Then again, Orson Welles probably thought the same thing in 1938 when he performed his original 
War of the Worlds radio broadcast, but that didn’t prevent large numbers of people from panicking.
Stejan Lovgen, “War of the Worlds”: Behind the 1938 Radio Show Panic, National Geographic 
News, (June 17, 2005), available at http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2005/06/0617_050617_
warworlds.html (last visited August 29, 2014).
4Ben Burrows, Video: Watch incredible augmented reality bus stop that scares Oxford Street com-
muters stiff, Mirror, (March 21, 2014), available at http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/weird-news/video-
watch-incredible-augmented-reality-3268061 (last visited August 29, 2014).

179
﻿ Intentional Torts
or frightening as to cause a reasonable apprehension of immediate and unwanted 
physical contact remains to be seen. But it seems likely that the providers of at least 
some displays may need to defend themselves against such claims before long.
INTENTIONAL INFLICTION OF EMOTIONAL DISTRESS
This tort, known as “IIED” for short, is a relatively new development in tort law. 
Courts have historically been hesitant to recognize and compensate injuries that are 
purely emotional, rather than physical, in nature. Such harm is difficult to verify 
and quantify. Perhaps as a result, the standard one must meet to prevail on an IIED 
claim is intentionally demanding. A plaintiff must prove extreme and outrageous 
conduct that intentionally or recklessly causes severe emotional distress. Hurt feel-
ings or rudeness is not enough. A classic way that courts have traditionally explained 
the standard of proof is that the conduct must be such that it would cause a reasonable 
person to exclaim “Outrageous!” in response.
Despite the demanding level of proof required, it is actually easier to imagine 
scenarios in which creators of augmented experiences could be held liable for this 
tort than for the tort of assault. That is because society is already rife with individu-
als who intentionally bully, stalk, harass, abuse, and intimidate others in outrageous 
ways. AR would simply be another medium into which such people could extend 
their activity.
Take, for example, the phenomenon of student bullying. Whether or not one 
agrees with the prevailing wisdom that this activity is pandemic in contemporary 
society, it cannot be denied that many teens already use technology to harass and pick 
on others. There have been several high-profile examples in recent years of young 
people committing suicide after being targeted for ridicule through digital media. In 
2010, a Rutgers University freshman jumped to his death after his roommate, Dharun 
Ravi, used Twitter and iChat to publish live video of the freshman kissing another 
man.6 In 2013, a 12-year-old Florida girl killed herself after being relentlessly ha-
rassed through online message boards and texts by as many as 15 girls.7
Such poor judgment is not limited to teens. In 2010, Michigan couple Scott and 
Jennifer Petkov reportedly used Facebook (among other means, such as driving in 
front of the girl’s house with a truck adorned in hateful messages) to taunt and ha-
rass a terminally ill child – even going so far as to post photoshopped pictures of the 
young girl’s face above crossbones, and of her late mother in the embrace of the Grim 
Reaper (Fig. 7.3). Certainly, if any conduct could provoke an involuntary outcry of 
“outrageous,” it would be that. Yet it is also uncomfortably reminiscent of other 
hate-motivated crimes that many individuals have historically inflicted on entire 
groups of people on account of their race, ethnicity, sexuality, and other attributes.
6Wikipedia, Suicide of Tyler Clementi, available at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Suicide_of_Tyler_ 
Clementi (last visited August 29, 2014).
7Fox News, Girls, 12 and 14, arrested in death of bullied Florida girl who killed herself, (October 15, 
2013), available at http://www.foxnews.com/us/2013/10/15/girls-12-and-14-arrested-in-death-bullied-
florida-girl-police-say/ (last visited August 29, 2014).

180
CHAPTER 7  Torts and Personal Injury
Anyone with a motivation to intimidate and easy access to AR-creation tools is 
likely to be tempted to use the medium for hateful purposes. The same aspects of 
augmented expression that make it so attractive to artists, industrialists, and advertis-
ers will also offer new opportunities for harassment. Today, for example, students 
often create fake social media profiles for people they wish to target. Tomorrow, they 
may create augmented content visible on the targeted person themselves – the digital 
equivalent of a “Kick Me” sign on their back. Tomorrow’s Jennifer Petkov might litter 
her neighbor’s lawn with augmented taunts, while a racist down the street may target 
an ethnic minority’s home with digital burning crosses. Augmented reality is simply a 
medium; what a society chooses to publish in that medium will be a reflection of the 
messages that society wishes to convey – just as we see in social media today.
One issue that today’s digital media providers largely do not need to concern 
themselves with is the risk of accidental injury due to the use of their publications. 
The unique blend of digital and physical that defines AR, however, brings such con-
cerns to the forefront.
NEGLIGENCE
“Negligence is one of the greatest sources of litigation (along with contract and busi-
ness disputes) in the United States.”8 Anyone who has picked up a telephone direc-
tory, driven past a bus stop, or watched daytime television understands this intuitively 
8Law.com, Negligence, available at http://dictionary.law.com/default.aspx?selected=1314 (last visted 
August 29, 2014).
FIGURE 7.3
One of Jennifer Petkov’s hateful Facebook images.

181
﻿ Negligence
because there is never a shortage of personal injury attorneys soliciting new clients. 
But what exactly is negligence?
THE ELEMENTS OF A NEGLIGENCE CLAIM
Although each state has its own body of law on the subject, negligence is generally 
defined as “failure to exercise the care toward others which a reasonable or prudent 
person would do in the circumstances, or taking action which such a reasonable 
person would not.”9 In order to recover on a claim alleging injury caused by a defen-
dant’s negligence, a plaintiff must typically prove:
1.	 The defendant owed plaintiff a duty of care, which usually means that the risk 
to plaintiff was reasonably foreseeable, and that defendant should have taken 
precautions to prevent the injury. There are also situations in which defendant 
owe a special duty to the plaintiff, whether by agreement or by operation of law 
under the circumstances.
2.	 The standard of care that the defendant owed. Generally, this will be the duty 
of acting as a reasonable person would act under the circumstances. This is an 
objective standard, but can sometimes be influenced by the circumstances of 
the case.
3.	 The defendant breached the standard of care. This requires proof of what the 
defendant did and why those actions failed to live up to the duty required of 
them. Under limited circumstances, circumstantial evidence can be used to 
prove what the defendant must have done, even though no direct evidence 
exists. This is known as the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur, which is Latin for “the 
thing speaks for itself.”
4.	 The defendant’s breach of their duty caused plaintiff’s injury. This is often 
one of the more difficult factors to prove, especially when plaintiff’s injuries 
were only an indirect result of defendant’s actions. The plaintiff must prove not 
only that defendant was the factual cause of the injury – in other words, that 
the injury would not have happened but for defendant’s actions – but also that 
defendant was the “proximate cause.” This is basically a legal policy judgment 
of whether there was a sufficient link between a “cause” and its indirect “effect” 
that it is fair to hold the defendant liable. Issues of proximate cause come into 
play when there are multiple steps that occur between what the defendant did 
and what happened to the plaintiff. At some point, the indirect consequences 
of a defendant’s actions become so remote and unforeseeable that it would no 
longer be just to hold defendant accountable for the result.
5.	 The plaintiff suffered damages as a result of the negligence. Damages are not 
presumed, as they are by some other legal theories. Typical types of damages in 
negligence cases include pain and suffering, medical expenses, and lost income. 
The court will also consider what the plaintiff should have done to mitigate their 
own injuries.
9Id.

182
CHAPTER 7  Torts and Personal Injury
With this understanding of what it takes to prove a negligence claim, how might 
augmented reality lead to negligence liability?
AUGMENTED REALITY GAMES AND PHYSICAL INJURY
I love games, especially the type that really engage your mind and force you to solve 
problems creatively. By all indications, I’m not alone. In 2013, the video game in-
dustry reportedly made $21 billion in the United States alone.10 In March 2014, as 
online game company King Digital Entertainment prepared to go public, its runaway 
hit Candy Crush claimed 408 million active monthly users.11 When Grand Theft Auto 
V – a game that cost $265 million to make – hit the market in September 2013, it 
reached $1 billion in sales in only three days.12
So you can bet that games will be among the first commercially successful aug-
mented reality applications. Indeed, it has been persuasively argued13 that it will be 
games that take AR into the mainstream. In 2010, Australian media professional 
Gary Hayes wrote: “Expect lots and lots of horror, crime and murder mystery … 
locative AR games popping up in the next few years and months given the ease in 
which those genre can be adapted to ‘location’ points around any urban area and hunt 
for clue or task based play.”14 As one example, he pointed to “Operation SC Revela-
tion,” a transmedia campaign supporting the launch of Ubsoft’s Splinter Cell video 
game. The promoters “set up an extra level in augmented reality … a real-life fox-
hunt played by walking through Amsterdam whilst looking through a smartphone 
that used the Layar-AR-browser. Layar showed what was around the players by dis-
playing augmented reality seen through the camera of their smartphone.”15 A more 
recent example is the massively multiplayer game Ingress from Niantic Labs, which 
is easily the most popular entry in the genre to date. Thousands of players across the 
world, divided into two factions, compete to either protect or destroy virtual “por-
tals” whose locations are tied to an actual, physical landmark. In order to manipulate 
a virtual object, a player must be in close physical proximity to its assigned location.
10Kate Cox, It’s Time to Start Treating Video Game Industry Like the $21 Billion Business It Is, Con-
sumerist, (June 9, 2014), available at http://consumerist.com/2014/06/09/its-time-to-start-treating-
video-game-industry-like-the-21-billion-business-it-is/ (last visited August 29, 2014).
11Matt Krantz, Candy Crush King IPO: $22.50, Trades Wednesday, USA Today, (March 25, 2014), 
available 
at 
http://www.usatoday.com/story/money/markets/2014/03/25/candy-crush-king-ipo-
price/6879681/ (last viewed August 29, 2014).
12Kate Cox, It’s Time to Start Treating Video Game Industry Like the $21 Billion Business It Is, Con-
sumerist, (June 9, 2014), available at http://consumerist.com/2014/06/09/its-time-to-start-treating-
video-game-industry-like-the-21-billion-business-it-is/ (last visited August 29, 2014).
13Ori Inbar, 3 Reasons Why Games Are the Killer App for Augmented Reality, Games Alfresco, (August 
30, 2010), available at http://gamesalfresco.com/2010/08/30/3-reasons-why-games-are-the-killer-app-
for-augmented-reality/ (last visited August 29, 2014).
14Gary Hayes, Future of Location Based Augmented Reality Story Games, Personalizemedia, (October 25,  
2010), available at http://www.personalizemedia.com/future-of-location-based-augmented-reality-story-
games/ (last visited August 29, 2014).
15Id.

183
﻿ Negligence
But AR games carry at least one risk that the console-based games never did: 
physical injury.
The risks inherent in location-based AR games
Many digital games that incorporate some degree of AR pose no discernible risk of 
physical injury, because they do not require anything more from players than any 
other mobile game does. These include the dozens of “AR” games that are little 
more than a regular game superimposed on a live video feed. It also includes games 
that require the player to remain stationary, such as Total Immersion’s 2011 release 
“SkinVaders,” which used magic mirror-type technology to superimpose invading 
aliens onto the user’s face.
Rather, the risk of injury comes with games that involve movement and genuine 
interaction with the player’s physical environment. In these cases, injured players 
of AR games will argue that, by directing players to travel to various locations and 
perform certain tasks, the game designers undertook a duty to ensure that those ac-
tivities would not place the players at undue risk of injury. These lawsuits will in-
volve ascertaining just what duty the game designers owed to their players, whether 
they breached that duty, and whether the breach was the proximate cause of the 
player’s injuries.
To date, one of the most vivid illustrations of the risks inherent in this type of 
game is the 2011 trailer published online for The Witness, an AR game that billed 
itself as “The First Movie in the Outernet” (Fig. 7.4). As described by the trailer, The 
Witness is much more like a mobile version of an online role-playing / mystery game 
than like anything one would currently think of as a “movie.” Using AR-equipped 
video phones, players roam the physical world “collecting data” and “communi-
cating with other players.” Like a walking, talking version of a Choose Your Own 
Adventure book, the game directs players to different locations based on the choices 
FIGURE 7.4
Scene from the trailer for The Witness.

184
CHAPTER 7  Torts and Personal Injury
they make – eventually solving the mystery, or else meeting one of a variety of alter-
nate endings to the story.
But unlike someone playing a similar detective game on a board, console, or (non-
location-based) mobile device, a player of The Witness faces potential dangers in the 
real world as well. The trailer shows players in seedy hotels and bars, a disheveled 
office, climbing stairs in a parking garage during winter, and scurrying through an 
abandoned warehouse – complete with barking guard dogs – in order to collect the 
clues necessary to “stay in the game.”
In all likelihood, these scenes were probably amped up for dramatic effect. And 
there may have been safety measures in place that the trailer doesn’t mention. As 
depicted, however, they just scream with the potential for personal injury. One scene 
shows a player scanning a room with his phone, looking for clues. What if he gets 
distracted and trips over something, or something falls on him while he’s rooting 
around under a desk? Will the guard dogs always be there, and if so, will there be a 
staff member there 24/7 to make sure they don’t bite anyone? Suppose a player gets 
mugged in one of these abandoned buildings, or falls on poorly-maintained stairs? 
The possible scenarios for injury multiply with every new setting.
On September 13, 2012, Dreamworks’ Director of Global Interactive Chris Hew-
ish gave a wide-ranging keynote address on Hollywood’s use of augmented reality 
at Vox: the 4D Summit, an event for creatives that Daqri hosted in Long Beach, Cali-
fornia. One of the examples he cited was The Witness, and he played the trailer for 
the audience.
During the talk, Chris shared these thoughts on whether games like The Witness 
posed a risk of injury, and whether anyone in Hollywood was yet thinking about 
these issues:
I think we’re still really early on, and what you’re seeing here are great examples 
of pioneers, who tend to be outside of the normal boundaries, willing to take risks 
and not as worried about the consequences. Which is great, and that’s how you 
push the medium.
I think in order for big Hollywood companies to get onboard, they’re going to 
want to do something that has zero liability potential. And that’s where I think 
you’ll see these sorts of things become prevalent in established location-based 
entertainment. So, if you’re able to go to Disneyland and participate in the equiv-
alent of The Witness in a safe, controlled environment, now you’re talking. Now 
you’ve avoided a lot of those risks.
There’s also the fact of a low barrier to entry. People are already used to going to 
Disneyland, so you don’t have to convince them to go somewhere that’s strange 
or new. You’re just bringing them to somewhere they’re familiar with and building 
on that experience.
In other words, even if they’ve never had to worry about their viewers hurting them-
selves before, major content producers creating their own, self-administered immersive  
experiences are both smart and risk-averse. They are not likely to send users off to re-
mote locations outside the company’s control, for a host of safety- and business-related 

185
﻿ Negligence
reasons. On the other end of the spectrum, start-up entertainment companies with shoe-
string budgets may not ever worry about (or even consider) the risk of getting sued if 
players looking for digital data physically hurt themselves in the process.
But as Chris suggested, there will still be plenty of creators who take risks in 
order to push the medium forward. Those who do so and who have enough assets to 
create a very attractive location-based AR experience will create a tempting litigation 
target for would-be plaintiffs. Those entrepreneurs should not be afraid to continue 
innovating, but should get informed legal advice before encouraging their users to 
take any sort of risks in the real world.
Other games already in existence demonstrate the inevitable physical risks that 
come from requiring players to move from place to place. I have interviewed the 
players of some of these games. One admitted to slipping on ice and twisting their 
ankle; the other got themselves a bit scuffed up while searching through bushes for 
the exact coordinates of a virtual object. Additional potential avenues for mishaps 
were spotted and avoided. For example, they told me about one digital object that 
was originally located in the driveway for a hospital emergency room. This was re-
ported to the game’s designers, who moved it out of the way. Lessons like these 
should help future game designers avoid similar issues.
I have also wondered whether AR games will put players in dangerous situations 
that make them more vulnerable to criminal activity. It turns out that there is already 
a healthy debate on this very point among my new friends’ community of players. 
Some say yes, and are wary of going certain places at certain times. Others argue that 
encouraging presumably law-abiding gamers to visit areas they don’t normally fre-
quent will have a “neighborhood watch” effect, essentially deterring crime in those 
areas. Time will tell on that point, and both arguments are likely to find supporting 
examples as time goes on.
On the plus side, though; AR games are already liberating players from their 
couches and getting them into the real world. My new friends report that they al-
ready get more exercise and have visited more local landmarks than they otherwise 
would have.
When might game designers be liable for physical injury?
AR game designers should consider the foreseeable ways in which players could injure 
themselves while playing the game, and take reasonable steps to minimize that risk. The 
most obvious way of satisfying this duty is to convey appropriate disclosures and warn-
ings to users before they play. As of this writing, for example, the guidelines for Ingress 
players warn against trespassing onto private property, unwanted physical contact with 
others, unwanted recording of others, and insulting other players. They also include such 
blanket statements as “you are responsible for your own conduct and content while us-
ing the Products, and for any consequences thereof. You agree to use the Products only 
for purposes that are lawful, proper and in accordance with the Terms.”16
16Ingress, Ingress Terms of Service: Last Modified November 14, 2013, available at https://www.
ingress.com/terms (last visited on September 4, 2014).

186
CHAPTER 7  Torts and Personal Injury
In the absence of such precautions and warnings, however, an AR company may 
bear some measure of risk whenever it directs users to travel to a new location. The 
nature of the gaming experience can amplify that risk. The Witness, for example, says 
that players will need to “overcome their fear,” as “the borders between reality and 
fiction dissolve completely.” All of which makes the game that much more engaging 
and enjoyable; suspension of disbelief and an immersive experience are what every 
good storyteller aims for. But when you’re walking around in the real world, you rely 
on those “borders between reality and fiction” to avoid hurting yourself.
We don’t need to wait for mainstream AR gaming to see how courts might apportion 
liability for game-related injuries. Consider the 2000 decision of the Washington Court 
of Appeals in Anderson v. American Restaurant Group.17 Plaintiff Anderson “suffered 
injuries when she slipped and fell while running across the bathroom floor at the Black 
Angus restaurant in Bellevue to retrieve a piece of toilet paper for a restaurant-sponsored 
scavenger hunt.” Even though a wet bathroom floor is the type of dangerous condition 
that one might expect to be obvious, the appeals court reversed the trial court’s judgment 
in favor of the restaurant. “[A] jury could conclude,” the court explained, “that Black 
Angus should have expected that patrons darting into the bathroom would not discover or 
realize the danger of a wet floor because they would be focused elsewhere and in a hurry.”
In a similar vein – but with much more severe consequences – is the case of Bob 
Lord. He was an internet entrepreneur and first-time player of “The Game,” a pri-
vate, invitation-only, immersive role-playing game remarkably similar to the Michael 
Douglas movie of the same name. As summarized in a September 14, 2008 Seattle 
Times article, “The Game” was an annual “adventure scavenger hunt” in which adult 
players “would scuba dive, rock climb, sing karaoke with a drag queen and fire au-
tomatic weapons … decode the Declaration of Independence inside a prison and be-
friend a white rat named Templeton, whose shivering little body carried a message.”18
The 2002 version of The Game also involved searching for particular GPS coordi-
nates inside “the Argentena Mine complex, a warren of abandoned openings left over 
from a 1927 silver-mining operation.” Lord had gotten little sleep over the 28 hours 
before the time he entered the mines. Confused by the Game’s ambiguous directions, 
he entered the wrong shaft, and fell 30 feet head-first, crushing his vertebrae and be-
coming a C3 quadriplegic for the rest of his life. When Lord’s family discovered that 
the Game planners had been warned about mine’s dangers beforehand, Lord sued 
them, and eventually settled for $10.6 million.
More recent are the examples of Kim Flint and Chris Bucchere, two California 
bicyclists who were involved in fatal accidents in 2010 and 2012, respectively.19 Flint 
lost control while descending down a steep road and suffered fatal injuries. Bucchere 
struck Sutchi Hui, a 71-year-old pedestrian, killing him. Both riders were also active 
19David Darlington, The Strava Files, Bicycling, available at http://www.bicycling.com/news/featured-
stories/strava-files (last visited on September 4, 2014).
17No. 44488-3-I (Wash. Ct. App. November 6, 2000).
18Jonathan Martin, The Game, The Seattle Times, (September 14, 2008), available at http://seattletimes.
com/html/pacificnw/2008177548_pacificpendgame14.html (last visited on September 4, 2014).

187
﻿ Negligence
users of Strava, the mobile app that tracks riders’ speeds and elevations and allows 
them to share results with each other through social networks. Riders who achieve 
the top speed on any given segment re awarded the title of KOM or QOM (King, or 
Queen, of the Mountain). Flint’s family sued Strava for negligence, arguing that the 
company “breached their duty of care by: (1) failing to warn cyclists competing in 
KOM challenge that the road conditions were not suited for racing and that it was 
unreasonably dangerous given those conditions; (2) failing to take adequate mea-
sures to ensure the KOM challenges took place on safe courses; and (3) encouraging 
dangerous behavior.” A judge ultimately dismissed the lawsuit in 2013, finding that 
responsibility for safety lay with the riders themselves.20 Many of those following 
the case were not so convinced, however. The Flint family’s attorney explained the 
theory of their case this way:
“The social network is a secondary function of their true business, which is profit-
ing on what they call segments. The goal of these segments is to obtain the fastest 
pace. If you want to not call it a cycling race and call it a segment, that’s fine,” 
she told VeloNews. “Our main point was that, look, Strava is behaving a lot like a 
race course organizer, bringing people together in some capacity. … Why should 
Strava not be held to the same standards of any race organizer? They’re mak-
ing money based on faster and faster times. Sounds like a race organizer, right? 
It’s a difficult case to make, but my overall sense of it is that something doesn’t 
smell right.”21
One has to wonder how different the facts would have had to be before the case 
came out differently.
The typical AR game of the near future will almost certainly not involve circum-
stances as dangerous as those in The Game or injuries as severe as Flint’s. But as 
the Anderson case demonstrates, even a condition as mundane and obvious as a wet 
bathroom floor can become a source of potential liability when game players are sent 
out into the physical world hunting for clues and competing against other players 
under short deadlines. AR game designers – including marketing stunts that require 
individuals to search for clues within a physical environment – must take these risks 
into account when creating their fictional experiences. Although it may present frus-
trations on a creative level, designers must take all due care not to sacrifice gamers’ 
physical safety for the sake of an immersive gaming experience.
The special case of underage users
Location-based augmented reality games are growing in popularity. This mainstream 
appeal has led to some chance encounters that have some players wondering whether 
they could get in hot water for making the wrong sort of teammates.
20Brian Holcomb, Strava wins dismissal of civil suit over Berkeley death, VeloNews, (June 4, 2013), 
available at http://velonews.competitor.com/2013/06/news/strava-wins-dismissal-of-civil-suit-over-
berkeley-death_289714 (last visited on September 4, 2014).
21Id.

188
CHAPTER 7  Torts and Personal Injury
For example, when one of these games recently graduated from beta testing, 
droves of curious players flocked to try it out. But this led an anonymous local player 
to recently share with me the following thoughts:
One of the old timers … was talking to a new player in the in-game team chat sys-
tem …, doing what we all often do for new players… offering to drop them gear to 
help them level up, and even going on an “AP run” which is the … equivalent of a 
lioness chewing up a wildebeest a little so her cubs can learn to catch it.
Other players were trying to get his attention because they knew the new player in 
question was a 12 year old girl.
So yeah, some 30-something guy was unknowingly soliciting a rendezvous with a 
young minor. Honest mistake, but it opens up a number of questions.
You probably know better than me that I think all player interactive games have 
an EULA requiring them to be at least 13 years old. So while 13 year olds game 
against 30 year olds every day, forming clans, chatting on audio services like 
TeamSpeak, that has come to be accepted as okay as long as someone isn’t trying 
to do something illegal.
But now you have a game in physical places you must physically be at. On one 
hand it seems stupid and silly for it to be taboo for say a 16 year old with a couple 
twenty-somethings to walk around and hit some public portals. But people are 
really touchy, so… dammit I don’t know.
So, could adult players end up in trouble for using AR games to schedule a rendez-
vous with a minor? Should teens be wary of playing the games (to the extent that 
teens are wary about anything)?
The best answer to both questions is probably “only to the same extent they 
would in other, non-game circumstances.” But players of all ages should remain 
aware about these and  other  issues. Just because it’s a game doesn’t necessarily  
make it a good idea to meet up with strangers at night, for example. And if you’re an 
adult who happens to connect with a younger person, it’s probably smart to remain 
in public view at all times.
Designers of AR games should likewise take into account the anticipated age 
range of their users when establishing game protocols. In many cases, it may well be 
that no further action is necessary on the game company’s part other than to rely on 
the terms of use in the app stores that provide the game, or to include language in the 
game’s terms of use that forbid underage users (much like Facebook and other social 
media platforms currently do.) Depending on the circumstances of a particular game, 
however – especially if it is intentionally marketed to a younger audience – greater 
care may be required to avoid putting minors in harm’s way.
AUGMENTED DISTRACTIONS AND PHYSICAL INJURY
Just like the challenges of walking and chewing gum that came before it, today’s 
generation has encountered its share of incidents associated with walking and texting 
on a mobile device. Some of those have been spectacularly “epic fails,” to use the 

189
﻿ Negligence
vernacular. In March 2012, for example, Michigan resident Bonnie Miller became 
an international poster child for the dangers of walking and texting when she walked 
straight off the end of a pier while checking her phone.22 In 2009, Alexa Longueira, 
a teenager from Staten Island, New York, fell into an open manhole while reading a 
text on her friend’s cellphone. According to a local news report, she fell 6 feet into 
four inches of raw sewage.23 YouTube also has its share of local news broadcasts 
containing footage of falling pedestrians.24
With this in mind, how will a new class of augmented wearable devices affect 
pedestrian safety? On one hand, transparent digital eyewear may actually be safer 
than today’s mobile devices, which require users to look down at them. Writing in 
the MIT Technology Review, cognitive science professor and designed Don Norman 
notes, “[u]nlike ‘immersive’ displays that capture your full attention, [Google] Glass 
is deliberately designed to be inconspicuous and non-distracting. The display is only 
in the upper right of the visual field, the goal being to avoid diverting the user’s atten-
tion and to provide relevant supplementary information only when needed.”25 Among 
the current crop of digital eyewear either on the market or promised soon, Glass is the 
least “immersive” of the group in this way, and partially for this reason.
“Even so,” Norman argues, “the risk of [any digital eyewear] distracting the user is 
significant.” 26 That is because the modern virtue of “multitasking” is a myth. “Numer-
ous psychology experiments show that when two relatively complex tasks are done at 
the same time, performance deteriorates measurably.”27 A 2013 study from Carnegie 
Mellon, for example, noted that juggling email, texts, and social media while in the 
office notably decreased the efficiency of employees, even when they knew ahead of 
time that they would be interrupted.28 Moreover, the device manufacturer has only 
limited control over the user experience. Once third parties start providing software 
applications for the device, users will be able to customize their experience.
Used intentionally and effectively, however, wearable technology can actually 
enhance concentration and retention. Thad Starner is a founder and director of the 
Contextual Computing Group at Georgia Tech’s College of Computing, where he is 
a professor. He has been a wearable computing advocate for almost 25 years, and 
has given examples of how the devices improve his ability to remember details, even 
22Deborah Netburn, For some, texting and walking don’t mix, Los Angeles Times, (March 26, 
2012), available at http://articles.latimes.com/2012/mar/26/business/la-fi-tn-warning-texting-while-
walking-20120326 (last visited on September 4, 2014).
23Id.
24See, e.g., theChomchom10, Girl falls texting on live news, YouTube, (uploaded on February 15, 2012), 
available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g3jOlQqDPzQ (last visited on September 4, 2014).
25Don Norman, The Paradox of Wearable Technologies, MIT Technology Review, (July 24, 2013), 
available at http://www.technologyreview.com/news/517346/the-paradox-of-wearable-technologies/?
goback=%2Egde_4437607_member_260638211#%21 (last visited on September 4, 2014).
26Id.
27Id.
28Dan Bowens, Study: Downside of Digital Multitasking, my foxny.com, (Posted: May 15, 2013), 
available at http://www.myfoxny.com/story/22265626/study-downside-of-digital-multitasking (last 
visited on September 4, 2014).

190
CHAPTER 7  Torts and Personal Injury
years later, by allowing him to take detailed notes in real time.29 Maintaining Starn-
er’s level of focus, however, may be more difficult for the average user. “Without the 
right approach, the continual distraction of multiple tasks exerts a toll. It takes time 
to switch tasks, to get back what attention theorists call ‘situation awareness.’30 It will 
also “be difficult to resist the temptation of using powerful technology that guides us 
with useful side information, suggestions, and even commands,”31 with the result that 
it will become clear to those around us that our attention is divided.
These opposing factors create a paradox in which, according to Don Norman, 
“we will tread uneasily as we risk continual distraction, continual diversion of atten-
tion, and continual blank stares in hopes of achieving focused attention, continual 
enhancement, and better interaction, understanding, and retention.”32 As with any-
thing else, how an individual uses wearable technology ultimately depends on that 
person. Norman, however, is not entirely persuaded even by that conclusion. Noting 
the power that even today’s instant-access, internet-enabled devices already have, he 
asserts that “[t]he providers of these technologies must share the burden of respon-
sible design.”33
Plaintiffs’ attorneys representing those injured by distracted users will certainly 
agree. In an interview I conducted with a successful personal injury attorney, he ad-
mitted that he and others in his practice would look for any chance they could find to 
name the product manufacturer as a defendant in such a case. Their argument would be 
that the product itself was unreasonably designed, so as to cause an unacceptable risk of  
distraction and injury. In the terminology of negligence law, the argument would be 
that the manufacturers owed a duty to those affected by the wearers of the product to 
design the experience in a way that maximally reduced the likelihood of injury.
A simple online search confirms that personal injury lawyers across the coun-
try are virtually frothing at the mouth to be the first to sue someone over their use 
of digital eyewear. New York personal injury lawyer Eric Turkewitz declared in his 
well-read blog that:
“The chances of [digital eyewear] being a factor in people being maimed and 
killed is approximately 100%. .. Cocky [eyewear] users will walk into intersec-
tions and be hit by cars because they are getting a Facebook update on the latest 
cat video, or tweeting about the latest basketball buzzer beater. There won’t be 
sympathy for them, of course, as people chalk this up to the culling of the masses 
with Darwinian behavior.”34
34Eric Turkewitz, Will Google Glass Kill? New York Personal Injury Law Blog, (Posted March 13, 
2013), available at http://www.newyorkpersonalinjuryattorneyblog.com/2013/03/will-google-glass-
kill.html (last visited on September 4, 2014).
30Id.
31Id.
32Id.
33Id.
29Don Norman, The Paradox of Wearable Technologies, MIT Technology Review, (July 24, 2013), 
available at http://www.technologyreview.com/news/517346/the-paradox-of-wearable-technologies/?
goback=%2Egde_4437607_member_260638211#%21 (last visited on September 4, 2014).

191
﻿ Negligence
Similarly, a California law firm includes the article “[Digital] Glasses Could 
Cause Car Accidents” on its website.35 This advertising smacks of opportunism and 
is noticeably devoid of direct factual support for the claim made in its headline. 
These ads demonstrate the mindset of eager lawyers looking for the next big revenue 
stream, and not necessarily the extent of any actual liability that digital eyewear 
manufacturers will face. Whether lawsuits over such basic digital eyewear use – es-
pecially over the more obvious risks that are inherent to all digital devices – could 
ever succeed remains to be seen.
The potential for such assertions of liability, however, is exactly why many of 
today’s providers of augmented experiences include safety warnings with their prod-
ucts. For example, Qualcomm’s Vuforia software is one of the most popular visual 
recognition tools in the AR industry. As of May 2014, over 100,000 developers of 
augmented reality experiences were using Vuforia code.36 The terms of use govern-
ing Vuforia software instruct those developers to advise end users “of the hazards 
of using a camera based application while driving, walking, or otherwise by being 
distracted or disoriented from real world situations.”37 Similarly, when Google intro-
duced Glass to its first sets of Glass Explorers, it warned them “not to use Glass while 
driving, biking, using sharp objects, or playing sports, and to use caution while walk-
ing and crossing streets. If they have any concern about the safety of using Glass, 
Google asks participants to stop using them and return them immediately.”38 These 
companies are forward-thinking enough to anticipate the risks discussed in this chap-
ter and to take steps to avoid them. Other companies may not be as proactive.
DISRESPECTING THE PHYSICAL
Within the AR community, reference is sometimes made to Plato’s theory of forms, 
also known as Platonic Realism. This view postulates that all material objects are 
merely copies or imitations of the abstract concept, or form, of the shape, and that 
it is the forms that are ultimately “real.” AR’s ability to depict seemingly physical 
objects in evanescent digital space has resurrected and given a new immediacy to the 
debate over the relative significance of the physical or digital versions of an object, 
or whether perhaps they are equally important.
There is one sense, however, in which the physical will always be more sig-
nificant. Physical forms are able to injure a person if they collide hard enough, and 
35Thomas G. Appel, Google Glasses Could Cause Car Accidents, Appel Law Firm LLP, (November 14, 
2013), available at http://www.appellawyer.com/blog/google-glasses-cause-car-accidents/ (last visited 
on September 4, 2014).
36David Beard, Vuforia Ecosystem Reaches 100K Registered Developers, Qualcomm developer 
Network, (May 27, 2014), available at https://developer.qualcomm.com/blog/vuforia-ecosystem-
reaches-100k-registered-developers (last visited on September 4, 2014).
37Vuforia 2.8 License Agreement, Qualcomm Vutoria Developer Portal (Rev. December 10, 2013, avail-
able at https://developer.vuforia.com/legal/license/2-8 (last visited September 4, 2014).
38Pete Pachall, Google Glass Developer Conference Has Ultra-Strict Rules, Mashable, (January 25, 
2013), available at http://mashable.com/2013/01/25/google-glass-nda/ (last visited on September 4, 
2014).

192
CHAPTER 7  Torts and Personal Injury
may be capable of supporting a person’s weight if stepped on. Neither of these 
things is true of digital images or of abstract concepts. That fact is elementary, but 
it is worth remembering as we proceed toward more widespread adoption of AR 
throughout society.
Some AR environments may be so well-rendered that it becomes difficult for 
users to distinguish physical from digital. Making the wrong guess about whether 
an object is one or the other may lead to injury. Moreover, the very fact of being 
repeatedly presented with that ambiguity may eventually prove to have significant 
psychological consequences for many.
Some AR professionals have raised concern about what effect widespread adop-
tion of AR may eventually have on peoples’ subconscious appreciation of this very 
important distinction. Marianne Lindsell, an AR professional in the United King-
dom, raised this concern in an online conversation about a blog post of mine. She 
wrote: “This may have the potential to make users subconsciously learn to treat solid 
objects with less respect, with dangerous results.” If, psychologically, individuals 
train themselves to recognize and manipulate 3D digital imagery as if it were part 
of their physical environment, will they occasionally forget that the digital images 
aren’t actually there, or start treating physical objects (through inattention or misap-
prehension) as if they were insubstantial? Will they step on (and fall through) a digi-
tal floor panel, not realizing it’s only digital? Or run into a very physical wall, having 
grown accustomed to being surrounded by digital representations of walls?
This is a subject worthy of additional study. The results may inform what legal 
duty the creators of AR environments have to remind users of what is real and digital.
INJURY DUE TO INACCURACY
Anyone who has used an AR app on a mobile device has likely had their enthusiasm 
for the medium tempered a bit by the unsteadiness of the digital image. An article 
in an Australian publication captured that feeling in the following quote from archi-
tect Rana Abboud, who has studied the technology’s potential for the construction 
trades: “In some of the places I went to, the marketing around it was really glossy 
and amazing,” Abboud said. “But you actually tried the application and things didn’t 
quite work as planned. For instance, the Museum of Vancouver put out an app that 
we trialed and the tracking was not quite there, and things would disappear on you 
and then re-appear. It wasn’t stable enough.”39
Today’s technology still predominately relies on visual recognition of either a 2D 
marker or other distinct physical object to act as the image’s anchor in the real world. 
If the device’s camera loses sight of that target for even a split second, the image may 
disappear or lose its physical orientation, requiring the user to start over. Similarly, 
images that rely on GPS or other location awareness technology are often unsteady 
39Andrew Heaton, Major Obstacles for AR on Construction Sites, Sourceable, (April 8, 2014), avail-
able at http://sourceable.net/major-obstacles-for-ar-on-construction-sites/ (last visited on September 4,  
2014).

193
﻿ Products Liability
or jerky, jumping around in different directions as the device struggles to maintain 
pinpoint accuracy.
Both types of errors create a risk of injury for anyone who relies on the accuracy 
of the image’s location. If a court later determines that it was objectively reason-
able for the injured party to have relied on the location data, the creator of the AR 
experience may be found liable for the injury. So, for example, if (as in the foregoing 
example from The Game) a user is following augmented walking directions that are 
marketed as being accurate, and those directions lead the user to fall in a hole, the 
provider of those directions may be held liable.
The injury resulting from locational inaccuracy might be economic as well. Ab-
boud’s study highlighted a number of potential uses for AR in construction, such as 
visualizing future additions, discovering the position of hidden or obscured elements 
within a structure, and increasing worker efficiency by using mobile devices to overlay 
modeling information over their field of view onsite.40 “Incorrect, incomplete or out-of-
date data, [however], could have serious consequences if it showed the wrong location 
for a hidden pipe, wall stud or cable.”41 Expenses from such construction errors as a 
result of sensor or GPS inaccuracy could potentially rival the savings from using the 
technology in the first place. For that reason, although Abboud sees the technology’s 
use in construction as inevitable, it will not likely take hold for another 5-10 years.42
PRODUCTS LIABILITY
Another facet of tort law imposes liability on the manufacturers and distributors of 
commercial products that cause injury to users. These claims are typically grounded 
in the principles of negligence law, although the laws of various jurisdictions also 
create statutory and breach of warranty causes of action.
In order for liability to be imposed, the product must first be defective. Broadly 
speaking, there are three different types of defects: manufacturing, design, and mar-
keting.43 Manufacturing defects result from errors in the creation of a particular unit 
of a product that cause it to not meet the quality standards the product is designed to 
meet. By contrast, a defectively designed product behaves as it is intended to, but that 
intended function is one that causes an unacceptable risk of harm.
Marketing defects generally refer to a manufacturer’s failure to warn users against 
hidden dangers. Unless the injury is one for which the law imposes strict liability, 
manufacturers can often avoid liability for many “defects” in design by clearly com-
municating the risk to the users.
What sort of arguments might be made by future plaintiffs alleging that an AR 
device or similar wearable technology caused them injury? The following discus-
sion collects some of the more likely theories. Here again, it is worth repeating the 
40Id.
41Id.
42Id.
43James Henderson, et al, The Torts Process 561 (Little, Brown & Co., 1994).

194
CHAPTER 7  Torts and Personal Injury
disclaimer that none of this discussion should be read to suggest that any one particu-
lar product is defective at all. The fact that some products have reached market before 
others means that critics and the press have tended to focus most of their speculation 
on those early entrants. As with each chapter in this book, however, this is speculative 
discussion of the augmented reality industry as a whole.
EYE STRAIN
As of this writing, Google Glass has been available for more than a year. Thousands 
of users, myself included, use them on a regular basis without ill effects. Some users, 
however, have complained about eye strain.
Dr. Eli Peli, M.Sc., O.D. is the Moakley Scholar in Aging Eye Research at 
Schepens Eye Research Institute, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, and Professor of Oph-
thalmology at Harvard Medical School.44 He also consulted Google about the poten-
tial side-effects of using Glass. In May 2014, Dr. Peli started quite a buzz when he 
was quoted by BetaBeat as saying that prolonged use of the device would cause “a 
discomfort in the eye muscles,”45 because the act of looking up – where the Glass dis-
play sits – is the least-comfortable eye movement. “If you’re looking at the Glass for 
a minute,” said Dr. Peli, “you’re holding it there for sixty times longer than normal.”46
Not long after the BetaBeat article was published, Dr. Peli took to his Google+ 
account to clarify his position:
• 
First and foremost, I have researched both HMDs and Glass for years and have 
found no evidence of any health risks.
• 
Relative to the thousands of people using Glass, very few have reported that 
they’ve had an issue with eye discomfort or headaches.
• 
For most, the discomfort usually goes away after a day or two as they get used 
to the device.
• 
This adaptation phenomenon is similar to the initial discomfort some people 
have when wearing a new pair of prescription glasses, which eventually goes 
away.
• 
Like any piece of technology, from TVs to smart phones, it’s important that 
people find what’s comfortable for them. That’s why Explorers are encouraged 
to ease into Glass.
• 
Glass is designed for micro-interactions rather than long interactions like 
reading a book or watching a movie. The Glass team makes this clear in their 
Help Center.47
47Eli Peli, post on #Glasses, Google +, (May 21, 2014), available at https://plus.google.
com/u/0/109037277404485472366/posts/WbJDtZ7CYVY (last visited on September 4, 2014).
44Eli Peli, M. Sc., O.D., Vision Rehabilitation Library, available at http://serinet.meei.harvard.edu/
faculty/peli/ (last visited on September 4, 2014).
45Jack Smith IV, Google’s Eye Doctor Admits Class Can Cause Pain, BetaBeat, (May 19, 2014), avail-
able at http://betabeat.com/2014/05/googles-eye-doctor-admits-glass-can-cause-pain/ (last visited on 
September 4, 2014).
46Id.

195
﻿ Products Liability
Google itself likewise responded to the BetaBeat article by noting:
“When anyone gets a new pair of glasses or starts wearing them for the first time 
there is always an adjustment period until people get used to them. For some 
it’s the same with Glass. We encourage Explorers to ease into Glass, just as they 
would a new pair of glasses. As we note in our Help Center, Glass is designed for 
micro-interactions, not for staring into the screen, watching Friday night movie 
marathons or reading ‘War and Peace.”48
That isn’t to say that others haven’t raised similar concerns. “Sina Fateh, an oph-
thalmologist who has filed at least 30 patents related to wearable displays, told Forbes 
that these types of devices can put unnecessary stress on the eyes.”49 Read together, 
however, these competing viewpoints establish an uncontroversial proposition: using 
digital eyewear more heavily than intended, especially if the user isn’t accustomed 
to it, could cause discomfort. This is true of existing eyewear, and will be true of the 
digital variety. To simply identify a means by which users may possibly misuse a 
product, however, falls far short of suggesting any defect in its design.
It also remains to be seen how the design of future devices compares to those 
available now. Telepathy, a Japanese company, worked for years on a device that sits 
above the eye like Glass does. Vuzix, on the other hand, sells similarly monocular 
eyewear that sits below, rather than above, the eye. Other manufacturers have touted 
stereoscopic eyewear in varying shapes, sizes, and fits. The industry standard is cer-
tainly far from being set.
BLUNT TRAUMA
Anytime a device sits close to one’s eye, the potential exists that it could impact the 
eye, causing injury. Of course, this is true of any eyewear, digital or otherwise. “Pen-
etrating injuries are [already] widely reported with spectacle related eye trauma,” 
reported the British Journal of Opthalmology, and “the trend for small frames and  
frameless spectacles and may place patients at [increased] risk of serious ocular 
­injury.”50
Therefore, merely making eyewear digital should not necessarily increase that 
risk. Dr. Farooq Ashraf, MD, FACS, medical director at Atlanta Vision Institute, has 
been quoted as saying “the risk of eye damage [from Glass] is minimal, especially 
when the wearer uses common sense and avoids situations where his or her eye could 
48Jack Smith IV, Google’s Eye Doctor Admits Class Can Cause Pain, BetaBeat, (May 19, 2014), avail-
able at http://betabeat.com/2014/05/googles-eye-doctor-admits-glass-can-cause-pain/ (last visited on 
September 4, 2014
49Lisa Eadicicco, The Doctor Who Said Google Glass Causes Eye Pain Now Says There’s NO Evi-
dence of Health Risks, Business Insider, (May 29, 2014), available at http://www.businessinsider.com/
google-glass-complaints-2014-5 (last visited on September 9, 2014).
50J Clarke, R Newsom, and C Canning, Ocular trauma with small framed spectacles, Br J Ophthal-
molv.86(4);( April 2002), PMC1771106, available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC1771106/ (last visited on September 4, 2014).

196
CHAPTER 7  Torts and Personal Injury
be impacted.”51 Here again, whether future devices accentuate this risk at all remains 
to be seen.
MOTION SICKNESS
As the capabilities of digital eyewear expand, they will offer users an increasing 
amount of visual information that they were not previously accustomed to receiving. 
What’s more, different devices will vary in how acutely they deliver this information. 
These variances could make a significant difference in how users react physically to 
what they see.
A 2011 article in the MIT Technology Review called “Could Augmented Real-
ity Be Hazardous to Your Health?”52 focused on the research of Eric Sabelman, a 
functional neurosurgery bioengineer at Kaiser Permanente. According to Sabel-
man, ubiquitous digital information floating around our field of view is bound to 
have a range of physiological effects on AR users. For some, it may be no more 
than a minor contributor to ADD; for others, it may contribute to “simulator sick-
ness” – like watching The Blair Witch Project on a queasy stomach. “Mixing fixed 
elements into a dynamic real environment could … lead to ‘simulator sickness’ 
in some users,” the MIT article reports. This “extra load to our visual processing” 
could simply be too much for some users to handle – especially if we’re moving. 
“[There is] no problem with a static image in the corner of your eye if you are at a 
desktop, but it will present conflicting information if you are walking or driving,” 
Sabelman said.
According to Sabelman’s research, the fact that digital data in our peripheral 
vision remains stationary while the world in front of us moves – kind of like the 
opposite of reading in the car – could be one factor causing these physical reac-
tions. On the other hand, “the eye rapidly ‘accommodates’ to an image at a fixed 
location on the retina, rendering it invisible. Keeping interface elements visible 
could require jiggling them subtly, which might lead to further visual confusion 
as the user’s brain interprets such movement as movement of their real-world 
surroundings.”
We’ve already seen versions of this same effect in several other digital devices. 
For example, Apple’s iOS 7 operating system introduced parallax backgrounds and 
zoom animations throughout the user interface. Several users immediately reported 
that the devices gave them “motion sickness.” Dr. George Kikano, division chief of 
family medicine at UH Case Medical Center in Ohio, was quoted as saying “there’s 
some validity to this, for people who are susceptible. But it’s not the zoom anima-
tions that are responsible. It’s a new ‘parallax’ function that causes the background 
51LASIK Surgery Enhances Latest Tech Craze: Google Glass, The Atlanta Vision Institute, available 
at http://www.atlanta2020.com/blog2/lasik-surgery-enhances-latest-tech-craze-google-glass/ (last vis-
ited on September 4, 2014).
52Christopher Mims, Could Augmented Reality be Hazardous to Your Health?, MIT Technology Re-
view, (April 22, 2011), available at http://www.technologyreview.com/view/423811/could-augmented-
reality-be-hazardous-to-your-health/ (last visited on September 4, 2014).

197
﻿ Products Liability
of the phone to subtly move back and forth, a feature that leads to an effect not unlike 
car sickness.”53
“It’s no different than being in an IMAX theater,” Kikano said. “The inner ear 
is responsible for balance, the eyes for vision. When things are out of sync you feel 
dizzy, nauseous. Some people get it, some people don’t, and some people get used 
to it.”54
Indeed, as more digital devices increasingly seek to mimic and overlay the 
real world, the effect is only likely to become more common. Some news outlets 
have gone so far as to proclaim that “[d]igitally induced motion sickness caused by 
iPhones, 3D films and computer games will become the biggest occupational illness 
of the 21st century.”55 Even those experts who have been skeptical of the physiologi-
cal impact from small screen devices concede that more advanced displays will pose 
a risk of causing motion sickness. For example, Charles Oman, a former director at 
NASA who has studied motion sickness for over 15 years, was quoted as saying that, 
“if it were an immersive environment, like a headset or an IMAX screen, then I can 
believe it, but it’s a little harder to believe on the small screens.”56 The more recent 
introduction of the Oculus Rift virtual reality headset proves Oman’s point. Many of 
its users have reported that the slight lag between head movement and corresponding 
movement of the display has caused the motion sickness, and the device’s creators 
have conceded “that the problem is one which may never go away.”57
Of course, more complete immersion is the holy grail of augmented reality, so 
this concern will continue to loom on the horizon for the foreseeable future. More-
over, veterans of the industry know that precisely overlaying digital information onto 
physical objects – especially if those objects are moving or poorly lit – is exception-
ally difficult to do at all, let alone to do perfectly. And it is the slight imperfections in 
almost-accurate renderings that cause so many to feel ill. Managing that side effect 
and making sure that users are properly forewarned, therefore, will remain a chal-
lenge for the industry.
54Id.
55Aaron Sharp, The rise of digital motion sickness: Video games, 3D film and iOS 7 set to make condi-
tion the 21st century’s biggest occupational disease, Mail Online, (September 28, 2013), available 
at http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-2436638/Video-games-3D-films-iOS7-Why-digital-
motion-sickness-tipped-21st-centurys-biggest-occupational-disease.html (last visited on September 4, 
2014).
56Jon M. Chang, Apple iOS 7 Literally Making Some Users Sick, abc News, (September 26, 2013), avail-
able at http://abcnews.go.com/Technology/apple-ios-literally-making-users-sick/story?id=20385379 
(last visited on September 4, 2014).
57Aaron Sharp, The rise of digital motion sickness: Video games, 3D film and iOS 7 set to make condi-
tion the 21st century’s biggest occupational disease, Mail Online, (September 28, 2013), available 
at http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-2436638/Video-games-3D-films-iOS7-Why-digital-
motion-sickness-tipped-21st-centurys-biggest-occupational-disease.html (last visited on September 4, 
2014).
53Jeremy A. Kaplan, Apple iOS 7 is sickening users, doctor confirms, Fox News, (September 27, 2013), 
available at http://www.foxnews.com/tech/2013/09/27/is-apple-ios-7-actually-sickening-users/ (last 
visited on September 4, 2014).

198
CHAPTER 7  Torts and Personal Injury
SKIN IRRITATION
Many, if not most, wearable digital devices will come in contact with users’ skin. 
This necessarily introduces the potential of skin irritation. For example, in April 
2014, news outlets reported that “thousands” of people had complained that the Fitbit 
Force digital bracelet had given them “a bad rash.”58 By March 2014, “the Consumer 
Product Safety Commission issued a recall and Fitbit stopped [selling] the Force 
altogether.”59 Ultimately, the company determined that 1.7% of its users experienced 
the reaction because of an allergic contact dermatitis, which the company initially 
blamed on an allergic reaction to nickel, but later said “could stem from the stain-
less steel, materials in the strap, or adhesives used in its assembly.”60 A class action 
lawsuit against the company was filed shortly thereafter.
Similarly, in July 2014, the medical journal Pediatrics released a study suggest-
ing that one 11-year-old boy’s persistent rash turned out to be due to the frequent 
use of an iPad.61 The author concluded that the child was allergic to the nickel in the 
device’s exterior casing. The report prompted news coverage across the country and 
the world, which also suggested that such allergies are on the rise.62
While this is a very small sample set, these incidents are a sobering reminder of 
how little we truly understand about the consequences of prolonged contact between 
skin and hardware. It seems unlikely that the materials in the Fitbit Force were dra-
matically different than many other digital devices on the market. Other wearable 
technology manufacturers should learn a lesson from Fitbit’s cautionary example and 
invest in enough physiological research before marketing a product to ensure that the 
risk of similar incidents is acceptably low.
CANCER
To date, none of the digital eyewear devices on the market or announced as in pro-
duction contain a cellular radio. Without this capability, the devices cannot make 
phone calls or connect to LTE networks on their own. Instead, every device launched 
so far connects to a mobile phone or tablet, either by wireless Bluetooth connection 
or by a physical cord, or to Wi-Fi. Certainly, a do-it-all device would be more effi-
cient, so why the two-step process?
59Id.
60Id.
61Medical Journal: Electronic Devices Can Cause Nickel Allergies to Flare Up, CBS New York, (July 14,  
2014), available at http://newyork.cbslocal.com/2014/07/14/medical-journal-electronic-devices-can-
cause-nickel-allergies-to-flare-up/ (last viewed on September 4, 2014).
62AP, Is your iPad giving you a rash? Nickel in tablet case linked to uncomfortable skin inflamma-
tions, Mail Online, (July 14, 2014), available at http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2691169/
Itchy-rash-Could-iPad-Nickel-tablet-case-linked-scaly-eruptions-patients-body.html (last viewed on 
September 4, 2014).
58Liz Collin, Digital Bracelet Company May End Up In Court After Rash Reports, CBS Minnesota, 
(April 8, 2014), available at http://minnesota.cbslocal.com/2014/04/08/digital-bracelet-company-may-
end-up-in-court-after-rash-reports/ (last visited on September 4, 2014).

199
﻿ Products Liability
One reason that multiple commentators have pointed out is the ever-controversial 
potential link between radio frequency (RF) fields and brain cancer. To date, govern-
ment regulators and scientific studies have generated mixed information over wheth-
er phone signals contribute to this disease. Officially, the World Health Organization 
classifies RF fields as “possibly carcinogenic to humans.”63 But another reason the 
data remains inconclusive is that regulators (especially the US Federal Communica-
tions Commission, or FCC) have already acted to reduce potential exposure.
Therefore, introducing a line of RF-capable devices designed to be worn on one’s 
head all day long could, as one article put it, “become the definitive test of whether or 
not cell phones cause cancer, and not in a good way.”64 It seems unlikely, however, that 
any device manufacturer will be eager to become the guinea pig whose device tests 
the theory. Such devices may also violate the regulations already issued by the FCC.
RETINAL PROJECTION
“The unprotected human eye is extremely sensitive to laser radiation and can be 
permanently damaged from direct or reflected beams.”65 Nevertheless, various pro-
posed AR-related devices rely on laser projection to either recognize physical objects 
(which could potentially jeopardize others) or to relay digital information to the eye, 
which could injure the user. A 2012 post on Hack a Day, a do-it-yourself resource, 
reported on “a DIY retina projector,”66 which is a device that “focuses laser light 
though beam splitters and concave mirrors to create a raster display on the back of 
your eye.” What’s troubling about the project is that it emits a 200 milliwatt beam, 
which the site reports to be 100 times the intensity of commercial retina projectors 
and “more than enough to permanently damage your eye.”67
Of course, in one way or another, all digital displays must transmit light into the 
user’s eye, whether in the form or laser light or more conventional screens. Some 
designs even go so far as to “modify the eyeballs”68 themselves, such as Innovega’s 
iOptik system. This device relies on projectors inside eyeglass frames as well as 
specially designed contact lenses that focus the display. As of this writing, the last 
63Christopher Mims, Cancer fears could prevent Google Glass from ever becoming a phone, Quartz, 
(February 27, 2013), available at http://qz.com/57312/cancer-fears-could-prevent-google-glass-from-
ever-becoming-a-phone/ (last visited on September 4, 2014).
64Id.
65Osama Bader, M.D. and Harvey Lui, MD, FRCPC, Laser Safety and the Eye and Practical Pearls, 
Lions Laser Skin Centre Division of Dermatology, Vancouver Hospital and Health Sciences Cen-
tre, and University of British Columbia, Vancouver, B.C., (February 1996), available at http://www.
dermatology.org/laser/eyesafety.html (last visited on September 4, 2014).
66Brian Benchoff, Projecting video directly on the retina, Hack A Day, (April 9, 2012), available at  
http://hackaday.com/2012/04/09/projecting-video-directly-onto-the-retina/ (last visited on September 4,  
2014).
67Id.
68Evan Ackerman, Innovega Delivers the Wearable Displays that Science Fiction Promised, IEEE Spec-
trum, (January 9, 2014), available at http://spectrum.ieee.org/tech-talk/consumer-electronics/audiovideo/
innovega-delivers-the-wearable-displays-that-science-fiction-promised (last visited September 4, 2014).

200
CHAPTER 7  Torts and Personal Injury
hurdle to broad commercial introduction of this system is approval of the contacts by 
the Food and Drug Administration.
Presumably, the FDA’s seal of approval should go a long way toward insulating 
Innovega from most hypothetical future claims of injury by iOptik users. Most other 
devices, however, are unlikely to receive that level of regulatory scrutiny before be-
ing introduced to the public. It would be wise, therefore, for manufacturers of digital 
eyewear devices to think carefully about all foreseeable risks associated with their 
devices, and to mitigate them through re-design or warnings, as appropriate.
AUTOMOTIVE
The line of propriety between wearing digital eyewear and driving a car has been 
debated for several years already, including on my blog since 2011. The mainstream 
public conversation on the issue, however, has been sparked by two more recent 
developments. The first was the introduction of Google Glass, including the media 
hype surrounding its Explorer program. Eager to ride this wave of public fascination, 
legislators in multiple jurisdictions proposed or introduced legislation to ban use of 
digital eyewear while driving.
The second event occurred on October 29, 2013, when San Diego, California-
based Explorer and Glassware developer Cecilia Abadie received a traffic ticket for 
wearing her Glass while driving. The incident galvanized an amazing amount of 
media coverage, and strong opinions on both sides. On January 17, 2014, Abadie’s 
ticket was dismissed for lack of evidence that the display had actually been turned 
on while she was driving. By default, Glass remains off unless the user activates it 
with a tap or by tilting the head upwards. Abadie maintained that the device “was not 
on when she was driving, but was activated when she looked up at the officer during 
the stop.”69 Nevertheless, Abadie has also argued that wearing Glass was far less of 
a distraction than using a mobile phone while driving, and others have argued that 
digital eyewear and other AR devices can actually enhance driver safety. For its part, 
Google simply warns users to follow local laws and to use common sense:
“As you probably know, most states have passed laws limiting the use of mobile 
devices while driving any motor vehicle, and most states post those rules on their 
department of motor vehicles websites. Read up and follow the law! Above all, 
even when you’re following the law, don’t hurt yourself or others by failing to pay 
attention to the road. The same goes for bicycling: whether or not any laws limit 
your use of Glass, always be careful.”70
The following section will discuss the role of wearables and AR in driving.
69Jennifer Jensen, Google Glass user Cecilia Abadie acquitted in ticket case: Ticket is dismissed, abc10 
News, (Posted January 16, 2014), available at http://www.10news.com/news/trial-begins-in-google-
glass-ticket-case-011614 (last visited on September 4, 2014).
70FAQ, Google Glass, available at https://support.google.com/glass/answer/3064131?hl=en (last vis-
ited on September 4, 2014).

201
﻿ Automotive
AR MOBILE PHONE APPS AND DRIVING
The discussion earlier in this chapter about the potential for AR to distract from 
safe walking and other tasks applies equally to (and sometimes referenced) driv-
ing – particularly the Sabelman study cited in the 2011 MIT Technology Review 
article cited above. According to Sabelman, there is “no problem with a static im-
age in the corner of your eye if you are at a desktop, but it will present conflicting 
information if you are walking or driving.”71 “I suppose we could learn to [walk 
or drive and use an AR system at the same time],” he said, but the author of the 
article concluded that “we might have to someday expand on those no texting 
while driving laws.”72
Those commonplace laws already recognize driver distraction as an epidemic. 
Simply talking on your cell phone while driving used to get people up in arms, and 
it is still restricted in some areas. But now those who text while driving are the new 
pariahs – and not without reason. Multiple mass transit disasters and notable deaths 
have been blamed on texting. Some studies show that texting while driving is more 
dangerous than driving drunk. Yet large percentages of drivers can’t help but con-
tinue to do it.
My home state of Michigan is one of several jurisdictions to ban the practice as 
a primary offense. The Detroit suburb of Troy went one step further to prohibit not 
only texting and calling, but also “any other activity that can distract a driver and 
affect their ability to safely operate the vehicle. Activities under this classification 
include, but are not limited to, eating, grooming, reading, writing, or any other activ-
ity that prevents someone from having control of the vehicle with at least one hand 
on the wheel.”73
How would AR devices measure up by these standards? For starters, it seems 
clear that using an AR app (or any other app, for that matter) on your smartphone 
while driving is the functional equivalent of texting. You may not be inputting infor-
mation into the phone, but you’ve still got your eyes on it rather than the road. This is 
only slightly less true if you’re a driver peering through your smartphone to augment 
the view directly ahead of you. It may be the digital equivalent of looking at signs, a 
map, or a billboard while you drive, which can be distracting but not illegal (except 
maybe in Troy). But the app doesn’t know you’re driving, and can put an awful lot of 
information between you and what’s in front of you.
What about smartphone apps that are designed to be used while driving? Just 
because someone wants you to use it behind the wheel doesn’t make it a good idea. 
Take the “Augmented Driving” iPhone app,74 for example, which was first released in 
71Christopher Mims, Could Augmented Reality be Hazardous to Your Health, MIT Technology Review, 
(April 22, 2011), available http://www.technologyreview.com/view/423811/could-augmented-reality-
be-hazardous-to-your-health/ (last visited on September 4, 2014).
72Id.
73“New distracted driving law is now in effect in Troy,” WXYZ, July 29, 2010, available at http://www.
wxyz.com/news/region/oakland-county/new-distracted-driving-law-is-now-in-effect-in-troy
74imaGinyze, Augmented Driving, iTunes Preview, (Updated October 28, 2013), available at https://
itunes.apple.com/us/app/augmented-driving/id366841514?mt=8 (last visited on September 4, 2014).

202
CHAPTER 7  Torts and Personal Injury
2010 (Fig. 7.5). It “detects your lane and other vehicles in front of you and provides 
useful information for your driving situation,” but only “in good lighting conditions 
during daytime for visible lane markings on highways and country roads and for de-
tection of regular cars. For operation, a fix mount is required.” (A similar app called 
iOnRoad, introduced in 2013, makes similar claims.75) But suppose I encounter an 
“irregular” car on a partly cloudy day? Or I want to see a wider view than what’s vis-
ible through my front-mounted, 3.50 screen?
Maybe there’s more to this app than initially meets the eye. But relying on, and 
looking through, a mobile phone to detect other vehicles while driving seems like a 
dubious proposition.
DRIVING WITH DIGITAL EYEWEAR
There seems to be a growing interest in digital eyewear as a boon for driver safety. That 
certainly seems to be the prevailing conclusion among Glass Explorers, at least based 
on my own unscientific sampling of the Explorer Community message boards. In con-
trast to Cecelia Abadie’s experience, at least two other Explorers have reported that the 
police officers who pulled them over saw and disregarded their Glass devices.76 “I … 
said I thought it was okay to drive with Glass because they were hands-free,” wrote 
one. “That seemed to fly with him so after he ran my ID he let me go without a ticket!” 
Of course, such results may be influenced by the fact that (as discussed in Chapter 8) 
many law enforcement departments have themselves begun to wear Glass in the field.
76[need Google account] https://www.glass-community.com/t5/Discussions/Driving-with-Glass-
Hello-Johnny-Law/m-p/122602/highlight/true#M33803
75ionRoad, Augmented Driving Lite, Google Play, (October 29, 2013), available at https://play.google.
com/store/apps/details?id=com.picitup.iOnRoad&hl=en (last visited on September 4, 2014).
FIGURE 7.5
The “Augmented Driving” app.

203
﻿ Automotive
Automakers themselves are getting in on the game. Tim Mahoney, global CMO 
for General Motors’ Chevrolet brand, confirmed that Google held a demonstration 
for the automaker.77 “I think it’s pretty cool,” Mahoney was quoted as saying. “The 
demo that I saw was pretty fascinating.… It’s going to come at some point.”78 Sim-
ilarly, Mercedes-Benz is reportedly working to integrate both Glass and Siri, the 
voice-activated interface from Apple’s mobile devices, into the same system with its 
in-car infotainment systems.79 The idea would be to allow travel destinations stored 
in the user’s mobile or wearable device to automatically transfer to the in-car naviga-
tion systems when the driver enters the vehicle.
The same arguments raised in opposition to Cecilia Abadie’s example have been 
marshaled in response to these plans as well. Jurisdictions from the United Kingdom 
to West Virginia have moved to ban the use of digital eyewear while driving, con-
cerned that they may be distracting, particularly for young drivers.
For its part, however, Google has expressed its intention to design Glass for safe-
ty. “It’s early days and we are thinking very carefully about how we design Glass 
because new technology always raises new issues,” Google has said. “Our Glass Ex-
plorer program, which reaches people from all walks of life, will ensure that our us-
ers become active participants in shaping the future of this technology.”80 And again, 
my own first-hand experience using Glass in the car shapes my perspective (Fig. 7.6). 
80Michael McCarthy, Do Chevy Execs See a Future With Google Glass? Advertising Age, (October 4,  
2013), available at http://adage.com/article/news/chevy-execs-a-future-google-glass/244555/ (last vis-
ited on September 4, 2014).
77Michael McCarthy, Do Chevy Execs See a Future With Google Glass? Advertising Age, (October 4,  
2013), available at http://adage.com/article/news/chevy-execs-a-future-google-glass/244555/ (last 
­visited on September 4, 2014).
78Id.
79Mercedes Benz integrating Google Glass into its cars, Fox News, (July 30, 2013), available at 
http://www.foxnews.com/leisure/2013/07/30/mercedes-benz-intergrating-google-glass-into-its-cars/ 
(last visited on September 4, 2014).
FIGURE 7.6
Glass makes directions available to the driver without looking away from the road.

204
CHAPTER 7  Torts and Personal Injury
In Glass’ favor is the fact that the device displays navigation information where the 
driver need only glance up to see it, rather than down to a mobile device, in-dash 
display, or physical map. The device does not remain on or impede the user’s direct 
line of sight; instead, it chimes on when a turn is approaching, but otherwise remains 
off. Moreover, the interface is voice-driven. Directions are retrieved (and recited) by 
voice, rather than requiring the driver to type them into a keyboard. This too is a fac-
tor making the device less distracting than the alternatives.
It may be that regulators someday ban all digital interactions by a driver inside a 
car, including hands-free calling, map programs, and wearable technology. As long 
as navigational aids are allowed, however, it is difficult to see how digital eyewear is 
any more distracting than other, currently acceptable alternatives.
ACHIEVEMENTS TO DATE WITH AUGMENTED WINDSHIELDS AND 
DRIVER AIDS
One product has consistently been inserted between the driver and the road for the 
past century: the windshield. Automakers have experimented with projecting speed-
ometer data and other information in heads-up displays on windshields for decades. 
And for at least the past several years, these same companies have been experiment-
ing with truly interactive, augmented displays in this medium as well. A 2010 news 
report, for example, described a project by General Motors “to develop a working 
next-generation heads-up display that turns an ordinary windshield into an aug-
mented reality information dashboard.”81 This approach used night vision, naviga-
tion sensors and cameras to gather data about the driver’s surroundings – such as the 
location of road boundaries and speed limit signs – and ultraviolet lasers to project 
corresponding images onto the windshield surface.
In 2011, a company called Autoglass published a concept video for a similar 
windshield display system it suggested could be ready by 2020. It is unclear, how-
ever, how much actual progress the company has actually made in the interim toward 
achieving this goal.
Hollywood has foreseen the usefulness of displaying truly interactive, augmented 
data in this medium. In the 2011 film Mission Impossible: Ghost Protocol, for ex-
ample, Tom Cruise’s character drives a luxury sedan through a crowded intersection 
(Fig. 7.7). When pedestrians pass in front of the vehicle, heat signatures in the shape 
and location of their bodies flash onto the windshield.
Pioneer has actually demonstrated working prototypes of similar technology. In 
2011, its Japanese arm announced the AVIC-VH09CS, ostensibly the world’s first 
in-car, AR navigation system,82 complete with “targeting” icons that encircle and 
82Serkan Toto, Pioneer Shows Augmented Reality-Powered Car Navigation System, TechCrunch,  
(Posted May 9, 2011), available at http://techcrunch.com/2011/05/09/pioneer-shows-aumented- 
reality-powered-car-navigation-system/ (last visited on September 4, 2014).
81Barb Dybwad, Awesome Augmented Reality Windshield [video], Mashable, (March 18, 2010), avail-
able at http://mashable.com/2010/03/18/gm-ar-windshield/ (last visited on September 4, 2014).

205
﻿ Automotive
identify other vehicles without obstructing them, and direction arrows that appear 
to hover over the intersection in real time and in three dimensions (Fig. 7.8). The 
images are displayed in a dash-mounted video display, however, rather than over 
the driver’s actual point of view. In 2013, the company introduced Cyber Navi, an 
updated version of the same system.83 This iteration includes the same in-dash AR 
system, as well as a heads-up display that replaces the driver’s sunshade. Lasers 
project real-time navigational information onto the display so that they appear to the 
driver to be a few feet in the air in front of the vehicle.
A company named MVS-California, LLC has demonstrated a different, more 
minimalist approach to the augmented windshield. Called the Virtual Cable™, the 
device “presents a wayfinding line visible right through the windshield; presenting 
the information as a natural part of the landscape. [T]he line appears to be stretched  
over the road for several hundred yards in front of the car, above the street-level 
83Network World, Pioneer’s augmented reality, heads-up display navigation system, You Tube (pub-
lished on June 28, 2013), available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DomtZjAaxwM (last visited 
on September 4, 2014).
FIGURE 7.7
A scene from Mission Impossible: Ghost Protocol.
FIGURE 7.8
Pioneer’s augmented navigation display.

206
CHAPTER 7  Torts and Personal Injury
­activity of traffic.”84 Very similar to the red line followed by Daniel Suarez’s protago-
nist in Daemon and Freedom™, the system is also capable of displaying logos of 
businesses along the route and other trip-related information.
In 2014, Land Rover took augmented windshields in a unique direction. Rather 
than adding augmented digital information to the driver’s view of the road, its “Vi-
sion” concept employed a diminished reality technique to partially remove the ve-
hicle’s front end, or “bonnet.” The result was to allow the driver to “see” the front 
wheels and the road underneath them, thus enhancing the driver’s knowledge of driv-
ing conditions – especially on steep or uneven terrain (Fig. 7.9).86
The same technology would also be capable of augmenting the driver’s situation-
al awareness in all directions, as well as the car’s ambiance. “The clear glass roof of 
the [Land Rover] Concept has ‘mood screens’ that behave like the screensaver on a 
computer. It’s possible to change the roof from displaying a starry night to a sunny 
day…. The wing mirrors [also] have cameras that can project parts of the ground dif-
ficult to see onto the glass when parking.”87
FIGURE 7.9
Land Rover’s transparent bonnet system.85
87Id.
84Follow the Virtual Cable, MVS-California, LLC, available at http://mvs.net/ (last visited on 
September 4, 2014).
86Hunter Skipworth, Land Rover Discovery Vision Concept: Hands-on, augmented reality in car, Digi-
tal Spy, (May 21, 2014), available at http://www.digitalspy.co.uk/tech/feature/a572533/land-rover-
discovery-vision-concept-hands-on-augmented-reality-in-a-car.html#∼oEXyIcuPQVUVS3 (last vis-
ited on September 4, 2014).
85Image © Jaguar Land Rover Ltd. Used with permission.

207
﻿ Automotive
Such news is enough to give hope that AR could soon improve our driving experi-
ence in a meaningful way soon. In the not-too-distant future, AR windshield systems 
like this might be sufficiently effective that they become required by law, just like 
seat belts and scores of other safety features are today, and as car-to-car wireless 
communication will be within the next few years.
DRIVING AMIDST UBIQUITOUS AUGMENTED REALITY
Assuming that autonomous vehicles have not fully displaced human-driven cars by 
the time AR technology is ubiquitous throughout society, there are a number of ways 
in which a mature digital infrastructure could enhance the driving experience.
Transparent buildings
A January 2010 concept video from New Scientist magazine88 demonstrates how a 
network of cameras synced with an AR windshield could allow drivers to literally see 
through walls, and thus spots potential dangers lurking around corners:
A system that works as smoothly as the one depicted in the video would certainly 
be a boon to driver safety, especially in urban settings with lots of blind corners. But 
it may be some time before the technology is that seamless. Latency and off-kilter 
images would make the service not only less useful, but also potentially distracting. 
It would also take quite an investment (of presumably public money) to get a network 
of cameras installed and to keep them properly aligned.
Traffic lights? Why not traffic walls?
Today’s traffic lights are dots of colored light that appear relatively tiny from a driv-
er’s perspective, and are easily obscured by direct sunlight, rain, and obstructions. 
The mechanical systems required to create those “tiny” lights, however, are actually 
huge, and quite expensive. One local news source recently ran a story about the 
$450,000 price tag that came with a single new traffic light.89 “The reason a single 
traffic light costs so much,” the article explained, “is due to the cost of the hard-
ware. Each traffic signal must be custom made. In addition, the cost of steel used 
to support the lights and the traffic signals themselves have gone up dramatically in 
recent years.”
When the signals are virtual, however, there are no mechanical or financial con-
straints on their size. Instead of looking up to find the little dot of light in the sky, 
a driver viewing an upcoming intersection through an AR windshield could just as 
easily see a giant red wall stretching across the entire road – translucent enough 
not to obscure physical objects behind it, but visible enough to make it impossible 
to miss.
88New Scientist, Transparent Wall, YouTube, (Uploaded on January 15, 2010), available at https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q5O13bk7z2s (last visited on September 4, 2014).
89Ken Ross, $450,000 traffic light cost eyed for Holyoke, MassLive by the Republican Newsroom, 
(February 11, 2009), available at http://www.masslive.com/news/index.ssf/2009/02/450000_traffic_
light_cost_eyed.html (last visited on September 4, 2014.

208
CHAPTER 7  Torts and Personal Injury
Floating, virtual road signs
Why stop at traffic signals? All road signs could easily be augmented just as well, 
and made to float right at eye-level for easy viewing. A “right-hand turn only” sign, 
for example, suddenly becomes a curved arrow floating in space, rather than a road-
side sign or words painted on the asphalt that are too easily obscured by other cars. 
The same could be done for every one of the messages currently displayed by metal 
rectangles on poles. As long as this is done in an efficient manner that aids the driver 
rather than cluttering her view, safety should noticeably improve.
A system of AR road signs could also have a wealth of collateral benefits beyond 
driver assistance. The most obvious is reducing government spending. Virtual road 
signs would cost a whole lot less than tangible ones – after the network needed to 
project them was in place. (And creating that infrastructure would be no mean feat; 
it would have to be widespread, reliable, and universally adopted before physical 
signs could be done away with, so this is a long-term vision.) A less tangible, but  
perhaps more impactful result would be the beautification of our roadways – 
­especially if physical billboards were also replaced by virtual advertisements, a la 
Minority Report. Imagine if residents, pedestrians, passengers – everyone except the 
AR-equipped driver – could enjoy the scenic natural beauty alongside the road, un-
obstructed by a sea of signage.
Virtual speed displays
AR could be a boon to traffic cops as well. The U.S. Supreme Court has already up-
held the secret installation by law enforcement of GPS beacons that track a vehicle’s 
movement. The smarter our cars get, the more likely it will be that they’ll have GPS 
devices of their own built in. Add AR to the mix, and it’s a short distance to a world 
in which traffic cops come equipped with sensors that read speed data broadcast by 
the vehicle and display the information so that the officer sees it directly above the 
vehicle itself. Of course, by that point, we may not need police officers to hand out 
the tickets at all; our speeds would be automatically monitored by a central system 
that churns out tickets automatically.
Virtual speed displays could also benefit drivers. It’s not always easy to immedi-
ately tell, for example, how quickly a car ahead of you is decelerating. Someone slam-
ming on their brakes might trigger an accentuated, visual warning to other drivers 
behind the car, with different shades of color to indicate the degree of deceleration.
CONCLUSION
In sum, those who augment the physical world with digital imagery should always 
keep in mind the fact that physical objects can cause physical injury. Although it will 
be easy to become enamored of the various ways there will be to digitally supple-
ment our daily experiences, designers of augmented reality experiences will have a 
responsibility to help their users to blend the digital and the physical in ways that 
minimize dangers.

209
CHAPTER
Augmented Reality Law, Privacy, and Ethics﻿
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Unintentional encounters with law enforcement
• Criminal collaborations and tools
• Enhancing and monitoring law enforcement
INTRODUCTION
For all of the promise that any new technology brings, there will always be an ele-
ment of society that seeks to exploit it for unlawful purposes. That is an inevitable 
characteristic of human nature. This is not to say that we should fear or suppress 
augmented world technologies simply because they can and will be misused. To the 
contrary, the best way to protect society against the abuses of AR is to anticipate and 
understand them, so that we are better able to minimize and react to harmful devel-
opments. The worst thing we could do is hide our heads in the sand, pretending that 
this will be the first technology that criminal elements will not exploit, or that talking 
about misuse will somehow cause it to happen.
In practice, this means talking with the AR industry about criminal misapplica-
tions, so that we can design our safeguards to make the technology more difficult to 
abuse. It also means educating and equipping law enforcement to understand and 
deal with what they are likely to encounter. At the same time, however, it also means 
educating and equipping the citizenry to monitor police officers and hold them ac-
countable to the public they serve.
UNINTENTIONAL RUN-INS WITH THE LAW THROUGH AR
In most respects, law enforcement tends to lag behind the leading edge of technological  
innovation. Like any publicly funded agency, the average police department gets 
computer upgrades only so often, and many of its officers are too busy doing other 
things to stay abreast of the latest technological developments and fads. As a result, 
officers will sometimes mistake innocent activity as potentially criminal.
LOCATION-BASED GAMES
As with the other mentions of the popular location-based AR game Ingress throughout  
this book, the following discussion is directed at location-based AR games in ­general, 
Criminal Law
8

210
CHAPTER 8  Criminal Law
not at Ingress specifically. It is only because Ingress has been the first game of its 
kind to gain such widespread adoption that the currently available examples of what 
can happen in connection with such games tend to involve that one.
In December 2012, a gamer who goes by the handle “Eheaubaut” on the social 
network Reddit was walking the streets of his city playing Ingress. The game re-
quires players to locate and either destroy or repair virtual objects called “portals.” 
Almost all of these portals are located on public property, for reasons that have been 
discussed in previous chapters. In order to manipulate a portal, however, a player 
needs to be physically very near to it. This can lead players to engage in behavior 
that is not typical of the average pedestrian, especially because, depending on one’s 
experience level in the game, it can take some time to meaningfully affect the portal.
On this occasion, Eheaubaut was engaging a portal located over a police station. 
Although stopping to point his phone for a long period of time at the local police 
station gained him an advantage in the game, it was predictably suspicious to the 
officers inside. He wrote:
“I was out capturing some portals (I live in a medium sized city and only one 
other person is playing that I noticed, only one portal was taken.). And I walk by 
the police station and notice that the portal was still free! So I grabbed it. Then my 
phone locked up. I restart it, and load the game back up when a cop noticed me, 
shouted to me and arrested me. Apparently sitting near a police station for about 
5 minutes with a GPS view of the surrounding area with little blue blips on the 
screen is a red flag. I was in a holding cell for nearly 3 hours explaining to them 
it’s just a game by google, ‘Strangest night ever.’1
A friend alerted me to this post, writing: “Your prognostications about augmented 
reality legal troubles have begun to come true.”
Not long after this incident, I was able to interview multiple, active Ingress 
­players in my area. They retold their own stories, both personal and second-hand, 
of players being questioned by police. In one such incident, the player was playing 
while driving (which, I understand, the game discourages) and was pulled over after 
circling the same location at low speeds several times.
Similar incidents continue to occur. The Multi-State Information Sharing &  
Analysis Center – a division of the Center for Internet Security – published a notice 
to ­participating law enforcement agencies that Ingress “will likely increase reports 
of suspicious ­activity.”2 The publication explained the basis of the game and that the 
­behavior and terminology associated with it (including “hacking” and “attacking”) 
“are part of the game and not real-world malicious activity.” Nevertheless, the notice 
also speculated that “[m]alicious actors unaffiliated with the game may attempt to 
1Eheaubaut, So I got arrested [post], Reddit-Ingress, (submitted 1 year ago), available at http://www.
reddit.com/r/Ingress/comments/13zehg/so_i_got_arrested/ (last visited on September 5, 2014).
2“Google’s Ingress Game Will Likely Increase Reports of Suspicious Activity,” Multi-State Information  
Sharing & Analysis Center, Msisac.cisecurity.org/daily-tips/google-ingress-game.cfm (last visited 
September 13, 2014).

211
﻿ Unintentional Run-Ins with the Law Through AR
cover up their malicious activity and/or surveillance effort by claiming they are play-
ing the game.” It will be interesting to see if officers begin demanding to see – and 
are able to evaluate – players’ in-game credentials to judge whether they’re telling 
the truth.
In January 2014, a Kansas law enforcement lobbyist posted an article online 
­purporting to describe “a number” of 911 calls in Park City, Kansas about ­“suspicious 
persons” who turned out to be playing Ingress. The article also cites one of my blog 
posts as an example of what “can go wrong” when Ingress players cross paths with 
police, and suggests that readers Google the phrase “ingress police calls” to find 
more. He wrote:
“The Park City Police Department has had a number of 911 suspicious character 
calls, and upon further investigation, the ‘suspect(s)’ were actually in the process 
of playing a new smart-phone ‘augmented-reality’ game called ‘Ingress’….
This game is rapidly becoming more popular. Part of this game involves actually 
going to a physical location, and then ‘tagging/ marking/ closing/ taking over’ 
that location. With the success of this game, it is likely that similar games will be 
created in the future. …
One recent confirmed experience with this game occurred at a church in Park 
City. A vehicle occupied by two people had been sitting in the parking lot for quite 
some time, but for no apparent reason. This occurred again the following day, and 
when church employees called 911 about ‘suspicious characters’, officers stopped 
the vehicle and found the occupants had been playing ‘Ingress’….
It is very likely that this game will generate even more 911 calls as it becomes 
more popular.”3
The article also noted the fact, however, that Niantic Labs had been proactive about 
warning players how to react to police inquiries. There are similar resources avail-
able online as well, including a page from the user-generated “Ingress Field Guide” 
describing the game to law enforcement officials.4 Similar advice abounds in online 
player forums and Reddit threads. Handling such encounters, it seems, will continue 
to be a fact of life that must be dealt with by players of location-based AR games.
VIRTUAL SHOOTING GAMES
The stakes only get higher when – unlike Ingress – the AR game in question is one 
where players pretend to shoot each other.
Several years ago now, an incident happened only a few miles from my home 
that foreshadowed the risks of such games. A group of teens were running through 
3General Information, Kansas Law Enforcement Information, available at http://www.kslawenforce-
mentinfo.com/general-information-postings.html (last visited on September 5, 2014).
4Ingress Field Guide, “Ingress Informationor for Law Enforcement,” available at <ingressfieldguide/
police.php> (last visited September 13, 2014).

212
CHAPTER 8  Criminal Law
a neighborhood yard shooting at each other with Airsoft guns (which, if you don’t 
know, are like paintball except more realistic and with smaller, softer pellets). A 
passing police officer mistook the toy guns for real ones and fired his (real) weapon 
at one of the teens. Fortunately, he missed. The lesson: things that you pretend to do 
in public might be interpreted by others as real, and that can be especially dangerous 
when what you’re pretending to do is violent.
Nevertheless, there is good reason to think that AR companies will continue to 
develop games that involve virtual gunplay. First-person shooters have perennially 
been one of the most popular category of video games. Whatever the reasons, lots of  
people enjoy acting out violent scenarios within the (heretofore) safe boundaries 
of pretend environments. Geeks around the world are salivating in anticipation of 
the first truly immersive first-person shooter game in AR that takes that experience 
even further into the real world.5 Therefore, as one industry observer wrote in July 
2014, “there’s been a huge push in the video games space towards a little some-
thing known as immersion.”6 The industry has sought to provide players with an 
immersive experience by introducing “a whole host of peripherals[, including] the 
ATOC Gaming Gun (the name stands for Advanced Tactical Oriented Controller).  
Designed for PC, Xbox 360, and PlayStation 3[,] it’ll allow people to experi-
ence their shooters in a way they never have before: by making them get up and 
move around.”7 Chapter 12 further discusses these games and the effect they have 
on those who play them.
EFFECT ON CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY
One of the first things that first-year law students learn about Criminal Law is the 
concept of mens rea, which is Latin for “guilty mind.” It is the measure of a person’s 
conscious intent. Unless a person has a sufficiently culpable state of mind when com-
mitting a certain action, that action will not be punished criminally.
So it will be interesting to see whether, and under what circumstances, a criminal 
defendant will ever be able to demonstrate that he did not have the mens rea neces-
sary to commit a crime because he thought that he was acting the virtual, rather than 
physical, world. There is already precedent for making such an argument. In February 
2013, according to a newswire report, a 35-year-old man in the eastern Russian town 
of Nizhnaya Monoma got drunk, armed himself with two knives, and began breaking 
5See, e.g., Chauncey Frend, Augmented Realtiy FPS System, YouTube, (Published on May 1, 2012), 
available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ELt_aPLxKds (last visited on September 5, 2014); 
Chauncey Therelsa Canal, Battlefield 5 on Google Glass (The Marine Revenge), YouTube, (Published 
on April 12, 2012), available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-sSsRIhVYB4 (last visited on 
September 5, 2014).
6Nicholas Greene, Want to Unlock A New Level of Immersion In Your First Person Shooters? The 
ATOC Gaming Gun Has You Covered, Inventor Spot, available at http://inventorspot.com/articles/ 
want-­unlock-new-level-immersion-your-first-person-shooters-atoc- (last visited on September 5, 2014).
7Id.

213
﻿ Intentional Criminal Activity
into local homes. He stabbed five people, one fatally. His defense? “The suspect told 
investigators he had no intention of actually killing anyone. He said he thought he was 
committing a ‘virtual reality’ murder.”8
In truth, this particular defendant’s state of mind probably owed more to the al-
cohol he drank than to any video game he may have played, or thought he was play-
ing. And there is, in fact, precedent for arguing that a severely drunk person cannot 
think coherently enough to form the state of mind necessary for some crimes.9 The 
incident is likely, however, to foreshadow more sophisticated legal arguments to 
be made in a time when digital interactions in AR are much more commonplace. 
In a setting in which digital content is intentionally designed to be perceived and 
interacted with as if it were physical, it will not be such a stretch to argue that the 
defendant thought he was interacting with a digital object or person. If the action 
results in an otherwise criminal act, the defendant may well be able to establish his 
lack of mens rea.
INTENTIONAL CRIMINAL ACTIVITY
AUGMENTED WEAPONS
In addition to weapon-oriented video games, another contributor to augmenting 
the firearm experience is the trickle-down effect of military research and develop-
ment. It should be no surprise that the military and its contractors are one of the 
leading forces behind the development of AR. An oft-repeated truism of modern 
society is that war, pornography, and fast food are among the leading drivers of 
technological innovation. And AR has a lot to offer soldiers in the field. Distin-
guishing enemy units from allies, visualizing the insides of buildings, and heads-
up display of directions and targeting information are only a few of the more 
obvious applications.
Nor are these new ideas. Fighter pilots have used heads-up displays for decades, 
and virtually every combat-themed video game on the market demonstrates the util-
ity of having these tools available.
In fact, the earliest example I can think of goes back to the mid-1980s animated 
series Robotech (Fig. 8.1). In one episode,10 the character Louie Nichols develops 
an eyewear-based controller for a video game used for training military pilots. After 
8UPI, Man Accused in Killing Said He Thought It Was a “Virtual Reality” Game, Breitbart, (February  
7, 2014), available at http://www.breitbart.com/system/wire/upiUPI-20140207-093340-8698 (last 
­visited on September 5, 2014).
9Voluntary intoxication, however, is not a defense to crimes requiring the mental state of recklessness 
or malice, because the defendant’s decision to become that intoxicated in the first place is recognized 
as reckless in itself.
10InfoPedia, The Hunters, Robotech.com, available at http://www.robotech.com/infopedia/episodes/
viewepisode.php?episode=53 (last visited on September 5, 2014).

214
CHAPTER 8  Criminal Law
he uses them to set a new score, an onlooker exclaims, “It’s as if there’s a machine 
gun built right into your glasses!” “Exactly,” Louie explains “The glasses pick up 
the movements of my pupils and respond with impulses which program the mem-
ory in the cartridge. The cartridge remembers the patterns on my pupils, producing 
a recognizable firing zone, which is activated by organic impulses produced when 
my ­pupils intercept the reflected light from the target.” He calls it Nichols’s Special 
Vision Track Firing System (VTFS), or the “Pupil Pistol.” To Nichols’ chagrin, his 
superiors promptly copy the technology and incorporate it into their pilots’ targeting 
computers.
It’s also a truism that government-funded technologies eventually tend to filter 
down into the public’s hands. From Tang to assault rifles to spaceflight, companies 
quickly figure out how to commercialize military-funded capabilities.
AR for the individual shooter will follow this same trend, sooner or later. 
­Shooting games are already some of the most popular AR applications for mobile de-
vices. How much longer until gun stores sell heads-up targeting accessories for real 
­handguns? This alone, of course, is unlikely to be per se illegal; in fact the current 
political climate ensures that there will be a fierce confrontation between gun control 
advocates who see augmented weaponry as dangerous and Second Amendment pur-
ists who argue that the only way to stop a criminal with AR targeting capabilities is 
with one’s own augmented gun.
It seems inevitable that AR will be used by criminals to place digital bounties on 
certain places or people, visible only by others using a certain AR darknet. (More 
on those below.) Even more unnerving would be target device that identify certain in-
dividuals based on AR information that they share about themselves, once augmented 
FIGURE 8.1
Louie Nichols in Robotech episode “The Hunters.”

215
﻿ Intentional Criminal Activity
social networks gain more traction. Displaying information about ourselves as we 
walk down the street would make it that much easier for someone to pick targets with 
particular attributes out of a crowd. Even militarized versions of video game-style 
self-monitoring data (such as vital signs, ammunition, wind conditions and the loca-
tion of nearby threats) would be enough to make criminal shooters that much more 
dangerous in a public setting.
Of course, none of these are reasons to ban AR from the marketplace, as if such 
a thing were even possible. AR, like the internet before it, will be another ubiquitous 
medium for data transmission. Even tying AR into private weapons is not necessarily 
a categorically bad or good idea. But the first time that a rogue gunman uses his digi-
tal eyewear in connection with shooting civilians, you can bet that we’ll hear calls 
to ban the technology. So let’s give some thought ahead of time to how AR can and 
should be used in connections with firearms.
SURREPTITIOUS DATA COLLECTION AND HACKING
The allure of wearable recording devices is the promise of being able to forever me-
morialize cherished sights in our field of view. What one person wishes to see, how-
ever, is often something that another wishes to hide from view. So when on-the-fly 
recording capabilities increase, intrusion into ostensibly private spaces will as well, 
unless opposing countermeasures are taken.
We have already discussed the potential for eavesdropping – which in many ju-
risdictions is a criminal offense as well as a civil tort – and other forms of privacy 
invasion in Chapter 3. Here, it is interesting to note the type of criminally surreptitious 
recording to which wearable technology is already being put. For example, in June 
2014, Wired magazine reported on a study performed by researchers at the ­University 
of ­Massachusetts Lowell.11 They tested the ability of various wearable cameras “to 
surreptitiously pick up four-digit PIN codes typed onto an iPad from almost 10 feet 
away – and from nearly 150 feet with a high-def camcorder.” By using custom vi-
sual recognition software, they were able to determine the numbers entered merely 
by tracking finger movements, even when the video could not directly see the screens 
onto which the numbers were entered. Criminals in the field could easily use similar 
methods to collect ATM and device passwords from unsuspecting users. At the same 
time, however, the researchers also suggested an easy solution to the problem: software 
that randomizes the positions of the numbers on the keypad used to enter the PINs.
Of course, for as long as recording devices have existed, they have also been 
used for gathering more prurient images. In 2008, for example, a stalker inserted a 
tiny video camera into the keyhole of ESPN reporter Erin Andrews’ hotel rooms in 
11Andy Greenberg, Google Glass Snoopers Can Steal Your Passcode With a Glance, Wired, (June 24, 
2014), available at http://www.wired.com/2014/06/google-glass-snoopers-can-steal-your-passcode-
with-a-glance/ (last visited on September 5, 2014).

216
CHAPTER 8  Criminal Law
Tennessee, Wisconsin, and Ohio to capture images of her in the nude.12 Similar in-
cidents involving less-high-profile victims are reported with disturbing frequency in 
local tanning salons, dressing rooms, showers, and similar locales across the country.
Here again, increasing the prevalence of recording devices – a necessary con-
sequences of an increasingly augmented world – will increase the number of such 
Peeping Toms and the ways in which they can capture the images they seek. In June 
2014, a Seattle woman made national headlines by reporting a suspicious drone fly-
ing outside her window.13 The next month, a New York man was arrested and charged 
with unlawful surveillance after allegedly flying his video-recording drone outside 
the 4th-floor examination rooms of a medical building.14
The complexity of this issue lies in the fact that such devices have multiple le-
gitimate uses in addition to the perverse ones. For example, it later became apparent 
the owner of the Seattle drone was actually recording a panoramic image of the city 
skyline, and was not recording through the woman’s window at all. The New York 
defendant likewise claimed to be recording architecture and not indoor activity.
The exponentially expanding Internet of Things that will undergird the augmented 
world, however, offers a tempting collection of targets for hackers. At the 2013 Black 
Hat security conference, “two researchers from Trustwave Security Labs discussed 
vulnerabilities in a number of home-automation systems, such as door locks, alarm 
systems, garage doors, lights, surveillance cameras and other electronic appliances that 
could be used to carry out covert surveillance and gain entry to buildings.”15 As men-
tioned in Chapter 3, the Federal Trade Commission has already taken action against 
one such home monitoring company for doing too little to prevent such hacking.
As this network adds more devices that perform important and sensitive functions, 
the consequences of that hacking escalate. “In order to avoid lurid headlines about 
cars crashing, insulin overdoses and houses burning,” warned The Economist, “tech 
firms will surely have to embrace higher standards.”16 These are not hypothetical 
concerns. At the 2013 hacker convention DEF CON, security researchers Charlie 
Miller and Chris Valasek showed how they used a simple Mac laptop hack a Toyota 
12Monty, Erin Andrews Suing Peepr, Nashville Marriott for $7 Million, Busted Coverage, (December 5, 
2011), available at http://bustedcoverage.com/2011/12/05/erin-andrews-suing-peeper-nashville-marriott-
for-7-million-documents/ (last visited on September 5, 2014).
13Gregory S. McNeal, Alleged Drone ‘Peeping Tom’ Photo Reveals Perils of Drone Related Journalism, 
Forbes, (July 14, 2014), available at http://www.forbes.com/sites/gregorymcneal/2014/07/14/alleged-
drone-peeping-tom-photo-reveals-perils-of-drone-related-journalism/ (last visited on September 5, 
2014).
14“NY man charged with peeping in windows with drone,” WRGB July 16, 2014, available at http://
www.cbs6albany.com/template/cgi-bin/archived.pl?type=basic&file=/news/features/top-story/stories/
archive/2014/07/HMAM58iB.xml#.VBUF4PldV8E
15Fahmida Y. Rashid, How the Internet of Things Could Kill You, tom’sGuide, (July 18, 2014), 
­available at http://www.tomsguide.com/us/iot-attack-physical-impact,news-19182.html (last visited 
on ­September 5, 2014).
16The internet of things (to be hacked), The Economist, (July 12, 2014), available at http://www.econo-
mist.com/news/leaders/21606829-hooking-up-gadgets-web-promises-huge-benefits-security-must-
not-be (last visited on September 5, 2014).

217
﻿ Intentional Criminal Activity
Prius, deactivating the brakes regardless of what the driver attempts to do. They 
can likewise “turn off power steering, make the onboard GPS systems give wrong  
directions, change the numbers on the speedometer and even make the car change 
­direction.”17 Likewise, “[t]he famed late hacker Barnaby Jack demonstrated how to 
hijack wireless insulin pumps to deliver potentially fatal doses from across a room, 
or hijack wireless pacemakers to stop hearts … or deliver electric shocks (Fig. 8.2).”18
The unnerving plausibility of these scenarios has spawned fictional dramatiza-
tions of such malicious IOT hacks. The television drama “Homeland” featured a 
hacked pacemaker, while an artificially intelligent program uses similar methods 
to eliminate enemies and ensconce itself in computers around the world in Daniel 
Suarez’s AR-influenced techno-thrillers Daemon and Freedom™. As the world be-
comes more connected, criminal hackers will have more access points for causing 
more harm than they will know what to do with.
AR AS A DISCLOSURE OF “SOFT TARGETS”
Augmented reality has sometimes been referred to as a window into, or the visual 
“interface for[,] the Internet of Things.”19 It offers the same advantages for existing 
networks of other kinds as well. One of the most compelling and practical use cases 
for AR in both the consumer and industrial sectors will be visualizing electronic, 
mechanical, and organizational processes and activities that would not otherwise be 
apparent to the user. This could be as simple as the proverbial smart fridge that alerts 
its owner when food items are running low, to on-the-job visual prompts that instruct 
a technician on how to repair a piece of machinery or locate a particular piece of 
pipeline or equipment. In my neighborhood, utility companies regularly fly planes 
overhead to monitor the status of underground pipelines, which are marked by un-
sightly signs designed to be visible from the air. Similarly, homeowners are required 
to call 1-800-MISS-DIG before breaking ground for landscaping or construction; 
servicemen then come and use flags and spray paint to mark out the location of all 
underground pipes and wires. All of these precautions could – and someday are ­likely 
to – be rendered obsolete by an AR application that reliably displays the ­location of 
all underground structures in three dimensions.
Travelers are also likely to become more dependent on AR. In their book Aug-
mented Reality: An Emerging Technologies Guide to AR, Gregory Kipper and Joseph 
Rampolla discuss various AR apps that track and visualize the identity and location 
17Jill Scharr, Hackers Hijack Prius with Mac Laptop, tom’sGuide, (July 26, 2013), available at http://
www.tomsguide.com/us/hackers-hijack-prius-with-laptop,review-1797.html (last visited on September  
5, 2014).
19Anna Leach, When augmented reality hits the Internet of Things, wired.co.uk., (October 10, 2014), 
available at http://www.wired.co.uk/news/archive/2010-10/14/augmented-reality-internet-of-things (last 
visited on September 5, 2014).
18Fahmida Y. Rashid, How the Internet of Things Could Kill You, tom’s Guide, (July 18, 2014), avail-
able at http://www.tomsguide.com/us/iot-attack-physical-impact,news-19182.html (last visited on 
September 5, 2014).

218
CHAPTER 8  Criminal Law
of individual rail cars, buses, ships, planes, and more.21 This functionality is not 
limited to AR apps; FlightAware, for instance, is a popular app that tracks nearby 
flights in a two-dimensional display. But conveying vehicle information to travelers 
by means of AR can provide real value in locating public transit routes, stations, and 
vehicles.
21pp. 100–04.
FIGURE 8.2
Barnaby Jack.20
20© Marc Handelman / cc licensed.

219
﻿ Intentional Criminal Activity
As with most information, however, all of these insights could be used for nefari-
ous purposes as well. For instance, a terrorist intent on attacking a particular vehicle 
(perhaps because of who is inside) or causing the maximum number of casualties 
would have a better chance of succeeding if he had access to a real-time, heads-up 
display of traffic information.
Policymakers have long fretted about the vulnerability of such “soft targets” as 
power grids and water purification plants (Fig. 8.3). For example, immediately after 
the onset of the 2003 blackout that left much of the Eastern and Midwestern United 
States without power for days, many of us affected by it initially assumed that it must 
have been the result of a terrorist attack. Attacks on such systems hit far more average 
citizens “where they live,” so to speak, than do the more common forms of terrorism, 
such as bombings or mass shootings. In November 2012, the National Academy of 
Sciences released the results of a study finding that a successful attack on the United 
States’ power grid could cost hundreds of billions of dollars and lead to thousands of 
deaths.22 In 1993, the parasite cryptosporidium infiltrated the water distribution ­system 
in Milwaukee, Wisconsin by unknown means. In all, more than 400,000 people were 
FIGURE 8.3
A mock-up at DefCon 2014 of potentially hackable computers in a water treatment system.
22Brian Wingfield, Thousands Could Die If U.S. Power Grid Attacked, BloombergBusinessWeek, 
(November 14, 2012), available at http://www.businessweek.com/news/2012-11-14/thousands-seen-
dying-if-terrorists-attack-vulnerable-u-dot-s-dot-grid (last visited on September 5, 2014).

220
CHAPTER 8  Criminal Law
sickened, and at least 69 died – “the largest waterborne outbreak recorded in U.S. 
history.”23 Although there is no evidence to suggest that this contamination occurred 
intentionally, it revealed society’s enormous vulnerability to adulterated water supplies.
Without a doubt, access to a three-dimensional AR display of the grid’s intercon-
nected components would make such an attack even easier to carry out and more 
effective in its results. Again, this sort of threat does not emerge from whole cloth; 
governments and utilities are (generally) already sensitive to the need to guard such 
information, and access to the systems that controls these networks, carefully. But 
with the increased transparency that AR brings comes a commensurate need to weigh 
carefully how much information is shared, and how well-secured the sensitive data is 
kept. If these high-value networks are kept as unsecured as some of the commercial 
IOT networks that have been cited for lax security (such as TrendNET24), the result 
could be far more catastrophic than mere embarrassment and civil fines.
REPURPOSING THE INFRASTRUCTURE OF AN AUGMENTED  
WORLD FOR CRIMINAL PURPOSES
One of the most exciting features of the emerging augmented world is the power it 
gives individuals to create and innovate. We are so awash in information, program-
ming skill, and manufacturing capability that we already have the ability to create a 
far more diverse range of applications than we currently have. All that is needed is 
time and imagination.
Again, that applies equally to those who innovate for criminal purposes. Police of-
ficer and long-time AR commentator Joseph Rampolla sees the combination of aug-
mented reality and flying drones as a real security threat in the near term (Fig. 8.4). In 
April 2014, for example, FBI agents arrested a Moroccan national who was allegedly 
plotting to use a consumer-grade drone to fly a homemade bomb into a Connecticut 
school.25 Drone aircraft are a growth market for visual AR. The “Fat Shark” line of 
goggles are specifically designed to give drone pilots a bird’s-eye view through the 
vehicle’s on-board cameras, creating the illusion that they are actually on board.26 
The popular “AR Parrot” drone creates a similar effect by beaming live HD video 
to the mobile device used to control it, and several applications (both official and 
otherwise) are available to display that feed directly into various AR-capable digital 
eyewear. This offers a more intuitive method of controlling the craft’s trajectory, but 
25Michael P. Mayko, FBI: Drone-like toy planes in bomb plot, ctpost, (April 7, 2014), http://m.ctpost.
com/local/article/FBI-Drone-like-toy-planes-in-bomb-plot-5383658.php (last visited on September 5, 
2014).
26FatShark RC Vision Systems home page, fatshark.com, available at http://www.fatshark.com/ (last 
visited on September 5, 2014).
24See Chapter 3.
23Marion Ceraso, 20 years after fatal outbreak, Milwaukee leads on water testing, WisconsinWatch.
org, (May 22, 2013), available at http://wisconsinwatch.org/2013/05/20-years-after-fatal-outbreak-
milwaukee-leads-on-water-testing/ (last visited on September 5, 2013).

221
﻿ Intentional Criminal Activity
at the same time increases their attractiveness as a means of delivering explosives. 
It does not take a great deal of imagination to draw parallels between AR-enabled 
weaponized drones and the warhead’s-eye view footage from Tomahawk cruise mis-
siles that so captivated the American public during the war to liberate Kuwait. The 
military puts video cameras in its missiles and drones to better avoid interception 
and confirm the results of air strikes; criminals will do likewise, for the same reason.
Another component of the increasingly augmented world is the autonomous 
automobile. Driverless cars are already being tested on American roads, and they 
have been approved for deployment in the United Kingdom beginning in 2015. An 
internal report authored by the Strategic Issues Group within the FBI’s Directorate 
of Intelligence and revealed to the public in July 2014 identified these as a “game-
changing” weapon for criminals. For one thing, driverless cars will essentially take 
the place of the “getaway driver.” The report notes that “bad actors will be able to 
conduct tasks that require use of both hands or taking one’s eyes off the road which 
would be impossible today.”27
Such vehicles could also be packed with explosives and weaponized as easily as 
airborne drones could be. Car bombings have already become a staple of terrorism 
and low-intensity warfare across the world. Automated vehicles – especially when 
their use becomes so normalized as to not raise eyebrows – offer the groups behind 
such attacks the option to launch target car-bomb attacks without the need to recruit 
suicide bombers. Some in the media have attacked the FBI’s predictions as alarmist, 
reactionary, and anti-progress.28 To the contrary, the history of automobiles’ use in 
FIGURE 8.4
Joseph Rampolla.
27Mark Harris, FBI warns driverless cars could be used as lethal weapons, theguardian, (July 16, 
2014), available at http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jul/16/google-fbi-driverless-cars-
leathal-weapons-autonomous (last visited on September 5, 2014).
28Tim Cushing, FBI Thinks Driverless Cars Could Be Criminals’ New Best Friends, techdirt, (July 17, 
2014), available at https://www.techdirt.com/articles/20140716/11432527899/fbi-thinks-driverless-
cars-could-be-criminals-new-best-friends.shtml (last visited on September 5, 2014).

222
CHAPTER 8  Criminal Law
crime and terrorism make these predictions so self-evident as to be inevitable. The 
only surprise is that they were not made sooner. Rather than focusing only on the 
positive applications of these and similar technologies, companies and law enforce-
ment alike should waste no time in devising means to deter and defeat their misuse.
CRIMINAL COLLABORATIONS THROUGH AR DARKNETS
Darknets all around us
In November 2002, a group of Microsoft researchers coined the term “darknet” to 
describe “a collection of networks and technologies used to share digital content.”29 
The term has since come to be used (in both capitalized and uncapitalized form) to 
refer to the underground Internet – the “walled-off online databases that are off-limits 
to search engines and indexing software robots.”30 In popular culture and mainstream 
media, this realm has been likened to “private, invitation-only cyberclubs or gated 
communities requiring an access code to enter,” as well as “the world of cybercrime, 
spammers, terrorists, and other underworld figures who use the Internet to avert the 
law.”31 Sensationalism aside, darknets are simply “closed-off social spaces – safe 
havens in both the virtual and the real worlds where there is little or no fear of detec-
tion.”32
The augmented medium, of course, offers a unique opportunity to create such 
safe havens that combine aspects of both the digital and the physical. Daniel Suarez 
best captured this idea in his novels Daemon and Freedom™. There, the primary an-
tagonist creates an encrypted virtual network simply called “the Darknet” as a means 
for his operatives to communicate with each other without being detected. Through 
digital eyewear, they share text and audio messages, recognize each other through 
virtual “call-out” name badges, see their assigned paths as a red line in the sky (very 
much like the “virtual cable” car navigation system described in Chapter 7), share 
programs with each other in the form of three-dimensional digital objects, and even 
create such objects by performing spell-like rituals inspired by the role-playing 
games favored by the network’s creator.
With or without such artistic flare, AR darknets are sure to crop up in the near fu-
ture – if they haven’t already – as an extension of the same clandestine criminal orga-
nizations that exist today. Indeed, they apparently already exist in the virtual world. 
Since at least 2008,33 the U.S. intelligence community has been concerned about 
terrorist groups collaborating in plain sight, as it were, as characters within such mas-
sively multiplayer online communities as Second Life and World of ­Warcraft. That 
was the same year that the U.S. Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity 
29J.D. Lasica, Darknet: Hollywood’s War against the Digital Generation 45 (2005) .
33Office of the Director of National Intelligence Data Mining Report, (February 15, 2008), available at 
http://www.fas.org/irp/dni/datamining.pdf (last visited on September 5, 2014.)
30Id.
31Id.
32Id.

223
﻿ Intentional Criminal Activity
(IARPA) launched its “Project Reynard” to uncover recruiting and training opera-
tions going unnoticed in these online gaming environments.34 The use of these online 
communities to recruit operatives was also a key plot point in Daniel Suarez’s books, 
as well as in the novel MMORPG by Dutch author Emile van Veen.35 When these 
online communities begin expanding into the physical world by way of AR – as they 
have already begun to do – encrypted digital data tied to specific physical locations 
will become potential means of secret communication by underground groups.
When collaboration becomes criminal
The potential for criminal liability in these communications begins with solicitation. 
Although we usually use this term in connection with the encouragement to engage 
in prostitution, it also applies more generally to any communication that encour-
ages another person to commit a felony or serious misdemeanor, with the intent that 
the person commit the crime. Such encouragement may take many forms, including 
words, writings, or combinations of the two. Mere talk about a crime is not enough; 
the defendant must specifically intend that the recipient commit the crime. Once the 
communication is made, however, the crime of solicitation is complete; it does not 
matter if the hearer actually acts on the encouragement.
If two or more people reach agreement between themselves to commit an unlaw-
ful act, that agreement can be punished by the law as a criminal conspiracy. The 
crime here is the mutual intent to carry out the plan, which does not necessarily 
need to be verbalized in order to be proven. The defendants’ action can be sufficient 
evidence of their agreement. In some jurisdictions, the act that the conspirators agree 
to commit need not even be a criminal one, but simply unlawful. Moreover, once 
the conspiracy is formed, members can be held liable not only for the agreed-upon 
action, but also any foreseeable criminal actions carried out in furtherance of the 
conspiracy. Most jurisdictions require that at least one conspirator take some overt 
action in furtherance of the conspiracy before liability will be imposed, but this is not 
a high threshold; virtually any action will do.
Actions taken in furtherance of a crime that fall short of carrying it out can still 
be punished as an attempt. To be held liable, the defendant must have specifically 
intended that the crime be committed and do something that constitutes a substantial 
step toward completing the crime.
As current criminal behavior migrate into the augmented medium, legal liability 
will follow. It is easy to picture a number of scenarios in which AR messaging could 
be considered solicitation, conspiracy, or attempt. Instigators could digitally mark a 
location with symbols, virtual objects, or instructions that other members of a gaming 
or Darknet community would recognize as an encouragement to commit a criminal 
act. As in a particular scene in Daniel Suarez’s books – in which several members of 
34Aaron Saenz, Al Qaeda in Azeroth? Terrorism Recruiting and Training in Virtual Worlds, Singularity 
Hub, (August 24, 2011), avaialbe at http://singularityhub.com/2011/08/24/al-qaeda-in-azeroth-terror-
ism-recruiting-and-training-in-virtual-worlds/ (last visited on September 5, 2014).
35Id.

224
CHAPTER 8  Criminal Law
the Darknet receive precise instructions from an omniscient voice ­speaking through 
their eyewear to walk here, turn there, hand this package to that person at this specific 
time, culminating in an untraceable but impeccably coordinated mass shooting – sepa-
rate instructions could be sent in sequence to various members of a Darknet commu-
nity that constitute foreseeable criminal acts in furtherance of a conspiracy, even if 
certain members of the conspiracy are not aware of the full plan.
Again, none of these scenarios are cut from whole cloth; analogous criminal-
ity occurs every day through video messaging, SMS, telephones, and even the U.S. 
Mail. But each upgrade in communications technology makes it that much easier to 
coordinate conspiracies with increasing robustness and detail. The ability to simulta-
neously and remotely augment the vision and hearing of multiple individuals will be 
the latest step in that progression.
Augmenting personal and property crimes
Law enforcement has long foreseen the threat of criminals making use of AR in the 
furtherance of their crimes. In 2003, Thomas J. Cowper of the New York State Police 
and Michael E. Buerger of Bowling Green State University authored a paper that was 
published by the FBI. Entitled Improving Our View of the World: Police and Aug-
mented Reality Technology,36 it included a substantial discussion of the types of AR 
crimes that law enforcement personnel of the future would encounter. “It is necessary 
to anticipate that the bad guys will have access to the technology fairly early and will 
work to devise both defensive measures and counterattack strategies,” the authors 
wrote. “Indeed,” they continued, “it may be wise to anticipate that the criminal ele-
ment may already be ahead of the police in these areas.”37
Cowper and Buerger’s primary concern was criminals’ use of AR to gain a tactical ad-
vantage over police officers in the field. “It is only a small leap of the imagination,” they 
wrote, “to envision the interior of a mob bar or restaurant being … outfitted to support 
a rudimentary AR environment.... enough to discern whether an informant is carrying a 
wire, or where an undercover officer has concealed a backup weapon.”38 They went on 
to mention such complementary technology as “cameras that spot liars,” “stolen [virtual] 
‘Friend/Foe’ signatures,” and “night time thermal imaging.” These are all capabilities that 
one could easily conceive of being added to existing or in-development digital eyewear.
Enhanced situational awareness through AR would also aid individuals in 
­carrying out various crimes, especially those against property. There are already an 
endless number of apps available that cull certain types of data from social media 
and other public databases. In 2010, the site Please Rob Me39 made a splash when 
37Id.
38Id.
36Thomas J. Cowper and Michael E. Buerger, Improving Our View of the World: Police and Augmented 
Reality Technology, (abstract), NCJRS- National Criminal Justice Reference Service, (February 
2003), available at https://www.ncjrs.gov/App/publications/abstract.aspx?ID=200341 (last visited on 
September 5, 2014).
39Raising awareness about over-sharing, Please Rob Me, available at http://pleaserobme.com/ (last 
visited on September 5, 2014).

225
﻿ Intentional Criminal Activity
it collected – for the purpose of raising awareness – posts by individuals indicating 
that they were not at home. It is not difficult to imagine an AR network dedicated to 
visualizing this same information over the locations in question, just to make it that 
much easier for the would-be burglar to find a place to rob. Around the same time, an 
AR industry blogger posited this scenario:
“[Y]our mother comes over to your house and tweets about your priceless col-
lection of Ming dynasty vases. Your home location is geotagged and out there for 
all to see along with details of your most valued possession. An enterprising thief 
using the latest version of BurglAR would be able to see high value items worth 
stealing in the local area.”40
Cowper and Buerger highlighted similar, albeit more violent, concerns:
When “through-the-wall” technology becomes available, it can be used to pin-
point the location of individuals in a private home (or a police station) for rescue, 
­kidnap, or assassination. It can identify key junctures to cripple electronics, tell 
when the on-duty data entry clerk has gone to the relief room on break, show 
the location of Evidence/Property rooms and their electronic monitors, isolate 
burglar alarms on private residences and send false signals to cover electronic 
intrusions….
The police are not the only, nor even the most likely targets: intrusive technology 
in the hands of the bad guys makes the citizenry far more vulnerable and in need 
of protection. Leaving timer lights on in the house, even with recorded music 
or conversation or barking dogs, is of little consequence to a burglar who can 
establish electronically that the house is not occupied. The thought of portable 
through-the-walls technology in the hands of a child kidnapper/murderer is ter-
rifying, as the Polly Klaas, Samantha van Dam and Elizabeth Smart cases vividly 
illustrate.41
Speaking from experience, these authors see the technologies of the augmented 
world as inevitable steps in the endless cycle of escalation and countermeasure be-
tween cops and robbers. As Augmented World Expo co-founder Tish Shute is fond of 
saying, augmented reality is a “superpower,” and it can be used for good or for evil.42 
Or, more likely, for both.
40Lester, The Case Against Augmented Reality, Augmented Planet, (submitted on January 27, 2010), 
available at http://www.augmentedplanet.com/2010/01/the-case-against-augmented-reality/ (last 
­visited on September 5, 2014). As of this writing, more than four and a half years later, this post re-
mains the blog’s most commented upon.
41Thomas J. Cowper and Michael E. Buerger, Improving Our View of the World: Police and Augmented 
Reality Technology, (abstract), NCJRS- National Criminal Justice Reference Service, (February 
2003), available at https://www.ncjrs.gov/App/publications/abstract.aspx?ID=200341 (last visited on 
September 5, 2014).
42Tish Shute, Augmented Humans in an Augmented World: Quantified Desire, slideshare, (June 14, 
2013), available at http://www.slideshare.net/TishShute/augmented-humansaugmentedworld (last 
­visited on September 5, 2014).

226
CHAPTER 8  Criminal Law
LAW ENFORCEMENT USAGE
AR by itself is simply a medium. Like any other medium or technology, how it is 
used will be up to the people using it. As Cowper and Buerger predicted, for every 
criminal exploitation of AR, there is likely to be a responsive counter-measure, or 
even an escalation, by law enforcement.43
ENHANCING SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
Cowper and Buerger foresaw situations in which police officers engaged in tacti-
cal law enforcement situations would rely on augmented reality data to gain the 
tactical upper hand over resisting suspects. “AR information can be transmitted 
wirelessly from a centralized computer network, accessed directly from a wearable 
computer carried by the individually equipped AR user, acquired from purposely 
embedded devices within a surrounding intelligent environment and acquired from 
an array of AR sensors scanning the immediate or visible location of the user. The 
information is then projected onto a see-through heads-up display, transmitted au-
dibly to a headset, or felt through a haptic interface like a glove.”44 In other words, 
officers would essentially become the “Robocop” character that inspired so many 
early innovators of AR (Fig. 8.5).
Developments since their report, particularly in the area of visual AR, have 
brought us very close to realizing this predicted future. In 2009, the San Jose police 
experimented with head-mounted cameras to monitor their interactions with civil-
ians. Officers activated the over-the-ear cameras every time they responded or made 
contact with a person. At the end of the officer’s shift, the recording was downloaded 
to a central server. The pilot project was launched in response to public criticism over 
incidents of police violence.
More recently, several law enforcement agencies have begun to test the use of 
Google Glass and other digital eyewear in the field. Most prominent among these is the 
New York City Police Department – the country’s largest police department – which 
began beta tests of Glass in February 2014,45 before they became publicly accessible. 
Reports said that the department had obtained a few of the devices and were evaluating 
43See also Joseph Rampolla, Top 5 Reasons Law Enforcement Cannot Ignore Augmented Realtiy, AR 
Dirt, (February 2, 2012), available at http://www.ardirt.com/general-news/top-5-reasons-law-enforce-
ment-cannot-ignore-augmented-reality.html (last visited on September 5, 2014.)
44Thomas J. Cowper and Michael E. Buerger, Improving Our View of the World: Police and Augmented 
Reality Technology, (abstract), NCJRS- National Criminal Justice Reference Service, (February 
2003), available at https://www.ncjrs.gov/App/publications/abstract.aspx?ID=200341 (last visited on 
September 5, 2014).
45Richard Byrne Reilly, New York Police Department is beta-testing Google Glass, VBnews, (February 
5, 2014), available at http://venturebeat.com/2014/02/05/nypd-google-glass/ (last visited on September 
5, 2014).

227
﻿ Law Enforcement Usage
their usefulness for officers on patrol.46 At that time, “[t]he chief information officer of 
the San Francisco police department, Susan Merritt, said that her department ha[d] yet 
to test the wearable Google computers. But she says the applications for law enforce-
ment are potentially huge.”47 Merritt cited facial recognition applications, instant ac-
cess to records, and reduction of paperwork as potential advantages.48 Members of the 
Secret Service are said to be “smitten”49 with Glass and have been spotted in the wild 
testing it out. Brazilian police officers, moreover, reportedly already employed “facial-
recognition camera glasses that can capture 400 facial images per second to store them 
in a central database of up to 13 million faces” during the 2014 World Cup.50
I have also spoken with Bill Switzer, head of CopTrax, a division of Stalker Radar 
in Georgia. CopTrax is making a name for itself as the first private company to offer 
a software solution to law enforcement officers based on Google Glass.
On Friday, September 13, 2013, the Byron Police Department in Georgia – a 
loyal Stalker Customer – captured video footage using Glass while running the Cop-
Trax software application for Android (Fig. 8.6). Byron PD uses the CopTrax video 
system in their cars but during the field trail the goal was to capture video using 
CopTrax from the vantage point of the officers eyes using the new Google Glass 
wearable computers. In order to avoid running down Glass’s battery, the CopTrax 
system doesn’t start recording until the officer activates his car siren. Byron was able 
to capture footage of an arrest, a traffic stop, using radar and lidar, and firing weapons 
FIGURE 8.5
The Robocop films depicted the advantages of enhanced situational awareness for officers 
through AR.
46Id.
47Id.
48Id.
49Aliya Sternstein, How Soon Before Obama’s Bodyguards Don Google Glass? Nextgov., (September 10,  
2013), available at http://www.nextgov.com/defense/2013/09/how-soon-obamas-bodyguards-don-
google-glass/70112/ (last visited on September 5, 2014).
50U.S. robots, Israeli drones to help make 2014 World Cup in Brazil one of safest sporting events 
ever, rt.com, (May 19, 2013), availablae at http://rt.com/news/brazil2014-us-military-robots-501/ (last 
visited September 5, 2014).

228
CHAPTER 8  Criminal Law
while wearing Glass – reportedly the first time an arrest had been captured through 
Glass by the arresting officer (but not, as discussed below, the first time anyone had 
used Glass to film an arrest).
CopTrax is not the only outfit interested in equipping officers with Glass. A com-
pany named Mutualink demonstrated an app in August 2013 that would allow of-
ficers to communicate in real-time via streaming video from the scene, as well as to 
receive and view key documents, including things like building schematics, medical 
records of victims, live feeds of security cameras in the area and more.
The United States military – whose technological advances often trickle down to 
law enforcement agencies – has likewise been at work for years developing digital 
eyewear for soldiers. The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, or DARPA, 
has developed a prototype tactical augmented reality system called the ­Urban Leader 
Tactical Response, Awareness and Visualization, or ULTRA-Vis.51 (Fig. 8.7) This 
“system overlays full-color graphical iconography onto the local scene … ­[using an] 
integrated a light-weight, low-power holographic see-through display with a vision-
enabled position and orientation tracking system.”52 The device is meant to enhance 
situational awareness by “visualiz[ing[ the location of other forces, vehicles, hazards 
and aircraft in the local environment even when these are not visible to the Soldier. In 
FIGURE 8.6
The CopTrax system on Glass.
51ARPA, “URBAN LEADER TACTICAL RESPONSE, AWARENESS & VISUALIZATION  
(ULTRA-VIS),” available at http://www.darpa.mil/Our_Work/I2O/Programs/Urban_Leader_­Tactical_
Response,_Awareness,___Visualization_%28ULTRA-VIS%29.aspx (last visited September 12, 2014).
52Id.

229
﻿ Law Enforcement Usage
addition, the system can be used to communicate to the Soldier a variety of tactically 
significant (local) information including imagery, navigation routes, and alerts.”53
A similar device, called the X6, is being developed for the Defense Department by 
San Francisco-based Osterhout Design Group.54 During a June 2014 demonstration 
of the device, a user looked at a two-dimensional map, “and suddenly structures ap-
peared in three dimensions related to objects of interest.”55 Here again, facial recogni-
tion capability is high on the government customer’s priority list, and an Australian 
company called Imagus has developed a program for the X6 that provides it. 56 The 
Defense Department has already ordered 500 units of the device.57 Likewise, “United  
Kingdom-based BAE systems built the Q-Warrior high-tech headset to live-stream 
more to soldiers than ever before, and provides a tremendous battlefield advantage by 
showing soldiers multi-dimensional, full-color displays of battle zones outside their 
fields of ­vision.”58 Similar applications for both first responders and the military are 
summarized in Kipper and Rampolla’s book.59
Discussing technological developments since the publication of his book, Ram-
polla shared with me his eagerness to see law enforcement make use of instant three-
dimensional mapping capabilities such as those offered by the Structure Sensor60 and 
Google’s Project Tango.61 In particular, Rampolla envisions this functionality added 
to an aerial drone, allowing officers to map out in real time “the position of active 
shooters” during hostile encounters. A forerunner of such technology received an 
53d.
54Patrick Tucker, The Military is about to Get New Spay Glasses, Defense One, (June 25, 2014), avail-
able at http://www.defenseone.com/technology/2014/06/military-about-get-new-spy-glasses/87292/ (last 
visited on September 5, 2014).
55Id.
56Id.
57Id.
58Giuseppi Marci, The military’s new Google Glass streams TONS of futuristic battle date, The Daily 
Caller, (March 11, 2014), available at http://dailycaller.com/2014/03/11/the-militarys-new-google-
glass-streams-tons-of-futuristic-battle-data/ (last visited on September 5, 2014).
59PP.100–03.
FIGURE 8.7
DARPA’s ULTRA-Vis system.
60Structure home webpage, available at http://structure.io/ (last visited on September 5, 2014).
61Project Tango home webpage, available at https://www.google.com/atap/projecttango/#project (last 
visited on September 5, 2014).

230
CHAPTER 8  Criminal Law
“Auggie Award” at the 2011 Augmented Reality Event62 in Santa Clara, California. 
Churchill Navigation of Boulder, Colorado won the award for ARS (Fig.  8.8), a 
helicopter-mounted system that gives in-flight officers a heads-up overlay of street 
names and other navigational data over their view of the ground during a chase, 
­giving the effect of an immersive version of Google Maps.
HARVESTING DIGITAL INFORMATION FOR CRIME  
INVESTIGATION AND PREVENTION
Rampolla also foresees augmented world technologies being used to harvest data in 
the course of investigating and preventing crimes. As the foregoing discussion high-
lighted, the law enforcement and military agencies who have already begun work 
on AR eyewear have consistently identified facial recognition technology as a top 
priority.
Cowper and Buerger described its utility:
A more robust example of AR technology is real-time facial recognition. A user 
wearing an AR system containing a dataset of business and personal contacts (or 
a police officer with access to a known-criminal database) that included facial 
recognition features would always know the names and associated information 
of people in his or her presence that are matched within that database. Upon ap-
proaching any person the AR system could automatically capture and compare 
their facial or biometric features and if found, superimpose a heads-up textual 
annotation of the person’s name and available statistics in the user’s field of view, 
or provide an auditory announcement into an earphone.
FIGURE 8.8
ARS by Churchill Navigation.
62The former name of what is now the Augmented World Expo.

231
﻿ Law Enforcement Usage
Rampolla expects law enforcement agencies equipped with such devices to ­regularly 
harvest such data into databases for later comparison to suspects, much like agencies 
have begun to do with license plates in recent years.
Cowper and Buerger predicted a number of applications for AR in crime scene  
investigation, including “[t]he use of AR video, audio and sensing devices used to  
visualize blood patterns, blood stains and other sensor-detectable forensic data available 
at crime scenes.” Similarly, they said, “[f]orensic pathology could benefit from various 
advanced medical imaging techniques to visualize traumatic penetrating wounds before 
physical autopsy.” Long time AR developer Robert Rice likewise authored an entire 
chapter on “Augmented Reality Tools for Enhanced Forensic Simulation and Crime 
Scene Analysis” in the 2012 book Working Through Synthetic Worlds.63 “Law enforce-
ment and investigations officers,” he wrote, “will have the ability to mark and highlight 
evidence with virtual markers and metadata, as well as run real-time tests and analysis 
through the use of dynamic tools and immediate access to key databases and other in-
formation sources.”64
Such capabilities have since materialized. In February 2012, it was revealed that 
“[r]esearchers at Delft University of Technology in the Netherlands have created AR 
goggles that let investigators create 3D videos of crime scenes, tag evidence and then 
virtually re-visit the scene.”65 “With this tech, you’d be free to move and look around 
while you manipulate the electronic display with a pair of gloves. The left hand 
brings up a set of menus and tools, while the right hand acts as a pointer. By pointing 
to a blood splatter or bullet holes (for example), you’d be able to tag them as points 
of interest in a 3D-model of the crime scene.”66 “If the person wearing the glasses 
requires assistance, they can contact someone back in the lab who can watch their 
video stream, speak to the wearer through a headset and place markers in the scene 
using a mouse and keyboard. This would also allow a police officer to take the first 
look around a crime scene.”67
Visualization in AR would be useful for more than just cataloguing physical evi-
dence at a crime scene. Tweetaround, an AR app introduced in 2010, ­visualized tweets 
according to the geolocation from which they were posted. Rampolla ­observes that 
65Mashable Video, Augmented Reality Goggles Virtually Recreate Crime Scenes [VIDEO], Mashable, 
(February 1, 2012), available at http://mashable.com/2012/02/01/augmented-reality-goggles-crime/ at 
201 (last visited on September 5, 2012).
66Kevin Lee, Coming Soon: Augmented Reality Goggles for Crime Scene Investigations, TechHive, 
(Feb. 1, 2012), available at http://www.techhive.com/article/249143/coming_soon_augmented_real-
ity_goggles_for_crime_scene_investigations.html (last visited on Sept. 5, 2014).
67Jacob Aron, AR googles make crime scene investigation a desk job, NewScientist, (Jan. 31, 2012, 
available 
at 
http://www.newscientist.com/article/mg21328495.700-ar-goggles-make-crime-scene-
investigation-a-desk-job.html#.U9mkhvldV8E (last visited on Sept. 5, 2014).
63Google Books description of Working Through Synthetic Worlds by Morrison, Kisiel, and Smith, 
available at http://books.google.com/books?id=EebmDgC2bb0C&dq=augmented+reality+crime+sce
ne&source=gbs_navlinks_s (last visited on September 5, 2014).
64Id.

232
CHAPTER 8  Criminal Law
expanding and refining that functionality could be incredibly useful for investigators 
trying to reconstruct what observers saw at a particular time and place.
Police have even proposed crowd-sourcing such investigation data. In January 
2014, a San Jose, California city councilman proposed a system that “would allow 
property owners voluntarily to register their security cameras for a new San Jose Police  
Department database. Officers then would be able to access the footage quickly after 
a nearby crime has occurred.”68 To the cash-strapped police department, such a da-
tabase would save the expense of collecting security footage on an ad hoc, door-to-
door basis in response to each crime reported. Predictably, civil rights groups raised 
the alarm, particularly because this was the same city in which police had also begun 
wearing video cameras on their persons to prevent abuses. But San Jose was not the 
first to create such a public-private surveillance collaboration. Cities such as Phila-
delphia and Chicago and small towns such as Los Gatos, California have launched 
similar initiatives, with significant results. The Philadelphia Police Department re-
ports that, over the course of two years, its SafeCam program resulted in over 200 
arrests.69 With advanced AR eyewear, officers could access and view such remotely-
stored footage while standing in the actual location that was filmed (as was depicted 
in the 2013 remake of Robocop).
FORCE MULTIPLICATION WITH AUTONOMOUS DRONES
Yet another development presaged by the original Robocop is the use of unmanned 
ground vehicles (i.e., robots) to amplify the force projection capabilities of human 
officers. By the time the movie was remade, this was already reality. For example, 
the “Packbots” manufactured by iRobot and used by American soldiers in Iraq 
and Afghanistan were employed by Brazilian police during the 2014 World Cup.70 
Various groups have experimented with adding AR visualization capabilities to 
robots like these to “enable better mission performance and better skill transfer 
from platform to platform,”71 and such devices represent an integral component of 
a future augmented world.
68Mike Rosenberg, San Jose police could tap into volunteer residents’ private security cameras un-
der new proposal, San Jose Mercury News, available at http://www.mercurynews.com/crime-courts/
ci_24979753/san-jose-police-would-tap-into-residents-private (last visited on Sept. 5, 2014).
69Alan Reiter, City Police Create Personal Surveillance Database, UBM’s Future Cities, (Dec. 27, 
2013), available at http://www.ubmfuturecities.com/author.asp?section_id=378&doc_id=526350 (last 
visited on Sept. 5, 2014).
70Corinna Underwood, Packbot: Serving the Military and World Cup Football, TechEmergence, (Feb. 
19, 2014), available at http://techemergence.com/packbot-serving-the-military-and-world-cup-foot-
ball/ (last visited on Sept. 5, 2014).
71R. Darin Ellis Ph.D., Warfighter-Focused UGV System Design: Augmented Reality-Enhanced Hu-
man-Robot Interaction for UGV Operations, Wayne State University—College of Engineering, avail-
able at http://engineering.wayne.edu/ise/research/interaction.php (last visited on Sept. 5, 2014).

233
﻿ Turning the Cameras Backwards
South African company Desert Wolf has taken the concept one step further 
with “the Skunk,” the heavy-duty, semi-autonomous octocopter drone it debuted in 
June 2014.72 Designed for riot control, the drone “can unleash pepper spray, plastic 
bullets, paintballs, strobe lights and ‘blinding’ lasers” – at a potential combined rate 
of 80 projectiles per second – as well as various audio messages.73 “The Skunk is also 
equipped with FLIR thermal infrared and HD color cameras to capture the identity of 
those in a crowd to be controlled.”74 According to the manufacturer, dozens of units 
have already been ordered by police departments and other customers.75
TURNING THE CAMERAS BACKWARDS: WEARABLES  
AS A MEANS TO MONITOR LAW ENFORCEMENT
On July 4, 2013, New Jersey Google Glass Explorer Chris Barrett wore his device 
through what proved to be fairly raucous Independence Day celebrations. In the 
midst of it, he ended up capturing on video what was reported to be the first arrest 
filmed through Glass (Fig. 8.9).76 “I think if I had a bigger camera there, the kid 
would probably have punched me,” Barrett said. “But I was able to capture the ac-
tion with Glass and I didn’t have to hold up a cell phone and press record.”77 Perhaps 
FIGURE 8.9
The arrest that Chris Barrett captured #throughglass.
76John Koetsier, “I filmed the first fight and arrest through Google Glass” (VB news, (July 5, 2013), 
available 
at 
http://venturebeat.com/2013/07/05/i-filmed-the-first-fight-and-arrest-through-google-
glass/ (last visited on Sept. 15, 2014).
77Id.
72Sean Gallagher, Flying RoboCop is a “riot control” octocopter with guns and lasers, arstechnica, 
(June 19, 2014), available at http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2014/06/flying-robocop-is-a-riot-
control-octocopter-with-guns-and-lasers/ (last visited on Sept. 5, 2014).
73Id.
74Id.
75Id.

234
CHAPTER 8  Criminal Law
the more important question is what the arresting officer would have done if he had 
noticed Barrett.
Although I am not aware of any reason to suspect any irregularities with this arrest, 
videos taken with mobile and wearable devices have exposed all manner of officer 
excesses and mistakes. In July 2013, the San Francisco Fire Department rushed to the 
aid of those who survived an Asiana Airlines plane crash at the city’s airport. Those fire 
fighters were wearing helmet cameras. “The footage recorded by Battalion Chief Mark 
Johnson’s helmet camera shows a Fire Department truck running over 16-year-old  
Ye Meng Yuan while she was lying on the tarmac covered with fire-retardant  
foam.”78 The incident was then reported by journalists, leading to an internal investi-
gation. Soon thereafter, Chief Joanne Hayes-White announced a “clarification” that a 
pre-existing ban on video cameras applied to devices worn by fire fighters. The Chief 
cited medical privacy concerns, but the timing smacked of damage control.
As the world becomes increasingly augmented, video footage of every sort – 
including of police officers acting in the line of duty – will proliferate. If history is 
any guide, law enforcement and prosecutors will continue to respond to such surveil-
lance by arresting and prosecuting those who record them. It currently seems that ev-
ery week brings another headline about yet another citizen arrested and charged with 
wiretapping or eavesdropping (or sued civilly for invasion of privacy) for recording 
police officers acting in the line of duty. Indeed, in 2011, a 41-year-old mechanic in 
Illinois faced life in prison merely for recording officers issuing a citation.
In recent years, social media has provided a new and more effective way to get 
those videos out to the public. Just type in the search term “police brutality” into 
YouTube and see how many results pop up. This trend will only accelerate as the 
footage is recorded by more types of wearable devices, including in three dimen-
sions, and broadcast through augmented means. Citizens and officers across the 
country need to know once and for all, therefore, whether recording cops is lawful.
As an attorney, I have advocated in court that such recording is protected by the 
First Amendment. That said, before you run out and click the “record” button, keep 
in mind that not all courts (and certainly not all police officers) agree. But almost 
every court to consider the issue has reached the same conclusion. Here’s why.
THE RIGHT TO HOLD PUBLIC OFFICIALS ACCOUNTABLE 
IS ENSHRINED IN THE FIRST AMENDMENT AND OUR SYSTEM 
OF ORDERED LIBERTY
Our democratic system of ordered liberty cannot tolerate a rule of law that permits 
public officials to keep “private” – and, hence, free from public scrutiny – the man-
ner in which they choose to enforce the law against private citizens. That funda-
mental principle is part and parcel of the right of open debate on issues of public 
importance enshrined in the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. In 1980, 
78AP, “After airliner crash, SF chief bans helmet cams,” Aug. 18, 2013, available at http://bigstory.
ap.org/article/after-airliner-crash-sf-chief-bans-helmet-cams

235
﻿ Turning the Cameras Backwards
Supreme Court Justice William J. Brennan wrote: “the First Amendment embod-
ies more than a commitment to free expression and communicative interchange for 
their own sakes; it has a structural role to play in securing and fostering our repub-
lican system of self-government.”79 The Court has similarly held that “[t]here is an 
undoubted right to gather news from any source by means within the law”80 and 
“news gathering is not without its First Amendment protections,. .. for without some 
protection for seeking out the news, freedom of press could be eviscerated.”81 This 
First Amendment right to gather “news” applies equally to all citizens, not just the 
professional press.
When public officials restrict access to information about their official activities, 
they are “selectively control[ling] information rightfully belonging to the people. 
Selective information is misinformation. The Framers of the First Amendment ‘did 
not trust any government to separate the true from the false for us.’ They protected the 
people against secret government.”82 “Secret government” – law enforcement outside 
the scope of public scrutiny – is precisely what allowing cops to suppress video of 
themselves would permit.
THE FIRST AMENDMENT SEVERELY LIMITS PUBLIC OFFICIALS’ 
ABILITY TO ASSERT PERSONAL PRIVACY IN THEIR WORK-RELATED 
SPEECH
Speech by public officials carries few, if any, of the personal rights and privileges as-
sociated with private speech. In 2006, the U.S. Supreme Court reiterated “that when 
public employees make statements pursuant to their official duties, the employees 
are not speaking as citizens for First Amendment purposes.”83 “Restricting speech 
that owes its existence to a public employee’s professional responsibilities does 
not infringe any liberties the employee might have enjoyed as a private citizen.” 84 
Likewise, the landmark case of New York Times Co v Sullivan,85 established that a 
public official could not recover for “a defamatory falsehood relating to his official 
conduct unless he proves that the statement was made with ‘actual malice,’ a nearly 
insurmountable burden of proof. This holding flowed from our society’s “profound 
national commitment to the principle that debate on public issues should be uninhib-
ited, robust, and wide-open.”
Accordingly, several courts have held that recording of police officers and other 
public officials in the course of carrying out their duties is directly protected by the 
79Richmond Newspapers v Va, 448 US 555, 586-88 (1980) (Brennan, J concurring)
80Houchins v KQED, Inc, 438 US 1, 11 (1978) (citations omitted)
81Branzburg v Hayes, 408 US 665, 681, 707 (1972)
82Detroit Free Press v Ashcroft, 303 F3d 681; 683 (CA6, 2002) (quoting Kleindienst v Mandel, 408 US 
753, 773 (1972)).
83Garcetti v Carbalos, 547 US 410, 421 (2006).
84Id.
85376 US 254, 279-280 (1964)

236
CHAPTER 8  Criminal Law
First Amendment.86 These federal constitutional principles severely curtail, as a mat-
ter of law, the conceivable range of privacy interests that on-duty officers could assert.
POLICE OFFICERS ARE PARTICULARLY SUBJECT  
TO PUBLIC SCRUTINY
Police officers are the epitome of a public servant, whose official words and deeds 
are subjects of legitimate public scrutiny. As recently as June 2010, the United States 
Supreme Court held that “a law enforcement officer. .. should have known that his 
actions were likely to come under legal scrutiny, and that this might entail an analysis 
of his on-the-job communications.”87
Courts around the country universally echo this reasoning. As the Massachusetts 
Supreme Court explained:
Law enforcement officials ... necessarily exercise State power in the performance 
of their duties. All police officers are empowered to further the preservation of 
law and order in the community, including the investigation of wrongdoing and 
the arrest of suspected criminals. Even patrol-level police officers are vested with 
substantial responsibility for the safety and welfare of the citizenry in areas im-
pinging most directly and intimately on daily living: the home, the place of work 
and of recreation, the sidewalks and streets. Further, although a patrol officer 
such as the plaintiff is “low on the totem pole” and does not set policy for the de-
partment, abuse of the office can result in significant deprivation of constitutional 
rights and personal freedoms, not to mention bodily injury and financial loss. All 
police officers have the ability and authority to exercise force. We conclude, in line 
with the vast majority of other jurisdictions, that the abuse of a patrolman’s office 
can have great potentiality for social harm; hence, public discussion and public 
criticism directed towards the performance of that office cannot constitutionally 
be inhibited by threat of prosecution under State libel laws.88
Likewise, the Montana Supreme Court wrote that “the position of great public 
trust which law enforcement officers occupy [as compared to other public officials]. 
Specifically, the nature of the office [job] mandates that the office holder [officer] 
be properly subject to public scrutiny in the performance of his duties, and the pub-
lic has the right to be informed of the actions and conduct of such office holders 
86See, eg, Smith v City of Cumming, 212 F3d 1332, 1333 (CA11, 2000) (“The First Amendment pro-
tects the right to gather information about what public officials do on public property, and specifically, 
a right to record matters of public interest”); Alvarado v KOB-TV, LLC, 493 F3d 1210, 1219-20 (CA10, 
2007) (dismissing privacy lawsuit by undercover police against videographer on First Amendment 
grounds); Gilles v Davis, 427 F3d 197, 212 (CA3, 2005) (“videotaping or photographing the police in 
the performance of their duties on public property may be a [First Amendment] protected activity”); 
Fordyce v. City of Seattle, 55 F3d 436, 439 (CA9, 1995) (recognizing a “First Amendment right to film 
matters of public interest”); Blackston v Alabama, 30 F3d 117, 120 (CA11, 1994) (First Amendment 
protects right to film public meetings).
87City of Ontario v Quon, 130 S Ct 2619, 2631 (2010).
88Rotkiewicz v Sadowsky, 730 NE2d 282, 288 (Mass, 2000) (emphasis added);

237
﻿ Turning the Cameras Backwards
[officers].”89 Consequently, law enforcement personnel of every rank and function 
are public figures for First Amendment purposes, and – as illustrated below – no 
expectation of privacy in their official law enforcement actions.
Virtually all courts to address the issue have held that police officers 
cannot have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the performance 
of their public law enforcement duties
Courts applying the U.S. Constitution and the laws of Washington, New Jersey, 
Missouri, and Pennsylvania (informed and limited by the above-mentioned First 
Amendment principles) have held that police officers performing their law enforce-
ment duties cannot objectively expect their actions to be private and hence free from 
unauthorized recording.
One of the earliest cases on point was State v Flora,90 decided in 1992 by the 
Washington Court of Appeals. There, a private citizen recorded his own arrest “be-
cause he feared the deputies would assault him and use racial slurs as they had done 
in the past.” He was convicted of criminal eavesdropping. In reversing the conviction, 
the Washington court noted a lack of authority allowing “public officers [to assert] 
a privacy interest in statements uttered in the course of performing their official and 
public duties,” and held that “the police officers in this case could not reasonably have  
considered their words private.” In Flora and its progeny, “Washington courts  
have refused to transform the privacy act into a sword available for use against indi-
viduals by public officers acting in their official capacity.”91
Across the country, “[c]ourts have held that police officers do not have a reason-
able expectation of privacy when they are interacting with suspects.”92 Such expecta-
tions are objectively unreasonable, according to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 
Eight Circuit, even where officers subjectively believe their words to be private:
Clearly the officers’ subjective expectations [were] that their communication 
would not be intercepted. . . . The objective reasonableness of the subjective expec-
tations of the officers, however, is another matter. The undisputed facts show that 
the tape-recorded incident took place in a public jail and between police officers 
89Bozeman Daily Chronicle v City of Bozeman Police Dep’t, 859 P2d 435, 440 (Mont, 1993)
9068 Wn App 802; 845 P2d 1355 (Wash Ct App, 1992)
91Johnson v Hawe, 388 F3d 676, 682 (CA9, 2004) (internal quotation omitted) (upholding a §1983 
action against a police chief who arrested a citizen for videotaping the chief “in the performance of his 
public duties”).
92Hornberger v. ABC, 799 A2d 566, 594 (N.J. Super. 2002) (dismissing eavesdropping charges against 
television station that used hidden cameras to record police searching a car); see also Hart v City 
of Jersey City, 308 NJ Super 487, 493; 706 A2d 256 (NJ App Div, 1998) (“police officers, because 
they occupy positions of public trust and exercise special powers, have a diminished expectation of 
privacy”); Commonwealth v Henlen, 522 Pa 514; 564 A2d 905 (Penn, 1989) (finding no reasonable 
expectation of privacy for police officer who was recorded interrogating a prison guard in closed 
room); Rawlins v Hutchinson Pub Co, 543 P.2d 988, 993 (Kan, 1975) (“a public official, a fortiori, has 
no right of privacy as to the manner in which he conducts himself in office. Such facts are ‘public facts’ 
and not ‘private facts.’ Hence, a truthful account of charges of misconduct in office cannot form the 
basis of an action for invasion of privacy.”)

238
CHAPTER 8  Criminal Law
and a prisoner. These are the only material facts necessary to prove, as a matter 
of law, that it was not objectively reasonable for the officers to expect that their 
conversations would not be intercepted.93
Because society entrusts police officers with unique license to deprive others of 
liberty, the manner in which they use those powers vis-à-vis private citizens is inher-
ently a subject for public scrutiny, and not the officer’s own private concern.
More recent legal developments have continued this trend. In 2011, the U.S. 
Court of Appeals for the First Circuit ruled that “a citizen’s right to film government 
officials ... in the discharge of their duties in a public space is a basic, vital, and well-
established liberty safeguarded by the First Amendment.”94 In January 2012, the U.S. 
Justice Department filed a brief in the U.S. District Court for the District of Maryland 
expressly supporting a citizen’s right to film police in public. According to the DOJ:
This litigation presents constitutional questions of great moment in this digital 
age: whether private citizens have a First Amendment right to record police of-
ficers in the public discharge of their duties, and whether officers violate citizens’ 
Fourth and Fourteenth Amendment rights when they seize and destroy such re-
cordings without a warrant or due process. The United States urges this Court to 
answer both of those questions in the affirmative. The right to record police offi-
cers while performing duties in a public place, as well as the right to be protected 
from the warrantless seizure and destruction of those recordings, are not only 
required by the Constitution. They are consistent with our fundamental notions of 
liberty, promote the accountability of our governmental officers, and instill public 
confidence in the police officers who serve us daily.
Later the same year, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit enjoined 
enforcement of Illinois’ eavesdropping law. In a 2-1 decision, the court ruled that 
the law, which prohibits people from making audio recordings of police officers in 
public, “likely violates” the First Amendment.
MASSACHUSETTS SHOWS WHAT HAPPENS IF FIRST AMENDMENT 
RIGHTS ARE NOT PROTECTED
In the widely criticized 2001 decision Commonwealth v Hyde,95 a motorist was 
convicted of eavesdropping for recording his traffic stop by police. A divided Mas-
sachusetts Supreme Court upheld the conviction. The court sidestepped Flora’s 
rejection of privacy protection for police acting their official capacities by noting 
that Massachusetts’ eavesdropping statute – unlike those in most other states – 
outlawed all unauthorized recording, whether or not the recorded persons had a 
reasonable expectation of privacy.
Two of the six justices dissented, lamenting that, had the Rodney King beating 
occurred in Massachusetts, George “Holliday would have been exposed to criminal 
93Angel v Williams, 12 F3d 786, 790 (CA8, 1993) (applying Missouri law).
94Glik v. Cunniffe, 655 F. 3d 78 (1st Cir. 2011)
95434 Mass 594; 750 NE2d 963 (Mass, 2001)

239
﻿ Turning the Cameras Backwards
indictment rather than lauded for exposing an injustice.” The majority did not dis-
agree, but was nevertheless unmoved. It relied on the plain text of the statute “in 
favor of speculation as to how an imaginary scenario might have played out, had 
the Rodney King episode occurred in Massachusetts.” Massachusetts Chief Justice  
Marshall saw this development as a grave threat to our Republic:
Citizens have a particularly important role to play when the official conduct at 
issue is that of the police. Their role cannot be performed if citizens must fear 
criminal reprisals when they seek to hold government officials accountable by 
recording – secretly recording on occasion – an interaction between a citizen and 
a police officer.
This view has been vindicated by virtually every other court to consider a similar 
dispute.
REPRISALS BY POLICE AGAINST THE CITIZENS WHO RECORD  
THEM ARE INEVITABLE WITHOUT CLEAR JUDICIAL GUIDANCE
The instinct to suppress video recordings of their misdeeds is not unique to the law 
enforcement officers of any particular jurisdiction. And in light of the ever-increasing  
ubiquity of audiovisual recording technology in modern society, officers and other 
public officials will have more opportunities to initiate such reprisals. In 2010, 
25-year-old motorcyclist Anthony Graber used a helmet-mounted camera to record 
his traffic stop by a plain-clothes officer in Maryland. After posting the clip to the 
internet site YouTube, police raided Graber’s home, confiscated his computer and 
camera, and charged him with wiretapping – a felony carrying a possible sentence of 
16 years’ imprisonment (Fig. 8.10).
The incident sparked a torrent of news coverage and editorials decrying the 
charges. The same publications also note the disturbing increase in such arrests in re-
FIGURE 8.10
The wearable video recorded by Anthony Graber.

240
CHAPTER 8  Criminal Law
cent years.96 Notably, those charged with interpreting the law in these States continue 
to reject such charges. On July 7, 2010, the Maryland Attorney General responded to 
the Graber incident by endorsing the conclusion that “a police stop of an individual 
necessarily is not a ‘private conversation.’97 Following Flora and similar cases – and 
distinguishing Massachusetts’ Hyde decision – the Attorney General opined that a 
reasonable expectation of privacy is “an unlikely conclusion as to the majority of en-
counters between police and citizens, particularly when they occur in a public place 
and involve the exercise of police powers.”
In a September 27, 2010 opinion, Judge Emory A. Plitt agreed and dismissed 
the eavesdropping charge against Graber, holding that, “[i]n this rapid information 
technology era in which we live, it is hard to imagine that either an offender or an 
officer would have any reasonable expectation of privacy with regard to what is said 
between them in a traffic stop on a public highway.” The thoroughly researched opin-
ion concludes with the following reflection:
Those of us who are public officials and are entrusted with the power of the state 
are ultimately accountable to the public. When we exercise that power in public 
fora, we should not expect our actions to be shielded from public observation. 
“Sed quis custodiet ipsos cutodes” i.e., “Who will guard the guards themselves?”
Many courts, however, have yet to pass on the issue. Therefore, police and pros-
ecutors in those jurisdictions remain free to interpret the law as they see fit. “Even 
if these cases do not hold up in court, the police can do a lot of damage just by 
threatening to arrest and prosecute people. . . . Most people are not so game for a fight 
with the police. They just stop filming. These are the cases no one finds out about, in 
which there is no arrest or prosecution, but the public’s freedoms have nevertheless 
been eroded.”98 By contrast, thanks to the clear guidance of the Flora decision, police 
­officers in Washington State know unequivocally that the conversations they have 
with citizens in their official capacities are not private.99
96(USA Today, July 17, 2010) (“This is an abuse of prosecutorial authority and a misinterpretation of 
state law. But it’s typical of the attitude of too many prosecutors and police toward people who record 
their encounters with law enforcement”); (ABC News, July 20, 2010) (“Arrests such as Graber’s are 
becoming more common along with the proliferation of portable video cameras and cell-phone record-
ers”); (Boston Globe, Feb. 3. 2010) (“in Massachusetts and other states, the arrests of street videog-
raphers, whether they use cellphones or other video technology, offers a dramatic illustration of the 
collision between new technology and policing practices”).
97Letter from Robert McDonald of the State of Maryland Office of the Attorney General to Honor-
able Samuel Rosenberg, (July 7, 2010), available at http://www.thenewspaper.com/rlc/docs/2010/md-
youtube.pdf (last visited on Sept. 5, 2014).
98(Time, Aug. 4, 2010).
99See, e.g., Johnson, supra (“Because it was clearly established under Washington law at the time of the 
arrest that recording a police officer in the performance of his public duties was not a violation of the 
Privacy Act and it was unreasonable for Chief Nelson to believe otherwise, we hold that the Chief is 
not entitled to qualified immunity”); Barela v City of Woodland, 358 Fed Appx 857, 859 (CA9, 2009) 
(same, following Johnson and Flora).

241
﻿ Turning the Cameras Backwards
CITIZEN VIDEO RECORDINGS ARE EFFECTIVE IN CURBING UNLAWFUL 
CONDUCT BY POLICE
Audiovisual recording empowers citizens to document abuses of power by law en-
forcement officers that would otherwise never be held accountable. Data collected by 
the United States government suggests that most police officers will not report even 
serious misconduct by a fellow officer. The entire nation, of course, is familiar with 
the video of Rodney King’s March 3, 1991 beating by Los Angeles police, which 
George Holliday, a private citizen, recorded with his camcorder. Without Holliday’s 
recording, however, it is probable that the officers involved would not have been con-
victed in federal court, and the Christopher Commission, which revealed widespread 
corruption in the Los Angeles Police Department, would (by the Commission’s own 
admission) never have been formed. Cell phone videos taken by onlookers were 
the key evidence against the San Francisco officer convicted of manslaughter in the 
January 1, 2009 fatal shooting of Oscar Grant.
Video evidence has been no less useful in holding law enforcement officers ac-
countable in my home state of Michigan. In November 2009, a Lansing police officer 
was disciplined after video evidence emerged showing him tasering a handcuffed and 
subdued suspect. In April 2005, “videotape evidence played a key role in convincing 
prosecutors to charge a Michigan State Police trooper with second-degree murder 
in the. .. shooting of a homeless man”100 in Detroit. Similar examples abound from 
across the country and the globe.
This is a public service that benefits both society and police departments. Ad-
vocacy groups have recognized the power of a camera-armed citizenry. In 2006, 
the ACLU responded to repeated accusations of police misconduct in St. Louis by 
distributing free video cameras to local residents, for the purpose of documenting 
any such incidents. Police departments themselves have acknowledged the social 
utility of such precautions. St. Louis’ police chief responded to the ACLU’s plan by 
saying, “It’s legal and there’s nothing wrong with it.” As noted above, in 2009, San 
Jose police adopted a similar approach in response to incidents of police violence.
Without question, society as a whole around the country is moving toward more 
video recording of police officers acting in the line of duty, not less – and our democ-
racy is healthier for it. Shielding public servants acting in official capacities from em-
barrassing public scrutiny simply is not worth the price of eroding our civil liberties.
100Ben Schmitt, Acquitted In Killing, Trapper Files a Lawsuit, Convertino and Associates webpage, 
(March 15, 2006), available at http://convertino.net/id21.html (last visited on September 5, 2014).

243
CHAPTER
Augmented Reality Law, Privacy, and Ethics﻿
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Civil rights for the disabled
• How AR can help the disabled
• AR as a civil right
INTRODUCTION
With all the wonder and anticipation that surrounds augmented reality, it is easy 
to forget that there are already millions of people whose experience of reality 
through their five senses has already been involuntarily altered. More than 50 million 
Americans – about 18% of our population – have some form of disability. Whether 
their condition impairs one or more of their five senses, their freedom of movement, 
or their cognitive abilities, these individuals do not enjoy the same capacity to experi-
ence reality that others have.
When discussing this fact in the context of AR, it is tempting to make the 
observation – as I have mistakenly done in the past – that disabled persons already 
experience an “augmented reality.” That is, until one remembers that to “augment” 
means to “make greater or larger.” Physical and mental disabilities do anything but. 
They “substantially limit[] one or more of the major life activities of such individu-
al,”1 thereby diminishing that individual’s opportunity to experience physical reality 
in ways that others take for granted.
Yet AR does have an important role to play for these individuals. Custom-designed 
augmented world devices could go a long way toward bridging the experiential gap 
imposed by disabilities. Although the end result may be only an approximation of 
typical human experience, the inherent value of the augmentation to that individual 
certainly could be significantly more meaningful than an equivalent improvement in 
a normally abled person’s experience.
The United States and many other nations have various laws on the books de-
signed to encourage providers of goods and service to make extra effort to accommo-
date the disabled, in order to minimize the degree to which disabilities keep people 
from enjoying everyday life experiences. When certain methods of accommoda-
tion become sufficiently economical and logistically feasible, they tend to become 
Civil Rights
9
128 C.F.R. §36.106.

244
CHAPTER 9  Civil Rights
requirements instead of suggestions. As AR technologies improve, it seems inevi-
table that some of them will first be encouraged, and ultimately become prescribed, 
methods of accommodating disabled persons.
THE CURRENT REQUIREMENTS FOR 
ACCOMMODATING THE DISABLED IN DIGITAL MEDIA
THE GOVERNING LEGAL FRAMEWORK
The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) is the flagship of legal protection 
for the disabled in the United States. It was adopted to ensure, among other things, 
that no one is “discriminated against on the basis of disability in the full and equal en-
joyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations 
of any place of public accommodation.”2 The law has required public and private 
entities across the country to make a number of significant accommodations in the 
way they do business, and modifications to their physical structures, to assist disabled 
individuals. Various other Federal3 and state laws supplement these protections.
By and large, these laws have received broad, bipartisan support, and have even 
been strengthened over the years. But striking the right balance between accommo-
dating the disabled and respecting the liberty and economic interests of businesses 
is not always simple, especially in light of how quickly technological and economic 
realities change.
When regulations requiring accommodation are perceived as imposing too heavy 
a burden on businesses, a backlash can erupt. For example, in 2010, the Department 
of Justice published updated regulations under the ADA. These regulations adopted 
the 2010 Standards for Accessible Design, which, for the first time, contain specific 
accessibility requirements for many types of recreational facilities, including swim-
ming pools, wading pools, and spas. In January 2012, the Department issued guid-
ance titled “ADA 2010 Revised Requirements: Accessible Pools – Accessible Means 
of Entry and Exit” to assist entities covered by Title III of the ADA, such as hotels 
and motels, health clubs, recreation centers, public country clubs, and other busi-
nesses that have swimming pools, wading pools, and spas, in understanding how the 
new requirements apply to them. Many owners of such businesses, however, did not 
care at all for what they learned, sparking a firestorm of criticism. The DOJ relaxed 
its enforcement of the new regulations a bit, by delaying the deadline for implemen-
tation and emphasizing that “there is no need [under the ADA] to provide access to 
existing pools if doing so is not ‘readily achievable,’4 especially in a weak economy.
242 U.S.C. 12182.
3U.S. Department of Justice – Civil Rights Division – Disability Rights Section, A Guide to Disabil-
ity Rights Laws (July 2009), available at http://www.ada.gov/cguide.htm (last viewed on September 
5, 2014).
4Questions and Answers: Accessibility Requirements for Existing Swimming Pools at Hotels and Other 
Public Accommodations, ada.gov, available at http://www.ada.gov/qa_existingpools_titleIII.htm (last 
visited on September 5, 2014).

245
The Current Requirements for Accommodating the Disabled in Digital Media
Pressure to provide more accommodation is building on the international level as 
well. The UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities – the first hu-
man rights treaty of the twenty-first century – was opened for signature in 2007. The 
United States is one of the 149 member states to sign the treaty, although Congress 
has not ratified it as of this writing.
The same debates will continue in the augmented world. As noted above, the 
points of conflict in today’s world are over such issues as building ramps into swim-
ming pools and making sure sidewalks have adequate curb cuts – because these are 
“readily achievable” means of providing equal access to “places of public accommo-
dation.” Tomorrow, as virtual “places” become more important venues for commerce 
and entertainment, the fight will likely be over equal access to those experiences. It 
will be interesting to observe whether the law continues to view such immersive con-
tent as purely software and speech,5 or according to the metaphors of physicality and 
place that we use to describe them. If the latter, then we may see laws treat massively 
multi-participant virtual experiences as “places of public accommodation,” at least 
for purposes of civil rights laws. The question will then be which forms of ensuring 
equal access to those “places” are “readily achievable” for its creators to provide.
DIGITAL ACCOMMODATION IS STILL IN ITS EARLY STAGES
Equal access standards are only beginning to make an impact in digital technology. 
Section 255 and Section 251(a)(2) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended 
by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, require manufacturers of telecommunica-
tions equipment and providers of telecommunications services to ensure that such 
equipment and services are accessible to and usable by persons with disabilities, if 
readily achievable. The UN Convention likewise “recognizes access to information 
and communications technologies, including the Web, as a basic human right,”6 but 
that standard will not apply in the United States unless Congress ratifies and imple-
ments the treaty.
The Federal government actually holds itself up to a higher standard than others 
in this area. Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 19737 was first added in 1986, 
and has been updated several times since. This legislation requires all Federal de-
partments and agencies to “ensure … that the electronic and information technology 
[they develop, procure, maintain or use] allows [disabled persons] to have access 
to and use of information and data that is comparable to the access to and use of 
the information and data”8 by individuals without disabilities. This provision applies 
“regardless of the type of medium of the technology,”9 but comes with a variety of 
5See Chapter 6 for a deeper elucidation of this concept.
6Tim Berners-Lee, Accessibility, W3.org, available at http://www.w3.org/standards/webdesign/acces-
sibility (last visited on September 5, 2013).
729 U.S.C. §749d.
829 U.S.C. §749d(a)(1)(A).
9Id.

246
CHAPTER 9  Civil Rights
caveats, including an exception for when “an undue burden would be imposed on the 
department or agency.”11
Nevertheless, these standards put the Federal government ahead of most private 
providers in terms of access to digital materials. As applied to online resources, 
such as websites, Section 508 and its enabling regulations are modeled after the 
access guidelines developed by the Web Accessibility Initiative of the World Wide 
Web Consortium, or W3C (Fig. 9.1).12 The W3C advertises that its “guidelines [are] 
widely regarded as the international standard for Web accessibility.”13 Indeed, some 
of the W3C’s basic tips for making websites more accessible – such as alternative 
text for images, allowing for input by keyboard instead of a mouse, and transcripts 
for podcasts14 – are becoming increasingly common. That said, such standards still 
remain largely voluntary in most circumstances.
FIGURE 9.1
Chief Operations Officer Torsten Oberst demonstrates FEDVC’s software, which reads web 
page content aloud at a 2011 program highlighting Section 508.10
10USDA/CC BY2.0 license.
1129 U.S.C. §749d(a)(1)(A).
12Summary of Section 508 Standards, Section 508.gov webpage, available at http://www.section508.
gov/summary-section508-standards#web (last visited on September 5, 2014).
13Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI), W3.org webpage, available at http://www.w3.org/WAI/ (last vis-
ited on September 5, 2014).
14Tim Berners-Lee, Accessibility, W3.org, available at http://www.w3.org/standards/webdesign/acces-
sibility (last visited on September 5, 2014).

247
The Current Requirements for Accommodating the Disabled in Digital Media
Applying such laws to the digital economy, however, is tricky. For one thing, so 
much digital content is inherently audiovisual in nature that it may be either practical-
ly impossible, or at least very expensive, to create satisfactory accompaniments for the 
blind or deaf – especially in light of the sheer volume of digital data available. What is 
more, there is not the same tradition of access to such materials as there are for more 
basic functions such as climbing stairs and crossing streets. On the other hand, our 
society becomes more dependent on digital and online data with each passing day, 
meaning that those without meaningful access to that world are getting increasingly 
left behind.
Therefore, advocates on both sides of the issue tend to be particularly vocal when 
disputes arise. For example, in March 2012, a federal judge in California allowed the 
Greater LA Council on Deafness to proceed with a lawsuit against CNN for failing 
to provide close captioning for videos on its website. Similar accommodations for 
the deaf have become customary in many television broadcasts, which has created an 
expectation for similar options with online video.
To date, close captioning has been required online only for video that was origi-
nally broadcast on television. In 2012, the Federal Communications Commission re-
quired closed captioning only in full-length TV shows that were rebroadcast online. 
By 2016, this requirement will be extended to “so-called ‘straight lift’ clips using the 
same audio and video …. A year later, the rule will apply to montages involving mul-
tiple straight-lift clips. And by mid-2017, closed captioning will be required on live 
and near-live TV over the web, including news and sports.”15 Some providers already 
go beyond these minimum expectations, however – such as the text transcripts that 
YouTube auto-generates for many of its videos – and there is every reason to believe 
that the requirement will eventually be imposed on more, if not all, video content 
provided online, and perhaps other content as well.
Indeed, in June 2012, a judge in Massachusetts became the first to rule in favor of 
those seeking to require Netflix to close caption its online video.16 The foundation 
of this ruling was the judge’s finding that Netflix and other websites had become 
“place[s] of public accommodation” – the first time any court had reached that con-
clusion. The implications of this holding are not modest. Leading internet law com-
mentator Eric Goldman, of the Santa Clara University School of Law, saw this as a 
dangerous and errant deviation from previously settled law that threatened to do real 
damage to internet commerce:
This is a bad ruling. Really terrible. It’s … potentially ripped open a huge hole in 
Internet law. … If websites must comply with the ADA, all hell will break loose. 
Could YouTube be obligated to close-caption videos on the site? (This case seems 
to leave that door open.) Could every website using Flash have to redesign their 
sites for browsers that read the screen? I’m not creative enough to think of all the 
15David Lieberman, FCC Creates Timetable For Closed Captioning In TV Clips That Run Online, 
Deadline Hollywood (July 11, 2014), available at http://www.deadline.com/2014/07/fcc-online-tv-
clips-closed-captioning/ (last visited on September 5, 2014).
16National Association of the Deaf v. Netflix, Inc., 3:11-cv-30168-MAP (D. Mass. June 19, 2012)

248
CHAPTER 9  Civil Rights
implications, but I can assure you that ADA plaintiffs’ lawyers will have a long 
checklist of items worth suing over. Big companies may be able to afford the com-
pliance and litigation costs, but the entry costs for new market participants could 
easily reach prohibitive levels.17
Nevertheless, that case settled a few months later, with Netflix agreeing to caption 
100% of its videos by 2014, and to reduce the time the service takes to add captions 
to new streaming content down to 7 days by 2016.18 The National Association for the 
Deaf, which brought the lawsuit, heralded this agreement as “a model for the streaming 
entertainment industry,” although it’s still not clear two years later whether the Netflix 
model will indeed become the norm anytime soon. As of this writing, courts remain 
“split about the extent to which private websites are subject to the accessibility require-
ments of Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and the U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice (DOJ) has not yet published any clear regulations about the issue.”19
Meanwhile, Federal regulators continue to push for greater accommodation not 
only by websites, but in mobile applications as well. In June 2014, the Department 
of Justice reached its first settlement agreement that included a provision requiring 
the settling party to make its mobile app ADA-compliant. “The [DOJ’s] investigation 
found that the [Florida State University] Police Department’s online application form 
asked questions about a past or present disability and other medical conditions in vio-
lation of the ADA.”20 One of the steps FSU agreed to take to rectify the problem was 
“ensuring that the FSU Police Department website, including its employment oppor-
tunities website and its mobile applications, conform to the Web Content Accessibil-
ity Guidelines 2.0 Level AA Success Criteria and other Conformance Requirements 
(WCAG 2.0 AA).”21
These developments demonstrate the growing political and legal pressure to make 
digital media more accessible to disabled persons. Especially in light of the increas-
17Eric Goldman, Will the American with Disabilities Act tear a hole in Internet law? Arstechnica, (June 
27, 2012), available at http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2012/06/will-the-americans-with-disabilities-
act-tear-a-hole-in-internet-law/ (last visited on September 5, 2014). I’m sure Professor Goldman would 
also want it known, however, that he qualified his comments as follows: “Although I believe the statute 
and case law make it clear that ADA does not apply to websites, I also believe that responsible websites 
should voluntarily undertake extra efforts to accommodate users with disabilities. In many cases, doing 
so will actually increase profits by expanding the userbase; and even where it isn’t, it’s a good business 
decision both as a matter of corporate ethics and for providing extra utility to all users.”
18National Association of the Deaf, et al., v. Netflix, Inc., U.S. District Court, District of MA, Consent 
Decree of October 9, 2012, available at http://dredf.org/captioning/netflix-consent-decree-10-10-12.
pdf (last visited on September 5, 2014).
19Michael C. Wilhelm, Are websites operated by public accommodations subject to the American with 
Disabilities Act (ADA)? ACC-Association of Corporate Counsel website, (January 9, 2014), available 
at http://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=40a950f7-8c9b-4d88-9595-5a7a6399a267 (last vis-
ited on September 5, 2014).
20Department of Justice Office of Public Affairs, Justice Department Reaches Settlement with Florida 
State University, The United States Department of Justice website, (June 5, 2014), available at http://
www.justice.gov/opa/pr/2014/June/14-crt-606.html (last visited on September 5, 2014).
21Id.

249
﻿ How AR can Meaningfully Improve the Lives of Disabled Persons
ing median age in the United States and other developed nations,22 there is every rea-
son to expect this trend to continue. This means that those developing the augmented 
world should proactively include access concerns in their design strategies from the 
very beginning. It also suggests there will be lucrative markets available for digital 
solutions that enhance access to digital content.
HOW AR CAN MEANINGFULLY IMPROVE THE LIVES OF 
DISABLED PERSONS
Fortunately, the augmented medium provides several natural methods of enhancing 
disabled persons’ access to digital information. Again, Google is largely responsible 
for sparking most of the public conversation on this topic because its Glass device 
was the first digital eyewear to get widespread attention. (Not to mention the “smart” 
contact lenses that Google announced in July 2014, which are said to be capable of 
“monitor[ing] the wearer’s blood sugar levels.”)23 Some have said of Glass that “not 
since the invention of text-to-voice and other speech-recognition software has a tech 
invention had such potential to help the disabled.”24 The issues and opportunities 
Glass raises, however, apply to the entire category of wearable computing.
THE DEAF
Enormous sums of money and political capital have been spent to achieve the mod-
est improvements in close captioning availability that resulted from the Netflix and 
CNN cases and related FCC regulations. Yet AR-infused eyewear could accomplish 
far more in terms of giving the deaf access to the everyday world.
Google Glass has already offered a glimpse of what this future might look like. 
Because the device (by default) conveys sound through bone conduction – i.e., 
through the skull directly into the inner ear – rather than headphones, it actually al-
lows even many deaf persons to perceive the sounds. Digital marketing professional 
David Trahan, who is deaf in his right ear, experienced this first-hand. The audio 
produced by his Glass device allowed him to hear through his right ear for the first 
time, and now it has become an integral part of his life.25
22See, e.g., Congressional Research Service, The Changing Demographic Profile of the United States, 
March 31, 2011, available at http://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/RL32701.pdf.
23Mark Scott, Novartis Joins With Google to Develop Lens that Monitors Blood Sugar, New York  
Times (July 15, 2014), available at http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/16/business/international/
novartis-joins-with-google-to-develop-contact-lens-to-monitor-blood-sugar.html?_r=0 (last visited on 
September 5, 2014).
24Marco della Cava, Beyond a gadget: Google Glass is a boon to disabled, USA Today (October 
23, 2013), available at http://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/2013/10/22/google-glass-aids-disabled/ 
3006827/ (last visited on September 5, 2014).
25Andy Meek, Voices In Your Head: How Google Glass Lets a Half-Deaf Person Hear, Fast Company, 
available at http://www.fastcompany.com/3015749/voices-in-your-head-how-google-glass-lets-a-half-
deaf-person-hear (last visited on September 5, 2014).

250
CHAPTER 9  Civil Rights
Combining digital eyewear with speech recognition software has the potential to 
radically enhance life for deaf individuals by essentially close captioning anything 
and everything in life. People wearing such digital eyewear could potentially see the 
words of someone speaking to them superimposed on their field of vision in more-
or-less-real time. Obviously, technological barriers to such devices still remain. Soft-
ware would need to improve, and it would need to sync with directional microphones 
that could isolate the speaker’s voice from the background noise. But the impressive 
quality of voice recognition products like Dragon Naturally Speaking and Siri bring 
hope such a product is not far off.
Voices are not the only sounds that deaf people could benefit from “hearing.” 
Wearable devices could be programmed to recognize and alert to the telltale sales of 
oncoming traffic, traffic control signals, music, alarms – all the sounds that others take 
for granted every day – and display appropriate text notices in the user’s field of view.
These solutions would allow a deaf person to understand the sounds around them, 
but could AR help the deaf communicate? For more than a decade, researchers have 
been working toward that exact goal. As early as the 2003 IEEE International Sym-
posium on Wearable Computers, a team demonstrated the ASL OneWay, a tool de-
signed to help the deaf community to communicate with the hearing by translating 
American Sign Language.26 The device consists of a set of sensors in a hat worn by 
the signer, and two wristwatch-sized devices, one on each hand. The system recog-
nizes the hand gestures that make up a sign and deduces the English phrases most 
closely associated with the signed phrase. The deaf person sees these phrases in his 
eyewear and selects the appropriate one, which the device then speaks through a 
speaker in the hat. As one would imagine, these prototypes were a bit cumbersome, 
but the concept was potentially revolutionary.
More recently, researchers at the multi-university project MobileASL have been 
working to develop visual recognition software capable of detecting hand gestures 
and transmitting them in real time over standard mobile phone networks (Fig. 9.2).27 
Other projects hope to someday be able to translate the signs in to written or spoken 
speech in near-real time. These projects have advanced far in the past decade, and 
it is feasible to imagine them installed in digital eyewear within the coming de-
cade. Likewise, designers have at least begun to conceive of gloves that can track the 
wearer’s gestures in three dimensions, also providing instant translation from sign 
to speech. Such developments could increase deaf persons’ ability to integrate into 
society by orders of magnitude.
Once such on-the-fly captioning becomes even marginally feasible, we are likely 
to see political pressure grow to make the technology available to the deaf community. 
The first implementations will almost certainly be voluntary, by providers who seek 
267th IEEE International Symposium on Wearable Computers, Oct. 2003, home page, available at 
http://www.iswc.net/iswc03/press.html (last visited on September 5, 2014).
27Stuart Fox, “Targeted Video Compression Brings Cell Phones to Sign Language Users,” Popular 
Science December 8, 2009, available at http://www.popsci.com/technology/article/2009-12/targetted-
compression-brings-sign-language-cell-phones.

251
﻿ How AR can Meaningfully Improve the Lives of Disabled Persons
to distinguish themselves from their competitors. By that time, much of the program-
ming that we currently receive on televisions may be broadcast on eyewear instead, 
meaning that the same close captioning rules that currently apply to TV will be in force 
there as well. What is more, the deaf will not be the only market for the technology. 
Just like noisy bars will activate the close captioning feature of their televisions to allow 
patrons to follow the programming, normally abled people could encounter situations 
in which they too can benefit from technology originally intended for the disabled.
Once the technology gains a track record, insurance companies may begin to sub-
sidize it for persons who lose their hearing as a result of injury or disease. Government 
officials and politicians who today ensure that a sign language interpreter is present 
with them onstage may instead make live-captioning eyewear available to those in 
the crowd who need it. Eventually, provisions like the Rehabilitation Act may require 
Federal employees to provide such “access” to their live speeches. By various means, 
live close captioning in the physical world will eventually become commonplace.
THE BLIND
Games like Inception the App,28 which “uses augmented sound to induce dreams,” al-
ready promise to digitally augment our sense of hearing. AR devices could accentuate 
FIGURE 9.2
The MobileASL project.
28Inception: The App home page, available at http://inceptiontheapp.com/ (last visited on September 
5, 2014).

252
CHAPTER 9  Civil Rights
the hearing of blind individuals in a way analogous to the visual information it could 
provide for the deaf. Users could receive audible alerts when they come into proxim-
ity with a person, vehicle, traffic control device, sign, or any of a hundred other sig-
nificant objects. In 2012, Japanese telecommunications giant Nippon Telegraph and 
Telephone Corp. developed a prototype pair of glasses designed to do just that. Run-
ning the company’s “SightFinder” technology, the device “sends streaming images 
from a camera to one of NTT’s data centers to recognize and identify street signs or 
potential obstacles. In real time, NTT’s computers analyze the images and provide 
warnings – street construction causing a detour or a cone in front of a pothole – 
via an Internet-connected device like a smartphone to help the visually impaired to 
move freely.”29
Dr. Peter Meijer, a senior scientist at Philips Research Laboratories in the Nether-
lands, has been working toward this goal for years. His software, called the “vOICe,” 
is “a universal translator for mapping images to sounds.”30 Already available as a free 
Android app, the software uses a mobile phone’s camera to take an audio snapshot of 
the user’s surroundings, associating height with pitch and brightness with loudness. 
Presumably once the user grows accustomed to this system, it will become second 
nature and allow the blind to roam more confidently than is possible with a mere 
walking stick for guidance. As of this writing, the app has earned an average of 3.5 
out of 5 stars from more than 77,000 reviews in the Google Play store – a respectable 
indication of real utility.
One could imagine similar functionality being added to Word Lens or almost any 
other visual recognition app, allowing the app to audibly explain to the user what it 
sees. The blind community has certainly imagined this future. One sight-impaired 
Explorer shared his thoughts after testing Glass:
I imagine a future where Glass can read a menu to me in a restaurant. A simple 
glance at the menu and glass recognises the text and begins to read aloud. Or per-
haps, opening a book and have it read aloud, reading a book – that is something I 
have not been able to do in a long time. Object recognition, the ability to identify 
objects in a specific scene, or recognise my friends and acquaintances, and speak 
their names in my ear. Essentially, Glass would allow me to more readily operate 
in social environments, fill in the gaps created by my lack of vision.31
The impact of such advances would be so profound for blind individuals that they 
are likely to become common and even required by the same mechanisms discussed 
above with respect to accommodations for the deaf.
29Sarah Berlow, Google Glasses Find Unlikely Japanese Rival, The Wall Street Journal (April 12, 
2012), available at http://blogs.wsj.com/japanrealtime/2012/04/19/google-glasses-find-unlikely-japa-
nese-rival/ (last visited on September 5, 2014).
30“The vOICe for Android,” http://www.seeingwithsound.com/android.htm (last visited September 12, 
2014).
31Simon, Google Glass – A blind perspective, andadapt, (June 27, 2014), available at http://www.and-
adapt.com/google-glass-a-blind-users-perspective/ (last visited on September 5, 2014).

253
﻿ How AR can Meaningfully Improve the Lives of Disabled Persons
As one step in that direction, the “vOICe for Android has already been demon-
strated to run on Google Glass, letting the blind ‘see’ for themselves and get visual 
feedback in a second. A talking face detector and color identifier is included.”32 A 
significant caveat to this idea is the limited battery life of Glass in its current form. 
Users are cautioned to use an external battery, and even then “[i]t is recommended 
to run the vOICe for Android on Google Glass only for up to a few minutes at a 
time, to avoid overheating risks.”33 These present-day limitations, however, have not 
tempered the excitement Glass has stirred within the blind community, with some 
already calling it “a blind man’s window into the world.”34
Dr. Meijer has proposed an even more radical version of this idea by integrating 
the vOICe app directly into a dedicated eyewear device promises “synthetic sight” 
by essentially hacking the brain to accept audio signals as visual images. According 
to Meijer’s website, “neuroscience research has already shown that the visual cortex 
of even adult blind people can become responsive to sound, and sound-induced illu-
sory flashes can be evoked in most sighted people. The vOICe technology may now 
build on this with live video from an unobtrusive head-mounted camera encoded in 
sound.”
Digital eyewear also offers a promising new platform for apps like VizWiz, which 
might be described as crowd-sourced AR. Currently a smartphone app, VizWiz al-
lows blind people to upload pictures of their surroundings and ask questions about 
them, then get feedback from seeing persons around the globe. “Where smartphone-
based VizWiz users have to contend with the inherent hassle of ‘using a handheld 
device while blind, Glass offers the chance to provide continuous, hands-free visual 
assistance,’35 according to the service’s founder.
Of course, audio signals are not the only way to enhance life for the blind. Those 
who read Braille could still benefit from enhanced haptic technology. In theory, the 
feel of virtually any surface could be augmented with additional sensory feedback, 
including in the Braille language. Therefore, a blind person wearing a haptic glove 
could “feel” Braille text on any surface, without that writing physically being there.
THE PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED
Digital information alone can’t do anything to increase the mobility of those with 
physical impairments. Better databases and way finding applications, however, could 
make it a lot easier to find the accommodations designed to make their lives easier. 
35Kevin Kepple, Beyond a gadget: Google Glass is a boon to disabled, USA Today, (October 23, 2013), 
available 
at 
http://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/2013/10/22/google-glass-aids-disabled/3006827/ 
(last visited on September 5, 2014).
32“The vOICe for Android,” http://www.seeingwithsound.com/android.htm (last visited September 12, 
2014).
33Id.
34Vaibhav Athare, Google Glass for Visually Impaired and Blind, I Wanna See, (Posted on April 12, 
2014), available at http://www.iwannaseee.com/google-glass/google-glass-for-visually-impaired/ (last 
visited on September 5, 2014).

254
CHAPTER 9  Civil Rights
For example, Mapability,36 an existing data layer on the Layar browser, helps the 
disabled locate the nearest wheelchair-accessible venue.
The introduction of Glass has also done much to illustrate how digital eyewear 
can improve the lives of the physically disabled. Just the simple ability to take pic-
tures and video has been a sea change in the lives of disabled users. One Glass Ex-
plorer wrote, “[m]y injury was a spinal cord injury that occurred in 1988 and yester-
day I was able to take a picture unassisted for the first time in 24 years!”37 Similar 
stories abound.
The disabled have even had a hand in helping to overcome the limitations of first-
generation devices like Glass. Because Glass is still (as of this writing) a beta prod-
uct, its Explorers have an active voice in shaping future enhancements and revisions. 
Disabled users have made such suggestions as making the volume control less buried 
in the command menu,38 decreasing the sensitivity of the touchpad,39 and allowing 
alternate methods of controlling the video camera (because those without use of their 
hands cannot tap the touchpad, as is presently required).40 Input like this allows the 
device (and those that come after it) to be designed with accessibility in mind.
One specific community that has benefited from Glass has been those with Par-
kinson’s disease, which causes uncontrollable tremors. “With custom apps, experts 
have tuned Glass to provide subtle alerts reminding volunteers to take their medica-
tion and notify them of upcoming medical appointments. Sufferers are also prompted 
to speak or swallow to prevent drooling. Glass’ motion sensors are put to good use 
too, preventing patients from ‘freezing’ by displaying visual cues to help them un-
block their brain and regain a flow of a movement.”41 One can easily imagine those 
afflicted by any number of diseases with analogous physical symptoms to benefit 
from the same functionality.
For example, patients with ALS (Lou Gehrig’s disease) and muscular dystrophy – 
both of which lead to loss of motor control throughout the body – have experienced 
increased quality of life through digital eyewear. One volunteer who works with ALS 
patients said, “Some patients have no use of their hands, and others are losing their 
38Kevin Kepple, Beyond a gadget: Google Glass is a boon to disabled, USA Today, (October 23, 2013), 
available 
at 
http://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/2013/10/22/google-glass-aids-disabled/3006827/ 
(last visited on September 5, 2014).
39Id.
40Kelly Michels, “Accessibility for physically disabled recording video,” Glass Explorers Community, 
July 24, 2014, available at https://www.glass-community.com/t5/Wishlist-for-Glass/Accessibility-for-
physically-disabled-recording-video/idi-p/147155 (Google+ authentication required).
41Matt Brian, First UK Google Glass trial gives Parkinson’s sufferers more independence, engadget, 
available at http://www.engadget.com/2014/04/09/google-glass-parkinsons-uk-trial/ (last visited on 
September 5, 2014).
36Mapability Association, Mapability Creates First Augmented Reality Layer for Accessibility, Dis-
abled World, (September 16, 2012), available at http://www.disabled-world.com/assistivedevices/apps/
mapability.php (last visited on September 5, 2014).
37Kelly Michels, “Accessibility for physically disabled recording video,” Glass Explorers Community, 
July 24, 2014, available at https://www.glass-community.com/t5/Wishlist-for-Glass/Accessibility-for-
physically-disabled-recording-video/idi-p/147155 (Google+ authentication required).

255
﻿ How AR can Meaningfully Improve the Lives of Disabled Persons
vocal abilities. But they talk to Glass and it understands them.”42 In July 2014, the 
Portuguese company LusoVU successfully completed a Kickstarter campaign for its 
own “augmented reality glasses” called EyeSpeak (Fig. 9.3).43 This device – which 
was inspired by the CEO’s father being diagnosed with ALS – is designed to capture 
in a wearable device the same eye-tracking technology currently used by desktop 
computers to turn patient’s eye movements into written letters and words.
Because the impairments suffered by these communities are more often the re-
sult of injury, disease, or advanced age, they are more likely to receive AR devices 
through their health insurance provider or medical professional.
THOSE WITH COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENTS, 
LEARNING DISABILITIES, AND EMOTIONAL TRAUMA
One study in Ohio created simulated virtual environments to aid the rehabilitation 
of those with traumatic brain injuries and other cognitive impairments.44 Similarly, 
Dr. Helen Papagiannis – a designer, researcher, and artist specializing in AR – has 
written an AR pop-up book designed to let those suffering from phobias directly 
encounter their fears in augmented space45 called “Who’s Afraid of Bugs?” the book 
FIGURE 9.3
EyeSpeak by LusoVU.
42Kevin Kepple, Beyond a gadget: Google Glass is a boon to disabled, USA Today, (October 23, 2013), 
available 
at 
http://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/2013/10/22/google-glass-aids-disabled/3006827/ 
(last visited on September 5, 2014).
43LusoVU-Usa, Eye Speak: Beyond Communication, Kickstarter request, available at https://www.
kickstarter.com/projects/886924859/eyespeak-beyond-communication (last visited on September 5, 2014).
44Maurissa D’Angelo, S. Narayanan, A Virtual Reality Environment to Assist Disabled Individuals, 
paper submitted for Virtual Rehabilitation 2007 Conference, available at http://www.wright.edu/lwd/
documents/virtual_rehabilitation_dangelo.pdf (last visited on September 5, 2014).
45Helen Papagiannis, New Work: First AR Pop-up Book for iPad 2 and iPhone 4 using image rec-
ognition, Augmented Stories, (June 27, 2011), available at http://augmentedstories.wordpress.
com/2011/06/27/new-work-first-ar-pop-up-book-for-ipad-2-and-iphone-4-using-image-recognition/ 
(last visited on September 5, 2014).

256
CHAPTER 9  Civil Rights
features various insects that appear to come alive through a companion AR app. It 
“was inspired by AR psychotherapy studies for the treatment of phobias such as 
arachnophobia. AR provides a safe, controlled environment to conduct exposure 
therapy within a patient’s physical surroundings,” Papagiannis writes, “creating a 
more believable scenario with heightened ‘presence’ and greater immediacy than 
Virtual Reality (VR).”46
Wearable devices even hold promise for those with severe neuro-psychological 
impairments. The startup company Sension, for example, develops software that rec-
ognizes people’s emotional state by analyzing their facial expression (Fig. 9.4). The 
company’s Glass software maps 78 points on the face and labels the faces with on-
screen keywords like “happy” and “angry.”
“Emotional recognition (software) is still in its early days, at about the state of a 
3-year-old, but I still felt passionate about trying to do something meaningful,” says 
Sension founder Caitalin Voss. “From my personal experience, I know that the issues 
(for my cousin) are recognizing an expression, and then smiling back. Glass is good 
for the first, and can help with the second.”47 Here, too, health insurance companies 
and medical professionals will be the most likely source AR-based treatments.
The possibilities for AR in the educational field are seemingly endless. Brad Waid 
and Drew Minock have been at the forefront of this topic for some time. They were 
each elementary school educators in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, when they began 
touring the country teaching other educators how to use AR in the classroom. Now 
employed by Daqri to do the same work on a broader scale, they have seen count-
less educators break down barriers to learning and open up exciting new pedagogical 
FIGURE 9.4
Sension app for autistic users.
47Kevin Kepple, Beyond a gadget: Google Glass is a boon to disabled, USA Today, (October 23, 2013), 
available 
at 
http://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/2013/10/22/google-glass-aids-disabled/3006827/ 
(last visited on September 5, 2014).
46Id.

257
﻿ How AR can Meaningfully Improve the Lives of Disabled Persons
possibilities with AR applications. For example, AR allows kinesthetic learners their 
best opportunity yet to interact with digital objects in a way that fits their learning style.
Although these techniques offer new worlds of possibilities for all kids, the po-
tential is particularly tantalizing for kids with learning disabilities and other barriers 
to comprehension. Educators are currently limited in what they can offer by such 
pesky constraints as budgets, resources, and the laws of physics. AR overcomes those 
barriers by virtually replicating and allowing students to meaningfully interact with 
anything they can imagine. Kids who need to learn through particular senses can 
have their instruction tailored to those needs.
Driven by such legal mandates as the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act 
(IDEA), which was reauthorized in 2004, the public education system is constantly 
searching for alternative methods to teach kids who do not respond to traditional 
pedagogical techniques. For example, the IDEA requires that a meeting of parents, 
educators and other professionals be convened for each student with special needs, 
resulting in an Individualized Education Plan (IEP) designed to accommodate the 
child’s specific disabilities.
IDEA 2004 already requires IEP teams to consider the use of “assistive technol-
ogy” so as “to maximize accessibility for children with disabilities.”48 An “assistive 
technology device” is defined as “any item, piece of equipment, or product system, 
whether acquired commercially off the shelf, modified, or customized, that is used to 
increase, maintain, or improve functional capabilities of a child with a disability.”49 
IDEA defines an “assistive technology service” as:
“any service that directly assists a child with a disability in the selection, 
acquisition, or use of an assistive technology device. Such term includes
(A)	the evaluation...
(B)	purchasing, leasing, or otherwise providing for the acquisition of assistive 
technology devices...
(C)	selecting, designing, fitting, customizing, adapting, applying, maintaining, 
repairing, or replacing...
(D)	coordinating and using other therapies, interventions, or services with assistive 
technology devices...
(E)	training or technical assistance for such child, or ...the family of such child...
(F)	training or technical assistance for professionals...”50
The Act also requires schools to provide training in the assistive technology for 
the teachers, child, and family.51
These statutory provisions already provide the legal foundation for requiring AR-
based tools as part of a disabled child’s IEP. Once educators have a sufficient track 
record with AR pedagogical tools to prove their effectiveness – which, thanks to 
4820 U.S.C. 1400(c)(5)(H).
4920 U.S.C. 1401(1).
5020 U.S.C. 1401(2).
5120 U.S.C. 1400(2)(E) & (F).

258
CHAPTER 9  Civil Rights
passionate educators like Waid, Minock, and many others, will not be long – we 
could very soon see conversations about augmented reality happening in IEP meet-
ings across the country.
The incredible promise of augmented world devices and experiences to improve 
the lives of the disabled suggests that legal incentives and sanctions will soon en-
courage or require its use in various contexts. The concepts discussed in this chapter 
highlight some of the rationales by which that may be accomplished.

259
CHAPTER
Augmented Reality Law, Privacy, and Ethics﻿
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Evidence and V-Discovery
• In the courtroom
• Exercising personal jurisdiction
INTRODUCTION
On the whole, the legal profession is a conservative institution. It does not move 
quickly to adopt new technologies or change the way it does things. To the contrary, 
it serves to bring some semblance of balance and consistency to a rapidly changing 
society by applying the lessons of the past to solve today’s disputes. Change does 
come even within the legal system, however, and like everything else in contempo-
rary life, change seems to be coming at a faster rate than it did before.
So it will be with augmented reality. As of this writing, only a handful of disputes 
involving AR have made it through the legal system. It will be some time before use 
of the technology becomes anywhere near commonplace within the system itself. 
Nevertheless, some legal innovators have already begun to see the value AR can add 
in the way they do their jobs and represent their clients’ interests. As the ability to 
tell stories in AR improves, it should become a more frequently used tool for legal 
persuasion. And before any of that change sets in, lawyers will likely be scrambling 
to understand and adapt to the AR data that their clients create in the course of their 
more-rapidly adapting businesses.
GATHERING EVIDENCE FOR USE IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
One of the main attractions of digital eyewear is its ability to capture users’ experi-
ences from their own first-hand perspective, in a hands-free manner that prevents the 
device from interfering with what it’s recording. The advertisements and popular 
apps in this space emphasize the use of such capabilities for recording fun, recre-
ational activity, like playing with kids, shopping, and even skydiving. As with any-
thing else in AR, though, these devices simply provide a platform. It’s up to the user 
to determine the content.
Litigation Procedure 10

260
CHAPTER 10  Litigation Procedure
One group of people that cares quite a bit about accurately reproducing scenes 
from everyday life as accurately as possible is the legal profession. Law enforcement 
officers, detectives, inspectors, and lawyers all seek to gather and preserve evidence 
of what other people are doing in order to be able to accurately retell that story in 
the neutral context of a courtroom. Just as wearable technology holds the promise of 
being able to capture moments more accurately and uniquely than other methods, so 
too does it stand to enhance the ability to introduce those experiences into evidence.
MOBILE VIDEO AS AN INTENTIONAL MEANS OF GATHERING 
EVIDENCE
United States courts already have a predisposition in favor of video evidence. In the 
landmark case Scott v. Harris,1 decided in 2007, the United States Supreme Court 
announced what almost amounts to a per se rule of deference. The plaintiff in that 
case alleged that the defendant police officer had used excessive force by ramming 
the plaintiff’s car during a high-speed chase, causing a crash that badly injured the 
plaintiff. The lower courts had allowed the lawsuit to proceed, determining that a 
reasonable jury could rule for either party based on its interpretation of the evidence.
The Supreme Court in Scott reversed, holding as a matter of law that the evidence 
could only support a judgment in favor of the officer. Its primary basis for reaching 
this conclusion was the “existence in the record of a [dashcam] videotape … [that] 
quite clearly contradicts the version of the story told by [plaintiff.]”2 Specifically, the 
video demonstrated that plaintiff’s driving had “resemble[d] a Hollywood-style car 
chase of the most frightening sort, placing police officers and innocent bystanders 
alike at great risk of serious injury,”3 and therefore justifying the degree of force used 
by the defendant officer. The guiding principle for future cases set forth by Scott is 
one that commands deference to unrebutted video evidence:
When opposing parties tell two different stories, one of which is blatantly contra-
dicted by the record, so that no reasonable jury could believe it, a court should 
not adopt that version of the facts for purposes of ruling on a motion for summary 
judgment.
That was the case here with regard to the factual issue whether respondent was 
driving in such fashion as to endanger human life. [Plaintiff’s] version of events 
is so utterly discredited by the record that no reasonable jury could have believed 
him. The Court of Appeals should not have relied on such visible fiction; it should 
have viewed the facts in the light depicted by the videotape.4
Of course, video recordings can be altered. “There [were] no allegations or 
indications that [the Scott] videotape was doctored or altered in any way, nor any 
1127 S. Ct. 1769.
2Id. at 1775.
3Id. at 1775–1776.
4Id. at 1776.

261
﻿ Gathering Evidence for Use in Legal Proceedings
contention that what it depicts differs from what actually happened.”5 Video editing 
technology has come a long way even in the years since Scott, such that litigants in 
later cases may have to do a little more work to prove the authenticity of their re-
cords. But Scott’s rule of deference still governs.
Meanwhile, one of the predominate features of augmented world technology is 
the proliferation of devices that can record audiovisual footage. It is little wonder, 
therefore, that people have already begun using these devices for the purpose of 
gathering evidence to use in court. In April 2014, New York City – which had already 
experimented with giving its police officers digital eyewear – next decided to give the 
devices to their restaurant inspectors.6 Around the same time, the Phoenix, Arizona 
personal injury law firm Fennemore Craig launched a program it called “Glass Ac-
tion” (groan), through which the firm lent its digital eyewear devices to its clients. 
“The idea is to let the clients communicate with their lawyers via Glass to show how 
their injuries impact their daily lives. Ultimately, Fennemore Craig hopes to turn 
these communications into evidence.”7 The program is a testament to the fact that 
the intimacy generated by first-person-perspective video can also subtly influence 
a jury to empathize with the person behind the recording, “see[ing] the nuances of 
a victim’s daily challenges firsthand.” 8 It is as close as video evidence can come to 
putting the viewer in the victim’s shoes.
PRESERVING THREE-DIMENSIONAL EXPERIENCES IN AR
Writing in 2003, police futurists Thomas J. Cowper and Michael E. Buerger foresaw 
“[a]utomatic sensor readings that calculate distance and height and directly create 
digital and AR maps for court presentation.”9 By 2011, private accident reconstruc-
tion firms in the United States were already beginning to employ 3-D laser scanner 
for just this purpose, although only on a small scale.10 “Mounted on a tripod, a laser 
scans the horizon and records up to 30 million separate data points, down to sub-
millimeter resolution. Each sweep takes four minutes, and investigators will typically 
5Id. at 1775.
6Matthew D. Austin, NYC eyes Google Glass for restaurant inspections, is OSHA next? Association 
of Corporate Counsel website, (April 23, 2014), available at http://www.lexology.com/library/detail.
aspx?g=71a587d3-12ab-40d3-88cf-68fa2001be3f (last visited on September 5, 2014).
7Lily Hay Newman, Use of Google Glass to Win your Next Personal Injury Lawsuit, Slate (April 
7, 2014), available at http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/04/07/law_firm_fennemore_
craig_is_giving_google_glass_to_clients_so_they_can_create.html?sf24910004=1 (last visited on 
September 5, 2014).
8Id.
9Thomas J. Cowper and Michael E. Buerga, Improving Our View of the World: Police and Augmented 
Reality Technology, FBI.gov publication, available at http://www.fbi.gov/stats-services/publications/
police-augmented-reality-technology-pdf (last visited on September 5, 2014).
10Rebecca Boyle, 3-D Scanning and Reconstruction of Crash Scenes Will Save Cops and Drivers 
Time and Money, Popular Science (Posted July 15, 2011), available at http://www.popsci.com/cars/
article/2011-07/3-d-crash-scene-reconstruction-lasers-will-save-cops-time-and-money?cmp=tw (last 
visited on September 5, 2014).

262
CHAPTER 10  Litigation Procedure
make four sweeps…. The image can then be processed into a 3-D computer model, 
allowing investigators to see where the vehicles are located relative to each other, tire 
skid marks, and other evidence.”11
The following year, as discussed in Chapter 9, Danish researchers presented a 
multi-sensory system designed to allow investigators to capture a full crime scene 
in AR:
“The goggles consist of two head mounted 3D-cameras feeding video to a back-
pack with laptop. With this tech, you’d be free to move and look around while you 
manipulate the electronic display with a pair of gloves. The left hand brings up 
a set of menus and tools, while the right hand acts as a pointer. By pointing to a 
blood splatter or bullet holes (for example), you’d be able to tag them as points of 
interest in a 3D-model of the crime scene. The system is also set up to completely 
document the crime scene with a video and audio track. This sort of virtual record 
would allow a new investigator to explore the crime scene and it may also be ac-
cepted as evidence in future court cases.”12
Such technology, however, would be just as useful for civil litigation as for crimi-
nal prosecutions, as discussed further below.
GATHERING EVIDENCE FROM DIGITAL REMNANTS
Of course, a fundamental characteristic of digital data is its permanence. Once creat-
ed – and especially once it is uploaded to a server – digital information is notoriously 
difficult to ever truly, permanently delete. Therefore, it will not always be necessary 
or even preferable to use wearable devices to capture events as they happen. Rather, 
most AR evidence used in legal proceedings will likely be found after the fact, often 
because it was shared socially by the very person against whom it is to be used.
The bounty of evidence being collected in social media today bears this out. 
Three particular examples serve as interesting transitional species, so to speak, in the 
evolution from social media to the augmented world. First, as discussed in Chapter 7, 
California bicyclist Chris Bucchere struck and killed an elderly pedestrian while 
Bucchere was competing for the fastest recorded time on the competitive bicycling 
social network Strava. At a hearing in his prosecution for manslaughter, “data from 
Bucchere’s Strava account … had been used to show how fast he had been going and 
to prove he had ignored stop signs.”13 Likewise, Bucchere’s comments made through 
the social network after the crash – in which he lamented the “heroic” loss of his 
helmet – helped establish his reckless disregard for the consequences of his actions.
13Kashmir Hill, Google Glass Will Be Incredible for the Courtroom, Forbes (March 15, 2013), avail-
able at http://www.forbes.com/sites/kashmirhill/2013/03/15/google-glass-will-be-incredible-for-the-
courtroom/ (last visited on September 5, 2014).
11Id.
12Kevin Lee, Coming Soon: Augmented Reality Goggles for Crime Scene Investigations, TechHive 
(February 1, 2012), available at http://www.techhive.com/article/249143/coming_soon_augmented_
reality_goggles_for_crime_scene_investigations.html (last visited on September 5, 2014).

263
﻿ ﻿ Gathering Evidence for Use in Legal Proceedings
Another case discussed in Chapter 7 was the first-ever traffic citation for wearing 
Google Glass while driving, issued to software developer and avid Glass Explorer 
Cecilia Abadie. She was found not guilty because the officer could not prove that 
the device was actually turned on while she was behind the wheel. This prompted 
some internet sleuths to investigate her Google+ and YouTube social media accounts, 
where they found photos and recordings that appeared to have been taken while driv-
ing (Fig. 10.1). Apparently, they also found a message Abadie had posted saying “I 
just received a message … while driving.” Of course, none of this “evidence” would 
have been likely to make a difference in the actual hearing on Abadie’s citation, 
nor is it conclusive proof that she was the one who made the recordings, or that she 
did so while driving (which, it should be observed, is not necessarily unlawful or 
even dangerous; see the discussion in Chapter 7). But it does illustrate the fact that 
there are evidentiary goldmines online, and that wearable devices will create even 
more opportunities for lawyers to discover such gems – if they have the stamina and 
wherewithal to sift through all the available data.
A third, almost-real example came in August 2014, when online news outlets 
reported that Gainesville, Florida police had used a murder suspect’s interactions 
with his iPhone to prove he committed the crime, including the “fact” that he had 
asked Siri where to hide the victim’s body.14 “In addition to the Siri query, [the sus-
pect’s] phone had no activity between 11:31pm and 12:01am on the night [the vic-
tim] disappeared. [The suspect] also used the flashlight app on his phone for a total of 
FIGURE 10.1
Alleged excerpt from Cecilia Abadie’s Google+ account appearing to show a picture taken 
through Glass while driving.
14Casey Johnson, Murder suspect’s phone held screenshot of “hide my roommate” Siri query [up-
dated], arstechnica (August 13, 2014), available at http://arstechnica.com/gadgets/2014/08/murder-
suspect-asked-siri-where-to-hide-my-roommate/ (last visited on September 5, 2014).

264
CHAPTER 10  Litigation Procedure
48 minutes that day…”15 Although later reports recanted much of this narrative, the 
fact of its plausibility demonstrates just how many digital remnants we leave behind 
already using today’s technology. As the world becomes more augmented, even more 
of our everyday actions will be preserved, allowing others to come back after the fact 
and reconstruct – or misinterpret – our actions in litigation.
V-DISCOVERY
THE PRECEDENT OF e-DISCOVERY
As these examples demonstrate, advances in digital and computing technologies can 
make litigation, like anything else, more effective and efficient. Lawyers have so 
many more tools at their disposal for crafting and communicating persuasive argu-
ments than they did 10, or even five years ago.
But this rapid expansion of technology has also been giving lawyers a whole 
lot more to do. Generally speaking, any documents, files, emails, spreadsheets, or 
information that is reasonably likely to reveal evidence that could be admissible 
in court is fair game for discovery during litigation.16 Increasingly, the digital data 
stored and exchanged by the people and companies involved in lawsuits are becom-
ing important to the issues being fought over. Especially over the past decade, that 
has meant that lawyers and their staff often have to gather “electronically stored 
information” (ESI) during the discovery phase, in addition to the paper documents 
and testimony – a phenomenon we call “e-discovery,” Therefore, lawyers end up 
with even more data to sift through in order to figure out what happened than they 
used to a lot more.
“Perhaps no case could be a more monumental example of the reality of mod-
ern e-discovery,” says a 2011 article in the ABA Journal, “than the [then-]ongoing 
Viacom copyright infringement lawsuit against YouTube filed back in 2008. In that 
dispute, the judge ordered that 12 terabytes of data be turned over”17 – more than 
the printed equivalent of the entire Library of Congress. Even after a few years, this 
example still remains a prodigious monument to the burdens of e-discovery. “Experi-
ences like these,” the article continues, “have left law firms and in-house attorneys 
scrambling to make sense of the new risks associated with the seemingly endless data 
produced by emerging technologies like cloud computing and social media.”
How will law firms and litigants cope, then, when augmented reality becomes 
mainstream, and digital technology leaps off the computer monitor to overlay the 
physical world? At least four potential problems seem apparent.
15Id.
16Legal Information Institute, Federal Rules of Civil Procedure: Rule 26. Duty to Disclose, General 
Provision Governing Discovery, Cornell University Law School, available at http://www.law.cornell.
edu/rules/frcp/Rule26.htm (last visited on September 5, 2014).
17Joe Dysart, As Bulging Client Data Heads for the Clud, Law Firms Ready for a Storm, ABA Jour-
nal, (Posted April 1, 2011), available at http://www.abajournal.com/magazine/article/as_bulging_cli-
ent_data_heads_for_the_cloud_law_firms_ready_for_a_storm/ (last visited on September 5, 2014).

265
﻿ V-Discovery
ORDERS OF MAGNITUDE MORE DATA
The first problem will be one of volume. Consider this: in 2013, it was calculated 
that “[a] full 90 percent of all the data in the world has been generated over the last 
two years.”18 And that was before the wave of wearable communications and health-
monitoring devices that began shortly thereafter.
Companies such as Vuzix and Google already have digital eyewear on the mar-
ket, and several more are in development. If a site like YouTube can amass enough 
video footage to make the prospect of reviewing it all seem (quite rightly) ridiculous, 
how about when everyone is wearing digital eyewear that is capable of recording 
more or less everything we look at? Will paralegals be sifting through days and 
weeks worth of mundane, first-person audio and video to find the relevant portions 
of a litigant’s experiences? As more of our reading takes place on digital devices, we 
are already creating troves of data about our activities in browser caches and RAM 
memory. But how much larger will our digital footprints be when everyday physical 
objects become opportunities (even necessities) for encountering and creating geo-
tagged data?
TRACKING IT ALL DOWN
The second, and closely related, problem will be locating and collecting all of this 
data. As recently illustrated by the comedic film Sex Tape, it is hard enough nowa-
days to locate data stored in “the cloud,” which actually means some remote server 
farm nestled somewhere in the distant hills. Presumably, that data will be stored in 
even more diffuse ways in an AR world, in which our digital experience is likely 
to be generated by a mesh of interconnected devices. Whether or not my eyewear 
will require a centrally broadcast “signal” or “network” in order to function, it will 
certainly be interacting with any number of signals sent to and from objects that I 
physically encounter, leaving digital traces of my physical presence behind.
We are already halfway there. Consider Color, the social media startup that gath-
ered a lot of attention for a brief period in 2011. Its premise was to give users access 
to other people’s photo streams merely by coming into physical proximity to those 
people. Foursquare, Waze, and similar sites likewise track users’ locations in real 
time and offer them discounts to businesses near their current, physical location. 
Once transactions like this become the centerpiece of a lawsuit, will it require law-
yers to pinpoint where particular people where when they accessed these apps?
If it becomes relevant in litigation to retrace someone’s steps through an aug-
mented reality, how would one do it? That will depend on how and where the data 
is stored. If, as is the case today, almost all data resides either on central servers or 
on the mobile device itself, there will be obvious points for collecting the data. But 
as the data disperses, it may become necessary to actually visit the locations where 
18Ase Dragland, Big Data, for better or worse: 90% of world’s data generated over last two years, Sci-
ence Daily (May 22, 2013), available at http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2013/05/130522085217.
htm (last visited on September 5, 2014).

266
CHAPTER 10  Litigation Procedure
the person being investigated traveled, in order to retrieve the bits of digital data they 
left behind in nearby connected devices. Or perhaps we will all be equipped with 
personal “black boxes” that keep track of our digital experiences – all too often, 
probably, for the purpose of uploading them to lifelogs, or whatever social media has 
by then become.
MAKING SENSE OF FIRST-PERSON AR DATA
A third problem will be one of triangulation. Today, ESI may take various forms, but 
it all has one thing in common: it’s almost always viewable on a two-dimensional 
screen. That will not be universally true for much longer. How one perceives aug-
mented reality will depend first on how they’re looking at their physical surround-
ings. It may not be possible to interpret digital data stored in a server somewhere 
without knowing exactly where the individual(s) viewing it were located, the direc-
tion they were facing, what other data they had open, and so on.
As an example, take the situation discussed in Chapter 5: a trademark infringe-
ment lawsuit in which the plaintiff alleges that a virtual version of his trademark 
was geo-tagged onto the brick-and-mortar location of his competitor’s store, leading 
confused customers to patronize his competitor instead of his own business. (This is 
a fairly straightforward extrapolation of all the lawsuits being filed nowadays over 
sponsored ads in search engine results.) That plaintiff’s claim will rise or fall in part 
based on how that geotag actually looked to customers. That, in turn, may depend 
on where the potential customers were when they looked at the logo. Was it visible 
through the trees, or in the sun? On which AR platforms was it viewable (assuming 
that there will be multiple service providers)? Did different brands of eyewear render 
it in the same way? Was it a static display, or did it sense and orient itself toward each 
individual viewer?
Even more complex issues come into play with other forms of AR, such as haptic 
feedback. A server or device memory may record that a glove or other haptic device 
delivered a series of electrical impulses, but determining with any reliability exactly 
how that felt to the user may not be possible without recreating the experience.
PRESERVATION
Fourth, after courts and the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure began to acknowledge 
the significance of electronically stored information, it also became clear how eas-
ily and frequently individuals and companies were deleting potentially significant 
evidence – whether intentionally or merely out of ignorance. Out of this realization 
came the recognition of a duty that every person has to preserve evidence relevant 
to a potential legal claim – including ESI – whenever that person “reasonably an-
ticipates” litigation over the claim. When someone ought to have that anticipation is 
necessarily fact-dependent; it could be by receiving a formal complaint or warning 
that a lawsuit is coming, or when a disagreement becomes sufficiently contentious 
that a reasonable person would see litigation as a distinct possibility. If the duty is 

267
﻿ Assisting Lawyers with Legal Research
triggered in a corporate setting, the company’s lawyers or other representative will 
often issue an internal “litigation hold” warning, putting all employees on notice not 
to delete digital information that could relate to the issues in the potential lawsuit.
Just when corporate officers were beginning to wrap their brains around the idea 
of preserving vast amounts of emails, spreadsheets, and word processing documents, 
the duty of preservation expanded to such platforms as social media accounts, voice-
mails, and text messages. The introduction of wearable devices, AR interfaces and 
v-discovery will expand the burdens of preservation yet another order of magnitude. 
There will come a time in the near future when companies will need to catalog, or 
at least query their employees when needed on, the types of wearable devices they 
use and the data those devices accumulate. When one employee sues over stressful 
or discriminatory workplace conditions, for example, it may become necessary to 
collect the health-monitoring data of each employee in the office to establish the 
average level of stress and the factors that tended to increase it. If some individuals 
delete such information about themselves during the relevant timeframe, however, 
the company could find itself sanctioned for destroying evidence.
These are just a few of the potential issues; rest assured, there will be others. But 
it all comes with a silver lining. Just a few minutes contemplating the complexities 
of virtual (or “v-”) discovery makes the current fuss over e-discovery seem not so 
bad after all.
ASSISTING LAWYERS WITH LEGAL RESEARCH
At a 2014 legal technology conference at Harvard Law School, Wayne Weibel pre-
sented his own customized “citation extraction” software for Google Glass.19 Al-
though public details on the project are scarce, it appears to recognize legal text 
that the person wearing Glass is looking at and find the case law citations in the 
document. From there, the software could presumably look up and display the case 
being cited. More advanced versions might even detect the name of a case when 
spoken in the courtroom, and provide the wearer with instant intelligence on the 
cited opinion.
Of course, finding a legal opinion only tells half the story. Lawyers regularly 
rely on one of two databases – Shephard’s® and Keycite® – to determine whether 
the holding of a particular opinion remains valid law in light of subsequent inter-
pretations and rulings by other courts. A really useful Glassware app, then, would 
be one that could also run a case citation through one of these databases, and super-
impose the user’s view of the written text with the databases’ red, yellow, and green 
flags, allowing the user to easily spot potential weak points in a legal argument on 
the fly.
19Wayne Weibel, Law in the Wild: Citation Extraction and Glassware, Conference for Law School 
Computing, available at http://conference.cali.org/2014/sessions/law-wild-citation-extraction-service-
and-glassware (last visited on September 5, 2014).

268
CHAPTER 10  Litigation Procedure
AUGMENTED REALITY IN THE COURTROOM
TELEPRESENCE
Public speakers have traditionally honed their presentations by performing in front 
of a mirror, but digital eyewear will provide lawyers with a whole new level of self-
analysis. The personal injury law firm of “Fennemore Craig is … considering using 
Glass with expert witnesses, or putting Glass on ‘jurors’ in mock trials to see court 
presentations from that perspective.”20 The lawyers could then analyze the footage to 
determine how well a presentation is playing to the jury.
Other trial lawyers plan to use the technology as a teaching or client-relations 
tool. “Just before the clerk calls our case,” speculated trial lawyer Mitch Jackson, 
“I command Glass to ‘go live’ and a real time audio and video feed displays back 
at the office and private Youtube, Google Hangout, and Spreecast channels so 
that the new associates can watch the law and motion and oral argument from 
our various offices across the U.S. A private link is also shared with the clients 
so they can watch the procedure poolside from their hotel in the Bahamas where 
they are vacationing.”21 Presumably, lawyers outside the office could also watch 
the argument in real time (on their own headset, of course), and offer the in-
court attorney real-time input that affects the outcome of the hearing. Similar 
methods are already being used to give medical students a unique, first-person 
perspective of surgeries from the surgeon’s own perspective, and to allow treating 
physicians to collaborate in real time. Applied in the courtroom, such techniques 
could ultimately save clients significant sums on travel expenses and allow greater 
collaboration at times when it could make a critical difference in the outcome of 
an argument.
Telepresence in the courtroom may also expand the concept of “testifying in 
court.” Today, when a witness gives testimony outside of the courtroom, there are 
only two commonly-used methods for preserving it: having it typed by a stenog-
rapher or video recorded. Adding the ability to record and play back testimony in 
three dimensions would certainly add to its persuasive effect in the courtroom. By 
the same token, witnesses who now (in rare circumstances) are allowed to testify in 
court by means of live videoconferencing could instead someday soon “appear” on 
the witness stand by means of a life-size, interactive hologram, a device frequently 
seen in Star Wars films (Fig. 10.2).
Without a serious shift in legal precedent, however, telepresence testimony is 
not likely to be widely adopted in criminal proceedings. At least four of the United 
States Courts of Appeal have decided that criminal defendants must be physi-
cally present in the courtroom when being sentenced, regardless of how effective 
20Lily Hay Newman, Use of Google Glass to Win your Next Personal Injury Lawsuit, Slate (April 
7, 2014), available at http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/04/07/law_firm_fennemore_
craig_is_giving_google_glass_to_clients_so_they_can_create.html?sf24910004=1 (last visited on 
September 5, 2014).
21Id.

269
﻿ Augmented Reality in the Courtroom
videoconferencing technology may be. “Being physically present in the same room 
with another has certain intangible and difficult to articulate effects that are wholly 
absent when communicating by video conference. As written, the Rule [43(a) of the 
Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure] reflects a firm judgment in favor of physical 
presence and does not permit the use of video conferencing as a substitute,”22 wrote 
one such court in 2011.
Similarly, the Confrontation Clause of the Sixth Amendment to the United States 
Constitution provides that “in all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the 
right…to be confronted with the witnesses against him.” This bedrock provision of 
constitutional law is already posing obstacles to the use of videoconferencing in 
criminal trials,23 and would likely also hinder the use of telepresence technology. 
Recent Supreme Court case law interpreting the Confrontation Clause, however, has 
suggested that courts may soon begin opening the door a little wider to the possibility 
of “[using] remote testimony as a method to satisfy the Confrontation Clause when a 
witness cannot be present at trial.”24
IMMERSING JUDGES AND JURORS IN THE EVIDENCE
I described above how lawyers might use digital eyewear to capture video footage of 
a scene or of an injured person’s experiences from a first-person perspective. Captur-
ing the footage, however, is only half the process. Ultimately, the footage must be 
conveyed to the judge or jury who will decide its significance. Here again, digital 
FIGURE 10.2
The Star Wars films have perfected the concept of telepresence.
22United States v. Williams, 641 F.3d 758 (6th Cir. 2011).
23Valerie Werse, The Confrontation Clause in Video Conferencing, Rutgers Computer and Technology 
Law Journal (October 11, 2012), available at http://www.rctlj.org/2012/10/the-confrontation-clause-
in-video-conferencing/ (last visited on September 5, 2014).
24Jessica Smith, Remote Testimony and Related Procedures Impacting a Criminal Defendant’s Con-
frontation Rights, UNC School of Government Administration of Justice Bulletin (No. 2013/12 
February 2013), available at http://sogpubs.unc.edu/electronicversions/pdfs/aojb1302.pdf (last visited 
on September 5, 2014).

270
CHAPTER 10  Litigation Procedure
eyewear could be a great assistance. For example, if each member of the jury were 
given a set of digital eyewear, they could all simultaneously experience the content 
first-hand, rather than viewing it on a two-dimensional monitor. The immersive ex-
perience would draw the jurors into the experience, necessarily increasing its emo-
tional resonance and hence its persuasive effect. This would likely be best accom-
plished with eyewear meant to deliver a wide, stereoscopic field of view like the 
Epson Moverio or the Meta Space Glasses, rather than smaller displays like Glass or 
Vuzix devices.
Such immersion could also go beyond video footage to include additional senses. 
In 2012, a Detroit police officer stood trial on involuntary manslaughter charges after 
a botched raid of a house that resulted in the shooting death of a seven-year-old girl. 
A critical fact in the case was that the police had set off a flashbang grenade, which 
“is a non-lethal device meant to disorient and give an advantage to police during a 
raid.”25 Arguing that “words alone can’t describe the [disorienting] effects [this type 
of grenade] has,”26 the prosecutor in the case argued that the jurors could only under-
stand the circumstances of the shooting by experiencing the explosion first-hand. The 
judge agreed, and assembled all of the jurors in a room where a flashbang grenade 
was detonated.27
Though the experience was doubtless enlightening, such extreme measures are 
also exceedingly rare, as well as expensive. Equipping courtrooms to deliver multi-
sensory experiences through haptic and audio-visual AR could revolutionize the 
practice of presenting evidence in court at least as much as the introduction of video 
recordings and computer-generated reconstructions have done. Jurors could feel the 
chill of a dark city street, hear sounds from specific directions, and generally put 
themselves in the shoes of those of whose actions they sit in judgment. If done cor-
rectly, such juries would gain a much more precise understanding of the evidence, 
presumably leading to better-informed verdicts.
The various technical difficulties in accomplishing that precise re-enactment, 
however, coupled, with the inherent subjectivity involved in how competing parties 
present their respective cases, may lead to more arguments over the permissibility of 
such experiences. These arguments are likely to center on Federal Rule of Evidence 
403, under which a “court may exclude relevant evidence if its probative value is sub-
stantially outweighed by a danger of one or more of the following: unfair prejudice, 
25Gus Burns, Aiyana Jones trial jurors to witness flashbang grenade detonation Wednesday, Mlive (June 11, 
2013), available at http://www.mlive.com/news/detroit/index.ssf/2013/06/aiyana_jones_trial_jurors_to_w.
html (last visited on September 5, 2014).
26Prosecutor Wants to Simulate Explosion in Court: Detroit Police Officer Faces Manslaughter 
Charge in Fatal Shooting of 7 year old Black Girl, The Brown Watch (June 16, 2012), available at 
http://brownwatch.squarespace.com/police-brutality-watch/2012/6/16/prosecutor-wants-to-simulate-
explosion-in-court-detroit-poli.html (last visited on September 5, 2014).
27Jurors in trial of officer accused in death of Aiyana Stanley-Jones see stun grenade demonstration, 
Channel 7 abc WXYZ Detroit (posted June 12, 2013), available at http://www2.wxyz.com/web/wxyz/
news/state/jurors-in-detroit-cop-trial-to-see-stun-grenade-demonstration (last visited on September 5, 
2014).

271
﻿ Personal Jurisdiction
confusing the issues, misleading the jury, undue delay, wasting time, or needlessly 
presenting cumulative evidence.” In particular, intense, immersive demonstrations 
may be argued to “prejudice” the jury by arousing a strong emotional reaction. Some 
jurors may even have physical conditions that would make it dangerous to view the 
augmented content.
Moreover, appellate review of cases involving such evidence could be particu-
larly difficult. Typically, legal appeals are fairly sterile processes, involving oral ar-
guments in pristine halls based on the written transcripts of trial court proceedings. 
Video and other electronic evidence can be preserved and re-examined by appellate 
courts easily enough. The uniquely experiential nature of multisensory AR evidence, 
however, would presumably make it very difficult, or at least complicated, to recreate 
after the fact. When the admissibility or weight of such evidence is the subject of an 
appeal, appellate judges may find themselves with no other choice but to strap on the 
same equipment used by the jurors to experience the AR evidence, more than likely 
with assistance from the parties or their experts.28
PERSONAL JURISDICTION
Picture this: a California based software company writes an augmented reality pro-
gram that allows people to engage in a digital experience tied to their respective 
locales. An end user in New Jersey downloads the app, and is injured while using it. 
(Maybe it gives her bad directions that cause a traffic accident, or maybe it gives her 
improper instructions for how to use a product.) She sues the California company in 
a New Jersey state court. Has she sued in the correct court? Is the California company 
subject to the New Jersey court’s authority?
This is a question of “personal jurisdiction” – the power of a court to exercise 
authority over a specific person (or company). As a general rule, state courts may not 
exercise judicial power over a person or company not located in that state unless the 
defendant “purposefully avails itself of the privilege of conducting activities within 
the forum State, thus invoking the benefits and protections of its laws.”29 U.S. courts 
have spilled a lot of ink over hundreds of years trying to define the circumstances 
under which it is “fundamentally fair” for a state court to exercise jurisdiction over a 
person or company not located in that state.
Augmented reality media will give digital data a physicality that it has never had 
before, allowing creators and users of software to project their influence in specific, 
remote locations like never before. As this means of interaction expands, courts will 
have new opportunities to explore when it is fair for courts in one state to assert ju-
risdiction over someone in another state.
29J. Mcintyre Machinery, Ltd. v. Nicastro, 131 S. Ct. 2780 (2011).
28As of this writing, the prosecution of the Detroit police officer remains pending, as the first pro-
ceeding ended in mistrial. It remains to be seen, therefore, whether a three-judge panel of the 
Michigan Court of Appeals will one day find it necessary to experience a flashbang grenade for 
themselves.

272
CHAPTER 10  Litigation Procedure
JURISDICTION REQUIRES A MEANINGFUL CONNECTION BETWEEN 
THE DEFENDANT AND THE FORUM STATE
As of this writing, the most recent and definitive word on the subject of personal 
jurisdiction comes from the United States Supreme Court’s 2014 decision in Walden 
v. Fiore.30 The Court’s unanimous opinions described the issues as follows:
The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment constrains a State’s au-
thority to bind a nonresident defendant to a judgment of its courts. Although a 
nonresident’s physical presence within the territorial jurisdiction of the court is 
not required, the nonresident generally must have certain minimum contacts such 
that the maintenance of the suit does not offend traditional notions of fair play and 
substantial justice.31
The inquiry into whether a defendant has sufficient “minimum contacts” with a 
State “focuses on the relationship among the defendant, the forum, and the litiga-
tion.”32 That “relationship must arise out of contacts that the defendant himself cre-
ates with the forum State,”33 and “looks to the defendant’s contacts with the forum 
State itself, not the defendant’s contacts with persons who reside there.”34 “[T]he 
plaintiff [who lives in the forum State] cannot be the only link between the defendant 
and the forum. Rather, it is the defendant’s conduct that must form the necessary con-
nection with the forum State that is the basis for its jurisdiction over him.”35
A line of cases beginning with the Supreme Court’s 1984 decision in Calder v. 
Jones36 found sufficient minimum contacts, and hence jurisdiction, by focusing the 
effect that a defendant’s remote conduct had in the forum State. In that case, the Flor-
ida-based defendant published a newspaper article that libeled a California celebrity; 
the Court upheld the exercise of jurisdiction in California because the “brunt” of the 
injury caused by that libel was felt in California.
The Court’s 2014 decision in Walden reigned in the application of this “Calder 
effects test.” In Walden, a Georgia policeman seized funds at an airport belonging 
to a Nevada resident. The Nevada resident sued in Nevada, and argued it was fair 
to subject the officer to jurisdiction there because he knew that his actions would 
have consequences in Nevada. Relying on Calder, the Court of Appeals agreed. But 
the Supreme Court unanimously reversed, holding that “[t]he proper question is not 
where the plaintiff experienced a particular injury or effect but whether the defen-
dant’s conduct connects him to the forum in a meaningful way.”37 This officer’s ac-
tions, the Court explained, were not inherently aimed at Nevada. The connection to 
Nevada existed only because that was “where respondents chose to be at a time when 
30134 S.Ct. 1115 (2014).
31Walden v. Fiore, 134 S. Ct. 1115, 1121 (2014) (citations, internal quotations, and alterations omitted).
32Id. (internal quotation omitted).
33Id. at 1222.
34Id.
35Id.
36465 U.S. 783 (1984)
37Walden v. Fiore, 134 S. Ct. 1115, 1125 (2014).

273
﻿ Personal Jurisdiction
they desired to use the funds seized by petitioner. Respondents would have experi-
enced this same lack of access in California, Mississippi, or wherever else they might 
have traveled and found themselves wanting more money than they had.”38
Because mobile apps can be downloaded and used anywhere, this principle will 
be particularly instructive in applying personal jurisdiction law to digital content. 
Applied to AR and its particular connection to distinct places, however, Walden may 
actually increase the likelihood of jurisdiction being exercised.
THE PRECEDENT OF TODAY’S INTERNET LAW
Courts have developed various tests for determining whether a defendant’s activities 
online meaningfully connected him to another forum so as to allow a court in that 
forum to exercise jurisdiction over him. In the early days of the public internet, the 
predominate test focused on a website’s “interactivity.” Under this approach – some-
times called the “Zippo sliding scale” analysis, after the case that coined it – courts 
place a website on a spectrum from “passive” to “interactive.” The more interactive 
the site is, the more likely it is that the site owner is using it to intentionally interact 
with users in distant states.
As “interactivity” online has become more common, however, the Zippo sliding 
scale analysis has become less useful. Writing in 2010, for example, the Seventh 
Circuit Court of Appeals, ruled that “a defendant [should] not be haled into court 
simply because the defendant owns or operates a website that is accessible in the 
forum state, even if that site is ‘interactive.’ Beyond simply operating an interactive 
website that is accessible from the forum state, a defendant must in some way target 
the forum state’s market.”39 Other courts were quick to “generally agree”40 with this 
holding, but “[c]ourts differ … regarding which Internet activities constitute conduct 
‘purposefully directed’ at the forum state.”41
These “interactivity” or “sliding scale” tests proved to have especially little utility 
when applied to individual users of social media, which is the predominate online 
activity as of this writing. “While the websites at issue in this case may themselves 
be considered interactive,” the Texas Court of Appeals explained, “a third party’s 
use of the website may, in effect, be a ‘passive’ usage of the internet, i.e. an act of 
simply posting information which is accessible anywhere the internet is accessible. 
Such passive usages of the internet do not support jurisdiction over a non-interactive 
website under a sliding-scale analysis.”42 Similarly, in the case Capitol Records, LLC 
v. VideoEgg, Inc.,43 a New York federal judge did not exercise jurisdiction over a 
video-sharing website just because New York residents were able to share and view 
videos on it. Because the site did not charge its users, the court concluded, the site’s 
42Wilkerson v. RSL FUNDING, LLC, 388 SW 3d 668 (Tex. Ct. App. 2011).
43Capitol Records, LLC v. VideoEgg, Inc., 611 F. Supp. 2d 349 (S.D.N.Y. 2009).
38Id.
39Illinois v. Hemi Group, LLC, 622 F.3d 754, 760 (7th Cir. 2010).
40Revision Military, Inc. v. Balboa Manufacturing Company, No. 5:11-cv-149 (D. Vermont 2011)
41Illinois v. Hemi Group, LLC, 622 F.3d 754, 760 (7th Cir. 2010).

274
CHAPTER 10  Litigation Procedure
relevant “business” activity for purposes of personal jurisdiction was not video shar-
ing, but selling advertising.
Yet the court did ultimately exercise jurisdiction in the case, because the specific 
advertising on the site was targeted at New York residents. “Documents produced 
in discovery show that [defendant’s] employees touted the company’s large New 
York user base to potential advertisers and responded directly to advertising inqui-
ries from New York-based companies, including companies seeking to promote re-
cording artists. Documents also support Plaintiffs’ allegations that [defendant] either 
actively sought or actually consummated advertising sales transactions that targeted 
New York users.”44 The specific business conducted by the site, therefore, tied it in a 
meaningful way to New York, supporting the exercise of jurisdiction there.
EXERCISING JURISDICTION OVER PROVIDERS OF 
AUGMENTED REALITY EXPERIENCES
These precedents offer some inkling of when courts will be allowed to exercise ju-
risdiction over an AR service provider in another State or country. The mere fact that 
a particular AR app obtains information from the online cloud in order to perform 
its function, for example, does not distinguish it from any other use of the internet, 
and therefore is quite unlikely to support the exercise of jurisdiction over the data 
provider by a court in the user’s forum. Like the defendant in Walden, the fact that an 
app user happens to be in a particular State when using a generally accessible mobile 
app is purely the consequence of the user’s choice, not the provider’s, and does not 
meaningfully connect the provider to that forum.
What makes AR different from other digital experiences is the way it enhances 
a user’s physical experience of the world around them. This could be a general en-
hancement of a particular sense regardless of surroundings – such as, for example, 
an aid for deaf individuals to read sign language. In that circumstance, there would 
still be nothing in particular about the experience that tied the experience provider to 
the user’s location.
Many visual AR applications, however, will be tied to a specific physical location. 
That could include augmented advertising through particular physical signs, provid-
ing an interactive game tied to particular physical landmarks, a travel app designed 
to lead tourists around a certain city, or any one of a thousand other applications. In 
these cases, the experience provider has targeted its services toward the residents of 
a particular location as in the VideoEgg case, and is “meaningfully connected” to 
that location as discussed in Walden, because the experience will not work properly 
anywhere else. In these cases, even if the data for the AR experience is provided from 
a remote location, there is a much more persuasive basis for arguing that the experi-
ence provider will be subject to jurisdiction in the users’ forum.
Whether courts apply Walden to AR experiences in this manner, however, re-
mains to be seen.
44Id.

277
CHAPTER
Augmented Reality Law, Privacy, and Ethics﻿
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• AR as a vehicle for social change
• AR as a mechanism for enforcing political correctness
• AR’s potential to exacerbate groupthink on political and social issues
INTRODUCTION
The medium of augmented reality holds almost boundless potential for sharing infor-
mation, potentially eclipsing even the advances in communication made to date by 
the internet. As our experience with the internet has amply demonstrated, however, 
people do not often do an admirable job at taking advantage of such potential. In-
stead, we often seek out only that which we already know will please or entertain us. 
Humans are, after all, finite beings with pleasures, preferences, and opinions that are 
often quite deeply ingrained.
Digital media can mobilize people to accomplish remarkable things, often to 
the benefit of society. When individuals use digital media to further ensconce 
themselves in their preferred, pre-selected points of view, however, they have less 
opportunity or desire to interact with, understand, or find common ground with 
others of a different persuasion. This harms the fabric of relationship and common 
purpose that binds societies together. By expanding the reach of digital media 
into our previously non-digitized daily experiences, augmented world technolo-
gies will inevitably carry the potential to further exacerbate these negative social 
developments.
AR AS A MEANS OF MOBILIZING PEOPLE FOR SOCIAL GOOD
REDISCOVERING AND REBUILDING CIVIC IDENTITY
Beginning in September 2010, the city of Christchurch, New Zealand was rocked 
by a series of devastating earthquakes. As a result, several longstanding, historical 
buildings have been destroyed or demolished, and reconstruction efforts are under-
way. “Even for people who have lived in Christchurch all their lives it is difficult to 
Politics and Civil Society 11

278
CHAPTER 11  Politics and Civil Society
walk through the earthquake damaged city and remember what buildings used to be 
there.”1
It happens, however, that Christchurch is also the home of Dr. Mark Billinghurst – 
one of the world’s most pedigreed experts in AR – and his Hit Lab NZ organization. His 
team reacted to the earthquakes by developing “CityViewAR,” a “mobile Augmented 
Reality application that allows people to see how the city was before the earthquakes 
and building demolitions. Using an Android mobile phone people can walk around the 
city and see life-sized virtual models of what the buildings looked like on site before 
they were demolished, and see pictures and written information” (Fig. 11.1).2 The team 
intends future updates of the app to enable users to not only view past buildings, but also 
see and comment on proposed future construction. In this way, the app has the potential to 
encourage greater civic participation and ownership in the community’s reconstruction.
PROTESTS AND SOCIAL CHANGE
Superimposing digital data on the physical world is not just for “the one percent” 
social elite. As more of our innovators, artisans, and marketers experiment with aug-
mented reality, the tumultuous politics of our times are beginning to follow suit.
2011’s “Occupy” movement broke new ground in various ways that will keep 
sociologists and political scientists busy for decades. One example is how some of 
the protestors resorted to free AR apps to keep the public informed about related 
events and locations. Using Metaio’s location-based AR browser Junaio, one AR de-
veloper launched an “Occupy channel” that provides locations, contact information, 
and resources for all the Occupy protests in various cities across the country. The 
FIGURE 11.1
The CityViewAR app from Hit Lab NZ.
2Id.
1Hit Lab NZ, “CityViewAR,” http://www.hitlabnz.org/index.php/products/cityviewar#sthash.lGTOfwrT.
dpuf.

279
﻿ AR as a Means of Mobilizing People for Social Good
Occupy Wall Street group in New York took this idea one step further, using Junaio 
to superimpose signs, placards, and related imagery over areas from which they were 
restricted from physically protesting. A related site called “AR Occupy Wall Street” 
styled itself as a “call to all AR activists,” and collects a series of protest-themed im-
ages from various AR designers.
Of course, the utility of these apps to the overall movement remains an open 
question. One first has to have a compatible device and software, then download the 
app (or subscribe to the right channel inside an app), then be in the correct location, 
then use the app, all before one can encounter the experience that the apps intend to 
convey. Someone who jumps through those hoops is likely to be someone already 
sympathetic to the cause – which means these may be the first real-world examples 
of AR’s tendency to entrench existing political divisions.
Nevertheless, these examples do illustrate AR’s power to crowd source a move-
ment’s message. They allow individual artists located anywhere in the world to add 
their own spin on the group’s message – using different perspectives, images, and 
even languages – in a way that no mere physical demonstration could ever hope to 
accomplish. If even one of those protest “filters” catches on with a critical mass of 
individuals, it could change the entire course of the movement.
This technique of spurring social change isn’t limited to protesters, either. The 
Dutch government recently used AR billboards as a form of experiential Public Ser-
vice Announcement. The goal was to avoid a situation like one that occurred in New 
York City, where passersby left a “homeless hero” to die in public after he saved a 
woman from a mugging. The billboard superimposed a violent criminal encounter 
over live video footage of the area where viewers stood. The onlookers could do 
nothing to interact with the scene or stop the crime. But they got a stark visual re-
minder of how appalling doing nothing can look.
POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS
Just as Barack Obama proved in 2008 that social media could be an effective means 
of rallying support, so too are political parties beginning to discover AR’s potential 
value in political campaigns. The Green Party in Germany partnered with Metaio to 
launch an app that lets constituents leave comments geo-tagged to specialized bill-
boards and specific physical locations and that represent a certain issue – and to hear 
pre-recorded statements by party officials about those very issues.
Just in time for the 2012 presidential campaign in the US, AR startup GoldRun 
announced a feature called “Visualize the Vote” that lets users pose for a picture with 
their favorite presidential candidate – super imposed over the user’s physical location 
– then share that photo with their friends.
NEW AUGMENTED COMMUNITIES
Several of the previous chapters have discussed different aspects of AR games. In 
Chapter 6, we saw how these experiences are giving players new reasons to get off 

280
CHAPTER 11  Politics and Civil Society
their couches and intermingle, often forming genuine communities in the process. 
This is a tangible example of how AR can contribute to social cohesion.
As society grows more accustomed to engaging with customizable layers of re-
ality, AR’s ability to affect social change will deepen exponentially. For example, 
GoldRun also announced plans to launch a location-based reminder service that au-
tomatically alerts you to a particular cause when you come within a certain distance 
of a related location. (Virtual personal assistants and similar apps offer analogous 
functionality.) The first example that was mentioned is showing you the image of a 
dog or cat when you walk within a mile of an animal shelter.
But this same technique could easily be applied to any social or political issue. 
Driving over a bridge might bring you a layer of information about the “pork barrel 
spending” that went into funding it. Entering a road construction area might prompt 
data on “your tax dollars at work,” or perhaps information about that company’s 
safety record. And whether a particular geotagged location sends you negatively or 
positively spun information could well depend on which political group’s channel 
you’ve already subscribed to (reinforcing a tendency toward political groupthink, as 
discussed below.)
Perhaps the most radical vision of AR’s impact on society can be found in Daniel 
Suarez’s books Daemon and Freedom™. In that two-part story, members of the AR-
driven “Darknet” form a networked society that begins to subvert and supplant the 
existing political and economic order. Members of the community wear AR eyewear 
that allows them to see the information on which their Darknet society is based. All 
manner of virtual information like that described above is available to these people, 
except in a fully immersive, always-on manner. If someone writes a virtual protest 
sign on the side of a building, for example, that sign is equally visible to Darknet 
members as if it had been written with physical paint.
But Suarez’s meditation on how AR would affect society goes deeper than virtual 
graffiti. Each of these people develop “reputation scores” that are visible to other 
Darknet members as numbers floating in midair above their heads. These scores are 
the cumulative averages of the “rating” that person has received from other Darknet 
members based on their credibility, honesty, proficiency, and the like. The higher that 
score – especially as the “base” number of ratings increases – the more trustwor-
thy that individual is considered. It would be like living in a world where everyone 
judged you by your rating on eBay.
Even more interesting is Suarez’s concept of the power meter. In addition to repu-
tation scores, Darknet members achieve experience levels by accomplishing various 
tasks – exactly as in a video game. The higher one’s experience level, the more abili-
ties they unlock within the Darknet, and the more data to which they gain access. In 
order to keep any one person or faction from gaining too much power over others 
in this way, however, all Darknet members are able to see not only the experience 
levels of others around them, but also the distribution of power within a given com-
munity. If power is concentrated in too few hands, the needle tips to the right. But if 
it’s dispersed too thinly – i.e., if there are no potential leaders within the group – the 

281
﻿ AR and the Erosion of Civil Society
needle leans left. The optimal distribution of power is considered to be somewhere 
in between those extremes.
In this way, Daniel Suarez posited a solution to the inequities protested by the 
Occupy movement well before that group existed. But is that the way in which AR 
is likely to shape society?
AR AND THE EROSION OF CIVIL SOCIETY
THE DEVALUATION OF PHYSICAL PROXIMITY AND INTERPERSONAL 
COMMUNITY
As a powerful new communications platform, it seems inevitable that AR will in-
crease the amount of interaction between individuals and draw them closer together. 
As mentioned above, we have already seen examples of this in the context of AR 
gaming. It is tempting to believe that these deeper interactions will be to the benefit of 
all, but that may be naïve. Instead, the shadowy netizens of Daniel Suarez’s Darknet 
may be a more realistic example. By its very nature, AR is an invisible medium in that, 
in most cases, it is not immediately recognizable by our unaided physical senses. It 
requires a digital device to decode physical objects and reveal the digital message hid-
den in plain sight. In this way, AR rewards the discovery of gnosis, i.e., metaphysical 
knowledge that cannot be derived through ordinary physical senses. One might refer 
to this particular means of divining special knowledge as “aug-gnosis.”
For this reason, AR is likely to build communities – but more often than in other 
types of groups, they may be isolated, bespoke communities that do not directly in-
teract with the general populace around them. Marshall McLuhan’s famous maxim 
that “the medium is the message” captures the fact that the means we use to convey 
information tends to shape how that information is understood and applied. Although 
it may be too severe to call AR “anti-social” or “anti-democratic,” a society in which 
AR is a prevalent or predominate mode of communication is, at best, a gated commu-
nity that can only be accessed using some sort of digital key. Indeed, a closer meta-
phor would be that AR enables the creation of multiple gated neighborhoods amidst 
and on top of each other, and that the neighborhood in which any given individual 
resides depends on which keys he holds.
We have already seen this to a degree in the way mobile devices have come to 
dominate our lives over the past decade. Most Americans today use a smartphone, 
tablet, or similarly interactive mobile device. A 2013 study found that the average 
person checks their mobile phone approximately 150 times per day, for such purposes 
as messaging, voice calls, and even just to get the time – to say nothing of internet use. 
During peak times, this amounted to once every six seconds for the highest-frequency 
users.3 In 2014, another study found that the average American adult spent 34 hours 
3Victoria Woollaston, How often do you check your phone? Mail Online (October 8, 2013), available at 
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-2449632/How-check-phone-The-average-person-does-
110-times-DAY-6-seconds-evening.html (last visited on September 5, 204).

282
CHAPTER 11  Politics and Civil Society
per month on mobile internet applications, seven more hours than they spend in front 
of desktop or laptop computers. Forty-seven percent of those used social media on 
their mobile devices on a daily basis.4 Therefore, as a result of today’s digital media, 
the gross number of social interactions may well be on the rise, but the increase in dig-
ital communication is coming at the expense of face-to-face conversations. (Fig. 11.2)
Accessing digital content via digital eyewear may liberate us from looking down 
at a hand-held device, but there is no reason to suspect that it will necessarily lead to 
more in-person interactions. Rather, our physical surroundings will take the place of 
our smartphone screens. If the other human beings in our vicinity are not part of the 
same digital simulation that we see through our eyewear, then we are more likely to 
look through them than at them. We may come to think of them as distractions from 
our personal realities rather than cohabitating the same physical plane.
At the very least, there will be fewer reasons to think of ourselves as being part 
of the same society as others just because they are in close physical proximity to us. 
Again, this is simply a continuation of a trend that is already well underway. When 
we sit in a crowded room ensconced in our mobile Facebook app, it is because we 
would rather interact (however obliquely) with our online friends than with the hu-
man beings to whom we are physically near. The more time we spend in digital 
worlds – whether through a social media platform or a massively multiplayer online 
4Greg Sterling, Nielsen: More Time on Internet Through Smartphones Than PCs, Marketing Land (February 
11, 2014), available at http://marketingland.com/nielsen-time-accessing-internet-smartphones-pcs-73683 
(last visited on September 5, 2014).
FIGURE 11.2
Mobile devices now permeate the lives of many individuals in contemporary society.

283
﻿ AR and the Erosion of Civil Society
roleplaying game – the more we come to consider the members of those groups 
(who could be actual people, virtual assistants, or AI-driven fictional characters) our 
“real” community, to the exclusion of the other people we encounter. A persistently 
augmented world frees (or “enslaves,” if you prefer) us from ever having to leave 
that digital world in which our digital friends live, even when we look away from a 
particular device with its two-dimensional screen. It is only natural, then, to expect 
that many of us will come to accord even more personal significance to the people 
with whom we interact digitally, and less to those in our physical proximity.
In the abstract, there may be nothing inherently wrong with this idea. The real-
world consequences, however, may include a fraying of the already-worn bonds and 
social contract that holds us together as a society. In communities where those bonds 
are already in danger of breaking, developments like these may be enough to bring 
them to an end.
POLITICAL GROUPTHINK, OR THE “ECHO CHAMBER” EFFECT
Another socially deleterious consequence of digital media that we already see at 
work by virtue of today’s technology is groupthink: the reinforcement of our pre-
existing opinions and the filtering out of anything that is inconsistent with those 
opinions. Psychologists for Social Responsibility define groupthink as follows:
Groupthink, a term coined by social psychologist Irving Janis (1972), occurs 
when a group makes faulty decisions because group pressures lead to a deterio-
ration of “mental efficiency, reality testing, and moral judgment” (p. 9). Groups 
affected by groupthink ignore alternatives and tend to take irrational actions that 
dehumanize other groups. A group is especially vulnerable to groupthink when 
its members are similar in background, when the group is insulated from outside 
opinions, and when there are no clear rules for decision making.5
To be sure, we do not need to wait for an augmented world to make political 
groupthink a reality in the United States. Commentators are already bemoaning the 
sharp rise in political partisanship and rancor, and the corresponding dysfunction of 
civil society.
The diversity of media channels and news sources makes such polarization orders 
of magnitude easier than it used to be. Whatever your political leaning, you can find 
a customized website, satellite radio station, news channel, and talk show host who 
will give you the news filtered through that perspective. Opposing viewpoints are 
increasingly things to be mocked, shouted down, or ignored, not to be respected, un-
derstood, or even considered. To see the consequences of this trend, one need look no 
further than the record-breaking level of gridlock in the United States Congress.6 On 
5Groupthink webpage, Psychologists for Social Responsibility website, available at http://www.psysr.
org/about/pubs_resources/groupthink%20overview.htm (last visited on September 5, 2014).
6Zach Carter and Will Wrigley, Do-Nothing Congress Challenges Record for Low Levels of Legislation In 
Fist Weeks of 2013, Huffington Post (Posted February 26, 2013), available at http://www.huffingtonpost.
com/2013/02/26/do-nothing-congress-house_n_2744597.html (last visited on September 5, 2014).

284
CHAPTER 11  Politics and Civil Society
the issue of the national debt ceiling, for example, two parties with deeply entrenched 
political ideologies played an unprecedented game of chicken while the threat of a 
sovereign debt default loomed, triggering a downgrade of the country’s creditworthi-
ness and a stock slide.
Even some of the most ardent and hard-working AR advocates acknowledge this 
concern. As hard as artist BC Biermann is working to enable ubiquitous AR experi-
ences, he freely acknowledges the drawbacks that would come with it. I asked him 
whether this ability to filter one’s experience of reality could lead to more political 
groupthink. “The question is right on target,” says BC, “and honestly, I have no good 
answer for it right now.” Eventually, he suggests, there should be a way to combine 
filtering with an avenue for unfiltered information as well. But the echo chamber 
problem is already inherent in our current media environment, he notes, and on bal-
ance, he believes that ending what he sees as commercial dominance of public spaces 
will still be a net-positive.
Others are more bullish on the conviction that the augmented medium will do 
much more foster education and open minds rather than box them in. Daqri CEO 
Brian Mullins is one such person. His favorite example is the scene in The Matrix 
where Trinity needs to learn how to fly a helicopter. “She just calls up the instruc-
tions,” he recounts, “and they’re delivered to her on the spot.” AR will likewise de-
liver information on the spot when needed. “AR will become a way to get knowledge 
in people’s heads much faster than any other way that we’ve done education,” Brian 
says. “It could possibly allow the sum total of human knowledge to be presented in 
the most effective way possible. Everybody should have access to that.”
ENFORCEMENT OF POLITICAL CORRECTNESS
One disturbing outgrowth of groupthink that is already becoming increasingly more 
evident by the day is the growing use of social media to enforce homogeneity of 
thought and shaming of minority (and even majority) views. Ubiquitous AR has the 
potential to carry this trend forward as powerfully as it could some of the other social 
phenomena described in this chapter.
In March 2014, for example, Mozilla’s co-founder and CEO Brendan Eich was 
driven to resign his position after a short but passionate online campaign seeking that 
result. His crime? Having made a donation in 2008 to support California’s Proposi-
tion 8, a law that a then-majority of the state’s voters passed to prohibit the recogni-
tion of same-sex marriage. Eich’s donation had been public knowledge since 2012, 
but the Supreme Court’s 2014 decision striking down Proposition 8 had emboldened 
those who sought to punish those who had supported it.
In the immediate aftermath of Eich’s resignation, even many of those who de-
nounced Proposition 8 distanced themselves from the shaming campaign against him. 
In the words of the popular marketing executive Ashley Brown, who is vocal in his sup-
port for same-sex marriage, what happened to Eich was “wrong. … While in hindsight 
Eich’s contribution to the Prop 8 campaign was probably unwise,” Brown wrote, “he 
is by all accounts a great, fair, and passionate leader. He also doesn’t shouldn’t have to 

285
﻿ AR and the Erosion of Civil Society
check his freedom of speech at the Mozilla front door. As long as it’s not a workplace 
matter, it’s as fine for someone to oppose same-sex marriage as to support it.”7
Yet the same story played out in the following weeks when a Duck Dynasty cast 
member (crudely) voiced a similar position on the same topic, and when HGTV 
cancelled Flip This House before it ever aired, because a little-known blog managed 
to stoke controversy over year-old comments of a similar nature made by the show’s 
would-be hosts, David and Jason Benham. After the latter incident, Brown wrote 
that “[t]he Eich disaster, the Duck Dynasty kerfuffle, and now this fiasco make 
clear that no one in business or entertainment can expect privacy of personal belief. 
We urgently need to settle as a society where our fundamental freedoms meet our 
professional lives. Until then, we’re living in the wild west ….”8
To be sure, there has been vociferous disagreement on political and social issues 
since the dawn of civilization. What is unique about these examples, however, is both 
the degree of access that the entire world has to virtually every recorded statement ever 
made by a particular person, and the ease with which any other individual can make 
their ire over those statements known to the rest of society. The internet – and particu-
larly social media – makes all of this not only possible, but so easy as to be inevitable.
The same ability of digital media to impose a viewpoint is seen in more subtle 
ways as well. For decades, courts and litigants have wrestled with the question of 
how accessible law enforcement booking photos – i.e., mug shots – should be to 
the public. For many years, courts (and most police departments) generally sided 
with newspapers and other media outlets who argued that the photos were public 
documents that should be made freely available under Freedom of Information laws. 
This is why we are accustomed to seeing such photos prominently displayed in news 
reports of a celebrity’s arrest.
Then the internet and big data came along and changed the equation. In recent 
years we have seen an explosion of mug shot websites that obtain huge troves of the 
photos, post them online, then demand extortionate “takedown fees” from embar-
rassed individuals. As a result, the legal status of mug shots has become a bit murkier.
Those campaigning to restrict access to the photos, however, have found an easier 
solution to litigation. They have instead put social pressure on the companies that 
make the mug shot websites possible. As a result, many credit card companies stopped 
processing payments for the sites, and search engines changed their algorithms to 
lower the sites’ popularity in search results.9 Overnight, the ability of these sites took 
a massive – and in some cases, lethal – hit.
7Ashley Brown, Brendan Eich’s Resignation Is Why We Need ENDA, The Dash (April 7, 2014), avail-
able at http://www.ashbrown.org/2014/04/brendan-eichs-resignation-is-why-we.html#.VAPLUfldV8F 
(last visited on September 5, 2014).
8Ashley Brown, What C-Suite Leaders Need to Understand About the Benham Brothers Fiasco, ash-
brown.org (May 10, 2014), available at http://www.ashbrown.org/2014/05/what-c-suite-leaders-need-
to-understand.html?m=1 (last visited on September 5, 2014).
9David Segal, Mug-Shot Websites, Retreating or Adapting, The New York Times (November 9, 2013), 
available at http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/10/your-money/mug-shot-websites-retreating-or-adapting.
html?_r=0 (last visited on September 5, 2014).

286
CHAPTER 11  Politics and Civil Society
Or consider the cases in which e-book publishers have unilaterally deleted copies 
of purchased books from customers’ mobile devices, along with any notes or an-
notations the user may have made.11 Such incidents have usually been commercially 
driven, because of disputes over intellectual property rights and the like. But there 
is no reason that internet-driven social pressure could not lead to similar decisions, 
echoing Rage Against the Machine’s lyric about modern thought control: “They 
don’t gotta burn the books, they just remove ‘em.”12
Ubiquitous AR will not fundamentally change this tendency to enforce a particu-
lar stance of particular political and social issues, but it will enhance the temptation 
and ability to do so. This phenomenon has become so much more prevalent in recent 
years only because, for the first time in millennia, virtually all of society interacts 
through the same platform – the internet. Like a late-game move in board game 
Othello, applying social pressure online is often the easiest way to flip the positions 
of the greatest numbers of individuals with the least amount of effort (Fig. 11.3). 
By extending the degree to which the internet envelops our daily activities, AR will 
magnify our exposure to digitally reiterated social messages.
FIGURE 11.3
The game Othello.10
11Brad Stone, Amazon Erases Orwell Books From Kindle, The New York Times, (July 17, 2009), avail-
able at http://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/18/technology/companies/18amazon.html (last visited on 
September 5, 2014).
12Rage Against the Machine Lyrics, Bulls on Parade, azlyrics.com, available at http://www.azlyrics.
com/lyrics/rageagainstthemachine/bullsonparade.html (last visited on September 5, 2014).
10© flickr user donger / cc by-nd 2.0 license. See http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/2.0/.

287
﻿ AR and the Erosion of Civil Society
DIMINISHED REALITY
AR apps will contribute to partisanship and polarization as much with what they 
prevent us from seeing as with what they display. In November 2009, Jamais Cascio 
published a spot-on piece in The Atlantic called “Filtering Reality: How an emerg-
ing technology could threaten civility.”13 Cascio saw in AR the potential to “strike a 
fatal blow to American civil society,” as people use their immersive AR eyewear “to 
block any kind of unpalatable visual information, from political campaign signs to 
book covers.” Moreover, as those devices become more able to give us information 
about particular individuals in our field of view (perhaps based on facial recognition 
technology, social media-linked RFID tags, or nanotaggants), we can start blocking 
those people as well. “You don’t want to see anybody who has donated to the Palin 
2012 campaign?” Cascio writes. “Gone, their faces covered up by black circles.”
Again, we can already see the results of similar motivations today. A photo taken 
in the White House situation room on the day Osama Bin Laden was killed appeared 
on newspapers and websites across the world. Di Tzeitung, a Brooklyn-based Hasidic 
newspaper, wanted to use it as well – but its religious rules do not allow it publish pho-
tographs of women. Their solution? They simply edited out the two women present in 
the picture, and said nothing about it to their readers – until they got caught.
People are already talking about the ability of AR to do the same thing to our everyday 
lives, in real time. They call it “diminished reality” (DR) – augmenting our view of the 
world not to add more data, but to make things we don’t want to see disappear. (Fig. 11.4) 
FIGURE 11.4
An example of “diminished reality.”
13Jamais Cascio, Filtering Reality, The Atlantic (November 1, 2009), available at http://www.theatlantic.
com/magazine/archive/2009/11/filtering-reality/307713/ (last visited on September 5, 2014).

288
CHAPTER 11  Politics and Civil Society
AR/DR apps would not have to be directly related to politics in order to have a negative 
effect on civil society. Suppose someone does not want to see evidence of poverty in their 
neighborhood. AR could make those ratty foreclosures look like splendid estates, and the 
homeless panhandler on the corner appear as if he’s wearing a tuxedo. DR apps could 
simply block them from view altogether, using an algorithm to extrapolate the back-
ground view behind them and show you that instead. The less we see of the negative as-
pects of society, the less motivated we will be to remedy them. Out of sight, out of mind.
The same technology has implications for race relations as well. In 2009, Hewlett 
Packard stepped into a firestorm of criticism when consumers discovered that its 
facial recognition technology did not work very well on people with dark skin 
(Fig. 11.5). Now consider more malicious apps intentionally designed to produce the 
same result – apps that recognize a particular shade of melanin and replace it with 
another – so that the user can live in their own artificial version of a racial utopia. 
Such augmentations would make it that much harder to ever moderate, reform, or 
even challenge an individual’s racist attitudes.
LABELING OTHERS – LITERALLY
Perhaps even more corrosive to civil society than ignoring people with opposing view-
points or different ethnicities is the ability to (literally, in this case) label and objectify 
people. Cascio asks, “You want to know who exactly gave money to the 2014 ban on 
SUVs? Easy – they now have green arrows pointing at their heads.” Even more probable 
are labels that AR users choose for themselves. Social media is likely to be one of the pri-
mary forces driving the adoption of AR. As soon as the technological capacity is there, 
expect to see Facebook profiles and Twitter feeds floating over their authors’ heads.
FIGURE 11.5
A facial recognition app that sparked controversy by being less able to recognize darker-
skinned faces.

289
﻿ AR and the Erosion of Civil Society
Again, we already have real-world precedents. Cascio highlighted one:
After California’s Prop 8 ban on gay marriage passed, opponents of the measure 
dug up public records of donors supporting the ban, and linked that data to an 
online map. Suddenly, you could find out which of your neighbors (or the busi-
nesses you frequent) were so opposed to gay marriage that they donated to the 
cause. Now imagine that instead of a map, those records were combined with an 
AR system able to identify faces.
This precise scenario is all too likely in light of what happened to Brendan Eich 
and others for supporting the same measure.
There is an endless array of other labels that users may want to see hovering over 
other peoples’ heads as well – including tags identifying religious affiliations, club 
memberships, socioeconomic background, alumni groups, fraternal orders, or sexual 
proclivities. That would be as simple as importing one’s Facebook or other social 
media profile into AR space, something that will certainly happen as soon as tech-
nologically possible. And if we choose to see such labels in a real-time AR display, 
it is probably because we either want to associate with, or disassociate from, “those 
kinds” of people.
Or worse. Recall the case of Michael Enright, the New York college student who, 
in August 2010, went out looking for a Muslim to kill. According to Enbright’s con-
fession,14 when he asked his cabbie, Ahmed Sharif, if he was a Muslim and the driver 
said “yes,” Enbright stabbed him several times. If Enbright had been wearing AR 
eyewear that tagged Sharif (or anyone else, rightly or wrongly) as a Muslim, he 
would not have even had to ask. Instead, Enbright or someone like him could seclude 
themselves on a hidden perch with a rifle and wait for their chosen victims to come 
into view – lit up with targeting information just like a video game.
With apps like these running in our AR eyewear, literally everyone we meet dur-
ing the course of a day could come pre-labeled as a friend or enemy – or at least as 
interesting or uninteresting. What space will that leave for getting to know someone 
as an individual? For learning from someone with experiences that are different than 
ours? For taking seriously a viewpoint that doesn’t already fit into our worldview?
Such a world would certainly “diminish” our realities – in more ways than one. 
When I was in high school, we often read the Opposing Viewpoints series of book-
lets, each one of which summarized differing views on a particular subject. I’ve al-
ways remembered the slogan printed on those books: “Those who do not know their 
opponents’ arguments do not completely understand their own.” It’s a good reminder 
that a truly critical thinker is never 100% convinced that his own perception and 
understanding of any given issue is entirely complete or correct. Even strong opinions 
can be further nuanced, modified, reconsidered – or, if nothing else, strengthened – by 
confronting an opposing viewpoint. And even the most passionate advocate can still 
14Shayna Jacobs, “Cabbie Slasher” Michael Enright pleads guilty to Muslim hate attack, New York 
Daily News (June 11, 2013), available at http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/cabbie-slasher-michael-
enright-pleads-guilty-muslim-hate-attack-article-1.1369610 (last visited on September 5, 2013).

290
CHAPTER 11  Politics and Civil Society
acknowledge the basic human dignity and worth of someone who disagrees with him. 
Disagreement and debate can – and should – be a respectful, constructive process.
People who understand that concept are a necessary prerequisite to a healthy civil 
society and a functioning democracy. And at this point in American history, we could 
use many more such people.
HOPE REMAINS
Simply banning AR or DR applications is not the answer. That is not a realistic option 
in a free society, nor should we throw the baby of progress out with the bathwater of 
misuse even if it were possible to do so. The only question is how we as individuals 
will apply these tools, and how we allow them to shape our society.
It is not inevitable that widespread use of AR will visit upon us all of the social 
ills listed in this chapter. As BC Biermann encourages and present-day AR games 
show is possible, those developing the medium should be intentional about using AR 
to draw people into genuine community and real conversations – interactions with 
more depth than what today’s two-dimensional screen-based social media allow. Will 
Wright, who created such acclaimed games as SimCity, The Sims, and Spore, gave a 
similar admonition in his keynote address to the 2013 Augmented World Expo. He 
said, “I’m less interested in putting zombies on the real world and more interested in 
how we focus in on what’s actually there.”15 He went on to extoll the “tremendous 
value” that diminished (or “decimated,” as he called it) reality has to remove the 
excess information that society already throws at us, in order to train our focus on 
the things most important to us. With tongue only halfway in cheek, Wright even 
suggested that the Amish were the group of people who have done the best job to 
date about being intentional in selecting only the technology that enhances, rather 
than distract from, the way in which they desire to experience the world around them.
Wright ended his speech by encouraging developers to design AR media that al-
lows us to experience the physical world more viscerally, in a way that works with 
the user’s intuition instead of against it. In sum, the AR he wants to experience is that 
which “helps me see beauty in the world, and not to see the world as just a better way 
to browse the internet.” 16
A few hours’ drive south of the Santa Clara-based AWE conference, educators 
at Fuller Theological Seminary reached remarkably similar conclusions about the 
promise of AR.17 Examining an educational program of theirs that interwove digital 
interaction with interpersonal contact, and contrasting it against wholly online learn-
ing experiences such as those offered in bespoke virtual worlds like Second Life, 
17Augmented Reality: Technology and Personal Presence, Seminary of the Future (December 21, 2011), 
available at http://future.fuller.edu/Discussion_Points/Discussion_Point_6__Augmented_Reality__Technology_
and_Personal_Presence/ (last visited on September 5, 2014).
15AugmentedRealityOrg, Will Wright –Keynote AWE 2013, YouTube (Published on June 9, 2013), 
available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4d0k_7pdPGg (last visited on September 5, 2014).
16Id.

291
﻿ Hope Remains
opened their eyes to the power of augmented education.18 “Augmented reality,” wrote 
the Fuller authors, “recognizes that the most meaningful experiences and relation-
ships in human beings’ lives take place in the created world, and that no artificial, 
sub-created world will ever be able to approach the created world for richness, depth, 
and meaning. Technology’s role, including information technology, is not to replace 
this world but unearth its latent wealth of potential.”
The types of AR experiences that Wright and the educators at Fuller describe 
could greatly strengthen, rather than fray, the bonds of civic society, not to men-
tion our own individual abilities to appreciate life experiences. The more we think 
through questions like these ahead of time, the better our chances will be of using AR 
in a mature, constructive manner.
18Reading the entire Fuller article in context shows that they used the term “augmented reality” a bit 
more broadly than how I have chosen to do in this book. The Fuller authors use it as a synonym for 
mixing online interactions with in-person education, not necessarily for the narrower, more technologi-
cally oriented understanding of superimposing digital information on the physical world. That said, the 
reasoning of the article – especially in the way that it contrasts AR to VR – is apt here.

293
CHAPTER
Augmented Reality Law, Privacy, and Ethics﻿
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Eroding our ability to make ethical decisions
• Corrupting our ethical decisions
• Forming bad habits
INTRODUCTION
“You have a responsibility …: to understand what you are doing and how you are 
doing it and obey [social rules] appropriately ….”1 That is what Google’s executive 
chairman Eric Schmidt was quoted as saying in an interview about the impact Glass 
will have on social etiquette. As a genre-creating device, Glass has served as the post-
er child for the ways in which wearable computing – and eventually AR—will shape 
individual behavior and social norms. Schmidt’s point was that, as the ones helping 
to induce the change, Glass users should accept responsibility for their actions and 
for the way those actions make others feel. They should behave with an appropriate 
level of self-awareness and caution, lest they actually become the “Glasshole” that 
others may accuse them of being.
The same advice will apply with equal, if not greater, force as true AR becomes 
ubiquitous. As discussed in the previous chapter, the very nature of AR is to provide 
access to secret knowledge, which inherently affords some measure of power. Users 
must be cautious and transparent about their exercise of that power, lest it become a 
corruptive influence on their own ethical and moral sensibilities.
WILL AUGMENTED WORLD TECHNOLOGIES ERODE 
OUR ABILITY TO MAKE ETHICAL DECISIONS?
SELF-MONITORING APPS ARE INCREASINGLY GIVING  
US ETHICAL GUIDANCE
The “quantified self” movement is all the rage as of this writing. Dozens of wearable 
devices currently on the market or about to launch are designed to sense information 
Personal Ethics
12
1Keerthi Chandrashekar, Google Glass: Schmidt Admits ‘We’ll Have to Develop Some New Social Etiquette,’ 
Latinos Post (posted April 24, 2013), available at: http://www.latinospost.com/articles/17372/20130424/
google-glass-schmidt-admits-well-develop-new-social-etiquette.htm (last visited on Sept. 9, 2014).

294
CHAPTER 12  Personal Ethics
about their user’s physical condition, such as heart rate, physical activity, and hours 
slept. Popular entries in this category include the Fitbit and Jawbone Up bracelets; 
there are new lines of beds that track the same information.2 Mobile app stores are 
awash with health monitoring software. Apple’s HealthKit—the newest and most 
high-profile example as of this writing—promises an entire ecosystem of apps that it 
says “just might be the beginning of a health revolution.”3
To be sure, having more and better information about ourselves has the potential 
to help us improve our lives. Futurist and author John C. Havens has dedicated a 
good portion of his professional career to advocating this view. He is the founder of 
the H(app)athon Project, an organization dedicated to “identifying how our actions 
affect our wellbeing [so] we can track what behaviors increase our happiness.’4 In 
March 2014, Havens also released the book Hacking Happiness: Why Your Personal 
Data Counts and How Tracking It Can Change the World, in which “Havens propos-
es that [the increased collection of ‘quantified self’ data] will lead to new economic 
policies that redefine the meaning of ‘wealth,’ allowing governments to create policy 
focused on purpose rather than productivity.”5 Through several personal interactions, 
I have gotten to know the sincerity with which Havens pursues these goals, and I am 
encouraged by the potential his work has to make a meaningful difference in people’s 
lives.
But he has his work cut out for him. The trouble so far is that very few people 
currently seem to know what to do with all this self-tracking information. In the 
summer of 2014, Fortune magazine reported that as many as “[85%] of fitness track-
ing devices [sold] had become inactive,”6 because people had simply stopped using 
them. Although these devices and apps offer encouragement and superficial feedback 
on how we’re doing, it turns out that people’s habits are not changing very much as 
a result.
This is not to say that the industry is giving up on the quantified self. Quite to 
the contrary, observed Fortune, the newest wave of devices is taking a harder line 
with their users. “Instead of incentivizing users to exercise or sleep or eat healthy, 
and rewarding them for it with virtual badges and digital high-fives, this new class 
of devices use shame, guilt, and in one case, a physical shock, to keep their owners 
in line.”7
2Dana Wooman, Sleep Number’s x12 Smart Bed Monitors Your Sleeping Habits, engadget, available 
at: http://www.engadget.com/2014/01/07/sleep-number-x12-bed/ (last visited on Sept. 9, 2014).
3Health: An Entirely New Way to Use Your Health and Fitness Information, Apple’s iOS 8 web page, 
available at: https://www.apple.com/ios/ios8/health/ (last visited on Sept. 9, 2014).
4http://happathon.com/about/.
5Amazon book summary, available at: http://www.amazon.com/Hacking-Happiness-Personal-Counts-
Tracking/dp/0399165312.
6Erin Griffith, Introducing iPhone Masochism: Soon Everything You Own Will Judge You, Fortune, 
June 9, 2014, available at: http://fortune.com/2014/06/09/introducing-iphone-masochism-soon-every-
thing-you-own-will-judge-you/ (last visited on Sept. 9, 2014).
7Id.

295
Augmented World Technologies
As one mild example, take the devices currently offered by Palo Alto start-up 
Lumo. Each is focused on encouraging proper posture. The Lumo Back is a strap 
worn around the lower back, while the Lumo Lift clips to a user’s shirt underneath 
the collar bone. Each monitors the user’s posture, and gives a gentle vibration when-
ever their wearer slouches. Analogous devices from other companies provide haptic 
feedback to discourage speed eating8 or too much sitting.9 “But the most punishing 
device,” says Fortune, “is the Pavlok, its name a nod to the father of classical con-
ditioning research”. According to its creators, this bracelet “doesn’t just track what 
you do. It transforms who you are.”10 Users can program it to track any number of 
goals, including when they wake up, their physical activity, how they use the Inter-
net, whether they meditate, and so on. “If the user hasn’t completed their goal [by 7 
p.m. each day], they get a shock through the bracelet and charged money through the 
app.”11 It can also “shame post” automated messages to the user’s Facebook page, 
letting their friends know that the user is a slacker, or deny the user access to their 
phone.12 “If [users] complete their goal, [however,] they get rewards like lottery tick-
ets or money.”13 “This is an expensive spin on the idea of wearing an elastic band that 
you ping when you have thoughts or behavior you want to change.”14 The device’s 
creator, Maneesh Sethi, offers his own social science research to justify his approach, 
arguing that real consequences are necessary in order to incentivize users to actu-
ally meet their goals. Sethi practices what he preaches; he gained his initial infamy 
by paying a woman $8 an hour to slap him in the face whenever he wasted time on 
Facebook (Fig. 12.1).
When such applications run on digital eyewear, they may very well resemble 
an active, three-dimensional version of the content filters that can be found in most 
Internet browsers today. Family-friendly applications will likely take advantage of 
“diminished reality” techniques to remove from the user’s field of view material 
deemed objectionable. The next chapter discusses the availability of pornography in 
the augmented medium, but digital eyewear could just as easily remove or regulate 
such fleshly temptations that we encounter in the physical world. A married man 
8HAPIfork: Eat Slowly, Lose Weight, Feel Great, HAPI.com webpage, available at: http://www.hapi.
com/product/hapifork (last visited on Sept. 9, 2014).
9Darma Sitting Wisdom, darma.co webpage, available at: http://darma.co/ (last visited on Sept. 9, 2014).
10Pavlok: A Personal Coach on Your Wrist, pavlok.com webpage, available at: http://pavlok.com/ (last 
visited on Sept. 9, 2014) (emphasis original).
11Erin Griffith, Introducing iPhone Masochism: Soon Everything You Own Will Judge You, Fortune, June 
9, 2014, available at: http://fortune.com/2014/06/09/introducing-iphone-masochism-soon-everything-you-
own-will-judge-you/ (last visited on Sept. 9, 2014).
12Pavlok: A Personal Coach on Your Wrist, pavlok.com webpage, available at: http://pavlok.com/ (last 
visited on Sept. 9, 2014).
13Erin Griffith, Introducing iPhone Masochism: Soon Everything You Own Will Judge You, Fortune, 
June 9, 2014, available at: http://fortune.com/2014/06/09/introducing-iphone-masochism-soon-every-
thing-you-own-will-judge-you/ (last visited on Sept. 9, 2014).
14Dr. Sheri Jacobson, clinical director of Harley Therapy, London, quoted in James Trew, Pavlok 
is a Habit-Forming Wearable That Will Shock You, Engadget, available at: http://www.engadget.
com/2014/07/04/pavlok-wearable/ (last visited on Sept. 9, 2014).

296
CHAPTER 12  Personal Ethics
wearing such glasses may see black rectangles interposed over his view of passing 
women in short skirts, for example—or, if the glasses are made by Pavlok, he may 
receive an electric jolt each time the glasses catch him looking.
On one level, external reinforcements, both negative and positive, have always 
had their place in shaping our decisions. But contemporary ethicists are troubled 
by the inexorable growth in outsourcing our ethical decision making to digital as-
sistants. Professors Thomas Seager and Evan Selinger (of Arizona State University 
and Rochester Institute of Technology, respectively) have studied the new wave of 
behavior-reinforcing apps, and predict that “the range of ethical dilemmas they can 
weigh in on will only increase. At this rate, Siri 5.0 may be less a personal assistant 
than an always-available guide to moral behavior.”15 They refer to such apps as “digi-
tal Jiminy Crickets,” after the omnipresent voice of reason in Disney’s Pinocchio. 
With good reason, however, they do not view this possibility as a positive one.
The belief that “endurance builds character”16 is ancient wisdom that is still  
repeated throughout popular culture (though often in a less-than-sincere manner17). 
At its root, this concept recognizes that exercising one’s will to choose a course of 
action that one believes to be morally right, even though it results in less immediate 
15Evan Selinger and Thomas Seager, Digital Jiminy Crickets, article from Future Tense on Slate (July 
13, 2012), available at: http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2012/07/ethical_deci-
sion_making_apps_damage_our_ability_to_make_moral_choices_.html (last visited on Sept. 9, 2014).
16Romans 5:4-6, Bible Gateway, available at: https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Romans+ 
5%3A4-6&version=CEV (last visited on Sept. 9, 2014).
17Build character entry, Urban Dictionary, available at: http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.
php?term=builds%20character (last visited on Sept. 9, 2014).
FIGURE 12.1
The inspiration for Pavlok.

297
gratification than the alternatives, strengthens the individual’s ability to make simi-
larly virtuous choices in the future. In this sense, it is directly analogous to physical 
exercise. Repeatedly lifting heavy objects results in short-term injury to muscle fi-
bers, but when the body repairs itself, the muscles grow larger and stronger. No pain, 
no gain. Consistently relying on another person (or robot) to do the heavy lifting, 
however, leaves us with no opportunity to develop our own physical strength, so our 
muscles atrophy. We get weaker and less healthy.
So it is with exercising our ethical muscles. Consistently relying on others—
whether other people or digital Jiminy Crickets—to make the hard decisions for us 
leaves us with less ability in the next situation to decide correctly for ourselves. That 
is not to say that advice and counsel are necessarily debilitating. To the contrary, both 
ancient18 and modern19 philosophers have praised individuals who choose to consider 
the input of others when making ethical decisions. But the decision must ultimately 
be made by the individual in order for that person to gain any moral benefit. Defer-
ring instead to the advice of a piece of software does nothing to challenge an indi-
vidual’s moral convictions, and therefore threatens to atrophy the person’s ability to 
resist temptations to decide otherwise the next time they encounter a similar ethical 
dilemma.
Philosopher Robert J. Howell of Southern Methodist University took this trend 
to its logical conclusion in the 2012 scholarly essay “Google Morals, Virtue, and the 
Asymmetry of Deference.”20 As a hypothetical example, Howell posited an app he 
called “Google Morals”—the ultimate digital Jiminy Cricket. “When faced with a 
moral quandary or deep ethical question,” went Howell’s thought experiment, the 
users of this app “can type a query and the answer comes out forthwith …. Never 
again will I be paralyzed by [an ethical dilemma]. I’ll just Google it.”21 Realized in 
augmented reality, such an app may very well take the form of an angelic adviser 
seated visibly on the user’s shoulder; Evan Selinger even suggests that alerts from the 
app could take the form of “the sound of angelic harps playing.”22
Summarizing Howell’s essay, Selinger tells us that the most obvious concerns 
with this scenario are not its most troublesome features. For the sake of argu-
ment, he explains, “[l]et’s imagine [the app] is infallible, always truthful and 100% 
Augmented World Technologies
18Proverbs 15:22, Bible Hub, available at: http://biblehub.com/proverbs/15-22.htm (last visited on 
Sept. 9, 2014).
19Evan Selinger, Would Outsourcing Morality to Technology Diminish Our Humanity? HuffPost 
Tech on Huffington Post (posted Sept. 19, 2012), available at: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/
evan-selinger/google-morals_b_1895331.html (last visited on Sept. 9, 2014).
20Robert J. Howell, Google Morals, Virtue, and the Asymmetry of Deference, Nous 48(3), 389–415, 
Wiley Online Library (Sept. 2014), available at: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1468-
0068.2012.00873.x/abstract;jsessionid=90CA5DF6B071148314493533F8D7D437.f01t02 (last visited 
on Sept. 10, 2014).
21Id.
22Evan Selinger, Would Outsourcing Morality to Technology Diminish Our Humanity? HuffPost 
Tech on Huffington Post (posted Sept. 19, 2012), available at: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/
evan-selinger/google-morals_b_1895331.html (last visited on Sept. 9, 2014).

298
CHAPTER 12  Personal Ethics
hacker-proof. The government can’t mess with it to brainwash you. Friends can’t 
tamper with it to pull a prank. Rivals can’t adjust it to gain competitive advantage. 
Advertisers can’t tweak it to lull you into buying their products.”23 What is more, use 
of the app is not compulsory, so it is not a question of losing individual autonomy. 
“Even so, Howell contends, depending on it is a bad idea.”24
Why? Because “deferring to [an app to make moral decisions] can reveal pre-
existing character problems and stunt moral growth, both short and long term.”25 
In other words, it would demonstrate just how ethically immature the user is. Even 
asking some questions would reveal more about the user than the user could ever 
hope to gain from the app. “For example,” says Selinger, “if you need to ask Google 
Morals whether it is wrong to tell a lying promise to your best friend, you display 
callousness and disloyalty. This, in turn, reveals poor habituation and the influence 
of an underdeveloped character.”26
Deference to such an app could also prevent the user from ever gaining the expe-
rience necessary to flex, let alone strengthen, his or her moral muscles. Among the 
hazards that Selinger (elaborating on Howell’s argument) identifies27 are that users: 
“might not exert the effort to learn why a course of action is good or bad”; might 
become intellectually lazy; might fail to see the broader principles behind distinct 
moral decisions; and might, by virtue of having delegated away all of the higher 
reasoning functions that distinguish us from other creatures, ultimately lose their hu-
manity. Howell’s highly technical essay and Selinger’s summary of it examine these 
arguments in much greater detail, but the implications are clear. People are increas-
ingly relying on wearable devices and mobile apps to help them make decisions. Tak-
ing advantage of useful tools is fine, but the temptation to abdicate even more of our 
personal decision-making responsibility to software will only increase as augmented 
interfaces make interacting with them all the more intuitive and frictionless. If we 
are not careful, such habits could easily detract from our ability to fulfill our human 
potential, leaving us with a morally diminished reality.
Even for individuals who opt not to use ethical-advice apps, their mere avail-
ability could radically alter what others expect of us. “Much the same way the rise 
of Blackberries and mobiles has raised expectations around instant reachability and 
response,” writes MIT research fellow Michael Schrage, “the pervasiveness of [such 
software] seems sure to reset expectations about self-monitoring and interpersonal 
behaviors. It may be considered rude—and/or remarkably unprofessional—not to 
have your devices make sure you’re behaving yourself.”28 “[L]arge-scale adoption[, 
23Id.
24Id.
25Id.
26Id.
27Id.
28Michael Schrage, Managing Yourself With Your Smartphone, Harvard Business Review, June 6, 
2011, available at: http://blogs.hbr.org/2011/06/managing-yourself-smartphone/ (last visited on Sept. 
10, 2014).

299
Will Augmented World Technologies Corrupt our Ethical Decisions?
then,] might do more than change personal behavior. It could transform ethical 
norms—the very fabric of what members of a society expect from one another.”29
WILL AUGMENTED WORLD TECHNOLOGIES CORRUPT OUR 
ETHICAL DECISIONS?
Tish Shute, cofounder of the Augmented World Expo, is fond of referring to aug-
mented reality as a “superpower”—and of pointing out that there is nothing to guar-
antee that those with such powers will become superheroes as opposed to supervil-
lains.30 After all, “power tends to corrupt,”31 as Sir John Dalberg-Acton first said and 
social science has repeatedly confirmed.32 As discussed in Chapter 11, AR is, by its 
very nature, a “secret” medium, accessible only to those with access to the necessary 
decoding device. And as another famous maxim puts it, “knowledge is power.” It 
seems logical, then, that the more tightly the access to a particular augmented me-
dium remains controlled, the more the power to access the secret knowledge within 
that medium will tend to corrupt those who have it.
It is somewhat foreboding, therefore, that three completely separate short films 
about augmented reality released between 2012 and 2014 depict nearly identical vi-
sions of that exact prospect.
SIGHT
The first is a 7-min short film called Sight, released in August 2012 (Fig. 12.2). It 
follows a young man in his late 20s/early 30s as he prepares for and goes out on a 
date. Both he and his date wear the “Sight” line of AR contact lenses, which in that 
future has become commonplace. The main character, it turns out, works for the 
Sight company, and the plot centers around his use of a “dating app” installed on his 
contacts. The app acts as his wingman, reading the woman’s body language for signs 
of interest and intoxication, and giving helpful suggestions such as “act interested” 
and “suggest different location.”
These tips become vital for helping him overcome some early faux pas in the 
date and in eventually persuading her to come home with him for a nightcap. The 
system apparently even “keeps score” of his successes and awards badges for in-date 
30Tish Shute, Augmented Humans in an Augmented World: Quantified Desire, SlideShare (June 14, 
2013), available at: http://www.slideshare.net/TishShute/augmented-humansaugmentedworld (last visited 
on Sept. 10, 2014).
31John Dalberg-Acton, 1st Baron Acton, Wikipedia, available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_
Dalberg-Acton,_1st_Baron_Acton (last visited on Sept. 9, 2014).
32Christopher Shea, Why Power Corrupts, Smithsonian Magazine, Oct. 2012, available at: http://www.
smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/why-power-corrupts-37165345/?no-ist (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
29Evan Selinger and Thomas Seager, Digital Jiminy Crickets, article from Future Tense on Slate (July 
13, 2012), available at: http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2012/07/ethical_deci-
sion_making_apps_damage_our_ability_to_make_moral_choices_.html (last visited on Sept. 9, 2014).

300
CHAPTER 12  Personal Ethics
accomplishments. It’s those badges that ultimately give him away; when his date sees 
the virtual icons with her own contacts and recognizes that she’s being played, she 
storms off toward the door. That’s when the lead character’s creepiness goes from 
subtle to overt. He commands her to stop, and she freezes. Exactly why is unclear; 
there is debate in my circles as to whether the system somehow takes control of her 
body, or whether she was a virtual character all along, a test run of the dating pro-
gram. In any event, his mastery over her actions is clearly against her will. The video 
ends with him intoning, “Let’s try this again.”
INFINITY AR
The second video, released June 12, 2013, is remarkably similar to Sight—except that 
it is a 3-min concept video by what held itself out as an actual AR company (com-
plete with its own OTC stock symbol) working on actual AR products (Fig. 12.3). 
This video (which echoes elements of Sight, Google Glass promos, and the real AR 
Pool33 application) also follows a hip young man who uses a nondescript pair of 
AR glasses to augment his night on the town. Our hero begins his evening by using 
the 3D instructions given to him by his AR glasses to hustle other competitors in 
a billiards contest, all of whom appear unaware that he’s being guided by prompts 
from his glasses overlaid onto the pool table. He then follows up his conquest of 
the pool table by approaching a svelte, young bartender and wowing her with the 
secret knowledge conveyed to him by his eyewear. First, the glasses read her face to 
(somehow) determine her astrological sign, and register her as being “intrigued” by 
his ability to discern it. A little conversation and a Facebook friend request later, she 
shows up at his house, where (as in Sight) he watches virtual TV programs projected 
333D Perspectives, “AR Pool” @ Laval Virtual 2010, YouTube (uploaded on April 7, 2010), available 
at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p_onAohGmrs (last visited on Sept. 9, 2014).
FIGURE 12.2
The brilliant short film Sight.

301
Will Augmented World Technologies Corrupt our Ethical Decisions?
on his empty wall. The glasses then somehow figure out her favorite wine, and read 
her as being “impressed” by his selection. The video ends there, but with the clear 
implication that the protagonist’s luck will not.34
EX POST FACTO
“Living in a world of grey, two M.I.T. graduates invent a gadget that will not only 
rival one of the world’s largest tech companies but the morality of our society as a 
whole.” That is how first-time filmmaker Antonio R. Cannady summarizes Ex Post 
Facto, the 13-min short film he published on YouTube on August 5, 2014. The film’s 
subtitle is even more direct: “If rape was legal, would you do it?”
Most of the film is dialogue between the two aforementioned recent college grads 
who have invented a new digital eyewear device with great commercial potential. 
Exactly what it does isn’t made clear at first, but what is clear is the stock role that 
each character plays in the story. One is the Voice of Greed and Amorality; he actu-
ally says “morals hinder progress; do yourself a favor and dump ‘em.” The other is 
the Good Guy With the Conflicted Conscience about what effect the device might 
have on others.
From both the dialogue and the characters’ nonverbal interactions, we soon get 
the idea that the device does something that women will find creepy and invasive. 
The characters are told that “women’s rights groups, religious groups, civil rights 
groups” and others will be up in arms over the device. The Voice of Greed brushes 
FIGURE 12.3
A scene from the creepy concept video posted by Infinity AR.
34Interestingly, this initial version of the video was later removed by YouTube for violating its terms of 
service. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8GcYWdg81BQ. On April 23, 2014, Infinity AR reposted 
a new version of the same video with most of the interaction between the protagonist and the bartender 
removed. Infinity AR, Infinity Augmented Reality Concept Video, YouTube (published on April 23, 
2014), available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fJI8tNG1rbQ (last visited on Sept. 9, 2014).

302
CHAPTER 12  Personal Ethics
these comments off. Then another character makes an offhand remark that the device 
“basically rapes” people—a characterization already foreshadowed in the film’s pro-
motional material. This comes off as a figure of speech, and at this point in watching 
the film, I was sure that the fictional device does exactly what I have often predicted: 
capture the three-dimensional images of unsuspecting strangers so they can be made 
into digital avatars for prurient uses by others.
Sure enough, that’s exactly where the plot goes. When Good Guy can no longer 
take being spurned by the Girl Next Door, he spies her through the window using 
his invention (Fig. 12.4). The eyewear recognizes the woman and processes her 
three-dimensional image. In seconds, Good Guy sees, through his eyewear, a digital 
version of the scanned woman walk into his apartment door with a sexy outfit and a 
come-hither look (Fig. 12.5). You can guess where their interactions go from there.
The final moments of the film then take an unexpected and unnecessary twist 
that leapfrogs well beyond the degree to which any reasonable viewer would be 
willing to suspend disbelief. By some magical plot device that is never explained, 
the real-life woman whose image was scanned by the glasses actually feels, physi-
cally and in real time, what Good Guy is doing to her digital avatar. So, whether he 
realizes it or not (and the whole moral dilemma leading up to this moment suggests 
that he does), he ends up actually raping this woman, albeit from a distance.
Inexplicable and disturbing though this plot device is, Mr. Cannady intended it 
to drive home his conviction that AR will seduce many of its users into unethical 
behavior. As he told me:
Yes, it was a very intentional and harsh commentary on the morality of this technology. 
… [T]he bad apples that populate our society who will most likely turn this fun device 
FIGURE 12.4
A scene from Ex Post Facto.

303
Will Augmented World Technologies Corrupt our Ethical Decisions?
into something of a nightmarish proportions. Everyone from hackers, pedophiles and 
morally bankrupt individuals will find ways to misuse [digital eyewear] for their own 
personal and misguided use. I wanted my film Ex Post Facto to paint a harsh and 
cold reality to get people to think before embarrassing this technology.
Whatever other logical or artistic disagreements I may have with Mr. Cannady 
about this film, these concerns certainly ring true.
A DISTURBING UNANIMITY
Knowledge is power. And in each of these three videos, the male protagonist uses it 
to gain an advantage—specifically, sexual dominance—over an unsuspecting female 
character, through either subtle influence or overt force. In each case, if the woman had 
known that the man was using the app, it would have completely undermined the effect. 
We see that in the female Sight character’s angry reaction to discovering the app, and 
it’s safe to assume that the Infinity AR video’s bartender would not have been particu-
larly “intrigued” or “impressed” to know that her suitor was simply using his glasses 
to scour her social media accounts. The woman in Ex Post Facto expressly rejects the 
male character’s advances, and never anticipates her impending augmented assault.
Of course, sex sells, and there’s a bit of wish fulfillment going on here too. Men 
have been imagining ways to increase their odds with women throughout human his-
tory. Nor are these videos the first to wonder how digital eyewear might be used in 
dating. The fact that the Infinity AR video got more than 1.5 million YouTube views 
suggests that viewers liked what they saw. Ex Post Facto, on the other hand, leaves 
no room for private titillation, and instead forces viewers to confront the stark moral 
consequences of this power imbalance.
FIGURE 12.5
The wish-fulfilling avatar created by the AR eyewear in Ex Post Facto.

304
CHAPTER 12  Personal Ethics
But underneath each of these videos is the suggestion that AR offers clever users 
the ability to gain secret information about—and, thus, power over—those around 
them. That same dynamic plays out with con men, stalkers, rapists, Peeping Toms, 
burglars, and similarly ill-intentioned types. And it’s this association that can make 
AR feel creepy.
So it’s one thing when a fictional film such as Sight or Ex Post Facto posits such 
a future, but it’s another thing entirely when an actual company does it, and when 
others in the industry trumpet the video—which they did with Infinity AR’s video—
as “the future of AR.” No wonder today’s pioneers of digital eyewear sometimes 
encounter such resistance from the general public. If those in the AR industry are 
highlighting the underhanded ways in which the technology could be used, you can 
bet that the general public will as well.
There are mitigating factors, of course. For one thing, it’s hard to believe that any 
product as revolutionary as the one depicted in the Infinity AR video—which is light-
years ahead of today’s capabilities—would be as unrecognizable as it would have to 
be to fool anybody. As with today’s digital eyewear, others would see the digital data 
flashing on the lenses, alerting them that the device is active. And even if the device’s 
camera wasn’t visible, most people would either have seen the product advertised or 
be so accustomed to the technology that they’d instantly suspect what was going on. 
But the industry as a whole still has work to do in convincing the public that these 
devices don’t facilitate deception—at least, not any more than any other consumer 
electronics on the market—and in promoting safeguards and social norms to combat 
such misuse.
If, on the other hand, such a profound imbalance of power really is inherent to 
the augmented medium, then the industry has an altogether different problem. In 
that case, the best hope for introducing AR in a societally healthy way is to do so 
cautiously, with plenty of safeguards built in to both devices and AR networks to en-
sure that users cannot gain an undue amount of leverage over unsuspecting individu-
als—for the benefit of those users who could otherwise be ethically corrupted by the 
devices’ power as much as for those who would be hurt by their actions.
WILL AUGMENTED WORLD TECHNOLOGIES  
LEAD US TO FORM BAD HABITS?
THE INSEPARABILITY OF FANTASY AND REALITY
Beloved American author Kurt Vonnegut wrote, “We are what we pretend to be, so 
we must be careful about what we pretend to be.”35 The values and aspirations on 
which we focus our attention reveal what is truly inside us. We may be drawn to 
think and behave in a certain way in augmented (or any other) media that we would 
have never done anywhere else. But if we nurture that second life to the point that 
it becomes what we truly desire, the role becomes our true self, both inside and out.
35Kurt Vonnegut, Mother Night, HarperCollins (1966).

305
Will Augmented World Technologies Lead us to Form Bad Habits?
Few issues are more hotly contested in contemporary social science as the ques-
tion of whether violent video games contribute to violent behavior in children. If we 
are honest, much of the resistance to the conclusion that there is a link comes from 
the fear of having to give up our own ability to play such games. “Approximately 
90% of children in the U.S. play video games, and more than 90% of those games 
involve mature content that often includes violence.”36 For many of us—children and 
adult alike—such games are a fun escape from the boundaries of real life.
There is evidence on both sides of the debate. For example, “[researchers at the] 
Center for the Study of Violence at Iowa State University found hints that violent 
video games may set kids up to react in more hostile and violent ways,”37 according 
to a study they published in the journal JAMA Pediatrics. “What this study does is 
show that it’s media violence exposure that is teaching children and adolescents to 
see the world in a more aggressive kind of way,”38 said study leader Craig Anderson. 
In other words, the more someone thinks about resolving conflicts with violence, the 
more likely they are to choose a violent solution over a nonviolent one. As the saying 
goes, “when all you have is a hammer, everything looks like a nail.”
The rapid rate at which this literature evolves, however, “is why some research-
ers, including Christopher Ferguson, chair of the psychology department at Stetson 
University, insist there isn’t strong evidence that exposure to violent video games 
leads to more aggressive behavior.”39 He notes that actual rates of crime have not 
risen along with exposure to violent media. The truth in this debate, therefore, likely 
lies somewhere in between the two extremes. Although people cannot escape their 
personal moral responsibility by blaming their actions on video games, and most 
people are easily capable of distinguishing in-game escapism from real-life norms, 
repeated exposure to violent fantasies must have some effect on a person’s manner of 
thinking, feeling, and acting, at some level.
AR, MUSCLE MEMORY, AND DESENSITIZATION
All of this research, however, has been confined to present-day, two-dimensional 
media. Although video games are interactive, they are still a 2D simulation on a flat 
screen. There is every reason to expect that augmented experiences will have a far 
more powerful effect on our habits and thought patterns, precisely because AR is 
designed to perceive exactly as experience actual, physical reality.
Unlike—or, at least, to a much greater extent than—traditional video games, AR 
can convey muscle memory. This term refers to “a form of procedural memory that 
involves consolidating a specific motor task into memory through repetition. When a 
36Alice Park, Little By Little, Violent Video Games Make Us More Aggressive, Time Magazine, March 
24, 2014, available at: http://time.com/34075/how-violent-video-games-change-kids-attitudes-about-
aggression/ (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
37Id.
38Id.
39Id.

306
CHAPTER 12  Personal Ethics
movement is repeated over time, a long-term muscle memory is created for that task, 
eventually allowing it to be performed without conscious effort.”40 As suggested by 
the common phrase “it’s like riding a bike,” many believe that muscle memory can-
not be unlearned, but rather, at most, only covered over with new habits.41
Industry and the military alike have already lauded AR as a training mechanism 
for this exact reason. Explaining the utility of an “Augmented Reality Training Sys-
tem” for soldiers, Major General Thomas M. Murray of the United States Marine 
Corps was quoted as saying, “It’s like a quarterback taking snaps; the more snaps he 
takes, the more ready he’ll be for the game. We deal with many possible situations so 
the units can react like muscle memory. We want that reaction to become as routine 
as possible to handle situations that you can’t anticipate.”42 The term shows up often 
in AR literature, including in reference to using haptic feedback for learning to play 
an instrument or read Braille,43 practicing surgical techniques,44 learning the texture 
of tumors,45 and relearning how to walk for the elderly and neurologically injured.46 
We also see it in applications such as the “Soldamatic Augmented Training” helmet 
that teaches industrial workers how to weld by reproducing the look and texture of 
the actual welding process without using hot, dangerous metals.47 In each of these 
examples, and countless others like them, the goal is to acquaint a person with the 
movements and sensations involved in a particular task through repetition, until it 
becomes second nature to them. When those tasks are (in reality) dangerous or in-
timidating ones, such as welding or warfighting, the goal is also to desensitize the 
user to that fear in the augmented simulation before they encounter it in the flesh.
40Muscle Memory, Wikipedia, available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muscle_memory (last visited 
on Sept. 10, 2014).
41Eruditio Loginquitas, Muscle Memory and Learning, IDOS (Instructional Design Open Studio) (Feb. 
16, 2009), available at: http://id.ome.ksu.edu/blog/2009/feb/16/muscle-memory-and-unlearning/ (last 
visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
42Brian O’Shea, Augmented Reality, Military Training Technology, MT2, 17(5) (Aug. 2012), 
available at: http://www.kmimediagroup.com/military-training-technology/articles/424-military-train-
ing-technology/mt2-2012-volume-17-issue-5-august/5787-augmented-reality-sp-449 (last visited on 
Sept. 10, 2014).
43Haptic Feedback and Augmented Reality Can Accelerate Skill Learning, Next Big Future (June 
6, 2014), available at: http://nextbigfuture.com/2014/06/haptic-feedback-and-augmented-reality.html 
(June 6, 2014).
44T. Edmunds & D.K. Pai, Perpetually Augmented Simulator Design (abstract), IEEE Xplore Digi-
tal Library (IEEE Transactions on Haptics, 5(1)), available at: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/ar-
ticleDetails.jsp?reload=true&arnumber=5975145 (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
45Seokhee Jeon, Seungmoon Choi & Matthias Harders, Rendering Virtual Tumors in Real Tissue 
Mock-Ups Using Haptic Augmented Reality (abstract), ACM Digital Library (published in Jour-
nal IEEE Transactions on Haptics, 5(1), 77–84 (2012)), available at: http://dl.acm.org/citation.
cfm?id=2197138 (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
46A. Mirelman, et al., V-Time: A Treadmill Training Program Augmented by Virtual Reality to De-
crease Fall Risk in Older Adults: Study Design of a Randomized Controlled Trial (abstract), BMC 
Neurology, 13, 15 (2013), available at: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2377/13/15 (last visited 
on Sept. 9, 2014).
47Soldamatic Augmented Training, Soldamatic Augmented Training Technology, YouTube, available 
at: https://www.youtube.com/user/SOLDAMATIC (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).

307
Will Augmented World Technologies Lead us to Form Bad Habits?
There is no principled reason why playing games in this manner would not 
produce exactly the same sorts of muscle memory and desensitization. Indeed, the 
growing use of gamification in various industries48 suggests that many of the “seri-
ous” training programs will have game elements in them, and educational “games” 
are (as with today’s variety) likely to include many “educational” aspects. So there 
will be very little practical distinction between an augmented “game” and “training 
program.”
What will this mean for augmented video games containing violent, misogynis-
tic, sadistic, or other escapist role-playing? We know by both intuition and actual 
examples that the demand for such content is, and will continue to be, high. Two-
dimensional AR shooting games have been on the market for years, and in 2013 a 
Louisiana high school student was arrested for posting to YouTube a video of him-
self using the game to imagine himself shooting his classmates.49 Concept videos of 
immersive AR first-person shooters50 and hand-to-hand combat games are plentiful 
online (Fig. 12.6).51 Some even involve running and jumping on a circular, omni-
directional treadmill and wearing haptic feedback clothing that delivers the sting 
of pretend bullet wounds, all to further simulate the battlefield experience.52 Mean-
while, one of the world’s most popular video game series, Grand Theft Auto, is no-
torious for rewarding players who commit random acts of unprovoked violence and 
for engaging prostitutes to gain “health” (Fig. 12.7). This is just one example in the 
long-running controversy over sex53 and torture54 in video games.
Bringing games like these into the augmented medium will change the debate on 
whether it is ethical or socially responsible for anyone—let alone children—to play 
such games. If repeated experience through AR simulation is so widely acknowl-
edged as a training tool in every other facet of life, it will no longer be plausible to 
deny that similarly repeating violent and prurient actions in the same manner will 
have the same effect. Just as AR uses high-resolution 3D video and haptic feedback 
to impart muscle memory to a surgeon, welder, or soldier, so too might Augmented 
Grand Theft Auto players gain muscle memory of what it is like to steal a car, torture 
48Gamification Industries and Examples, Gamification Wiki webpage, available at: http://badgeville.
com/wiki/Gamification_Industries_Examples (last visited on Sept. 9, 2014).
49Caroline Moss, A Teenager Was Arrested After Using An iPhone to Go on a Virtual Shooting Spree, 
Business Insider, Sept. 16, 2013, available at: http://www.businessinsider.com/teenager-arrested-
real-strike-app-virtual-shooting-spree-2013-9 (last visited on Sept. 9, 2014).
50Chauncey Frend, Augmented Reality FPS System, YouTube (published on May 1, 2012), available at: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ELt_aPLxKds (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
51TherelsaCanal, Battlefield 5 on Google Glasses (the Marine Revenge), YouTube (published on April 12, 
2012), available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-sSsRIhVYB4 (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
52Joseph Nettleton, Ultimate Battlefield 3 Simulator Build and Test Video the Gadget Show YouTube, 
YouTube (published on Oct. 16, 2012), available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B9ioVceVlvI 
(last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
53Sex and Nudity in Video Games, Wikipedia, available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sex_and_nu-
dity_in_video_games (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
54A.J. Glasser, Torture in Video Games, Kotaku (Sep. 10, 2009), available at http://kotaku.
com/5353873/torture-in-video-games (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).

308
CHAPTER 12  Personal Ethics
a rival, or bed a prostitute. It seems inevitable that such training will encourage play-
ers to replicate those behaviors in real life, if only out of ingrained habit.
In some senses, though, whether that proves true will hardly even matter at that 
point. As a New York Times blogger writes, “all of this ‘reality’ might be a bit too 
FIGURE 12.6
Real and imagined first-person shooter games in AR.
FIGURE 12.7
A scene from Grand Theft Auto.

309
Will Augmented World Technologies Lead us to Form Bad Habits?
much for many of us. As much as I like playing a first-person shooter game once 
in a while … I’m not sure I want to run through a war zone and see lifelike brains 
sprayed across my face. I might need some virtual therapy after playing a game that 
realistic.”55 By repeatedly simulating the actions and experiencing the consequences 
through their own physical senses, the effect on players’ own ethical sensibilities 
may be the same as if they had committed the actual acts. They will, as Vonnegut 
warned, have become what they pretended to be, with all the emotional desensitiza-
tion and altered moral outlook that comes with it.
Applying the medium to the opposite sort of content, of course, stands an equal 
chance of producing the opposite result. Training people through AR to make right 
choices will build the muscle memory that makes such behavior second nature. A 
hybrid approach is also possible, as shown by the Dutch billboard discussed in Chap-
ter 4. By inserting pedestrians into an augmented scenario in which they ought to 
come to the aid of a first responder being attacked, but cannot, the subject is meant 
to feel both the impulse to behave ethically and the shame that ought to come from 
not acting on that impulse. This is meant to serve as negative reinforcement that sen-
sitizes the person to the need to take action in such scenarios.
The discussion in this chapter is meant to demonstrate that we cannot wield the 
tool of AR to change the world we live in without also changing ourselves in the 
process. In the next and final chapter, we will ask whether and to what extent we can 
trust ourselves to create our own worlds, by highlighting some of the darkest and 
most seductive vices with which we will be tempted to populate our new worlds.
55Nick Bilton, Disruptions: The Holodeck Begins to Take Shape, The New York Times—Bits, Jan. 
26, 2014, available at: http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/01/26/disruptions-the-holodeck-begins-to-
take-shape/ (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).

311
CHAPTER
Augmented Reality Law, Privacy, and Ethics﻿
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Addiction to AR
• The reality and inevitability of adult augmented media
• The socially destructive potential of AR porn
INTRODUCTION
The previous chapter ended with a discussion of the negative habits we could form 
by indulging in the wrong sorts of AR experiences too often. This chapter begins by 
acknowledging one logical consequence of that behavior: addiction. It then examines 
what is already guaranteed to be the most prominent vice in the augmented medium: 
pornography. These are emblematic of the pitfalls that an augmented society will 
need to overcome in order to derive the greatest value that AR has to offer.
AR ADDICTION
SOME PEOPLE WILL GET HOOKED ON AUGMENTED  
WORLD TECHNOLOGIES
Augmented reality is all about customizing the world around us. Through video-
enabled smartphone and tablet apps, and soon directly through eyewear, AR overlays 
digital data over our perception of the physical world. The virtual world gets layered 
directly on top of the real one.
A key buzzword within the AR industry is “immersive.” Immersiveness is a mea-
sure of how seamless the integration is between virtual and physical data. The more 
immersive a user’s experience (or “UX”) is, the less the user consciously perceives 
the augmented content as being separate from, or inferior in quality or value to, what 
he or she sees with his or her naked eye. For designers of almost any AR app, the 
more immersive an app is, the better. In a fully immersive environment, a user per-
ceives the virtual data as being equivalent to, and indistinguishable from, his or her 
physical surroundings – in other words, just another part of the landscape.
Of course, no AR company is currently in a position to achieve complete im-
mersion. Hardware limitations make that impossible. As engrossing and useful as 
the display on a monitor, smartphone, or tablet screen is, it only augments one small 
Addiction and 
Pornography
13

312
CHAPTER 13  Addiction and Pornography
rectangle in your field of view, and only as long as you hold the device up in front of 
you. Looking away from the screen doesn’t take much effort. Even the best AR app 
is no more immersive than a really good movie would be.
But what about in the not-too-distant future, when AR-capable eyewear is com-
monplace, and AR content is plentiful? At that point, it will be possible for a user to 
become totally “immersed” in a digitally enhanced view of the world. If recent expe-
rience with consumer technologies has taught us anything as a society, however, it is 
that the more engrossing a form of entertainment is, the more likely it is that a certain 
segment of the population is going to develop an unhealthy fixation with it. Whether 
you call it “addiction” (a diagnostic term that gets thrown around far too often, but 
that makes for catchy headlines), compulsive behavior, or simply a deeply ingrained 
habit, the fact is that people love to immerse themselves in fantasy worlds to escape 
the doldrums and difficulties of real life. And fully immersive AR will be orders of 
magnitude more engaging and attractive than even the best of today’s digital content.
We see this type of behavior everywhere today. Gamers will sit in front of their 
consoles playing massively multiplayer online games for hours and days on end. In 
2011, someone died from a blood clot after sitting too long playing Halo 3 on Xbox. 
I have personally seen people dedicate the majority of their nonworking hours to 
online role-playing games such as EverQuest and World of Warcraft. The 2014 docu-
mentary Web Junkie takes place in “a division of a Beijing military hospital, where 
teenage boys are being treated for Internet addiction – more specifically, addiction 
to ‘World of Warcraft’ and other games like it.”1 In 2010, a South Korean couple was 
arrested for allowing their newborn infant to starve to death while they did 12-hour 
stints at an Internet café raising a virtual baby in the online role-playing game “Prius 
Online.” “Online game addiction can blur the line between reality and the virtual 
world,” a South Korean professor said about the case. “It seems that taking care of 
their on-line game character erased any sense of guilt they may have had for neglect-
ing their daughter.”2
I am not without sympathy for those who get absorbed into video games. There 
were portions of my college years when I certainly spent more than my fair share 
of time playing the computer strategy game Civilization and other games like it, 
although the Internet connectivity of newer games adds a social element that draws 
players in even further. None of these games are bad in and of themselves. Rather, 
they are so good – so immersive – that players with poor self-discipline can easily get 
sucked into playing them longer than they should.
The problem is not limited to games. In a 2013 TEDx talk, Dr. Zoe Chance 
of the Yale School of Management admitted her addiction to a wearable device –  
specifically, a “smart pedometer.” Driven to reach the daily goal of 10,000 steps that 
1Farran Smith Nehme, Internet Addiction the Focus of ‘Web Junkie’ Documentary, New York Post, 
Aug. 7, 2014, available at: http://nypost.com/2014/08/07/internet-addiction-the-focus-of-web-junkie-
documentary/ (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
2CNN, Report: South Korea Couple Starved Child While Raising Virtual Baby, CNN World (March 5, 
2010), available at: http://www.cnn.com/2010/WORLD/asiapcf/03/05/korea.baby.starved/index.html 
(last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).

313
﻿ AR Addiction
the device set for her, Dr. Chance’s entire waking experience soon became filled with 
trying to move as much as possible. Her marriage began to suffer, she admitted, as 
her new obsession led her to bond instead with other compulsive users of the device, 
both in person and online. “They market it as a ‘personal trainer in your pocket,’ 
Chance said. “No! It is Satan in your pocket.”
Silicon Valley venture capitalist Marc Andreessen predicted that, once digital 
eyewear goes mainstream, many of its users will have a similar degree of attachment. 
“The idea of having the Internet with you all the time, being able to see, literally to 
be able to have the Internet in your field of vision … and to be able to talk to it, it 
basically just wraps you in all the information you would ever need all the time,” he 
said. “I think people are going to find they feel, basically, naked and lonely, when 
they don’t have this at some point.”3
The AR medium will make digital experiences even more appealing and compel-
ling than they already are. The explosive growth in recent years of proto-AR gaming 
systems, such as the Wii, Kinect, and Nintendo 3DS, demonstrates that AR is the 
future of digital gaming.
Toward the end of a very thoughtful panel discussion on the challenges of design-
ing AR user experiences at the 2011 ARE Conference, Brendan Scully of Metaio 
said, “I certainly wouldn’t trust myself to design my own UX.” This reminded me 
of some of the cautionary tales that pop culture has already given us about the draw-
backs of having complete control over our surroundings. Star Trek: The Next Gen-
eration did this frequently (sometimes to a fault) via the “Holodeck,” a holographic 
room capable of replicating any environment and character imaginable. In the epi-
sode “Hollow Pursuits” (and later episodes), the socially inept character Reginald 
Barclay literally becomes addicted to living in the artificial worlds he creates there 
– complete with racier versions of his real-life female acquaintances and diminutive 
parodies of the men that intimidate him (Fig. 13.1).
The ability to create similar scenarios of our own may not be far off. “[S]ome 
scientists and researchers say we could have something like holodecks by 2024.”4 
This has some futurists concerned. Ernest Cline, author of the popular sci-fi novel 
Ready Player One, also commented: “Once video games become so real, when 
you’re wearing goggles and gloves and you’re completely logged in, then [it will get 
worse]. Once it becomes like the holodeck, how will people avoid becoming more 
addicted?”5
Then there’s the classic virtual reality film Lawnmower Man, in which the title 
character conquers an artificial world and declares, “I am God here!” The special 
3Cadie Thompson, ‘Naked and Lonely’ Without Google Glass: Andressen, CNBC, June 12, 2013, 
available at: http://www.cnbc.com/id/100809673 (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
4Nick Bilton, Disruptions: The Holodeck Begins to Take Shape, The New York Times—Bits (Jan. 
26, 2014), available at: http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/01/26/disruptions-the-holodeck-begins-to-
take-shape/ (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
5Nick Bilton, One on One: Ernest Cline, Author of ‘Ready Player One,’ The New York Times—
Bits (Aug. 22, 2012), available at: http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/08/22/one-on-one-ernest-cline-
author-of-ready-player-one/ (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).

314
CHAPTER 13  Addiction and Pornography
effects in these shows may be dated, but their message is timeless: the more con-
trol we gain over their personal environments and surroundings, the more those sur-
roundings will tend to reflect our own narcissism.
It seems inevitable that at least some AR users will demonstrate the same ten-
dencies, to varying degrees. For most people, AR will probably be a lot like text 
messaging or Facebook is today – a technological convenience that many people 
may actually spend too much time with and joke about being “addicted” to, but 
that leads to few actual cases of bona fide dependence. Even if it doesn’t amount to 
“addiction,” though, the potential for unhealthy behavior through AR will always 
be present to some degree. Even today, for example, a jilted lover or spurned suitor 
could use an AR app to display their desired partner’s face at the physical location 
of every past date – reinforcing a vicious cycle of negative emotions. As discussed 
further subsequently, pornographic content – already ubiquitous and responsible for 
an array of unhealthy behavior – can be displayed anywhere in ways that standard, 
two-dimensional monitors won’t be able to match.
As AR hardware and capabilities mature beyond today’s comparatively simplis-
tic communication technologies into a more immersive environment, the potential 
for abuse will grow accordingly. To those who become accustomed to living in a 
Domestic Robocop–type world, nonaugmented reality may start to seem unbearably 
mundane by comparison. At that point, we could very well see a number of real-
world Reginald Barclays.
WHAT CAN AND SHOULD BE DONE TO PREVENT ADDICTION?
Will government or industry step in to regulate AR content and head off some of 
these consequences? Perhaps. Although governments have more or less lost the abil-
ity to regulate violent content, age restrictions on prurient material remain enforce-
able, and would certainly be applied in this new medium. Crackdowns on illegal 
FIGURE 13.1
Reginald Barclay in the holodeck.

315
﻿ AR Addiction
gambling programs may well follow. Just as we see counselors specializing in ad-
dictions to such content today, we’re likely to see similar services available for those 
who lose themselves in their own augmented worlds.
“The trouble,” says Nir Eyal, author of Hooked: How to Build Habit-Forming 
Products, “is this: The attributes that make certain products engaging also make them 
potentially addictive. There is no way to separate the fun of gaming, for example, with 
its potential for abuse. Social media is exciting principally because it utilizes the same 
variable rewards that make slot machines compelling. Spectator sports or television 
watching, enjoyed by billions of people, share common traits with the primary func-
tion of illicit drugs – they provide a portal to a different reality. If what we’re watching 
is engaging, we experience the high of being mentally elsewhere.”6
Eyal, therefore, proposes that the creators of immersive digital experiences 
should bear some ethical and moral responsibility to prevent addiction. This is due 
in part to the unique metrics that digital technology provides about individual users. 
“Makers of alcoholic beverages for example, can throw up their hands and claim they 
have no idea who is an alcoholic. However, any company collecting user information 
can no longer take cover under the same excuse. Tech companies know exactly who 
their users are and how much time they are spending with their services. If they can 
hypertarget advertising, they can identify harmful abuse.”7 Eyal argues that these 
companies therefore “have both an economic imperative and a social responsibility 
to identify addicts and intervene.”8
He proposes that tech companies establish what he calls a “Use and Abuse Policy,” 
which helps establish the parameters of healthy use and redlines that trigger an interven-
tion when crossed. “Of course, what constitutes abuse and how companies intervene are 
topics for further exploration,” writes Eyal, “but the current status quo of doing nothing 
despite having access to personal usage data is unethical. Establishing some kind of 
upper limit helps ensure that users do not abuse the service and that companies do not 
abuse their users.”9 Some companies, he notes, already take similar measures. The tech-
nical Q&A site StackOverflow, for example, limits how often the site can be accessed 
by a single user. “Programmers should be out there in the world creating things too,”10 
writes cofounder Jeff Atwood, rather than spending all of their time on his website.
REASONS FOR OPTIMISM
Just because AR will be immersive does not automatically make it addictive or dan-
gerous. No matter how convincing its digital content is, AR is, by definition, the 
intersection between that data and the real, physical world. The most exciting pos-
sibilities for immersing oneself in AR are also the same features that would take 
7Id.
8Id.
9Id.
10Id.
6Nir Eyal, Is Some Tech Too Addictive? TechCrunch (posted May 31, 2014), available at: http://tech-
crunch.com/2014/05/31/is-some-tech-too-addictive/ (last posted on Sept. 10, 2014).

316
CHAPTER 13  Addiction and Pornography
users outdoors. Therefore, augmented content may never have the same tendency to 
isolate users into online communities and separate them from physical interaction the 
way that console-based gaming systems with monitor-dependent displays do today. 
Proto-AR systems such as the Wii and Kinect are already heralded as getting gamers 
off the couch; AR could be the killer app for getting them outside and into the world 
around them.
Counselors, meanwhile, need not wait for AR-addled patients to start taking the 
technology seriously. Today’s innovators are already devising ways that AR can be 
used to counsel patients. As mentioned in Chapter 9, Helen Papagiannis designed 
the world’s first AR pop-up book for the iPad (Fig. 13.2).11 It is designed to let users 
interact with virtual representations of their phobias – spiders, for example – in a 
visually convincing, but perfectly safe, way.
PORNOGRAPHIC AND PRURIENT CONTENT
PORNOGRAPHY IS ALREADY GOING MAINSTREAM  
THROUGH TODAY’S DIGITAL MEDIA
Regardless of your moral outlook, porn is a serious and growing presence in con-
temporary society. Paul Fishbein, founder of Adult Video News, correctly notes that 
FIGURE 13.2
The AR pop-up book.
11Bruce Sterling, Augmented Reality: Helen Papagiannis AR Pop-Up Book, Wired (June 27, 2011), 
available at: http://www.wired.com/2011/06/augmented-reality-helen-papagiannis-ar-pop-up-book/.

317
﻿ Pornographic and Prurient Content
“Porn doesn’t have a demographic – it goes across all demographics.”12 An analysis 
of 400 million web searches demonstrated that 1 in every 8 searches of all searches 
was for erotic content.13 “By 2015, mobile adult content and services are expected to 
reach $2.8 billion per year, mobile adult subscriptions will reach nearly $1 billion, 
and mobile adult video consumption on tablets will triple [over 2013 levels].”14
“It’s not news, of course,” the New Yorker wrote in 2003, “that men are into 
porn – or that the Internet has made it possible to delve into the dirty without slip-
ping into the back room at a video store or hunkering down in a Times Square 
peep booth.” But “thanks to the advent of cable modems and DSL connections,” it 
continued, “the mass consumption of cyberporn has slyly moved from the pathet-
ic stereotypes (fugitive perverts, frustrated husbands) into the potent mainstream 
(young professionals, perhaps your boyfriend) …. Porn is not merely acceptable; 
it’s hip.”15 By 2013, “more and more adult companies [were] expanding into new 
fields of business. And business has been good. Hustler leads the charge in this area, 
having spent years building up a successful clothing line, opening casinos and even 
publishing the occasional mainstream magazine.”16 That is the society into which 
AR is being introduced.
PORN WILL BE PLENTIFUL IN AUGMENTED MEDIA
The Internet meme called “Rule 34” is a maxim that states, “If it exists, there is porn 
of it. No exceptions.” This bit of popular wisdom reminds us that we will encounter 
prurient content in AR, and that such content is not unique to the medium. Neverthe-
less, AR’s unique capabilities will bring an unparalleled degree of anonymity and 
accessibility to explicit content that will magnify the erotic temptation, compulsion, 
and dysfunction with which our society is already riddled.
Visual content
The fact that the public is already accustomed to downloading digital porn may be 
why, as soon as the first video teaser17 for the first mainstream digital eyewear – Glass 
– was released on YouTube, a recurrent theme in the viewers’ comments was how it 
could be used for pornographic applications. For example:
12Luke Gilkerson, Get the Latest Pornography Statistics, CovenantEyes (Feb. 19, 2013), available 
at: http://www.covenanteyes.com/2013/02/19/pornography-statistics/ (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
13Id.
14Pornography Statistics: Annual Report 2014, CovenantEyes, available at: http://www.covenant-
eyes.com/pornstats/ (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
15David Amsden, Not Tonight, Honey. I’m Logging On, New York Magazine, available at: http://
nymag.com/nymetro/news/trends/n_9349/ (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
16Chris Morris, Will Porn Become a Mainstream Business? CNBC, Jan. 15, 2013, available at: http://
www.cnbc.com/id/100364346# (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
17Google, Project Glass: One day …, Apr. 4, 2012, available at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v= 
9c6W4CCU9M4.

318
CHAPTER 13  Addiction and Pornography
	
“you can watch porn on the go!”
	
“Awesome, with this remarkable device it’s possible for me to watch porn while 
i watch porn on my computer. Life’s good     ”
	
“download porno on a crowded bus!”
The sentiment is easy to comprehend. Anonymity has always fueled porn con-
sumption. First, there were magazines in slick black bags. Then pay cable stations. 
Then the Internet. Now, digital eyewear will enable users to take the content with 
them outside the house, viewing it in public while still remaining anonymous. One 
of the New Yorker’s interview subjects wrote of the thrill of danger he got by viewing 
porn in his university’s computer lab, while others worked in adjacent cubicles. AR-
equipped thrill-seekers will be able to take this one step further, and watch explicit 
content while actually standing in front of and talking to those same colleagues face-
to-face. At school, work, home, on the bus – no setting will ever again reinforce a 
social stigma against watching it, because only the wearer will see what is on their 
AR lenses.
In the few years since Glass was first announced, independent developers have 
indeed been busy finding ways to apply the device to pornographic purposes. In 
June 2013, a small company called MiKandi released the first explicit app for the 
device, fittingly titled “Tits & Glass.”18 The app “allows users to view and share 
pornographic content from a point-of-view angle … [and] to comment and vote on 
their favorite content.”19 Unamused, Google promptly revised its Glassware policy 
to prohibit “content that contains nudity, graphic sex acts or sexually explicit mate-
rial.”20 The app returned to the unofficial market of “side-loaded” Glassware, but now 
cautions users to share only images that are “safe for work.”21 The revised terms of 
service did not, however, “preclude [MiKandi] from enabling users to go buckwild 
in sharing their own POV creations.”22 So MiKandi launched a traditional website to 
store users’ first-person perspective videos – the first of which was contributed by in-
famous porn star James Deen – and teamed up with a larger company in the industry 
to sell videos containing the results.23
Soon thereafter, a three-person team of developers caused a stir with their entry to 
a London-based hackathon, which they called “Sex With Glass.”24 The idea was to al-
low two partners, each wearing Glass, to see on their own devices the other person’s 
point of view, in real time, during sex. With the public’s imagination aroused, the 
developers refined the software into an app now called “Glance.” As of this writing, 
24Glance App Action webpage, available at: http://www.glanceapp.info/ (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
18Tits & Glass, available at http://titsandglass.com/.
19Cadie Thompson, X-Rated Google Glass App Gets Banned, CNBC—Disruptor 50, June 4, 2013, 
available at: http://www.cnbc.com/id/100787343 (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
20Id.
21How It Works, available at: http://titsandglass.com/how-it-works.
22Marikia Millikan, I Watched James Deen Make the First-Ever Google Glass Porn, Motherboard 
(July 23, 2013), available at: http://motherboard.vice.com/blog/i-watched-james-deen-make-the-first-
ever-google-glass-porn-1 (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
23Id.

319
﻿ Pornographic and Prurient Content
Glance is available for the iPhone, although the version for Glass is still under devel-
opment. When released, the goal is that each user will “say ‘ok glass, it’s time’ and 
Glance on Google Glass will stream what you see to each other.”25 Taking a cue from 
Snapchat and other ephemeral social media, the app keeps the resulting video for 5 h, 
after which it is deleted if one of the users does not actively save it.26
The renewed interest in virtual reality sparked by the Oculus Rift has gotten de-
velopers working on adult content for that medium as well. “Adult-film streaming 
service SugarDVD announced [in March 2014] that it is working on an app for the 
[Rift] … that will stream adult movies and content to the device.”27 At the same time, 
the company was already “working with motion-capture studios in Los Angeles to 
generate original, VR-optimized content that will take full advantage of the Rift’s 
technology.”28 A small California start-up called Sinful Robot announced that it was 
doing the same.29 These would be fully immersive, interactive experiences that play 
out as a Choose Your Own Adventure story with benefits.
Visual recognition software and user-generated content
There is another reason that viewers are likely to take their AR porn into the public 
square. The ability to overlay explicit content on the real world – or, more to the 
point, on real people – will offer synergies that have been heretofore relegated only 
to private imaginings.
“I’m just going to say this right now,” blogger Jordan Yerman wrote on the same 
day the first Glass teaser was released. “The dev teams for every online porn outfit on 
the web are watching the Google Project Glass video … and thinking, ‘we can create 
an app that matches sex footage from our libraries to the body positions of passersby 
spotted by augmented-reality glasses.’ I promise you, that’s what they’re thinking.”30
The demand for such technology was proven in 2009, when a video advertise-
ment31 for the mobile app Nude It32 – which purported to allow users to see through 
25Id.
26Sylvia Tomayko-Peters, Mediating Sexual Experience: A Discussion of the Glance App for Google 
Glass, HASTAC (posted March 10, 2014), available at: http://www.hastac.org/blogs/sylviatp/2014/03/10/
mediating-sexual-experience-discussion-glance-app-google-glass (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
27Jeffrey Grubb, Strap on Your Oculus Rift and Get Ready: Interactive Porn Is Coming, VB/Gamesbeat 
(May 21, 2014), available at: http://venturebeat.com/2014/05/21/strap-on-your-oculus-rift-and-get-
ready-interactive-porn-is-coming/ (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
28Id.
29Damon Brown, Sinful Robot: How Immersive Virtual Reality Will Transform Adult Entertainment, 
Future of Sex (Feb. 28, 2013), available at: http://futureofsex.net/virtual-sex/interview-with-vr-sex-
experimenter-sinful-robot (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
30The original post, which was at http://www.examiner.com/tech-biz/google-project-glass-future-aug-
mented-reality-porn-2910206.html, is no longer available. I first quoted it here: Brian Wassom, Aug-
mented Reality Eyewear & the Problem of Porn, May 2, 2012, available at: http://www.wassom.com/
augmented-reality-eyewear-the-problem-of-porn.html.
31Whoisthebaldguy, iPhone 6 AR App Demo: “Nude It,” Oct. 11, 2009, available at: https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=G_AzDO_uwz8 (last visited Sept. 12, 2014, at which time the video had 3,449,910 views).
32Nude It Android Phone Application webpage, available at: http://www.presselite.com/iphone/nudeit/ 
(last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).

320
CHAPTER 13  Addiction and Pornography
clothing – went viral (Fig. 13.3). Despite the obvious fact that it was a spoof – some-
thing the originators quickly acknowledged – that didn’t stop thousands of eager 
users from demanding the ability to download it. Perhaps the most enabling develop-
ment, however, has been the beta-level introduction of mobile devices able to scan 
three-dimensional environments in real time. Devices such as Occiptal’s Structure 
Sensor33 and Project Tango34 demonstrate technology that, once perfected, will en-
able the masses to create their own digital avatars of anything and anyone around 
them. You can have three guesses as to how selfie-obsessed teens will use this tech-
nology, as long as each guess is “for sexting.”
Haptic interaction
Vision will not be the only sense to be digitally augmented for prurient purposes. 
Digital sex toys have already been on the market for years. These include those de-
vices traditionally intended for women – such as the music-driven OhMiBod35 – as 
well as a growing market for digitized receptacles made for male use. These are 
sold under the brand names Fleshlight and RealTouch, and were originally designed 
to sync haptic pulses with the action portrayed in prerecorded videos.36 The latter 
brand, however, has since introduced a service called RealTouch Interactive, which 
FIGURE 13.3
Nude It.
33The First 3D Sensor for Mobile Devices Is Here, Structure webpage, available at: http://structure.io/ 
(last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
34Project Tango webpage, Google, available at: https://www.google.com/atap/projecttango/#project 
(last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
35Sylvia Tomayko-Peters, Human Computer Interaction: Digitally Enhanced Sex and Body Explora-
tion, HASTAC (posted Feb. 16, 2014), available at: http://www.hastac.org/blogs/sylviatp/2014/02/16/
human-computer-interaction-digitally-enhanced-sex-body-exploration (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
36Id.

321
﻿ Pornographic and Prurient Content
puts male device owners in touch with live “models” for “private 1-on-1 fantasy 
encounters.”37 According to the company, “your RealTouch senses both the velocity 
and depth of motion that models perform on their joystick. This is the most realistic 
live sexual experience the world has ever known and we are proud to call it True 
Internet Sex!™”38
This is only one facet of the rapidly expanding genre some have labeled “teledil-
donics.”39 “While similar in design to the RealTouch Interactive,” for example, a 
company called LovePalz differentiated itself by marketing its services to couples.40 
“LovePalz is intended for use by couples in long distance relationships. Rather than a 
single purchasable device, there is one designed for female anatomy and one for male. 
Partners connect via video chat software and the devices communicate information 
back and forth via bluetooth and the internet. What one partner does with their device, 
the other feels.”41 The company soon spread its marketing to a broader demographic, 
however; as of this writing, its website also advertises the “LovePalz Club,” which 
promises members thereof, “Stay in your room and start meeting new people all over 
the world.”42 An Amsterdam-based start-up attempted to fund through Indiegogo a 
similar service called Kiiroo, which it billed as “the first social platform with an inti-
mate touch.” As of March 2014, however, the project fell short of its funding goal.43
Even the blow-up doll industry is getting into the digital age. The first commer-
cial sexbot, called “Roxxxy,” was introduced in 2010, and the company behind it 
now offers a wide range of units in the series. “Roxxxy is decidedly a robot … [and] 
mannequin-like,” offering little more nonphysical interactivity than a Teddy Ruxpin 
bear. “Right now, [however,] we’re at an inflection point on the meaning of sexbot,”44 
says Kyle Machulis, a California-based computer scientist who focuses on sensual 
technologies.45 “Henrik Christensen, founder of the European Robotics Research 
Network, thinks that sex with robots is only five years away.”46 In a report released 
37Real Touch Interactive Beta webpage, available at: http://www.realtouchinteractive.com/how_it_
works.php (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
38Id.
39Burke Denning, Technologasm?! The Rise of Teledildonics and Adult Haptic Devices, Kinsey Con-
fidential (May 15, 2012), available at: http://kinseyconfidential.org/technologasm-rise-teledildonics-
adult-haptic-devices/.
40Sylvia Tomayko-Peters, Networked Bodies: Connectivity in Digitally Enhanced Sex Toys, HASTAC 
(Feb. 24, 2014), available at: http://www.hastac.org/node/109248 (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
41LovePalz, available at: http://www.lovepalz.com.
42Twist, the Cutting-Edge Cyber Pleasure Toy, webpage of LovePalz, available at: https://www.love-
palz.com/twist/ (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
43Kiiroo, the First Social Platform With an Intimate Touch, webpage on Indie Gogo, available at: 
https://www.indiegogo.com/projects/kiiroo-the-first-social-platform-with-an-intimate-touch (last vis-
ited on Sept. 10, 2014).
44Leah Reich, Sexbot Slaves, Aeon (June 6, 2014), available at: http://aeon.co/magazine/technology/
how-will-sexbots-change-human-relationships/ (Sept. 10, 2014).
45Nonpolynomial Labs webpage, available at: http://www.nonpolynomial.com/about/ (last visited on 
Sept. 10, 2014).
46Robot Sex Revolution, The Ratchet, available at: http://theratchet.ca/robot-sex-revolution (last vis-
ited on Sept. 10, 2014).

322
CHAPTER 13  Addiction and Pornography
in August 2014 by Pew Research, GigaOM Research’s Stowe Boyd predicted that, 
by 2025, “robotic sex partners will be a commonplace.”47 By 2050, predicts artificial 
intelligence researcher David Levy, “Love with robots will be as normal as love with 
other humans while the number of sexual acts and lovemaking positions commonly 
practiced between humans will be extended, as robots teach us more than is in all 
of the world’s published sex manuals combined.”48 Already, in May 2014, Florida 
resident Chris Sevier filed a lawsuit seeking the right to marry his pornography-laden 
MacBook, characterizing himself as not materially different from same-sex couples 
and other “sexual minorities” seeking the right to marry.49
The beauty of AR is that it liberates content from two-dimensional monitors and 
sets it free into the physical world. But we may also come to see that as AR’s curse.
SOCIETY WILL SUFFER AS A RESULT
No blog post I have ever written got as much reaction – both positive and negative – 
as when I criticized the effects that augmented pornography could have on society. 
Many people agreed; yet many also responded with vigorous disdain and defensive-
ness. The subject strikes a chord, perhaps because so many people already consume 
adult content on a regular basis and cannot, or do not want to, examine it objectively. 
The experiences of millions, however, do not lie. One does not have to be a prude to 
recognize the corrosive effects adult content can have on individuals and society. To 
the contrary, one must try hard not to see it.
Compulsive behavior
Much of the debate over pornography’s impact on the person viewing it gets hung up 
on terminology. As mentioned in the previous section, it is easy and commonplace to 
throw around the word “addiction.” That is what a panel of experts did in 2004 when 
they testified on the subject before the Senate Commerce Committee’s Science, Tech-
nology and Space Subcommittee. “Pornography really does, unlike other addictions, 
biologically cause direct release of the most perfect addictive substance …. It does what 
heroin can’t do, in effect,” said one witness.50 Similarly, in 2010, “[t]he National Coun-
cil on Sexual Addiction and Compulsivity estimates that 6 to 8 percent of Americans – 
or 18 million to 24 million people – are sex addicts. And 70 percent of sex addicts report 
50Ryan Singel, Internet Porn: Worse Than Crack? Wired (Nov. 19, 2004), available at: http://archive.
wired.com/science/discoveries/news/2004/11/65772 (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
47Sebastian Anthony, By 2025, ‘Sexbots Will Be Commonplace’ Which Is Fine, as We’ll All Be Unemployed 
and Bored Thanks to Robots Stealing Our Jobs, ExtremeTech (Aug. 14, 2014), available at: http://
www.extremetech.com/extreme/188047-by-2025-sexbots-will-be-commonplace-which-is-just-fine-as-
well-all-be-unemployed-and-bored-thanks-to-robots-stealing-our-jobs (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
48David Levy, Love and Sex with Robots: The Evolution of Human–Robot Relationships, 
Harper Perennial (Nov. 4, 2008).
49David Millward, Florida Man Demands Right to Wed Computer, The Telegraph, May 7, 2014, 
available at: http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/northamerica/usa/10814098/marriage-gay-
marriage-mac-wedding-computer-Florida-Utah.html (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).

323
﻿ Pornographic and Prurient Content
having a problem with online sexual behavior.”51 Yet other experts in the field scoff at 
the term “pornography addiction,” and “the panelists themselves acknowledged [that] 
there is no consensus among mental health professionals about the dangers of porn or 
the use of the term ….” “‘Compulsive’ is [a] more appropriate [term]” to describe those 
for whom pornography leads to unhealthy behaviors, said one sex therapist.52
This debate, however, misses the point. Whatever one calls it, adult content is easy 
to abuse. Just like a drug, not every encounter will necessarily lead to unhealthy or 
compulsive behavior, but line between use and abuse is difficult to perceive and easy 
to cross. Those who do fall into compulsive habits struggle mightily to overcome 
them, and those who cannot break free suffer a variety of negative consequences.
One of the most pernicious things about pornography is its staying power. Those 
addicted to drugs “can get the drug out of their system, but pornographic images stay in 
the brain forever.” They are thoughts that cannot be unthought; the best that one can do 
is to try and drive the images out of one’s conscious brain by training one’s self in new 
thought patterns. That is where having constant, heads-up access to prurient content on 
digital eyewear will prove so destructive. It virtually ensures that one whose mind is al-
ready dwelling on adult topics will have those explicit thoughts on their mind constant-
ly, thereby reinforcing the negative thought patterns that lead to compulsive behavior. 
That calls to mind the warning of seventeenth century poet Thomas Traherne, who said, 
“As nothing is more easy than to think, so nothing is more difficult than to think well.”53 
Walking around in the wrong AR layers will make it even more difficult to think well.
There is also evidence that repeated exposure to explicit content literally messes 
with one’s head. A recent study in Germany published in JAMA Psychiatry, for ex-
ample, found that “[m]en who report watching a lot of pornography tend to have 
less volume and activity in regions of the brain linked to rewards and motivation.”54 
Likewise, “[s]cientists at Cambridge University recently studied the brain scans of 
porn addicts and found that they looked exactly like those of drug addicts.”55
It has also become widely understood – as was the subject of the 2013 film Don 
Jon – that habitual porn users find “less enjoyment during sex”56 with actual people. 
51Regan McMahon, Porn Addiction Destroys Lives, San Francisco Chronicle, Feb. 22, 2010, avail-
able at: http://www.sfgate.com/health/article/Porn-addiction-destroys-relationships-lives-3272230.
php (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
52Is Pornography Addictive? WebMd—Men’s Health, available at: http://www.webmd.com/men/
features/is-pornography-addictive (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
53Thomas Traherne, Wikipedia, available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Traherne (last vis-
ited on Sept. 10, 2014).
54Andrew H. Seaman, Porn May Be Messing With Your Head, Reuters on Yahoo News, May 28, 
2014, available at: http://news.yahoo.com/porn-may-messing-head-202420648.html (last visited on 
Sept. 10, 2014).
55Scott Christian, 10 Reasons Why You Should Quit Watching Porn, GQ, Nov. 20, 2013, available 
at: http://www.gq.com/blogs/the-feed/2013/11/10-reasons-why-you-should-quit-watching-porn.html 
(last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
56Nisha Lilia Din, How Porn Is Rewiring Our Brains, The Telegraph, Nov. 15, 2013, available at: 
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/men/thinking-man/10441027/How-porn-is-rewiring-our-brains.html (last 
visited on Sept. 10, 2014).

324
CHAPTER 13  Addiction and Pornography
Psychiatrist Norman Doidge, author of the book The Brain That Changes Itself, 
observed that these men “had rewired the arousal pathways in their brains,”57 and 
explained how that occurs:
“Pornography,” writes Doidge, “satisfies every one of the prerequisites for neuro-
plastic change,” – that is, the brain’s ability to form new neural circuitry. The most 
important condition is the release of dopamine, the neurotransmitter that gives 
us a feeling of exciting pleasure, which porn triggers. The more often you watch 
porn and get the dopamine hit it delivers, the more the activity and the sensation 
become entwined in your brain.
Doidge puts it like this: “since neurons that fire together wire together, these men 
got massive amounts of practice wiring these images into the pleasure centres of 
the brain.” And, “because plasticity is competitive, the brain maps for new, excit-
ing images increased at the expense of what had previously attracted them.”58
In other words, the brain learns what it likes, and devotes more resources over 
time to recreating that experience instead of less-satisfying alternatives – in this case, 
interaction with actual people. A related consequence of the same process is the 
development of tolerance. Over time, it takes more and more stimulus to achieve the 
same amount of dopamine.59 “It’s known as the Coolidge Effect, or novelty-seeking 
behavior. Porn, after all, trains the viewer to expect constant newness.” Whatever 
you call that state of being, it certainly bears a striking resemblance to what we com-
monly call “addiction.”60
The impact on healthy adult relationships
For compulsive pornography users, this leads to “what Doidge politely calls ‘potency 
problems.’ Anecdotal surveys have suggested that as many as 34% of frequent porn 
watchers suffered performance issues with their partners, while 60% felt their per-
formance improved after committing to stay away from adult content. Since – in the 
physical world – it takes two to tango, this cannot help but undermine the health of 
marriages and relationships.
Indeed, the deleterious impact of Internet porn on healthy adult relationships has 
been well documented. As early as 2003, the New Yorker ran a piece on mainstream, 
well-educated, professional men who found themselves increasingly hooked on ex-
plicit Internet imagery. This and other articles found the men correspondingly unable 
to relate to,61 or maintain a healthy relationship with, the actual women in their lives. 
58Id.
59Id.
60It further calls to mind the lyrics of the 1987 Guns N’ Roses hit, “Mr. Brownstone,” about the band’s 
experiences with heroin addiction: “I used to do a little, but a little wouldn’t do, so the little got more 
and more. I just keep trying to get a little better, said a little better than before.”
61Michael J. Formica, Female Objectification and Emotional Availability: Understanding the Social 
Dynamics of Pornography Addiction, Psychology Today, Aug. 22, 2008, available at: http://www.
psychologytoday.com/collections/201111/the-porn-factor/pornography-emotional-availability-and-
female-objectification (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
57Id.

325
﻿ Pornographic and Prurient Content
At the same time, those women found it increasingly difficult to find a man whose 
mind isn’t dominated by such content. One woman interviewed in the New Yorker 
article admitted, “I think it will be really rare, and hopefully it will happen, that I can 
meet a guy who will be happy with only me.”
Other women find themselves compromising their own standards to meet men’s 
unrealistic ones. “Even among more casual users, porn is wreaking havoc in the bed-
room.” Men are increasingly reported to expect “pornified sex” from their partners. 
Cindy Gallop, an advertising executive, TED speaker, and founder of the website 
Make Love Not Porn, says “guys watch porn and when they go to bed with a real 
woman, all they think about is recreating that scenario. … [Women, meanwhile,] 
start believing that that is what they have to be like in bed as well.”62 “The result 
is mutual unhappiness, frustration and disappointment. And, according to Doidge, 
[young men face] a potentially permanently addled sexuality thanks to the presence 
of porn during this highly plastic period of brain development.”63
Unsurprisingly, this situation takes its toll on marriages. “According to the Web 
site Divorcewizards.com, huge numbers of divorce lawyers report that pornography 
is a big issue in divorce these days, which it never was before the advent of the Inter-
net.” What happens when erotica become available not only on computer screens and 
mobile devices but also 24/7 in augmented space?
Perhaps the worst-case scenario of what could happen across society is the situation 
already beginning to play out in Japan. According to a 2013 report, “45% of Japanese 
women aged 16–24 are ‘not interested in or despise sexual contact.’ More than a quarter 
of men feel the same way.”64 Although such a broad demographic trend cannot reason-
ably be traced back to a single cause, digital technology and the social acceptance of 
Internet-fueled fetishes play a strong role. “Lacking long-term shared goals, many are 
turning to what [some call] ‘Pot Noodle love’ – easy or instant gratification, in the form 
of casual sex, short-term trysts and the usual technological suspects: online porn, virtual- 
reality ‘girlfriends’, anime cartoons.”65 One Japanese therapist related the story of a  
client – a virgin in his 30s – unable to become aroused “unless he watches female robots on  
a game similar to Power Rangers.”66 In 2009, a Japanese man even went to the length of 
holding a wedding ceremony at the Tokyo Institute of Technology to solemnize his mar-
riage to Nene Anegasaki, an anime character in the Nintendo DS video game LovePlus.67 
It was reported that the ceremony paid homage to the otaku (loosely translated as “nerd” 
or “geek” fans of manga and anime68) subculture “that nurtures this type of creativity.”
64Abigail Haworth, Why Have Young People in Japan Stopped Having Sex? The Observer, Oct. 19, 
2013, available at: http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/20/young-people-japan-stopped-hav-
ing-sex (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
65Id.
66Id.
67Lisa Katayma, Video: Man in Japan Weds Anime Game Character, boingboing (Nov. 29, 2009), 
available at: http://boingboing.net/2009/11/24/footage-from-the-fir.html (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
68Otaku, Wikipedia, available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Otaku (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
62Id.
63Id.

326
CHAPTER 13  Addiction and Pornography
According to Japanese-American author Roland Kelts, however, it is inevitable 
that both young men and women in Japan will find their social relationships driven 
by technology. “Japan has developed incredibly sophisticated virtual worlds and on-
line communication systems. Its smart phone apps are the world’s most imaginative.” 
One has to wonder how much further augmented reality, with its inherent empha-
sis on “immersion” into digital content, will tip that balance away from in-person 
interaction.
The national government sees this “celibacy syndrome” as a mortal threat to the 
nation’s future. “Japan already has one of the world’s lowest birth rates. Its popula-
tion of 126 million, which has been shrinking for the past decade, is projected to 
plunge a further one-third by 2060.”69 If people in that society continue to find sexual 
satisfaction from sources other than each other, Japanese culture could quickly plea-
sure itself out of existence. This is not the only society in this predicament, however. 
“A 2010 census showed that 31.4 million Americans live alone … [which] allows 
people to pursue individual freedom, exert personal control and go through self-real-
ization, but these people have fewer children.”70 That has left the United States with 
a birth rate just below the replacement level of 2.1, while the rate in most of the rest 
of the developed world is far below that. (Germany, Italy, and Spain, for example, are 
each at 1.4.71) From a demographic perspective, the last thing that any of these societ-
ies need is something else to dissuade their residents from reproducing.
Reinforcement of misogyny and sexual aggression
“Pornography itself is about the objectification of women. In this context women are 
treated as things, receptacles and socially dissociated objects to be used and tossed 
aside.” The principal attraction to erotica is that the viewer (usually, but not always, a 
man) gets to choose a partner with the exact physical and behavioral specifications he 
is in the mood for at the time. And if he wants something different the next time, he 
can find that too. There is no mutuality, no requirement or even possibility of serving 
the needs of another person. It is all about the viewer and his whims. Similar to the 
discussion of “muscle memory” in Chapter 12, this sort of habituation cannot help but 
ingrain in viewers a debased understanding of sexuality as a means of conquest and 
self-gratification, and nothing more.
Consuming this content through the augmented medium can only deepen that 
habituation. We have already established that experiencing content in the augmented 
medium – where it seems more real to us because we experience it through our physi-
cal senses in an intuitive way – is an excellent way to train our minds and bodies to 
react in certain ways in a given situation. It follows, therefore, that pornographic 
content in the augmented medium will be even more effective in training people to 
objectify others than its two-dimensional counterpart.
69Id.
70Lee Kuan Yew, Warning Bell for Developed Countries: Declining Birth Rates, Forbes, Oct. 16, 2012, 
available at: http://www.forbes.com/sites/currentevents/2012/10/16/warning-bell-for-developed-countries-
declining-birth-rates/ (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
71Id.

327
﻿ Pornographic and Prurient Content
This is even more troubling with respect to content that is more graphic than 
simple erotica, such as rape and other sexual violence. Leaving aside the effect of 
consuming too much adult content in general, the specific characteristics of much of 
this content raise additional concerns. Already, according to one study, over 88% of 
explicit content online depicts some form of physical aggression, while almost half 
include verbal aggression.72 Viewers already intent on viewing such content will be 
eager to experience it as only AR allows. The short film Ex Post Facto (discussed in 
Chapter 12) presaged this development (however imperfectly) with its tagline: “If 
rape was legal, would you do it?” The same question is inherent in the very concept 
of digital replacements for human sex partners, whether that takes the form of digital 
content with haptic augmentation or robotic prostitutes. “[E]ven if sexbots are not 
currently conscious, they do have the external markings of personhood, and we are 
programming them to be person-like. Indeed, we are programming them to be like 
a specific type of person: the type of woman who can be owned by a heterosexual 
man.” To own and use such a device would be to habituate oneself in the experience 
of having a sex slave, which cannot possibly make a positive contribution to that 
person’s general socialization.
Indeed, we already have essentially the same thing today in the form of Real-
Touch Interactive and other live digital interactions. RealTouch’s “models” are little 
more than telecommuting prostitutes, performing sex acts with a digital device for 
the pleasure of paying clients. The technical distinction between how they and a 
more traditional prostitute ply their respective trades, however, is likely to render 
these “models’ services legal in more jurisdictions than just Nevada.
Children’s access to porn
One of the most troublesome numbers in the statistics that has been gathered on 
pornography is “11.” That is the average age at which a boy first encounters explicit 
material online. The Daily Mail recently featured an interview with a mother who 
told how her 11-year-old son’s “entire character” changed after he began watching 
porn on his laptop in his own bedroom.73 She wrote:
If Charlie had been on Class A drugs he couldn’t have been more transformed. 
He became withdrawn, moody and sullen. He wasn’t sleeping at night. He lost his 
normal gargantuan appetite. He looked hollow-eyed and listless. He had none of 
the boyish energy and high spirits that we were all used to.
He began writing things like ‘I hate myself’, or ‘Charlie is s***’ on scraps 
of paper, newspapers, books, even his bedroom furniture and walls. He drew 
obscene cartoons with speech bubbles filled with the filthiest words in the 
dictionary.
72Internet Safety 101: Pornography Statistics, Enough Is Enough webpage, available at: http://www.
internetsafety101.org/Pornographystatistics.htm (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
73Liz Martin, How Internet Porn Turned My Beautiful Boy Into a Hollow, Self-Hating Shell, Mail Online 
(April 19, 2012), available at: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2132342/How-internet-porn-turned-
beautiful-boy-hollow-self-hating-shell.html#ixzz1scCMm8x3 (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).

328
CHAPTER 13  Addiction and Pornography
I once rolled back his sleeve to find ‘I am disgusting’ scrawled on the inside of his 
arm. I managed to stop myself from crying until I’d left the room. But the moment 
the door closed behind me I broke down completely.74
After intensive intervention, Charlie recovered. But millions of other 11-year-
olds encounter similar pitfalls. In their article “Why Shouldn’t Johnny Watch Porn 
if He Likes?,” educators and authors Gary Wilson and Marnia Robinson explained 
that “sexual-cue exposure matters more during adolescence than at any other time in 
life.”75 That’s because the age of 11 or 12 is “when billions of new neural connections 
(synapses) create endless possibilities. … By his twenties, he may not exactly be 
stuck with the sexual proclivities he falls into during adolescence, but they can be like 
deep ruts in his brain – not easy to ignore or reconfigure.” This echoes the findings of 
psychiatrist Norman Doidge quoted earlier. In other words, constant, easy access to 
porn-on-demand conditions young men to stimuli that real-life interactions can never 
match, setting them up for frustration and failed relationships later in life.
And yet the Internet is already exposing kids even younger than this to adult con-
tent. One survey found that “kids start watching porn from as early as the age of 6.”76 
Another found that “children aged 12 to 17 are one of the largest consumer groups 
of online porn … [which] can hook kids on hardcore and often violent imagery.”77 
If this is what happens over desktop and mobile computers, then children will be all 
the more likely to find such content on digital eyewear. With no one else able to look 
over their shoulders to check what they are watching, kids will be even less able than 
adults to resist the temptation to indulge in such content anywhere and everywhere.
AR creation tools will also give already sexually frustrated teens even more abil-
ity to create and publish lewd content of their own. Social media and texting already 
provide ample opportunity for sexting and shaming with explicit content. In a world 
where all teens wore devices that allowed them to see digital content on top of the 
physical, bullied teens could be forced to walk in a world where they see embarrass-
ing photos of themselves posted on literally every wall. As mentioned in Chapter 12, 
moreover, the instant 3D scanning technology that is already beginning to hit the 
market will soon be – if it has not already been – used to create digital avatars that can 
then be made to perform all manner of lewd acts, either with or without the permis-
sion of the person scanned.
Exploitation of children
Some of those whose physical forms will be digitally scanned – or digitally aug-
mented with explicit content – will be minors. Some devices may (hopefully!) be 
74Id.
75Oct. 5, 2011, available at: http://goodmenproject.com/families/boys/why-shouldnt-johnny-watch-
porn-if-he-wants-to/.
76Kids Access Porn Sites at 6, Begin Flirting at 8, USA Today, available at: http://www.usatoday.com/
story/cybertruth/2013/05/14/childrens-online-safety-porn/2158015/ (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
77Teen Addiction to Pornography a Growing Problem, 7WDAM, available at: http://www.wdam.com/
story/23243124/teen-porn-addiction (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).

329
﻿ Pornographic and Prurient Content
programmed not to process the images of those who are obviously children, but 
verifying the ages of teens would be beyond its ability. And the truth is that a depress-
ingly large number of men would use such devices for exactly that purpose. AR Dirt 
commentator Joseph Rampolla – whose day job as a police captain and consultant 
has included many years of cybercrime investigation – has repeatedly warned that 
“wherever society finds pornography, child pornography is not too far behind.”78 Ex-
perience on the Internet to date has repeatedly proven him right.
This dark rule of human nature will play out in all augmented contexts, not only 
with regard to digital images. The same commentators discussing human-like sex-
bots, for example, have already anticipated “a hypothetical company that starts pro-
ducing child sex-robots to satisfy deviant sexual desires.”79 Indeed, some have even 
advocated for this development. Ron Arkin, Georgia Tech’s Mobile Robot Lab di-
rector, has “said that while he doesn’t approve of child sex bots for recreational use, 
he’d like to see them … used for pedophiles the way methadone is used to treat drug 
addicts.”80 Arkin’s motivation – “to possibly provide better protection to society from 
recidivism in sex offenders”81 – is noble enough: but the possible unintended conse-
quences of investing in such technology (even Arkin worries about a black market for 
the devices), and the very idea of positively reinforcing pedophiles’ impulses, are so 
revolting as to warrant serious hesitation in considering this approach.
Even more troubling is the distinct possibility that, if (really, when) such devices 
become available, they may very well be perfectly legal. In the 2002 decision 
Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that digital images 
that look like child porn, but do not portray actual children, are protected speech 
and cannot be punished under the laws against child porn.82 It goes without saying 
that it has gotten increasingly easy to create photo-realistic digital images, and that 
it will get even easier in the very near future. In 2011, for example, clothing retailer 
H&M acknowledged that the models in its catalogs were merely digitally enhanced 
mannequins with the heads of real models photoshopped onto them (Fig. 13.4).83 
Yet it took a very discerning eye to notice that the images were artificial. Combining 
user-generated digital imagery with AR eyewear will allow anyone to immerse 
themselves in the objects of their desire, even if those objects happen to be in the 
form of children.
The best that can be said in response is that the legal lines around such content 
are at least fuzzy. In 2012, for example, a Georgia lawmaker proposed a statute to 
78Eric Huber, Augmented Reality: An Interview With Joseph Rampolla, A Fistful of Dongles (Apr. 20, 
2011), available at: http://www.ericjhuber.com/2011/04/augmented-reality-interview-with-joseph.html.
79Kashmir Hill, Are Child Sex-Robots Inevitable? Forbes, July 14, 2014, available at: http://www.forbes.
com/sites/kashmirhill/2014/07/14/are-child-sex-robots-inevitable/ (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).
80Id.
81Id.
82Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition, 535 US 234 (2002).
83Austin Considine, Invasion of the Head Snatchers, The New York Times, Dec. 16, 2011, avail-
able at: http://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/18/fashion/hm-puts-real-heads-on-digital-bodies.html (last 
visited on Sept. 10, 2014).

330
CHAPTER 13  Addiction and Pornography
outlaw superimposing a minor’s head onto an explicit image,84 and in July 2014, the 
United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit upheld a man’s child pornog-
raphy conviction for doing exactly that.85 Using augmented world technologies to 
make or display explicit images blending real and digital images, then, might well be 
punishable. Moreover, Free Speech Coalition was a 6–3 decision, so it is not entirely 
insulated from being narrowed or reversed by a future Supreme Court, especially if 
an explosion of explicit AR content makes a measurable impact in the lives of many 
individuals. It may also prove easier to prosecute augmented child pornography in 
other countries. In 2013, a 48-year-old Canadian man ordered a child-sized sex doll; 
the shipment was intercepted and he was charged with child pornography. If the pros-
ecution succeeds, it could stand as a potent warning to the simulation of child porn in 
augmented media as well, at least in Canada.
CONCLUSION
Augmented reality will be an interesting and powerful medium, with the ability to do 
both good and harm to individual psyches and society as a whole. It will offer users 
the ability to psychologically immerse themselves in artificial content to a degree 
FIGURE 13.4
H&M’s digital models.
84Tim Cushing, Georgia Lawmaker Looking to Make Photoshopping Heads on Naked Bodies Illegal, 
techdirt (Jan. 24, 2012), available at: https://www.techdirt.com/articles/20120122/02084717501/
georgia-lawmaker-looking-to-make-photoshopping-heads-naked-bodies-illegal.shtml (last visited on 
Sept. 10, 2014).
85United States v. Anderson, No. 13-2337, Affirming district court order denying Anderson’s motion to 
dismiss indictment (8th Cir., 2013), available at: http://media.ca8.uscourts.gov/opndir/14/07/132337P.
pdf (last visited on Sept. 10, 2014).

331
﻿ Conclusion
unmatched by other technologies. That ability, in and of itself, is ethically neutral, 
but how we exercise it will ultimately be a reflection of ourselves. When our desires 
are personally destructive or socially unacceptable, however, augmented media will 
have the power to intensify those urges and the likelihood that we will act on them – 
to the detriment of ourselves or others. Therefore, not only must we exercise discern-
ment and good judgment in how we choose to augment our physical surroundings, 
but also the consequences of making poor choices with respect to digital media will 
often be even more severe than they would be in other circumstances.
In the end, it comes down to the timeless wisdom of the Spiderman franchise: 
“with great power comes great responsibility.” Perhaps, with a little foresight and 
self-awareness, we will use augmented reality to truly make our world greater.

333
A
“Absolut Truths” app, 73
Addiction to augmented reality, 311
compulsive behavior, 322
exploitation of children, 328
impact on healthy adult relationships, 324
reinforcement of misogyny and sexual 
aggression, 326
steps to prevent, 314
used for pornographic and prurient content, 316
children’s access, 327
Advertising and marketing, augmented reality in, 71
augmented content on product packaging, 73
Augmented (hyper) Reality: Domestic 
Robocop, 79
billboards and wall-sized advertisements, 77
biometrics, 78
business defamation and product 
disparagement, 89
digital billboard replacement technology, 83
disclosures, 90
false advertising and unfair competition, 81
future perspective, 77
in-store kiosks, 74
interactive print, 72
interactive video billboards, 75
interactivity with physical places and things, 96
Keiichi Matsuda’s vision, 79, 80
keyword, 116
location-based advertising, 79
“magic mirror”-type augmented displays, 78
“pay-per-gaze” advertising, 78
printed targets, 71
projection mapping, 76
property rights and freedom of speech, 157
models of controlling location-based 
messages, 158
public installations, 74–76
shocking AR ads, 178
Air Commerce Act (1926), 154
AIREAL, 27
Air rights, 154
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), 248
Anderson v. American Restaurant Group, 186
Anti-cybersquatting Consumer Protection 
Act (1999), 166
Apple’s HealthKit, 293
Arnold v. Treadwell, 147
Ashraf, Farooq, 195
Assault, 176
in augmented medium, 177
defined, 176
immersion, element of, 176
intent to, 176
reasonable fear of contact, 176
Assistive technology service, defined, 257
Augmented digital information, 173
Augmented graffiti, 163
Augmented methods of teaching, 38
Augmented reality 
definition, 18, 19
different meanings of, 20
distinction between virtual reality and, 18, 19
in enhancing privacy, 68
extra-sensory, 29
false advertising and unfair competition in, 81
innovations, 36
legitimacy, 36
levels of adoption, 36
making appropriate disclosures in, 92
Mann’s, 21
maturity, 39
monetary transactions in, 97, 98
consumer protection and contract law, 98
muscle memory and desensitization, 305
related vocabulary, 22
synonyms, 20
synthetic synthesis, 30
training system, 306
use in advertising and marketing, 71
Augmented reality devices/products, 
physical injury and 
blunt trauma, 195
cancer, 198
eye strain, 194
motion sickness, 196
retinal projection, 199
skin irritation, 198
Augmented reality games, 290
case of underage users, 187
“The Game”, 186
Grand Theft Auto, 307, 308
location-based, 187
physical injury and, 182
from augmented distractions, 188
due to inaccuracy, 192
liability on game designers, 185
physical or digital versions of an object, 191
Index

334
Index
risks inherent in location-based, 183
sci-fi themed AR game Ingress, 167–169,  
182, 185
law enforcement, 209–211
“SkinVaders,” 183
Splinter Cell video game, 182
virtual shooting games, 211
weapon-oriented video games, 213
Witness, The, 183, 184
risk of injury, 184, 185
Augmented weapons, 213
Augmented world technologies, 4, 31
facial recognition technology, 35
hand and gesture tracking, 34
mechanical vision and sensors, 32
mesh networking, 31
Panternet, 31
taggants for pinpoint-accurate perception, 32
Augmenting architectural works, copyrights of, 134
Azuma, Ronald, 19
B
Battery, 176
Biermann, B. C., 83, 284, 290
Biometrics, 78
Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) technology, 62
application using, 62
next-generation, 63
potential of, 62
sensors, 32
Bosley, Catherine, 147
Bowery Wall project, 163
Bucchere, Chris, 186
C
Calder effects test, 272
Capability of augmented reality (AR) law, 12
Cheok, Adrian, 28
Communications Act (1934), 245
Communications Decency Act (1996), 160
Consumer protection and contract law, 98
1-800-Contacts v. Ditto Technologies, 106
Convenience of augmented reality (AR) law, 7
Copyright, 125. See also Patents; Trademarks
basics, 125
Copyright Act (USA), 125
in defense of fair use, 137
eligibility for, 127
enforcement in AR medium, 138
through licensing, 141
fixation in a tangible medium, 126
idea/expression dichotomy and, 127
infringement liability, 137, 175
moral rights, 136
obtaining, 126
principle of originality, 127
digital imitations of reality, case of, 130
protection 
adding to existing work, 132
in analogous cases, 129
in “augmented substitution” scenario, 133
of augmenting architectural works, 134
duplicating copyrighted works, 131
reproduction and derivative works, 131
public display and performance rights, 136
sine qua non of, 127
Courtroom, AR in 
telepresence, 268
using haptic and audio-visual AR for evidence, 
269
Creative expression, in augmented reality 
(AR) law, 10
Cyber Navi, 204
D
Daemon and FreedomTM, 132, 205, 218,  
222, 280
DAQRI Smart Helmet, 25, 30
Darknets, 138
AR, 222
Darknet society, 280, 281
Data enhancement and privacy concerns, 55
Decimated reality, 22
Defectively designed product, injury from, 193
Designing of three-dimensional objects, 10
Digital advertising and privacy concerns, 55. See 
also Advertising and marketing, augmented 
reality in
Digital billboard replacement technology, 83
Digital communications networks, 172
Digital divide, 39
Digital enhancement of senses 
hearing, 27
sight (vision), 23
taste and smell, 28
touch, 26
Digital eyewear, 22, 25, 26, 38
Digital lollipop, 29
Diminished reality (DR), 22, 287
Disabled persons and AR technologies 
blind, 251
cognitive impairments, 255
deaf, 249
Augmented reality games (cont.)

335
Index
emotional trauma, 255
equal access standards, 245
governing legal framework, 244
Individualized Education Plan (IEP), 257
learning disabilities, 255
patients with ALS (Lou Gehrig’s disease) and 
muscular dystrophy, 254
patients with Parkinson’s disease, 254
physically handicapped, 253
Disclosures in advertisement, 90. See also 
Advertising and marketing, augmented 
reality in
disclaimers in or with the claim, 93
distractions, 95
empirical research and analytical data, 96
FTC’s enforcement, 90
Doritos Late Night campaign, 85, 86, 88
Driving, injury from wearing digital eyewear 
and, 200
AR mobile phone apps and driving, 201
augmented windshields and driver aids, 204
driving amidst ubiquitous augmented  
reality, 207
floating, virtual road signs, 208
transparent walls, 207
virtual speed displays, 208
virtual traffic lights, 207
driving with digital eyewear, 202
Dublon, Gershon, 28
Dylan, Natalie, 146, 147
E
Eavesdropping and privacy concerns, 60
“Echo chamber” effect, 283
E-discovery, 264
Electronically stored information (ESI), 264
Emotional recognition (software), 256
Enhanced reality, 20
Enright, Michael, 289
Environmental protection laws, 173
E-skin, 26
Ethics and augmented world technologies 
development of bad habits, 304
ethical decisions, 299
self-monitoring apps, 293
Evidence in legal proceedings, gathering, 259
from digital remnants, 262
mobile video, 260
preserving three-dimensional experiences 
in AR, 261
Extra-sensory AR, 29
Eye-tracking data, 61
F
Facial recognition technology, 35, 78
privacy concerns, 50
regulation of, 50
Fair use, of trademark, 137
False advertising and unfair competition, 81
business defamation and product 
disparagement, 89
deceptive advertising methods, 85
Doritos Late Night campaign, 85, 86, 88
false suggestions of endorsement or 
sponsorship, 84
False light, 47
Federal Aviation Act (1958), 154
Federal Lanham Act, 80, 81
false advertising, 81
false endorsement, 84, 148
false sponsorship, 84
Federal Trade Commission Act, 85, 86
advertisement disclosures, 90, 91
disclaimers in or with the claim, 93
unfair practices, defined, 87
Feelings, importance of, 10
Flint, Kim, 186
Floating, virtual road signs, 208
Freedom of speech, 156
hyperlinks, 160
G
Gartner Hype Cycles, 37
Geofencing, 22
Geolocation, 22
privacy, 66
sensor infrastructure, 64
Goldman, Eric, 247
Google Glass, 22, 58, 194, 195, 249, 253
Google Morals, 297
GoPro, 58
Groupthink, defined, 283
H
Hand and gesture tracking, 34
H (app)athon Project, 294
Haptic technology, 26, 320
haptic feedback and buzzing, 27
Havens, John C., 294
Hearing, digital enhancement of, 27
Intelligent Headset, 28
“Voice”, 27
Helmet cameras, 234
Horizontal study, 3
Horse law, 5

336
Index
Horse lawyer, 5
Howell, Robert J., 297
I
Immersion, concept of, 22
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act 
(IDEA), 257
Infringement 
facial recognition as infringing rights, 145
liability, 137
virtual assistants as, 149
Intellectual property laws, 148
Intelligent Headset, 28
Intent, defined, 176
Intentional criminal activity, 213
augmented weapons, 213
criminal collaborations through AR darknets, 222
developing infrastructure of augmented world 
for, 220
personal and property crimes, 224
surreptitious data collection and hacking, 215
vulnerability of “soft targets”, 218
Intentional infliction of emotional distress 
(IIED), 179
augmented expression for harassment, 179, 180
Intentional torts, 175
assault, 176
intentional infliction of emotional distress 
(IIED), 179
negligence, 180
student bullying, 179
“Interactivity” or “sliding scale” tests, 273
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and 
Numbers (ICANN), 166
Internet law, 5
Internet of Things (IOT), 31
aggregating interactions with, 63
beacons and taggants, 62
enforcement action related to IOT-collected 
information, 65
in innovative consumer products and services, 65
privacy regulations and, 65
Internet protocol address system, 63
Intrusion into seclusion tort, 47
Iron Man movies, 8, 9
K
Kapture (audio recording device), 59
Keycite® database, 267
Keyword advertising system, 90. See also Advertising 
and marketing, augmented reality in
AdWords, 116
Kickstarter-funded Structure Sensor, 145
Kikano, George, 196, 197
L
Landowner’s rights, remedies for violations of, 155
Law enforcement 
digital information for crime investigation and 
prevention, 230
effect on criminal responsibility, 212
enhancing situational awareness, 226
in location-based AR games, 209
right to hold public officials accountable, 234
citizen video recordings, 241
Graber incident, 239, 240
Massachusetts’ eavesdropping statute, 238
personal rights and privileges associated with 
private speech, 235
police officers, 236, 237
reprisals by police against the citizens, 239
using autonomous drones, 232
virtual shooting games, 211
vulnerability of “soft targets” and, 218
wearables for, 233
Law of the horse, 5
Legal research in AR, 267
Location-based services (LBS), 67
Longueira, Alexa, 188
Looxcie (over-the-ear camera), 58, 59
Lumo Back, 295
M
“Magic Mirror” app, 73
“Magic Mirror”-type augmented displays, 78
Mann, Steve, 20, 21, 58
Mediated reality, 20
Meijer, Peter B.L., 27, 252
Meshwerks v. Toyota Motors Sales USA, Inc., 
129, 130, 132
Miller, Bonnie, 188
MindLight, 29
Minock, Drew, 256
Mobilizing people using AR 
building new augmented communities, 279
contribution to partisanship and polarization, 283
creation of multiple gated neighborhoods, 281
devaluation of physical proximity and 
interpersonal community, 281
“diminished reality” (DR), 287
enforcement of political correctness, 284
labeling others, 288
for political campaigns, 279
for protests and social change, 278, 280

337
Index
rediscovering and rebuilding civic identity, 277
socially deleterious consequences, 283
Monetary transactions in AR, 97, 98
consumer protection and contract law, 98
Moore’s law, 12
Moral rights, 136
Mullins, Brian, 284
N
Nano crystal taggants, 34
Nanotaggants, 172–174
National Policy & Legal Analysis Network to 
Prevent Childhood Obesity (NPLAN), 85
Near Field Communication (NFC) technology, 32, 62
Negligence, 180
in augmented reality games, 182
elements of claim alleging, 181
physical injury due to, 182
Newsom, Gavin, 58
Njewadda, Ajanaffy, 178
Norman, Don, 189, 190
Nuisance, 171
O
Oculus Rift, 18
Oman, Charles, 197
On-the-fly captioning, 250
“Operation SC Revelation” campaign, 182
Orthorectified image skin, 63
Ownership rights, 154
P
Panternet, 31
Papagiannis, Helen, 255
Patents. See also Copyright; Trademarks
nature of protection under, 101
in AR inventions, 102
AR patent infringement case, 104
rights of Lennon Image Technologies, LLC, 
107, 108
as weapons of competition, 106
Patriot Act (USA), 50
PayPal, 62
“Peeping Tom” cameras, 65
Peli, Eli, 194
Personal jurisdiction, 271
connection between defendant and forum state, 272
interactive sites, 273
over providers of augmented reality 
experiences, 274
Petkov, Jennifer, 179
Petkov, Scott, 179
Platonic Realism, 191
Porn consumption, 316, 317
children and, 327
Privacy laws, 43
AR-related technologies and, 50
eavesdropping and wiretapping statutes, 48
electronic, 48
limitations on government intrusion into privacy, 49
modern era of American privacy protection, 46
reasonable expectation of privacy, 47
right to be left alone, 46
subject-specific, 49
Projection mapping, 25, 76, 133, 134
Property rights 
air rights, 154
in augmented medium 
freedom of speech and, 157
nuisance, 171
physical and virtual easements, 172
sci-fi themed AR game Ingress, 167–169
trespass, 169
digital graffiti, 163
easement rights, 172
environmental protection laws, 173
infringement of, 155
Madison Square Gardens arena, case of, 154, 155
real property rights, 153
scarcity and, 165
Transfer of Development Rights (TDR), 155
violations of a landowner’s rights, remedies for, 155
Proto-AR systems, 315
Public Ad campaign, 83, 133
Publication of private facts, 47
Publicity rights, 143
basics, 144
commercial aspect of, 144
digital avatars and, 151
facial recognition as infringing, 145
likeness and, 145
sex appeal and, 145
profiting from, 146, 148
as shields against prurient publications, 147
Q
QR codes, 160
Qualcomm’s Vuforia software, 191
“Quantified self” movement, 293
R
Radio frequency identification (RFID) tags, 33
Ramirez, Edith, 65
Ranasinghe, Nimesha, 29

338
Index
Real property rights, 153
ownership, 153
Real-time AR display, 289
Reasonableness, 176
believable and unexpected condition, 176
Recon’s ski goggles, 58
Right to be left alone, 46
S
Sabelman, Eric, 196
Seager, Thomas, 296
Selinger, Evan, 296, 297
Senseg (Finnish company), 26
Senses, digitally augmented, 19
Shephard’s® database, 267
Short films about augmented reality, 303
Ex Post Facto, 301
Infinity, 300
Sight, 299
Sight (vision), digital enhancement of, 23
billboards, 24
computer webcams, 23
DAQRI Smart Helmet, 25
digital eyewear, 25, 26
holographic projections, 23
in-store kiosks, 24
projection mapping, 25
vehicle windshields, 24
“virtual try-on” websites, 23
Smart glasses, 22
Snowden, Edward, 63
Sterling, Bruce, 19, 20, 25
Strict liability torts, 175
Suarez, Daniel, 280, 281
Surveillance and sousveillance, 57, 61
as invasions of privacy, 60
issue of spying, 57
T
Taggants, 32, 174
nano crystal, 34
Taste and smell, digital enhancement of, 28
digital lollipop, 29
Telecommunications Act (1996), 245
Thermal Touch technology, 34
Tomita v. Nintendo, 104
Tongueduino, 28
Torts, 175
categories, 175
intentional, 175
of negligence, 175
products liability, 193
strict liability, 175
Touch, digital enhancement of, 26
e-skin, 26
Senseg, 26
Touch pixels, 26
Trackable nanotaggants, 64
Trademarks, 111. See also Copyright; Patents
basics, 111
emerging AR technologies and 
trademark law, 114
fair use and free speech, 121
third-party, 122
unauthorized augmentation of, 123
Transfer of Development Rights (TDR), 155
Transparent walls, 207
TRENDnet, 65
Trespass, 169
defined, 169
legal risks for land owners, 170
liability for physical harm and, 170
Turkewitz, Eric, 190
Tushnet, Rebecca, 81
U
Unfair competition, 80
Uniform dispute resolution policy (UDRP), 166
User-generated parody videos, 79
V
V-discovery, 140, 264
first-person AR data, 266
magnitude of data, 265
preservation of data, 266
tracking of data, 265
Veen, Emile van, 222
Veenhof, Sander, 69
Video game industry, 182, 182.  
See also Augmented reality games
Virtual reality (VR), 18, 20
Virtual speed displays, 208
Virtual traffic lights, 207
Vision-based AR devices, 32, 33
“vOICe” software, 252, 253
W
Waid, Brad, 256
“Watch Your Privacy” app, 69
Weapon-oriented video games, 213
“Wearable Marker for Passive Interaction” 
patent, 34
Wright, Will, 290
Z
Zerkin, Noah, 25

