
 AUTISM SPECTRUM 
DISORDERS 

 American Families in Crisis,  Jeffrey S. Turner 
 Animal Rights,  Clifford J. Sherry 
 Campaign and Election Reform,  Glenn H. Utter and Ruth Ann 
Strickland 
 Climate Change,  David L. Downie, Kate Brash, and Catherine 
Vaughan 
 Corporate Crime,  Richard D. Hartley 
 DNA Technology,  David E. Newton 
 Domestic Violence,  Margi Laird McCue 
 Education in Crisis,  Judith A. Gouwens 
 Emergency Management, Jeffrey B. Bumgarner 
 Environmental Justice,  David E. Newton 
 Gangs, Karen L. Kinnear 
 Gay and Lesbian Rights,  David E. Newton 
 Globalization,  Justin Ervin and Zachary A. Smith 
 Identity Theft,  Sandra K. Hoffman and Tracy G. McGinley 
 Lobbying in America,  Ronald J. Hrebenar and Bryson B. Morgan 
 Modern Sports Ethics,  Angela Lumpkin 
 Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation,  Sarah J. Diehl and James 
Clay Moltz 
 Obesity,  Judith Stern and Alexandra Kazaks 
 Policing in America,  Leonard A. Steverson 
 Renewable and Alternative Energy Resources, Zachary A. Smith and 
Katrina D. Taylor 
 Rich and Poor in America,  Geoffrey Gilbert 
 Sentencing,  Dean John Champion 
 Sexual Crime,  Caryn E. Neumann 
 U.S. National Security,  Cynthia A. Watson 
 U.S. Social Security,  Steven G. Livingston 
 U.S. Trade Issues,  Alfred E. Eckes, Jr. 
 Waste Management, Jacqueline Vaughn 
 For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit 
 www.abc-clio.com. 
 Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s 
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series 

 Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital 
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution, 
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and 
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly 
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting 
point for research by high school and college students, scholars, 
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople, 
activists, and others. 
 Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an 
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical 
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies, 
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index. 
 Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will 
find the information they need to have a better understanding of 
the social, political, environmental, and economic issues facing 
the world today. 

This page intentionally left blank

 AUTISM SPECTRUM 
DISORDERS 
 A Reference Handbook 
 Raphael Bernier and Jennifer Gerdts 
 CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES 

 Copyright 2010 by ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior 
permission in writing from the publisher. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Bernier, Raphael (Raphael A.)
 Autism spectrum disorders : a reference handbook / Raphael Bernier 
and Jennifer Gerdts.
   p. ; cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-1-59884-334-7 (alk. paper) — ISBN 978-1-59884-335-4 
(eISBN) 1. Autism spectrum disorders —Handbooks, manuals, etc.
I. Gerdts, Jennifer. II. Title. III. Series: Contemporary world issues. 
 [DNLM: 1.  Child Development Disorders, Pervasive—Resource 
Guides.  WS 39 B528a 2010]
 RC553.A88B47 2010
 618.92'85882— dc22   2010018022
 ISBN: 978-1-59884-334-7 
 EISBN: 978-1-59884-335-4 
 14 13 12 11 10  1 2 3 4 5 
 This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. 
 Visit www.abc-clio.com for details. 
 ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911 
 Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911 
 This book is printed on acid-free paper  
 Manufactured in the United States of America 

 To my father who inspired me, my wife who continues to 
inspire me, and to my daughter who I hope to inspire. 
 Raphael Bernier 
 To my husband, Scott, and my parents, Carm, Chris, and 
Patti. Thanks for your constant and loving support. 
 Jennifer Gerdts 

This page intentionally left blank

ix
 Contents 
 Preface , xvii
 Acknowledgments , xxi
 1 
Background and Overview of Autism 
Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) , 1
 Introduction , 1
 Brief History of Autism , 2
 Domains of Impairment , 4
 Reciprocal Social Interaction , 5
 Communication Skills , 7
 Repetitive or Restricted Interests and Behaviors , 10
 ASD Diagnosis , 12
 PDDs , 13
 Diagnostic Evaluation , 20
 Clinical Vignettes , 22
 Autistic Disorder , 22
 Asperger’s Disorder , 23
 PDD-NOS , 24
 Early Identification of ASD , 24
 Genetic Factors , 26
 Brain Development , 27
 Treatments , 28
 Conclusion , 34
 References , 35
 2 
Controversies, Problems, and Solutions 
in the Field of ASD , 43
 Controversies Surrounding the Causes of Autism , 45
 The Refrigerator Mother Theory and the Birth of the 
Genetics of Autism , 45

x  Contents
 “The Autism Epidemic” , 51
 The Vaccine Controversy , 54
 The Contextual Factors , 55
 Events in the Controversy , 58
 Controversies Surrounding the Treatment of Autism , 67
 Facilitated Communication , 69
 Secretin , 72
 Chelation , 75
 The Gluten-Free, Casein-Free Diet , 78
 Conclusion , 81
 References , 83
 3 
Worldwide and Cultural Perspectives in ASD , 89
 Introduction , 89
 Prevalence Rates , 91
 Epidemiological Studies , 91
 Immigrant Status , 93
 Social Class , 93
 Cultural Influences in Mental Disorders , 94
 Cultural Factors Related to Developmental Disabilities , 95
 Family Adaptation , 95
 Family Appraisal , 96
 Religion , 97
 Social Support , 98
 Cognitive Testing , 100
 Cultural Factors and ASDs , 102
 ASD Symptoms and Diagnosis , 103
 Diagnostic Tools , 103
 Countries outside of the United States , 104
 Racial and Ethnic Groups within the United States , 107
 Acquisition of Cultural Knowledge , 108
 The Culture of Autism , 109
 Treatment , 110
 Access to Services , 110
 Cultural Influences in Treatment Choice , 111
 Focus of Treatment , 112
 Treatment/Educational Recommendations , 113
 Conclusion , 115
 References , 116
 4 
Chronology , 125

 Contents xi
 5 
Biographical Sketches , 145
 Hans Asperger , 145
 Tony Attwood , 146
 Simon Baron-Cohen , 147
 Margaret Bauman , 147
 Bruno Bettelheim , 148
 Eugene Bleuler , 149
 Tony Charman , 149
 Eric Courchesne , 150
 Geraldine Dawson , 151
 Susan Folstein , 152
 Eric Fombonne , 152
 Uta Frith , 153
 Daniel Geschwind , 154
 Temple Grandin , 154
 Stanley Greenspan , 155
 Portia Iversen and Jonathan Shestack , 156
 Leo Kanner , 157
 Ami Klin , 157
 Robert and Lynn Koegel , 158
 Karen and Eric London , 159
 Catherine Lord , 160
 O. (Ole) Ivar Lovaas , 160
 Peter Mundy , 161
 Isabelle Rapin , 162
 Bernard Rimland , 163
 Edward Ritvo , 163
 Sally Rogers , 164
 Sir Michael Rutter , 165
 Eric Schopler , 166
 Robert Schultz , 167
 Marian Sigman , 167
 Marilyn and Jim Simons , 168
 Ruth C. Sullivan , 169
 Helen Tager-Flusberg , 169
 Fred Volkmar , 170
 Lorna Wing , 171
 Suzanne and Bob Wright , 172
 6 
Data and Documents , 173
 Domains of Autism , 173
 Pervasive Developmental Disorders Umbrella Term , 173

xii Contents
 Diagnostic Criteria for Autism Spectrum Disorders , 176
 Constellation of Symptoms in an Individual with ASD , 179
 Screening for Autism Spectrum Disorders , 180
 Neuroscience of Autism Spectrum Disorders , 183
 Face Perception in Autism , 184
 Prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorders , 187
 Prevalence Estimates from Monitoring Networks , 188
 Ethnic Differences in Prevalence of Autism Spectrum 
Disorders , 190
 Interventions in Autism Spectrum Disorders , 191
 Guidelines for Evaluating Interventions , 196
 Guidelines for Evaluating Complementary and Alternative 
Treatments , 198
 Applied Behavioral Analysis and Discrete Trial Training , 199
 Social Stories , 206
 Economic Cost of Autism Spectrum Disorders , 207
 Vaccine Injury Compensation Program and Autism , 209
 References , 217
 7 
Directory of Organizations , 223
 Private, Not-for-Profit Organizations , 223
 Association for Retarded Citizens (ARC) , 223
 Association for Science in Autism Treatment (ASAT) , 223
 Autism and PDD Support Network , 224
 Autism National Committee (AUTCOM) , 224
 Autism Research Institute (ARI) , 224
 Autism Science Foundation (ASF) , 225
 Autism Society of America , 225
 Autism Speaks , 225
 AutismSpot , 227
 Consortium for Citizens with Disabilities (CCD) , 227
 Council for Learning Disabilities (CLD) , 227
 Doug Flutie Jr. Foundation for Autism , 227
 Families for Early Autism Treatment (FEAT) , 228
 Families of Adults Afflicted with Asperger’s Syndrome 
(FAAAS) , 228
 First Signs , 228
 Foundation for Educating Children with Autism 
(FECA) , 229
 Generation Rescue , 229
 The Help Group , 229

Contents  xiii
 Interactive Autism Network (IAN) , 229
 MAAP Services for Autism and Asperger Syndrome , 230
 Manitas por Autismo (SPANISH) , 230
 Mothers United for Moral Support (MUMS) , 230
 National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) , 231
 National Autism Association (NAA) , 231
 National Disability Rights Network (NDRN) , 231
 National Rehabilitation Information Center (NARIC) , 231
 Organization for Autism Research (OAR) , 232
 SafeMinds , 232
 Sibling Support Project , 232
 Simons Foundation Autism Research Initiative (SFARI) , 233
 Talk about Curing Autism (TACA) , 233
 Unlocking Autism , 234
 Professional Organizations , 234
 American Academy of Pediatricians (AAP) , 234
 American Speech and Hearing Association (ASHA) , 235
 Council for Exceptional Children (CEC) , 235
 Governmental Organizations , 235
 Autism Coordinating Center , 235
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) , 236
 Clinical Trials.gov , 236
 Interagency Autism Coordinating Committee (IACC) , 236
 National Dissemination Center for Children with 
Disabilities , 237
 National Institutes for Health Autism Research 
Networks , 238
 National Institutes for Mental Health (NIMH) , 239
 National Institutes of Child Health and Human 
Development (NICHD) , 240
 National Institutes of Health (NIH) , 240
 National Institutes of Neurological Disorders and Stroke 
(NINDS) , 241
 National Institutes on Deafness and Other Communication 
Disorders (NIDCD) , 241
 National Institutes on Disability and Rehabilitation 
Research (NIDRR) , 242
 National Library of Medicine , 242
 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) , 243
 University-Based Organizations , 243
 Autism Center of Excellence and Healthy Infant 
Development Lab, University of California–San Diego , 243

xiv  Contents
 Autism Intervention Research Program, University of 
California–San Diego , 244
 Drexel Autism Center , 244
 Emory Autism Center , 245
 Florida Atlantic University Center for Autism and 
Related Disabilities (CARD) , 245
 Florida State University Center for Autism and Related 
Disabilities (CARD) , 245
 Indiana Resource Center for Autism (IRCA), Indiana 
University , 246
 Kennedy Krieger Institute Center for Autism and Related 
Disorders , 246
 Massachusetts General Hospital, Learning and 
Developmental Disabilities Evaluation and 
Rehabilitation Services (LADDERS) , 247
 Thompson Center for Autism and Neurodevelopmental 
Disorders, University of Missouri , 248
 Treatment and Education of Autistic and Related 
Communication-Handicapped Children 
(TEACCH) Program, University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill , 248
 University of California, Davis, Medical Investigation 
of Neurodevelopmental Disorders (M.I.N.D.) 
Institute , 249
 University of California, Los Angeles, Center for Autism 
Research and Treatment (CART) , 250
 University of Central Florida Center for Autism and 
Related Disabilities (CARD) , 251
 University of Florida at Jacksonville Center for Autism and 
Related Disabilities (CARD) , 251
 University of Florida Center for Autism and Related 
Disabilities (CARD) , 251
 University of Miami and Nova Southeastern University 
Center for Autism and Related Disorders 
(UM-NSU CARD) , 252
 University of Michigan Autism and Communication 
Disorders Centers (UMACC) , 253
 University of South Florida Center for Autism and Related 
Disabilities (CARD) , 253
 University of Washington Autism Center , 254
 Yale Autism Program , 255

Contents  xv
 8 
Resources , 257
 Print Resources , 257
 General Information about ASDs , 257
 Biological Mechanisms: Genetics and Neurological 
Functioning , 262
 General Intervention , 264
 Helpful Tools , 269
 Social and Communication Skills , 273
 School and Education , 277
 Biography/Personal Stories/Stories , 280
 Parenting/Family Issues/Parent Perspectives , 284
 Books for Individuals with Autism , 285
 Adolescence , 286
 Adulthood , 287
 Nonprint Resources , 288
 General Autism Resources , 288
 Films and Video Clips , 290
 Environmental Supports: Computer Software, Visual 
Supports, and Other Materials , 292
 Support Resources , 294
 School and Education , 295
 Glossary , 297
Index, 303
 About the Authors , 325

This page intentionally left blank

xvii
 A
utism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is now considered to be 
the most prevalent of all developmental disorders. The ris-
ing prevalence rates (1 in 10,000; 1 in 1,000; 1 in 150; and now 
1 in 110), media interest, and celebrity attention in recent years 
have brought ASD into living rooms across the world. The feeling 
of personal connection to those diagnosed with ASD is rapidly 
growing, and whether you know someone personally or are sim-
ply interested in learning more, this book can be your formal in-
troduction to ASD. 
 Autism Spectrum Disorders: A Reference Handbook  is designed 
to provide an overview of ASD for readers interested in learning 
more about the disorder, exploring the controversies that the field 
continues to face, understanding the historical and cultural influ-
ences of ASD, and becoming aware of the resources and organi-
zations available for the support of individuals, providers, and 
family members impacted by ASD. 
 The book begins with a broad overview of what we currently 
know about ASDs regarding etiology, neuroscience, behavioral 
presentation, and intervention with a focus on the significant ad-
vances of our understanding during the 20th and early 21st centu-
ries. Building upon this foundation, the next chapter of the book 
addresses the controversies and questions that have impacted the 
field. These enduring questions are presented within a historical 
and cultural context intended to provide a broader viewpoint for 
why these controversies exist and persist. Given the challenges 
faced by those impacted by ASD and the lack of definitive an-
swers currently available from the scientific community, issues 
around its cause and most effective treatments are hotly debated. 
This is evident nowhere more so than the popular media as ASD 
has increasingly received a tremendous amount of attention in the 
Preface

xviii Preface
popular press, television, movies, and even sports over the past 
decade. As such, in response to scientific findings and celebrity 
pronouncements, competing theories regarding the etiology of the 
disorder have risen and taken hold in the ASD community. Given 
the lack of definitive answers regarding etiology, it follows that 
there is much controversy around interventions in ASD. The only 
empirically supported treatments (i.e., behavioral interventions 
using the principles of Applied Behavioral Analysis) are costly, 
time intensive, and not effective for every child, while the avail-
able alternative treatments lack scientific support and can have 
dangerous side effects. Through a historical and cultural frame-
work, the origin of these controversial issues and their impact on 
the field of ASD are discussed. 
 ASD is, at its core, a disorder of social interaction. Yet social be-
havior is largely culturally influenced, and what is considered to 
be socially appropriate in one cultural group may be discouraged 
in another. In the following chapter, the symptoms of ASD are 
examined through a cultural lens, and diagnostic rates across eth-
nicities, nations, and cultural groups are discussed. The histori-
cal factors relevant to the field of ASD are clarified in Chapter 4 
through an annotated chronology. Beginning in 1911, when the 
word  autism  was first used by Eugene Bleuler to refer to children 
with schizophrenia who lost contact with reality, the chronology 
highlights the important scientific findings, publications, and media 
events. The historical perspective is continued in the following 
chapter through a description of the influential people who have 
played a role in our understanding of ASD in the 20th and 21st 
centuries. Supporting data and documents relevant to our under-
standing of ASD, including information about diagnosis, neuro-
science, prevalence, and intervention provide a closer look into a 
variety of components of the ASD scientific field. For example, the 
diagnostic criteria of the ASDs outlined in the  American Psychiatric 
Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual—Fourth Edition  are 
reprinted in Chapter 6 to transparently illuminate the diagnostic 
process. Additionally, examples of behaviorally based interven-
tion tools are described and shown to provide insight into the 
challenging and important work of behavioral intervention. The 
book concludes with descriptions of the organizations dedicated 
to ASDs and a selection of the print and electronic resources avail-
able in the field. 
 There is an ever-increasing amount of information regarding 
ASD available through the expanding scientific and medical lit-

 Preface xix
erature, the popular press, and other media outlets. Some of the 
information is steeped in scientific understanding, while other in-
formation lacks credibility and can be harmful to families. The in-
formation presented in this handbook is based on the research that 
we, and others, have conducted at the University of Washington; 
research from others in the scientific community; and our review 
of the scientific literature. Our hope is that this handbook pro-
vides readers with a comprehensive overview of what is known 
about ASD with an aim to increase awareness and understanding 
of the disorder. 

This page intentionally left blank

xxi
 P
roviding a broad overview of a disorder as challenging and 
complex as ASD is a substantial undertaking and would not 
have been possible without support from the autism commu-
nity. We are particularly grateful for the encouragement, insight, 
and comments from our friends and colleagues at the University 
of Washington Autism Center and the Seattle Children’s Autism 
Center as well as other expert researchers and clinicians around 
the country. Thanks also to the editors and staff at ABC-CLIO, 
including Robin Tutt, Jane Messah, and Lauren Thomas who have 
provided valuable support and guidance along the way during 
this endeavor. Most importantly, we are grateful to the children 
and families that we work with everyday who help us to under-
stand the real lives behind the diagnosis and who continually 
broaden our understanding of the world. 
 Finally, we would be remiss if we didn’t acknowledge the debt 
of gratitude that we owe to our own families. We can only hope 
that the many hours we spent behind the computer and in the 
office away from our families were well worth the final product 
held in your hands. 
 
Acknowledgments

This page intentionally left blank

1
 1 
 Background and Overview of 
Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) 
 Introduction 
 Autism Spectrum Disorder  (ASD) is a term that has been widely ad-
opted to describe an array of diagnoses, including Autistic Disorder 
(referred to hereafter as autism), Asperger’s Disorder, and Perva-
sive Developmental Disorder—Not Otherwise Specified (PDD-
NOS). Impaired social interactions are a common feature among all 
three of the diagnoses, and social interactions are considered to be 
the core area of functioning that is impacted in ASD. Diagnostic cri-
teria for ASDs include impairments in reciprocal social interactions 
and communication skills as well as the presence of restricted and/
or repetitive interests and behaviors. Individuals with ASDs often 
present with a unique array of symptoms within these domains. 
ASD is a neurodevelopmental disorder, meaning that it is based in 
the brain and has an onset in early childhood. 
 The average age of diagnosis for all ASDs ranges from 3.5 to 
5 years of age in the United States (Autism and Developmental 
Disabilities Monitoring Network 2009). Factors such as lower IQ, 
being male, and the presence of a regression in skills contribute to 
a younger age of diagnosis (Shattuck et al. 2009). However, parents 
of children with ASD often report symptom onset between 12 and 
18 months of age (De Giacomo and Fombonne 1998; Rogers and 
DiLalla 1990), and the early markers of ASD have received recent 
research attention. In 2007, the Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
vention (CDC, 2007) reported a prevalence rate in the United States 
of 1 in every 150 children, which is a dramatic increase from re-
ported prevalence rates of approximately 1 in 2,500 reported in de-
cades prior (e.g., Lotter 1966). Two years later, the prevalence rate 

2 Background and Overview of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) 
rose to 1 in every 110 (Autism and Developmental Disabilities 
Monitoring Network 2009), and 1 in 90 parents reported that their 
child had a diagnosis on the autism spectrum (Kogan et al. 2009). 
 Males are more often affected than females, and the sex ratio 
of males to females with a diagnosis of ASD is approximately 4:1. 
Most cases of ASD are idiopathic, meaning that they do not have 
such known causes as brain injury or genetic disease. However, 
there does appear to be a genetic influence as individuals are at 
increased risk for developing ASD if they have a positive family 
history of the disorder. Much research has been conducted examin-
ing the brain functioning of individuals with ASD and the neural 
differences between typically developing individuals and those 
with ASD. 
 Many options exist for providing treatment to individuals with 
ASD. Early intensive behavioral intervention is the recommended 
treatment approach to address the core symptoms of ASD and is 
the only treatment that has received positive research support to 
date. A behavioral intervention approach called Applied Behavior 
Analysis (ABA) has been studied extensively and has demonstrated 
promising results in improving outcomes for individuals with ASD. 
 Brief History of Autism 
 The term  autism  was first used in the early 20th century by psychi-
atrist Dr. Eugen Bleuler to describe individuals with schizophre-
nia who were disconnected from reality (Bleuler 1916). Decades 
later, Dr. Leo Kanner, a child psychiatrist at Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity, adopted the term to describe a childhood disorder he 
deemed “early infantile autism” involving challenges in social and 
language in addition to the presence of repetitive behaviors (Kan-
ner 1943). Dr. Kanner indicated that the group of children he was 
referring to also had a disconnect from reality as described by 
Dr. Bleuler, but did not also have schizophrenia. During the same 
time period in Europe, Dr. Hans Asperger, an Austrian pediatri-
cian practicing in Vienna, described a small group of boys in 1944 
with similar challenges in social interaction, but who were not as 
severely affected as those described by Dr. Kanner (Asperger 1944). 
He called them “little professors” due to their tendency to discuss 
subjects in great detail. Dr. Lorna Wing, a psychiatrist in the United 
Kingdom, later revisited Dr. Asperger’s work in the 1980s and en-
couraged autism experts to view autism as a spectrum of chal-

Brief History of Autism 3
lenges rather than one homogenous disorder. This thinking led to 
the addition of Asperger’s Disorder, among other autism-related 
diagnoses such as PDD-NOS, to be considered separate diagnoses 
from autism in 1994 (APA 1994). 
 Psychoanalytic theory dominated mid-20th-century psycho-
logical thought and autism was considered for many years to be 
rooted in parental rejection of the child. Followers of this “refriger-
ator mother theory” purported that cold, aloof parenting was the 
cause of the child’s autism. However, many parents of children 
with autism along with a number of prominent psychiatrists and 
psychologists rejected this theory. Research in the genetic bases of 
autism began to take place in the 1970s. In 1977, Dr. Susan Folstein 
and Sir Michael Rutter published their seminal paper describing 
identical and fraternal twins with autism and concluded that au-
tism is a genetically based disorder not caused by poor parenting 
(Folstein and Rutter 1977). This paper was critical in dispelling the 
refrigerator-mother theory. These findings were replicated and ex-
panded upon in 1995 by a team of researchers led by Dr. Anthony 
Bailey and provided further support for the role of genetic factors 
in autism (Bailey et al. 1995). 
 Dr. Bernard Rimland, an experimental psychologist and father 
of a child with autism, was an early advocate for a biological ex-
planation of autism (Rimland 1964) and early research in brain 
development and functioning in children with autism was in part 
encouraged by Dr. Rimland’s writings. Over the years, findings 
using electrophysiology, neuropsychological testing, postmortem 
autopsy, and brain imaging have pointed to differences in a range 
of brain regions in autism including the frontal lobe, the tempo-
ral lobe, the limbic system, the cerebellum, and a variety of other 
brain structures (Akshoomoff, Pierce, and Courchesne 2002; Baron-
Cohen 2004; Bauman and Kemper 2005; Hill and Frith 2003). In 
the years since the early explorations of the neuroscience of autism, 
many findings have been supported and clarified, highlighting that 
autism is clearly a disorder that is based in the brain. 
 Although autism research was conducted and much discus-
sion among clinicians and scientists occurred about autism mid-
century, the general public’s awareness of autism began to increase 
in the 1980s. Many have partly attributed this increased aware-
ness to the movie  Rain Man  (1988), which won several Academy 
Awards, including best picture and best actor for Dustin Hoffman 
who gave a very accurate portrayal of an adult with autism. Media 
attention to autism has increased significantly since the early 1990s, 

4 Background and Overview of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) 
leading to even more public awareness and connection with the 
disorder. Many television reports, documentaries, newspaper ar-
ticles, and magazine stories about autism have been on the rise in 
recent years. 
 Public awareness has been further enhanced by celebrity at-
tention given to the disorder and the influence of several nonprofit 
organizations such as Autism Speaks who have worked to increase 
public attention to autism. Such organizations have aided in the 
provision of increased research and service funding from the gov-
ernment for families of children with autism. For example, Autism 
Speaks was very influential in passing the Combating Autism Act, 
signed into law in 2006, which allotted billions of dollars in gov-
ernment expenditures to autism research and clinical services for 
families. 
 Domains of Impairment 
 The core symptom of ASD is considered to be difficulty with re-
ciprocal social interaction, such as limited abilities to develop ap-
propriate peer relationships and decreased shared enjoyment with 
others. Communication skills are also impacted in ASD. Individu-
als often struggle to maintain reciprocal conversations and fre-
quently demonstrate unusual speech patterns. The last area of 
impairment is often the most outwardly striking and involves a pat-
tern of behavior, interests, and activities that are unusually repeti-
tive or restricted in quality. Symptoms in this domain include hand 
flapping and insistence on maintaining a routine. Each domain will 
be discussed in detail below. 
 Although the general areas of challenge are similar across indi-
viduals with ASD, a notable reality is that children and individuals 
with ASD vary significantly in their exact symptom presentation. 
In fact, experts often conceptualize individuals not as having au-
tism, but rather “autisms” because each child can be so different 
in his/her presenting strengths and weaknesses. For instance, one 
child may be particularly good at maintaining consistent eye con-
tact during social interactions, but struggle to maintain age appro-
priate friendships while another may use appropriate gestures, 
but have difficulty with direct eye gaze. Taking into account each 
child’s individual symptom profile is important in developing an 
appropriate case conceptualization as well as focusing on suitable 
treatment targets. 

Domains of Impairment 5
 Reciprocal Social Interaction 
 Atypicality in the quality of social interactions with others is often 
considered to be the core symptom of ASD. Difficulties with non-
verbal social behaviors, peer relationships, spontaneous seeking 
to share enjoyment, and social reciprocity are all observed in indi-
viduals with ASD. Although verbal exchanges are often a medium 
of social interaction, much of social intent is actually communi-
cated without language or “nonverbally.” Eye contact, gestures, 
facial expression, and body proxemics are all examples of nonver-
bal aspects of communication. Individuals with ASD often have 
difficulty with nonverbal communication in addition to challenges 
in the social aspects of verbal communication. 
 Maintaining direct eye contact with others is often challenging 
in ASD. Some individuals with ASD establish only brief eye con-
tact before looking down. Alternatively, they may look past their 
social partner’s eyes to a point behind them or at another part of 
their face. Some higher functioning individuals with ASD report 
that making eye contact is actually acutely uncomfortable for them. 
Research studies have been conducted in which the direction of 
eye gaze is followed using eye tracking technology (e.g., Klin et al. 
2002; Norbury et al. 2009). These studies suggest that in fact, in-
dividuals with ASD tend not to focus on people’s faces during 
social exchanges and instead more often attend to something else 
of interest in a room such as a light switch on the wall. The pat-
tern of eye gaze is also different in ASD. Whereas typically devel-
oping individuals complete a triangle formation with their eye gaze, 
scanning back and forth between the eyes and down the face, in-
dividuals with ASD tend to only briefly look at eyes and more 
often focus on other aspects of the face during social interactions, 
such as the mouth (Klin et al. 2002). Much of emotional expres-
sion is relayed through the eyes. Therefore, it is theorized that be-
cause individuals with ASD do not often focus on the eyes, they 
are missing cues on emotional expressions in others, making it 
difficult to accurately gauge others’ emotions. 
 Other aspects of nonverbal communication used to regulate 
social interaction are also impaired in ASD. For instance, a limited 
range of facial expressions is often observed in individuals with 
ASD and/or the facial expression may not match the situation at 
hand. Some individuals with ASD may laugh at inappropriate 
times such as when someone gets hurt or may display a flat affect 
when everyone else is laughing. Body proximity and an altered 

6 Background and Overview of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) 
sense of personal space can be an additional difference observed 
in ASD, such as standing too close or too far away from a social 
partner. Gestures like using the hands to indicate the size or shape 
of something brought up during a conversation or to emphasize 
a conversational point do not often come naturally to individuals 
with ASD. In younger children with ASD, gestures such as nod-
ding the head to indicate “yes” or shaking the head to indicate “no” 
may be absent or rarely used. Some individuals with ASD have 
difficulty spontaneously sharing their enjoyment of something with 
others by, for example, holding up and showing the item of inter-
est or commenting on it verbally. 
 A concept called “joint attention” is also an area of challenge 
in ASD and delays in joint attention are one of the earliest signs 
of ASD. Joint attention refers to calling a social partner’s attention 
to an object or action of interest by either pointing and then look-
ing back-and-forth between the object of interest and the social 
partner  or  using eye gaze alone to bring their attention to the item 
of interest. Typical infants begin to initiate joint attention at ap-
proximately 12 months of age by, for example, using their index 
finger point out items of interest at a distance, such as airplane in 
the sky or a train on railroad tracks. Young children with ASD are 
often significantly delayed in the development of joint attention 
and frequently need to be taught how to initiate joint attention 
through intervention. 
 Peer relationships are often delayed or absent in ASD and par-
ents of children with ASD report that this gap in peer relationships 
becomes more pronounced as children grow older. Many young 
children with ASD stay on the perimeter of a group of children who 
are playing in a playground. They may watch the other children, 
but do not often join the group on their own initiative or if they 
do, it is done in an inappropriate way. One boy with autism, Billy, 
was easily identifiable on the school playground because while the 
rest of his class would pair up to swing on the swings or gather 
to play kickball, he often stood at the edge of the playground and 
lined up sticks in the dirt. Another child with autism, Harlan, told 
his psychologist that he wanted to make friends at his junior high. 
His teacher reported that Harlan did appear to want to make 
friends but he attempted to do so by regaling his peers with facts 
about whales, one of his very specific interests. Despite looks of 
annoyance and clear cues that his peers were not interested, he 
would persist, sometimes following them around the classroom 
talking to their backs about how blue whales eat. Asking questions 

Domains of Impairment 7
about friends and other social partners, taking turns and paying 
attention to the other person when it is their turn, and offering 
to share are all important components of social interactions with 
peers; skills such as these are not intuitive for children with ASD. 
Often, children with ASD show marked impairments in these sub-
tleties of social interaction. 
 Parents of children with ASD report that their children often 
get along better with children who are younger or older than they 
are, but have specific difficulties with same-aged peers. This can 
cause particular difficulty in teenage years when peer relationships 
are such a focus of social development. Parents of teenagers with 
ASD report that it is the reciprocal nature of friendships that is 
challenging because many individuals with ASD have difficulty 
sustaining a back-and-forth exchange. Some individuals may, for 
instance, remain quiet when someone else brings up a topic of in-
terest or fail to ask them a question about it. 
 A commonly held misconception about ASD is that all indi-
viduals with ASD are not interested in social interaction. Although 
this is true for some people with ASD, many higher functioning 
individuals indeed have the motivation to engage in social inter-
actions and have social relationships but do not know how to suc-
cessfully initiate and maintain these exchanges. Treatment such as 
social skills groups can be particularly helpful in teaching children 
with ASD about the details of successful social interaction. 
 Communication Skills 
 Communication is also often impacted in ASD and delayed lan-
guage development, difficulties in initiating and maintaining con-
versations, presence of repetitive speech, and lack of pretend play 
skills are common. Many children with ASD are delayed in the de-
velopment of their first words or phrases. Most typically develop-
ing children have single words by 12 months of age and phrase 
speech that is two to three words in length by 24 months. Many 
children with ASD develop single words at 24 months or later and 
phrase speech at 36 months or later. Some children with ASD do 
not develop spoken language at all in their lifetime, but the per-
centage of children with ASD who remain nonverbal has decreased 
in recent years. 
 For those who develop fluent speech, an often noted chal-
lenge is the ability to initiate and maintain age appropriate con-
versations. In general, individuals tend to be better able to hold 

8 Background and Overview of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) 
conversations about their own topics of interest rather than about 
someone else’s choice of topics. Some individuals with ASD may 
provide an inappropriate response rather than ask questions about 
the other person or make an on-topic comment. Comments that 
are not relevant to the conversation at hand and inflexibility in con-
versation topics may also be observed. All these factors make the 
back-and-forth nature of conversation difficult to sustain. 
 A recent conversation between a fourth-grade student named 
Cameron with Asperger’s Disorder and his clinician went some-
thing like this: 
 CAMERON: 
It was awesome with all the dinosaurs but I 
couldn’t see the T-Rex for very long. (Cameron failed 
to provide any context for the start of the conver-
sation). 
 CLINICIAN: 
I’m confused. What dinosaurs? Was this a movie? 
 CAMERON: 
The T-Rex, Diplodocus, Raptors, and Brontosau-
rus, but time was up when I got to the T-Rex. He 
is big, has a long tail and has little front arms and 
is a meat-eater. (Cameron failed to acknowledge 
the clinician’s confusion and only responded to 
the clinician’s first question and in a very literal 
sense—he specified what dinosaurs he saw. He 
then continued to talk more about the T-Rex, his 
favorite dinosaur). 
 CLINICIAN: 
Oh, were you at . . . 
 CAMERON: 
The T stands for Tyrannosaurus. A smaller type 
of meat eater is the Allosaurus. (Cameron inter-
rupted the clinician in order to finish sharing facts 
about the T-Rex). 
 CLINICIAN (RECALLING THE DINOSAURS ON DISPLAY AT THE PACIFIC SCIENCE 
CENTER): 
Oh, you went to the Pacific Science Center . . . 
(Cameron continued to share facts about dino-
saurs with the clinician). 
 One girl with autism, Julia, responded to a classmate’s com-
ment “I had a really great time at soccer practice” by saying, 
“Yeah.” Her classmate made another statement, “I scored two 
goals and I was so proud of myself!” Again, Julia responded, 
“Yeah.” The classmate further explained, “Those were the first 

Domains of Impairment 9
goals I have ever scored and I think I’m going to try really hard 
to score in our game on Saturday,” and Julia replied, “Yeah.” Julia 
learned in her social skills group that she should say something 
after someone makes a comment about themselves. She memo-
rized the word  yeah  to say in such situations. However, she used 
 yeah  too many times in this interaction, and the classmate walked 
away when Julia failed to ask her questions about her soccer prac-
tice and did not expand upon her  yeah statements. 
 Some unusual aspects of spoken language are also common 
in ASD. Many individuals with ASD use repetitive language in 
everyday interactions. For instance, they may repeat phrases that 
adults say either immediately after they have been said (called 
echolalia) or some time after they have been said (called delayed 
echolalia). Another common type of repetitive speech involves re-
peating lines heard on movies, commercials, and television shows. 
Although these phrases can be used at random times, they can 
also be used in a communicative manner. An example would be 
when a parent asks a child a question (e.g., “Would you like some-
thing to eat?”) and the child answers the question with a line that 
is verbatim from a movie, such as “Pokémon’s energy is running 
low and needs replenishment.” Although many typically devel-
oping children engage in this behavior occasionally, individuals 
with ASD may regularly use this “stereotyped” speech as part of 
their everyday language. 
 The quality of expressive language can also be unusual in 
terms of the intonation and rhythm of speech. Some individuals 
with ASD speak in an overly monotone voice (almost sounding 
robotic) and others have a halting rhythm of speech and take long 
pauses between words. Parents of higher functioning children 
with ASD report that their speech can sound as if they are giving 
a lecture when the children are relaying information about a topic 
of interest. 
 Imaginative play skills are also often impacted in ASD. Pre-
tend play is considered to be under the “communication” domain 
because play skills are often linked to language development. 
Typically developing children begin to develop pretend play skills 
before 24 months of age. Early imaginative play skills include pre-
tending to talk on a telephone or play with dolls. Often children 
with ASD prefer to explore toys for their function rather than en-
gage in interactive pretend play. For example, they may press the 
buttons on a toy phone or move a doll’s arms rather than pretend 
to talk on the phone or feed the doll with a toy spoon. 

10 Background and Overview of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) 
 Repetitive or Restricted Interests and Behaviors 
 Many individuals with ASD engage in repetitive patterns of be-
havior or have restricted interests. Repetitive motor mannerisms, 
intense interests, and compulsive behaviors represent some of the 
symptoms within this domain. Although these features may be 
the most noticeable to the general public, they do not represent 
the core symptoms of ASD and are not sufficient to diagnose an 
individual with ASD. Many of these behaviors are also present 
in individuals with developmental delays without ASD, such as 
intellectual disability (previously known as  mental retardation ). As 
children with ASD grow older, the nature of the repetitive/re-
stricted behavior often changes. “Lower order” repetitive behav-
iors such as hand flapping and lining up toys are more common in 
younger and more cognitively delayed children with ASD while 
“higher order” repetitive behaviors often include intense interests 
and compulsive behaviors and are more common in older and 
less cognitively impaired children with ASD. 
 Although restricted and repetitive behaviors can interfere 
with an individual’s functioning, there are also some important 
benefits to these behavior patterns. For instance, many individu-
als with ASD are intent on following rules and routine. This can 
be a positive trait in that they often do not break the rules inten-
tionally and generally attempt to comply with a rule that has been 
taught. Individuals with ASD often have intense interests in spe-
cific topics. Therefore, they often become experts in a given area 
and have an in-depth knowledge of a particular topic. This can be 
beneficial in building future careers and hobbies and may be way 
to encourage learning of other related topics. 
 Lower Order Repetitive Behavior 
 Lower order repetitive (also known as stereotyped) behavior in-
cludes repetitive motor movements and repeated use of objects in 
a nonfunctional way. Stereotyped and/or repetitive motor move-
ments (also called motor mannerisms) are common in ASD and 
involve specific and repetitive ways of moving the body, such as 
repeated hand flapping, finger flicking, and complex, whole body 
movements (e.g., rocking back-and-forth while moving the arms). 
Motor mannerisms may occur more often during stressful situa-
tions or periods of excitement than during other neutral times. 
Repetitive and nonfunctional use of objects is also common, par-
ticularly in younger children. Examples include repeatedly wav-

Domains of Impairment 11
ing objects in front of the eyes, lining up toys, repeatedly spinning 
the wheels of a car, and dropping items from the same distance to 
watch them fall. These behaviors are called “nonfunctional” be-
cause they prevent the use of the objects as they were intended 
(e.g., focusing on spinning the wheels of a car rather than racing 
cars along a pretend road). Individuals with ASD are also at greater 
risk for engaging in self-injurious behaviors such as repeatedly 
banging their heads or biting their arms. 
 These types of behaviors (e.g., repeated hand flapping, wav-
ing objects in front of eyes, and self-injurious behavior) are often 
described as self-stimulatory behaviors and are known colloqui-
ally as “stimming.” The origin of the term came from the philoso-
phy the behaviors persist because they serve to stimulate an in-
dividual’s brain and sensory experience in some way. There has 
been much debate over the purpose of these behaviors and an-
other school of thought purports that the behaviors serve actu-
ally to calm an individual during times of overstimulation by the 
external environment. The controversy about the purpose of self-
stimulatory behaviors remains unresolved. 
 Higher Order Repetitive Behavior 
 Individuals with ASD often have specific interests in topics such 
as particular video games or certain characters in a television 
show. Although it is common for typically developing individu-
als to have interests and preferences, a restricted/repetitive inter-
est differs from typical interests in that conversations often turn 
to this specific topic, it can be difficult to shift the person’s interest 
to other topics, and this interest can take up the majority of the 
individual’s time for many months and often years. Interrupting 
an individual when they are talking about this interest or doing 
something associated with the interest can be challenging. The 
intense interest may cause significant impairments for the child 
because it takes away from other functional learning and play in 
which the child could be engaging. Stereotyped language as de-
scribed above may also occur in relation to the special interest. In 
addition to interests that are unusual in their intensity, interests 
that are unusual in quality may also be observed. Examples in-
clude an intense interest in pinecones, clothespins, and lights. 
 An additional area within the restricted and repetitive pattern 
of behavior domain is an insistence on sameness. Many individu-
als with ASD prefer routine and become upset when the routine 
is altered in some way. Driving the same way to school, keeping a 

12 Background and Overview of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) 
consistent daily schedule, and putting food on the plate in a cer-
tain way are examples of these routinized behaviors. Parents may 
go to great lengths to prepare their children for a change in routine 
and some choose to adhere strictly to a consistent schedule to help 
their children’s daily functioning. Insistence on sameness can also 
include rituals that individuals with ASD do in a very particular 
way or order or insist that others do in a certain way. For instance, 
they may insist that a social partner say something in an exact 
way or that they get dressed in a particular order (e.g., first socks, 
then shirt, then pants). The character portrayed by Dustin Hoff-
man in the movie  Rain Man  (1988) demonstrated this “insistence 
on sameness” in his adherence to his television watching and eat-
ing schedule. Strict rule adherence is also considered to be part of 
an insistence on sameness area and is often observed in ASD. 
 Other Restricted Interests 
 Although not part of the diagnostic criteria, many individuals with 
ASD are sensitive to sensory input. Some individuals are quite 
interested in the sight, feel, sound, taste, or smells of things or 
people. They may, for example, seek out certain textures or smells, 
such as repetitively feeling a soft blanket or sniffing people inap-
propriately. Other sensory experiences can be experienced as quite 
aversive to individuals with ASD. Repeatedly putting hands over 
the ears in response to ordinary sounds such as a vacuum cleaner 
or reacting strongly to certain textures such as tags on clothing are 
common examples of sensory aversions in ASD. 
 ASD Diagnosis 
 Although ASD has neurobiological underpinnings and genetic 
factors play a role in its development, brain scans and blood tests 
do not currently exist to diagnose ASD. Instead, diagnosis is based 
mainly on direct observation of and parent interview about be-
haviors in the social, communication, and restricted/repetitive be-
havior domains. Specific symptoms within each domain that are 
required for a diagnosis on the autism spectrum are described in 
the  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders, Fourth 
Edition  ( DSM-IV ; APA 1994). Although autism was not listed as a 
diagnosis in the first edition of the  DSM ( DSM-I ; APA 1952), the 
diagnostic term  schizophrenic reaction, childhood type  was listed and 
was used to capture children presenting with behaviors that re-

ASD Diagnosis 13
semble what would now be called autism. Autism continued to be 
considered a part of childhood schizophrenia until the 1980s when 
it was recognized as its own disorder called “infantile autism” in 
the publication of the  DSM-III ( APA 1980). Subsequent editions 
of the  DSM  have further delineated autism diagnoses and currently 
there are different diagnostic criteria for Autistic Disorder, Asper-
ger’s Disorder, and PDD-NOS. A number of well-established tools 
exist to help make a diagnosis of ASD, including the Autism 
Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS; Lord et al. 1999) and the 
Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI; Lord, Rutter, and Le 
Couteur 1994). 
 The development of the  DSM-V  is underway and significant 
revisions to the diagnostic process are currently under discussion. 
Some of the potential modifications include the addition of new 
subtypes of pervasive developmental disorders (PDDs) and the 
combination of the social and communication domains of impair-
ment to reflect one focal area of impairment in social communica-
tion. The final outcome remains to be determined. 
 PDDs 
 ASDs fall under the category of PDDs in the  DSM-IV . PDDs as a 
whole are characterized by severe and pervasive impairments in 
many aspects of an individual’s life, including social interactions, 
communication skills, and presence of stereotyped behaviors. Other 
diagnoses exist within this category of clinical disorders that are 
not on the autism spectrum. Clinicians working with individuals 
with ASD are careful to distinguish these disorders from an ASD. 
 Clinician  is a general term for people such as psychologists, speech 
therapists, and treatment providers, who work directly with pa-
tients and/or clients. The term is used in clinics and hospitals to 
distinguish those professionals who work directly with patients 
and clients from administrative staff. 
 Autistic Disorder 
 Autistic Disorder is also known as “autism,” “strict autism,” or 
“early infantile autism.” The majority of individuals with ASD 
have the specific diagnosis of autism (~60%) versus Asperger’s 
Disorder (~24%) or PDD-NOS (~16%; Goin-Kochel, Mackintosh, 
and Myers 2006). Males are more often diagnosed with autism 
than females and the sex ratio of males to females with autism is 
approximately 4:1. There have been some reports that females 

14 Background and Overview of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) 
with autism have more severe symptom presentations and de-
creased cognitive abilities as compared to males. 
 Autism can be reliably diagnosed at two years of age or older, 
and diagnosis is generally stable. Like all diagnoses within the 
category of PDDs, individuals with autism have difficulty in three 
general domains: social interactions, communication, and re-
stricted/repetitive interests and behaviors. Criteria in the  DSM-IV 
 specify that a diagnosis of autism is appropriate for individuals 
who have at least two specific symptoms in the social domain, at 
least one in the communication domain, and at least one in the 
restricted/repetitive interests and behaviors domain. In addition 
to these criteria, six symptoms total across all three domains are 
required to receive a diagnosis of autism. A portion of these chal-
lenges must have had an onset at three years of age or earlier. 
Like many diagnoses in the  DSM-IV , they must cause significant 
impairment in an individual’s life and are not better accounted for 
by other clinical disorders. 
 Partly due to the symptom count requirements put forth in 
the  DSM-IV , children with autism generally experience a greater 
number of difficulties than those with a diagnosis of Asperger’s 
Disorder or PDD-NOS. Epidemiological studies suggest that ap-
proximately 60–70 percent of individuals with autism have co-
occurring intellectual disability (Fombonne 2003) and one-third to 
one-half of those diagnosed with Autistic Disorder have severely 
impaired language and/or remain nonverbal through adulthood 
(Howlin et al. 2004).  Intellectual disability  is a diagnostic term used 
to describe individuals with significantly below-average intellec-
tual abilities that are accompanied by other impairments in daily 
living behaviors (e.g., self-care, independent living skills, and 
interpersonal skills). Difficulties must begin early in life and are 
assessed by an evaluation of cognitive abilities and daily living 
skills. There are a range of different levels of intellectual disability, 
from mild to profound. In recent years, diagnoses of intellectual 
disability have decreased while numbers of autism diagnoses have 
increased (Croen et al. 2002). Many experts believe that this is due 
to identifying many children previously labeled with intellectual 
disability as having autism. In the past, many more children diag-
nosed with autism had co-occurring intellectual disability and a 
large percentage were nonverbal for the duration of their lifetime 
(Rutter, Greenfield, and Lockyer 1967). However, the number of 
children diagnosed with autism who have intellectual disability 
and/or do not develop language has decreased substantially in 

ASD Diagnosis 15
recent years (Croen et al. 2002). This is likely due to a number of 
factors, including an increased ability to diagnose more subtle 
and less severe individuals as well as improved interventions that 
are increasingly available in the community. 
 Although not a technical  DSM-IV  diagnosis, many clinicians 
classify individuals with autism according to their cognitive ability 
level and ability to adapt in their day-to-day lives (called adaptive 
functioning). Individuals with average cognitive abilities and little 
impairment in adaptive functioning are often referred to as hav-
ing “high-functioning autism (HFA)” while those with some form 
of intellectual disability and challenges in adaptive functioning 
are referred to as having “low-functioning autism (LFA).” Many 
children with LFA are also nonverbal. The line between high- and 
low-functioning autism is often blurred and there is not consen-
sus by professionals as to specific criteria for HFA and LFA. 
 Individuals with autism experience a greater number of med-
ical conditions as compared to the general population. The exact 
reasons for this occurrence are unclear at this time. “Associated 
symptoms” may include sleep disturbances (e.g., difficulty falling 
and staying asleep), gastrointestinal problems (e.g., constipation 
and abdominal pain), and neurological problems, including an 
increased risk for seizures particularly during puberty. They also 
may have behavioral problems such as extreme temper tantrums, 
self-injurious behaviors, and aggression. Certain specialists, such 
as gastroenterologists, sleep specialists, child clinical psychologists, 
and neurologists are experienced in helping families of individuals 
with autism to treat these associated symptoms. 
 Children with autism also often have difficulties with execu-
tive functioning skills. Executive functioning refers to a person’s 
ability to engage in independent and self-serving behaviors such as 
planning and carrying out activities. People with executive func-
tioning impairments may appear to be careless, have difficulty 
maintaining/shifting attention and staying on task, and struggle 
to organize themselves and their materials. Executive functioning 
challenges are not specific to autism. For example, children with 
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) also have ex-
ecutive functioning impairments. 
 Asperger’s Disorder 
 As with the other ASDs, individuals with Asperger’s Disorder (also 
known as Asperger’s Syndrome or Asperger Syndrome) have so-
cial challenges and restricted/repetitive interests. Specifically, the 

16 Background and Overview of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) 
 DSM-IV  requires at least two symptoms in the social domain as 
well as at least one symptom in the restricted/repetitive interests 
and behaviors domain. No requirement for challenges in the com-
munication domain is specified. However, individuals with As-
perger’s Disorder often have difficulty maintaining age appropriate 
conversations. 
 Asperger’s Disorder differs from autism in a number of ways. 
One difference is that a diagnosis of Asperger’s Disorder rules out 
individuals with a language delay whereas this is one of the po-
tential symptoms in the communication domain for autism. Ad-
ditionally, although many children with autism have cognitive 
challenges, individuals with Asperger’s Disorder have average to 
above-average intelligence as measured by cognitive testing. If an 
individual did not demonstrate delays in language development 
and has normal cognitive functioning, but meets full diagnostic 
criteria for autism (i.e., at least two symptoms in the social domain, 
at least one in the communication domain, and at least one in the re-
stricted interests/behavior domain, with a total of six symptoms 
overall across domains), then they would receive a diagnosis of 
autism instead of Asperger’s Disorder. That is, meeting full crite-
ria for Autistic Disorder would override a diagnosis of Asperger’s 
Disorder. 
 An additional difference is that the observed sex ratio of males 
to females with Asperger’s Disorder is approximately 6:1, which 
is higher than the 4:1 sex ratio observed in autism. Asperger’s Dis-
order is usually diagnosed later in life as compared to autism. The 
average age of diagnosis for Asperger’s Disorder is 7.2 years of 
age as compared to 3.1 years of age in individuals with autism 
(Mandell, Novak, and Zubritsky 2005). This is likely because indi-
viduals with Asperger’s Disorder do not have a language delay or 
cognitive impairments. A delay in spoken language or other areas 
of cognitive development is often one of the earliest indicators of 
atypical development for parents. Many parents of children with 
Asperger’s Disorder describe their children as being precocious 
toddlers with strong and early developing verbal skills. Concerns 
about social development are often not present until children 
enter into a school setting where direct comparisons with typical 
social behavior can be made. 
 Despite these differences, there has been recent controversy 
about the utility of maintaining a diagnostic boundary between 
Asperger’s Disorder and autism since both diagnoses have core 
impairments in social interactions. The issue remains unresolved, 

ASD Diagnosis 17
with some studies finding differences between high-functioning 
individuals with autism versus Asperger’s Disorder and others 
finding no differences. Future editions of the  DSM  may not distin-
guish between a diagnosis of autism and Asperger’s Disorder. 
 Strong verbal abilities in individuals with Asperger’s Disor-
der often mask difficulties in other areas of development and pro-
fessionals (e.g., teachers and clinicians) may mistakenly attribute 
observed challenges to being stubborn or overly willful. On one 
hand, individuals with Asperger’s Disorder can appear relatively 
high functioning and can give the impression of being typically de-
veloping. However, this can also be a challenge because they may 
not receive the attention and intervention necessary for improved 
functioning. 
 As children with Asperger’s Disorder enter teenage years 
and adulthood, they are at increased risk for developing other 
kinds of clinical disorders, such as anxiety and depression (Bellini 
2004; Russell and Sofronoff 2005). Experts believe this is due to 
the presence of age appropriate or advanced cognitive skills in 
individuals with Asperger’s Disorder. Strong cognitive skills put 
individuals with Asperger’s Disorder in more complex social en-
vironments and cause them to be more self-aware of their difficul-
ties with social interaction. This places them at increased risk for 
feelings of isolation, sadness, and social anxiety. However, overall, 
prognosis is better for Asperger’s Disorder than for autism and 
studies suggest that many individuals with Asperger’s Disorder 
are employed and self-sufficient in adulthood. 
 PDD-NOS 
 Like many other “not otherwise specified” diagnoses in the  DSM-
IV , a diagnosis of PDD-NOS is appropriate for individuals who 
display some clinically significant symptoms but do not meet full 
criteria for any other specific diagnosis in the category of PDDs. 
PDD-NOS is often described as “atypical autism” because indi-
viduals with this diagnosis have autism-like features, but do not 
meet full criteria for either autism or Asperger’s Disorder. As with 
autism and Asperger’s Disorder, severe and pervasive impairment 
in the development of social interaction is required for a diagnosis 
of PDD-NOS as is impairment in either verbal or nonverbal com-
munication skills  or  the presence of stereotyped behaviors, inter-
ests, and activities. 
 Individuals may meet criteria for PDD-NOS if, for example, 
they have a late age of onset of symptoms that precludes them from 

18 Background and Overview of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) 
meeting criteria for autism. They may also present with subthresh-
old symptoms, meaning that they have some symptoms, but not 
enough to meet the required symptom counts for either Asperger’s 
Disorder or autism. Additionally, generally children with PDD-
NOS have improved language and cognitive skills relative to a child 
with autism. As a result, PDD-NOS is often considered a milder 
diagnosis and is associated with improved prognosis as compared 
to autism. 
 Course of Onset 
 For the majority of children with ASD, development of social and 
communication skills is consistently delayed from an early age 
and social and communication milestones are slow to progress. In 
retrospect, most parents of children with ASD report noticing dif-
ferences in their child’s development at 12–18 months of age (De 
Giacomo and Fombonne 1998; Rogers and DiLalla 1990). In fact, 
a portion of parents indicate that they were concerned within the 
first year of life. This type of course of the development of ASD is 
often referred to “early onset,” meaning that differences in devel-
opment of the domains affected in ASD were noted early in life. 
 However, a subset of children with ASD develop normally 
(or near normally) through infancy and then experience a regres-
sion in skills at approximately 18 –24 months of age. Although a 
regression in previously acquired skills is associated with other 
PDDs such as Rett’s Disorder and Childhood Disintegrative Dis-
order, children with ASD who experience regression have very 
particular losses in the areas of language and social skills. Losses 
of single words or phrases are specific to ASD and are reported 
in approximately 20–50 percent of individuals with ASD (Kurita 
1985; Luyster et al. 2005). 
 Until recently, data in the phenomenon of autistic regression 
had been gathered retrospectively from parents many years after 
the regression was reported to have occurred. In fact, there was 
controversy about whether or not autistic regression was a real 
phenomenon. Home videotape studies confirmed the authentic-
ity of regression in a sample of children with ASD (Werner and 
Dawson 2005). The sample consisted of children with ASD whose 
parents reported a regression in social and/or communication 
skills within the first three years of life, children with ASD whose 
parents reported that they had impairments before one year of 
age and did not experience a regression, and typically developing 
children. 

ASD Diagnosis 19
 Whenever possible, home videotapes of children’s first and 
second birthday parties were used in an attempt to maintain com-
parable settings across videotapes and behaviors were coded by 
raters who did not know their group status. The goal was to cap-
ture a child’s behavior both before and after the average reported 
timing of regression occurs. Researchers found that regressed 
ASD infants used complex babbling and words significantly  more 
frequently than both early onset ASD infants and typical infants. 
Early onset ASD infants pointed significantly less often than re-
gressed and typically developing infants. By the time of the sec-
ond birthday, the regressed ASD group showed marked delays 
in language as compared to typical children. Both ASD groups 
were significantly impaired in social gaze and orienting to name 
as compared to the typically developing toddlers. This study was 
important because it provided objective evidence of autistic re-
gression and validated parent reports of a loss in previously ac-
quired skills. 
 Non-ASD PDDs 
 There are two other diagnoses called Rett’s Disorder and Child-
hood Disintegrative Disorder that are not part of the autism spec-
trum, but fall within the category of PDDs. Extra care is given to 
differentiate Rett’s Disorder and Childhood Disintegrative Disorder 
from ASD. Both Rett’s Disorder and Childhood Disintegrative 
Disorder are associated with significant losses of previously ac-
quired skills and are very rare, with far lower prevalence rates, 
than ASD. 
 Rett’s Disorder has been reported mostly in females and is 
characterized by typical development in all areas of functioning, 
including motor skills, through at the least the first five months 
of age. Between ages 5 and 48 months, a loss of previously ac-
quired fine motor skills occurs, accompanied by the development 
of characteristic stereotyped hand movements that involve mov-
ing the hands in front of the body as if washing them. Head cir-
cumference growth decelerates during this time period and gross 
motor coordination declines. Significant losses in social interest 
and language skills also occur and, consequently, children with 
Rett’s Disorder can resemble those with ASD. Rett’s Disorder is 
associated with severe to profound intellectual disability and 
there is generally little improvement noted after these losses have 
occurred. 

20 Background and Overview of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) 
 Childhood Disintegrative Disorder generally involves losses 
in many different areas of functioning following a period of at 
least 2 years of apparently normal development and must be di-
agnosed prior to 10 years of age. Generally, children with Child-
hood Disintegrative Disorder lose language, social skills, adaptive 
behavior, bowel and/or bladder control, play skills, and motor 
abilities. However, some children lose just a few of these areas of 
functioning. Like Rett’s Disorder, Childhood Disintegrative Dis-
order is also associated with severe intellectual disability and can 
resemble ASD in its social and communication impairments. The 
sex ratio is equally split between males and females and seizure 
activity is commonly observed. 
 Diagnostic Evaluation 
 A diagnosis of ASD involves direct behavioral observations of the 
individual as well as an in-depth interview with an individuals’ 
caregiver about presenting skills and challenges. If possible, an in-
dividual’s teacher may also be contacted to learn more about his/
her functioning in a school environment. This overall diagnostic 
process is similar for young children as it is for older children, 
adolescents, and even adults. However, the specific content of the 
evaluation varies depending on the age and level of functioning of 
the individual. For instance, an evaluation for ASD for a toddler 
will generally involve playing with the child with toys while an 
evaluation for ASD with an adult would be more focused on con-
versation skills while seated at a table. Given the severity and per-
vasiveness of challenges associated with ASD, it is unusual for 
individuals to receive a first-time diagnosis of ASD in adulthood. 
The majority of individuals who are diagnosed in their lifetime 
with ASD receive the diagnosis in early childhood. The aver-
age age of diagnosis in the United States for all ASDs is currently 
5.1 years (Wiggins, Baio, and Rice 2006). 
 Only certain clinicians are trained to diagnose ASD as it is a 
complex process involving careful documentation and observation 
of specific behaviors as well accurate acquisition of developmen-
tal history of the presenting concerns. Such clinicians (“diagnosti-
cians”) include clinical psychologists, developmental pediatricians, 
psychiatrists, and some neurologists. Other professionals such as 
teachers, speech therapists, and occupational therapists who work 
with children with ASD often refer children to diagnosticians to 
complete an evaluation. 

ASD Diagnosis 21
 Diagnostic Tools 
 A number of gold-standard tools exist to help clinicians diagnose 
ASD by providing a standardized way to collect and observe rel-
evant information about skills and development. Autism is cur-
rently the only childhood mental or developmental disorder for 
which such well-validated diagnostic tools exist. The ADOS ( Lord 
et al. 1999) is a semistructured and often-used assessment that al-
lows clinicians to obtain information about skills relevant to ASD. 
It is a play-based measure assessing social and communication 
skills as well as restricted/repetitive interests and is widely used in 
both autism research and clinical settings. The ADOS usually lasts 
45 – 60 minutes and consists of 10 –14 different play activities de-
signed to elicit social communication. For younger children, par-
ents are often in the room while the clinician is doing the ADOS. 
 The ADI (Lord, Rutter, and Le Couteur 1994) is also an as-
sessment tool that is helpful in making a diagnosis of ASD. It is a 
2–2.5 hour interview that is conducted with a child’s primary 
caregiver. During the ADI, the clinician asks very specific questions 
about a child’s social and language development as well as sen-
sory and repetitive/restricted behaviors and interests. The ADI is 
more often used in research than clinical settings because it is a 
lengthy interview. In its stead, clinicians may chose to use a modi-
fied intake interview to collect information from parents about 
developmental history. Questions are generally similar to those on 
the ADI. 
 After collecting all relevant information from direct observa-
tion of the individual as well as parent interview, clinicians refer 
to the  DSM-IV  to determine if the child meets criteria for an ASD. 
The  DSM  is a reference manual that is published by the American 
Psychiatric Association. It is widely used by clinical providers and 
provides a description of all of the specific diagnoses of mental 
disorders and groups these diagnoses by category. A list of symp-
toms and diagnostic criteria is specified for all of the possible di-
agnoses. As of 2010, the  DSM  was in its fourth edition. Sections 
pertaining to ASD will likely be significantly modified in the sub-
sequent edition. 
 Standardized testing is often conducted during diagnostic 
evaluations for ASD to determine the individual’s level of adap-
tive and cognitive functioning. Executive functioning, memory, 
and learning abilities may also be examined. Standardized testing 
refers to a general category of neuropsychological assessments 
that have been widely used with individuals of a variety of ages. 

22 Background and Overview of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) 
The tests are administered using a specific manual and are de-
signed to be given in the same way to every individual who takes 
the test. This allows the makers of the tests to report “normative 
scores” (also called “standard scores” or “norms”), which provide 
the average score for a particular age and/or sex. This allows cli-
nicians to compare an individual’s test results to the average re-
sults for someone his/her age in order to see how a given person’s 
performance on the test may (or may not) vary from what would 
be expected. For example, the average score for many cognitive 
assessments is 100. An earned standard score of 80 on a cognitive 
assessment generally indicates that the individual is functioning 
below age expectations as compared to the average person his/
her age who takes the test. 
 Cognitive testing is a type of standardized test that is often 
given during ASD diagnostic evaluations. This is sometimes re-
ferred to as “intelligence testing ” and is a general term describing 
many different assessments that are all designed to provide in-
formation about a child’s current verbal and nonverbal problem-
solving skills. Usually, cognitive testing is done at a table and 
includes activities such as making patterns with blocks, complet-
ing patterns/puzzles, and answering questions about words. Re-
sults from a child’s cognitive test helps schools and clinicians to 
better understand what a child’s strengths and weaknesses are in 
terms of learning styles and knowledge-base. Many children with 
ASDs complete a number of cognitive tests throughout their life-
time either in school or as part of another evaluation. Some of the 
different cognitive test names include the Wechsler Intelligence 
Scale for Children, Differential Ability Scales, Stanford-Binet Intel-
ligence Test, and Mullen Scales of Early Learning. 
 Clinical Vignettes 
 Autistic Disorder 
 Connor is a three-year-old boy who was recently diagnosed with 
autism. His parents were first concerned about his development 
at 18 months of age because he was not using any words and did 
not point to make requests or express an interest. He currently has 
difficulty initiating communication with his parents in any way 
and it is often difficult for his parents to determine what he wants 
because he does not gesture or use any word approximations to 

Clinical Vignettes 23
communicate his needs and wants. Connor appears content to en-
tertain himself and his parents always commented that he was an 
easy baby because he was so independent. 
 At preschool, Connor prefers to play alone and does not ap-
proach other children to play. When other children approach him, 
he often walks away or seems to ignore them entirely. Connor of-
ten focuses on toys or objects instead of looking his parents in the 
eyes when playing with them and it is often difficult for his par-
ents to gain his eye contact even when Connor is motivated. His 
play usually involves lining up cars and other objects in a row and 
he can engage in this behavior for hours on end. Connor’s parents 
have always commented on his long attention span for this activ-
ity and others like it (e.g., taking apart toys and putting them back 
together). After he lines up toys or takes something apart, he often 
gets excited and flaps his hands repeatedly near his face. 
 Asperger’s Disorder 
 Austin is a 12-year-old boy who received a diagnosis of Asperger’s 
Disorder at 5 years of age. His mother was not concerned about 
his early development because he seemed to meet all of his mile-
stones on time (or early) and was speaking in two- to three-word 
phrases by 18 months of age. In fact, his mother often called him 
the “little professor” because he seemed to grasp adult language 
at a very young age and was interested in seeing how toys went 
together. Austin has been fascinated by trains since approximately 
24 months of age and, as a toddler, he spent hours examining their 
working parts and memorizing their specific names. Scores on the 
cognitive testing that was part of his diagnostic evaluation indi-
cated that Austin’s verbal skills were in the high range for chil-
dren his age and his nonverbal skills were above average. Austin 
could read well before kindergarten and academic performance 
was not a concern for his mother or the teacher. 
 Austin began to attend kindergarten at five years old and his 
mother and teachers noticed at this time that his social interac-
tions with peers were unusual. Although he approached other 
children to engage with them and was interested in interacting, he 
often talked only about trains and shared details of his knowledge 
of trains (e.g., the specific models and makes of various trains and 
their maximum speed) with other children. The vocabulary words 
he used were more advanced than other children his age and 
other children typically had difficulty understanding what he was 

24 Background and Overview of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) 
saying. Holding a back-and-forth conversation with Austin could 
also be very difficult because he tended to dominate the conver-
sation and rarely responded when others made comments about 
their interests. Although his conversation skills have improved 
since this early age, Austin continues to have difficulty maintain-
ing peer relationships and despite reports that he wants to make 
friends, he does not currently have any close friendships. 
 PDD-NOS 
 Charles is an eight-year-old boy who received a diagnosis of PDD-
NOS last year. He had numerous prior evaluations and previously 
received a diagnosis of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder 
(ADHD), which was treated unsuccessfully with stimulants, a class 
of medications that includes Ritalin. His parents reported no con-
cerns about his language development, but did report that Charles 
has always had difficulty in group settings and often “tries to get out 
of things” by throwing tantrums. For example, at school, he cries and 
occasionally becomes aggressive when there is a substitute teacher or 
a school assembly. Charles has a few friends in the neighborhood, 
is interested in other children, and can sustain a back-and-forth 
conversation with his friends. However, his friends usually invite 
him to play, he rarely initiates interactions with other children, 
and does better in one-on-one peer interactions than group activi-
ties. His eye contact is also inconsistent and he tends to look past 
his social partners rather than maintain direct eye contact. Dur-
ing the diagnostic evaluation, his tantrums were determined to be 
aggravated by changes to his day-to-day schedule and to group 
activities. 
 Early Identification of ASD 
 ASD can be reliably diagnosed at 24 months of age. However, par-
ents generally report having been concerned about their child’s 
development much earlier than 24 months, which suggests that 
there may be red flags of atypical development prior to receiving 
an actual diagnosis. No well-validated assessment tools exist to 
diagnose children younger than 24 months, but a number of meth-
ods have been used to learn about the earliest signs of ASD. These 
methods include parent’s recollection of their child’s behavior prior 
to diagnosis, analysis of home videos prior to diagnosis, screening 

Early Identification of ASD 25
large numbers of children with screening checklists and following 
them prospectively, and identifying infants who are at high-risk 
for ASD and following them prospectively. 
 Parent recollections of concerns involving delayed speech and 
language development are the most commonly reported and are 
often the primary reason that parents first report concerns to pro-
fessionals. Analysis of home videotapes of infants and toddlers 
who later go on to receive an ASD diagnosis reveal atypical pat-
terns of social orienting (e.g., responding to their name and other 
social sounds), joint attention, imitation, emotion regulation, and 
reduced use of gestures (Maestro et al. 2001, 2002; Osterling and 
Dawson 1994; Werner et al. 2000). 
 In a series of home videotape studies, coders who did not 
know the infant’s future diagnostic status analyzed a number of 
social, communication, and play behaviors and attempted to clas-
sify infants according to diagnostic status. At 12 months of age, 
coders correctly differentiated infants who later received an ASD 
diagnosis from typically developing infants in 91 percent of cases 
using eye gaze, pointing, showing, and responding to name (Os-
terling and Dawson 1994). At 8 –10 months of age, not responding 
when their name was called by turning and looking toward the 
parent was the best discriminator between infants with ASD and 
typically developing infants ( Werner et al. 2000). This variable 
alone correctly classified 77 percent of infants. However, overall, 
fewer differences in social behavior were apparent at 8–10 months 
relative to 12 months of age. 
 The third home videotape study in this series compared 12-
month-old infants with either ASD, delayed development unre-
lated to ASD, or typical development (Osterling, Dawson, and 
Munson 2002). The inclusion of infants with developmental de-
lays without ASD was important due to the high comorbidity of 
ASD and intellectual disability as it is essential to distinguish which 
behaviors are specific to ASD versus general cognitive delays. Ori-
enting to name, looking at people, and the frequency of directed 
vocalizations correctly identified 87 percent of children with ASD 
versus those with developmental delays (Osterling, Dawson, and 
Munson 2002). Therefore, it seems that social behaviors are largely 
intact in infants with intellectual disability but are impaired in in-
fants with ASD. 
 The next line of research in identifying early signs of ASD has 
involved following infants at-risk for ASD until a reliable diag-
nosis can be made and then comparing their early development 

26 Background and Overview of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) 
with those infants who do not eventually receive an ASD diagno-
sis. These prospective studies often include either infant siblings 
of older children with ASDs who are at heightened risk for ASD 
due to genetic factors or those identified as at-risk by screeners for 
social communication challenges. Prospective studies have dem-
onstrated that by 12-18 months of age, infants later diagnosed with 
ASDs show similar difficulties as were noted in the home vid-
eotape studies. Impairments in imitation, eye gaze, orienting to 
name, and early language development (such as social, back-and-
forth babbling) have all been found to be predictors of later ASD 
diagnosis (as reviewed in Zwaigenbaum et al. 2009). Additional 
early signs have included atypical visual tracking, delayed fine 
and gross motor skills, delays in play skills, repetitive actions with 
toys, decreased social smiling and gestures, and slower acquisi-
tion of new skills (as reviewed in Zwaigenbaum et al. 2009). 
 Genetic Factors 
 Approximately 5 –10 percent of individuals diagnosed with ASD 
have an identifiable disorder with a known inheritance pattern, 
such as Fragile X syndrome, tuberous sclerosis, and neurofibro-
matosis. However, for the remaining 90 –95 percent of individuals 
with ASD, there is no known genetic cause or inheritance pattern. 
Studies examining twins with ASD have found that the likelihood 
of two identical twins having ASD is 60 –95 percent (Bailey et al. 
1995; Ritvo et al. 1985) while the likelihood of two fraternal twins 
or two siblings having ASD is 2.5–8.5 percent (Le Couteur et al. 
1996; Ritvo et al. 1989). Since identical twins share 100 percent 
of their genetic material and fraternal twins/siblings share only 
50 percent, the differing concordance rates are often interpreted as 
evidence that genetic factors play a strong role in the development 
of ASD. Although the majority of individuals who have a relative 
with ASD do not develop ASD themselves, they are at heightened 
risk compared to the general population prevalence rate of 0.9 per-
cent and genetic findings suggest that the risk of developing ASD 
rises dramatically as the level of shared genes increases. 
 There has been extensive genetic research conducted with fam-
ilies containing multiple children with ASD (called “multiplex ” 
families). However, the majority of individuals with ASD do not 
have a significant family history and are the only people in their 
family with the diagnosis. These “simplex ” families represent the 
most common ASD family type and have received recent genetic 

Brain Development 27
research attention. Sebat and colleagues (2007) found that certain 
genetic abnormalities, called copy number variants—tiny muta-
tions in DNA, were significantly more likely to occur in simplex 
families than either multiplex or healthy control families. Other 
studies have found similar results ( Bucan et al. 2009; Marshall et al. 
2008) and together, these finding suggest that the types of genetic 
causes of ASD may vary between simplex and multiplex ASD 
families. 
 Although many ASD genetic studies have been conducted, 
there is limited consensus on exact genes that may be implicated in 
ASD as findings are generally difficult to replicate across studies 
and research groups. The complexity and variability of the ASD 
symptom profile presentation may contribute to the difficulty in 
identifying susceptibility genes. It is likely that many genes, as well 
as an array of environmental and genetic risk and protective fac-
tors, contribute to the social and communication impairments that 
constitute a diagnosis of ASD. Despite these challenges, genetics 
is one of the fasting growing research areas in the field of autism 
and breakthroughs in technology and methodology have become 
a regular occurrence. 
 Brain Development 
 Research studies show that ASD affects a wide range of brain 
regions. The prefrontal cortex, the medial temporal lobe (particu-
larly the amygdala), and the cerebellum have been shown by mul-
tiple research studies to be implicated in ASD. A well-replicated 
finding in ASD research is that individuals with ASD more often 
have macrocephaly (i.e., larger brains) as measured by head cir-
cumference compared to age-based normative measurements 
(Courchesne, Carper, and Akshoomoff 2003; Deutsch and Joseph 
2003). Head circumference is considered to be a fairly accurate 
estimation of overall brain size. Although children with ASD do 
not have larger heads at birth on average, they often experience a 
rapid growth of head circumference in the first year of life, which 
then slows after 12 months of age. The relation between head cir-
cumference and ASD symptoms is variable and findings across 
studies are inconsistent. Some studies have found that increased 
head size in ASD is advantageous and is related to higher IQ 
(Sacco et al. 2007) and better social skills (Dementieva et al. 2005), 
while others have reported deleterious relationships, such as an 
association between macrocephaly and delayed onset of words 

28 Background and Overview of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) 
( Lainhart et al. 2006) and more impaired social cognition (Sacco et al. 
2007). Still other studies have found no direct associations be-
tween head circumference and ASD-related symptoms (Deutsch 
and Joseph 2003). 
 At two to three years of age, brain imaging studies validate 
the head circumference research findings and suggest that chil-
dren with ASD have larger than normal cerebral volume. Technol-
ogy such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) allows scientists to 
take pictures of the brain and what they have consistently found 
is that individuals with ASD have an unusually large amygdala, 
which is associated with emotional functioning and processing 
(Mosconi et al. 2009). 
 Cellular abnormalities in the cerebellum have also been noted 
(Allen and Courchesne 2003;, Courchesne 1997). The cerebellum is 
involved with complex motor activities, attention, and language. 
These are all areas of impairment in autism. 
 In addition to specific brain regions that are shown to be un-
usual in autism, new technologies have allowed scientists to look 
at connections between regions of the brain. Researchers have 
found that there is poor connectivity between different brain re-
gions, particularly between the frontal cortex and other regions, in 
individuals with autism (Minshew and Williams 2007). 
 These findings of abnormal brain regions and poor connec-
tions between brain regions in autism has led scientists to con-
sider two different theories to account for the social impairments 
noted in autism. One theory is that specific regions of the brain 
are impaired—regions of the brain that are involved in social in-
formation such as the amygdala and prefrontal cortex. The second 
theory is that a general impairment in connectivity between brain 
cells and brain regions results in the impairments in symptoms 
of autism. According to this theory, it is the connections between 
brain regions, not focal impairments in those regions themselves, 
which results in the impairments in autism. Future research using 
brain imaging techniques hopes to resolve this debate. 
 Treatments 
 Despite the strong biological basis of ASD, medical treatments 
such as medication have not been shown to successfully treat the 
core symptoms of ASD and behavioral intervention is the only 

Treatments 29
treatment to date with research support demonstrating effective-
ness. In particular, ABA has repeatedly been shown to improve 
ASD symptoms.  ABA is a general term that encompasses interven-
tion approaches designed to change behavior and is a teaching 
method of carefully reinforcing certain positive behaviors while 
decreasing unwanted behaviors. 
 The first support for using behavioral intervention with young 
children with autism surfaced in the 1960s and 1970s. Prior to this 
time, it was assumed that children’s symptoms could not improve 
and that individuals with autism could not gain skills. Individuals 
with autism, along with others with intellectual disability were 
often institutionalized in “mental asylums” for the duration of 
their lifetime where visits from relatives were discouraged. Psy-
choanalysis was also used as a treatment for autism as it was the 
main treatment modality recommended for mental disorders dur-
ing that time period. However, treatment gains were rarely noted 
in children with autism using psychoanalysis. Pioneering work 
on behavioral intervention in children with autism was done pri-
marily by O. Ivar Lovaas (Lovaas 1987; Lovaas et al. 1973; Lovaas, 
Schreibman, and Koegel 1974). Through many years of study, 
Lovaas found that specifically reinforcing and punishing certain 
behaviors could shape a child with autism’s behavior and produce 
measurable improvement in the areas targeted in the interven-
tion such as eye contact and development of language. This was 
a groundbreaking finding given the commonly held assumption 
of the time that individuals with autism could not learn. Up until 
approximately the mid-1980s, ABA included physical punish-
ments such as electric shock, spanking, and slapping (Lovaas, 
Schaeffer, and Simmons 1965). These punishments are no longer 
recommended in ABA therapy and only reinforcements (not pun-
ishments) are used to teach skills. 
 Social and communication skills are usually the focus of ABA 
treatment in ASD and skills are generally taught methodically, 
starting with more foundational skills and moving onto more com-
plex skills. ABA therapy is often done in a home setting by trained 
therapists but can also be applied in a school setting. Parents can 
be taught ABA techniques and are often encouraged to use such 
methods when interacting with their children to maximize treat-
ment responsiveness. A child’s ABA therapy program is usually 
designed by a psychologist or applied behavior analyst and is in-
dividualized for each child in order to address and use the child’s 
specific strengths to improve areas of challenge. 

30 Background and Overview of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) 
 The first treatment based on ABA principles was Discrete Trial 
Training (DTT) and early on the term ABA was used to refer to this 
specific technique. In DTT a child is reinforced with a reward for 
each trial to which he or she responds correctly. A trial might be to 
correctly identify a cup compared to a shoe. Over multiple trials 
the clinician shapes the child’s behavior and through careful moni-
toring for effectiveness a clinician can determine when it is time to 
focus on a new skill. This original ABA treatment was conducted 
in stark rooms for which there was little distraction and the treat-
ment took up to 40 hours each week (Lovaas et al. 1973). Since this 
original form of ABA treatment, a number of other methods ap-
plying these behavioral principles have been established. 
 Other ABA treatment modalities include Pivotal Response 
Training (PRT; Schreibman, Kaneko, and Koegel 1991), which was 
developed by Robert Koegel and Laura Schreibman who worked 
with Lovaas on his original DTT research. PRT differs from DTT 
in that it is a more naturalistic intervention based on the principles 
of ABA. PRT is a type of intervention specific to ASDs that targets 
two “pivotal” behaviors: motivation and responsiveness to mul-
tiple cues. The rationale behind PRT is that by changing these piv-
otal behaviors, all other areas of functioning are improved as well. 
PRT works to increase motivation by including components such 
as child choice, turn-taking, reinforcing attempts and interspers-
ing maintenance tasks. 
 The Early Start Denver Model is another treatment based on 
ABA principles. It is an intervention for children with ASD that 
fuses teaching principles of ABA with a developmental curriculum 
and relationship-based component. Play is the framework for de-
veloping positive social interactions and teaching episodes be-
tween the child and the adult. This model was developed by Sally 
Rogers and Geraldine Dawson, and their collaborators at the Uni-
versity of Washington, the UC Davis M.I.N.D. Institute, and Uni-
versity of Colorado Health Sciences Center (Rogers and Dawson, 
in press). 
 Recommendations for ASD intervention (Dawson and Os-
terling 1997) include beginning treatment as early as possible 
( between two and four years of age) to capitalize on the brain’s 
plasticity early in life. Treatment should be intensive for maximum 
effectiveness and 25 hours/week for two years is recommended. 
Interventions should have a comprehensive curriculum address-
ing attention, imitation, language, play, and social interaction 
while being sensitive to normal developmental sequence. Highly 

Treatments 31
supportive teaching strategies should be used that are based on 
ABA principles and include a protocol for addressing disruptive 
behaviors that may impede treatment responsiveness. Parent in-
volvement is important as is gradual and careful transition from 
highly supportive treatment environment to a naturalistic envi-
ronment. Treatment is best applied by building on an individual’s 
presenting strengths to help compensate for and overcome weak-
nesses. 
 Although ABA is the only treatment with research support 
demonstrating effectiveness in treating ASD symptoms, the num-
ber of large-scale, well-conducted studies examining ABA is mini-
mal. This is generally because such studies are very costly and 
time-intensive. The original study demonstrating effectiveness of 
ABA in treating ASD was reported by Lovaas (1987) and showed 
that children receiving early intensive behavioral intervention 
had significantly higher cognitive scores at treatment termination 
as compared to a control group and maintained these gains at fol-
low up. Importantly, children in the experimental treatment con-
dition who received ABA were reportedly indistinguishable from 
typical peers at follow-up. More recent studies with improved 
methodology are currently being conducted. 
 In addition to behavioral therapy, individuals with ASD often 
receive other forms of intervention either in school or in a private 
setting such as a clinic. Speech therapy is usually recommended for 
children who receive an ASD diagnosis to help address communi-
cation challenges. Speech therapy can focus on improving a child’s 
understanding of other’s communication (receptive language), 
verbal and nonverbal communication (expressive language), and 
conversation skills. Occupational therapy is also often recom-
mended for children with a diagnosis of an ASD to address sensory 
difficulties, fine and gross motor deficits, repetitive motor manner-
isms, and daily living skills. Given that children with ASDs often 
have difficulties interacting with other children their age, specific 
instruction in social skills can often be helpful. Social skills groups 
(or “Friendship Groups”) are available in some places and gener-
ally include a small number of children who have a diagnosis of 
an ASD. Group leaders focus on promoting positive social interac-
tions among group members with hope that the skills learned in 
the groups will generalize to other settings as well. Topics include 
starting conversations, maintaining friendships, and improving 
back-and-forth play. Many children with ASD enjoy these groups 
and establish friendships in the group setting. 

32 Background and Overview of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) 
 Alternative therapies such as special diets, chelation treatment, 
and supplemental vitamins are also used by some to treat ASD. 
However, these have not received research support demonstrat-
ing effectiveness and some treatments actually cause harm to the 
recipients. Decisions for which treatments may be most beneficial 
for an individual with ASD should always be a joint process be-
tween the family and treatment provider. 
 Children with ASD generally qualify for special education ser-
vices provided through their school and often have an Individual-
ized Education Program (IEP) to address goals in a school setting. 
Children with ASDs can range from being in a special education 
classroom 100 percent of the time, to coming into the special edu-
cation classroom for one period or one class during the day, to be-
ing 100 percent “mainstreamed” in a general education classroom. 
An increasing number of children with ASD are placed in at least 
part-time general education settings rather than exclusive special 
education classrooms. Integrated classrooms also exist, which are 
classroom environments containing both typically developing chil-
dren and children with special needs. In these classrooms, typi-
cally developing children often serve as models for children with 
special needs (such as ASD) in learning, for example, social, com-
munication, and academic skills. Speech therapy, occupational 
therapy, and social skills groups can also be provided in a school 
setting. The type of services offered at a child’s school varies widely 
among school districts. 
 Specific treatment aids such as visual supports are particu-
larly helpful for children with ASD. Children with ASD are gen-
erally better able to understand their world visually rather than 
verbally. In order to take advantage of this relative strength, it is 
often helpful to use visual cues to help children with autism un-
derstand verbal information. Techniques such as using small pic-
tures to make requests instead of using words, [Picture Exchange 
Communication System (PECS)], showing the schedule for the 
day visually in pictures (called a “visual schedule”), and pairing 
pictures with verbal information (e.g., “social stories”) can be very 
helpful in maximizing a child’s learning and understanding. 
 PECS is a visual support that is intended to help children com-
municate through the use of pictures in place of spoken language. 
PECS was created especially for children with autism who have 
delayed language development and/or who are nonverbal. In 
PECS, children approach a communicative partner and give them 

Treatments 33
a picture of a desired item in exchange for that item. Eventually, 
children can learn to string pictures together to form sentences. 
PECS can be used to make requests or to comment on the environ-
ment. Some parents have expressed concern that their child will 
become dependent on PECS to communicate rather than devel-
oping speech. Research studies have actually found that chil-
dren develop speech  faster  with PECS than without it ( Yoder and 
Stone 2006). 
 A visual schedule is a method of providing a schedule for the 
day or an activity in pictures. Children with ASD often respond 
better when they can predict the day’s events because they are 
better prepared for transitions, which can be difficult for some 
children. Encouraging the child to follow along with the schedule 
can also be helpful in staying on task and transitioning to the next 
activity. 
 A social story is a short, developmentally appropriate story 
that describes a social situation or concept (e.g., a trip to the doc-
tor’s office) from beginning to end. It also describes any potential 
difficulties that may be encountered along the way (e.g., “The shot 
at the doctor might hurt a little, but my mom will be there and it 
will be all right”). Social stories are designed to help children with 
ASD anticipate events and expectations and providing pictures 
along with the story can also be helpful. 
 As children gain skills using some of the treatments described 
above, new treatments are often introduced. For example, young 
children with a diagnosis of ASD may initially benefit from in-
tensive ABA treatment to learn fundamental skills in a variety of 
domains, including social, cognitive, and language. Once they have 
established a firm skill set, children may be ready for group work. 
Through ABA, one child learned how to successfully maintain eye 
contact during social interactions, initiate interactive play with 
the therapist, and make some social comments. However, interac-
tions with peers continued to be a struggle at treatment termina-
tion and her treatment providers recommended a social skills group 
to practice appropriate peer conversation skills, sharing, and play-
ing. Treatment recommendations for older and/or higher function-
ing children often involves group work instead of or in addition 
to intensive and individual ABA therapy. Older children, adoles-
cents, and adults with ASD, particularly those who are higher 
functioning, are at heightened risk for internalizing disorders such 
as anxiety and depression. Individual therapy using a  modified 

34 Background and Overview of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) 
cognitive-behavioral approach can be helpful for addressing these 
emerging issues later in life (e.g., Wood et al. 2009). 
 Therapy objectives for adolescents and adults with ASD in-
volve the same general domains as in childhood, including social 
and communication skills. However, specific therapy goals within 
those domains often vary. For instance, within the social domain, 
appropriate play skills with peers may be a focus of treatment in 
childhood while dating skills and more complex conversation 
skills may be highlighted in treatment with older adolescents and 
adults. Daily living skills (e.g., paying bills and house cleaning ) 
and job training are often also targets of intervention with adults 
with ASD. Identification of community resources and support in 
helping to coordinate long-term care is critical to providing the 
best care for adults with ASD. Services provided by some states 
for individuals with ASD may include provision of supported em-
ployment and residential living arrangements. Individuals with 
ASD who have comorbid intellectual disability are more likely to 
qualify for such services. 
 Individuals diagnosed with Asperger’s Syndrome often have 
substantially better outcomes as adults in comparison to indi-
viduals diagnosed with Autistic Disorder (Cederlund et al. 2008). 
This may be accounted for by increased intellectual abilities in 
this population. Overall, however, the percentage of adults with 
ASD who are able to live and work independently has increased 
significantly in recent decades (Howlin et al. 2004). 
 Conclusion 
 ASD is a lifelong disorder affecting social interactions and com-
munication skills and is associated with the presence of restricted 
and repetitive behaviors and interests. Individuals with ASD are as 
different as individuals without autism, with no individual with 
ASD having the same pattern of symptoms. There is a range of 
symptom severity with some individuals having significant im-
pairments, that is, having no speech, limited daily living skills, 
and profound intellectual disability, and other individuals show-
ing mild impairments, but able to be very successful and live and 
work independently. 
 ASD has received much research and media attention in recent 
years and scientists are making new discoveries in genetics, neuro-
imaging, early diagnosis, and effective interventions daily. One 

References 35
important advance made within the past decade is that children 
with ASD can now be diagnosed reliably as early as 24 months of 
age, although warning signs such as not responding when a child’s 
name is called and inconsistent eye gaze may be present as early 
as 8 months of age. Much research is being conducted to follow 
these behaviors from infancy and to develop better diagnostic 
tools to identify children at younger ages with the goal of starting 
intervention as early as possible. In some cases, it may be possible 
to prevent the onset of the disorder with targeted and effective in-
tervention and outcomes of early, intensive behavioral interven-
tion reported to date are promising. 
 References 
 Akshoomoff, Natasha, K. Pierce, and Eric Courchesne. 2002. “The 
Neurobiological Basis of Autism from a Developmental Perspective.” 
 Developmental Psychopathology 14 (3): 613–34. 
 Allen, Greg, and Eric Courchesne. 2003. “Differential Effects of Devel-
opmental Cerebellar Abnormality on Cognitive and Motor Functions 
in the Cerebellum: An fMRI Study of Autism.”  American Journal of 
Psychiatry  160 (2): 262–73. 
 American Psychiatric Association (APA). 1952.  Diagnostic and Statis-
tical Manual of Mental Disorders, First Edition (DSM-I). Washington, 
D.C.: APA. 
 American Psychiatric Association (APA). 1980.  Diagnostic and Statis-
tical Manual of Mental Disorders, Third Edition (DSM-III).  Washington, 
D.C.: APA. 
 American Psychiatric Association (APA). 1994.  Diagnostic and Statis-
tical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV). Washington, 
D.C.: APA. 
 Asperger, Hans. 1944. “Die ‘Autistischen Psychopathen’ Im Kinde-
salter.”  Archiv Für Psychiatrie und Nervenkrankheitein 117:76–136. 
 Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network. 2009. 
“Prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorders —Autism and Develop-
mental Disabilities Monitoring Network, United States, 2006.”  MMWR 
Surveillance Summary 58 (10): 1–20. 
 Bailey, A., A. Le Couteur, I. Gottesman, P. Bolton, E. Simonoff, E. Yuzda, 
and M. Rutter. 1995. “Autism as a Strongly Genetic Disorder: Evidence 
from a British Twin Study.”  Psychological Medicine  25 (1): 63–77. 

36 Background and Overview of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) 
 Baron-Cohen, Simon. 2004. “The Cognitive Neuroscience of Autism.” 
 Journal of Neurology and Neurosurgery Psychiatry 75 (7): 945 – 48. 
 Bauman, M. L., and T. L. Kemper. 2005. “Neuroanatomic Observations 
of the Brain in Autism: A Review and Future Directions.”  International 
Journal of Developmental Neuroscience 23:183–87. 
 Bellini, Scott. 2004. “Social Skill Deficits and Anxiety in High-
Functioning Adolescents with Autism Spectrum Disorders.”  Focus on 
Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities 19 (2): 78 – 86. 
 Bleuler, Eugen. 1916.  Lehrbuch der Psychiatrie . Trans. by A. A. Brill as  
Textbook of Psychiatry. New York: Dover, 1951. 
 Bucan, Maja, Brett S. Abrahams, Kai Wang, Joseph T. Glessner, Edward I. 
Herman, Lisa I. Sonnenblick, Ana I. Alvarez Retuerto, et al. 2009. 
“Genome-Wide Analyses of Exonic Copy Number Variants in a Family-
Based Study Point to Novel Autism Susceptibility Genes.”  PLoS Genet  
5 (6): e1000536. 
 Cederlund, Mats, Bibbi Hagberg, Eva Billstedt, Christopher Gillberg, 
and I. Carina Gillberg. 2008. “Asperger Syndrome and Autism: A 
Comparative Longitudinal Follow-up Study More Than 5 Years after 
Original Diagnosis.”  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 38 (1): 
72–85. 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2007. “Prevalence of Au-
tism Spectrum Disorders—Autism and Developmental Disabilities 
Monitoring Network, 14 Sites, United States, 2002.”  MMWR Surveillance 
Summaries 56 (1): 12–28. 
 Courchesne, Eric. 1997. “Brainstem, Cerebellar and Limbic Neuro-
anatomical Abnormalities in Autism.”  Current Opinion in Neurobiology 7 
(2): 269–78. 
 Courchesne, Eric, Ruth Carper, and Natasha Akshoomoff. 2003. “Ev-
idence of Brain Overgrowth in the First Year of Life in Autism.”  JAMA: 
Journal of the American Medical Association 290 (3): 337–44. 
 Croen, Lisa A., Judith K. Grether, Jenny Hoogstrate, and Steve Selvin. 
2002. “The Changing Prevalence of Autism in California.”  Journal of 
Autism and Developmental Disorders 32 (3): 207–15. 
 Dawson, Geraldine, and Julie Osterling. 1997. Early Intervention in 
Autism: Effectiveness and Common Elements of Current Approaches. 
In  The Effectiveness of Early Intervention: Second Generation Research 
(pp. 307–326).  edited by Michael Guralnick . Baltimore: Brookes. 
 De Giacomo, Andrea, and Eric Fombonne. 1998. “Parental Recognition 
of Developmental Abnormalities in Autism.”  European Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry 7 (3): 131–36. 

References 37
 Dementieva, Y. A., D. D. Vance, S. L. Donnelly, L. A. Elston, C. M. 
Wolpert, S. A. Ravan, G. R. DeLong, R. K. Abramson, H. H. Wright, and 
M. L. Cuccaro. 2005. “Accelerated Head Growth in Early Development 
of Individuals with Autism.”  Pediatric Neurology  32 (2): 102–8. 
 Deutsch, Curtis K., and Robert M. Joseph. 2003. “Brief Report: Cognitive 
Correlates of Enlarged Head Circumference in Children with Autism.” 
 Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  33 (2): 209–15. 
 Folstein, Susan, and Michael Rutter. 1977. “Infantile Autism: A Genetic 
Study of 21 Twin Pairs.”  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  18 (4): 
297–321. 
 Fombonne, Eric. 2003. “Epidemiological Surveys of Autism and Other 
Pervasive Developmental Disorders: An Update.”  Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders 33 (4): 365–82. 
 Goin-Kochel, Robin P., Virginia H. Mackintosh, and Barbara J. Myers. 
2006. “How Many Doctors Does It Take to Make an Autism Spectrum 
Diagnosis?”  Autism 10 (5): 439–51. 
 Hill, E. L., and Uta Frith. 2003. “Understanding Autism: Insights from 
Mind and Brain.”  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biologi-
cal Sciences 358:281–89. 
 Howlin, Patricia, Susan Goode, Jane Hutton, and Michael Rutter. 2004. 
“Adult Outcome for Children with Autism.”  Journal of Child Psychology 
and Psychiatry 45 (2): 212–29. 
 Kanner, Leo. 1943. “Autistic Disturbances of Affective Contact.”  Nervous 
Child 2:217–50. 
 Klin, Ami, Warren Jones, Robert Schultz, Fred Volkmar, and Donald 
Cohen. 2002. “Visual Fixation Patterns during Viewing of Naturalistic 
Social Situations as Predictors of Social Competence in Individuals with 
Autism.”  Archives of General Psychiatry 59 (9): 809–16. 
 Kogan, Michael D., Stephen J. Blumberg, Laura A. Schieve, Coleen A. 
Boyle, James M. Perrin, Reem M. Ghandour, Gopal K. Singh, et al. 2009. 
“Prevalence of Parent-Reported Diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder 
Among Children in the US, 2007.”  Pediatrics  124 (5): 1395–403. 
 Kurita, Hiroshi. 1985. “Infantile Autism with Speech Loss before the Age 
of Thirty Months.”  Journal of the American Academy of Child Psychiatry  
24 (2): 191–96. 
 Lainhart, Janet E., Erin D. Bigler, Maureen Bocian, Hilary Coon, Elena 
Dinh, Geraldine Dawson, Curtis K. Deutsch, et al. 2006. “Head Circum-
ference and Height in Autism: A Study by the Collaborative Program of 
Excellence in Autism.”  American Journal of Medical Genetics A 140 (21): 
2257–74. 

38 Background and Overview of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) 
 Le Couteur, A., A. Bailey, S. Goode, A. Pickles, S. Robertson, I. 
Gottesman, and M. Rutter. 1996. “A Broader Phenotype of Autism: The 
Clinical Spectrum in Twins.”  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 37 
(7): 785–801. 
 Lord, Catherine, Michael Rutter, P. C. DiLavore, and Susan Risi. 1999. 
 Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule —WPS (ADOS-WPS). Los Angeles: 
Western Psychological Services. 
 Lord, Catherine, Michael Rutter, and Ann Le Couteur. 1994. “Autism 
Diagnostic Interview-Revised: A Revised Version of a Diagnostic 
Interview for Caregivers of Individuals with Possible Pervasive 
Developmental Disorders.”  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  
24 (5): 659 – 85. 
 Lotter, Victor. 1966. “ Epidemiology of Autistic Conditions in Young 
Children: I. Prevalence.”  Social Psychiatry 1:124 –37. 
 Lovaas, O. Ivar. 1987. “Behavioral Treatment and Normal Educational 
and Intellectual Functioning in Young Autistic Children.”  Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology 55 (1): 3 – 9. 
 Lovaas, O. Ivar, Robert Koegel, James Q. Simmons, and Judith S. Long. 
1973. “Some Generalization and Follow-up Measures on Autistic 
Children in Behavior Therapy.”  Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis 6 (1): 
131– 66. 
 Lovaas, O. Ivar, Benson Schaeffer, and James Q. Simmons. 1965. 
“Building Social Behavior in Autistic Children by Use of Electric Shock.” 
 Journal of Experimental Research in Personality 1 (2): 99 –109. 
 Lovaas, O. Ivar, Laura Schreibman, and Robert L. Koegel. 1974. “A 
Behavior Modification Approach to the Treatment of Autistic Children.” 
 Journal of Autism and Childhood Schizophrenia 4 (2): 111–29. 
 Luyster, Rhiannon, Jennifer Richler, Susan Risi, Wan-Ling Hsu, 
Geraldine Dawson, Raphael Bernier, Michelle Dunn, et al. 2005. “Early 
Regression in Social Communication in Autism Spectrum Disorders: A 
CPEA Study.”  Developmental Neuropsychology 27 (3): 311–36. 
 Maestro, Sandra, Filippo Muratoria, Filippo Barbieria, Cristina Casellaa, 
Valeria Cattaneoa, M. Cristina Cavallaroa, Alessia Cesaria, et al. 2001.
“Early Behavioral Development in Autistic Children: The First 2 Years of 
Life through Home Movies.”  Psychopathology 34 (3): 147–52. 
 Maestro, Sandra, Filippo Muratori, Maria Cristina Cavallaro, Francesca 
Pei, Daniel Stern, Bernard Golse, and Francisco Palacio-Espasa. 2002. 
“Attentional Skills During the First 6 Months of Age in Autism Spec-
trum Disorder.”  Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry 41 (10): 1239 – 45. 

References 39
 Mandell, D. S., M. M. Novak, and C. D. Zubritsky. 2005. “Factors Asso-
ciated with Age of Diagnosis among Children with Autism Spectrum 
Disorders.”  Pediatrics 116 (6): 1480 – 6. 
 Marshall, Christian R., Abdul Noor, John B. Vincent, Anath C. Lionel, 
Lars Feuk, Jennifer Skaug, Mary Shago, et al. 2008. “Structural Variation 
of Chromosomes in Autism Spectrum Disorder.”  American Journal of 
Human Genetics 82 (2): 477–88. 
 Minshew, Nancy J., and Diane L. Williams. 2007. “The New Neuro-
biology of Autism: Cortex, Connectivity, and Neuronal Organization.” 
 Archives of Neurology 64 (7): 945 –50. 
 Mosconi, Matthew W., Heather Cody-Hazlett, Michele D. Poe, 
Guido Gerig, Rachel Gimpel-Smith, and Joseph Piven. 2009. 
“Longitudinal Study of Amygdala Volume and Joint Attention in 
2- to 4-Year-Old Children with Autism.”  Archives of General Psychiatry  
66 (5): 509 –16. 
 Norbury, Courtenay Frazier, Jon Brock, Lucy Cragg, Shiri Einav, 
Helen Griffiths, and Kate Nation. 2009. “Eye-Movement Patterns 
Are Associated with Communicative Competence in Autistic 
Spectrum Disorders.”  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  
50 (7): 834 – 42. 
 Osterling, Julie, and Geraldine Dawson. 1994. “Early Recognition of 
Children with Autism: A Study of First Birthday Home Videotapes.” 
 Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 24 (3): 247– 57. 
 Osterling, Julie A., Geraldine Dawson, and Jeffrey A. Munson. 2002. 
“Early Recognition of 1-Year-Old Infants with Autism Spectrum 
Disorder Versus Mental Retardation.”  Development and Psychopathology 
14 (2): 239 –51. 
 Rimland, Bernard. 1964.  Infantile Autism. East Norwalk, CT: Appleton-
Century-Crofts. 
 Ritvo, E. R., B. J. Freeman, A. Mason-Brothers, A. Mo, and A. M. Ritvo. 
1985. “Concordance for the Syndrome of Autism in 40 Pairs of Afflicted 
Twins.”  American Journal of Psychiatry 142 (1): 74–77. 
 Ritvo, E. R., L. B. Jorde, A. Mason-Brothers, B. J. Freeman, C. Pingree, 
M. B. Jones, W. M. McMahon, P. B. Petersen, W. R. Jenson, and A. Mo. 
1989. “The UCLA—University of Utah Epidemiologic Survey of Autism: 
Recurrence Risk Estimates and Genetic Counseling.”  American Journal of 
Psychiatry 146 (8): 1032 – 36. 
 Rogers, Sally J., and Geraldine Dawson. 2010.  Early Start Denver Model 
for Young Children with Autism: Promoting Language, Learning, and 
Engagement. New York: Guilford Press. 

40 Background and Overview of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) 
 Rogers, Sally J., and David L. DiLalla. 1990. “Age of Symptom Onset in 
Young Children with Pervasive Developmental Disorders.”  Journal of the 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 29 (6): 863–72. 
 Russell, Emily, and Kate Sofronoff. 2005. “Anxiety and Social Worries in 
Children with Asperger Syndrome.”  Australian and New Zealand Journal 
of Psychiatry 39 (7): 633–38. 
 Rutter, Michael, D. Greenfield, and L. Lockyer. 1967. “A Five to Fifteen 
Year Follow-up Study of Infantile Psychosis. II. Social and Behavioural 
Outcome.”  British Journal of Psychiatry 113:1183–99. 
 Sacco, Roberto, Roberto Militernib, Alessandro Frollib, Carmela 
Bravaccioc, Antonella Grittib, Maurizio Eliad, Paolo Curatoloe, et al. 
2007. “Clinical, Morphological, and Biochemical Correlates of Head 
Circumference in Autism.”  Biological Psychiatry 62 (9): 1038–47. 
 Schreibman, Laura, Wendy M. Kaneko, and Robert L. Koegel. 1991. 
“Positive Affect of Parents of Autistic Children: A Comparison across 
Two Teaching Techniques.”  Behavior Therapy 22 (4): 479–90. 
 Sebat, Jonathan, B. Lakshmi, Dheeraj Malhotra, Jennifer Troge, Christa 
Lese-Martin, Tom Walsh, Boris Yamrom, et al. 2007. “Strong Association 
of De Novo Copy Number Mutations with Autism.”  Science 316 (5823): 
445–49. 
 Shattuck, Paul T., Maureen Durkin, Matthew Maenner, Craig New-
schaffer, David S. Mandell, Lisa Wiggins, Li-Ching Lee, et al. 2009. 
“Timing of Identification among Children with an Autism Spectrum 
Disorder: Findings from a Population-Based Surveillance Study.”  Journal 
of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 48 (5): 474–83. 
 Werner, Emily, and Geraldine Dawson. 2005. “Validation of the Phe-
nomenon of Autistic Regression Using Home Videotapes.”  Archives of 
General Psychiatry 62 (8): 889 – 95. 
 Werner, Emily, Geraldine Dawson, Julie Osterling, and Nuhad Dinno. 
2000. “Brief Report: Recognition of Autism Spectrum Disorder before 
One Year of Age: A Retrospective Study Based on Home Videotapes.” 
 Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 30 (2): 157– 62. 
 Wiggins, Lisa D., Jon Baio, and Catherine Rice. 2006. “Examination of 
the Time between First Evaluation and First Autism Spectrum Diagnosis 
in a Population-Based Sample.”  Journal of Developmental and Behavioral 
Pediatrics 27 (2): S79 –S87. 
 Wood, Jeffrey J., Amy Drahota, Karen Sze, Kim Har, Angela Chiu, and 
David A. Langer. 2009. “Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Anxiety in 
Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders: A Randomized, Controlled 
Trial.”  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 50 (3): 224 –34. 

References 41
 Yoder, Paul, and Wendy L. Stone. 2006. “A Randomized Comparison 
of the Effect of Two Prelinguistic Communication Interventions on the 
Acquisition of Spoken Communication in Preschoolers with ASD.” 
 Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 49 (4): 698–711. 
 Zwaigenbaum, Lonnie, Susan Bryson, Catherine Lord, Sally Rogers, 
Alice Carter, Leslie Carver, Kasia Chawarska, et al. 2009. “Clinical 
Assessment and Management of Toddlers with Suspected Autism 
Spectrum Disorder: Insights from Studies of High-Risk Infants.” 
 Pediatrics 123 (5): 1383–91. 

This page intentionally left blank

43
 “T
ime to get on the bus. Time to get on the bus,” six-year-old 
Jimmy repeated while standing up from his seat, clearly ag-
itated. He was seated at a knee-high table across from the 
psychologist who was working with Jimmy during the diagnostic 
evaluation. Jimmy’s mother, seated at his side, helped redirect him 
to his chair and glanced over at the psychologist and explained, 
“That means he does not want to do this task anymore. He uses 
that phrase when he wants to leave, regardless of whether he is 
getting on the bus for school or just wanting to leave the room.” 
The psychologist nodded and switched activities, “  Jimmy, let  ’s 
play with these toys, then.” The diagnostician placed the toys in 
front of Jimmy noting that the young boy did not respond to his 
statement nor was he making eye contact with him or his mother. 
Instead Jimmy was focused on the table leg closest to him and was 
peering intently at the edges of the metallic, cylindrical table leg. 
“Let’s play with these toys,” the psychologist instructed again in 
an attempt to get Jimmy’s attention. On the fourth prompt, Jimmy 
looked up, fleetingly made eye contact, and then exclaimed, “Oh, 
Hermione from Harry Potter,” when he caught sight of the action 
figure on the table. The psychologist noted that Jimmy made this 
statement with a perfectly imitated British accent. Jimmy grabbed 
the Hermione action figure and toy dinosaur from the table and 
turned away from his mother and the psychologist. Balancing the 
toys on the back of his chair, he murmured under his breath, again 
in a British accent, “Hermione is friends with Harry Potter. Harry 
Potter is a sorcerer.” 
 After several unsuccessful attempts to draw Jimmy back to the 
table and into an interaction, the psychologist turned his attention 
 2 
 Controversies, Problems, and 
Solutions in the Field of ASD 

44 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
to asking Jimmy’s mother about the boy’s early development. 
She highlighted reduced interest in interacting with family mem-
bers and other children, delays in language and use of repetitive 
phrases, intense interests in specific areas, such as Harry Potter, 
and regular repetitive motor mannerisms. After reviewing his 
early development Jimmy’s mother asked, “So what caused this? 
Was it something I did wrong or is there something he was ex-
posed to after he was born that caused his behaviors?” The psy-
chologist shook his head and said, “Certainly not something you 
did, but you’re not the first parent to ask this question. Many sci-
entists have asked, and are still asking, similar questions about 
what causes autism.” Jimmy’s mother quickly followed up, “Well, 
then if we don’t know what causes it, can I do anything to help 
Jimmy?” The psychologist smiled warmly, “Again, a tough ques-
tion and one not without controversy. The good news is that there 
are many effective interventions available to help Jimmy. How-
ever, there are also plenty of interventions that we don’t know 
enough about their effectiveness and some that have been shown 
to be ineffective.” 
 Interactions and conversations like this happen throughout 
the country on a daily basis as physicians and psychologists work 
with families to identify and diagnose autism and provide treat-
ment options. The questions that parents pose to clinicians and 
scientists are poignant in that the lack of definitive answers can 
have a huge impact on a family’s experience, development and 
growth. Unfortunately, science does not move forward as quickly 
as families want or need. 
 The number of children receiving a diagnosis of autism and 
requiring intervention services rises daily. However, there are 
limited diagnostic and evaluation centers staffed by profession-
als with expertise in autism, which results in long wait lists for 
families. A formal diagnosis is important in defining appropriate 
treatments and a requirement in many states and school systems 
to receive treatment. We know that the earlier intervention starts, 
the better the outcome for most children because of the ability for 
treatment to positively impact the altered trajectory of develop-
ment in autism. Each month that a family sits on a wait list with-
out receiving a diagnosis, is one more month that the child is not 
receiving intervention. The problems of understanding the causes 
of autism, why there is a rise in the prevalence rates, and how we 
can treat it are paramount to helping families that are working 
to provide the best possible futures for their children. Scientists, 
clinicians, and parents have worked to answer these imperative 

The Refrigerator Mother Theory 45
questions and, as in all areas of science and medicine, false leads 
have been pursued and championed and some conflict has re-
sulted. However, despite these controversies, clear advances have 
also been made in the field of autism. There is currently great in-
terest and focus in the field of autism and new advances in our 
understanding of autism are being made every day. The contro-
versies that have plagued the field have been part of the growing 
pains of a young subject of scientific inquiry. 
 Controversies Surrounding 
the Causes of Autism 
 Our understanding of the etiology of autism has come a long way 
since Leo Kanner’s first description of the disorder in 1943. How-
ever, further progress still needs to be made. In the mid-1940s, 
psychoanalytic thought predominated psychological theory, an 
awareness of childhood mental illness was just beginning to take 
shape, treatment for most mental illness was limited and confined 
to residential placement, and it would not be another decade be-
fore Watson and Crick could announce that they discovered the 
secret of life in the double helix. In the century since the term  au-
tism  was first used to refer to the withdrawal from the outside 
world shown by individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia, sig-
nificant advances in science, medicine, and understanding of 
development have profoundly impacted the furthering of under-
standing the origins of autism. The development of technologies 
to image the brain, to scan the entirety of the genome, and to clas-
sify behaviors has provided the means for scientists to disprove or 
support theories and move our understanding of autism forward. 
Certainly the process has not been easy for scientists and parents 
alike and controversies have dotted the landscape of the study of 
the causes of autism. 
 The Refrigerator Mother Theory and 
the Birth of the Genetics of Autism 
 The first predominant theory regarding the cause of autism was 
that autism resulted from pathological parenting. Termed the “re-
frigerator mother theory,” this theory proposed that the mothers 
of children with autism respond abnormally and psychologically 

46 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
harmfully to normal childhood behaviors due to their psycho-
logical coldness and aloofness —their refrigerator personalities. 
According to Bruno Bettelheim, the champion of this theory, it is 
the mother’s coldness that ultimately results in the child turning 
inward and retreating into autism. 
 In order to understand how this theory originated, it is im-
portant to understand the prevailing atmosphere of psychological 
understanding of the middle of the 20th century. While this theory 
may seem out of place in the early 21st century given our current 
understanding of mental illness, child development, biology, and 
genetics, during the time of its development, it followed directly 
from the established psychological perspectives. 
 In the middle of the 20th century, psychoanalytic theory was 
the prominent perspective on the development of mental illness. 
Sigmund Freud, considered to be the founder of the field of psy-
chology, developed psychoanalytic theory in the late 19th and 
early 20th centuries. Followers of Freud have built upon and ex-
panded this school of thought and aspects of his psychological 
theories continue on today. Although there are a number of schools 
of thought and divisions within the field, psychoanalytic theory 
generally purports that mental illness results from unconscious 
conflicts that follow from early childhood experiences, predomi-
nantly relationships with parents. Concepts that are common in 
today’s language and culture are the result of many of the writ-
ings from psychoanalytic thought, such as the terms  anal retentive 
and  oral fixation , and the concepts of denial, the unconscious, and 
dream analysis. Followers of psychoanalytic thought focus on a 
child’s early relationships to explain disordered or abnormal be-
havior as these early relationships are considered to be the most 
important features of a child’s early social experiences. Extending 
this viewpoint, if a parent, particularly the mother, is considered 
to be the most important aspect of a child’s early development and 
unconscious conflicts resulting from early development are be-
lieved to be the root cause of mental illness, then clearly parents 
could be considered the causal factor in the development of men-
tal disorders. 
 Psychologists and physicians of the early 20th century work-
ing with individuals for whom there was no identifiable cause 
of their disorder ascribed to the predominantly held notion that 
parents played a causal role in the development of their mental 
difficulties. Bruno Bettelheim, a professor of psychology at the 
University of Chicago and director of a school for children with 

The Refrigerator Mother Theory 47
emotional disturbances, developed his refrigerator mother theory 
on the cause of autism within this framework of psychoanalytic 
thought. But, it was not based on his clinical observations alone 
that he considered the parents’ personalities to be a contributing 
factor. This notion of “coldness” in parents of children with autism 
was actually described in Leo Kanner’s first account of autism. 
 In 1943, in a paper titled, “Autistic Disturbances of Affective 
Content,” Johns Hopkins professor, Leo Kanner, reported on 11
children with “an inability to relate themselves in the ordinary 
way to people and situations” (p. 242). In this seminal paper out-
lining the behaviors of these children with “early infantile autism,” 
Kanner mentioned the traits of the parents as well. In the con-
clusion of the paper, he noted, “one other fact stands out promi-
nently. In the whole group, there are very few really warmhearted 
fathers and mothers” (p. 250). Despite these observations, Kanner 
concluded that parent personalities did not cause autism and 
ended his groundbreaking paper with, “we must, then, assume 
that these children have come into the world with innate inabil-
ity to form the usual, biologically provided affective contact with 
people” (p. 250). 
 Kanner highlighted that his conclusion was that autism was 
an innate disorder, not caused by parents. In fact, the lack of 
warmth Kanner reported observing in the parents of the children 
with autism in his sample could just as easily have resulted from 
having a child with autism. That is, instead of concluding that 
parent personality resulted in a child with autism, it could have 
been theorized that having a child with a disability results in pa-
rental stress and emotional distance. However, the prevailing cur-
rent of psychoanalytic theory held stronger sway. 
 With the convergence of the prevailing viewpoint of psycho-
analytic theory and the anecdotal reports of parent personalities 
in the 11 children with autism in Kanner’s 1943 report, Bruno Bet-
telheim posited the refrigerator mother theory of autism. Basing 
his theory in psychoanalytic thought, Dr. Bettelheim contrasted 
the behavior of parents with autism to parents of typically de-
veloping children. Specifically, he stated that in normal develop-
ment, as children progress and interact with the world around 
them, at times they withdraw in response to frustrations or ob-
stacles along the way. Typically, parents respond to the child’s 
withdrawal to the threats of the world with increased warmth, 
cuddling, and care. The child experiences this care and reassur-
ance and the child reengages with the world around him or her. 

48 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
In contrast, according to the refrigerator mother theory, parents of 
children with autism, because of their psychological pathology of 
coldness and aloofness, respond to normal childhood withdrawal 
with rejection and negativity. In turn, the child perceives this as 
hostility and threat, which intensifies his or her withdrawal. The 
cycle continues to repeat until the child is lost to autism. In his 
1967 book,  The Empty Fortress: Infantile Autism and the Birth of the 
Self,  Dr. Bettelheim summarized his theory: “In those children 
destined to become autistic their oversensitivity to the mother’s 
emotions may be such that they try, in defense, to blot out what is 
too destructive an experience for them. Little is known about the 
relation between the development of the child’s feelings and his 
cognition. But to blot out emotional experience probably impedes 
the development of cognition, and it may be that the two reinforce 
each other till autism results” (p. 398). 
 As one can imagine, the impact of this theory was felt through-
out the parent community. Guilt, shame, and pain accompanied 
the already challenging day to day experience for parents trying 
to raise a child with a significant disability. Unfortunately, at the 
time, there was little more that science could provide in the way 
of insight into the cause of autism. However, there were advocates 
for the theory that autism’s cause was rooted in neurological im-
pairment and biology, not pathological parenting. 
 Dr. Bernard Rimland, an experimental psychologist and the 
parent of a child with autism, joined forces with Dr. Ruth Sullivan 
and other parents and founded what is now called the Autism So-
ciety of America. Through the development of a parent-run orga-
nization focusing on advocacy, research, and support, the notion 
that autism was caused by cold, aloof parenting could be exam-
ined and the veracity of its statements tested. 
 Over the years many arguments and questions were posed 
to counter the refrigerator mother theory. One primary argument 
against the refrigerator mother theory was that not all parents of 
children with autism, even children that fit Kanner’s classical, 
prototypical examples, are cold or aloof as Kanner mentioned. In 
fact, most are not. The second argument consistently noted was 
that many parents that fit Kanner’s description of cold and aloof 
do not have children with autism. A third argument was that many 
siblings of children with autism do not themselves have autism. 
How could this theory account for these three inconsistencies? If 
autism is indeed caused by refrigerator mothers, we would expect 

The Refrigerator Mother Theory 49
that all (or at least most) parents of autism would be cold and 
aloof, that all (or at least most) children of aloof parents would have 
autism, and that all (or at least most) siblings of autism would 
also have autism. These logical extensions of the theory were not 
observed. 
 Other counterarguments were presented as well including the 
observation that many children with autism demonstrate atypical 
developmental trajectories from birth, far too early for parenting 
to have an effect and that some autistic symptomology is similar to 
that of symptoms shown following brain damage. Many of these 
arguments were presented in Dr. Rimland’s 1964 review of what 
was known about autism. His book,  Infantile Autism, highlighted 
the rationale for a biological basis of the disorder and did much to 
allay the guilt and shame of parents and drive the scientific com-
munity to explore biological causes of autism (Rimland 1964). In 
total, over the years, a large number of counterarguments were 
presented to refute the refrigerator mother theory, but the strong in-
fluence of psychoanalytic theory coupled with a lack of a specific, 
definitive alternative causal mechanism carried the pathological 
parenting theory forward for many years. 
 Finally, in 1977, with a landmark publication of a twin study 
conducted in England, the refrigerator mother theory was finally 
left out in the cold. Dr. Susan Folstein, a child psychiatrist from the 
United States, and Sir Michael Rutter, a British child psychiatrist 
considered by many to be the father of child psychology, reported 
their findings from 21 twin pairs and concluded that autism is 
predominantly a genetic disorder ( Folstein and Rutter 1977). 
 Drs. Folstein and Rutter used what we know about twins to 
answer questions about the role genetics might play in the dis-
order. Monozygotic twins, or identical twins, share nearly iden-
tical genetic structure while dizygotic, or fraternal twins, share 
approximately 50 percent of their genes—the same as nontwin 
siblings. By comparing the concordance rate of autism in monozy-
gotic twins, that is the rate in which both twins have autism, to the 
concordance rate of autism in dizygotic twins, the contribution of 
genetics or environment to the disorder can be estimated. If autism 
is caused by environmental factors, such as cold parenting, it would 
be expected that both types of twins, monozygotic and dizygotic, 
would have the same concordance rate. This is because, presum-
ably, the environment would have a similar impact on both same-
aged children raised in the same environment. In contrast, if  autism 

50 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
is caused by genetic factors, then it would be expected that de-
spite growing up in a similar environment the monozygotic twins 
would have a higher concordance rate because they share the same 
genes. 
 In this study, Drs. Folstein and Rutter cast a wide net to iden-
tify same sex twins with autism. Same sex twins were sought be-
cause the rate of autism varies by gender. Boys are three or four 
times more likely to have autism than girls. As a result, female 
monozygotic twins, male-female dizygotic twins (and same sex 
dizygotic twins), and male monozygotic twins would all naturally 
have different rates of autism due to gender differences and not 
simply genetic differences. Additionally, a large enough sample of 
children observed by the scientists to confirm a diagnosis of autism 
was needed to draw definitive conclusions. 
 After carefully identifying, recruiting, and evaluating as many 
twin pairs as possible for which at least one child had a diagno-
sis of autism, Drs. Folstein and Rutter examined the concordance 
rate. They found that not one of the dizygotic (fraternal) twin pairs 
were concordant for autism. When one of the twin pairs had au-
tism, his sibling did not. However, 4 of the 11 monozygotic (identi-
cal) twin pairs were concordant for autism; 36 percent of the twins 
both had autism. Statistically speaking, the likelihood that chance 
alone could explain this pattern of differential concordance rates 
in identical versus fraternal twins is less than 5 percent. 
 This finding provided definitive evidence against the refriger-
ator mother theory and suggested a clear alternative to the cause 
of autism—genetics. In the intervening years between Kanner’s 
first report of autism and subsequent examination of the disorder 
by other scientists, changes were taking place in the field of bi-
ology that allowed for more advanced scientific questions to be 
asked and answered. James Watson and Francis Crick, the Nobel 
Prize–winning biologists, identified the structure of the double 
helix thereby providing a molecular basis for genetic transmis-
sion of disease and mental illness. Pictures of the brain were made 
available through computerized tomography providing insight 
into brain structure and function. Advances were also made in the 
understanding of other mental illnesses. For example, researchers 
studying schizophrenia maintained the position that genetics are a 
primary causal mechanism. Given these advances in science, al-
ternatives to pathological parenting could then be provided to ac-
count for behavioral disorders for which no known medical cause 
could be identified. Autism was the perfect example of a disorder 

“The Autism Epidemic” 51
for which no known specific medical cause could be identified. 
Drs. Folstein and Rutter concluded on the basis of their findings 
in twins that the difference in concordance rates “clearly points 
strongly to the importance of genetic factors in the aetiology of 
autism” (Folstein and Rutter 1977, p. 307). A new era in understand-
ing the causes of autism was born. 
 In the years following the Folstein and Rutter paper, scien-
tists studying the causes of autism examined all aspects of autism 
including the effectiveness of different treatment options; early 
development and the behaviors and symptoms associated with 
autism, such as imitation and repetitive behaviors; brain structure 
and function through autopsy and technologies, such as electroen-
cephalography (EEG), positron emission tomography (PET), mag-
netic resonance imaging (MRI); functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI); and genetics through expanded twin studies, ge-
nome wide linkage studies, and candidate gene studies. Parents 
became increasingly more involved in autism research, which 
helped speed advances in understanding through active family 
participation in large studies and a louder voice in lobbying for 
federal research dollars. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, other 
parent groups, such as the National Alliance for Autism Research, 
Cure Autism Now, and Autism Speaks, joined the ranks of the ex-
isting Autism Society of America and worked to provide funding 
for autism research. Although the time when parents were side-
line observers in autism research and held to blame for the cause 
of disorder had come to end, the controversies in understanding 
the causes of autism did not end there. Further, the controversies 
regarding the origins of autism were compounded by reports of 
an increase in the prevalence of the disorder. 
 “The Autism Epidemic” 
 Increasing rates of autism have been reported in the media and 
the term epidemic has been included in more than one article 
headline: “Is the Autism Epidemic a Myth?” (Wallis 2007); “Sci-
entists Challenge Claims of Steep Rise in Autism” (Derbyshire 
and Brahic 2002); and “Autism Epidemic Being Ignored” (Taylor 
2007). Those in the public eye have reported similarly. “We have 
an autism epidemic on our hands,” Dan Burton, Representative 
of Indiana, declared in 2001 (Lilienfeld and Arkowitz 2007, p.   58). 

52 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
 The spark in the autism epidemic issue was a 1999 report 
generated by California’s Department of Developmental Services 
that reported a 273 percent increase in the number of children with 
an ASD entering the regional treatment center system over the 
course of 11 years (Department of Developmental Services 1999). 
Since the 1999 report, there have been a number of scientifically 
conducted epidemiological studies assessing the prevalence and 
incidence rates for autism. (The prevalence is the number of indi-
viduals with a given disorder in a population at a given time, while 
the incidence rate indicates the number of new cases in a given 
time period.) These studies indicate that the current estimate for 
the prevalence of autism is approximately 1 in 110 children. This 
number is a vast increase over the estimates that existed prior to 
the 1990s. Previous estimates were approximately 1 in 2,500. 
 There are a number of complicating factors that make it im-
possible to compare the current prevalence estimate of 1 in 110 
children with a diagnosis to the previous 1 in 2,500 estimate that ex-
isted for many years. These include changes in diagnostic criteria, 
increased awareness and greater access to services, financial in-
centives, and changes in epidemiological methodology and re-
porting procedures. 
 Firstly, the diagnostic criteria for autism have changed con-
siderably in the past 20 years. The  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders ( DSM ) is the reference book for psychiatry and 
psychology. It is currently undergoing its fifth revision. With each 
revision, diagnostic boundaries are modified and criteria adjusted 
to reflect new scientific research (and cultural influences). As the 
landscape in autism is consistently shifting, so is the field of psy-
chiatry and psychology in general and this is reflected in the  DSM . 
For example, in the first edition of the  DSM , homosexuality was 
listed as a mental disorder. Thankfully, advances in research and 
cultural awareness were incorporated in the  DSM  revision pro-
cess and homosexuality was removed from the manual in 1974. 
Substantial changes were made to the diagnostic criteria for au-
tism through the  DSM  revision process, including the addition of 
two additional subtypes of Pervasive Developmental Disorders: 
Asperger’s Disorder and Pervasive Developmental Disorder—
Not Otherwise Specified (PPD-NOS). The inclusion of these addi-
tional subtypes involved the loosening of diagnostic criteria. That 
meant that more people could meet diagnostic criteria for an ASD 
when these changes took place in 1987 with the development of 

“The Autism Epidemic” 53
the  DSM-III-R  and again in 1994 with the  DSM-IV . Previous prev-
alence rates, therefore, considered only what would now be clas-
sified as Autistic Disorder, while the current 1 in 110 prevalence 
rates include all three diagnoses in the autism spectrum. The au-
thor of the 2007  Unstrange Minds: Remapping the World of Autism, 
Roy Grinker, suggests that these changes made in the diagnostic 
criteria could account for 50–75 percent of the increase in preva-
lence rates. 
 A second factor that contributes to the changes in prevalence 
rates is the vast increase in autism awareness. This increase in 
awareness allows for greater identification of children who might 
have previously been overlooked and not diagnosed. Increased 
awareness also decreases the stigma of having a child with a dis-
ability, which allows families to openly seek services and become 
involved in treatment and educational systems. Increased aware-
ness also means an increased awareness for professionals. As pro-
fessionals become more expert at identifying autism, children can 
be diagnosed earlier and entered into treatment and educational 
programs earlier. The more children enrolled in services means 
the more children that are being serviced and helped. But it also 
means that more children can be counted when a prevalence 
study is being conducted. 
 As awareness of autism has increased, so have the treatment 
opportunities. Many of these treatment opportunities are expen-
sive, but they can at times be financially covered by the school 
system and in some cases, by insurance coverage. However, in 
order to receive the financial compensation for treatment, the di-
agnosis of autism is necessary. This can be a crucial factor for some 
families and professionals, as Grinker reports in his book. He cites 
an example of one professional stating, facetiously, but with some 
truth behind it, that she would call a child a zebra if that is what it 
took to secure services for him. 
 Finally, changes in the methods used to determine and assess 
the number of children with a diagnosis of autism could also con-
tribute to the rise in the prevalence rates for children with au-
tism. Many recent studies, including the California Department 
of Developmental Disabilities report, utilize information based on 
children entering a given program, be that the special education 
system or regional center. In order to identify a child with a spe-
cific disorder, that disorder must first be included in the program’s 
categorical list of diagnoses. Prior to 1991, autism wasn’t listed as 

54 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
a specific diagnostic category in the U.S. special education system. 
Obviously, the disorder could not be counted if it was not listed as 
a possible entity. The manner in which studies of prevalence rates 
are conducted, therefore can have a huge impact on the observed 
rates of a disorder. Only if similar methods are utilized can truly 
accurate comparisons be made. 
 There are several factors that refute the notion that there is an 
autism epidemic, including changes in diagnostic criteria, greater 
awareness, and changes in epidemiological reporting and meth-
odology. However, these factors most likely do not account for the 
total increase in prevalence rates that have been reported. There 
may be some measure of secular increase, although not at epidemic 
levels, in the prevalence rates of autism. 
 In sum, there seems to be some measure of secular increase in 
the rate of autism. Further, despite clear evidence of a causal ge-
netic role, there is no specific, definitive causal pathway and mecha-
nism identified for all cases of autism. Genes do not act in a vacuum 
and heritability estimates suggest there is an as yet unidentified 
environmental factor(s) in autism. These are props on the stage of 
autism and these props clearly set the scene for continued contro-
versy about the cause of autism. 
 The Vaccine Controversy 
 The second biggest controversy concerning the etiology, or cause, 
of autism revolves around the role of immunizations in the cause 
of autism. With reports of rising prevalence rates and an “au-
tism epidemic,” many have turned their attention to toxins in the 
environment to identify the cause of autism. One organization main-
tains that there is an autism epidemic and propose that vaccines 
are to blame. On the organization’s Web site, Generation Res-
cue states: “Our children are experiencing epidemics of ADD/
ADHD, Asperger’s Disorder, PDD-NOS, and Autism. We believe 
these neurological disorders (“NDs”) are environmental illnesses 
caused by an overload of heavy metals, live viruses, and bacteria” 
(Generation Rescue 2009). In order to understand this contro-
versy, which continues today, it is essential to consider the cul-
tural context and prevailing atmosphere of our understanding of 
autism. 

The Vaccine Controversy 55
 The Contextual Factors 
 No Definitive Causal Genetic Mechanism, Gene-
Environment Interactions, and the Lack of 
Identified Possible Environmental Factors 
 The Folstein and Rutter study in 1977 indicated that genetics are a 
significant factor in the etiology of autism. A follow-up twin study 
published in the mid-1990s by Tony Bailey and colleagues includ-
ing a much larger number of twin pairs further supported the 
finding that genetics play a significant role in autism (Bailey et al. 
1995). Based on these twin studies, heritability estimates, which 
are statistical estimates of the contribution of genetic and envi-
ronmental factors to a disorder, were established at 91–93 percent 
(Freitag 2007). This suggests that approximately 90 percent of the 
variance of autism in the population is due to genetic factors. This 
is very high for a psychiatric disorder. However, that means, of 
course, that autism is not solely caused by genetics. There is an 
“environmental” factor as well. 
 Environmental factors in the context of heritability estimates 
simply mean: not genetic. Environment from a geneticist’s per-
spective does not refer specifically to features of the natural world, 
such as air quality, temperature, or number of extinct species, 
although it could. Environment in the context of the heritability 
of disorders refers to factors other than genetics, which could in-
clude family environment, such as number of siblings or amount 
of violence in the home, or toxins in the air, or even the intra-
uterine environment—the environment that the developing fetus 
experiences in the womb. 
 The identities of these environmental factors in autism have 
been unknown since the first twin study and remain unknown 
today. However, countless factors have been proposed over the 
years ranging from microwave signals to intra-uterine tempera-
ture changes to rainfall, to name a few. Given the multitude of 
possible environmental factors, many geneticists have proposed 
that it is essential to identify the genetic mechanisms involved in 
autism before attempting to identify these other risk factors. 
 The reason for this proposed strategy is that the phenotype 
for autism, that is, the observed behaviors of autism, are the re-
sult of a complex interaction between genes and environment that 
plays out in the brain. Imagine a grassy playing field in which 
11 players with red uniforms are interacting with 11 players with 
green uniforms around the placement of a small, leather ball into 

56 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
two opposing nets. The result of this complex interaction is the 
game of soccer. If we removed the colored jerseys it might take 
the uninformed viewer some time to determine the rules of the 
game. But, by putting colored jerseys on just one team, it makes a 
significant difference in helping the novice sports watcher figure 
out what is happening in the game. Now imagine that there are 
thousands of players on the field, hundreds of balls, and tens of 
nets. And there are no colored jerseys. This is akin to the complexity 
of autism. Given the complexity of the interaction in autism, by 
shedding light on one side of the complex interaction, the genetic 
contribution, scientists believe it will be easier to then identify 
how the environmental contribution interacts to result in autism. 
This has been the strategy of the late 1990s and early 2000s in ex-
ploring causal factors in autism. 
 Genetic studies have employed a number of technological and 
statistical strategies relying on advances in genetics to identify the 
risk genes for autism. In the 1990s, genome wide linkage scans be-
came possible due to advances in genetic technologies. In genome 
wide linkage scans blood is collected from each family member 
in a “multiplex family”—a family in which more than one person 
has autism. Most often the participating families are families for 
which two children have autism. Then, through complicated ge-
netic processes and statistical analyses, scientists identify regions 
in the genetic code that have potential to contain genes related to 
autism. These initial studies published in the late 1990s and early 
2000s clearly indicated that the genetics of autism were not as 
straightforward and simple as the recessive and dominant trans-
mission methods that Gregor Mendel discussed with his peas in 
the 1800s. While many potential “hotspots” throughout the genome 
have been identified, a number of possible candidate genes have 
been suggested, and a number of theoretical genetic transmission 
processes have been proposed, no definitive genetic causal mech-
anism has been identified yet for the majority of cases of autism. 
 Without a definitive genetic mechanism, it is impossible to 
rule out which of the possible billions of environmental factors 
might be playing a role in autism. This leaves almost any of these 
environmental factors open to debate. The lack of a definitive ge-
netic mechanism for autism, coupled with the fact that genes do 
not operate without input from the environment, has set the stage 
for controversies about the environmental contribution to autism. 
However, there are other factors to consider in the context of the 
current controversy. 

The Vaccine Controversy 57
 Timing of Symptom Onset 
 Another important contributing factor related to the current vaccine 
controversy concerns the timing with which symptoms emerge 
in autism. The mean age in the United States at which a child is 
diagnosed with an ASD is estimated at 5.1 years of age (Wiggins, 
Baio, and Rice 2006) while the median age 5.7 years old (Shattuck 
et al. 2009). However, the age at which a disorder such as autism 
is diagnosed indicates little about the biology or even about the 
emergence of symptoms. The age of diagnosis reflects a combina-
tion of factors including how old the child is when parents first 
note problems, when the consulted professional, most often a pe-
diatrician, considers the problems worthy of referral, and when a 
child is finally able to be evaluated by a specialist who can make 
a formal diagnosis. This process can take more than two years in 
some cases. In fact, research indicates that parents most often 
report problems with their child’s development in the first two 
years of life indicating a long time indeed, between recognizing 
difficulties and receiving a diagnosis. 
 The symptoms that parents most often first report noting are 
delays and difficulties with language and communication as well 
as abnormalities in social responsiveness. However, in an estimated 
one quarter of children with autism, development appears to de-
velop typically for the first year of life, followed by a regression 
in language, social and other skills (Wiggins, Rice, and Baio 2009). 
On average, parents report that the regression occurs around 
18 months of age. When parents talk about these early years, com-
ments from parents attending the University of Washington Au-
tism Center clinic include, “he just wasn’t talking as much as his 
older sister and I thought, well, maybe his sister is just doing his 
talking for him . . . she loves to talk, you know.” Or, another par-
ent has said, “Paul just didn’t seem very interested in me or any-
one else when he was a baby. After he learned to walk around a 
year of age, he just wandered around the living room in circles 
not very interested in us.” Or, yet another parent has said, “In the 
first year of his life, Joey, seemed just like a typical baby. He cooed, 
babbled, had even started saying mama, dada, and ball. But then 
just before a year and a half, he stopped being so interested in 
others and stopped making sounds altogether. We didn’t know 
what was happening” (R. Bernier, unpublished data).In typical 
development, many children begin using single words, such as 
mama and dada around the first birthday and short phrases shortly 
thereafter. However, there is a large range in the age at which 

58 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
 children begin to speak. Practice parameters  suggest that parents 
consult a physician if a child is not using single words by 16 months 
of age and two word phrases by 24 months (Filipek et al. 1999). 
Also typical development social skills, such as orienting to your 
name or using a point to show something of interest, only emerge 
in the second half of the first year of life. What this means is that 
if development is progressing abnormally, it is difficult to notice 
until after a child is old enough to demonstrate the skills in the 
first place. 
 Parents first start noticing abnormalities in their child’s de-
velopment in the first two years of life, at some point after the 
typical age that skills should first emerge. When parents first start 
noticing delays, or a regression in skills, often the first thing that 
parents do is review recent adverse events in the child’s life to iden-
tify a potential cause of the difficulty. During the first two years of 
life, children receive a number of vaccinations and crying, fatigue, 
and occasionally fevers, are the child’s response to the pokes. Vac-
cines are easy targets for blame because they are an easily identifi-
able adverse event in a baby’s life that happens around the time 
that abnormalities (or regressions) are first observed in autism. 
 But there are other factors to consider besides the rise in autism 
prevalence rates, the lack of a definitive genetic mechanism, the 
lack of identified environmental factors, and the correlated timing 
between symptom presentation and vaccine schedule in the cur-
rent controversy. Several specific events have fueled the vaccine 
controversy. 
 Events in the Controversy 
 The Initial Study 
 The first study to suggest a link between vaccines and autism was 
one published in 1998 in England’s most prestigious medical jour-
nal, the  Lancet.  (Wakefield et al. 1998). The team of authors, led 
by Andrew Wakefield, a physician at the Royal Free Hospital in 
London, concluded that there was a connection between gastroin-
testinal disorders and autism. In a sample of eight children with 
autism and four children with autism symptoms with gastroin-
testinal disease, they reported a regression in skills following the 
measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) immunization. In the final para-
graph of the manuscript, the authors state: “We have identified a 
chronic enterocolitis in children that may be related to neuropsy-
chiatric dysfunction. In most cases, onset of symptoms was after 

The Vaccine Controversy 59
measles, mumps, and rubella immunisation” (Wakefield et al. 
1998, p. 641). During the press conference held on the day of pub-
lication of the manuscript, Dr. Wakefield proposed that the MMR 
vaccine may be causing the gastrointestinal inflammation in these 
children with autism. With the press conference and publication, 
the curtain was raised on the controversy regarding the vaccines 
and autism. 
 The press conference garnered immediate media attention and 
parents and families responded. In the 10 years since the publica-
tion in the  Lancet,  the  New York Times  alone has published almost 
4,000 letters, articles, or editorials regarding autism and vaccines. 
Following the publication of the manuscript, the immunization 
rates for the MMR vaccine dropped precipitously in England. One 
year after the press conference, the online version of the newspa-
per the  Guardian  in England reported on a study highlighting con-
cerns of the possible return of a rubella epidemic. “Britain could 
face a new rubella epidemic with devastating effects on unborn 
babies if parents continue to shun the MMR vaccine, according to 
a report by child health specialists published yesterday” (Boseley 
1999). In 2008, the  New York Times  reported “Measles Cases Grow 
in Number, and Officials Blame Parents’ Fear of Autism” (Harris 
2008). And, as reported in the  Times  in February of 2009 (Lister 
2009), the Health Protection Agency in the United Kingdom indi-
cated that in 2008 there was a 36 percent increase in the numbers 
of children infected with measles with 1,348 new cases reported. 
This is in stark contrast to 56 cases of measles reported in 1998. 
There was clearly a significant response to the claims that the 
MMR vaccine was linked to autism spurred by the first and only 
paper to publish a relationship between the MMR vaccine and 
autism. 
 The study that generated so much attention and had a sub-
stantial impact on parental behavior also generated a second flurry 
of controversy six years later. In 2004, the  Lancet  published state-
ments from 10 of Dr. Wakefield’s 12 coauthors on the paper re-
tracting the conclusions from the 1998 publication (Horton 2004; 
Murch et al. 2004). As reported in the March 7, 2004, issue of the 
 Sunday Times,  the  Lancet  retraction followed an investigation by a 
reporter from the  Sunday Times  who found that Dr. Wakefield had 
been given approximately $100,000 by a personal injury lawyer 
(Rogers 2004). The lawyer was involved in a class-action lawsuit 
against a pharmaceutical company that manufactured vaccina-
tions, such as the MMR vaccine. Further, the journalist reported 

60 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
that several of the research participants were clients of the personal 
injury lawyer and these families had a financial interest in iden-
tifying a link between the MMR vaccine and autism. Subsequent 
investigation, as reported in Paul Offit’s  Autism’s False Prophets, 
suggested that this figure of $100,000 was a significant underesti-
mate of the amount of money given to Dr. Wakefield for research 
to link the MMR vaccine and autism (Offit 2008). This represented 
a significant conflict of interest for Dr. Wakefield, and the  Lancet 
editors noted that he failed to report this conflict of interest when 
submitting the manuscript for publication. 
 Conflicts of interest are expected to happen in science and re-
search and are one of the reasons that submitted manuscripts are 
subjected to close peer review during the scientific process. Before 
a researcher can publish a manuscript with scientific findings, the 
manuscript must undergo careful scrutiny by experts in the field 
who then recommend to the chief editor of a scientific journal to 
publish, reject, or accept with revisions the submitted manuscript. 
During this process the methodology of the study is reviewed for 
accuracy, the results are assessed for veracity, and conclusions 
are examined to ensure they follow directly from the results and 
methodology. Additionally, conflicts of interest are considered to 
rule out the possibility of bias in the research. However, in the case 
of the 1998 manuscript, Dr. Wakefield failed to report this conflict 
of interest to the journal and to all of his coauthors. 
 Failing to cite a conflict of interest does not inherently mean 
that the underlying science is faulty or that the conclusions are 
inaccurate. But, it does mean that the scientists conducting the 
research may inadvertently overlook findings or reach flawed 
conclusions as a result. The reviewers for the 1998  Lancet paper 
reviewed the study and determined that based upon what the au-
thors wrote, the methodology was sound, the results viable, and 
the conclusions reasonable for publication. However, in 2004, the 
 Lancet  editorial board considered this omission of the conflict of 
interest to be significant in the case of the Wakefield study and 
retracted the paper (Horton 2004). 
 Supporters of the MMR vaccine and autism connection have 
also argued that a conflict of interest within the medical commu-
nity has promoted the continued use of vaccines. Bloggers have 
posted a range of proposed conflicts including suggestions that 
the  Sunday Times  was receiving special funds by the medical es-
tablishment to discredit the link between vaccines and autism and 
that the numerous research studies finding no link between vac-

The Vaccine Controversy 61
cines and autism were, in fact, funded by pharmaceutical compa-
nies, thereby suggestive of a conflict of interest. Clearly conflicts of 
interest can generate a bias in conclusions that can be drawn in a 
scientific inquiry. This is why the peer review process is essential, 
but it is also why a second component of the scientific method, 
independent replication, is invaluable. 
 An important second step in the scientific process, following 
the peer review of a research study, is independent replication of 
those findings. That is, in science, scientific conclusions from a 
research study, such as the MMR vaccine causes autism ,  must be 
replicated by other scientists who work independently from the 
original scientists to lend credibility to that finding. Through this 
process of using similar methodology to replicate findings or by 
addressing the question using complementary methodologies, ad-
vances in science are slowly and carefully made. This process is 
essential so that only true findings are accepted and become part 
of scientific knowledge. In the more than a decade since the 1998 
publication linking MMR and autism, the finding has yet to be 
replicated despite numerous attempts to reproduce the findings. 
Indeed, many studies using similar methods and complemen-
tary epidemiological methods have reported no link between the 
MMR vaccine and autism (Schreibman 2005). 
 There was a final controversy surrounding the 1998  Lancet pub-
lication in the spring of 2009. Further investigation by Brian Deer 
of the  Sunday Times in London of medical records and eyewitness 
testimony suggested that the data presented in the 1998 publica-
tion was fixed to produce the desired result (Deer 2009). Medical 
records were presented to the Medical Research Council in the 
United Kingdom and the investigation revealed that many of the 
symptoms the children reportedly experienced in the publication 
differed from what was noted in their medical records. Further, the 
symptoms reportedly noted following vaccination, were found to 
actually be present prior to the vaccination. This suggests that the 
vaccines in these cases could not be causal as the symptoms were 
observed  before ever having the vaccine. 
 Dr. Wakefield provided a rebuttal to this recent investigation 
in the form of annotations to the letter he received by journalist 
Deer two days prior to the printing of the story in February 2009. 
Dr. Wakefield titled his response, “In his desperation, Deer gets it 
wrong once again,” and in his annotations he states that he did 
not alter the data and that the purpose of the paper was not to in-
tentionally link the vaccine to autism, but to present a syndrome of 

62 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
gastrointestinal illness and developmental disability. Dr. Wake-
field ends his annotated rebuttal with: “I did not ‘create’ a scare 
but rather, I responded to a scare that parents brought to my at-
tention. To have ignored their concerns would have been profes-
sional negligence” (Wakefield 2009, p. 4). 
 Evidence of Harm and  Autism’s False Prophets 
 Two books stand out in the controversy between vaccines and au-
tism. In 2005, David Kirby, a journalist, shared the stories of parents 
of children with autism combined with commentary and excerpts 
from the scientific community and government officials in a book 
titled,  Evidence of Harm: Mercury in Vaccines and the Autism Epi-
demic: A Medical Controversy  (Kirby 2005). The  New York Times book 
review “What Caused the Autism Epidemic?” commends David 
Kirby  ’s ability to present the complicated information and jargon 
related to the controversy and to describe the theoretical process 
by which vaccines could cause autism, but highlights that readers 
“might welcome a summary” of the mainstream research find-
ings, which are not presented in the book (Morrice 2005, p. 20). 
 Evidence of Harm  is based on several years of research by Kirby 
and presents family stories of all too common challenges to receiv-
ing an appropriate diagnosis of autism. Kirby presents the contro-
versy including Dr. Wakefield’s proposal of an MMR vaccine and 
autism connection and he reviews the parent group-led proposal 
that it is a compound called thimerosal, the mercury containing 
preservative used to bind the vaccines, that is the causal agent 
in the etiology of autism. A galvanization for many parents was 
the American Academy of Pediatrics’ statement to request the re-
moval of thimerosal from vaccines in 1999 (American Academy of 
Pediatrics 1999). This event is presented in his book and served as 
the basis for its title. The issued report, for many parents, served 
as evidence that thimerosal was the culprit in the controversy. In 
the Academy report, researchers indicated that babies were re-
ceiving doses of ethylmercury in thimerosal in vaccines that ex-
ceeded the federal limitations of a different, yet chemically related 
compound, methylmercury. The authors of the report, however, 
concluded that there was “no evidence of harm” of using the 
thimerosal preservative in the vaccines. 
 In the years subsequent to the removal of thimerosal from 
vaccines, a variety of peer reviewed, scientific studies were con-
ducted. In 2004, the Institute of Medicine in the United States is-
sued a statement concluding there was no link between thimerosal 

The Vaccine Controversy 63
and incidence of autism ( Institute of Medicine 2004). Kirby indi-
cated in his book that the definitive answer would be found soon 
after the publication of the book. In 2007, data from California’s 
Department of Developmental Disabilities rang in the verdict. By 
2001, the preservative had been removed from all infant vaccines 
(and remains only in some multiple dose flu vaccines), and, by the 
time of the report, six years had passed since the removal of the 
preservative. Given that children are generally diagnosed with 
autism by six years of age, children not exposed to the preserva-
tive could be compared to children who had been exposed to the 
preservative. It was a simple matter of comparing the population 
of children born prior to 2001, when thimerosal was included in 
the vaccine, to those children born after the removal of the preser-
vative. If thimerosal were truly the causal agent, then a drastic re-
duction in the cases of autism should be seen. The California data, 
calculated and tallied in a report released in January 2008, showed 
that rates of autism had not decreased but, in fact, continued to 
increase (Schechter and Grether 2008). 
 Sally Bernard, a parent of a child with autism and autism 
advocate, commented on the findings. She stated that the report 
indicated that there were significant environmental factors in the 
etiology of autism and did not rule out thimerosal as one of them 
(DeNoon 2008). Sally Bernard cofounded Coalition of SafeMinds 
(Sensible Action for Ending Mercury-Induced Neurological Dis-
orders) with Lyn Redwood, also a parent and advocate whose 
story was told in Kirby’s book. They were the first to propose the 
thimerosal-autism connection in a publication in the journal  Medi-
cal Hypothesis (Bernard et al. 2001). 
 These same events are also told in another book published 
concerning this controversy. Paul Offit’s  Autism’s False Prophets: 
Bad Science, Risky Medicine, and the Search for a Cure  went to press in 
2008. Similar to David Kirby’s  Evidence of Harm,  Dr. Offit presents 
the vaccine autism controversy incorporating media commentary, 
firsthand accounts, parental insight, and data. Counter to  Evidence 
of Harm,  Dr. Offit’s book underscores that there is no connection 
between vaccines and autism and he couches his conclusion in 
a description of the context that gave rise to the controversy, as 
has been reviewed above. As the chief of Infectious Diseases and 
director of the Vaccine Education Center at the Children’s Hos-
pital of Philadelphia and the Maurice R. Hilleman Professor of 
Vaccinology and professor of pediatrics at the University of Penn-
sylvania School of Medicine, Dr. Offit presented his book from a 

64 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
position of great authority in the medical community. Dr. Offit 
has been the recipient of numerous awards, including Jonas Salk 
Award from the Association for Professionals in Infection Control 
and Epidemiology for coinventing the rotavirus vaccine RotaTeq. 
It is precisely because of these awards and his established history 
in the medical community that his book has received criticism. 
 Proponents of the vaccine autism link attribute Dr. Offit’s 
stance that vaccines do not play a causal role in autism to a conflict 
of interest of financial incentives from pharmaceutical companies. 
Proponents claim that because Dr. Offit conducts funded research 
into vaccines he has a conflict of interest that makes his conclu-
sions invalid and that leads him to say vaccines are safe. Dr. Offit’s 
rebuttal is simply “the reason I say vaccines don’t cause autism is 
that they don’t” (Offit 2008, p. xvii). 
 Subsequent to the publication of these two books that received 
a great deal of attention from both “sides” of the controversy, a 
final event in the drama unfolded in the court system. 
 The Vaccine Injury Compensation Program 
 The vaccine injury compensation program is a federally funded 
program to provide financial compensation to families following 
an adverse reaction to vaccination. Through this program started 
in 1986, families can quickly receive financial compensation of 
$900,000 in a very short time provided it can be definitively dem-
onstrated that the injury was caused by the vaccination. This 
program was started to alleviate the number of lawsuits directed 
against vaccine makers that in the mid-1980s threatened to end 
vaccine manufacturing. While this program does not entirely pro-
tect vaccine makers, because if families are dissatisfied with rul-
ings pharmaceutical companies can be sued in state courts, it has 
dramatically reduced the number of lawsuits. 
 Between 1999 and 2007, more than 5,000 families made claims 
that vaccines caused their child’s autism. This number overpow-
ered the vaccine injury compensation court and as a result the 
court decided to address the claims like a class-action lawsuit. Called 
the Omnibus Autism Proceeding, the trial began in the summer of 
2007 and focused on three specific cases. 
 On February 12, 2009, the courts revealed their verdict. After 
reviewing the testimony concerning the three cases and includ-
ing expert witnesses from both sides, the three judges that com-
prise the panel determined that for each case there was no evidence 
that the children’s autism was caused the MMR vaccine and 

The Vaccine Controversy 65
thimerosal ( Cedillo v. Secretary of Health and Human Services Case 
No. 98-916v  2009;  Hazelhurst v. Secretary of Health and Human Ser-
vices Case No. 03-654v  2009;  Snyder v. Secretary of Health and Human 
Services Case No. 01-162v 2009). 
 All three verdicts in this omnibus proceeding in the history 
of the vaccine act dealt a sharp blow to the theory claiming that 
vaccines cause autism. Yet, there is one additional case that warrants 
discussion in this controversy: Hannah Poling. In the fall of 2007, 
the Vaccine Injury Compensation Program compensated the fam-
ily concluding that her injuries were linked to the vaccine. CNN 
reported on March 7, 2008, the “underlying illness that had predis-
posed her to symptoms of autism was “significantly aggravated” 
by the vaccinations she received” (CNN 2008). Hannah Poling’s 
parents describe a regression and loss of skills in Hannah and 
onset of autism symptoms. In addition to autism, Hannah was also 
diagnosed with a mitochondrial disorder. Mitochondria are the 
energy manufacturers of the cell and dysfunction of the mitochon-
dria can occur in a variety of cell types: skin, brain, heart and lung. 
As a result, the symptoms of mitochondrial disorder vary greatly 
and can at times go undetected. There are only a few known cases 
of mitochondrial disorder and autism. Chief science officer at 
Autism Speaks Dr. Geraldine Dawson commented on the ruling: 
“Vaccines stimulate the immune system, which may put stress on 
the cell function of a child who has asymptomatic mitochondrial 
dysfunction or disorder such that the child now shows increased 
symptoms. In an extreme case, the symptoms could involve re-
gression and symptoms of autism” (Dawson 2008). As reported 
in  Time  magazine online, the director of the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Dr. Julie Gerberding, underscored, “the 
government has made absolutely no statement about indicating 
that vaccines are the cause of autism, as this would be a complete 
mischaracterization of any of the science that we have at our dis-
posal today” (Wallis 2008). The federal vaccine court found that 
the underlying cellular disorder, the mitochondrial disorder, was 
aggravated by vaccines and that in this particular case, symptoms 
of autism resulted. Contrary to the omnibus proceedings, this spe-
cific finding has encouraged those advocates of an autism vaccine 
connection. 
 The scene was set and specific events took place to fuel the 
vaccine-autism controversy. Despite scientific evidence indicat-
ing that no causal link between vaccines and autism, the contro-
versy persists. In part this is due to the context surrounding the 

66 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
controversy: the lack of a definitive causal mechanism for autism 
leaves the door open for speculations about putative causes, in-
cluding the role of vaccinations. Further, the onset of symptoms 
and timing of vaccines make vaccines a clear choice to consider. 
There is also a rising prevalence rate of autism that science sug-
gests is not at epidemic levels, but does indicate that there may be 
some increase in the rate of cases. Finally, the persistence of this 
controversy is in part due to the vast array of information that is 
available to families. The amount of information on the Internet 
regarding autism is staggering. An Internet Google search of the 
word “autism” returned 18,300,000 hits at the time that this book 
was written. In comparison, the word “schizophrenia,” a psychi-
atric disorder identified and diagnosed many years before autism, 
returned only 10,200,000 hits. Unfortunately, not all that informa-
tion has undergone scientific scrutiny. But, it is printed; and when 
information is printed, some credibility seems to be automatically 
lent to it. This means that families are presented with not only a 
vast array of information, but also a vast array of misinformation 
and it can be very challenging to discern the two. 
 In April 2009 on the  Huffington Post , the actor Jim Carrey wrote 
about his belief that vaccines could cause autism and suggested 
that decisions regarding vaccines were based on money not safety. 
He wrote: “With vaccines being the fastest growing division of the 
pharmaceutical industry, isn’t it possible that profits may play a 
part in the decision-making? That the vaccine program is becom-
ing more of a profit engine than a means of prevention?” (Carrey 
2009). One year prior, in April 2008, the actress Jenny McCarthy 
stated, “We believe autism is an environmental illness. Vaccines 
are not the only environmental trigger, but we do think they play 
a major role” (McCarthy and Carrey 2008). Both these statements 
are readily available to Google searchers across the world. It is im-
portant that they are available, but what is equally important is 
that readers know how to assess the accuracy of what is written. 
Science relies on the scientific method to disprove hypotheses (the 
scientific method cannot prove—only disprove), and it requires 
replication to ensure the accuracy of findings. Further, before any 
scientific results are published, other scientists painstakingly re-
view the researcher’s manuscript to ensure the accuracy and ve-
racity of what has been written. Through this process, accurate 
information can be translated to the public. It is important (and 
often uncommon) that information gleaned through this process 
be as available to the public as the information that is presented 

Controversies Surrounding the Treatment of Autism  67
via movie stars’ statements. At this point, science has been unable 
to compete. 
 Despite the controversy regarding the role of vaccines in au-
tism, there is forward momentum in the field. The field of autism 
genetics has grown exponentially in the past two to three years 
and innovative new technologies and elucidating discoveries are 
made on a regular basis at this point in time. New research into the 
interaction between genetics and environment is also on the rise. 
However, definitive answers from the genetics community and 
reports from collaborative work between scientists from multiple 
disciplines clarifying gene environment pathways in autism are 
essential to buy-in from the general public. Such advances and 
answers will hopefully even the playing field and allow science 
to better compete with alluring statements from celebrities. The 
end goal to all of this exploration into true causes of autism is to 
recommend and implement the most effective treatments, inter-
ventions, and, perhaps some day, preventions of autism. However, 
autism treatment research to date has also been plagued by con-
troversy. 
 Controversies Surrounding 
the Treatment of Autism 
 As heated as the debate has been concerning the cause of autism, 
discussion and controversy has also afflicted autism treatment. 
Similarly to the debate concerning the etiology of autism, there 
are a number of factors that make the concerns around autism 
intervention ripe for controversy. 
 One of the reasons that controversy surrounds treatments for 
autism is that there is no specific known cause for autism. There 
are most likely many causes that lead to the pattern of behaviors 
we term autism (Geschwind 2009). When the cause of a disorder 
is known, then the appropriate intervention can be assigned. If a 
person arrives at the doctor’s office with congestion and headache, 
there are a number of things that could possibly have caused the 
pattern of symptoms. By identifying the cause, a doctor can pre-
scribe the appropriate treatment. For example, if the congestion and 
pain was caused by a viral infection, then the prescription may 
be rest and lots of fluids. If the symptoms are the manifestations 
of a bacterial sinus infection, then perhaps, a course of antibiotics 

68 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
would be the appropriate treatment. Or yet, if the congestion and 
headache are caused by seasonal allergies, then perhaps the best 
course of action would be an antihistamine. 
 However, even with the etiology of autism identified this still 
may not necessarily advance treatment. In approximately 10–20 
percent of cases of autism, the specific cause is known, but this has 
not advanced treatment options significantly (Geschwind 2009). 
Even though advanced and new treatment options may not nec-
essarily result from an identified etiology of autism, by identify-
ing the causal pathway, treatments can be validated or refuted by 
virtue of their proposed mechanism. 
 A second reason that controversies persist regarding autism 
treatments is that currently the only treatment that has been em-
pirically demonstrated to be effective in treating children with au-
tism is behavioral intervention based upon methods of Applied 
Behavioral Analysis (ABA) (Schreibman 2005). There are no med-
ication treatments for autism although there are medication 
treatments for associated behaviors such as the management of 
aggressive or self-injurious behavior (Research Units on Pediatric 
Psychopharmacology Autism Network 2002). Behavioral interven-
tion for autism is time intensive—some programs include 40 hours 
of repetitive practice each week for the child. Children progress 
with ABA treatment programs, but progress is slow and can take 
months or even years to see noticeable gains. This can be pains-
taking for a parent wanting and waiting for his or her child to 
successfully interact with the world around. Additionally, the cost 
of intervention can be staggering, with current estimates suggest-
ing approximately $25,000 per year of ABA treatment. Currently, 
for most families this treatment is paid out of pocket as most in-
surance companies do not provide coverage. However, efforts are 
underway by lobbying groups to address this problem and some 
states have made substantial gains in intervention coverage. The 
considerable time requirement, the slow pace of progress, and the 
overwhelming financial burden limit the feasibility of behavioral 
intervention for many families. 
 Finally, similar to availability of information regarding the 
causes of autism, so too is there a vast array of information (and 
misinformation) about treatment possibilities for autism. In this 
complex arena of statistics, figures, anecdotal reports, case stud-
ies, and experimental studies, there are thousands of treatment 
options, ranging from empirically supported behavioral treatments 
to treatments that have actually caused significant harm to chil-
dren. Even among the behaviorally based treatments—termed 

Facilitated Communication 69
 efficacious  treatments, there are a multitude of names and abbre-
viations, such as PRT (pivotal response training), ABA, and ESDM 
(early start Denver model), so that it is difficult to navigate through 
the options. 
 Parents receiving a first-time diagnosis of autism for their 
child experience the diagnostic process in as many ways as there 
are people, but for many, receiving the diagnosis is an emotion-
ally turbulent time. Faced with that emotional struggle, the mul-
titude of options available makes it difficult for parents to mire 
through the mountain of information regarding treatment options. 
Many clinicians encourage families to consider treatment options 
through an analytic 2 × 2 matrix (Cohen and Eisenberg 2002). On 
the left side of the matrix, one considers the safety: yes the treatment 
is safe, or no it is not. On the top of the matrix, one considers the 
effectiveness: yes the treatment is effective, or no it is not. By com-
paring the four cells of the matrix, the appropriate course of action 
regarding that intervention can be determined. If the treatment is 
safe and effective, it is recommended. If it safe but not effective, 
it can be tolerated. If it is effective but unsafe, it can be monitored 
closely or discouraged. Clearly, if a treatment is ineffective and 
unsafe, it should be discouraged. The application of the treatment 
decision matrix to the four treatments implicated in controversies 
that are described below may be a useful exercise. 
 As yet, there are no identified causes of autism that can direct 
or guide promising interventions and the only empirically sup-
ported treatment is often perceived to be slow, time consuming, 
and costly. There is also significant difficulty in navigating infor-
mation and misinformation available to families regarding inter-
vention options. Combined with a parent’s driving desire to do 
what is going to help his or her child, it is no surprise that contro-
versies exist concerning autism treatment. There have been four 
specific controversies in autism treatment in the recent years. The 
controversies include the touting of facilitated communication as 
a miracle cure, the media attention over secretin, the use of bio-
medical interventions, such as chelation, and the use of dietary in-
terventions in autism. 
 Facilitated Communication 
 Facilitated communication (FC) was an augmentative communi-
cation technique developed in Australia in the 1970s. It was origi-
nally developed to assist individuals with cerebral palsy to express 

70 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
themselves based on the belief that with additional support, indi-
viduals would be able to demonstrate their true capacities. In fa-
cilitated communication an individual is seated at a keyboard or 
other letter-displaying instrument. A facilitator provides support 
for the communicator by holding his or her hand, arm, or elbow 
as the communicator selects or points to letters on the keyboard or 
visual display. Through this facilitation, the individual is then able 
to communicate in a manner that is purported to be more effective 
and reflective of his or her true abilities. 
 In 1990 Douglas Biklen, a professor of special education at 
Syracuse University in New York, returned from Melbourne Aus-
tralia where he had seen Rosemary Crossley, the teacher who de-
veloped the program based on her work with cerebral palsy, model 
the technique. He introduced the technique in the United States, 
and it quickly became widespread so much so that in 1993 he 
developed the Facilitated Communication Institute at Syracuse. 
Through facilitation it was reported that nonverbal children with 
autism were suddenly conveying sophisticated messages showing 
a strong grasp of grammatical structure and abstract conceptual 
understanding. The treatment was far less expensive than behav-
ioral intervention and produced results much more quickly while 
offering families hope and promise of success for their children. 
Through the facilitators, children who had never produced single 
words in their lifetime remarkably relayed long sought after mes-
sages of social connection, such as “I love you, Mommy,” and pro-
vided parents with a window into the apparently impenetrable 
minds of their children. 
 Unfortunately, FC took hold before any analysis of its effec-
tiveness could be made; there were harmful consequences as a 
result. In  The Science and Fiction of Autism, Laura Schreibman re-
counts receiving countless calls regarding the efficacy of the inter-
vention but being unable to report anything other than a healthy 
skepticism because she had not seen any research on it yet 
(Schreibman 2005). Prompted by allegations of sexual abuse made 
through FC by children with autism, prosecutors needed to do a 
thorough examination of Facilitated Communication. 
 Paul Offit describes the experience of the Wheaton family as 
the impetus that set in motion the critical examination of FC (Offit 
2008). Betsy Wheaton, a 17-year-old girl with autism, reported 
through the use of FC that she was being sexually abused by her 
parents, grandparents, and brother. Similar allegations were being 
reported throughout the country using FC. This prompted pros-

Facilitated Communication 71
ecutors and scientists alike to determine the way in which FC 
produced its results. A simple experiment was developed and 
conducted by scientists with no conflict of interest in the results. 
In the basic experiment, the table was divided in two with a screen 
such that the facilitator could only see her side of the table and the 
child communicator only his or her side. Then the facilitator and 
child were shown various pictures that the other could not see. 
Sometimes the child and facilitator were shown the same picture, 
while other times the pictures differed. As Offit describes, when 
Betsy and her facilitator were shown a picture of a key, Betsy typed 
in the word  key  with her facilitator. When Betsy was shown a pic-
ture of a cup and her facilitator shown a picture of a hat, Betsy 
typed the word  hat . The results were clear: Betsy’s facilitator was 
doing the communicating. 
 This same pattern was observed over and over again using 
this experimental paradigm and a similar paradigm. In the alter-
native test paradigm, the child was removed from the presence of 
the facilitator, shown some information that the facilitator had no 
access to, and then asked to indicate what was seen or heard upon 
return to the facilitator and the FC device. Regardless of which 
experimental paradigm was used, the results were the same. The 
facilitators were doing the communicating, not the child. Follow 
up analyses suggested that the facilitators were not doing this ma-
liciously or with evil intent. Indeed, psychologist Donald Wegner 
reported on a series of five studies examining the phenomena of 
ideomotor effects and concluded that facilitators of FC were not 
intending to mislead or direct the communicator’s behavior but 
did so unconsciously (Wegner Fuller, and Sparrow 2003). 
 The research in the mid-1990s dealt a significant blow to the 
FC movement and a number of national organizations, including 
the American Speech and Hearing Association, the Association for 
Behavioral Analysis, the American Association on Mental Retar-
dation and the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psy-
chiatry, have provided position statements indicating their failure 
to support FC due to its lack of scientific validity. Despite this, the 
Facilitated Communication Institute exists today, and proponents 
of the technique continue to promote its use. The parent-based 
nonprofit organization Autism National Committee (or AutCom) 
issued a policy statement in 2008 regarding FC. It states, “It is the 
policy of the Autism National Committee that everyone has some-
thing to say and a right to say it. Facilitated Communication is 
one accepted and valid way in which individuals with autism can 

72 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
exercise their right to say what they have to say” (Autism Na-
tional Committee 2008, p. 1). 
 In summary, the scientific research suggests that FC is not an 
effective treatment as it is the facilitators that are communicating 
 for  the individual with the disability, not the individual with au-
tism. This is reflected in the position statements of several national 
organizations. Additionally, it has become increasingly clear that 
FC could be considered harmful. Firstly, the widespread reports 
of abuse resulted in significant devastation to many families de-
spite the subsequent drop in charges. In most cases the allegations 
were unjustified and yet led to the removal of children from their 
home and incarceration of family members. The resulting impact 
on the family’s financial and community standing as well as emo-
tional and mental health was considerable. Secondly, time spent 
engaging in FC is time not spent engaging in treatments that are 
effective and shown to be helpful for children with autism. Given 
the importance of intervening as early as possible, time spent on 
treatments shown to be ineffective can be considered harmful. 
Thirdly, the diversion of funds to FC programs from efficacious 
treatment programs restricts intervention options. Finally, the de-
stroyed hopes, promises, and dreams of families who thought FC 
was helping their children could be considered significant harm 
(Schreibman 2005). 
 Secretin 
 While the controversy over FC took center stage in the mid-1990s, 
it shared the stage in the late 1990s with a second controversial 
treatment that also proved to be ineffective. In October 1998,  Date-
line  aired a segment reporting on a miraculous recovery by a 
young child with autism, named Parker Beck (Pauley 1998). The 
program described five-year-old Parker’s early development and 
loss of skills just after he turned two. Following what his parents 
described as happy and healthy early development, he lost his so-
cial interest, smiles, speech, and became more irritable and began 
spinning repetitively. In addition, his parents reported that he had 
persistent diarrhea and stomach pain. The program described the 
Beck ’s family struggles with finding treatment for Parker’s diag-
nosis of autism and their chance encounter with a pediatric gas-
troenterologist. While assessing Parker, Dr. Horvath conducted an 
endoscopy and administered secretin to test Parker’s pancreatic 

Secretin 73
functioning. Secretin is a peptide hormone produced by cells in 
the small intestine. Soon after the visit, Victoria, Parker’s mother, 
reported dramatic improvement in Parker’s symptoms. His gas-
trointestinal difficulties subsided and he began making more eye 
contact and using more language. 
 The Beck family tried to identify what during the procedure 
could have effected the change and after pouring over the records; 
they concluded that the secretin that was used as a diagnostic tool 
could have been the catalyst for Parker’s change. However, they 
struggled to find a source for secretin as the Federal Drug Admin-
istration (FDA) had not approved the use of secretin for anything 
other than what Dr. Horvath had used it for, a diagnostic aid. Doc-
tors were unwilling to prescribe secretin “off-label,” for a use not 
approved by the FDA. During the time the Becks were searching 
for another source of secretin, Parker stopped improving. Over a 
year later, they found a doctor willing to administer secretin and 
they reported seeing signs of Parker’s improvement again. 
 After the Beck family’s experience with secretin and Parker, 
they contacted the Autism Research Institute, founded by 
Dr. Rimland. He shared the family’s experience with other fami-
lies. A family in California was intrigued and mirrored the pro-
cedure with a local gastroenterologist. The second family also 
observed the same result. A third family had a similar experience 
and so Dr. Horvath and colleagues published their findings in 
1998 (Horvath et al. 1998). The  Dateline  program shared this story 
highlighting that is was a treatment pioneered by parents, not the 
medical or research. 
 Following the airing of the program, autism clinics and re-
search programs received countless calls from families requesting 
information about secretin. There was an outpouring of parental 
interest in utilizing secretin as a treatment for autism although 
practitioners had no experience in using the hormone in this man-
ner. The medical community was not prepared to meet the patient-
driven demand for this treatment that had no empirical support. 
On a pediatrician Listserve, one physician posted two days after 
the  Dateline  airing: “Anyone care to comment re: the dateline show 
related to using secretin for autism? Anyone with any experience 
with the medication? Any adverse side effects? Any published re-
search or pending research?” The next posting was a response, 
“Two of my patients have already asked me about it. Our local 
Pediatric Gastroenterology unit is besieged. They are trying to or-
ganize a well controlled study” (Shapiro 1998). 

74 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
 There was a rush on secretin and at the time only one manu-
facturer of the peptide hormone existed. As a result, costs went 
through the roof and families spent thousands of dollars acquir-
ing the hormone and finding doctors to prescribe it. An article was 
published in the  Ladies Home Journal  regarding the positive experi-
ence of an eight-year-old receiving a secretin injection (McLellan 
1999). This fueled parents’ hopes for the treatment and wishes to 
have access to the hormone. It was a challenging time for families 
as they waited for research results. 
 In December of 1999, a group of researchers published the 
results of their controlled study of 56 children in the prestigious 
 New England Journal of Medicine  (Sandler et al. 1999). In this study, 
half of the children were randomly assigned to a course of secretin 
and half were randomly assigned to a placebo, an injection of salt 
water. The random assignment assures that any differences ob-
served between groups is not due to some other factor related to 
the assignment of each research participant to a specific group. 
In the four weeks following the treatment parents, teachers, and 
clinicians observed the children’s behavior using a variety of mea-
sures. Importantly, none of the parents, teachers or clinicians rat-
ing the children’s behavior knew if they received the secretin or 
placebo. There were no differences between the groups in their be-
haviors following the injection. Interestingly, both groups showed 
improvement in the social and communicative abilities in this 
study. The authors concluded that secretin was no more effective in 
reducing symptoms of autism than salt water, but demonstrated 
the power of wanting children to improve following a medical 
procedure. 
 In the several years following this initial publication, 15 con-
trolled, blind studies all concluded that secretin was an ineffective 
treatment for autism. A controlled study is one in which random 
assignment and other measures are used to ensure that findings 
are related to the experimental manipulation and not anything 
else, like normal improvement over time. A blind study is one in 
which those observing and rating child behaviors were “blind” to 
what treatment the child received: secretin or placebo. Controls are 
essential in studies such as these so that other factors do not lead a 
scientist to conclude that a treatment is effective when it is not. In 
four of these 15 studies, a subgroup of children with gastrointes-
tinal symptoms reportedly demonstrated improvement in their 
GI symptoms, but these findings have not been replicated by a 
separate research group (Sturmey 2005). 

Chelation 75
 In the quarterly newsletter published by the Autism Research 
International, Dr. Stephen Edelson reports that despite the many 
published findings, more research is needed for secretin and high-
lights that the Autism Research Institute has collected surveys 
from parents of 468 individuals who have had secretin injections. 
Forty-four percent of these respondents report seeing an improve-
ment in their child’s behavior (Edelson 2008). 
 The  Dateline  story, the  Ladies Home Journal  story, and the initial 
Horvath publication fueled excitement about secretin as a treat-
ment for autism. The scientific community responded with well-
designed studies to examine its effectiveness. Again, science moved 
slowly and in the process families spent thousands of dollars pur-
suing a treatment option that the research had demonstrated to be 
effective. Well-designed, controlled studies indicate that secretin 
is not an effective treatment for autism and suggest that limited 
adverse effects have been noted, but this is not definitive. The 
FDA has only approved secretin’s use as a diagnostic tool for pan-
creatic functioning, not for treatment. 
 Chelation 
 A third area of controversy in the treatment of autism involves 
the use of chelation. Chelation was a process first developed after 
World War I as a method to remove poisonous gas from an exposed 
individual. The chelating agent was used to bind with the metal, 
arsenic, on which the poisonous gas was based. When the chelat-
ing agent bound to the arsenic, it formed water-soluble molecules 
that could pass through the bloodstream and be excreted from 
the system through the kidneys and liver. The original chelating 
agents had significant side effects (Bell 1977). 
 Following the initial introduction of chelation as a process 
to remove metal-based poisonous gas from the body, the process 
had been proposed as a method of removing other heavy metals, 
such as lead, mercury and also calcium. Following World War II, 
chelation was used in the treatment of lead poisoning, but as over-
all cases of lead poisoning have decreased over the years, so has 
chelation’s use. That is, until it was proposed as a treatment for 
autism, for which it has been used as an alternative treatment 
without the approval and recommendation of the medical and 
scientific community. 

76 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
 Chelation was proposed as a treatment for autism in accor-
dance with the theory that autism is the result of mercury poison-
ing. In the study by Bernard et al. (2001) published in  Medical 
Hypotheses,  the authors suggest that given their hypothesis that 
mercury causes autism, chelation may be an appropriate treatment. 
They write, “With perhaps 1 in 150 children now diagnosed with 
ASD, development of HgP-related treatments, such as chelation, 
would prove beneficial for this large and seemingly growing pop-
ulation” (Bernard et al. 2001, p. 467). This paper representing the 
hypothesis of mercury’s causal role in autism and the proposal 
that chelation is, therefore, a viable treatment has been cited con-
sistently by proponents of chelation for autism. A paper published 
in the  Journal of American Physicians and Surgeons  (Bradstreet et al. 
2003) reported on differential rates of mercury excretions between 
221 children with autism and 18 typical children following an oral 
chelation treatment. The authors concluded that the findings were 
suggestive of evidence of mercury poisoning, which they surmised 
as related to vaccine exposure and that chelation was an effective 
means of assessing this. 
 Neither of the above publications provides scientific evidence 
for chelation’s effectiveness as a treatment for autism. In a letter 
published in the British Journal of Medicine, Dr. Sinha and col-
leagues state, “there is no compelling   evidence to suggest that che-
lation therapy is an effective treatment   for autism. A review of 
Medline (1966 to April 2006) and Premedline   did not yield any rel-
evant reviews or randomised controlled   trials of chelation therapy 
for autism spectrum disorder” (Sinha, Silove, and Williams 2006, 
p. 756). The president of the American Academy of Pediatrics, 
Dr. Jay Berkelhamer, told  Dateline:  “The usefulness of chelation 
therapy in treating autism is nil” (Larson 2006). Dr. Berkelhamer 
goes on to say, “Chelation therapy is potentially toxic. The chela-
tion materials that are used to remove these metals from the blood-
stream can affect the liver and the kidney.” 
 In May 2008, the FDA approved the use of a chelating agent, 
DMSA, for a controlled, scientific trial of chelation’s effective-
ness as a treatment for autism. The National Institutes for Mental 
Health (NIMH), which is the largest funder of autism research 
in the United States, received pressure from critics for advocating 
and supporting this line of research. Proponents of the use of 
chelation saw the approval for this study as a response to parental 
belief and interest in exploring chelation as a treatment option. 
As reported in  Nature News,  Dr. Cooper, former president of the 

Chelation 77
American Academy of Pediatrics said, “that a well-designed study 
of chelation in children with autism would respond to these par-
ents’ deeply held beliefs in the most careful, ethical way.” He 
clarified that “with informed consent, such a study could ensure 
that the only families to be enrolled would be those already deter-
mined to try chelation” (Wadman 2008, p. 259). 
 Critics in the chelation controversy noted that given there is 
no evidence to support the mercury poisoning-autism link, there 
is no evidence to support using a potentially harmful treatment 
agent. And indeed, chelation can be harmful. In 2005, a 5-year-
old boy with autism died following a chelation treatment. While 
receiving his chelation treatment, the boy, Tariq Nadama, went 
limp and his mother reported this to the doctor. The medical staff 
rushed the boy to the hospital, but he died of a heart attack. Fol-
lowing a forensic investigation it was determined that as a result 
of the chelation process, Tariq’s calcium levels dropped, as the 
chelating agent used in this treatment, EDTA, also binds to calcium. 
Given the heart’s need for calcium in the bloodstream for it to 
pump and the drastically low calcium levels resulting from chela-
tion, Tariq’s heart stopped beating and he died. Two other deaths 
have been reported as a result of chelation treatment as well (Cen-
ters for Disease Control and Prevention 2006). 
 Based on these reports as well as a research study examining 
chelation therapy in rodents, the federal government decided to 
put a halt to pursuing this line of research. In a study conducted 
to assess the effects of chelation on rodents the authors found that 
chelation “improves learning, attention, and arousal regulation 
in lead-exposed rats but produces lasting cognitive impairment 
in the absence of lead exposure” (Stangle et al. 2007). The find-
ings demonstrated scientifically for the first time that chelation 
of lead can improve aspects of behavior shown to be impaired in 
lead poisoning. Importantly the study showed that it is only in the 
presence of lead poisoning that chelation shows improvement in 
learning and attention. Two different types of rats were tested in 
the study: rats with lead exposure and rats without lead exposure. 
In the rodents not exposed to lead, chelation actually impaired 
cognition. While the toxic metal in the rodent study was lead and 
not mercury, the process and chelating agent used in the rodent 
project was similar to the chelating agent used in children with 
autism and the agent proposed in the NIMH study. 
 The proposed applicability of chelation and autism rests on 
the hypothesis that autism is caused by mercury poisoning. The 

78 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
medical community maintains that there is no evidence to support 
the theory that autism is caused by mercury poisoning. Given the 
findings that chelation may actually cause cognitive impairment 
if it is administered to a patient (as supported by the rodent study) 
without heavy metal poisoning, opponents of chelation treatment 
hold that it can have harmful cognitive effects beyond being inef-
fective and putting the patient at risk for death. 
 Despite the lack of scientific support for its effectiveness and 
the risk of significant harm including death, many parents and 
practitioners have used and continue to use chelation as a form of 
treatment for autism. 
 The Gluten-Free, Casein-Free Diet 
 An additional treatment that has sparked some controversy and 
debate in the field of autism is the Gluten-Free, Casein-Free diet 
(GFCF diet). The GFCF diet involves restricting foods containing 
gluten and casein. Foods containing the protein gluten include 
wheat, rye, and oats while the protein casein is found in dairy 
products like milk, cheese, and yogurt. The diet is very difficult to 
maintain as these proteins need to be eliminated from the diet and 
that means monitoring the child’s intake at home, school, in res-
taurants, and anywhere else there may be food or other products 
containing gluten or casein. For example, in addition to food these 
proteins are found in substances such as Play Doh and glue. 
 The theoretical rationale for the use of this diet is that in in-
dividuals with gastrointestinal problems, such as leaky gut, pro-
teins such as gluten and casein are believed to pass through the 
permeable membrane of the intestines and into the bloodstream. 
Once in the bloodstream, these proteins are proposed to cause an 
immune response and impact functioning of the central nervous 
system resulting in social withdrawal and psychopathology. This 
notion was first presented by Dr. F. Curtis Dohan as a possible 
mechanism for schizophrenia following an experience in the 
south pacific (Dohan 1966). During his experience in Papua New 
Guinea and other South Pacific islands, he noted the reduced rate 
of schizophrenia and postulated the community diet that lacked 
gluten and casein might play a role. The theory behind the GFCF 
diet is that through the removal of the proteins that create the 
toxic peptides absorbed through the leaky gut, neuropathological 
symptoms can be ameliorated (Seim and Reichelt 1995). 

The Gluten-Free, Casein-Free Diet 79
 The connection between this diet and autism is based on the 
observation that increased amounts of opioid peptides based on 
food proteins have been found in individuals with autism (Reich-
elt and Knivsberg 2003) and that children with autism have in-
creased rates of gastrointestinal disorders (D’Eufemia et al. 1996). 
Several studies have demonstrated a greater incidence of gastro-
intestinal problems in autism, while others have shown no greater 
incidence than in control populations (Black, Kaye, and Jick 2002; 
Melmed et al. 2000). Taken as a whole the research in gastrointes-
tinal illness suggests that there is not a general relation between 
gastrointestinal disorders and autism, but that there may be a con-
nection in a subset of cases (Molloy and Manning-Courtney 2003). 
Although greater incidence of a “leaky gut” in autism remains un-
der debate, the dietary intervention is based upon this rationale. 
 Anecdotal reports fuel this argument for the effectiveness of 
this treatment. The impetus for pursuing GFCF interventions is 
based upon parental reports of the effectiveness. In a newsletter 
from the Autism Research Institute, one mother relays her child’s 
encounter with gluten and casein while on the diet. “He was averse 
to using a glue stick so his teacher rubbed it all over his palm so 
he could get used to the texture. Within the hour he was scream-
ing violently for the first time all year” (Autism Research Institute 
2009, p. 1). Reports such as this one in which parents conclude that 
behavioral disturbances are the result of exposure to gluten and 
casein are common in parent support groups and bolster support 
for GFCF as a treatment for autism. 
 The experimental studies that have been conducted examin-
ing the GFCF diet fail to demonstrate an effectiveness of this 
treatment in autism and controlled studies are recommended 
(Millward et al. 2008). There have been only few studies conducted 
and those that have been have reported findings on small samples 
and have not controlled for experimental biases. It is difficult to 
conduct well-designed dietary studies for many reasons. Firstly, 
it is difficult to maintain these diets because of the widespread 
use of gluten and casein in so many foods. That makes it difficult 
as an experimenter to monitor and maintain the diet as an ex-
perimental protocol. Secondly, although the diet is in widespread 
use, in order to conduct a controlled study it would be impor-
tant for scientists to randomly assign families to either the GFCF 
diet or nonrestricted diet. This requires recruiting families who 
have not had prior experience with the diet and families who are 
willing to either participate in the diet or not, based on random  

80 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
determination. The importance of having a large sample is that 
this allows for the generalizability of the results. If a study finds 
that a specific intervention is helpful for a small group of eight or 
nine children with autism it is difficult to conclude that it will be 
effective for all children with autism. Thirdly, as mentioned ear-
lier, the concept of blindness is important in scientific studies of 
treatments, but is hard to implement in dietary studies because it 
is challenging for parents and experimenters maintaining a spe-
cific diet for children to not know what types of food the children 
are consuming. 
 In a well-designed treatment study, research participants are 
tested on a number of variables that the treatment is believed to 
effect. In autism these variables may include aspects of autism 
symptomology such as cognitive ability, social ability, language 
ability, response to transitions, and frequency of repetitive behav-
iors. Often these abilities are measured by clinical observation and 
parent report. The assessment of these variables prior to admin-
istering the treatment is called the pretest assessment. Then, 
individuals are randomly assigned to one of at least two interven-
tions. In a GFCF diet intervention, this would mean having half of 
the children with autism being placed on the diet for a specified 
period of time while the other half receives a control diet. Fol-
lowing the dietary intervention, the pretest variables would be 
reassessed. This is called post-testing. If the post-testing reveals an 
improvement in abilities relative to pretesting in the children re-
ceiving the GFCF diet but not in the children receiving the control 
diet then researchers can conclude that the diet is effective. How-
ever, it is essential that the posttesting is conducted by individu-
als who do not know what intervention the research participant 
received. This “blindness” is essential to reduce subtle biases that 
inadvertently affect a clinician’s observation of the child or parent 
report. This “experimenter bias” could then skew the results and 
indicate a significant improvement in posttest scores relative to 
pretest scores, when in fact there is no difference. 
 This type of controlled study with blind raters, large samples, 
and random assignment has not been conducted on the GFCF diet 
and autism. As a result, it is not possible to comment on its effec-
tiveness yet. A preliminary study of this type of design has been 
conducted in a small group of 15 children with autism (Elder et al. 
2006). In this well designed study, the diet appeared to not have a 
significant effect on behavior. 

Conclusion 81
 Research is still needed to determine the effectiveness of the 
intervention. Although existing evidence suggests that the diet is 
not effective, at least for the majority of children with autism, a 
review of the scientific literature does not reveal any significant 
adverse effects (Millward et al. 2008). However, nutritional moni-
toring would be essential before embarking on a GFCF diet and 
the implementation of the diet without consideration of the nutri-
tional needs and status of the child could be harmful. It is impor-
tant to note that many children with autism have restricted food 
preferences to begin with, which makes implementing the diet and 
meeting nutritional needs even more difficult. This is especially 
relevant given that a study published in the  Journal of Autism and De-
velopmental Disorders  found thinner, less dense bones in boys with 
autism compared to typical peers, which the authors attributed to 
less exercise, digestive problems, more restricted diets, lack of vi-
tamin D, and reduced intake of casein due to diets in the children 
with autism (Hediger et al. 2008). 
 In summary, the effectiveness of the intervention remains un-
der debate. However, several small, well-designed research stud-
ies suggest it is ineffective for most children of autism. Clearly 
more research is needed in this area. While a review of the scientific 
literature indicates there is limited harm caused by the disorder, 
the importance of maintaining adequate nutrition is paramount 
and the time, money, and dedication required to maintain the diet 
could reduce time and money needed to facilitate treatments that 
have been shown to be effective. 
 Conclusion 
 The controversies that surround interventions in autism stem from 
the wishes of the autism community (parents, clinicians, teach-
ers, and scientists) to provide effective and efficient treatments. 
The controversies revolve around treatments that have limited 
validity as to their efficacy according to scientific examination, 
but that have strong testimonials from parents. Without a defini-
tive causal mechanism and corresponding intervention pathway, 
it leaves the door open for debate regarding therapeutic options. 
That is, options that could be ruled out if the active therapeutic 
ingredient ran counter to the causal mechanism of the disorder. 
At the root of many of the controversial treatments in autism is a 

82 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
controversial debate regarding the origin of the disorder. At the 
root of the chelation debate is the controversy regarding mercury 
and autism. At the root of the GFCF diet debate is the heated 
debate about gastrointestinal illness and autism. But there are ad-
ditional factors that set the scene for these controversies: the cul-
tural context influences both scientific and public ideas about 
causality of psychiatric disorders as it did in the 1950s and 1960s 
to support the refrigerator mother theory. The widespread avail-
ability of both information and misinformation can mislead and 
misguide the uninformed observer as happened with secretin. Fi-
nally, given the only empirically supported treatment, behavioral 
intervention, is costly, lengthy, and incredibly time consuming, it 
is difficult for parents to wait for the slow and meticulous pace of 
science. The scientific method’s value is in the process of peer re-
view, replication, and the careful administration of controlled stud-
ies. These all take considerable time. The method for translating 
scientific findings to clinicians and the public adds additional time 
and opens the door for miscommunication or communication that 
lacks the appeal of the testimony of a parent of a child with autism 
in the same position as the mothers and fathers seeking answers 
and directions for treatment of their child. Controversy is sure to 
erupt in these situations. 
 Even the notion of treating autism itself sparks controversy 
for some. Organizations have developed and activists have risen 
to promote the idea that individuals with autism do not need to be 
“cured” and that treatment is not needed as much as understand-
ing. Aspies for Freedom is one such organization that started in 
2004 to speak against abusive treatments and promote awareness 
of the advantages to having an ASD. On the Aspies for Freedom 
Web site, it states, “we know that autism is not a disease, and we 
oppose any attempts to ‘cure’ someone of an autism spectrum con-
dition, or any attempts to make them ‘normal’ against their will” 
(Aspies for Freedom, 2010). 
 There have been several controversies concerning autism 
since Leo Kanner first described 11 children with the disorder in 
1943. Debates concerning the cause of autism and the appropriate 
treatment of autism continue today. However, these controversies 
have not obstructed the forward movement and advancement of 
our understanding of autism. In many cases, the controversies 
have spurred on new findings and led to positive changes, such 
as the development of the first parent run advocacy program in 
support of parents first vilified as the cause of autism. 

References 83
 Much like Jimmy, the boy with autism who loved Harry 
Potter, and his family went through a developmental process, so 
too has the field of autism. Jimmy’s parents first noted that some-
thing was not quite typical about Jimmy’s development when his 
language developed slowly and he showed less interest in others 
than they expected. They sought out answers for what caused this 
from clinicians and through independent research into the avail-
able literature. They met with professionals and received a diag-
nosis of autism. Then they pursued treatment options with the 
same energy and devotion to their child as they did with identify-
ing what was causing their child’s social withdrawal and repeti-
tive behaviors. Throughout this process, they made advances and 
had setbacks, but always they moved forward for the betterment 
of Jimmy and their family. So, too, has the field of autism moved 
forward with advances and setbacks as the field has worked to 
answer the questions about what caused autism and what should 
we do about it. 
 References 
 American Academy of Pediatrics. 1999. “Joint Statement of the 
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the United States Public 
Health Service (USPHS)”  Pediatrics  104 (3): 568 – 69. 
 Aspies for Freedom. 2010. “Index Page.” http://www.aspiesforfreedom.
com. 
 Autism National Committee. 2008. “Autism National Committee 
(Autcom) Policy and Principles Regarding Facilitated Communication.”  
http://www.autcom.org/articles/PPFC.pdf. 
 Autism Research Institute. 2009. “Why My Child Is on a Special Diet.” 
http://www.autism.com/families/diet/GFCF_science.pdf. 
 Bailey, A., A. Bailey, A. Le Couteur, I. Gottesman, P. Bolton, E. Simonoff, 
E. Yuzda, and M. Rutter, 1995. “Autism as a Strongly Genetic Disorder: 
Evidence from a British Twin Study.”  Psychological Medicine  25 (1): 63 –77. 
 Bell, C. 1977.  Principles and Applications of Metal Chelation. Oxford, U.K.: 
Clarendon Press. 
 Bernard, S., A. Enayati, L. Redwood, H. Roger, and T. Binstock. 2001. 
“Autism: A Novel Form of Mercury Poisoning.”  Medical Hypotheses  
56 (4): 462–71. 
 Bettelheim, B. 1967.  The Empty Fortress: Infantile Autism and the Birth of 
the Self. New York: The Free Press. 

84 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
 Black, C., J. Kaye, and H. Jick. 2002. “Relation of Childhood Gastro-
intestinal Disorders to Autism: Nested Case-control Study Using Data 
from the U.K. General Practice Research Database.”  British Medical 
Journal 325 (7361): 419–21. 
 Boseley, S. 1999. “Parents’ Fear Puts Britain at Risk of Rubella 
Epidemic.”  Guardian, March 19, 1999. http://www.guardian.co.uk/
uk/1999/mar/19/sarahboseley. 
 Bradstreet, J. , D. Geier, J. Kartzinel, J. Adams, and M. Geier. 2003. 
“A Case-Control Study of Mercury Burden in Children with Autistic 
Spectrum Disorders.”  Journal of American Physicians and Surgeons  8 (3): 
76–79. 
 Carrey, J. 2009. “The Judgment on Vaccines Is In???”  Huffington Post . 
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/jim-carrey/the-judgment-on-
vaccines_b_189777.html. 
 Cedillo v. Secretary of Health and Human Services Case No. 98-916v . 2009. 
“Decision Statement.” United States Court of Federal Claims. 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2006. “Deaths Associated 
with Hypocalcemia from Chelation Therapy—Texas, Pennsylvania, and 
Oregon, 2003–2005.”  Journal of the American Medical Association  295 (18): 
2131–33. 
 CNN. 2008. “Vaccine Case Draws New Attention to Autism Debate.” 
 CNNhealth.com, http://www.cnn.com/2008/health/conditions/03/06/
vaccines.autism/index.html#cnnSTCvideo. 
 Cohen, M. H., and D. M. Eisenberg. 2002. “Potential Physician 
Malpractice Liability Associated with Complementary and Integrative 
Medical Therapies.”  Annals of Internal Medicine  136 (8): 596–603. 
 Dawson, G. 2008. “Statement by Dr. Geri Dawson Chief Science Officer, 
Autism Speaks.” Autism Speaks. http://www.autismspeaks.org/
dawson_statement_vaccine_case.php. 
 Deer, B. 2009. “MMR Doctor Andrew Wakefield Fixed Data on Autism.” 
 Sunday Times, February 8, 2009. 
 DeNoon, D. 2008. “Thimerosal Down but Autism Rising: Removal of 
Mercury from Child Vaccines Fails to Halt Autism Increase.”  WebMD 
Health News . http://www.webmd.com/brain/autism/news/20090212/
vaccine-court-rejects-autism-claims. 
 Department of Developmental Services. 1999.  Changes in the Population 
of Persons with Autism and Pervasive Developmental Disorders in California’s 
Developmental Services System: 1987 through 1998. Sacramento, CA: 
California Department of Developmental Services. 

References 85
 Derbyshire, D., and C Brahic. 2002. “Scientists Challenge Claims of 
Steep Rise in Autism.”  Telegraph (UK), September 6, 2002. 
 D’Eufemia, P., M. Celli, R. Finocchiaro, L. Pacifico, L. Viozzi, 
M. Zaccagnini, E. Cardi, and O. Giardini. 1996. “Abnormal Intestinal 
Permeability in Children with Autism.”  Acta Paediatrica  85 (9): 1076 –79. 
 Dohan, F. C. 1966. “Cereals and Schizophrenia Data and Hypothesis.” 
 Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica  42 (2): 125–52. 
 Edelson, S. 2008. “The Secretin Story: Still a Promising Treatment for 
Autism.”  Autism Research Review International  22 (2): 3, 6. 
 Elder, J. H., M. Shankar, J. Shuster, D. Theriaque, S. Burns, and 
L. Sherrill. 2006. “The Gluten-Free, Casein-Free Diet in Autism: Results 
of a Preliminary Double Blind Clinical Trial.”  Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders  36 (3): 413–20. 
 Filipek, P. A., P. J. Accardo, G. T. Baranek, E. H. Cook Jr., G. Dawson, 
B. Gordon, J. S. Gravel, et al. 1999. “The Screening and Diagnosis of 
Autistic Spectrum Disorders.”  Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders  29 (6): 439–84. 
 Folstein, S., and M. Rutter. 1977. “Infantile Autism: A Genetic Study 
of 21 Twin Pairs.”  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  18 (4): 
297–321. 
 Freitag, C. M. 2007. “The Genetics of Autistic Disorders and Its Clinical 
Relevance: A Review of the Literature.”  Molecular Psychiatry  12 (1): 2–22. 
 Generation Rescue. 2009. “Index Page.” http://www.generationrescue.org. 
 Geschwind, D. H. 2009. “Advances in Autism.”  Annual Review of 
Medicine  60:367–80. 
 Grinker, R. 2007.  Unstrange Minds: Remapping the World of Autism. New 
York: Basic Books. 
 Harris, G. 2008. “Measles Cases Grow in Number and Officials Blame 
Parents’ Fear of Autism.”  New York Times, August 21, 2008. 
 Hazelhurst v. Secretary of Health and Human Services Case No. 03-654v.  
2009. “Decision Statement.” United States Court of Federal Claims. 
 Hediger, M. L., L. J. England, C. A. Molloy, K. F. Yu, P. Manning-
Courtney, and J. L. Mills. 2008. “Reduced Bone Cortical Thickness in 
Boys with Autism or Autism Spectrum Disorder.”  Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders  38 (5): 848–56. 
 Horton, R. 2004. “The Lessons of MMR.”  Lancet  363 (9411): 747–49. 
 Horvath, K., G. Stefanatos, K. N. Sokolski, R. Wachtel, L. Nabors, and 
J. T. Tildon. 1998. “Improved Social and Language Skills after Secretin 

86 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
Administration in Patients with Autistic Spectrum Disorders.”  Journal of 
the Association for Academic Minority Physicians  9 (1): 9–15. 
 Institute of Medicine. 2004. “Immunization Safety Review: Vaccines and 
Autism.” Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press. 
 Kanner, L. 1943. “Autistic Disturbances of Affective Contact.”  Nervous 
Child  2:217–50. 
 Kirby, D. 2005.  Evidence of Harm: Mercury in Vaccines and the Autism 
Epidemic: A Medical Controversy. New York: St. Martin’s Press. 
 Larson, J. 2006. “The Unorthodox Practice of Chelation.”  Dateline, edited 
by NBC News. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/13102473/. 
 Lilienfeld, S., and H. Arkowitz. 2007. “Is There Really an Autism 
Epidemic?”  Scientific American 17: 58–61. 
 Lister, S. 2009. “Steep Rise in Measles Blamed on MMR Scare.”  Times 
Online, February 6, 2009. http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/life_and_
style/health/child_health/article5674974.ece. 
 McCarthy, J., and J. Carrey. 2008. “Jenny McCarthy: My Son’s Recovery 
from Autism.”  CNN, http://www.cnn.com/2008/US/04/02/mccarthy.
autsimtreatment/index.html. 
 McLellan, D. 1999. “Andrew Awakes.”  Ladies Home Journal 116: 
162–66. 
 Melmed, R., C. Schneider, R. Fabes, J. Phillips, and K. Reichelt. 2000. 
“Metabolic Markers and Gastrointestinal Symptoms in Children with 
Autism and Related Disorders.”  Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and 
Nutrition 3: S31–S32. 
 Millward, C., M. Ferriter, S. Calver, and G. Connell-Jones. 2008. “Gluten- 
and Casein-Free Diets for Autistic Spectrum Disorder (Review).” 
 Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,  Issue 2: 1–14. 
 Molloy, C. A., and P. Manning-Courtney. 2003. “Prevalence of Chronic 
Gastrointestinal Symptoms in Children with Autism and Autistic 
Spectrum Disorders.”  Autism  7 (2): 165–71. 
 Morrice, P. 2005. “What Caused the Autism Epidemic?”  New York Times, 
April 17, 2005. 
 Murch, S., A. Anthony, D. Casson, M. Malik, M. Berelowitz, A. Dhillon, 
M. Thomson, A. Valentine, S. Davies, and J. Walker-Smith. 2004. 
“Retraction of an Interpretation.”  Lancet 363 (9411): 750. 
 Offit, P. 2008.  Autism’s False Prophets: Bad Science, Risky Medicine, and the 
Search for a Cure. New York City: Columbia University Press. 
 Pauley, J. 1998. “Breaking the Silence.”  Dateline NBC, October 7, 
1998. 

References 87
 Reichelt, K. L., and A. M. Knivsberg. 2003. “Can the Pathophysiology of 
Autism Be Explained by the Nature of the Discovered Urine Peptides?” 
 Nutritional Neuroscience  6 (1): 19–28. 
 Research Units on Pediatric Psychopharmacology Autism Network. 
2002. “Risperidone in Children with Autism and Serious Behavioral 
Problems.”  New England Journal of Medicine 347 (5): 314–21. 
 Rimland, B. 1964.  Infantile Autism. New York: Appleton-Century-Crafts. 
 Rogers, L. 2004. “Scientists Desert MMR Maverick.”  Sunday Times (UK), 
March 7, 2004. 
 Sandler, A. D., K. A. Sutton, J. DeWeese, M. A. Girardi, V. Sheppard, 
and J. W. Bodfish. 1999. “Lack of Benefit of a Single Dose of 
Synthetic Human Secretin in the Treatment of Autism and Pervasive 
Developmental Disorder.”  New England Journal of Medicine  341 (24): 
1801–6. 
 Schechter, R., and J. K. Grether. 2008. “Continuing Increases in Autism 
Reported to California’s Developmental Services System: Mercury in 
Retrograde.”  Archives of General Psychiatry  65 (1): 19–24. 
 Schreibman, L. 2005.  The Science and Fiction of Autism. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
 Seim, A. R., and K. L. Reichelt. 1995. “An Enzyme/Brain-Barrier Theory 
of Psychiatric Pathogenesis: Unifying Observations on Phenylketonuria, 
Autism, Schizophrenia and Postpartum Psychosis.”  Medical Hypotheses 
 45 (5): 498–502. 
 Shapiro, H., ed. 1998. “Secretin Discussion.” In  Pediatric Development 
and Behavior.  Developmental-Behavioral Pediatrics Online Community. 
http://www.dbpeds.org. 
 Shattuck, P. T., M. Durkin, M. Maenner, C. Newschaffer, D. S. 
Mandell, L. Wiggins, L. C. Lee, et al. 2009. “Timing of Identification 
among Children with an Autism Spectrum Disorder: Findings from a 
Population-Based Surveillance Study.”  Journal of the American Academy 
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry  48 (5): 474–83. 
 Sinha, Y., N. Silove, and K. Williams. 2006. “Chelation Therapy and 
Autism.”  British Medical Journal  333 (7571): 756. 
 Snyder v. Secretary of Health and Human Services Case No. 01-162v. 2009. 
“Decision Statement.” United States Court of Federal Claims. 
 Stangle, D. E., D. R. Smith, S. A. Beaudin, M. S. Strawderman, 
D. A. Levitsky, and B. J. Strupp. 2007. “Succimer Chelation Improves 
Learning, Attention, and Arousal Regulation in Lead-Exposed Rats 
but Produces Lasting Cognitive Impairment in the Absence of Lead 
Exposure.”  Environmental Health Perspectives  115 (2): 201–9. 

88 Controversies, Problems, and Solutions in the Field of ASD 
 Sturmey, P. 2005. “Secretin Is an Ineffective Treatment for Pervasive 
Developmental Disabilities: A Review of 15 Double-Blind Randomized 
Controlled Trials.”  Research in Developmental Disabilities  26 (1): 87– 97. 
 Taylor, Z. 2007. “Autism Epidemic Being Ignored.”  Daily Telegraph (AU), 
May 12, 2007. 
 Wadman, M. 2008. “Autism Study Panned by Critics.”  Nature  453 
(7202): 259. 
 Wakefield, A. J. 2009. “In His Desperation, Deer Gets It Wrong Again.” 
 Age of Autism: Daily Web Newspaper of the Autism Epidemic,  http://www.
rescuepost.com/files/deer-response.pdf. 
 Wallis, C. 2007. “Is the Autism Epidemic a Myth?”  Time, January 12, 2007. 
 Wallis, C. 2008. “Case Study: Autism and Vaccines.”  Time.com, March 10, 
2008. http://www.time.com/time/health/article/0,8599,1721109,00.
html. 
 Wegner, D., V. Fuller, and B. Sparrow. 2003. “Clever Hands: Uncon-
trolled Intelligence in Facilitated Communication.”  Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology 85 (1): 5–19. 
 Wiggins, L. D., J. Baio, and C. Rice. 2006. “Examination of the Time 
between First Evaluation and First Autism Spectrum Diagnosis in 
a Population-Based Sample.”  Journal of Developmental and Behavioral 
Pediatrics  27 (2, Suppl.): S79–S87. 
 Wiggins, L., C. Rice, and J. Baio. 2009. “Developmental Regression in 
Children with an Autism Spectrum Disorder Identified by a Population-
Based Surveillance System.”  Autism  13 (4): 357–74. 

89
 3 
 Worldwide and Cultural 
Perspectives in ASD 
 Introduction 
 Individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) represent a het-
erogeneous population and come from a large variety of cultural 
backgrounds. Research has suggested that, aside from a well-
documented differential male-to-female sex ratio of 4:1, the diag-
nosis occurs approximately equally across ethnicities and cultures 
(Bertrand et al. 2001; Department of Health and Human Services 
2002). Additionally, the behavioral manifestation of the disorder ap-
pears to be similar across cultures and countries. No studies to date 
have reported significant ethnic differences in symptom presenta-
tion (Mandell and Novak 2005). However, much variation exists 
both across and within cultures in terms of the acceptance of an 
ASD diagnosis, appraisal of its etiology, views on sources of family 
support, and availability and acceptability of treatment options. 
 Culture is a complex concept with many different in depth 
meanings. In this chapter, culture will be defined as a set of per-
ceptions, beliefs, values and/or behaviors that are passed on from 
generation to generation via a shared context, such as a common 
language, history, or geographic location (Hays 2005). Cultural 
influence is a powerful aspect of an individual’s development of 
identity, kinship, and views about the world. Culture is also com-
monly confused with other related terms. For instance, it is often 
used interchangeably with  race  and  ethnicity. However, culture 
does not imply a shared biology, as has often been the case with 
many definitions of the latter two terms. 
 The definition of race has been a controversial topic for some 
time. The concept of race originated from European scientists in 

90 Worldwide and Cultural Perspectives in ASD 
order to categorize people into genetically related groups based on 
geography and certain physical characteristics, such as skin color 
and facial features (Hays 2005). Unfortunately, this proved to serve 
as a basis for hierarchically classifying individuals in society based 
purely on physical features. Additionally, it failed to take into ac-
count the huge variation of physical characteristics observed within 
racial groups. For example, the range of skin tones in persons of Af-
rican descent typically varies from very dark to very light and 
there is often overlap between Anglo Americans with darker skin 
and African Americans of lighter skin. In recent years, some racial 
categories (e.g., African American) have come to also imply a sense 
of heritage and shared social history in addition to (or, in fact, in-
stead of) physical characteristics. 
 Hays (2005, p. 12) defines ethnicity as a shared ancestry in-
volving communal values and customs that are “generally under-
stood to involve some shared biological heritage, [but] its more 
important aspects in terms of individuals and group identify are 
those that are socially constructed (e.g., beliefs, norms, behavior, 
and institutions).” 
 Research examining cultural factors in ASD is slim and has not 
received abundant financial or research attention. A number of rea-
sons exist for the lack of priority given to this aspect of ASD. The 
frequently disabling and pervasive nature of the disorder may pre-
vent cultural factors from being adequately considered due to the 
multitude of other issues (e.g., diagnostic process, treatment plan-
ning, and associated medical symptoms) that families, providers, 
and researchers are forced to manage. Additionally, well-replicated 
findings in the past three decades have revealed the disorder’s 
strong roots in biological processes, including genetic factors and 
neurological functions. Therefore, cultural environment  may be 
assumed to play no role in the disorder because biology appears 
to be very influential in its development. However, although actual 
symptoms of biologically based diseases may be comparable across 
cultures, how the symptoms are described, interpreted, and ac-
cepted into society varies widely. Consider cancer as an exam-
ple. Actual physical symptoms of cancer are generally the same 
whether a person has the disease in Uruguay, Ghana, or China. 
But how the patient and his/her family within these various cul-
tures understands, labels, and responds to the disease may be in-
credibly different. While more developed countries may quickly 
label the group of symptoms as “cancer” or a linguistic equivalent 
and treat with chemotherapy, others may view the symptoms as 

Prevalence Rates 91
spiritual punishment and treat with herbal remedies or religious 
interventions. Views and knowledge about ASD are variable both 
across countries and in cultures and ethnicities within countries 
such as the United States. 
 Macro cultural factors (i.e., factors occurring at the dominant 
culture level affecting the majority of people in that society) can play 
a large role in the level of functioning and outcome of an individ-
ual with ASD. Such factors include availability of services, cultural 
acceptance of the disorder, and existence of national and/or state-
funded treatment options. In addition to larger macro cultural fac-
tors, individual response and acceptance of the diagnosis varies 
at a micro cultural level within families. Prior to the first ASD ge-
netic findings in 1977 (Folstein and Rutter 1977), a commonly held 
position was that family culture, particularly cold, aloof parenting 
style, was responsible for the development of ASD in an individ-
ual. This Refrigerator Mother Theory, which has been discussed 
at length in previous chapters, has been disproved as a causal fac-
tor in ASD. However, although maternal behavior and parenting 
style are clearly not related to the  occurrence of ASD in their child, 
parental response to receiving the diagnosis, family views about 
ASD, and chosen next steps make an impact on the child’s prog-
nosis. Therefore, in addition to a consideration of larger cultural 
factors potentially affecting the prognosis of a child, family-specific 
factors are influential as well. 
 Prevalence Rates 
 ASD is a disorder that knows no cultural boundaries and appears 
to occur at approximately equal rates across countries, ethnicities 
within a country, and social classes. Additionally, rates of diagnosis 
are increasing at comparable percentages across these various 
cultures. Although controversy has existed, and continues to exist, 
about differential occurrence in, for instance, families within upper 
socioeconomic status (SES) and families immigrating from other 
countries, overall scientific evidence continues to point toward an 
equal distribution of ASD across all cultures. 
 Epidemiological Studies 
 The field of epidemiology studies the distribution of disease in 
human populations and influential factors in the presentation of the 

92 Worldwide and Cultural Perspectives in ASD 
disorder. Important measures of disease within the field include 
“incidence rates,” which refers to the number of new cases occur-
ring over a period of time, and “prevalence rates” signifying the 
proportion of subjects who, at a given point in time, have a dis-
ease. The vast majority of epidemiological studies of ASD have 
been cross-sectional in nature and report prevalence rates. There-
fore, these studies will be included in the discussion. 
 Dr. Eric Fombonne, a prominent epidemiologist and ASD ex-
pert, conducted a review of epidemiological studies of ASD in 2005. 
Using surveys from a range of countries, he found international 
median prevalence rates of ASD to be 13/10,000 for autistic dis-
order, 21/10,000 for Pervasive Developmental Disorders—Not 
Otherwise Specified (PDD-NOS), and 2.6/10,000 for Asperger’s 
Disorder (Fombonne 2005). Some reported estimates range from 
22/10,000 in the United Kingdom (Chakrabarti and Fombonne 
2005), to 7.2/10,000 in Denmark (Madsen et al. 2002), to 13.2/10,000 
in Iceland (Magnusson and Saemundsen 2001), to 66/10,000 in the 
United States (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2007). 
In his review, Fombonne (2005) found that prevalence rates were 
related to sample size such that studies with fewer participants re-
ported higher prevalence rates. Additionally, there was a large de-
gree of variability in samples, even within the same country due 
to different methodologies used in the epidemiological studies. 
How the diagnosis is made and ability to capture more subtle di-
agnoses such as Asperger’s Disorder and PDD-NOS, varies across 
countries as well. Fombonne (2005, p. 289) suggests that “epide-
miological surveys of ASD each possess unique design features, 
which could account almost entirely for between-studies varia-
tions in rates,” implying that the true prevalence rates are likely 
comparable across countries. 
 Difficulty in obtaining prevalence rates in some countries is 
common due to a variety of factors, such as increased childhood 
mortality, poverty, and health issues. Many cultures may not rec-
ognize ASD as a disorder or may group these individuals under 
another category.   A lack of consistent health records in some coun-
tries makes data on the prevalence of ASD or associated risk fac-
tors unavailable. Additionally, as will be discussed in subsequent 
sections of this chapter, cultural beliefs and practices often impact 
recognition and integration of ASD into society. Therefore, some 
individuals with ASD may be missed and true estimates impacted 
in epidemiological studies. 

Prevalence Rates 93
 Immigrant Status 
 There has been some debate concerning increased rates of ASD di-
agnosis among individuals whose parents have immigrant status 
(e.g., Gillberg et al. 1987; Wing 1980). More recently, increased prev-
alence of ASD in Somali immigrants has been reported in Sweden 
(Barnevik-Olsson, Gillberg, and Fernell 2008) as well as more in-
formal reports in the United States from the state of Minnesota 
(see Minnesota’s Department of Health fact sheet, http://www.
health.state.mn.us/ommh/projects/autism/reportfs090331.pdf ). 
However, Fombonne states that evidence for increased ASD rates 
in individuals with immigrant status is inconclusive given the vari-
ability of results across studies and relatively small sample sizes 
found in many surveys. Large-scale epidemiological estimates do 
not support the finding of increased prevalence rates in immigrant 
families. For example, Croen and colleagues (2002) reported on 
prevalence rates of “full syndrome ASD” (which excluded diag-
noses of Asperger’s Disorder, PDD-NOS, Childhood Disintegra-
tive Disorder, and Rett’s Disorder) in the state of California in birth 
cohorts over the course of a seven-year period. Prevalence rates 
were approximately equal across ethnic and racial groups, includ-
ing families with immigrant status. Fombonne (2007) summarizes 
his and many other expert’s view by stating that, “the hypoth-
esis of an association between immigrant status or race and 
ASD, therefore, remains largely unsupported by the empirical re-
sults” (p. 60). 
 Social Class 
 In Leo Kanner’s original work describing individuals with ASD, he 
observed “There is one other very interesting common denomina-
tor in the backgrounds of these children.  They all come of highly intel-
ligent families ” (1943, p. 248). Although Dr. Kanner’s statement refers 
to the parents’ intelligence, he did not actually conduct cognitive/
intelligence testing with them. Instead, he went on to describe their 
educational background and various professions, such as physi-
cian, lawyers, and professors. Articles in the 1960s and 1970s from 
the United Kingdom, Denmark, Japan, and the United States also 
found elevated rates of ASD in families with higher levels of educa-
tion who were of upper SES (e.g., Lotter 1966; Treffert 1970). 
 However, acquisition of participants in earlier epidemiological 
studies partially depended on families’ access to services. Since 

94 Worldwide and Cultural Perspectives in ASD 
families of higher SES can access services more readily than those 
of lower SES, it is likely that the association between ASD diagno-
sis and higher SES is an artifact of attainment bias in the studies 
(Fombonne 2007). More recent estimates with more rigorous and 
comprehensive methodology find no association with parent edu-
cation or SES and ASD diagnosis (e.g., Croen et al. 2002). This sug-
gests that ASD affects individuals of all socioeconomic backgrounds 
at an equal rate. 
 Cultural Influences in Mental Disorders 
 Cultural factors influencing perception, treatment options, and re-
sponse to diagnosis have received little research attention in the 
field of ASD relative to other areas. The majority of ASD studies do 
not include culture as a significant variable nor do they attempt to 
include individuals from diverse cultural groups (Mary 1990). How-
ever, inferences about cultural impacts in ASD can be drawn from 
research within other fields and/or disorders related to ASD. ASD 
is considered to be a developmental disability, classified under the 
category of mental disorders. 
 Within the United States and elsewhere, cultural sensitivity in 
diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders has been an increasing 
area of emphasis due to significant concerns about the disparities 
in access to and availability of mental health care for racial and eth-
nic minorities (Department of Health and Human Services 2001). 
For example, African American children in the United States and 
their families are less likely to seek out and use mental health ser-
vices compared to other groups (Cooper-Patrick et al. 1999; Diala 
et al. 2000). Furthermore, once African American families are in 
mental health treatment, they more often report having negative 
experiences (Diala et al. 2000) and remain in therapy for a shorter 
period of time than Anglo Americans ( Bui and Takeuchi 1992; Cuffe 
et al. 1995). Many Asian Americans experience shame and disgrace 
when acknowledging that emotional problems have brought them 
to seek mental health services instead of handling the problems 
themselves, within the family environment (Sue and Sue 2008). Such 
cultural factors often discourage Asian Americans from pursuing 
mental health treatment at all. 
 With respect to children, Lau et al. (2004) found that Asian 
American and African American parents less often agreed with 
teacher concerns that their children’s challenging classroom behav-

Cultural Factors Related to Developmental Disabilities  95
iors were a result of an underlying disorder (instead of a variation 
of normal behavior) than Anglo American parents. Therefore, some 
families from nondominant cultures may be less likely to inter-
pret their child’s behaviors as problematic. If they do not perceive 
the child’s behaviors to be interfering with functioning, then they 
will, naturally, less often seek treatment or services for said behav-
iors. Parents of children from low-income and minority groups 
may more often be less educated, lack access to information, and 
experience greater exclusion from educational services (Bennett 
1988; Harry 1992). These factors put them at risk for less knowl-
edge about and access to services. 
 The use of cultural sensitivity in the diagnosis and treatment 
of mental disorders has been shown to be effective in helping to 
establish and maintain positive clinical relationships. Cultural sen-
sitivity is defined by O’Donohue (2005) as knowledge of which cul-
tures a client/family belong, comfort with some basic facts about 
social rules and customs within these cultures, and knowing when 
it is appropriate to apply such rules. Consultation with a member 
of the client/family’s within a clinician’s profession is also recom-
mended to ensure culturally sensitive care. 
 Cultural Factors Related to 
Developmental Disabilities 
 In addition to existing discrepancies in the use of mental health 
services, differences also exist in how developmental disabilities 
specifically are diagnosed and treated among ethnic groups. Fam-
ily adaptation to their child’s condition, views on its etiology, and 
the impact of religion and social support on family functioning can 
vary widely. 
 Family Adaptation 
 Much is known about family adaptation to raising a child with 
developmental disabilities (Seligman 1999) and, as discussed in Dy-
ches, Wilder, and Obiakor (2001), ethnicity is beginning to be con-
sidered as a significant factor in a family’s adjustment to children 
in the family with developmental disabilities. Parallels can be 
drawn between general developmental delays and ASD, but cau-
tion should be used because of stressors that differentiate ASD 

96 Worldwide and Cultural Perspectives in ASD 
from other developmental disabilities. Modal cultural views and 
responses will be described, but specific family adaptation will, 
of course, vary depending on the particular child’s strengths and 
challenges and individual family response. 
 Dyches, Wilder, and Obiakor (2001) describe the Resiliency 
Model of Family Stress, Adjustment, and Adaptation (“Resiliency 
Model”), which was originally developed as a means to explore 
how ethnicity and culture come into play in the adaptation of fami-
lies with low income to life stressors. This model was first pres-
ented by McCubbin et al. (1998) and emphasizes ethnic and culture 
factors as influential in the development of new patterns of func-
tioning and reestablishment of balance within a family following a 
family stressor. A stressor does not necessarily have to be perceived 
as negative. Graduating from high school, changing jobs, and, 
perhaps, receiving a diagnosis of a developmental disability in a 
youngster can be interpreted as positive stressful life events. 
 Family Appraisal 
 Family appraisal or determination of the gravity of the stressor is 
a component of the adjustment phase of the Resiliency Model. In 
this case, the stressor of the diagnosis of a developmental disability 
may be appraised differently across cultures. As described in Dy-
ches, Wilder, and Obiakor (2001), a negative appraisal often arises 
when the medical model is applied—that “something is wrong” 
or “diseased” in individuals with developmental disabilities that 
needs to be “fixed.” The application of this medical model often 
occurs with Anglo Americans living in the United States. Even 
the English word  disability reflects the medical model, focusing on 
abilities that are “not” there. Negative appraisals about the origin 
of developmental disabilities also occur in cultures such as Mo-
javes (Green, Sack, and Pambrum 1981) and Navajos (Connors and 
Donnellan 1998) where it is believed that a child’s disabilities stem 
from the parents’ transgressions. Shame is often associated with 
diagnoses of developmental disabilities and mental health disor-
ders in modal Asian cultures (Sue and Sue 2008). Stigma about dis-
abilities is also a concern in Middle Eastern countries, such as the 
United Arab Emirates. Feelings of shame about the diagnosis and 
related challenges are common in parents, particularly fathers. Yet, 
mothers in one study appeared to be resolved to provide the best 
care possible for their children (Crabtree 2007). 

Cultural Factors Related to Developmental Disabilities  97
 Native Hawaiian and Native American cultures tend to focus 
more on the child’s abilities that  are  present and his/her “normal” 
behavior (whatever degree is present) rather than  dis abilities and 
unusual behaviors (McCubbin, Thompson et al. 1998). Many low-
income African American families are less likely to consider their 
child with a disability to be a significant burden as compared 
to Anglo Americans and report experiencing positive gains and 
personal growth from their child with a disability. Reports suggest 
that as the child with the disability reaches adulthood, they would 
prefer to keep him/her at home rather than obtaining outward help 
through a group home or more structured residential care (Heller 
and Factor 1988; McCallion, Janicki, and Grant-Griffin 1997; Val-
entine, McDermott, and Anderson 1998). Yet another study with 
African American families reported that families feared the stigma 
of a diagnosis (Pruchno, Patrick, and Burant 1997). 
 Appraisal can vary within cultures as well. Latino women from 
a younger generation have been reported to view a child with a dis-
ability as a blessing and an opportunity to rise to the challenge of 
bringing up a special child whereas older generations in the Latino 
culture may believe the child to be a punishment for wrongdoing 
(Skinner et al. 1999). 
 Religion 
 Religious beliefs are also an important cultural factor to consider as 
influential in a family’s adjustment to a developmental disability 
such as ASD. In modal American culture, the consideration of reli-
gion and/or spirituality in the care of a child with special needs rep-
resents a divergence from the typical practice of separating church 
from state. However, religion can and often does play an important 
role in the coping process of families with a child with a disability. 
Religion may serve as both a source spiritual support and informal 
support through religious institutions (Tarakeshwar and Pargament 
2001). It also influences child-rearing practices and helps to define 
the role of the help-giver and the nature of “help” itself. 
 One study compared religious perspectives among Latino 
families who had children with developmental disabilities. Those 
families whose religious perspectives were likely to encourage the 
belief that having a child with a developmental disability is a pun-
ishment from God for sins were impacted more negatively than 
those families whose religious perception was that the child was 
special and “chosen” by God (Gannotti et al. 2001). Religions 

98 Worldwide and Cultural Perspectives in ASD 
associated with modal African American culture emphasize accep-
tance and importance of all children and may be more likely to 
encourage a positive appraisal of ASD (Rogers-Dulan and Blacher 
1995). A female caregiver from an African American family who 
had a child with a disability commented, “They [the people at 
church] treat her like there wasn’t nothing wrong with her. They 
treat her like us. Like regular—like they would treat others” (Ter-
hune 2005, p. 21). 
 However, views on religion can vary within a cultural group. 
A number of low-income African American women (e.g., mothers, 
aunts, etc.) who were primary caregivers for family members with 
disabilities were interviewed about their experience raising an in-
dividual with a disability (Terhune 2005). The influence of “God” 
came up in every interview in relation to the women’s experience 
of raising a child with a disability. However, the particular type of 
influence God had on the caregivers varied. 
 A subgroup of women in this study, those with a more “secu-
lar discourse” as labeled by the author, viewed God as a distant, 
judgmental figure who had no direct influence on the occurrence 
of positive events in their lives (Terhune 2005). They tended to rely 
on services from professionals such as educational and treatment 
providers to support the child with special needs. In contrast, those 
women who reported having a more intimate relationship with 
God viewed Him as benevolent, caring, and actively involved in 
their day-to-day lives. One mother stated, “What my faith has 
done for me is to help me to know that that light that I keep say-
ing I see is there. And it is going to come forth. I don’t believe she 
[my child with a disability] was put into our lives just by happen-
stance” (Terhune 2005, p. 21). These women tended to view the 
challenges associated with raising the child as manageable and 
more often focused on the “blessings” in their lives, such as good re-
spite care and a positive school classroom. In summary, for some 
individuals within a culture, having a strong faith can be benefi-
cial in terms of support to manage the routine stress in life. Oth-
ers, however, may not experience religious faith in the same way 
and may rely instead on professionals as the primary care provid-
ers and source of support. 
 Social Support 
 According to Dyches, Wilder, and Obiakor (2001), another compo-
nent of the adjustment phase of the Resiliency Model that is relevant 

Cultural Factors Related to Developmental Disabilities  99
to adjustment to disabilities is the use of social support, including 
family, friends, neighbors, and community supports such as church 
and parent support groups. Type and level of social support var-
ies widely across cultures. Many cultures, such as modal Native 
Hawaiian (McCubbin, Thompson et al. 1998), Filipino (McCubbin, 
Thompson et al. 1998), Latino (Blacher et al. 1997), and African 
American (Pruchno, Patrick, and Burant 1997) cultures emphasize a 
broader cooperation among family members (both immediate and 
extended) and members of the community to care for an individ-
ual in need. Caregiver stress is often perceived to be lower in these 
groups, perhaps due to the shared provision of care for the child 
with disabilities. 
 An approach for provision of services that may be particu-
larly relevant for groups who rely heavily upon broader social 
supports is called Family-Centered Practice. Family-Centered Prac-
tice involves prioritizing the choices of the family to drive the de-
livery of services, rather than delivery based on preferences of the 
system (and associated professionals) and child-specific needs. It 
recognizes that the family is the constant in the child’s life while 
the service systems and personnel within those systems fluctuate. 
Family-Centered Practice is more flexible than more traditional 
forms of service delivery and encourages constant reflection upon 
the best treatment options possible for the particular family. It may, 
for example, involve offering choices to families and empowering 
the family to help decide the best course of action for their child. In-
teraction with and inclusion of professionals, caregivers, and com-
munity support (e.g., close friends, members of their church, and 
support group leaders) in treatment planning is essential. Many 
families report that informal social support through parents of 
other children with disabilities, close friends and family, and other 
community supports is more influential than professional support. 
Therefore, helping the family to activate informal social supports 
is considered to be an important component of Family-Centered 
Practice. 
 One randomized, controlled trial examined outcomes and 
follow-up support for high risk infants during the first year of life 
(Affleck et al. 1989). One arm of the study offered weekly in-home 
visits from professionals while another arm of the study involved 
treatment as usual, without regularly scheduled in-home visits. 
Results suggested that for families in the in-home visit group who 
had an informal social support network in place, weekly visits were 
often viewed as a burden and poor use of their time. For families 

100 Worldwide and Cultural Perspectives in ASD 
with low levels of informal social support, these visits were per-
ceived more positively. Affleck and colleagues’ (1989) results can 
be extended to the field ASD such that for families of children 
with ASD who have in tact informal support, less professional ser-
vices may be warranted. Making those families without much so-
cial support aware of supports available in their community, such 
as parent-led support groups for families of children with ASD, 
may be helpful. Overall, Family-Centered Practice involving an 
assessment of the level of social support available to families 
would be beneficial to providing the most effective support for 
the individual family. 
 Cognitive Testing 
 Although access to and use of mental health providers is lower in 
racial and ethnic minorities, studies have found that ethnic minor-
ity groups are overrepresented in public special education pro-
grams (Harry et al. 1995). In order to qualify for special education 
services in school, cognitive and other related types of testing are 
conducted to determine eligibility for school-provided services. 
Much controversy exists about the appropriateness and applica-
bility of standardized cognitive testing for all ethnic groups. Such 
aspects of testing as the nature of assessment tools and the evalu-
ation environment have been questioned regarding their cultural 
sensitivity. Children of particular ethnic minority statuses consis-
tently score lower on cognitive assessments compared to Anglo 
American children (Sattler and Dumont 2004). For instance, in the 
normative sample used in the  Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Chil-
dren, Fourth Edition ( WISC-IV , Wechsler 2003), Anglo American 
children as a whole had a full scale IQ score that was 11.5 points 
higher than that of African American children and 10 points higher 
than Latino children—almost a one standard deviation difference 
in scores. On the other hand, Asian American children scored 3.5 
points higher than Anglo American children on the  WISC-IV (Sat-
tler and Dumont 2004). 
 The differential scores have often been attributed to the dis-
proportionate percentage of these minority groups in the lower 
income brackets compared to Anglo Americans (Sattler 2001). Al-
though most minority families in the United States are not living 
in poverty, there is an overrepresentation of some groups living 
below the poverty level, particularly Latinos, African Americans, 
and Native Americans (21.2%, 24.7%, and 25.3%, respectively, 

Cultural Factors Related to Developmental Disabilities  101
compared to 10.5% of whites and 10.6% of Asian Americans; U.S. 
Census Bureau 2008). For children living in poverty, there is often 
increased stress due to parents holding multiple jobs, less access 
to educational opportunities such as tutoring, and decreased occur-
rence of preeducational activities such as reading. Additionally, 
exposure to toxic substances such as lead-based paint and living in 
areas with poor air quality are common in poverty-stricken house-
holds. Scores on cognitive tests may be impacted by the negative 
effects associated with living in a lower income household and/or 
one that is impacted by poverty (Turkheimer et al. 2003). 
 Although this is one potential causal factor for decreased cog-
nitive scores, another is that the cognitive tests may be culturally 
and linguistically biased. A recent study found that bilingual chil-
dren with autism of ethnic minority status scored lower on language 
assessments compared to Anglo American children, unrelated to 
SES (Leadbitter and Hudry 2009). Differences may arise from the 
faulty assumption that the dominant culture values apply for all 
cultures and these assumptions become embedded in these assess-
ments. For instance, one verbal subtest of a commonly used cog-
nitive assessment in the United States requires knowledge of the 
U.S. government and familiarity with normative social behavior. 
A child who, for instance, recently immigrated to the United States 
and who had limited awareness of the governmental process and 
little exposure to the social norms of the country would have dif-
ficulty answering these questions “correctly.” Thus, scores may be 
lowered not due to decreased intellectual abilities, but as a result of 
limited exposure to the cultural norms of the dominant society. 
 Language barriers also exist in assessments, which places some 
cultural and ethnic groups at risk for negatively impacted scores. 
Incorrect responses may be attributed to decreased fluency with 
the test language rather than actual ability level. To address po-
tential language barriers, it is ideal to conduct diagnostic and/or 
cognitive assessments in the child’s native language, if the clini-
cian is fluent. If not, then using independent interpreters who are 
knowledgeable in the family’s native culture, rather than family 
or friends, can be helpful. This serves to decrease potential bias in 
interpretation and maximize child response (Harry et al. 1995). 
 A child’s familiarity with the examiner appears to improve 
cognitive testing scores for all children (Fuchs and Fuchs 1989). 
However, it seems to be particularly influential for children of mi-
nority status and/or from low-income families. African American 
and Latino children scored approximately 11 IQ points higher with 

102 Worldwide and Cultural Perspectives in ASD 
a familiar as compared to an unfamiliar examiner. Familiarity with 
the examiner did not alter scores for Anglo American children as a 
whole. Similarly, for children from low-SES families (regardless of 
race), scores were more improved with a familiar examiner com-
pared to changes in score for children from middle- to upper-SES 
families (Fuchs and Fuchs 1989). 
 These arguments that have been raised describing potential 
bias in tests have helped to improve the cultural sensitivity of cog-
nitive testing by, for example, encouraging test-makers to expand 
the normative sample from which standardized tests are drawn to 
better reflect the demographics of the region. Additionally, test 
items now undergo more scrutiny to minimize cultural bias (Sat-
tler 2001). However, standardized tests continue to need modifi-
cations to become more culturally sensitive. 
 Cultural Factors and ASDs 
 ASD is often perceived to be a particularly stressful developmen-
tal disability (Randall and Parker 1999). Unlike some other devel-
opmental disabilities such as Down Syndrome, ASD cannot be 
detected in utero or at birth and does not have any associated physi-
cal characteristics that are observable from the outside. From a 
parent’s perspective, there are not outward signs that something 
is different about their child. As infants who eventually go on to 
receive an ASD diagnosis grow older, parents often only gradually 
realize that their child is not developing normally and not achiev-
ing the developmental milestones at the same rate (if at all) as their 
nieces, nephews, or friends’ children. These differences are gener-
ally not recognized until well into infancy or toddler years because 
social and language skills do not begin to mature in typically de-
veloping infants until late infancy and/or toddlerhood. So, for a 
significant amount of time in the child’s life, differences are not 
pronounced, if detectable at all, and parents (naturally) assume 
that their child is normal and “perfect.” 
 Therefore, in addition to the pervasiveness of eventual chal-
lenges, families often grieve the loss of their “perfect” child once a 
diagnosis is given (Dyches, Wilder, and Obiakor 2001). This com-
plex process can be particularly devastating for families whose 
children experience a significant regression in skills after devel-
oping normally for some time. Therefore, although research ex-
amining cultural factors associated with general developmental 

Cultural Factors and ASDs 103
disabilities provides insight into ASD, there may be additional and 
important considerations related specifically to having a child 
with ASD. 
 ASD Symptoms and Diagnosis 
 Cultural variation exists in social behaviors. What is considered 
“normal” social conduct in one culture may be atypical in another. 
Since ASD is at its core a disorder of reciprocal social interactions, it 
is crucial to consider cultural norms when determining whether a 
behavior is considered deviant. Certain symptoms of ASD may in 
fact be acceptable in particular cultures. For instance, modal Asian 
culture considers making direct eye contact with authorities to be 
a sign of disrespect. Children are taught to avoid eye contact with 
adults out of respect (Lian 1996; Sue and Sue 2008). In a typical 
ASD assessment, an adult who is likely to be considered an au-
thority figure attempts to engage a child in social interaction and 
notes concern if the child does not make eye contact. In fact, im-
pairment in nonverbal social behaviors such as eye contact is one 
of the diagnostic criteria for all ASDs. By extension, a child raised 
in modal Asian culture may avoid eye contact not because they 
have ASD, but because they are following the social norms of their 
culture. 
 Peer relationships are another area in which cultural influ-
ences may be confounded. Some families who live in remote or 
rural areas or who do not have other children in the family may 
have limited exposure and practice with peer interactions. There-
fore, challenges in peer relationships may not be due to fundamen-
tal challenges in social skills, but rather to a lack of experience 
with same-aged peers. Therefore, clinicians must act with cultural 
sensitivity when considering whether or not ASD is an appropri-
ate diagnosis. 
 Diagnostic Tools 
 The Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS; Lord et al. 
1999) and Autism Diagnostic Interview (ADI; Lord, Rutter, and 
Le Couteur 1994) are considered to be gold standard assessment 
tools in diagnosing ASD (Filipek et al. 1999). These tools have made 
significant improvements in standardizing the assessment of ASD 
and allow for better comparison across research studies. However, 
these measures were not designed to capture cultural variables. 

104 Worldwide and Cultural Perspectives in ASD 
Although the ADOS has been translated into 12 languages (Dan-
ish, Dutch, Finnish, French, German, Hungarian, Icelandic, Italian, 
Korean, Norwegian, Spanish, and Swedish), the impact of transla-
tion without modifications for potential cultural confounds has not 
been thoroughly assessed. Caution must be considered as to the 
applicability and appropriateness of using these instruments in 
cultures other than those in which they were created. 
 Countries outside of the United States 
 There is limited research examining cultural views about ASD 
specifically in other countries. This may partly be because many 
cultures and languages do not have a word or label for autism 
or ASD. For instance, Native Hawaiian and Native American lan-
guages use longer descriptions of behaviors associated with ASD 
to describe the condition rather than a single word (Connors and 
Donnellan 1998). Additionally, some Asian languages do not have 
a word for ASD (Dobson et al. 2001) while others use a label that 
does not accurately reflect the disorder. For instance,  autism  trans-
lates to “lonely disease” in China, which, as many Chinese par-
ents complain, does not capture the true nature of the disorder 
(McCabe 2007). Other languages have simply adapted the En-
glish word (e.g.,  autismo  in Spanish and Italian) and, according to 
Wilder and colleagues (2004), possibly the values that go along 
with it. 
 The few studies examining cultural and family response to 
ASD in non-Western cultures will be described. Although a thor-
ough literature review was conducted, it is possible that some 
sources may have been missed. A recent study examining mother’s 
experience of raising a child with ASD in an Ultraorthodox Jewish 
community in Israel suggests that ASD may be associated with mys-
tical forces in this culture (Shaked and Bilu 2006). The authors state 
that this community believes that “autistic children have sublime 
souls with direct access to the otherworldly” (Shaked and Bilu 2006, 
p. 20). Facilitated communication, described in detail in Chapter 2 
and repeatedly found by controlled studies to be an ineffective inter-
vention, continues to be used in the Ultraorthodox Jewish com-
munity in Israel. Facilitated communication involves the use of adult 
support of a child’s hand while he/she types on a keyboard to 
communicate and is viewed in this community in Israel as a way for 
children with autism to “impart hidden knowledge from heaven” 
(Shaked and Bilu 2006, p. 20). 

Cultural Factors and ASDs 105
 Chinese culture tends to view ASD in a more negative light. 
Special education was first introduced in China in the 1970s, but 
parents continue to be rarely involved in the educational planning 
of their children. As discussed, stigma exists about mental illness 
in Chinese culture (e.g., Tsang et al. 2003), and families often feel 
shamed about having a child with a disability—believing it oc-
curred as punishment for parent, particular maternal, behavior. The 
continued existence of societal pressures for conformity in China 
allows little room for the acceptance of individual differences, such 
as child disabilities. Furthermore, in more rural parts of the coun-
try, the diagnosis of ASD is relatively unknown to both profes-
sionals and parents and children with ASD are often turned away 
from services. 
 Forty-three caregivers of a child with ASD were interviewed 
about their experiences raising their child in China (McCabe 2007). 
Despite a societal disapproval of ASD, parents appear to continue 
to want the best for their children. Most families in the study de-
voted an incredible amount of time and resources to their child. 
A father explained, “When a person realizes their child, at age 3, 
age 5, realizes that their child is not normal, they will begin to ask 
everywhere, look everywhere. This is because for Chinese people, 
we do everything for our children, children are the hope of par-
ents . . . it was extremely hard on us, but what can you do? It’s for 
our child” (McCabe 2007, p. 47). However, all families relayed their 
fear that their children would be discriminated against based on 
their disability and the family judged for the child’s ASD due to the 
traditional Chinese belief that the child’s behavior and success di-
rectly reflects upon the parents. One mother described, “It’s as if, 
when other people run into this thing [having a child with a dis-
ability], maybe people where we’re from will laugh, point at you 
behind your back” (McCabe 2007, p. 43). Families were also con-
cerned about their child receiving proper care and services. The 
stigma of a diagnosis of a disability may discourage families from 
seeking out an evaluation and reporting a diagnosis to the school. 
In addition to modal Chinese culture, some South Asian families 
reported hesitation in referring their child for services because of 
the stigma associated with the diagnosis and possible negative 
impact on arranged marriages, particularly for girls (Raghavan, 
Weisner, and Patel 1999). 
 Roy Grinker, a professor of Anthropology at George Washing-
ton University in Washington, D.C., is a father of a daughter with 
severe autism who traveled around the world interviewing parents 

106 Worldwide and Cultural Perspectives in ASD 
of children with ASD. He published some of his experiences in 
a book entitled  Unstrange Minds: Remapping the World of Autism . 
 In his visit to South Africa, Grinker (2007) describes the com-
monly held belief by Europeans who colonized Africa that Africans 
were assumed to be “too primitive” to suffer from mental illnesses 
because of their lack of exposure to stresses associated with life in 
industrialized societies. When Africans did show signs of mental 
illness, they were kept in what essentially were prisons rather than 
hospitals. This unfounded belief is gradually changing and there 
are now psychiatric hospitals and treatment facilities available to 
treat mental disorders, but Africans are naturally suspicious of them 
because of this history. Grinker (2007) shares one story of a Zulu 
child from Africa with ASD who experienced a severe regression 
in skills. The boys’ grandparents recommended that he see a tra-
ditional Zulu healer, a  nygana , to determine the cause of the boy’s 
strange movements and sudden lack of eye contact. The nygana 
viewed his onset of challenges as punishment from the family’s 
ancestors for wrongdoing and believed that a demon spirit had 
possessed him. Although his parents eventually took him to a psy-
chiatrist in South Africa, many traditional healing methods were 
attempted before this last, and more successful, treatment effort 
took place. 
 In India, autism was only recognized as a disorder separate 
from intellectual disability (previously known as  mental retarda-
tion )  in 1999. However, many children continue to be mislabeled as 
having intellectual disability or are considered to be “mad” ( paagol 
in Hindu). Few professionals can actually diagnose ASD, and reli-
gious healers are often first consulted to help cure children. Medical 
providers who have heard of ASD will often prescribe medications 
or vitamins rather than recommending behavioral interventions 
that have been shown to be effective, although this has been chang-
ing in recent years (Grinker 2007). In his book, Grinker (2007) relays 
the story of the mother of a boy with ASD in India who, after going 
to great lengths to get him a diagnosis from one of the few psychia-
trists in New Delhi, could not enroll him in an autism treatment or 
educational program because they did not exist. So, she decided to 
open her own school for children with ASD. 
 An American psychologist, Tamara Daley, eventually met up 
and worked with this mother to increase the awareness about ASD 
in India. Part of Daley’s work involved studying Indian parent’s 
recognition and interpretation of ASD symptoms. 
 Daley (2004) found that Indian parents were more likely to 
notice social difficulties as compared to parents from the United 

Cultural Factors and ASDs 107
States who were more likely to detect general developmental de-
lays or regression in language skills (Coonrod and Stone 2004). In 
fact, language delays are not considered by some Indian parents 
and professionals to be a core feature of ASD because of the often-
held belief that boys acquire speech later than girls (Daley and Sig-
man 2002). Daley hypothesizes that these differences may be due 
to the fact that Indian culture values social conformity while culture 
in the United States is more focused on language development. 
 Racial and Ethnic Groups within the United States 
 As discussed in the introduction of this chapter, the use and mean-
ing of the term  race  has been historically controversial. However, 
demographic information continues to be collected using race as 
a variable in both clinical and research settings. Therefore, for the 
purposes of discussing research collected using this methodology, 
racial groups will be included in the discussion. However, cau-
tion should be used when applying sets of beliefs and behaviors 
to such groups. A study of Medicaid-eligible children with ASD in 
Philadelphia county found that Anglo American children receive 
a diagnosis about one and a half years, on average, earlier than 
African American children and two and a half years earlier than La-
tino children (Mandell et al. 2002). Additionally, African American 
children spent more time in treatment before receiving the diagno-
sis of ASD. A follow-up study found that African American chil-
dren ultimately diagnosed with ASD were nearly three times more 
likely than Anglo American children to be diagnosed with another 
disorder first such as conduct or adjustment disorder (Mandell 
et al. 2007). One possible interpretation put forth is that African 
American parents might have been more likely to emphasize their 
children’s disruptive behavior during the assessment rather than 
social oddities. Other explanations are that these racial differences 
in diagnosis may be attributable to general prejudices held by the 
clinician, specific stereotypes about health-related behaviors, and 
statistical discrimination in which the clinician can have different 
expectations about the probability of ASD occurring in children of 
different ethnicities (Balsa, McGuire, and Meredith 2005). 
 In the United States, the Individuals with Disabilities Educa-
tion Act (IDEA) requires an annual report of all children who re-
ceive educational services under this law. Reports generally include 
the number and percentage of children served under various dis-
ability categories, including ASD. Dyches, Wilder, and Obiakor 
(2001) reviewed the U.S. Department of Education’s 2001 IDEA 

108 Worldwide and Cultural Perspectives in ASD 
report and found that the percentage of children served under the 
category of ASD differed based on the race of the child. Students 
identified as African American or Asian/Pacific Islander were 
served under the category of ASD at twice the rate of those who were 
American Indian/Alaskan or Hispanic. Unlike true epidemiolog-
ical studies, these percentages do not indicate the actual diagnosis 
of children. A number of factors may influence these discrepant 
statistics, including actual differences in the prevalence of ASD 
across races (although this has not been supported by research), 
how individuals are categorized ethnically, and/or reluctance of 
families within some cultures in labeling their child with ASD in 
the school system (Dyches, Wilder, and Obiakor 2001). 
 Given that norms for social interactions, general behaviors 
(e.g., tantrums), and communication skills are culturally based, the 
context in which these “symptoms” occur needs to be carefully 
considered by school professionals and other treatment providers. 
It is possible that children identified under the “autism” category 
are misclassified. 
 Acquisition of Cultural Knowledge 
 Cultural influences on family’s perception and adjustment to the 
diagnosis have been discussed at length. A related area is how chil-
dren with ASD perceive cultural cues and acquire knowledge 
about their culture. Loth and Gómez (2006) state that “cultural 
knowledge is seen as a prism through which all experiences are fil-
tered. It influences how we perceive and interpret the world, it en-
dows us with knowledge and expectation of what kinds of things 
happen in different events, which social behavior is “good” or 
“bad,” permitted, allowed, or obligated” (p. 157). How children 
come to know and engage in social interaction is a cultural experi-
ence and varies significantly depending on which culture and family 
they are raised. We begin with an understanding of how typically 
developing children learn about their culture. Much of social learn-
ing originates from imitation (i.e., copying an observed action). Im-
itation interacts with the ability to take another’s perspective. This 
cognitive ability is called  theory of mind.  
 Typically developing infants are born with the seemingly in-
nate ability to imitate (Meltzoff and Moore 1977)—beginning with 
facial expressions and moving on to more complex social behaviors 

The Culture of Autism 109
such as gestures and play skills. The development of language also 
involves the use of social understanding. Word learning involves 
the directing of infants’ attention to the object of focus through non-
verbal means such as pointing and eye gaze (e.g., Tomasello 1992). 
For example, looking toward a cup, holding it up, and pointing to 
it while repeatedly saying “cup” is more effective than simply say-
ing “cup” without these extra social cues. Following a person’s 
point or eye gaze to an object of interest is posited to be a precursor 
to more advanced forms of theory of mind as it involves the basic 
insight that a social partner has a different perspective of the world. 
The use of someone else’s cues to direct one’s attention to an object 
or event of interest is called  joint attention.  Loth and Gómez (2006) 
suggest that these skills are essential in the acquisition of skills 
 through  others and that much of our learning, particularly early in 
life, occurs through these means. Studies have suggested that learn-
ing about one’s culture, including social norms and rules, is ac-
quired through these basic processes that are then expanded upon 
as children grow older (e.g., Bloom 2004; Clément, Koenig, and Har-
ris 2004). 
 Children with ASD have been shown to have deficits in a va-
riety of different kinds of imitation (see Rogers 1999 for a review; 
e.g., Williams, Whiten, and Singh 2004) and joint attention skills 
(e.g., Dawson et al. 1998). For those individuals who do have in 
tact imitation skills, the way in which they imitate may be un-
usual (Loth and Gómez 2006). Therefore, these necessary building 
blocks in beginning to understand and acquire cultural knowl-
edge are absent or delayed in children with ASD. This puts them 
at risk for missing cultural knowledge generally learned  through 
 another person by imitation and theory of mind. In fact, deficits 
in knowledge of social norms and cultural rules have been docu-
mented in individuals with ASD (Baron-Cohen et al. 1999). 
 The Culture of Autism 
 Although not traditionally considered a culture in and of itself, 
higher functioning individuals with ASD have advocated that “au-
tism” be considered and treated as its own cultural group. Sup-
porters of this view wish to be recognized as a group having values, 
beliefs, and behaviors that are to be respected. Therefore, some 
views held by members of this group warrant acknowledgement 
in a discussion about cultural influences in ASD. 

110 Worldwide and Cultural Perspectives in ASD 
 By and large, the professional and scientific community pro-
motes identification and treatment of ASD symptoms. However, 
there is a rising group of supporters called the Autism Rights 
Movement who instead encourage and embrace the “neurodiver-
sity” of individuals and resist finding a cure for ASD. They en-
courage the acceptance of individuals with ASD in the community 
as they are, without studying them or trying to fix them. Many In-
ternet Web sites and groups exist in support of this stance, includ-
ing the Autistic Self Advocacy Network and the Autism Network 
International. Another such group is called Aspies for Freedom, 
and their mission statement is as follows, “We have the view that 
aspergers and autism are not negative, and are not always a dis-
ability. . . . We know that autism is not a disease, and we oppose any 
attempts to ‘cure’ someone of an autism spectrum condition, or any 
attempts to make them ‘normal’ against their will. We are part of 
building the autism culture. We aim to strengthen autism rights, 
oppose all forms of discrimination against aspies and auties, and 
work to bring the community together both online and offline” 
(http://www.aspiesforfreedom.com/). 
 The culture of the pro-autism movement is to accept ASD as a 
variation in functioning as opposed to a mental disorder. The move-
ment adheres to the belief that ASDs are indeed genetically based 
and should be considered as part of the natural expression of the 
human genome, not genetic mutations. Their hope is to be accepted 
as a minority group in need of representation, rather than a dis-
abling condition in need of repair. 
 Treatment 
 Access to Services 
 Research has shown that behavioral treatment is the only inter-
vention that has been empirically demonstrated to be effective for 
children with ASD (National Research Council 2001). However, 
well-trained treatment providers are often associated with large 
universities or hospitals in metropolitan areas. There is limited 
access to qualified ASD treatment providers in rural areas and in 
many countries whose acceptance and understanding of ASD is 
low. For instance, in Taiwan, suburban and rural children with 
ASD tended to receive the diagnosis at an older age and to have a 
longer diagnosis process as compared with urban children (Chen 

Treatment 111
et al. 2008). Additionally, behavioral interventions are very costly 
to implement and they are generally not covered through public 
funding. These factors together place families who live in such 
areas or who cannot afford treatment at a disadvantage for obtain-
ing the most effective interventions for their children, if they are 
able to obtain services at all (Thomas et al. 2007). 
 Disparities in access to and use of services of individuals liv-
ing in rural areas and racial and ethnic minorities are common for 
all children both with and without special health care needs (e.g., 
Newacheck, Hung, and Wright 2002; Stevens and Shi 2003). In 
ASD, lower rates of diagnosis and access to treatment for Latino, 
African American, and socio-economically deprived families have 
been noted (Liptak et al. 2008). Thomas et al. (2007), among others, 
found that racial and ethnic minority families are less likely to use 
such services as a case manager, psychologist, and developmen-
tal pediatrician. More limited use of services by racial and ethnic 
minorities may be partially explained by a lack of appropriate out-
reach and cultural competency of providers (e.g., Lau et al. 2004) 
as well as a general mistrust of the system due to institutionalized 
discrimination (Schnittker 2003). An additional explanation is that 
these families are more likely to rely upon extended family mem-
bers and friends rather than meet with professionals who do not 
know their child personally and are part of a larger institution of 
which families are unfamiliar (Terhune 2005). 
 Cultural Influences in Treatment Choice 
 Cultural values influence how a family chooses a treatment and re-
sponds to various treatments. In the general field of mental health, 
treatment decisions are often made based on a family’s belief about 
the etiology of the diagnosis. As discussed, understanding of etiol-
ogy varies across cultures. African American, Asian American, and 
Latino families may be less likely to view their child’s symptoms as 
related to a health condition and therefore may be less likely to seek 
care through traditional medical systems and instead may pursue 
alternative therapies, such as diet changes and supplemental vi-
tamins (Bussing, Schoenberg, and Perwien 1998; Yeh et al. 2004). 
Cultural decisions about treatment choices in ASD was examined 
in one small study and found that Latino children diagnosed with 
ASD were six times more likely to be treated using nontraditional 
strategies than children of other ethnicities (Levy et al. 2003). Par-
ents in North Carolina who completed a higher level of education 

112 Worldwide and Cultural Perspectives in ASD 
were found to use more and different kinds of therapy services 
(e.g., Picture Exchange Communication System and therapeutic 
horseback riding) as compared to families with fewer years of com-
pleted education (Thomas et al. 2007). 
 Treatments that are commonly used in the United States to im-
prove ASD symptoms have rarely been researched to examine their 
effectiveness in other countries. A recent exception to this is the 
Treatment and Education of Autistic and related Communication-
handicapped Children (TEACCH), developed by Eric Schopler. 
TEACCH provides a structured teaching environment and includes 
parents as cotherapists to aid in the treatment and education of 
children with ASD. It has recently received positive research sup-
port for its effectiveness in improving ASD symptoms in a group of 
children in China (Tsang et al. 2007). Comparison groups are now 
necessary to determine its effectiveness compared to other treat-
ments in China. In traditional Chinese medicine, ASD is viewed 
as any other illness would be—as an imbalance in the energy of 
yin and yang. ASD is considered to be a “yin” disorder, involving 
social withdrawal and inwardness, with recommended traditional 
treatments such as acupuncture and Chinese herbs. However, 
more recent use of applied behavior analysis and sensory integra-
tion training, and now TEACCH are growing increasingly com-
mon (Clark and Zhou 2005). 
 Focus of Treatment 
 Varying cultural perspectives can also affect how intervention goals 
are prioritized in an ASD treatment plan. For instance, modal cul-
ture for Anglo Americans includes placing a high value on individu-
alism whereas other cultures have a more collectivist orientation, 
prioritizing the group over the individual. It may be more important 
for some families to focus on behaviors in their child that facilitate 
family and community activities rather than individual competence 
and autonomy. This could potentially clash with behavioral treat-
ments often aimed at fostering independence and teaching self-help 
skills such as making clear requests and performing tasks indepen-
dently. For example, an often-held Western goal for long-term out-
come of individuals with disabilities, including those with ASD, is 
to hold a steady job in their adult life. However, those providing 
treatment to individuals with should be aware that family expecta-
tions of families from a non-Western background might hold dif-
ferent expectations of their child in terms of long-term goals. 

Treatment 113
 Differences in child-rearing practices and cultural values have 
implications for therapists and educators working with parents of 
children with ASD and are important for both treatment develop-
ers and providers to consider when designing and implementing 
a treatment plan. For instance, child-rearing practices of Mexican 
American mothers tend to focus more on teaching politeness and 
obeying authority figures (e.g., parents and teachers), whereas with 
Anglo American mothers more often value self-directed learning 
and independent thinking (Rodriguez and Olswang 2003). 
 An examination of differences in views on the expression of 
emotion further elucidates the impact of culture on treatment goals. 
Individuals with ASD often have difficulty recognizing and ex-
pressing emotion; thus, many treatments are geared toward helping 
individuals express their emotions. However, many Asian cultures 
value private over public displays of emotion and discourage out-
ward emotional displays. A treatment attempting to elicit outward 
emotional expression may contradict the values of these cultures. 
Additionally, parents are often asked to be an active member of the 
treatment team and implement interventions at home and other 
settings for their child. But the role that parents take in treatment 
and the expected role of teachers and other clinicians varies across 
cultures—some cultures may expect therapists and educators to 
be the main providers and assume that parents do not need to be 
involved. 
 The style of teaching used with individuals with ASD may also 
be an area where compromise is necessary. For instance, the general 
educational environment in many Asian societies involves system-
atic and repeated practice of a newly acquired skill in a structured 
learning setting. This could potentially clash with an ASD treatment 
provider who uses a more naturalistic style of teaching, involving 
following the child leads and offering choices through play (as in 
the Denver Model; Sally Rogers). Treatments providers may need 
to adapt their style of service in order to collaborate effectively with 
families. 
 Treatment/Educational Recommendations 
 Dyches, Wilder, and Obiakor (2001) recommend several strate-
gies for working with individuals with ASD in an educational and 
treatment setting. Primarily, examining and being comfortable ac-
knowledging one’s own personal prejudices are part of an essential 
groundwork for providing the best education and care of children 

114 Worldwide and Cultural Perspectives in ASD 
from multicultural backgrounds. Possible prejudice may exist 
against groups based on such factors as religion, income, gender, 
race, ethnicity, personal appearance, and disability. This can be an 
emotionally taxing and difficult realization for care providers and 
yet crucial to determine whether these views are interfering with 
the effectiveness of intervention. Although a seemingly obvious 
objective, viewing each child with ASD in a positive light and as ca-
pable of growth, regardless of ability level or cultural background, 
is central to helping them meet their treatment goals. Provider and 
teacher expectations of children with disabilities, including ASD, 
are also influential in treatment. Expectations may vary for chil-
dren of different backgrounds, whether consciously acknowledged 
or not. Studies have found that when teachers have high expecta-
tions of children, they tend to meet or exceed those expectations 
(Lucas, Henze, and Donato 1990). 
 Language is also an important consideration. There is an 
overrepresentation of children from bilingual backgrounds in 
special education. This implies that professionals conducting as-
sessments to determine eligibility for special education may have 
difficulty distinguishing fluency and comfort with dominant lan-
guage from a true disability. If a student who is not fluent in the 
dominant language is identified for special education, then special 
education providers need to collaborate with the teacher respon-
sible for instructing students who do not speak the nondominant 
language to help implement educational and behavioral interven-
tions (Dyches, Wilder, and Obiakor 2001). Speech and language 
therapy may also be warranted and should often be considered as 
part of an overall treatment plan or an Individualized Education 
Program (IEP). If available, bilingual educational and treatment 
providers are also recommended to help ensure better under-
standing of material for children. Peer mentors can also be helpful 
in providing acculturation experiences and social skills training in 
the dominant culture, should that be recommended for the indi-
vidual student. 
 In terms of a broader educational curriculum, it has been 
noted that multicultural students in general education are nega-
tively impacted by the lack of exposure in the classroom to his-
tory, events, and educational experiences outside of the dominant 
culture (Dyches et al. 2004). Therefore, efforts can and should 
be made to incorporate such curricula into education to encour-
age feelings of belonging in students from a multicultural back-
ground, including those students with ASD. 

Conclusion 115
 Conclusion 
 Epidemiological studies suggest that ASD occurs at approximately 
equal rates across cultures, including countries, races, ethnicities, 
and income levels. However, cultural differences exist in terms of 
interpretation of symptoms, views about its etiology, possible 
stigma associated with the diagnosis, and treatments employed to 
address symptoms. ASD is primarily a disorder of social interac-
tions. However, social behaviors and rules are culturally derived and 
what is considered abnormal in one culture may be socially ap-
propriate in another. Clinicians making diagnoses must consider 
the child’s behavior within the context of their own culture when 
conducting an evaluation and deciding if ASD is an appropriate 
diagnosis. 
 Research examining cultural views about ASD specifically is 
slim. However, conclusions about such issues can be drawn from 
work on cultural factors relating to general mental health and de-
velopmental disabilities. For instance, some cultures have a posi-
tive appraisal of developmental disabilities and encourage the 
belief that children with a developmental disability are special or 
even chosen by God. They may also view the experience of raising 
the child as an opportunity for parents to challenge themselves 
and grow personally. Still others believe that parents/families who 
have a child with disabilities are being punished for parental or 
familial transgressions. For many cultures, there continues to be 
stigma associated with acknowledging that the child is different. 
This often discourages families from informing providers about 
the child’s diagnosis or from seeking help at all. However, with 
increased awareness about ASD and other developmental disabili-
ties, these stigmas are beginning to dissipate. 
 Given the multitude of views about the cause of develop-
mental disabilities such as ASD, it is not surprising that a vari-
ety of treatment approaches and styles exist as well. Beliefs about 
the etiology of an individual’s difficulties and treatment choices 
often occur in concert. More effective behavioral interventions are 
relatively unknown in some countries and traditional medicinal 
or religious healers are often the first choice of treatment for ASD. 
Others emphasize treatment goals of increased independence while 
some cultures may value group cohesion and cooperation over 
self-sufficiency in treatment planning. Therefore, those working 
with individuals with ASD must be sensitive to such cultural 

116 Worldwide and Cultural Perspectives in ASD 
differences when offering treatment choices to families and im-
plementing treatment programs. 
 References 
 Affleck, Glenn, Howard Tennen, Jonelle Rowe, and Beth Roscher. 1989. 
“Effects of Formal Support on Mothers’ Adaptation to the Hospital-to-
Home Transition of High-risk Infants: The Benefits and Costs of 
Helping.  Child Development 60 (2): 488–501. 
 Balsa, Ana I., Thomas G. McGuire, and Lisa S. Meredith. 2005. “Testing 
for Statistical Discrimination in Health Care.”  Health Services Research 40 
(1): 227–52. 
 Barnevik-Olsson, Martina, Christopher Gillberg, and Elisabeth Fernell. 
2008. “Prevalence of Autism in Children Born to Somali Parents Living 
in Sweden: A Brief Report.”  Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology 50 
(8): 598–601. 
 Baron-Cohen, Simon, Michelle O’Riordan, Valerie Stone, Rosie Jones, 
and Kate Plaisted. 1999. “Recognition of Faux Pas by Normally 
Developing Children with Asperger Syndrome or High-functioning 
Autism.”  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 29 (5): 407–18. 
 Bennett, Adrian T. 1988. “Gateways to Powerlessness: Incorporating 
Hispanic Deaf Children and Families into Formal Schooling.”  Disability, 
Handicap & Society 3 (2): 119–51. 
 Bertrand, Jacquelyn, Audrey Mars, Coleen Boyle, Frank Bove, Marshalyn 
Yeargin-Allsopp, and Pierre Decoufle. 2001. “Prevalence of Autism in 
a United States Population: The Brick Township, New Jersey, Investi-
gation.”  Pediatrics 108 (5): 1155–61. 
 Blacher, Jan, Steven Lopez, Johanna Shapiro, and Judith Fusco. 1997. 
“Contributions to Depression in Latina Mothers with and without 
Children with Retardation: Implications for Caregiving.”  Family 
Relations 46 (4): 325–34. 
 Bloom, Paul. 2004.  Descartes’ Baby: How the Science of Child Development 
Explains What Makes Us Human. New York: Basic Books. 
 Bui, Khanh-van T., and David T. Takeuchi. 1992. “Ethnic Minority 
Adolescents and the Use of Community Mental Health Care Services. 
 American Journal of Community Psychology 20 (4): 403–17. 
 Bussing, Regina, Nancy E. Schoenberg, and Amy R. Perwien. 1998. 
“Knowledge and Information about ADHD: Evidence of Cultural 

References 117
Differences among African-American and White Parents.”  Social 
Science & Medicine 46 (7): 919–28. 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2007. “Prevalence of 
Autism Spectrum Disorders—Autism and Developmental Disabilities 
Monitoring Network, 14 Sites, United States, 2002.”  MMWR Surveillance 
Summaries 56 (1): 12–28. 
 Chakrabarti, Suniti, and Eric Fombonne. 2005. “Pervasive Developmental 
Disorders in Preschool Children: Confirmation of High Prevalence.”  The 
American Journal of Psychiatry 162 (6): 1133–41. 
 Chen, Chuan-Yu, Chieh-Yu Liu, Wen-Chuan Su, Su-Ling Huang, and 
Keh-Ming Lin. 2008. “Urbanicity-related Variation in Help-seeking 
and Services Utilization among Preschool-age Children with Autism 
in Taiwan.”  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 38 (3): 489–97. 
 Clark, Elaine, and Zheng Zhou. 2005. “Autism in China: From 
Acupuncture to Applied Behavior Analysis.”  Psychology in the Schools 
42 (3): 285–95. 
 Clément, Fabrice, Melissa Koenig, and Paul Harris. 2004. “The 
Ontogenesis of Trust.”  Mind & Language 19 (4): 360–79. 
 Connors, Jeanne L., and Anne M. Donnellan. 1998. “Walk in Beauty: 
Western Perspectives on Disability and Navajo Family/Cultural 
Resilience.” In  Resiliency in Native American and Immigrant Families, 
ed. H. I. McCubbin, E. A. Thompson, A. I. Thompson, and J. E. Fromer, 
159–82,. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
 Coonrod, E. E., and W. L. Stone. 2004. “Early Concerns of Parents of 
Children with Autistic and Nonautistic Disorders.”  Infants and Young 
Children 17 (3): 258–68. 
 Cooper-Patrick, Lisa, Joseph J. Gallo, Neil R. Powe, Donald S. 
Steinwachs, William W. Eaton, and Daniel E. Ford. 1999. “Mental 
Health Service Utilization by African Americans and Whites: The 
Baltimore Epidemiologic Catchment Area Follow-Up.”  Medical Care 37 
(10): 1034–45. 
 Crabtree, Sara Ashencaen. 2007. “Maternal Perceptions of Care-giving of 
Children with Developmental Disabilities in the United Arab Emirates.” 
 Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities 20 (3): 247–55. 
 Croen, Lisa A., Judith K. Grether, Jenny Hoogstrate, and Steve Selvin. 
2002. “The Changing Prevalence of Autism in California.”  Journal of 
Autism and Developmental Disorders 32 (3): 207–15. 
 Cuffe, Steven, Jennifer Waller, Michael Cuccaro, Andres Pumariega, and 
Carol Garrison. 1995. “Race and Gender Differences in the Treatment 
of Psychiatric Disorders in Young Adolescents.”  Journal of the American 
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 34 (11): 1536–43. 

118 Worldwide and Cultural Perspectives in ASD 
 Daley, Tamara C. 2004. “From Symptom Recognition to Diagnosis: 
Children with Autism in Urban India.”  Social Science & Medicine 
58 (7): 1323–35. 
 Daley, Tamara C., and Marian D. Sigman. 2002. “Diagnostic Con-
ceptualization of Autism Among Indian Psychiatrists, Psychologists, 
and Pediatricians.”  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 32 
(1): 13–23. 
 Dawson, Geraldine, Andrew N. Meltzoff, Julie Osterling, Julie Rinaldi, 
and Emily Brown. 1998. “Children with Autism Fail to Orient to Nat-
urally Occurring Social Stimuli.”  Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders 28 (6): 479–85. 
 Department of Health and Human Services. 2001.  Executive Summary—
Mental Health: Culture, Race, and Ethnicity. Supplement to Mental Health: 
A Report of the Surgeon General. Washington, D.C.: Department of Health 
and Human Services. 
 Department of Health and Human Services. 2002.  Report to Congress 
on Autism. Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Mental Health, 
National Institute of Health, and Department of Health and Human 
Services. 
 Diala, Chamberlain, Carles Muntaner, Christine Walrath, Kim J. 
Nickerson, Thomas A. LaVeist, and Philip J. Leaf. 2000. “Racial 
Differences in Attitudes Toward Professional Mental Health Care 
and in the Use of Services.”  American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 
70 (4): 455–64. 
 Dobson, Susan, Shripati Upadhyaya, Jeanie McNeil, Shoba Venkat-
eswaran, and Debra Gilderdale. 2001. “Developing an Information 
Pack for the Asian Carers of People with Autism Spectrum Disorders.” 
 International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders 36:216–21. 
 Dyches, Tina Taylor, Lynn K. Wilder, and Festus E. Obiakor. 2001. 
“Autism: Multicultural Perspectives.” In  Autistic Spectrum Disorders: 
Educational and Clinical Interventions, ed. T. Wahlberg, F. Obiakor, S. 
Burkhardt, and A. F. Rotatori, 151–77,. Oxford, England: Elsevier 
Science Ltd. 
 Dyches, Tina Taylor, Lynn K. Wilder, Richard R. Sudweeks, Festus E. 
Obiakor, and Bob Algozzine. 2004. “Multicultural Issues in Autism.” 
 Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 34 (2): 211–22. 
 Filipek, Pauline A., Pasquale J. Accardo, Grace T. Baranek, Edwin H. 
Cook Jr., Geraldine Dawson, Barry Gordon, Judith S. Gravel, et al. 1999. 
“The Screening and Diagnosis of Autistic Spectrum Disorders.”  Journal 
of Autism and Developmental Disorders 29 (6): 439–84. 

References 119
 Folstein, Susan, and Michael Rutter. 1977. “Infantile Autism: A Genetic 
Study of 21 Twin Pairs.”  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 18 
(4): 297–321. 
 Fombonne, Eric. 2005. “The Changing Epidemiology of Autism.”
  Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities 18 (4): 281–94. 
 Fombonne, Eric. 2007. “Epidemiological Surveys of Pervasive 
Developmental Disorders.” In  Autism and Pervasive Developmental 
Disorders (2nd ed.), ed. F. R. Volkmarpp. 33–68. New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 Fuchs, Douglas, and Lynn S. Fuchs. 1989. “Effects of Examiner Famil-
iarity on Black, Caucasian, and Hispanic Children: A Meta-analysis.” 
 Exceptional Children 55 (4): 303–8. 
 Gannotti, Mary E., W Penn Handwerker, Nora Ellen Groce, and 
Cynthia Cruz. 2001. “Sociocultural Influences on Disability Status 
in Puerto Rican Children.”  Physical Therapy 81 (9): 1512–23. 
 Gillberg, Christopher, Suzanne Steffenburg, Birgitta Börjesson, and 
Lena Andersson. 1987. “Infantile Autism in Children of Immigrant 
Parents: A Population-based Study from Göteborg, Sweden.”  British 
Journal of Psychiatry 150:856–58. 
 Green, Ben E., William H. Sack, and Audra Pambrum. 1981. “A Review 
of Child Psychiatric Epidemiology with Special Reference to American 
Indian and Alaska Native children.”  White Cloud Journal of American 
Indian/Alaska Native Mental Health 2 (2): 22–36. 
 Grinker, Roy Richard. 2007.  Unstrange Minds: Remapping the World of 
Autism. New York: Basic Books. 
 Harry, Beth. 1992. “An Ethnographic Study of Cross-cultural 
Communication with Puerto Rican-American Families in the Special 
Education System.”  American Educational Research Journal 29 
(3): 471–94. 
 Harry, Beth, Marquita Grenot-Scheyer, Marsha Smith-Lewis, and 
Hyun-Sook Park. 1995. “Developing Culturally Inclusive Services for 
Individuals with Severe Disabilities.”  Journal of the Association for Persons 
with Severe Handicaps 20 (2): 99–109. 
 Hays, Pamela. 2005.  Addressing Cultural Complexities in Practice: A 
Framework for Clinicians and Counselors. Washington, D.C.: American 
Psychological Association. 
 Heller, Tamar, and Alan Factor. 1988. “Permanency Planning Among 
Black and White Family Caregivers of Older Adults with Mental 
Retardation.”  Mental Retardation 26 (4): 203–8. 

120 Worldwide and Cultural Perspectives in ASD 
 Kanner, Leo. 1943. “Autistic Disturbances of Affective contact.”  Nervous 
Child 2:217–50. 
 Lau, Anna S., Ann F. Garland, May Yeh, Kristen M. McCabe, Patricia 
A. Wood, and Richard L. Hough. 2004. “Race/Ethnicity and Inter-
Informant Agreement in Assessing Adolescent Psychopathology.” 
 Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders 12 (3): 145–56. 
 Leadbitter, K., and K. Hudry. 2009. “Does Bilingualism Affect 
Language Development in Autism?” Poster presented at the Annual 
International Meeting for Autism Research, Chicago. 
 Levy, Susan E., David S. Mandell, Stephanie Merhar, Richard F. 
Ittenbach, and Jennifer A. Pinto-Martin. 2003. “Use of Complementary 
and Alternative Medicine among Children Recently Diagnosed with 
Autistic Spectrum Disorder.”  Journal of Developmental and Behavioral 
Pediatrics 24 (6): 418–23. 
 Lian, Ming-Gong John. 1996. “Teaching Asian American Children.” 
In  Teaching Students with Moderate/Severe Disabilities, Including Autism: 
Strategies for Second Language Learners in Inclusive Settings (2nd ed.), 
ed. E. Durán, pp. 239–53. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 
Publisher. 
 Liptak, Gregory S., Lauren B. Benzoni, Daniel W. Mruzek, Karen W. 
Nolan, Melissa A. Thingvoll, Christine M. Wade, and G. Edgar Fryer. 
2008. “Disparities in Diagnosis and Access to Health Services for 
Children with Autism: Data from the National Survey of Children’s 
Health.”  Journal of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics 29 (3): 152–60. 
 Lord, C., M. Rutter, P. C. DiLavore, and S. Risi. 1999.  Autism Diagnostic 
Observation Schedule—WPS (ADOS-WPS). Los Angeles: Western 
Psychological Services. 
 Lord, C., M. Rutter, and A. Le Couteur. 1994. “Autism Diagnostic 
Interview-Revised: A Revised Version of a Diagnostic Interview for 
Caregivers of Individuals with Possible Pervasive Developmental 
Disorders.”  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 24 (5): 
659–85. 
 Loth, Eva, and Juan Carlos Gómez. 2006. “Imitation, Theory of Mind, 
and Cultural Knowledge: Perspectives from Typical Development and 
Autism.” In  Imitation and the Social Mind: Autism and Typical 
Development, ed. S. J. Rogers and J. H. G. Williams, 157–97. New York: 
Guilford Press. 
 Lotter, Victor. 1966. “Epidemiology of Autistic Conditions in Young 
Children: I. Prevalence.”  Social Psychiatry 1:124–37. 
 Lucas, Tamara, Rosemary Henze, and Ruben Donato. 1990. “Promoting 
the Success of Latino Language-Minority Students: An Exploratory 
Study of Six High Schools.”  Harvard Educational Review 60 (3): 315–40. 

References 121
 Madsen, Kreesten Meldgaard, Anders Hviid, Mogens Vestergaard, 
Diana Schendel, Jan Wohlfahrt, Poul Thorsen, Jørn Olsen, and Mads 
Melbye. 2002. “A Population-based Study of Measles, Mumps, and 
Rubella Vaccination and Autism.”  The New England Journal of Medicine 
347 (19): 1477–82. 
 Magnusson, Pall, and Evald Saemundsen. 2001. “Prevalence of Autism 
in Iceland.”  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 31 (2): 153–63. 
 Mandell, David S., Richard F. Ittenbach, Susan E. Levy, and Jennifer 
A. Pinto-Martin. 2007. “Disparities in Diagnoses Received Prior to 
a Diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder.”  Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders 37 (9): 1795–802. 
 Mandell, David S., John Listerud, Susan E. Levy, and Jennifer A. 
Pinto-Martin. 2002. “Race Differences in the Age at Diagnosis among 
Medicaid-eligible Children with Autism.”  Journal of the American 
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry 41 (12): 1447–53. 
 Mandell, David S., and Maytali Novak. 2005. “The Role of Culture 
in Families’ Treatment Decisions for Children with Autism Spectrum 
Disorders.”  Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities Research 
Reviews 11 (2): 110–15. 
 Mary, Nancy L. 1990. “Reactions of Black, Hispanic, and White Mothers 
to Having a Child with Handicaps.”  Mental Retardation 28 (1): 1–5. 
 McCabe, Helen. 2007. “Parent Advocacy in the Face of Adversity: 
Autism and Families in the People’s Republic of China.”  Focus on 
Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities 22 (1): 39–50. 
 McCallion, Philip, Matthew Janicki, and Lucinda Grant-Griffin. 1997. 
“Exploring the Impact of Culture and Acculturation on Older Families 
Caregiving for Persons with Developmental Disabilities.”  Family 
Relations 46 (4): 347–57. 
 McCubbin, Hamilton I., Marilyn A. McCubbin, Anne I. Thompson, 
and Elizabeth A. Thompson. 1998. “Resiliency in Ethnic Families: A 
Conceptual Model for Predicting Family Adjustment and Adaptation.” 
In  Resiliency in Native American and immigrant families, ed. H. I. 
McCubbin, E. A. Thompson, A. I. Thompson, and J. E. Fromer, 3–48. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
 McCubbin, Hamilton I., Elizabeth A. Thompson, Anne I. Thompson, 
and Julie E. Fromer. 1998.  Resiliency in Native American and Immigrant 
Families. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
 Meltzoff, Andrew N., and M. Keith Moore. 1977. “Imitation of Facial 
and Manual Gestures by Human Neonates.”  Science 198 (4312): 75–78. 
 National Research Council, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences 
Education. 2001.  Educating Children with Autism.  Washington, D.C.: 
National Academy Press. 

122 Worldwide and Cultural Perspectives in ASD 
 Newacheck, Paul W., Yun-Yi Hung, and Kara K. Wright. 2002. “Racial 
and Ethnic Disparities in Access to Care for Children with Special 
Health Care Needs.”  Ambulatory Pediatrics 2 (4): 247–54. 
 O’Donohue, William T. 2005. “Cultural Sensitivity: A Critical Exam-
ination.” In  Destructive Trends in Mental Health: The Well-intentioned 
Path to Harm, ed. R. H. Wright and N. A. Cummings, 29–44 . New York: 
Routledge. 
 Pruchno, Rachel, Julie Hicks Patrick, and Christopher J. Burant. 
1997. “African American and White Mothers of Adults with Chronic 
Disabilities: Caregiving Burden and Satisfaction.”  Family Relations 
46 (4): 335–46. 
 Raghavan, Chemba, Thomas S. Weisner, and Devindra Patel. 1999. 
“The Adaptive Project of Parenting: South Asian Families with Children 
with Developmental Delays.”  Education and Training in Mental 
Retardation and Developmental Disabilities 34 (3): 281–92. 
 Randall, Peter, and Jonathan Parker. 1999.  Supporting the Families of 
Children with Autism. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 
 Rodriguez, Barbara L., and Lesley B. Olswang. 2003. “Mexican-
American and Anglo-American Mothers’ Beliefs and Values About 
Child Rearing, Education, and Language Impairment.”  American 
Journal of Speech-Language Pathology 12 (4): 452–62. 
 Rogers, Sally J. 1999. “An Examination of the Imitation Deficit in 
Autism.” In  Imitation in Infancy, ed. J. Nadel and G. Butterworth, 
254–283. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Rogers-Dulan, Jeannette, and Jan Blacher. 1995. “African American 
Families, Religion, and Disability: A Conceptual Framework.”  Mental 
Retardation 33 (4): 226–38. 
 Sattler, Jerome M. 2001.  Assessment of Children: Cognitive Applications. 
San Diego: Jerome M. Sattler, Publisher. 
 Sattler, Jerome M., and Ron Dumont. 2004.  Assessment of Children: 
WISC-IV and WPPSI-III Supplement. San Diego: Jerome M. Sattler, 
Publisher. 
 Schnittker, Jason. 2003. “Misgivings of Medicine? African Americans’ 
Skepticism of Psychiatric Medication.”  Journal of Health and Social 
Behavior 44 (4): 506–24. 
 Seligman, Milton. 1999. “Childhood Disability and the Family.” In 
 Handbook of Psychosocial Characteristics of Exceptional Children, 
ed. V. L. Schwean and D. H. Saklofske, 111–32. Dordrecht, the 
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

References 123
 Shaked, Michal, and Yoram Bilu. 2006. “Grappling with Affliction: 
Autism in the Jewish Ultraorthodox Community in Israel.”  Culture, 
Medicine and Psychiatry 30 (1): 1–27. 
 Skinner, Debra, Donald B. Bailey Jr., Vivian Correa, and Patricia 
Rodriguez. 1999. “Narrating Self and Disability: Latino Mothers’ 
Construction of Identities vis-à-vis Their Child with Special Needs.” 
 Exceptional Children 65 (4): 481–95. 
 Stevens, Gregory D., and Leiyu Shi. 2003. “Racial and Ethnic 
Disparities in the Primary Care Experiences of Children: A Review 
of the Literature.”  Medical Care Research and Review 60 (1): 3–30. 
 Sue, Derald Wing, and David Sue. 2008.  Counseling the Culturally 
Diverse: Theory and Practice (5th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 
 Tarakeshwar, Nalini, and Kenneth I. Pargament. 2001. “Religious 
Coping in Families of Children with Autism.”  Focus on Autism and 
Other Developmental Disabilities 16 (4): 247–60. 
 Terhune, Peggy S. 2005. “African-American Developmental Disability 
Discourses: Implications for Policy Development.”  Journal of Policy 
and Practice in Intellectual Disabilities 2 (1): 18–28. 
 Thomas, Kathleen C., Alan R. Ellis, Carolyn McLaurin, Julie Daniels, 
and Joseph P. Morrissey. 2007. “Access to Care for Autism-related 
Services.”  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 37 (10): 
1902–12. 
 Tomasello, Michael. 1992. “The Social Bases of Language Acquisition.” 
 Social Development 1 (1): 67–87. 
 Treffert, Darold A. 1970. “Epidemiology of Infantile Autism.”  Archives 
of General Psychiatry 22 (5): 431–38. 
 Tsang, Hector W. H., Phidias K. C. Tam, Fong Chan, and W. M. Cheung. 
2003. “Stigmatizing Attitudes Towards Individuals with Mental Illness 
in Hong Kong: Implications for Their Recovery.”  Journal of Community 
Psychology 31 (4): 383–96. 
 Tsang, Sandra K. M., Daniel T. L. Shek, Lorinda L. Lam, Florence L. Y. 
Tang, and Penita M. P. Cheung. 2007. “Brief Report: Application of the 
TEACCH Program on Chinese Pre-school Children with Autism—
Does Culture Make a Difference?”  Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders 37 (2): 390–96. 
 Turkheimer, Eric, Andreana Haley, Mary Waldron, Brian D’Onofrio, and 
Irving I. Gottesman. 2003. “Socioeconomic Status Modifies Heritability 
of IQ in Young Children.”  Psychological Science 14 (6): 623–28. 
 U.S. Census Bureau. 2008. S1701. “Poverty Status in the Past 12 
Months.” In  Survey: American Community Survey: Data Set: 2006–2008 

124 Worldwide and Cultural Perspectives in ASD 
American Community Survey 3-Year Estimates. http://factfinder.
census.gov/servlet/ADPTable?_bm=y&-geo_id=01000US&-
qr_name=ACS_2008_3YR_G00_DP3YR5&-ds_name=&-_lang=en&-
redoLog=false&-format= 
 Valentine, Deborah P., Suzanne McDermott, and Dinah Anderson. 
1998. “Mothers of Adults with Mental Retardation: Is Race a Factor in 
Perceptions of Burdens and Gratifications?”  Families in Society 79 (6): 
577–84. 
 Wechsler, David. 2003.  The Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children, 4th 
Edition.  San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation. 
 Wilder, Lynn K., Tina Taylor Dyches, Festus E. Obiakor, and Bob 
Algozzine. 2004. “Multicultural Perspectives on Teaching Students with 
Autism.”  Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities 19 (2): 
105–13. 
 Williams, Justin H. G., Andrew Whiten, and Tulika Singh. 2004. “A 
Systematic Review of Action Imitation in Autistic Spectrum Disorder.” 
 Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 34 (3): 285–99. 
 Wing, Lorna. 1980. “Childhood Autism and Social Class: A Question of 
Selection?”  British Journal of Psychiatry 137:410–17. 
 Yeh, May, Richard L. Hough, Kristen McCabe, Anna Lau, and Ann 
Garland. 2004. “Parental Beliefs about the Causes of Child Problems: 
Exploring Racial/Ethnic Patterns.”  Journal of the American Academy of 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 43 (5): 605. 

125
 4 
 Chronology 
 T
his chapter provides a timeline of events that have shaped our 
understanding and awareness of autism. Although individu-
als lived with what was later termed  autism  prior to the initial 
usage of the term, the diagnosis itself was not established until 
the mid-20th century. Therefore, the field of autism is relatively 
young compared to other mental health disorders and dates back 
only to the early 1900s. This chapter describes important scientific 
findings in autism as well as different evolutions of diagnostic 
criteria, events that influenced the public’s awareness of the dis-
order, popularities of various treatments, and important events 
involved in examining the potential causes of autism. 
 1910 
 The Swiss psychiatrist Eugen Bleuler first uses 
the word autism to describe individuals with 
schizophrenia who have lost contact with reality. 
Dr. Bleuler describes an “autistic withdrawal of 
the patient to his fantasies.” He adapts the word 
autism from the Greek word autos, which means 
“self.”
1912 
 Dr. Bleuler publishes “Das Autistische Den-
ken” in a journal of psychiatry and presents his 
thoughts on how a person with autism (as he de-
fined autism) experiences the world.
1938 
 Dr. Hans Asperger, a professor of pediatrics at 
the University Children’s Hospital in Vienna, 
Austria, presents a lecture on child psychology. 

126 Chronology
1938 (cont.) 
 In the lecture, he adapts Bleuler’s term, autism, 
and uses the phrase “autistic psychopathy” to 
describe children showing social withdrawal 
and overly intense preoccupations.
1943 
 Dr. Leo Kanner, a child psychiatrist, from Johns 
Hopkins University, describes a childhood disor-
der involving social and language impairments 
and the presence of restricted or repetitive be-
haviors. He reports that the children have a sim-
ilar loss of contact with reality as described by 
Bleuler, but do not also have schizophrenia. He 
describes an “extreme autistic aloneness” and 
coins the term “early infantile autism.”
1944 
 Dr. Hans Asperger reports on four children 
with a pattern of behaviors he terms “autistic 
psychopathy.” The behaviors included reduced 
empathy, difficulties with forming friendships, 
impairments in the ability to maintain reciprocal 
conversations, all encompassing interests, and 
clumsiness.
1950s 
 Psychoanalytic theories dominate the field of 
psychology and behavioral disorders with no 
identifiable medical cause, such as behavior 
change following a head injury, are attributed to 
early developmental relationships, particularly 
with parental figures. In the case of autism, cold, 
aloof parenting is attributed to the cause of the 
disorder.
1952 
 The first edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM   ) is published. 
The text provides a glossary of descriptions of 
diagnostic categories of mental disorders. Al-
though autism is not listed as a diagnosis, the 
diagnostic term schizophrenic reaction, childhood 
type is listed and is used to capture children 
that present with behaviors that resemble what 
would now be called autism.
1962 
 LSD is used as a treatment for “autistic schizo-
phrenic children” and the results are reported 
in Biological Psychiatry. The authors of the study 

Chronology 127
conclude that the patients showed few side ef-
fects, appeared to be happier and “high,” were 
more interactive with others, and showed less 
repetitive behavior.
 
 The Autistic Children’s Aid Society of North 
London (later deemed the National Autistic So-
ciety) is founded by parents of children with 
autism in England, including Dr. Lorna Wing, 
a psychiatrist who would become a prominent 
figure in the autism world. The initial goals are 
to establish a center to care for affected children, 
with a more general goal of creating a sound 
entity to represent the interests of children with 
autism. In the years after its inception, the or-
ganization has expanded to include chapters 
throughout the United Kingdom.
1964 
 Dr. Bernard Rimland, an experimental psycholo-
gist and parent of a child with autism, publishes 
Infantile Autism. In the book, Dr. Rimland argues 
that there is no evidence to support the conclu-
sion that autism’s cause is rooted in parenting. 
In the text, Dr. Rimland reviews what is known 
about autism and promotes the notion that the 
disorder is brain based, citing physiological evi-
dence and implicating genetics.
1965 
 Dr. Bernard Rimland and Dr. Ruth Sullivan join 
forces with other parents of children with autism 
to found the National Society for Autistic Chil-
dren (later named Autism Society of America) in 
the United States. The core founders of the non-
profit foundation gather in response to the flood 
of support letters following the publication of 
Infantile Autism and Dr. Rimland’s refutation 
that poor parenting causes autism. The mission 
of the organization is to improve the lives of all 
individuals with autism.
 
 Life magazine publishes a story about the treat-
ment employed by Ivar Lovaas, professor of 
psychology at the University of California at 
Los Angeles. The article titled, “Screams, Slaps 

128 Chronology
1965 (cont.) 
 & Love: A Surprising, Shocking Treatment Helps 
Far-gone Mental Cripples,” provides a descrip-
tion of the treatment, based on the principles of 
Applied Behavioral Analysis. The treatment is 
the first to be scientifically studied and empiri-
cally validated to be effective in ameliorating 
symptoms.
1967 
 Dr. Bernard Rimland founds the Autism Re-
search Institute (ARI) in San Diego, California, 
with the mission to improve diagnosis, treat-
ment, and prevention of autism through scien-
tific research. Dr. Rimland remains involved in 
the organization until his death in 2006. The 
organization holds conferences called “Defeat 
Autism Now!” and is known for its focus on bio-
medical treatments of autism.
 
 Dr. Bruno Bettelheim, a professor of psychology 
at the University of Chicago and director of the 
Sonia Shankman Orthogenic School for treating 
children with developmental disabilities, pub-
lishes his book, The Empty Fortress: Infantile Au-
tism and the Birth of the Self. In accordance with the 
psychodynamic context of that time period, he 
proposes that autism is caused by “rejecting par-
ents.” The book contains Dr. Bettelheim’s most 
cited statement, “Throughout this book I state 
my belief that the precipitating factor in infantile 
autism is the parent’s wish that his child should 
not exist.”
1968 
 The second edition of the Diagnostic and Statis-
tical Manual of Mental Disorders is published. 
Under the diagnostic category schizophrenia, 
childhood type, autism is included as a descriptor.
1971 
 Professor of psychology, Dr. Eric Schopler, at the 
University of North Carolina, proposes that in-
stead of treating parents of children with au-
tism, therapists should involve parents as part of 
treatment for the child. He publishes the manu-
script: “Parents as Cotherapists in the Treatment 
of Psychotic Children.”

Chronology 129
 
 The Journal of Autism and Childhood Schizophenia 
(later renamed Journal of Autism and Develop-
mental Disorders) is founded with Leo Kanner as 
the editor in chief. The first issue includes arti-
cles by Drs. Leo Kanner, Michael Rutter, and Eric 
Schopler.
1972 
 Dr. Eric Schopler founds Division TEACCH 
(Treatment and Education of Autistic and re-
lated Communication-handicapped Children), a 
program that focuses on providing a structured 
teaching environment and including parents as 
cotherapists to aid in the treatment and educa-
tion of children with autism. The program was 
originally developed through a research grant 
and parents involved in the study, along with 
Dr. Schopler, successfully petition the state leg-
islature for permanent funding.
1977 
 Dr. Susan Folstein and Sir Michael Rutter, both 
prominent child psychiatrists, publish findings 
from a twin study of autism conducted in the 
United Kingdom. By comparing the concordance 
rates for autism in identical and fraternal twins, 
they demonstrate that autism is a genetic disor-
der, ending the myth that autism is caused by 
“cold, aloof, refrigerator” mothers.
1979 
 Lorna Wing, a psychiatrist and parent of a 
daughter with autism, collaborates with Judith 
Gould, a clinical psychologist, to publish their 
findings on the prevalence of autism and their 
hypothesis that the pattern of behaviors previ-
ously termed infantile autism is really a spectrum 
of disorders. The term autism spectrum is born.
1980 
 Autism is considered a rare childhood disorder. 
The prevalence of autism is estimated at 4 in 
10,000 children.
 
 The third edition of the DSM is published. For the 
first time autism is identified as a disorder of its 
own right, separate from childhood schizophre-
nia. The term infantile autism is used to describe 

130 Chronology
1980 (cont.) 
 “a pervasive lack of responsiveness to other 
people,” deficits in language development, pe-
culiar speech patterns, bizarre responses to vari-
ous aspects of the environment, and the absence 
of delusions or hallucinations as seen in schizo-
phrenia.
1981 
 Dr. Lorna Wing popularizes Dr. Hans Asper-
ger’s research and writings and champions the 
idea that Asperger’s Disorder, termed Asperger’s 
Syndrome in the publication, is a separate and 
distinct subtype of pervasive developmental dis-
order from Autistic Disorder. Much debate re-
garding the existence of distinct subtypes and 
whether or not Asperger’s Disorder and Autis-
tic Disorder are separate disorders ensues in 
the scientific community. The debate continues 
today.
 
 Dr. O. Ivar Lovaas publishes a book geared to-
ward parents called Teaching Developmentally 
Disabled Children: The Me Book. The book is a 
training manual that provides detailed explana-
tions and examples of how to apply the prin-
ciples of behavior therapy. It is designed for 
use with children with a variety of challenges, 
including autism, mental retardation, and brain 
damage.
1985 
 Working under the mentorship of Dr. Uta Frith, 
doctoral student Simon Baron-Cohen conducts 
studies examining deficits in “theory of mind” 
in children with autism. Theory of mind is a term 
adapted from work with chimpanzee cognition 
and refers to the cognitive ability to understand 
that other people have beliefs, intentions, and 
wishes that are different from one’s own inten-
tions and beliefs. The initial tasks used to assess 
theory of mind were easy to administer and 
have spawned a vast field of research in autism 
as well as in typical development.
1987 
 The revision of the third edition of the Diag-
nostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
(DSM-III-R) is published. In this edition, the term 

Chronology 131
infantile autism is replaced by Autistic Disorder, 
and additional specific criteria are included re-
garding the disorder. Criteria for Pervasive De-
velopmental Disorder are specified to indicate 
that this category refers to children with signifi-
cant social and language impairments but who 
do not meet criteria for another disorder.
 
 Dr. Ivar Lovaas, at the University of California, 
Los Angeles publishes the results of a study dem-
onstrating the effectiveness of applying behav-
ioral principles (termed Applied Behavior Analysis, 
or ABA) to treatment for children with autism. The 
intervention entails approximately 40 hours per 
week of repeated trials (called discrete trial train-
ing) in which the child with autism is reinforced 
through rewards for correct performance. He re-
ports finding significant improvements in in-
telligence scores for children and highlights that 
many of the children receiving intervention in 
the study are placed in regular education class-
rooms.
1988 
 Dustin Hoffman wins an Oscar for his portrayal 
of Raymond Babbit in the movie Rainman. Bab-
bit is a man with autism who shows marked 
impairments in social interactions, savant math-
ematical skills, ritualized behaviors, and a crip-
pling insistence on sameness. For the first time, 
the word autism becomes popularized and aware-
ness of the disorder increases among the general 
public.
1989 
 Dr. Douglas Biklen, a psychologist at Syracuse 
University, returns from a trip to Melbourne 
Australia where he observed an assisted tech-
nology called Facilitated Communication (FC) 
developed by a teacher, Rosemary Crossley, as a 
result of her work with individuals with cerebral 
palsy in the 1970s. Dr. Biklen popularizes FC in 
the United States as a way to help individuals 
with autism communicate via a keyboard with 
a facilitator touching the individual’s hands 
while he/she typed. Viewed as a miracle tool by 

132 Chronology
1989 (cont.) 
 parents of nonverbal children with autism, FC 
achieves rapid, widespread use despite no evi-
dence of its effectiveness.
 
 Dr. Catherine Lord, a professor of psychology 
and autism expert, and colleagues publish a stan-
dardized observation of communication and 
social behaviors called the Autism Diagnostic Ob-
servation Schedule. Soon after its publication, it is 
widely used as a diagnostic tool in both clinical 
and research in autism and is important because 
it allows for a standardized comparison of chil-
dren across study samples.
 
 Drs. Michael Rutter, Ann LeCouteur, and Cath-
erine Lord publish an interview for parents of 
children with autism (or suspected autism), 
called the Autism Diagnostic Interview (ADI). 
Primarily used in research settings due to its 
length, it helps to standardize information ob-
tained about current and past behaviors in chil-
dren with autism. It was later revised in 1994 to 
reflect new diagnostic criteria for autism spec-
trum disorders.
1993 
 Through FC, Betsy Wheaton, a child with au-
tism, reports that her parents, grandparents and 
brother have sexually abused her. This allega-
tion prompts studies of the FC as a legitimate 
means of communicating to be conducted. Sub-
sequent studies find time and time again that it 
is the facilitator who is doing the communicat-
ing, not the children and FC is found to be an 
invalid means of allowing children to commu-
nicate.
1994 
 Julie Osterling, a graduate student at the Uni-
versity of Washington, and her mentor, professor 
of psychology Dr. Geraldine Dawson, publish 
the findings of home videotapes of first year 
birthday parties of children later diagnosed with 
autism and children with typical development. 
The authors show that children with autism can 
be differentiated from typically developing chil-
dren at one year of age due to reduced eye con-

Chronology 133
tact, response to name and pointing and show-
ing behaviors. This finding indicates that chil-
dren with autism can be identified several years 
before concerns are assessed and they are diag-
nosed in the community.
 
 The fourth edition of the DSM is published. Per-
vasive Developmental Disorders (PDD) is listed 
as an umbrella term that encompasses five dis-
tinct disorders: Autistic Disorder, Asperger’s 
Disorder, Rett’s Syndrome, Childhood Disinte-
grative Disorder, and Pervasive Developmental 
Disorders—Not Otherwise Specified. In this edi-
tion of the DSM, Asperger’s Disorder becomes 
a distinct disorder.
 
 Committees updating the Pervasive Develop-
mental Disorders section of the DSM collaborate 
with committees developing the ninth edition of 
the International Classification of Diseases, which 
allows for the establishment of identical diag-
nostic criteria for both manuals. This creates a 
worldwide standard for PDDs allowing research 
and clinical information to be translated across 
continents.
 
 Frustrated by the slow pace of scientific progress 
regarding ASDs and the limited research funds 
dedicated to autism research by the National 
Institutes of Health, Karen and Eric London, par-
ents of a child with autism, found National Al-
liance for Autism Research (NAAR) to become 
first nonprofit devoted to furthering autism re-
search. Through funds garnered by parent do-
nations, the organization supports research into 
the causes and treatments of autism. NAAR 
goes on to establish the Autism Tissue Program 
to collect postmortem brains of individuals with 
autism to study the underlying anatomical and 
cellular features of autism.
1995 
 Jonathan Shestack and Portia Iversen, parents 
of a child with autism, found Cure Autism Now 
(CAN), a parent-based funding organization

134 Chronology
1995 (cont.) 
 dedicated to autism research. Both CAN and 
NAAR increase public awareness of autism and 
provide funds for increasing awareness and ad-
vancing research.
 
 A team of researchers in the United Kingdom 
led by Anthony Bailey report their findings from 
an expansion of the 1977 Folstein and Rutter 
seminal twin study. With a true population-
based sample ascertained by contacting every 
school, clinic, and twin register in the country 
and all cases of autism verified with standard-
ized parent report and child observation, this 
well-conducted study further clarifies the role of 
genetics in autism and replicates the original 
findings of an increased concordance rate for 
identical twins than fraternal twins. Further-
more, these newer findings suggest an even 
higher concordance rate for identical twins than 
the original 1977 paper.
1997 
 The National Institutes of Child Health and De-
velopment establish the Collaborative Programs 
for Excellence in Autism (CPEA) and provide 
$105 million in research funding over 10 years 
to nine network sites, including Boston Univer-
sity, the University of California at Davis, the 
University of California at Los Angeles, the Uni-
versity of Washington, the University of Roch-
ester Medical Center, the University of Utah, the 
University of Michigan, the University of Pitts-
burg, and Yale University. Each center conducts 
its own projects in autism focusing on genetics, 
neuroscience, early identification, early devel-
opment, and treatment. A standardization of a 
portion of measures allows for collaboration and 
data sharing, thereby increasing the number of 
participants in the study nationwide.
 
 Soon after establishing CAN, Portia Iversen and 
Jonathan Shestack cofound the Autism Genetics 
Resource Exchange (AGRE), the world’s larg-
est gene bank open to the scientific community 
to help search for genetic influences in autism. 

Chronology 135
Prominent genetics researchers are recruited to 
work on AGRE.
1998 
 First genome-wide linkage analysis of autism is 
published in a well-known genetics journal by 
a global scientific group, the International Mo-
lecular Genetic Study of Autism Consortium, 
suggesting a chromosomal hotspot for autism on 
chromosome 7. Other chromosomal areas, in-
cluding chromosome 16, are also found to be 
significant. The study examined 99 families con-
taining family members affected with autism and 
it represents an important step toward identify-
ing autism predisposition genes.
 
 After his son is diagnosed with autism, Doug 
Flutie, former NFL quarterback, founds the Doug 
Flutie Jr. Foundation for Autism. Its goal is to 
provide funding directly to families to help with 
treatment costs and also provides small grants 
to treatment research.
 
 Dr. Andrew Wakefield publishes findings in a 
leading general medical journal (The Lancet) re-
porting cases of 12 children with developmental 
disabilities who have traces of measles mRNA 
in the gut. This finding fuels fire to the idea that 
autism is caused by immunizations, particularly 
the MMR vaccine, and is considered by those 
in support of the autism-vaccine connection to 
represent significant scientific support for their 
claim. After the publication of this study, rates 
of inoculation in England drop from 92 percent 
to below 80 percent.
 
 First Signs Inc. is founded by a parent of a child 
with autism and is a national nonprofit organi-
zation whose mission is to promote the best out-
come for children through early identification of 
challenges. The organization has worked dili-
gently to improve screening processes for young 
children with the goal to lower the age at which 
children are diagnosed with autism. Among other 
resources, their Web site contains a video glos-
sary of early warning signs of autism.

136 Chronology
1999 
 The hormone Secretin is reported on a popula-
tion television show Dateline to have miracu-
lously cured one child’s autism. Secretin is a 
peptide hormone that is used during a medical 
procedure called an endoscopy to test pancreatic 
functioning and is not FDA-approved for any 
use other than as a diagnostic aid in endosco-
pies. Although subsequent studies indicate no 
effectiveness of Secretin, many parents seek out 
doctors who will prescribe Secretin to treat their 
child’s autism and prices for Secretin soar due to 
the high demand.
Late 1990s 
 Conclusions from Dr. Wakefield’s paper are sub-
sequently retracted by 10 of the 13 authors on the 
paper. The Lancet later retracts the manuscript 
when it is revealed that Dr. Wakefield is being 
retained by families and attorneys in lawsuits 
against a vaccine company.
2000s 
 Parents and advocacy groups across the coun-
try lobby state congresses to mandate insurance 
companies to cover the cost of such autism treat-
ments as ABA, which can be more than $70,000–
$90,000 for the recommended 25 hours/week of 
individual therapy. Some states pass the laws, 
including Arizona, Pennsylvania, and South 
Carolina, but include a cap of $36,000–50,000 per 
year for insurance coverage of treatments. Insur-
ance companies claim that autism treatments are 
educational in nature, not medical, and lack strong 
evidence of effectiveness.
 
 Jenny McCarthy, among many other parents of 
children with autism, continues to call for a closer 
examination of a causal relationship between vac-
cines and autism, despite continued opposing 
reports from the Institute of Medicine. Recom-
mendations include a major overhaul in the 
national immunization schedule and in the com-
pounds used in vaccines.
2000 
 Talking About Curing Autism (TACA) is founded 
and promotes biomedical treatments for chil-

Chronology 137
dren with autism. Jenny McCarthy partners with 
this organization after her son is diagnosed with 
autism.
 
 Portia Iversen establishes the International Meet-
ing for Autism Research (IMFAR) to create a 
forum to present research findings specific to au-
tism. The first IMFAR conference is held in San 
Diego, California, in 2001. IMFAR continues to be 
held annually in different cities across the world 
and is the most attended and popular scientific 
conference specific to autism.
 
 President Bill Clinton signs the Children’s Health 
Act and founds an autism research coordinating 
committee. Among other goals, the Children’s 
Health Act directs federal agencies to study 
diseases that are increasingly prevalent in the 
United States, including autism.
 
 The Children’s Health Act mandates that the Na-
tional Institutes for Mental Health dedicate $65 
million to establishing the Studies to Advance 
Autism Research and Treatment (STAART net-
work) and eight STAART centers are established 
across the United States: Boston University; 
Kennedy Krieger Institute; Mt. Sinai Medical 
School; University of California, Los Angeles; 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; Uni-
versity of Rochester; University of Washington; 
and Yale University. Each center supports three 
or more research projects, with at least one study 
focused on treatment, and engage in multisite 
clinical trials and collaborations. Most of the 
studies conducted at the centers evaluate and 
treat patients, as well as enroll them into clinical 
trials.
2001 
 U.S. Rep, Christopher Smith (R-NJ) and Rep. 
Mike Doyle (D-PA) found the Congressional 
Autism Caucus, also known as the Congres-
sional Coalition for Autism Research & Educa-
tion (C.A.R.E.). The bipartisan caucus goes on to 

138 Chronology
2001 (cont.) 
 include more than 160 members of Congress 
and is the first organization in Congress to focus 
its efforts on autism spectrum disorders.
 
 The Institute of Medicine publishes the first of 
eight Immunization Safety Reviews, three of 
which pertain directly to autism. In this first re-
port, available published and unpublished sci-
entific evidence are reviewed and the committee 
concludes that there is no causal link between 
immunizations and autism at a general popu-
lation level. The report also concludes that Dr. 
Wakefield’s paper is “uninformative with respect 
to causality between MMR and ASD” due to the 
small number of children included in the study, 
multiple diagnoses of the sample, selection bias, 
and the lack of detail about diagnoses of the chil-
dren in the study.
 
 In the second report of the Immunization Safety 
Review, the Institute of Medicine concludes that 
the relationship between thimerosal-containing 
vaccines and the onset of neurodevelopmental 
disorders such as autism and ADHD is not es-
tablished and research support is indirect and 
incomplete. Nevertheless, thimerosal is recom-
mended to be removed from the vaccinations 
DTaP, Hib, and hepatitis B vaccines in the United 
States. These vaccinations remain thimerosal-free 
today.
2002 
 Further work at the University of Washington 
utilizing a home videotape study demonstrates 
that children with autism can be differentiated 
from children with mental retardation as early 
as 12 months of age. Social behaviors that distin-
guish infants with developmental delay versus 
autism included orienting to name, looking at 
people, and frequency of directed vocalizations. 
People watching the videotapes use these three 
factors alone to correctly classify 87 percent of 
12-month-old infants in the study as either going 
on to be diagnosed with autism or developmen-
tal delay.

Chronology 139
2003 
 Jim and Marilyn Simons from the Simons Foun-
dation decide to take on a new initiative in their 
organization to fund autism research. A new di-
rection from their focus on basic science and 
mathematics research, they call prominent au-
tism researchers together to meet about up-and-
coming topics and next steps in the field. The 
Simons Foundation goes on to dedicate more than 
$100 million to autism research in subsequent 
years.
2004 
 This eighth and final Immunization Safety Re-
view report determines that the “body of epide-
miological evidence favors rejection of a causal 
relationship between the MMR vaccine and au-
tism. The committee also concludes that the body 
of epidemiological evidence favors rejection 
of a causal relationship between thimerosal-
containing vaccines and autism.” Potential bio-
logical mechanisms for vaccine-induced autism 
are determined to be plausible in theory, but not 
supported by the numerous scientific studies con-
ducted to date.
2005 
 The nonprofit foundation Autism Speaks is 
founded by Suzanne and Bob Wright (former 
CEO of the television network NBC) who are 
grandparents of a child with autism. Autism 
Speaks has raised $200 million to date and is 
known for lobbying congress and private citizens 
to allocate research money and national attention 
to autism. Now the nation’s leading nonprofit 
organization devoted to autism, Autism Speaks 
plays a key role in the successful passage of the 
Combating Autism Act and is a primary player 
in placing autism on the United Nations global 
health agenda.
 
 Average age of diagnosis for autism drops na-
tionally to approximately 3 years of age, with 
some research institutions, including some 
STAART centers, beginning to diagnosis children 
at 18 months of age. Mandell and colleagues 
report in the medical journal Pediatrics that the

140 Chronology
2005 (cont.) 
 average age of diagnosis is 3.1 years for children 
with Autistic Disorder, 3.9 years for PDD-NOS, 
and 7.2 years for Asperger’s Disorder (Mandell 
et al. 2005. “Factors Associated with Age of Di-
agnosis among Children with Autism Spectrum 
Disorders.” Pediatrics 116 (6): 148086).
2006 
 National Alliance for Autism Research (NAAR) 
merges with Autism Speaks. Karen and Eric 
London (NAAR’s cofounders) remain actively in-
volved in the organization’s growth and devel-
opment.
 
 The Combating Autism Act is signed into law 
by President George W. Bush. This legislation 
authorizes nearly one billion dollars in govern-
ment expenditures, over a five-year period, to be 
put toward screening, education, early interven-
tion, prompt referrals for treatment and services, 
and research in the autism spectrum disorders. 
This amount is approximately double the exist-
ing budget for these areas of focus and allows 
for additional Autism Centers of Excellence to 
be funded.
2007 
 The U.S. Senate designates April as National 
Autism Awareness Month.
 
 Numerous publications of epidemiological stud-
ies, both with cohort and ecological designs, as 
well as scientifically designed experiments, all 
fail to find evidence for causative link between 
immunizations and autism. As immunization 
rates fall and thimerosal or ethylmercury (preser-
vatives used in vaccines) are removed from vac-
cines, autism rates continue to rise.
 
 Autism Speaks merges with Cure Autism Now 
to form the largest nonprofit autism advocacy 
group in the nation. Autism Speaks’ global influ-
ence continues to rise.
 
 Prevalence of autism spectrum disorders is esti-
mated to be 1 in 150 children in the United States 
by the Centers for Disease Control and Preven-

Chronology 141
tion, which is a very substantial increase from 
previous prevalence rates reported in autism. 
Scientists suggest that the loosening of diagnos-
tic criteria, changes in ascertainment and study 
design, earlier detection, and increased aware-
ness lead to much of the increases in prevalence 
rates, but that there does appear to be some sec-
ular increase in the rate of autism. ASDs are now 
considered one of the most common develop-
mental disabilities in children.
 
 The National Institutes for Health establishes a 
network of research institutions called the Au-
tism Centers of Excellence (ACE) to serve as a 
consolidation of the CPEA and STAART net-
works. The ACE program encompasses research 
centers and research networks. ACE Center 
award recipients are University of Illinois at Chi-
cago; University of California, San Diego; Uni-
versity of Washington; University of Pittsburgh; 
and University of California, Los Angeles; and 
ACE network award recipients are University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill and University of 
California Davis.
 
 Jenny McCarthy publishes her book Louder Than 
Words: A Mother’s Journey in Healing Autism and 
begins appearing on such national television 
shows as Oprah, relaying the story of her son’s 
recovery from autism through biomedical treat-
ments such as the gluten- and casein-free diet. She 
and fellow actor Jim Carrey, take a strong stand in 
favor of the link between autism and vaccines.
 
 Jonathan Sebat and Michael Wigler, along with 
many other authors, publish a groundbreaking 
genetics article in one of the most prestigious sci-
entific journals in the world: Science. Sebat and 
colleagues report that a specific type of genetic 
mutation called copy number variants (CNVs) 
occur significantly more often in children with 
autism who do not have a family history of the 
disorder (simplex families, sporadic autism) as 

142 Chronology
2007 (cont.) 
 compared to children without autism and com-
pared to children with autism from families 
containing more than one child with autism (mul-
tiplex families, familial autism). Sebat’s article 
sparks a new line of genetic research in the field 
of autism examining simplex families and is con-
sidered groundbreaking because it suggests that 
familial and sporadic autism may develop from 
different genetic mechanisms.
 
 Based on findings from the study by Sebat et al. 
(2007), the Simons Simplex Collection Project 
(SSC) begins. The SSC is a multisite genetics study 
funded by the Simons Foundation that includes 
11 sites in the United States and Canada. Two ad-
ditional sites are added in the next year with the 
goal of collecting 3,000 simplex families to further 
explore genetic mechanisms of sporadic autism.
2008 
 One additional ACE program Center is awarded 
to Yale University. Additional ACE program net-
work award recipients are Wayne State Univer-
sity; University of California, Los Angeles; and 
Drexel University.
2009 
 Dr. Wakefield and two coauthors on his paper 
(Professor John Walker-Smith and Professor Si-
mon Murch) are under investigation for falsifying 
data in their 1998 paper that sparked the con-
troversial belief that the MMR vaccine causes 
autism. A careful examination of the medical re-
cords of the patients included in Dr. Wakefield’s 
study suggest that the symptoms described in 
the children’s medical records do not correspond 
with the those reported in Dr. Wakefield’s re-
search article and that some of the symptoms re-
ported as having an onset after the MMR vaccine 
were actually documented in the children’s med-
ical records before the immunization was given. 
If the results of this investigation are true, it rules 
out the possibility that the vaccines could have 
caused the symptoms since they were present be-
fore the immunization was given.

Chronology 143
 
 Alison Singer resigns as executive vice president 
of Autism Speaks due to her disagreement with 
the organization’s continued pursuit of research 
into the link between autism and vaccines despite 
repeated studies demonstrating no relationship. 
She then founds her own nonprofit called the 
Autism Science Foundation whose mission is to 
support research in autism, particularly genetic 
influences. Karen London, cofounder of NAAR, 
also joins the organization.
 
 Months after Alison Singer leaves Autism 
Speaks, Dr. Eric London, cofounder of the au-
tism research foundation NAAR, resigns from 
his role on the Autism Speaks Scientific Affairs 
Committee Speaks. In his resignation letter, he 
states “the pivotal issue compelling my decision 
is the position which Autism Speaks is taking 
concerning vaccinations. The arguments which 
Dr. Dawson [Chief Scientific Officer of Autism 
Speaks] and others assert—that the parents need 
even further assurances and there might be rare 
cases of ‘biologically plausible’ vaccine involve-
ment—are misleading and disingenuous.”

This page intentionally left blank

145
 5 
 Biographical Sketches 
 T
his chapter will provide brief biographies of notable individu-
als whose work and/or lives are relevant to the field of autism. 
Individuals discussed are autism researchers, founders of au-
tism nonprofit organizations, and influential figures in increasing 
autism awareness to the general public. Their various contributions 
to the autism community will be discussed in detail and notewor-
thy background information about their training and introduction 
into autism will be included, if pertinent. Wherever possible, birth 
years and year of death will be stated. This list is not exhaustive 
and we have attempted to sample individuals from a variety of 
disciplines to provide as much breadth as possible. 
 Hans Asperger (1906–1980) 
 Hans Asperger was born on a farm in Austria and the elder of two 
sons. He showed a talent for language and loved to memorize 
and recite poetry. His favorite poet was Franz Grillparzer, the 
Austrian national poet. He did not make friends easily in his early 
years, but did so during the 1920s when he became involved in 
the youth movement in Austria. He studied medicine in Vienna 
and in 1931 graduated with a medical doctorate. During World 
War II, he served as a medical officer in Croatia. After the war he 
took the position of chair of pediatrics at the University Children’s 
Hospital in Vienna. In 1944 he described four children with “ autistic 
psychopathy.” He used the term to describe the pattern of 

146 Biographical Sketches
behaviors that included reduced empathy, difficulties with form-
ing friendships and maintaining reciprocal conversations, all en-
compassing interests, and clumsiness. He highlighted their 
strengths in intellectual ability and curiosity and likened the chil-
dren to “little professors.” Dr. Asperger is known for highlighting 
the strengths of his patients and this is true in his descriptions of 
the children. It has been suggested that his focusing on the posi-
tive aspects of the behaviors is because, he, himself had Asper-
ger’s Disorder. Dr. Asperger was tirelessly devoted to the field and 
although there was little mention of Asperger’s Disorder prior to 
the 1994 inclusion of the disorder in the  Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual, the size of his contribution to the field is now clear. 
 Tony Attwood (b. 1952) 
 Tony Attwood, PhD, is a British psychologist who has authored 
several bestselling books on ASD, particularly on Asperger’s Dis-
order. Two of his books are  Asperger’s Syndrome: A Guide for Parents 
and Professionals and  The Complete Guide to Asperger’s Syndrome . 
Dr. Attwood has an honors degree in psychology from the Uni-
versity of Hull, a master’s degree in clinical psychology from the 
University of Surrey, and a doctorate from the University of Lon-
don, working under Dr. Uta Frith. He currently resides in Queens-
land, Australia, and is an adjunct associate professor at Griffith 
University in Queensland. Clinical work continues to be impor-
tant to Dr. Attwood, and he has a diagnostic and treatment clinic 
for children and adults with autism in Brisbane, Australia. His re-
search has been largely focused on treatment, and he has recently 
published articles reporting positive effects of cognitive behavioral 
therapy for managing associated symptoms (anxiety and anger) of 
Asperger’s Disorder. 
 Dr. Attwood first became interested in autism in 1971 while 
working as a volunteer at a school for special needs. After meeting 
two young children with autism, he became dedicated to under-
standing their unusual behavior and helping children and adults 
with autism in whatever way he could. Since then, Dr. Attwood’s 
career has been largely focused on helping individuals with Asper-
ger’s Disorder throughout the lifespan, including adulthood and 
elderly populations. 

Margaret Bauman 147
 Simon Baron-Cohen (b. 1958) 
 Professor Baron-Cohen made a significant contribution to the un-
derstanding of autism and the field of developmental psychol-
ogy when he authored the first publication indicating deficits and 
delays in “theory of mind” in individuals with autism. The paper 
was the result of his research conducted during his graduate 
work.  Theory of mind  is a term adapted from the study of cognitive 
processes in chimpanzees and refers to the cognitive ability to un-
derstand that others have beliefs, intentions, and wishes that are 
different from one’s own intentions and beliefs. His initial pub-
lication on “theory of mind” spawned a vast field of research in 
autism as well as in typical development. Following his pioneer-
ing work into the theory of mind, Dr. Baron-Cohen developed a 
theory to explain the gender differences observed in autism. He 
proposed that autism is a form of the extreme male brain. This 
theory has been met with both support and skepticism by the sci-
entific community. Dr. Baron-Cohen holds a PhD in psychology 
from University College in London, a master’s degree in clinical 
psychology from the Institute of Psychiatry, as well as a master’s 
degree in human sciences. He is currently a professor of devel-
opmental psychopathology at the University of Cambridge and 
director of the Autism Research Center. His cousin is the comedic 
actor Sacha Baron-Cohen, known for his roles in  Da Ali G show 
and the movie  Borat. 
 Margaret Bauman (dates unknown) 
 Margaret Bauman, MD, pioneered an understanding of the biologi-
cal basis of autism with her work identifying anatomical abnor-
malities in brain structures in individuals of autism. In addition to 
her research in the biology of autism, she is a clinician who has led 
the movement toward a multidisciplinary approach to the treat-
ment of autism. She founded LADDERS (Learning and Develop-
mental Disabilities and Rehabilitation Services) in 1981 to provide 
comprehensive diagnostic and treatment services that focus on 
the integration of disciplines ranging from neurology, gastroen-
terology, social work, physical therapy, occupational therapy, psy-
chiatry, psychology, speech therapy, nursing, and genetics to help 

148 Biographical Sketches
individuals with autism and developmental disabilities achieve 
their full potential. The Autism Treatment Network, funded by Au-
tism Speaks, is in part based on her clinic and treatment approach 
at LADDERS, located at Massachusetts General Hospital, and she 
has served as the medical director the network. 
 In addition to directing LADDERS, Dr. Bauman is an associ-
ate professor of neurology at Harvard University Medical School 
and an adjunct associate professor of anatomy and neurobiology 
at Boston University School of Medicine. In 1990 she started and 
organized the Autism Research Fund (TARF) to underscore the 
important role that research with brains of individuals with au-
tism can play in identifying the pathophysiology of the disorder. 
Since that time a large number of individuals with autism have 
donated their brains for autopsy and research to allow for this 
type of research. 
 Bruno Bettelheim (1903–1990) 
 Bruno Bettelheim was best known for his writings regarding au-
tism and his belief that autism was caused by cold, aloof “refrigera-
tor” mothering. He was born in Austria and began his education 
at the University of Vienna. With the death of his father he with-
drew from his studies to manage his family’s sawmill although he 
later returned to Vienna to finish his education. Dr. Bettelheim was 
Jewish and shortly after completing his dissertation in art history 
he was sent to a concentration camp in 1938. He regained his free-
dom in 1939 with a number of other prisoners following an am-
nesty that was granted. He emigrated to New York to reunite with 
his wife, who had emigrated earlier, but she had already become 
involved with another man. As a result he moved to Chicago and 
quickly took a position in psychology. He taught at Chicago Uni-
versity from 1944 until his retirement in 1973. While in Chicago he 
also directed the Sonia Shankman Orthogenic School and based 
much of his writings on his experiences treating children with 
emotional disturbances. He published a number of books during 
his tenure at the University of Chicago, most notably,  The Empty 
Fortress: Infantile Autism and the Birth of the Self,  which fostered the 
refrigerator mother theory. Biographies published after his suicide 
in 1990 indicate that many of his reported accomplishments were 
fabricated, including his multiple degrees, his academic awards, 

Tony Charman 149
his positive reviews by Freud, training experiences, the care and 
improvement of the children he worked with at the Orthogenic 
School, and even his reported involvement with the anti-Nazi 
underground. 
 Eugene Bleuler (1857–1939) 
 Eugene Bleuler was born in Switzerland and studied medicine in 
Zurich, Paris, London, and Munich. In the late 1880s and early 
1890s he served as director of the psychiatric clinic at the hospital 
Rheinau and made significant improvements in patient care. In 
1898 he became director of the Burgholzli, the psychiatric hospi-
tal at the University of Zurich. One of his interns was Carl Jung, 
the psychiatrist who started the Jungian branch of psychology. 
Dr. Bleuler is credited with renaming dementia praecox as schizo-
phrenia. Basing on the Greek word  schizein,  which means “split,” 
and  phren,  which means “mind,” Dr. Bleuler suggested this was 
a better descriptor for the disorder. He presented in a speech at 
the German Psychiatric Association in Berlin that the disorder was 
not a form of dementia and most often developed in early adult-
hood and was therefore not an early developing disorder ( praecox 
meaning “early”). In a 1910 paper on schizophrenia, Dr. Bleuler 
discussed the “autistic withdrawal of the patient to his fantasies, 
again which any influence from outside sources becomes and in-
tolerable disturbance.” He adapted the word autism from the Greek 
word  autos,  meaning “self.” It was the first time that the word  au-
tism  was used in print to refer to mental illness. Two years later, in 
1912, Dr. Bleuler published an article, “Das Autistische Denken,” 
in a journal of psychiatry, and in it he muses on the world of an 
autistic person. This 1912 text focuses on Dr. Bleuler’s concept of 
autism and is not used in the same sense that it is currently. 
 Tony Charman (dates unknown) 
 Tony Charman, PhD, is a clinical psychologist based at the Insti-
tute of Health in London where he is a professor of Autism Educa-
tion and Neurodevelopmental Disorders. His research has focused 
on the early social cognitive development in children with autism 
spectrum disorders, including examinations of imitation abilities 

150 Biographical Sketches
in young children with autism and children who experienced a re-
gression in language early in life. Recent work from Dr. Charman’s 
research group involves studying varying cognitive abilities of 
children with autism. Dr. Charman is also a well-known clinician 
and his research has remained firmly grounded in his clinical work 
at the Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children in the United 
Kingdom. His clinical research interests have included the de-
velopment of screening tools to aid in the early identification of 
autism spectrum disorders, epidemiological studies, intervention 
studies, and the prospective study of infants who are at risk for 
developing autism. Dr. Charman has also published a number of 
research articles refuting the purported link between the measles 
vaccination and autism. Dr. Charman was the editor-in-chief of 
the  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry  between 2007 and 
2009 and has been associate editor and contributor to a number of 
other scientific journals, including  Autism Research  and  Journal of 
Autism and Developmental Disorders. 
 Eric Courchesne (dates unknown) 
 Eric Courchesne, PhD, is a neuroscientist whose work has focused 
on studying the brain functioning and neuroanatomy of individu-
als with autism. Dr. Courchesne is currently a Professor of Neuro-
science at the University of California San Diego (UCSD) Medical 
School and director of the UCSD Autism Center of Excellence 
(ACE) awarded by the National Institute of Mental Health. He 
has published over 140 scientific articles in his academic career. 
Among many other research findings on specific brain regions 
implicated in autism, Dr. Courchesne was the first to document 
abnormally large brains in young children with autism (2–3 years 
of age) compared to both typically developing children and those 
with developmental delays without autism. The overgrowth is 
most notable in neural systems involved in cognitive, language, 
emotional and social functions that are known to be impaired in 
autism. 
 Dr. Courchesne’s work has also extended down to infancy 
and his laboratory carefully documented abnormal head circum-
ference growth trajectories in infants who go on to be diagnosed 
with autism. Head circumference is considered to be a good esti-
mate of overall brain size and volume in children. Dr. Courchesne 
obtained this information by examining medical records and head 

Geraldine Dawson 151
circumference measurements at well-baby visits with pediatri-
cians. He found that newborns who go on to be diagnosed with 
autism, on average, have normal to slightly below normal sized 
heads in the first one to two months of life. This period is followed 
by a rapid growth in head circumference during the first year of 
life, which levels off and approaches a normal growth trajectory 
in the second year of life. These findings were significant in the field 
of autism because they documented neurological abnormalities 
present in individuals with autism before a diagnosis was made 
and generally before behavioral differences were noted. Overall, 
it lends support to the conceptualization of autism as a develop-
mental disorder with a divergence from typical development de-
tectable in infancy. 
 Geraldine Dawson (b. 1951) 
 Geraldine Dawson, PhD, is a well-known autism researcher who 
retired in 2008 from a long career in academia and is now work-
ing as Chief Science Officer at the autism advocacy organization 
 Autism Speaks.  Dr. Dawson is a clinical psychologist and completed 
her undergraduate and graduate work at the University of Wash-
ington and received her doctorate degree in 1979. She is the found-
ing director of the University of Washington Autism Center and 
Professor Emeritus of Psychology at the University of Washing-
ton. Dr. Dawson was the director of the University of Washington 
Center of Excellence in Autism Research as well as the director of 
the Collaborative Program of Excellence in Autism from the mid-
1990s through 2008. 
 Dr. Dawson has conducted research in many areas within the 
field of autism, including autism diagnosis, brain functioning, ge-
netics, early identification of autism and, more recently, interven-
tion and prevention. She has authored five books on autism and 
has published more than 150 research articles in her academic ca-
reer. Important research findings from Dr. Dawson include discov-
eries of abnormal face processing in the brains of individuals with 
autism and further research into the social brain circuitry involved 
in autism. Her laboratory also conducted home videotape stud-
ies validating early indicators of autism in infancy and providing 
substantial support for the authenticity of autistic regression. 
Dr. Dawson has contributed greatly to the understanding of the 
genetic underpinnings of autism and to the features of the broader 

152 Biographical Sketches
autism phenotype in family members of children with autism. In 
addition to scientific contributions, Dr. Dawson testified before the 
U.S. Senate on behalf of individuals with autism and was a leading 
member of the Washington State Autism Task Force. 
 Susan Folstein (b. 1944) 
 Dr. Susan Folstein has been an active researcher in the field of psy-
chiatry since the 1970s. She received her MD at Cornell Medical 
College in 1970. Following her medical education at Cornell, in-
ternship in pediatrics at Bronx Municipal Hospital and residency 
in child psychiatry at New York Hospital, Dr. Folstein sought out 
further training with Sir Michael Rutter at Maudsley Hospital in 
London. As a fellow under the guidance of Professor Rutter, 
Dr. Folstein conducted a twin study of autism and definitively 
demonstrated that autism is a genetic disorder. Her findings, pub-
lished in 1977, struck a significant blow to the refrigerator mother 
theory of autism. Following her return from the United Kingdom, 
Dr. Folstein took a position as professor of psychiatry at Johns 
Hopkins University. There she continued her work in the field of 
psychiatric genetics including work on Huntington’s Disease as 
well as autism. In collaboration with her husband, Dr. Marshall 
Folstein, Dr. Susan Folstein developed the mini mental status exam, 
an easy to administer tool for physicians to assess the mental status 
of psychiatric patients. This tool becomes the most widely used 
assessment tool for assessing cognitive impairment. Later, as the 
head of the department of child psychiatry at New England Medi-
cal Center, Dr. Folstein served as the principal investigator of the 
Collaborative Linkage Study of Autism, a collaborative effort to 
conduct research on the genetics of autism through the assessment 
of families with two or more family members with autism. In 2004, 
Dr. Susan Folstein retired from active academic work but contin-
ued to play a significant role in the field of autism as an expert 
witness in court cases involving the vaccine autism controversy. 
 Eric Fombonne (b. 1954) 
 Dr. Fombonne was born and educated in France. He did not first 
intend to study medicine, but engineering instead. In an inter-
est “to have an impact on people” he switched to medicine, but 

Uta Frith 153
found that medical school “wasn’t enough of a challenge” and so 
became involved in research as well. He served in the French mili-
tary in the West Indies, and upon his return to France he led a 
groundbreaking epidemiological study of psychiatric disorders in 
children. During this study, he became interested in autism and 
continued his work in France conducting treatment research in au-
tism. He then spent a sabbatical year working with Michael Rutter 
and accepted an offer to remain in London at the Institute of Psy-
chiatry as a senior research scientist. There he began his research 
investigating the proposed relationship between vaccines and au-
tism and assessing the prevalence rates of autism. He has continued 
his research in these arenas in his position as director of psychia-
try at McGill University’s Montreal Children’s Hospital, which he 
accepted in 2001. His research has repeatedly indicated that there 
is no link between vaccines and autism and he is passionate about 
this line of work. Fombonne has strongly expressed his concern 
of the repercussions of parents deciding not to vaccinate their 
children for fear of vaccines causing autism. He took a stance to 
make his research findings accessible to the public and this mis-
sion is summarized by his statement, “Children were dying be-
cause fewer vaccines were being given and parents had forgotten 
that measles can be a killer. It became obvious that scientific evi-
dence had to be communicated efficiently for this debate to be 
resolved.” 
 Uta Frith (b. 1941) 
 Dr. Uta Frith was born in Germany and was lured away from 
studying art history in college to pursue study in experimental 
psychology in the early 1960s in Saarbrucken, Germany. In 1964 
she continued her studies in clinical psychology at the University 
of London’s Institute of Psychiatry and received her PhD in 1968. 
She took a position at the Medical Research Council where she re-
ceived mentoring from Lorna Wing and Sir Michael Rutter. Later 
she was a founding member of the Institute of Cognitive Neuro-
science at University College, London. She is credited for trans-
forming developmental psychology into developmental cognitive 
neuroscience through her careful scientific study of early devel-
opment, cognition and the disorders of autism and dyslexia. In 
the field of autism she, along with Simon Baron-Cohen and Alan 
Leslie, pioneered the exploration of cognitive deficits in autism 

154 Biographical Sketches
identifying impairments in mentalizing and central coherence. She 
has published more than 200 scientific articles, has written and 
edited a half dozen books, one of which, 1989’s  Autism: Explaining 
the Enigma , has been translated into 10 languages. She was awarded 
the prestigious Lifetime Achievement Award by the International 
Society for Autism Research in 2007. 
 Daniel Geschwind (b. 1960) 
 Daniel Geschwind, MD, PhD, is the director of the UCLA Cen-
ter for Autism Research and Treatment, the Gordon and Virginia 
MacDonald Distinguished Chair in Human Genetics, director of 
the Neurogenetics Program, and a professor of neurology and 
psychiatry at UCLA. He holds a BA from Dartmouth College 
and received his MD and PhD at Yale School of Medicine before 
completing his internship, residency, and post-doctoral work at 
UCLA. Initially a student working toward a chemistry degree, he 
veered from science to make and star in ski movies in France be-
fore training as a neurologist. Later, he turned to study genetics 
to answer complicated questions regarding social development 
and communication. With a bibliography of over 130 empirical 
articles focusing on genetics and neuroscience, Dr. Geschwind 
has considerably advanced the understanding of the etiology of 
autism and complex human behavior by addressing the complex 
questions regarding the genetic basis of autism. In 2001 he joined 
forces with other researchers affiliated with Cure Autism Now, 
and together they created the Autism Genetic Research Exchange 
(AGRE) through which dozens of studies exploring the genetics 
of autism have been conducted. Through groundbreaking stud-
ies he has identified several genomic regions related to autism as 
well as a specific gene associated with autism and language im-
pairments in males. 
 Temple Grandin (b. 1947) 
 Temple Grandin, PhD, is a renowned speaker and author provid-
ing insight into the experience of living with autism. Her descrip-
tions are especially powerful given that she herself was diagnosed 
with autism as a young child in 1950. At the time, her parents were 

Stanley Greenspan 155
told that she would have to be institutionalized for the rest of her 
life. However, Dr. Grandin has made the extraordinary transition 
from not speaking until three and a half years of age (communicat-
ing instead by humming and screaming) to eloquently describing 
her sensory and day-to-day experience as an individual with au-
tism. She is often considered to be one of the most well-known 
individuals with autism in the world. Dr. Grandin is dedicated to 
increasing autism awareness in the national and international com-
munity and has given countless talks and lectures across the United 
States and in other countries. She has also been featured on sev-
eral major television programs, including a documentary about her 
life. Dr. Grandin’s books elegantly describe her perception of the 
world and her views on social interactions. Titles include  Thinking 
in Pictures and  The Way I See It . 
 Dr. Grandin’s profession is actually a designer of livestock 
handling facilities and the majority of facilities across the country 
use Dr. Grandin’s designs. She is a professor of animal science at 
Colorado State University and is a strong advocate for utilizing 
humane practices in the slaughtering of livestock. Dr. Grandin ob-
tained her BA at Franklin Pierce College, her MS in animal science 
at Arizona State University, and her PhD in animal science from the 
University of Illinois in 1989. A film starring Claire Danes was re-
cently released documenting Dr. Grandin’s early life, school years, 
and career beginnings as an animal scientist. 
 Stanley Greenspan (b. 1941) 
 Stanley Greenspan, MD, is a psychiatrist and psychoanalyst who 
developed a popular autism intervention called Floortime. Dr. Green-
span attended Harvard University for his undergraduate work 
and received his medical degree from Yale Medical School in 1966. 
He is currently a clinical Professor of Psychiatry and Pediatrics at 
George Washington University Medical School and Chairman of 
the Interdisciplinary Council on Developmental and Learning Dis-
orders. His Floortime method is a form of play therapy utilizing 
social interactions and relationships to teach children with devel-
opmental delays, including autism. Floortime operates within a 
framework of capitalizing on a child’s emotions and interests to cre-
ate learning opportunities. In Floortime following the child’s lead 
and natural interests are essential in challenging the child toward 
skill mastery. The interactions and methods are often viewed by 

156 Biographical Sketches
parents, clinicians, and children to be fun and enjoyable experiences. 
With younger children, these playful interactions generally occur 
on the “floor,” but, as children age, naturalistic teaching oppor-
tunities grow to include more advanced social experiences, such 
as conversations and interactions in other settings. Emphasis is 
placed on the role of parents because of the importance of their 
emotional relationships with the child. Floortime is often used as 
a complementary treatment to other more structured behavioral 
interventions, such as Applied Behavior Analysis. Dr. Greenspan 
continues to conduct trainings and workshops in Floortime meth-
ods and training DVDs are available on his Web site. 
 Portia Iversen (dates unknown) 
and Jonathan Shestack (b. 1959) 
 Portia Iversen, an Emmy Award–winning art director and writer, 
and Jonathan Shestack, a film producer, founded a nonprofit re-
search foundation and parent advocacy organization called Cure 
Autism Now (CAN) in 1995. The Los Angeles–based couple learned 
that their son, Dov, was diagnosed with severe autism and were 
unsatisfied with the limited resources and research on autism that 
was going on at that time. Their discontent sparked a strong desire 
to help move the field forward quickly and Iversen and Shestack 
established CAN to encourage progress toward the goal of rais-
ing funds to support autism research and increase attention to the 
disorder. They lobbied countless groups, from private individuals 
to congress, for funds to put toward autism research. CAN went 
on to raise $10 million per year for autism research. Many autism 
scientists have credited this organization with changing the face 
of autism because of the attention and funding that it brought to 
the disorder. 
 Soon after establishing CAN, Iversen and Shestack cofounded 
the Autism Genetics Resource Exchange (AGRE) in 1997, which is 
the world’s largest gene bank open to the scientific community to 
help search for genetic influences in autism. Portia Iversen estab-
lished the International Meeting for Autism Research (IMFAR) in 
2000, which is an annual conference specific to autism research. She 
also has published a book describing her son’s life entitled  Strange 
Son  as well as a number of scientific research articles on autism 
genetics and neural functioning in autism. 

Ami Klin 157
 In 2007, CAN merged with Autism Speaks (another nonprofit 
parent-founded organization) to become the primary autism par-
ent advocacy organization and research foundation in the world. 
Iversen and Shestack continue to be involved in the Autism Speaks 
foundation and Iversen serves on the advisory board. 
 Leo Kanner (1894–1981) 
 Leo Kanner was born in Austria, studied in Berlin until World 
War I, at which point he entered military service. Following the 
war he returned and finished his medical education at the Uni-
versity of Berlin. In 1921 he received his MD degree. In 1924 he 
emigrated to the United States and took a position as an assistant 
physician in South Dakota. Six years later, he was invited to de-
velop and head the first child psychiatry division at the pediat-
ric hospital of Johns Hopkins University. He remained Director 
of Child Psychiatry at Johns Hopkins until he retired in 1959. In 
1935, he published the first book of child psychiatry written in 
English. Dr. Kanner is credited for first describing autism in his 
case reports of 11 children with a pattern of disorders marked by 
significant impairments in social interactions, delays in language 
and odd use of communication, and restricted interests and re-
petitive behaviors. In this pioneering 1943 publication, he reports 
that several children demonstrating this pattern of behaviors had 
come to his attention since 1938. In his paper, he reflects on Dr. 
Bleuler’s use of the word  autism  and so titles his manuscript “Au-
tistic Disturbances of Affective Contact.” 
 Ami Klin (b. 1960) 
 Ami Klin, PhD, is another well-known autism researcher. Dr. Klin 
is the Director of the Autism Program at the Yale Child Study 
Center and is an Associate Professor of Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry at Yale University. He received his BA at the Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem in 1983 and his PhD in Psychology at the 
University of London in 1988. Dr. Klin’s research has provided 
insight into the neural mechanisms of socialization and their dis-
ruption in autism. 
 Dr. Klin is particularly well known for using novel methods 
to study and track social processes in individuals with autism. For 

158 Biographical Sketches
instance, Dr. Klin often uses eye-tracking technology in which sen-
sors detect the direction of eye gaze and match it onto an object of 
reference in an individual’s visual field. Eye-tracking studies pro-
vide insight into the processes of visual scanning and allow us to 
infer what individuals are attending to and, perhaps, what draws 
their interest in their environment. Results from Dr. Klin’s studies 
suggest that individuals with autism track and attend to differ-
ent elements of naturalistic social interactions and situations as 
compared to typical peers. An important finding from Dr. Klin’s 
laboratory was that individuals with autism tend to look at an 
individual’s mouth when they are talking rather than at their eyes 
and often focus on details in a room rather than people involved 
in an emotional social exchange. 
 Robert and Lynn Koegel 
(dates unknown) 
 Drs. Robert and Lynn Koegel are autism treatment researchers 
who developed an intervention called Pivotal Response Training 
(PRT) that is based on the principles of applied behavior analy-
sis. Together, they founded and direct the University of California 
Santa Barbara Koegel Autism Center that serves as both a research 
institution and service provider. Dr. Robert Koegel trained at 
UCLA with Ivar Lovaas, PhD, in the 1970s and 1980s and worked 
with him on the Lovaas Young Autism Project. Dr. Koegel noted 
the lack of emotional connectedness and joy shown by the chil-
dren in the projects, even when they successfully accomplished 
tasks and learned skills. After leaving UCLA, Dr. Koegel decided 
to embark on a mission to develop his own behavioral interven-
tion using a child’s own motivations and interests as the medium 
through which intervention is delivered. Natural reinforcers are 
used instead of tangible, often unrelated rewards. For example, 
instead of earning a potato chip for correctly pointing to a named 
color, the child would be rewarded with the opportunity to draw 
with the color crayon that he/she had correctly named. The ratio-
nale behind such techniques is that these teaching moments use 
a child’s own motivation to create a naturally reinforcing learning 
environment in which acquired skills are more likely to generalize 
to other settings. 

Karen and Eric London  159
 Unlike other ABA programs that focus on one particular skill 
area at a time, PRT targets multiple “pivotal areas” of a child’s de-
velopment and promote child motivation through strategies such 
as child choice, task variation, and rewarding efforts to complete a 
task. The Koegels have been strong advocates of nonaversive strat-
egies in implementing their treatment program and Positive Behav-
ior Support (PBS) is their primary behavior change mechanism. 
 Karen (b. 1954) and 
Eric (b. 1952) London 
 A similar story to that of Portia Iversen and Jonathan Shestack 
transpired on the East Coast of the United States in the early 1990s. 
Karen and Eric London’s son, Zachary, was diagnosed with autism. 
His parents were frustrated with, in their perspective, a lack of re-
search being conducted on autism at the time. Consequently, the 
London’s cofounded the National Alliance for Autism Research 
(NAAR) in 1994. Karen London sacrificed her career as a lawyer to 
devote her life to her son and helping NAAR move forward with 
the mission of funding autism research projects. Eric London is a 
psychiatrist by trade and is known for being in strong opposition 
to the claim that the disorder is caused by mercury-containing 
vaccines. 
 An additional important contribution from the London’s was 
the development of the autism tissue program in NAAR to collect 
postmortem brains from autism patients and their family mem-
bers. This program allows scientists to search for chemical, cel-
lular, and anatomical features involved in the underlying neural 
mechanisms in autism. NAAR’s primary means of raising money 
were organizing walkathons and by the time of its final year as 
an independent organization, it had committed approximately 
$30 million to autism research. In 2006, one year before Cure Au-
tism Now (another parent-founded autism organization), NAAR 
merged with Autism Speaks. The NAAR Autism Tissue Program 
has continued through Autism Speaks and the London’s served on 
the scientific advisory board of Autism Speaks from 2006 through 
2009. In 2009, the couple left the organization stating that they 
disagreed with Autism Speaks’ continued support of research ex-
amining the potential of a link between autism and vaccinations 
in rare cases. 

160 Biographical Sketches
 Catherine Lord (b. 1950) 
 Catherine Lord, PhD, is a world-renowned autism researcher and 
is currently the director of the University of Michigan Autism and 
Communication Disorders Center (UMACC), the interim director 
of the New York University Child Study Center Asperger Insti-
tute, and a Professor of Psychology and Psychiatry at the Univer-
sity of Michigan. Dr. Lord is Chair of the Board of Directors for 
the Simons Foundation and also the Early Intervention in Autism 
Committee at the National Academy of Science. Dr. Lord did her 
undergraduate work at UCLA and received her PhD in psychol-
ogy and social relations from Harvard University. Dr. Lord has pub-
lished more than a hundred journal articles in addition to books 
and book chapters and has worked at several universities in her 
academic career, including the University of North Carolina, Uni-
versity of Minnesota, University of Alberta, Harvard University, 
and University of Chicago. 
 Dr. Lord is particularly well known for the development of 
several tools that are widely used during diagnostic evaluations 
of autism. The Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) 
is a standardized means for clinicians and researchers to quan-
tify and assess autism-related symptoms. The Autism Diagnostic 
Interview (ADI) is a semistructured parent interview designed to 
document developmental history of autism symptoms as well as 
current strengths and challenges. The ADOS and ADI are now 
considered gold-standard diagnostic tools in assessing autism 
and are used throughout the world to help diagnose autism. 
 Dr. Lord’s research has centered on following young children 
with autism through early childhood, into adolescence, and now 
through adulthood. She is the first to provide a truly developmen-
tal perspective of the disorder throughout the course of the life-
time. In addition to her academic achievements, Dr. Lord is known 
for her devotion to the betterment of individuals with autism and 
her sharp clinical acumen in working with families affected by 
autism. 
 O. (Ole) Ivar Lovaas (b. 1927) 
 Dr. Lovaas is considered by many as the father of applied behav-
ioral analysis and the first to demonstrate the effectiveness of be-

Peter Mundy 161
havioral intervention for the treatment of autism. He grew up in 
Norway and moved to the United States on a scholarship to Luther 
College in Iowa. As a professor of psychology at the University of 
California—Los Angeles, Dr. Lovaas applied the principles of be-
haviorism that indicate that behavior is guided and shaped through 
the rewarding of desirable behaviors and the punishment of unde-
sirable behaviors to the treatment of autism. In a 1965 article in  Life 
 magazine, “Screams, Slaps & Love: A Surprising, Shocking Treat-
ment Helps Far-gone Mental Cripples,” his treatment method 
received considerable attention. In his initial studies, Dr. Lovaas 
used “aversives” essentially physical punishment to direct behav-
ior in addition to using rewards. In later incarnations of the ABA-
based treatment technique, sometimes referred to as discrete trial 
training, “aversives” were discontinued and only rewards utilized 
to shape behavior. Although the etiology of autism was still under 
considerable debate at the time of his initial treatment studies, 
Dr. Lovaas eschewed the principle of identifying the cause to define 
the treatment and said, “you have to put the fire out first before 
you worry how it started.” Following the publication of his 1987 
paper demonstrating the effectiveness of the treatment through 
scientific analysis, Dr. Bernard Rimland wrote an editorial for Au-
tism Research Institute’s newsletter in which he stated, “when the 
history of autism is written, the name of Ivar Lovaas will be writ 
far larger than the names of his many short sighted critics.” 
 Peter Mundy (dates unknown) 
 Peter Mundy, PhD, is a clinical and developmental psychologist 
and a prominent autism researcher. He currently is the Lisa Capps 
Professor of Neurodevelopmental Disorders and Education at the 
University of California, Davis School of Education, and serves as 
the director of educational research at the M.I.N.D. Institute. Prior 
to his current position, Dr. Mundy was a long-standing professor 
of psychology at the University of Miami. He is the founding di-
rector of the University of Miami Center for Autism and Related 
Disabilities and the founding co-director of the Marino Autism 
Research Institute at Vanderbilt University. Dr. Mundy obtained 
his BA in psychology at Stockton State College, New Jersey in 
1976, and his MS in 1979 and PhD in 1981 in developmental psy-
chology from the University of Miami. 

162 Biographical Sketches
 Dr. Mundy’s main area of focus has been in joint attention and so-
cial cognition in autism. He has published over a hundred schol-
arly articles and book chapters. His early work with Dr. Marian 
Sigman contributed to an understanding that joint attention impair-
ments may be a fundamental component of social challenges in 
autism. Dr. Mundy’s work in this area has helped propagate the 
field toward earlier identification and diagnosis of autism. Diag-
nostic tools and early intervention now often focus on joint atten-
tion skills in autism, partly due to Dr. Mundy’s research efforts. 
In his more recent work, Dr. Mundy has conducted longitudinal 
studies of the development of joint attention in typical children. 
He reports that individual differences in infant joint attention pre-
dict social outcomes and social competence in typically develop-
ing children. 
 Isabelle Rapin (dates unknown) 
 Isabelle Rapin, MD was born in Lausanne, Switzerland, and from 
the age of 10, she knew that she wanted to be a physician. She was 
one of a dozen women that attended the Lausanne medical school 
from which she graduated in 1952. Following graduation, Dr. Rapin 
moved to New York City where she completed her residency and 
focused on child neurology. She accepted a position at Albert Ein-
stein College of Medicine in 1958, shortly after the school was 
founded. Once there she became a prolific scientist, educator, and 
practitioner, publishing more than 200 articles and books since the 
1950’s and helping countless families and children with autism. 
Dr. Rapin began her career interested in language and communi-
cation disorders in childhood and studied auditory processing in 
the brain. Her career later shifted to a focus on autism spectrum 
disorders. Among other areas within the field of autism, Dr. Rap-
in’s research has largely involved the presentation of a variety of 
language-based disorders in autism, the neurobiology of autism 
and, more recently, on the subtyping and classification of autism. 
 She was a founding member of the Child Neurology Society 
and the International Child Neurology Association and served in 
the American Academy of Neurology and American Neurological 
Association. She has been honored with Autism Society of Amer-
ica’s award for excellence in autism research and the Lifetime 
Achievement Award from the International Society for Autism 

Edward Ritvo 163
Research. She has also provided advice for newcomers to the field 
of medicine, “Consider every patient a potential source of new 
knowledge, describe what you see, pursue your interests vigor-
ously, and learn to cut corners and prioritize. Find a good mentor, 
enjoy what you do, and be lucky.” 
 Bernard Rimland (1928–2006) 
 Dr. Rimland is best known for his long time advocacy for indi-
viduals with autism and for challenging the “refrigerator mother” 
theory of autism. Born in the Midwest, he moved to Southern 
California at 12 years of age, and in the late 1920s, he attended 
college at San Diego State University. He subsequently traveled to 
the University of Pennsylvania to complete a doctoral degree in 
experimental psychology in 1953. He returned to southern Cali-
fornia and took a position with the navy following the comple-
tion of his PhD. His son, Mark, was born three years later and 
subsequently diagnosed with autism. During Mark’s early years, 
the predominant theory regarding the cause of autism was that 
poor, cold, unloving parenting led to autism. Dr. Rimland spoke 
out against this cause, most notably in his book published in 1964: 
 Infantile Autism: the Syndrome and It’s Implications for a Neural The-
ory of Behavior . Shortly thereafter, Dr. Rimland joined forces with 
other parents at a meeting he organized in New Jersey and set 
the groundwork for the establishment of the parent organization: 
the Autism Society of America. Two years later, he founded the Au-
tism Research Institute with a mission to conduct and foster re-
search to improve diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of autism. 
He is credited with initially championing that autism is a neu-
rodevelopmental disorder and more recently attributed as first 
espousing the notion of an autism epidemic and the idea that mer-
cury in vaccines play a causal role in autism. Upon his death at the 
age of 78, countless obituaries reported that the father of modern 
autism research had died. 
 Edward Ritvo (dates unknown) 
 Edward Ritvo, MD, is child psychiatrist and professor emeritus 
at the UCLA School of Medicine. He joined the medical school 
faculty at UCLA in 1963 and decided to, as he says in his book 

164 Biographical Sketches
 Understanding the Nature of Autism and Asperger’s Disorder,  “set out 
to slay the fire-breathing dragon we called at that time ‘atypical 
autistic ego development’ . . . and have been jousting with this same 
mean dragon ever since.” Dr. Ritvo has been a pioneer in the field 
of autism and Asperger’s Disorder. He is the author of more than 
100 scientific papers on autism and Asperger’s syndrome and has 
published several books on autism, including  Understanding the 
Nature of Autism and Asperger’s Disorder  and a storybook about au-
tism called  Joey and Sam: A Heartwarming Storybook About Autism, a 
Family, and a Brother’s Love. 
 Dr. Ritvo’s research in the 1970s focused on autism diagnosis 
and identification of milder forms of the disorder and spectrum 
of challenges involved in autism. Later in his career, Dr. Ritvo was 
part the UCLA–University of Utah epidemiologic survey of autism 
and published findings of an important twin study reporting mo-
nozygotic concordance rates for autism of 95.7 percent compared 
to 23.5 percent in dizygotic twins. Dr. Ritvo coauthored the official 
diagnostic criteria for ASD in the  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders . He has been a strong opponent of the alleged “au-
tism epidemic,” instead citing improved ability to detect milder 
forms of the disorder as being responsible for the increased rates 
of diagnosis. Dr. Ritvo earned the Lifetime Achievement Award 
from the International Society for Autism Research in 2010. 
 Sally Rogers (b. 1948) 
 Sally Rogers, PhD, is a developmental psychologist who is best 
known for her work in autism treatment and interventions. She re-
ceived her doctoral degree in developmental psychology with a 
specialization in intellectual and developmental disabilities, and 
is currently a professor of psychiatry and behavior science at the 
M.I.N.D. Institute at University of California Davis Medical Cen-
ter. She received her BA from Ashland College in 1969 and PhD from  
 Ohio State University in 1975. Dr. Rogers and her colleagues devel-
oped an internationally known intervention designed to promote 
social interactions and language development in children with au-
tism called the Denver Model (so named because Dr. Rogers was 
working at the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center at 
the time it was developed). Dr. Rogers is also the director of the 
Collaborative Programs of Excellence in Autism Research (CPEA) 
at the M.I.N.D. Institute and is an active clinician. She continues 

Sir Michael Rutter 165
to be involved in diagnostic evaluations and provides treatment to 
families in addition to running her research studies. 
 Although the Denver Model overlaps some with the tradi-
tional behavioral approach pioneered by psychologists such as Ivar 
Lovaas, PhD, the Denver Model utilizes more of a developmental 
perspective and alternates between intensive teaching trials and 
developing social-communicative skills through more naturalistic 
means. Dr. Rogers asserts that these skills are best taught and 
learned within the context of social relationships, so great empha-
sis is placed on learning and understanding through emotional 
exchanges between people. The Denver Model has been applied 
both in home therapy programs, center-based treatments, and within 
school environments. More recently, Dr. Rogers collaborated with 
researchers at the University of Washington, including Geraldine 
Dawson, PhD, to adapt the Denver Model for use with toddlers 
with autism (called the Early Start Denver Model) in the first ran-
domized, control trial of early intensive intervention in autism. 
Compared to those receiving intervention available in the commu-
nity, young children who received the Early Start Denver Model 
showed significant improvements in IQ, adaptive behavior, and 
autism diagnosis. 
 Sir Michael Rutter (b. 1933) 
 Professor Sir Michael Rutter is considered by many to be the fa-
ther of child psychology and psychiatry. He completed his basic 
medical education at the University of Birmingham and 10 years 
later, in 1965, he accepted an academic post at the Institute of Psy-
chiatry at King’s College in London. At the institute he advanced 
in rank becoming Professor of Child Psychiatry and then Head of 
the Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. Starting in 
1966 he also served as consultant psychiatrist at Maudsley Hospi-
tal. He established the Medical Research Council Child Psychiatry 
Research Unit in 1984 and the Social, Genetic, and Developmental 
Psychiatry Research Centre in 1994, serving as honorary director 
of both until 1998. Professor Sir Michael Rutter’s research interests 
have spanned development from childhood to adulthood, child-
hood resiliency to stressors, the social aspect of schools, dyslexia, 
infantile autism, antisocial behavior, the effects of deprivation on 
Romanian orphan adoptees, antisocial behavior, and has spanned 
the domains of psychiatric epidemiology, psychiatric genetics, 

166 Biographical Sketches
and neuropsychiatry. He made significant contributions to under-
standing development by following the Romanian orphans ad-
opted into Britain in a major study examining the effects of severe 
early deprivation. His pioneering work in autism included publish-
ing the first population-based twin study with Susan Folstein in 
1977 as well as the establishment of diagnostic tools with Catherine 
Lord and others. In these areas of research he has published more 
than 40 books as well 400 scientific articles and book chapters. He 
has received numerous awards including the prestigious Helmut 
Horten Award in 1997 for his contributions to the clinical prac-
tice of autism, the Lifetime Achievement Award from the Interna-
tional Society for Autism Research in 2002, as well as knighthood 
in 1992. 
 Eric Schopler (1927–2006) 
 Psychologist Eric Schopler pioneered the inclusion of parents in 
treatment of autism as well as the experimental analysis of inter-
ventions. He was born in Germany in 1927 and although he reports 
not being a personal victim of the prevailing anti-Semitism of the 
day, his father, a prominent lawyer, was encouraged to leave with 
his family in 1938 for their safety. Eric’s family left immediately for 
the United States where Eric finished high school, joined the U.S. 
Army, and then attended the University of Chicago. He continued 
there to receive a graduate degree in social service administration 
and then a PhD in clinical child psychology in 1964. While a gradu-
ate student in Chicago, the young Schopler questioned the no-
tion that autism was caused by rejecting parents and was convinced 
that through scientific inquiry he could demonstrate the error of 
this thinking. He approached Bruno Bettelheim, one of the lead-
ing authorities on autism of the day, for assistance in conducting 
empirical research with children with autism. Dr. Bettelheim rejected 
his ideas and efforts, but Schopler was not deterred from his goal. He 
took a faculty position at the University of North Carolina where he 
began a five-year study examining the impact of structured treat-
ment environments on autism symptoms and parent personality 
characteristics. After completing the study, his treatment modifi-
cations were so well received and the children responded so pos-
itively that the parents involved in the study petitioned the state 
to acquire permanent funding. The funding was granted and in 
1972, Division TEACCH (Treatment and Education of Autistic and 

Marian Sigman 167
related Communication-handicapped Children) opens its doors in 
1972. Dr. Schopler tirelessly continued his work as an editor of the 
 Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  for 24 years, as the 
director of Division TEACCH, and as a researcher, publishing 
more than 200 books and research articles before his death at the 
age of 79. 
 Robert Schultz (dates unknown) 
 Robert Schultz, PhD, is the director of the Center for Autism Re-
search (CAR) and the Developmental Neuroimaging Laboratory 
at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, and holds an endowed 
chair in the Department of Pediatrics. As an executive board mem-
ber and past president of the International Society for Autism Re-
search (INSAR), and scientific advisor for Autism Speaks and the 
United Kingdom’s MRC Neuroimaging Consortium on Autism, 
Dr. Schultz is actively engaged in the autism research community. 
Dr. Schultz’s own considerable contributions to the understanding 
of autism come from his groundbreaking imaging research into the 
brain regions involved in social interactions. By using structural 
and functional imaging he has gained insights into the processes 
underlying social interactions, such as face processing, and has 
published over 100 articles and chapters in the field of psychology 
and neuroscience. He received his BS from the University of Dela-
ware and his PhD in clinical psychology with a focus on neuro-
psychology from the University of Texas–Austin. 
 Marian Sigman (dates unknown) 
 Dr. Sigman has conducted research in the field of autism for more 
than 25 years at the University of California in Los Angeles. She 
joined the faculty at UCLA in 1977 after a move west from Bos-
ton University where she received her PhD in 1970. At UCLA she 
holds faculty appointments in the Department of Psychology and 
Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences. She was the 
first president of the International Society for Autism Research, 
held the position of Chair for the Advisory Committee of the Na-
tional Childcare Study, and was the founding president for the 
International Society for Infant Studies. She served as the UCLA 
director for the Collaborative Program of Excellence (CPEA) in 

168 Biographical Sketches
Autism and the Center for Autism Research and Treatment, one 
of the NIMH funded Studies to Advance Autism Research and 
Treatment (STAART) centers. Both the CPEA and STAART col-
laborations are federally funded centers to conduct research in 
autism and provide opportunities for collaboration and enhanced 
data collection to spur scientific findings. 
 During her tenure at UCLA, Dr. Sigman has authored more 
than 200 scientific articles and chapters and several books. Dr. Sig-
man’s research has included infant attention (particularly social 
attention) and its relation to later development and developmental 
challenges. She is one of the pioneers of the study of a concept 
called “joint attention” in autism, which involves an individual’s abil-
ity to attend to an object or event by means of a social partner’s eye 
gaze and/or gesture. Joint attention is crucial to a young child’s 
cognitive, linguistic, and social development and is significantly 
impaired in young children with autism. It is now considered by 
some to be one of the earliest expressions of the fundamental 
impairment in autism. Dr. Sigman’s work largely influenced this 
view. Her more recent research has expanded to include multidis-
ciplinary work involving treatment, genetics, and neurobiology of 
autism as well as the expression of subthreshold symptoms in in-
fant siblings of children with autism. In 2009, Dr. Sigman received 
the Lifetime Achievement Award from the International Society 
for Autism Research. 
 Marilyn (dates unknown) 
and Jim (b. 1938) Simons 
 As was the case for a number of private foundations funding au-
tism research, Jim and Marilyn Simons have a personal attachment 
to the disorder: their daughter was diagnosed with autism. How-
ever, unlike other founders of autism advocacy organizations, au-
tism is only one of the areas of focus for Jim and Marilyn Simons’ 
organization the Simons Foundation. A renowned mathematician 
by trade, Dr. Jim Simons became independently wealthy through 
the development of equations used in hedge funds and has do-
nated a large percentage of his wealth to philanthropic causes, in-
cluding basic science and math research. The Simons’ do not often 
step out into the limelight, but are known for being very involved 
in the projects that are funded through their foundation. 

Helen Tager-Flusberg 169
 In 2003, Jim and Marilyn Simons decided to embark on a new 
initiative for the Simons Foundation and called well-known minds 
in autism research together in a “Panel on Autism Research” to 
determine the most important next steps in the field. Since then, 
the Simons Foundation had dedicated more than $100 million to 
autism research, primarily through the Simons Simplex Collection 
(SSC) Project, which is an international, multi-site study examin-
ing the genetic causes of autism. The Simons Foundation plans on 
dedicating many more funds to autism research through the Si-
mons Foundation Autism Research Initiative (SFARI). 
 Ruth C. Sullivan (b. 1924) 
 Dr. Sullivan’s involvement in the field of autism began in 1963 
when her three-year-old child Joseph, her fifth of seven children, 
was diagnosed with autism. The reigning theory at the time was 
that cold, aloof mothers were the cause of autism. Dr. Sullivan, a 
public health nurse, knew that to be untrue and joined forces with 
Dr. Bernard Rimland and other parents to form what is now 
known as the Autism Society of America (ASA). She served as the 
organization’s first president. In the years following her son’s di-
agnosis and involvement in ASA, she became an outspoken activ-
ist for rights for individuals with disabilities and was instrumental 
in the passage of the 1975 Individuals with Disabilities Education 
Act. The act ensures a free public education to all children, includ-
ing those with disabilities. Four years later she focused her efforts 
at providing opportunities for adults with autism. She founded 
the Autism Services Center, which provides group home situations 
for adults with autism that allow the residents to remain engaged 
in life. She also played a role in the development of the Autism 
Training Center at Marshall University and served as a consultant 
for the movie  Rain Man . Dustin Hoffman worked with her son 
during his preparation for his role. 
 Helen Tager-Flusberg (b. 1951) 
 Helen Tager-Flusberg, PhD, is a Professor of Anatomy and Neuro-
biology and Psychology at Boston University and the Director and 
Principal Investigator at the Lab of Cognitive Neuroscience at 
Boston University. She did her undergraduate work in psychology 

170 Biographical Sketches
at University College, University of London in England and ob-
tained her doctorate degree in Experimental Psychology from 
Harvard University in 1978. Prior to her current professorship at 
Boston University beginning in 2001, Dr. Tager-Flusberg was a 
Professor of Psychology at the University of Massachusetts at Bos-
ton where she had been a member of the faculty since earning her 
doctorate degree in 1978. Dr. Tager-Flusberg’s research involves 
language and social-cognitive development within various popu-
lations, especially autism. She also has studied other groups with 
such genetically based disorders as Williams Syndrome and spe-
cific language disorders and is currently researching social cogni-
tion in Williams Syndrome. Dr. Tager-Flusberg is known for using 
a variety of methodologies to answer her research questions, in-
cluding behavioral tracking and brain imaging. More current au-
tism research of Dr. Tager-Flusberg’s has explored the interrelation 
of genetic, neurological, and cognitive/behavioral functioning in 
individuals with autism throughout their lifespan. She serves on 
the editorial board of several professional journals, including the 
 Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders  and  Applied Psycho-
linguistics . Dr. Tager-Flusberg has published four books on autism 
spectrum disorders and related fields and written many research 
articles focusing on linguistic development in children with au-
tism and theory of mind tasks in this population. 
 Fred Volkmar (b. 1950) 
 Dr. Fred Volkmar is the director of the Yale Child Study Center, 
the Irving B. Harris Professor of Child Psychiatry, Pediatrics and 
Psychology at the Yale University School of Medicine and is Chief 
of Child Psychiatry at the Yale Children’s Hospital. As an active 
physician focusing on autism research and treatment, he has 
served on a variety of national and international committees, in-
cluding the committee on Pervasive Developmental Disorders for 
the  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . He is the 
editor of the  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disabilities and 
has published several hundred scientific articles and book chap-
ters. His research in autism focuses on elucidating the nature and 
various expressions of the fundamental social difficulties in au-
tism. Dr. Volkmar uses innovative techniques to answer his re-
search questions, including functional and structural magnetic 
resonance imaging, genetic methodologies, and eye tracking tech-

Lorna Wing 171
nology. His studies using eye tracking (i.e., tracking the move-
ment of individuals’ eyes as they watch a monitor or potentially 
live scenes) revealed that individuals with autism tend to look at 
nonsocial aspects of a social scene. For example, they may focus 
on a light switch in a corner of a room rather than on individuals 
in the center of the room who are having an emotional exchange. 
Dr. Volkmar has studied individuals with autism of a variety of 
ages and levels of functioning, with more recent studies of infant 
siblings of children with autism. He has also written a number of 
influential books in the field of autism including  Asperger’s Syn-
drome ,  Health Care for Children on the Autism Spectrum , and  The 
Handbook of Autism . Dr. Volkmar is a graduate of the University of 
Illinois and attended medical school at Stanford University where 
he received his MD and a master’s degree in psychology in 1976. 
 Lorna Wing (b. 1928) 
 Lorna Wing, MD, is now a retired British psychiatrist who has 
been actively involved in the field of autism for more than 40 years 
and was originally drawn into the area because she has a daugh-
ter with autism. Dr. Wing and her colleague Dr. Judith Gould 
are credited with introducing the concept of the  autism spectrum, 
 which has changed the face of research and clinical understand-
ing of autism. Her description of variable symptom presentations 
and severities in autism was in disagreement with   Leo Kanner’s 
original 1943 assertion that autism presented as a single entity. Dr. 
Wing has published numerous journal articles and books describ-
ing various symptoms presentations and profiles on the autism 
spectrum throughout her academic career. She has developed a 
number of methods for subtyping individuals with autism and 
developed rating scales to better do so. More recently, Dr. Wing 
has researched changes in autism prevalence rates and examined 
possible reasons for this phenomenon, including differences in 
diagnostic criteria. 
 Dr. Wing also familiarized the autism world with the research 
of Hans Asperger, who in the 1940’s described a group of high 
functioning individuals with autistic features. His work went 
largely unrecognized until Dr. Wing published her academic paper 
“Asperger’s Syndrome: A Clinical Account” in 1981. This clinical 
account introduced the term  Asperger’s Syndrome,  which has been 
included in the most recent editions of the  DSM . Together with 

172 Biographical Sketches
other parents of children with autism, she founded the National 
Autistic Society (NAS) in the United Kingdom in 1962. Dr. Wing 
received a lifetime achievement award from the International So-
ciety of Autism Research in 2005 for her significant accomplish-
ments to the field of autism in her career. 
 Suzanne (b. 1946) and 
Bob (b. 1943) Wright 
 Like many of the other important contributors in the field of au-
tism, Bob and Suzanne Wright learned that a family member was 
diagnosed with autism (a grandson, Christian, in their case) and 
were compelled to do what they could to help. Their mission was 
to raise awareness about autism and build upon research into its 
causes and treatment. The Wrights established the foundation Au-
tism Speaks in 2005 in an effort to achieve this goal. Bob Wright, 
former CEO of NBC, encouraged colleagues and friends to donate 
funds to Autism Speaks and raised millions of dollars for autism 
advocacy. They have raised several hundred million to date and 
ceaselessly lobbied congress to allocate research money to autism. 
The couple played a primary role in the successful passage of 
the Combating Autism Act from which nearly $1 billion in fed-
eral funding was dedicated to “autism screening, education, early 
intervention, prompt referrals for treatment and services, and re-
search.” 
 The Wright’s commitment to introducing autism awareness to 
the global scene encouraged the United Nation to place autism on 
the global health agenda. After combining forces with other par-
ent-led foundations, including Cure Autism Now, the National 
Alliance for Autism Research, and Autism Coalition for Research 
and Education, Autism Speaks is the nation’s leading nonprofit or-
ganization devoted to autism and a leader in the world in autism 
advocacy. Additional projects for the Wright’s have included the 
production the short film  Autism Everyday  with the goal of provid-
ing a real-life documentary of the stresses (and joys) in the lives of 
parents and children with autism. This video received national at-
tention and is available in short form on the Autism Speaks Web site. 

173
 T
his chapter focusing on data and documents relevant to ASDs 
will include information relevant to the characterization and 
diagnosis of the disorder, screening and early identification 
processes, neuroscience, prevalence, and intervention. 
 Domains of Autism 
  Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are defined by behaviorally observed 
impairments in three domains. These domains include the social domain, 
the communication domain, and a third behavioral domain focusing on 
restricted or repetitive interests or behaviors. Examples of impairment 
in the social domain include atypical use of nonverbal behaviors (such 
as eye contact or facial expressions) in social interactions, difficulties 
in establishing or maintaining friendships, a lack of emotional or social 
reciprocity, and a lack of showing, sharing or giving. Examples of im-
pairment in the communication domain include language delay, defi-
cits in conversational skills, or the use of stereotypic (repetitive) or other 
atypical speech patterns. Examples in the behavioral domain include the 
presence of unusual interests, difficulties with transitions, or repetitive 
motor mannerisms. As Figure 6.1 demonstrates, it is the interaction 
of impairments in the domains that results in an autism spectrum dis-
order.
 Pervasive Developmental Disorders Umbrella Term 
  ASDs fall under the category of Pervasive Developmental Disorders in 
the fourth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-IV; 
6
Data and Documents

174 Data and Documents
Domains of
Autism
Social Domain
Communication
Domain
Behavioral
Domain
Autism
Spectrum
Disorder
Autistic Disorder
 Figure 6.1. Domains of Autism 
 Source:  R. Bernier. 2005.  Autism 101 Lecture.  Reprinted with permission of author. 
American Psychological Association 2000). As an umbrella term Perva-
sive Developmental Disorders are characterized by severe and pervasive 
impairments in many aspects of an individual’s life, including social in-
teractions, communication skills, and presence of stereotyped behaviors. 
As indicated in Figure 6.2, two other diagnoses, Rett’s Disorder and 
Childhood Disintegrative Disorder, fall into this category of clinical dis-
orders but are themselves not considered part of the autism spectrum. 
  To meet diagnostic criteria for Autistic Disorder, an individual must 
demonstrate qualitative impairments in the social, communication, and 
behavioral domains that results in adaptive functioning in school, home 
or the community. Further, these impairments must be evident by 3 years 
of age. This differs from the diagnostic criteria for Asperger’s Disorder in 

Data and Documents 175
that individuals with Asperger’s Disorder do not demonstrate any clini-
cally significant language or cognitive delays. More subtle differences be-
tween both disorders concern the focus of the behavioral concerns. While 
in Autistic Disorder the behavioral concerns often focus on repetitive 
motor mannerisms, difficulties with transitions, ritualized behavior, and 
preoccupations with parts of objects, in Asperger’s Disorder the behavioral 
concerns are more often marked by interests of markedly unusual intensity 
that form the focus of learning and conversational topics for the individual 
with the disorder. Similar to Autistic Disorder, the impairments in the 
social and behavioral domains must cause clinically significant impair-
ment in social, occupational or other important areas of functioning to 
warrant a diagnosis. The third diagnostic category under the umbrella 
term of Autism Spectrum Disorders is Pervasive Developmental Disor-
der—Not Otherwise Specified (PDD-NOS). This diagnosis is appropriate 
when an individual demonstrates clinically significant impairments in the 
social domain along with deficits in either communication or behavior, but 
when the specific criteria for Autistic Disorder or Asperger’s Disorder are 
not met. For example, this diagnostic category might be appropriate for 
individuals demonstrating a later age of onset, who have an atypical pre-
sentation of symptoms, or who have symptoms that are subthreshold for 
Autistic Disorder or Asperger’s Disorder.  
 Figure 6.2. The Pervasive Developmental Disorders Umbrella Term 
 Source: R. Bernier. 2005.  Autism 101 Lecture. Reprinted with permission of author. 

176 Data and Documents
 Diagnostic Criteria for Autism Spectrum Disorders 
  The specific criteria for the diagnosis of ASDs, including Autistic Disor-
der, Asperger’s Disorder, and PDD-NOS are outlined in DSM-IV. First 
published by the American Psychiatric Association in 1952, the DSM is 
in its fourth edition, and workgroups are currently working on the next 
version, with plans for the DSM-V to be released in 2012. Each disorder 
is given a code following a coding system that corresponds to the Interna-
tional Statistical Classification of Diseases, 10th edition (ICD-10). The 
text below outlines the diagnostic criteria for the three disorders consid-
ered ASDs.  
 Diagnostic Criteria for Autistic Disorder 299.00 
 A.  A total of six (or more) items from (1), (2), and (3), with at 
least two from (1), and one each from (2) and (3): 
 (1)  qualitative impairment in social interaction, as 
manifested by at least two of the following: 
 (a)  marked impairment in the use of multiple 
nonverbal behaviors such as eye-to-eye gaze, 
facial expression, body postures, and gestures to 
regulate social interaction 
 (b)  failure to develop peer relationships appropriate 
to developmental level 
 (c)  a lack of spontaneous seeking to share enjoyment, 
interests, or achievements with other people (e.g., 
by a lack of showing, bringing, or pointing out 
objects of interest) 
 (d)  lack of social or emotional reciprocity 
 (2)  qualitative impairments in communication as 
manifested by at least one of the following: 
 (a)  delay in, or total lack of, the development 
of spoken language (not accompanied by an 
attempt to compensate through alternative 
modes of communication such as gesture or 
mime)? 
 (b)  in individuals with adequate speech, marked 
impairment in the ability to initiate or sustain a 
conversation with others? 

Data and Documents 177
 (c)  stereotyped and repetitive use of language or 
idiosyncratic language? 
 (d)  lack of varied, spontaneous make-believe 
play or social imitative play appropriate to 
developmental level 
 (3)  restricted repetitive and stereotyped patterns of 
behavior, interests and activities, as manifested by 
at least two of the following: 
 (a)  encompassing preoccupation with one or more 
stereotyped and restricted patterns of interest 
that is abnormal either in intensity or focus 
 (b)  apparently inflexible adherence to specific, 
nonfunctional routines or rituals? 
 (c)  stereotyped and repetitive motor mannerisms 
(e.g., hand or finger flapping or twisting, or 
complex whole-body movements)? 
 (d)  persistent preoccupation with parts of objects 
 B.  Delays or abnormal functioning in at least one of 
the following areas, with onset prior to age 3 years: 
(1) social interaction, (2) language as used in social 
communication, or (3) symbolic or imaginative play. 
 C.  The disturbance is not better accounted for by Rett’s 
Disorder or Childhood Disintegrative Disorder. 
 Diagnostic Criteria for Asperger’s Disorder 299.80 
 A.  Qualitative impairment in social interaction, as 
manifested by at least two of the following: 
 (1)  marked impairment in the use of multiple nonverbal 
behaviors such as eye-to-eye gaze, facial expression, 
body posture, and gestures to regulate social 
interaction 
 (2)  failure to develop peer relationships appropriate to 
developmental level 
 (3)  a lack of spontaneous seeking to share enjoyment, 
interest or achievements with other people, (e.g., by a 
lack of showing, bringing, or pointing out objects of 
interest to other people) 
 (4)  lack of social or emotional reciprocity 

178 Data and Documents
 B.  Restricted repetitive & stereotyped patterns of behavior, 
interests and activities, as manifested by at least one of 
the following: 
 (1)  encompassing preoccupation with one or more 
stereotyped and restricted patterns of interest that is 
abnormal either in intensity or focus 
 (2)  apparently inflexible adherence to specific, 
nonfunctional routines or rituals 
 (3)  stereotyped and repetitive motor mannerisms (e.g., 
hand or finger flapping or twisting, or complex 
whole-body movements) 
 (4)  persistent preoccupation with parts of objects 
 C.  The disturbance causes clinically significant impairments 
in social, occupational, or other important areas of 
functioning. 
 D.  There is no clinically significant general delay in 
language (e.g., single words used by age 2 years, 
communicative phrases used by age 3 years). 
 E.  There is no clinically significant delay in cognitive 
development or in the development of age-appropriate 
self help skills, adaptive behavior (other than in social 
interaction) and curiosity about the environment in 
childhood. 
 F.  Criteria are not met for another specific Pervasive 
Developmental Disorder or Schizophrenia. 
 Pervasive Developmental Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (In-
cluding Atypical Autism) 299.80 
 This category should be used when there is a severe and per-
vasive impairment in the development of reciprocal social inter-
action or verbal and nonverbal communication skills, or when 
stereotyped behavior, interests, and activities are present, but the 
criteria are not met for a specific Pervasive Developmental Disor-
der, Schizophrenia, Schizotypal Personality Disorder, or Avoidant 
Personality Disorder. For example, this category includes “atypi-
cal autism”—presentations that do not meet the criteria for Autis-
tic Disorder because of late age of onset, atypical symptomatol-
ogy, or subthreshold symptomatology, or all of these. 

Data and Documents 179
 Source: Reprinted with permission from the  Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, Text Revision, Fourth Edition. Copyright 2000, 
American Psychiatric Association. 
 Constellation of Symptoms 
in an Individual with ASD 
  While many symptoms are common to individuals with ASD, each in-
dividual with ASD is unique. In order to meet diagnostic criteria for an 
ASD, it is not necessary to have all symptoms in each domain. For exam-
ple, in order to meet diagnostic criteria for Autistic Disorder, an individual 
must demonstrate qualitative impairment in two of four possible areas in 
the social domain, in two of four possible areas in the communication do-
main, and at least one of four possible areas in the behavioral domain, with 
a minimum of six areas of impairments across all three domains. Figure 6.3 
demonstrates a possible constellation of symptoms for an individual with 
an ASD. Another child with an ASD, while still meeting diagnostic cri-
teria for an ASD, may demonstrate a completely different constellation of 
symptoms.  
 This heterogeneity in symptom presentation is complicated by addi-
tional factors such as cognitive ability that can vary even within the diag-
nosis of Autistic Disorder. That is, one individual with Autistic Disorder 
could have an IQ well above average, while another individual may have 
an IQ indicating intellectual disability (formerly called mental retarda-
tion). This range is pronounced throughout the ASDs. While cognitive 
ability varies widely in ASD, with some individuals demonstrating above 
average IQ, approximately one-third to one-half of individuals with ASD 
also have intellectual disability (Autism and Developmental Disabilities 
Monitoring Network Surveillance year 2002 Principal Investigators 
2007). Intellectual functioning in its own right significantly impacts an 
individual’s functioning. This could profoundly impact the presentation 
for an individual with autism. For example, two individuals with ASD 
with a similar constellation of social, communicative, and behavioral im-
pairments could radically differ in intellectual functioning, one individual 
having intellectual disability while the second individual displays above 
average cognitive skills. This disparity in intellectual functioning could re-
sult in radically different presentations. Further, individuals with similar 
constellations of symptoms may also have radically different developmen-
tal trajectories with one child with ASD responding well to intervention 
while a second child continues to demonstrate significant impairments 
despite a myriad of attempted treatments.  

180 Data and Documents
DOMAINS OF AUTISM:
An individual’s presentation
COMMUNICATION
DELAY OR LACK OF LANGUAGE
PRESENCE OF ATYPICAL LANGUAGE
MARKED CONVERSATION IMPAIRMENT
LACK OF SOCIAL IMITATIVE OR MAKE BELIEVE PLAY
SOCIAL
IMPAIRMENTS IN USE OF NONVERBAL BEHAVIORS
LACK OF SOCIAL OR EMOTIONAL RECIPROCITY
DECREASED SEEKING TO SHARE ENJOYMENT
FAILURE TO DEVELOP PEER RELATIONSHIPS
BEHAVIOR
STEREOTYPED AND REPETITIVE MOTOR MANNERISMS
INFLEXIBLE ADHERENCE TO ROUTINE
INTERESTS OF UNUSUAL FOCUS OR INTENSITY
PREOCCUPATIONS WITH PARTS OF OBJECTS
 Figure 6.3. Individual Constellation of ASD Symptoms 
 Source: Based on R. Bernier, J. Winter, and J. Varley. 2008.  My Next Steps: A Parent’s Guide to Understanding Autism. 
Seattle, WA: University of Washington Autism Center 
 Screening for Autism Spectrum Disorders 
 Red Flags for the Identification of Autism 
  In 1999 the Child Neurology Society and American Academy of Neurol-
ogy proposed to establish practice parameters regarding the screening and 
identification of autism. A multidisciplinary committee led by Dr. Pauline 
Filipek was tasked with reviewing what was currently known about the 
identification and diagnosis of autism to develop these practice parame-
ters. Following a systematic review of more than 2,500 published articles, 
the multidisciplinary consensus committee, composed of representatives 
from nine professional organizations, four parent-based organizations, 
and representatives from the National Institutes for Health, published the 
practice parameters. In the published manuscript, the panel reviewed the 
findings in the literature, proposed two levels of screening and identifica-
tion, and outlined the process for evaluation at both levels. The panel also 
identified parental concerns that constitute important red flags for autism 
in each of the three behavioral domains of autism and established those that 
warranted immediate evaluation.  
  The two levels of screening and evaluation consist of a first level to be 
performed on all children at well-child visits and used to detect any aspect 
of atypical development. During this screening primary care providers, 
through standardized questionnaire and parent interview, would conduct 
a quick screening for any evidence of atypical development, not necessarily 
autism. Based on this initial broad screen, if indicated the provider should 
conduct specific level-one testing, such as audiological or lead-poisoning 
testing or the administration of autism specific standardized question-

Data and Documents 181
naires. If the outcome of this level-one screening indicates the possibility 
of autism, then the provider would make a referral to a provider with au-
tism expertise for level-two screening. The second level of the screening 
process focuses specifically on the diagnostic evaluation and assessment of 
autism. For this level the panel proposed an in-depth process that includes: 
(1) referral to early intervention or school district; (2) formal diagnostic 
procedures by experienced clinician based on DSM-IV criteria; (3) com-
prehensive evaluation to determine profile and inform treatment recom-
mendations including (a) expanded medical and neurologic evaluation; 
(b) speech-language-communication evaluation; (c) cognitive evaluation; 
(d) adaptive behavior evaluation; (e) sensorimotor and occupational ther-
apy evaluation; (f) neuropsychological, behavioral, and academic evaluation; 
g. assessment of family functioning and resources; and (h) expanded labo-
ratory evaluation as needed focusing on metabolic testing, genetic testing, 
electrophysiologic testing, and neuroimaging ( for features not explained by 
diagnosis of autism).  
 The identified parental concerns that constitute red flags that are sug-
gestive of further level-one screening and potentially level-two screening 
as well as those behaviors that warrant immediate diagnostic evaluation 
(at level two) are identified below.  
 Concerns Presented by Parents that Are Red Flags for Autism  
 *Adapted from Filipek et al. 2000 
 Communication Concerns 
 Child does not respond to his/her name 
 Child’s language is delayed 
 Child does not follow instructions 
 Child appears deaf at times; seems to hear sometimes but 
not others 
 Child does not point or wave goodbye 
 Child has a loss of any language  
 Child cannot tell parents what he/she wants  
 Social Concerns 
 Child does not smile socially 
 Child prefers to play alone  

182 Data and Documents
  Child is very independent; gets things for him/herself; does 
things early  
 Child has poor eye contact  
 Child seems to be in his/her own world  
 Child tunes others out  
 Child is not interested in other children 
 Behavioral Concerns 
 Child has tantrums  
 Child does not know how to play with toys  
  Child gets stuck on things over and over; perseverates on 
things  
 Child toe walks  
  Child has unusual attachment to objects (i.e., is always hold-
ing a certain object)  
 Child lines things up (i.e., cars, chalk, pens, etc.)  
 Child is oversensitive to certain sounds or textures 
 Child has odd movement patterns  
 Child is hyperactive/uncooperative or oppositional  
 Further Developmental Evaluation Is Absolutely Indicated If: 
 Child is not babbling by 12 months  
  Child is not gesturing (pointing, waving bye-bye, etc.) by 
12 months  
 Child has no single words by 16 months  
 Child has no spontaneous two-word phrases by 24 months 
 Child has a loss of any language or social skills at any age  
 Source: Based on Filipek, P., Accardo, P., Ashwal, S., Baranek, G., Cook, 
E., Dawson, G., Gordon, B., Gravel, J., Johnson, C., Kallen, R., Levy, S., 
Minshew, N., Ozonoff, S., Prizant, B., Rapin, I., Rogers, S., Stone, W., 

Data and Documents 183
Teplin, S., Tuchman, R., Volkmar, F. 2000. “Practice Parameter: Screening 
and Diagnosis of Autism: Report of the Quality Standards Subcommit-
tee of the American Academy of Neurology and the Child Neurology 
Society.”  Neurology 55 (4): 468 – 79. 
 Neuroscience of Autism Spectrum Disorders 
 Social Brain Systems Impaired in ASD 
  There are several theories regarding the neurological pathology of ASD. 
Two of these theories have received support as a result of productive ex-
ploration of brain structures relevant to social information processing and 
the interconnectivity among these brain regions. Given the predominance 
of social dysfunction in the clinical presentation of ASD, the primacy of 
social behavior in human development, and the cross-species evolutionary 
conservation of brain systems apparently evolved to regulate interactions 
with others of the same species, social brain theories posit that (a) spe-
cific human brain systems exist to process information pertaining to other 
humans (Brothers 1990) and (b) autistic dysfunction originates in these 
brain systems, exerting secondary, peripheral impacts through develop-
mental effects. For example, one proposed hypothesis, the social motivation 
hypothesis, suggests that reduced social drive leads an individual with 
ASD to pay less attention to people which results in the consequent failure 
of developmental specialization in brain systems that rely upon experi-
ence to fully develop, such as processing information from faces (Dawson, 
Webb, and McPartland 2005).  
  Interconnectivity theories, in contrast to social information process-
ing theories, have predominantly focused on nonspecific brain processes, 
in which the nature of the information processed is relevant only insofar 
as it requires distributed brain function. For example, it has been posited 
that, due to poor long range connectivity in the brains of individuals with 
ASD, simple, local processing is intact while complex, distributed infor-
mation processing is impaired in ASD (Minshew and Williams 2007). 
Given the complexity of social interaction, functioning of distributed brain 
structures is required for rapid and easy processing of social information. 
According to connectivity theories, it is a disruption in connectivity that 
impairs social processing, not dysfunctional brain systems specific to so-
cial information processing. Evidence for atypical interconnectivity in 
ASD derives primarily from studies of brain structure (Barnea-Goraly et al. 
2004), fMRI (Kleinhans et al. 2008), and EEG coherence (Murias et al. 
2007), and, to date, has focused primarily on functional connectivity, or 
the temporal correlation between neural activity in separate brain areas.  

184 Data and Documents
A
B
C
E
D
F
G
H
A. Anterior Cingulate
 
(Mundy, 2003)
B. Medial Prefrontal Cortex
 
(Dawson et al, 2006)
C. Inferior Frontal Gyrus
 
(Dapretto et al, 2006)
D. Hippocampus
 
(Bauman & Kemper, 2005)
E. Amygdala
 
(Baron-Cohen et al, 2000)
F. Superior Temporal Sulcus
 
(Pelphrey & Carter, 2008)
G. Fusiform Gyrus
 
(Schultz et al, 2000)
H. Cerebellum
 
(Courchesne, 1997)
 Figure 6.4. Social Brain Circuitry Implicated in ASD 
  Source: Bernier, R. 2002.  Neuroscience of Autism Lecture. Reprinted with permission of author. 
  The social information processing theory suggests that the impair-
ments observed in autism are the result of dysfunctional circuitry related 
to brain structures relevant to processing social information. Figure 6.4 
highlights some brain structures and systems related to social information 
processing that have been implicated in ASD.  
 Face Perception in Autism 
  The ability to rapidly and easily process information in the human face is 
an early developing and essential skill for social interaction. Very young 
infants demonstrate a preference for faces and objects that look like faces 
and will attend to longer and look at faces (Goren, Sarty, and Wu 1975; 
Johnson et al. 1991). Further, young infants can use information from 
faces. For example, infants only days old are able to remember their mother’s 
face (Bushnell, Sai, and Mullin 1989) and infants as young as 42 min-
utes old demonstrate the ability to imitate facial expressions (Meltzoff 
and Moore 1977). This early attentional preference and ability to use in-
formation from faces from very early on, provides infants with valuable 

Data and Documents 185
information about the world around them. Through faces, humans learn 
about emotions, communication, and the intentions of others.  
  Researchers have learned about the perception of faces at the behav-
ioral, anatomical, and neurophysiological level. Face perception abilities 
become specialized within the first months of life (de Haan, Johnson, and 
Halit 2003; Leppanen and Nelson 2009) and continue to develop over 
childhood such that children move from processing faces using feature-
based strategies to using more holistic, configural processing strategies. 
That is, when looking at a car one might notice the headlights, the fend-
ers, and the emblem on the hood to determine what kind of car it is. This 
would be using a feature-based processing strategy, as opposed to a holistic 
strategy that humans rely upon for face processing (Farah, Tanaka, and 
Drain 1995).  
  Advances in technology have allowed researchers to understand the 
brain systems involved in the perception and processing of faces and infor-
mation from faces. Imaging research using positron emission tomography 
(PET) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) indicate that 
when looking at faces, a region of the occipitotemporal cortex in the brain, 
the fusiform gyrus, is activated (Haxby et al. 1994; Kanwisher, McDer-
mott, and Chun 1997; Puce et al. 1995). Studies using electrophysiology 
have also provided insight into face processing. Using event-related po-
tentials (ERPs), changes in the brain’s electrical activity in response to a 
specific event that are recorded via sensors attached to the scalp, scientists 
have shown a negative going peak in the brain’s electrical activity that oc-
curs approximately 170 milliseconds after perceiving a face. This peak is 
termed the N170, as it is a negative going wave that peaks around 170 milli-
seconds after the event (Bentin et al. 1996). The use of electrophysiology, 
which has a much finer temporal resolution that fMRI, on the order of milli-
seconds as opposed to seconds, provides insight into the speed at which 
information from faces is processed in the brain.  
  Research on face processing in autism indicates that this is a specific 
area of social interaction that is impacted in autism. At the behavioral 
level, infants who later go on to be diagnosed with autism attend to faces 
less than typically developing children or children with intellectual dis-
ability (Osterling and Dawson 1994) and perform more poorly at tests of 
face and emotion recognition (Hobson 1986). Further, individuals with 
autism attend differently to faces. While typically developing individuals 
attend more to eyes, individuals with autism focus more on the mouth than 
on the eyes (Klin et al. 2002). At the neurological level, it has been shown 
that individuals with autism show less activation of the traditional face 
processing region of the brain, the fusiform gyrus, than typical individu-
als (Schultz et al. 2000). Further, research employing electrophysiological 

186 Data and Documents
Typical
Auyism
N170
200 ms
180 ms
 Figure 6.5. Face Perception in Autism 
  Source: Based on J. McPartland, G. Dawson, S. Webb, H. Panagiotides, and L. Carver. 2004. “Event-related Brain 
Potentials Reveal Anomalies in Temporal Processing of Faces in Autism Spectrum Disorder.”  Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry 45:1235 – 45. Reprinted with permission of author. 
measurement and assessment of the N170 has shown that individuals with 
autism show delays in processing faces (McPartland et al. 2004).  
  Dr. McPartland and colleagues compared the ERP component, the 
N170, in response to pictures of faces in a group of adults with autism and 
a same age group of comparison adults with typical development. They 
found that the participants with autism showed a longer N170 latency, the 
characteristic N170 peak was delayed, compared to the comparison group. 
Importantly, they found that the electrophysiological delay correlated with 
behavioral measures of face recognition. Figure 6.5 shows the ERP wave-
form for both the group of participants with autism (in black) and the com-
parison group (in gray). The negative going peak is highlighted in gray 
and demonstrates that this peak is delayed in the individuals with autism. 
While the delay is on the order of milliseconds, at the brain level this is 
significant. One could imagine that if processing faces takes longer, even 
just moments longer, it delays the processing of all the other information 
related to faces or could lead to a mismatch in connecting information from 
faces and other information in the social world, such as language or con-
text. This underscores the importance of face processing in social interac-

Data and Documents 187
tion and the potential importance of face processing to the cascade of social 
impairments in autism.  
 Prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorders 
 Prevalence Estimates from Educational Records 
  Prevalence is defined as the number of cases of a given disorder in the 
population at a given time. Although studies to determine the prevalence 
of autism began shortly after Leo Kanner first reported on the disorder, in-
terest was kindled early in the 21st century following reports of increasing 
numbers of children with ASD being treated in the school systems across 
the United States. Reviews of educational records from the late 1990s and 
early 2000s has indicated that there is an increasing number of children 
being diagnosed with ASDs in the United States (Gurney et al. 2003; 
Newschafer et al. 2005). Moreover, the data from these records most likely 
underestimates the number of children with a diagnosis of ASD because 
children may receive special education services for difficulties other than 
ASD, such as speech therapy.  
  A rich source of data of this sort comes from information concern-
ing children with disabilities who are served under the Individuals with 
 Figure 6.6. Number of Children Served under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act 
 Source: Based on data available at http://www.ideadata.org. 
1998
700,000
600,000
500,000
400,000
number of children
year
300,000
200,000
100,000
0
1999
2000
mental retardation
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
autism
 hearing impairments     

188 Data and Documents
Disabilities Education Act (IDEA). The IDEA is a federal law, established 
in 1990, that provides guidelines of special education and early interven-
tion service provision by state and public agencies. The data that are collected 
indicates the number of children being served under the federal act for 
a given IDEA disability category (e.g., autism or hearing impairment) 
across all 50 states. Based upon IDEA data, Figure 6.6 shows the num-
ber of children being served by the IDEA between the years of 1998 and 
2007 for three disability categories: mental retardation, hearing impair-
ment, and autism. The graph shows the rising number of children being 
served falling into the IDEA category of autism, the decreasing number of 
children being served falling under the label of mental retardation, and the 
relatively consistent number of children with hearing impairment being 
served over the 10-year span.  
 Prevalence Estimates from Monitoring Networks 
  Data from educational records provide an important perspective on treat-
ment and services usage for children with disabilities, but are not the best 
indicators of the true prevalence of the disorder. Special education records 
provide information about numbers of children receiving special education 
services with a given disorder, but this is not the same as the number of 
children with a given disorder. More importantly, the eligibility criteria for 
determining which disability category a child falls into varies state by state 
and these criteria do not map precisely onto the diagnostic criteria as estab-
lished by the medical community for all states. For example, in order to es-
tablish eligibility for receiving services for autism in the state of Washington 
a child requires a diagnosis from a professional, licensed provider following 
the criteria outlined in DSM-IV. This is not the case for all states, and 
while IDEA states that the eligibility criteria cannot be any more restric-
tive than these criteria, the criteria can be looser.  
  This suggests that the accurate determination of prevalence rates 
must be achieved through different means. Accurate estimates of preva-
lence are critical because it allows for the comparison of rates across differ-
ing time points or populations. The characteristics of individuals with a 
disorder, such as race or gender, can be identified and this can help guide 
research to determine causes as well as risk and protective factors.  
  In an attempt to address this need to accurately estimate the preva-
lence of ASDs in the United States, the Centers for Disease Control formed 
the collaborative network, the Autism and Developmental Disabilities 
Monitoring (ADDM) Network. The ADDM network, consisting initially 

Data and Documents 189
  Figure 6.7.  Prevalence of ASD in 8-year-old Children in 2000 and 2002 in Six States Participating in the 
Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring (ADDM) Network 
 Source:  Based on data presented by Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring (ADDM) Network in  Morbidity 
and Mortality Weekly Report, Surveillance Summaries,  February 9, 2007, 56 (SS01): 1 – 11 and 12 – 28. 
of sites in 6 states and expanded to include 17 states, utilizes standardized 
measures to accurately count the number of eight-year-old children with 
an ASD in each project area.  
  The ADDM network established the prevalence rates for ASD in 
2000 for 6 states and in 2002 for 17 states. The overall prevalence rate 
across the six included states for 2000 was 6.7 per 1,000 eight-year-old 
children, which is approximately 1 in 150 children. The rate in 2002 was 
very similar at 6.6 per 1,000 eight-year-old children, which roughly ap-
proximates to 1 in 150 children as well. Based on data from the six states 
involved in both estimates, the results indicate that the prevalence rate of 
ASD was relatively stable in Arizona, Maryland, New Jersey, and South 
Carolina, but increased in Georgia and West Virginia. Interestingly, in 
2000 only 70 percent, and in 2002 only 61 percent, of the identified chil-
dren with ASDs in Maryland were receiving special education services. 
year 2000
 year 2002
12
11
10
9
8
7
p
e
c
n
e
l
a
v
e
r
r
e
t
a
p
1
 r
e
,
0
0
0
Autism & Developmental Disabilities (ADDM) monitoring sites
6
5
4
a
n
o
zir
A
a
n
o
zir
A
aig
r
o
e
G
aig
r
o
e
G
d
n
aly
r
a
M
d
n
aly
r
a
M
y
e
s
r
e
J 
w
e
N
y
e
s
r
e
J 
w
e
N
a
nilo
r
a
C
 
h
t
u
o
S
a
nilo
r
a
C
 
h
t
u
o
S
ainig
ri
V
 ts
e
W
ainig
ri
V
 ts
e
W

190 Data and Documents
This suggests that if educational records were utilized to estimate preva-
lence rates, the rate would be an underestimate. Figure 6.7 shows the prev-
alence rates for the six participating ADDM sites during both the 2000 
and 2002 assessments. The figure also shows that prevalence rates differed 
by state, with the rate of New Jersey falling above the rates obtained for the 
other states.  
 Ethnic Differences in Prevalence 
of Autism Spectrum Disorders 
 Although prevalence estimates across countries and within the United 
States suggest that autism affects members of all race and ethnicities 
equally, some research suggests there are differences in patterns of diagno-
sis of autism between racial groups. White Medicaid-eligible children with 
autism in Philadelphia county receive a diagnosis about one and a half 
years, on average, earlier than African-American children and two and a 
half years earlier than Latino children (Mandell, Listerud, Levy, & Pinto-
Martin, 2002). Additionally, African American children with ASD were 
nearly 3 times more likely than White children to be diagnosed with another 
disorder prior to receiving a diagnosis of ASD (Mandell, Ittenbach, Levy, 
and Pinto-Martin 2007). According to data presented in the Department 
of Education’s 2001 IDEA report, students in the United States identified 
as African American or Asian/Pacific Islander were served by the IDEA 
under the category of ASD at twice the rate of those who were American 
Indian/Alaskan or Hispanic (Dyches, Wilder, and Obiakor 2001).  
  A study to estimate ASD prevalence in the United States reported 
findings by racial group (Kogan et al. 2009). To conduct this study ques-
tions regarding autism were included in the 2007 National Survey of 
Children’s Health (NSCH) conducted by the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention’s National Center for Health Statistics. The NSCH is a 
telephone survey of child health and well-being and is used as a repre-
sentative sample of all of the United States. To estimate the prevalence of 
ASD and assess differences in prevalence rates by racial group, the authors 
asked parents participating in the survey if the child under discussion had 
ever been diagnosed with autism. Of 77,911 children between the ages of 
3 and 17, 911 had reportedly been diagnosed with autism at some point 
during their lives. This yields a population estimate of 110 per 10,000 
children having a diagnosis of ASD and representing approximately 
673,000 children in the United States (Kogan et al. 2009). In regards to 
race and ethnicity, the authors of the study found that non-Hispanic, black 

Data and Documents 191
 Figure 6.8. Point Prevalence Rates of Autism by Racial Group 
 Source: Based on data presented in M. Kogan, et al. 2009. “Prevalence of Parent-Reported Diagnosis of Autism 
Spectrum Disorder Among Children in the US, 2007.”  Pediatrics  124: 1395 – 403. 
children had 57 percent lower odds of having an ASD diagnosis than non-
Hispanic, white children. Non-Hispanic, multiracial and non-Hispanic 
other single race (not black or white) children both had 42 percent lower odds 
of having an ASD diagnosis than non-Hispanic, White children (Kogan et al. 
2009). As shown in Figure 6.8, there were no differences in prevalence 
rates for Hispanic or white children, and this finding differed from previ-
ous research, but the authors note that there is evidence to suggest that in 
Hispanic households in which Spanish is the primary language the preva-
lence of an ASD diagnosis is lower than that found in this study.   
   Interventions in Autism Spectrum Disorders 
 Treatment and Interventions for Autism Spectrum Disorders 
  The vast array of treatments and interventions that are used or have been 
used to treat individuals with autism ranges from education-based treat-
ments to animal-based treatments to pharmacological intervention. The 
large number and diversity of interventions available to families is stag-
gering and can be overwhelming for many families just receiving a diag-
nosis.  
140
120
100
80
D
S
A
p
0
0
0
,
0
1
 r
e
p
 
e
c
n
e
l
a
v
e
r
Racial group
60
40
20
0
hispanic
White
black
multiracial
other single race

192 Data and Documents
  The interventions for autism fall into three main categories: psy-
choeducational, psychopharmacological, and complementary (Charman 
and Clare 2004). There are currently no interventions that cure autism, 
few have been rigorously assessed by the scientific community, few have 
been found to demonstrate improvement of symptoms, and some inter-
ventions have even proven harmful.  
 However, within the psychoeducational domain, interventions based 
on applied behavioral analysis (ABA) have been shown to be effective in 
providing long-term benefits through well-controlled studies (Howlin, 
Magiati, and Charman 2009). Studies of behaviorally based interventions 
have demonstrated gains in intellectual ability and symptom reduction for 
individuals with autism. Although there is no direct evidence that inter-
vention begun earlier has a greater benefit than intervention begun later, 
consensus among the scientific community is that children with autism 
should begin a behaviorally based intervention program as early as pos-
sible (Dawson and Zanolli 2007). A perceived drawback for many families 
is that these early, intensive behavioral interventions (also known as EIBI) 
are costly and time consuming.  
  A number of medications falling in the psychopharmacological cat-
egory have been used to treat children and adults with autism. However, 
the focus of treatment with pharmacological agents has been on improving 
symptoms associated with autism, but not the core social communicative 
deficits. Medications have been used to ameliorate associated attentional 
deficits, depression, anxiety, sleep problems, obsessive compulsions or rit-
uals, as well as self-injurious or repetitive behaviors and tics. Although 
there are many conflicting results in the research literature, support has 
been found for the effectiveness of medication to reduce depression, re-
petitive behaviors, hyperactivity and aggression in autism (Charman and 
Clare 2004).  
  A third category of interventions focuses on complementary or alter-
native treatments. These treatments are labeled alternative because they 
currently fall outside what is considered mainstream provision of care and 
are sometimes termed Complementary and Alternative Medicine (CAM) 
treatments. Into this category falls the collection of treatments called bio-
medical treatments. The majority of these treatments have not been rigor-
ously studied using well-designed research studies. Most of the studies 
that have been conducted assessing these interventions lack sufficient 
experimental controls, suffer from small sample sizes, and have resulted 
in findings that have not been replicated in independent studies. Some 
treatments, including secretin and facilitated communication, have been 
demonstrated to have no effectiveness, while other treatments have yielded 
potentially promising initial findings that require rigorous evaluation and 

Data and Documents 193
replication (Myers, Johnson, & American Academy of Pediatrics Council 
on Children With Disabilities 2007).  
  The list of interventions identified below includes most of the treat-
ments and interventions that are used or have been used to treat individ-
uals with autism. The presence of a treatment or intervention on the list 
does not mean that there is any scientific evidence for its effectiveness. 
Importantly, the Treatments and Interventions table below is not in any 
way an endorsement of the listed treatments. 
 Treatments and Interventions for Autism Distributed by Category 
 Psycho-Educational 
 Standard 
 ART THERAPY 
 MUSIC THERAPY 
 PLAY THERAPY 
 OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY 
 SPEECH THERAPY 
 PROMPT SPEECH THERAPY 
 PHYSICAL THERAPY 
 Behavioral Interventions 
 APPLIED BEHAVIORAL ANALYSIS 
 EARLY START DENVER MODEL 
 PIVOTAL RESPONSE TRAINING 
 DISCRETE TRIAL TRAINING 
 SOCIAL STORIES 
 SOCIAL SKILLS TRAINING 
 SOCIAL GROUPS 
 INTEGRATED PLAY THERAPY 

194 Data and Documents
 Educational and Integrated Services 
 TEACCH 
 DAILY LIFE THERAPY 
 Technology Based 
 VIDEO MODELING 
 Alternative and Augmentative Communication  
 VISUAL SCHEDULES 
 PICTURE EXCHANGE COMMUNICATION SYSTEM 
(PECS) 
 COMPLEMENTARY 
 Animal Based 
 CANINE COMPANION 
 DOLPHIN THERAPY 
HIPPOTHERAPY
 THERAPEUTIC HORSEBACK RIDING 
 Spirituality Based 
 PRAYER 
 ENERGY HEALING 
 Diets and Supplements 
 DIETARY INTERVENTION (E.G., GLUTEN-FREE, 
CASEIN-FREE DIET [GFCF DIET]; YEAST FREE; 
KETOGENIC) 
 HOMEOPATHY 
 IMMUNOTHERAPY 
 VITAMIN THERAPY 

Data and Documents 195
 SECRETIN 
 MELATONIN 
 Medical Procedures 
 CHELATION 
 HYPERBARIC OXYGEN THERAPY 
 ELECTROCONVULSIVE THERAPY 
 Relationship-Based Interventions 
 FLOORTIME 
 SON-RISE TREATMENT 
 GENTLE TEACHING 
 HOLDING THERAPY 
 RELATIONSHIP DEVELOPMENT INTERVENTION 
 PEER MENTORING 
 Integrated Interventions 
 LINWOOD METHOD 
 SCERTS MODEL 
 Physiological Interventions 
 CHIROPRACTIC 
 CRANIO-SACRAL THERAPY 
 ACUPUNCTURE AND ACUPRESSURE 
 YOGA 
 THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE 
 PATTERNING THERAPIES 
 MILLER METHOD 
 AUDITORY INTEGRATION THERAPY 

196 Data and Documents
 RHYTHMIC ENTRAINMENT INTERVENTION 
 SAMONAS 
 SENSORY INTEGRATION THERAPY 
 TOMATIS METHOD 
 VISION THERAPY 
 IRLEN LENS SYSTEM 
 BIOFEEDBACK AND NEUROFEEDBACK 
 AQUATIC THERAPY 
 Technology Based 
 ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGY 
 TEACHTOWN 
 FAST FORWARD 
 ONLINE COMMUNITIES 
 Alternative and Augmentative Communication  
 FACILITATED COMMUNICATION 
 RAPID PROMPTING 
 Psycho-Pharmacological 
 PHARMACOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS ( INCLUDING: 
ANTI-CONVULSANTS; ANTI-DEPRESSANTS; ANTI-
FUNGALS; ANTI-HYPERTENSIVES; ANTI-PSYCHOTICS; 
ANXIOLYTICS; MOOD STABILIZERS; SEDATIVES; 
STIMULANTS; AMONG OTHERS) 
 Source: Based upon information in Charman, T., and P. Clare. 2004.  Map-
ping Autism Research: Identifying UK priorities for the Future. London: 
National Autistic Society; and Exhorn, K. S. 2005.  The Autism Sourcebook . 
New York: Regan. 
 Guidelines for Evaluating Interventions 
  There is a vast array of treatment and intervention options marketed and 
available to families of children with autism. The list of potential interven-

Data and Documents 197
tion is dizzying and ranges from such empirically supported treatments as 
ABA-based therapy to treatments that focus on specific areas of difficulty, 
such as speech therapy for communication difficulties, occupational ther-
apy for motor or sensory concerns, or medication for associated conditions 
such as depression or seizures. In addition to these treatments supported 
by the medical community there is an equally dizzying array of treatments 
termed Complementary and Alternative Medicines (CAMs). These treat-
ments range from chelation, facilitated communication, vitamin supple-
ments, dietary interventions, dolphin therapy, to social skills training, 
auditory integration, and secretin injections. And the list goes on. With 
this vast array of options, some of which have scientific support for their 
effectiveness while others have no scientific support, it is important that 
families have tools available to aid in the evaluation of these potential in-
tervention options. B. J. Freeman published guidelines in 1997 to provide 
a framework for families to evaluate intervention programs for autism 
(Freeman 1997). Freeman highlights that the critical factor to remember 
when evaluating programs is that every child with autism is unique and 
what is appropriate for one child with autism may not be appropriate for 
another and only programs with a goal to “help a person with autism 
become a fully functioning member of society” are appropriate (Freeman 
1997, p. 647).  
  The selected text below provides the list of general guidelines pro-
posed by B. J. Freeman and the corresponding five questions that must be 
asked of any program after considering these guidelines.  
 Guidelines for Evaluating Treatments for Autism 
 1.  Approach any new treatment with hopeful skepticism. 
Remember the goal of any treatment should be to help 
the person with autism become a fully functioning 
member of society. 
 2.  Beware of any program or technique that is touted as 
effective or desirable for every person with autism. 
 3.  Beware of any program that thwarts individualization 
and potentially results in harmful program decisions. 
 4.  Be aware that any treatment represents one of several 
options for a person with autism. 
 5.  Be aware that treatment should always depend on 
individual assessment information that points to it as an 
appropriate choice for a particular child. 
 6.  Be aware that no new treatment should be implemented 
until its proponents can specify assessment procedures 
necessary to determine whether it will be appropriate for 
an individual with autism. 

198 Data and Documents
 7.  Be aware that debate over use of various techniques are 
often reduced to superficial arguments over who is right, 
moral and ethical and who is a true advocate for the 
children. This can lead to results that are directly opposite 
to those intended including impediments to maximizing 
programs. 
 8.  Be aware that often new treatments have not been 
validated scientifically. 
 Questions to Ask Regarding Specific Treatments 
 1.  Will the treatment result in harm to the child? 
 2.  How will failure of the treatment affect my child and 
family? 
 3.  Has the treatment been validated scientifically? 
 4.  Are there assessment procedures specified? 
 5.  How will the treatment be integrated into the child’s 
current program? Do not become so infatuated with a 
given treatment that functional curriculum, vocational 
life and social skills are ignored. 
 Source: Freeman, B. J. 1997. “Guidelines for Evaluating Intervention Pro-
grams for Children with Autism.”  Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders  27:  641 – 51. Reprinted with permission from Springer Science + 
Business Media, © 1997. 
 Guidelines for Evaluating Complementary 
and Alternative Treatments 
  Given the myriad of complementary and alternative medical therapies 
available to families, physicians are faced with the need to help counsel 
families in their evaluation of CAMs. In an effort to aid in the assessment 
of potential malpractice liability issues around CAMs, Cohen and Eisen-
berg provide a framework in a 2 × 2 design. Through this framework, the 
authors also provide a framework for counseling families in the evaluation 
of any CAM. In this design the evaluator’s decision about the treatment 
should be based on available evidence concerning the safety of the treat-
ment and on the effectiveness of the treatment. As shown in Figure 6.9 a 

Data and Documents 199
 Figure 6.9. Decision Matrix for Complementary and Alternative Medical Therapies 
 Source: Based on M. Cohen and D. Eisenberg. 2002. “Potential Physician Malpractice Liability Associated with Comple-
mentary and Integrative Medical Therapies.” Annals of Internal Medicine  136: 596 – 603. 
treatment for which there is evidence in the scientific and medical litera-
ture of effectiveness and safety would be recommended while a treatment 
for which there is no evidence of either, would be avoided and discouraged. 
A treatment for which there is evidence of safety but for which there is 
inconclusive evidence of effectiveness could be tolerated but it would be 
important to advance with caution and its effectiveness would need to be 
closely monitored. If a treatment’s effectiveness was supported in the lit-
erature but evidence of its safety was inconclusive, the evaluator could 
consider tolerating the treatment, but close monitoring and caution would 
be imperative.  
 Applied Behavioral Analysis 
and Discrete Trial Training 
 Applied Behavioral Analysis (ABA) is a general term that encompasses 
intervention approaches designed to change behavior based on operant 
behavioral principles. ABA is based on the concept that behaviors paired 
or followed by a reward (termed a reinforcer) become more positive and 

200 Data and Documents
increase, while behaviors paired with or followed by a punishment or 
negative consequence become more negative and decrease. Treatments 
based on ABA principles are the only intervention approach that is 
deemed effective for addressing ASDs. In children with autism, these 
treatments generally involve an intensive teaching method of carefully 
reinforcing certain behaviors while ignoring others. Social and com-
munication skills are usually the focus of ABA and skills are generally 
taught methodically, starting with more foundational skills and moving 
onto more complex skills. Therapies based on ABA principles are often 
done in a home setting by trained therapists. Parents can also be taught 
therapy techniques based on ABA and are often encouraged to use such 
methods when interacting with their children. A child’s ABA-based 
therapy program is usually designed by a psychologist and is individu-
alized for each child in order to address the child’s specific strengths and 
weaknesses.  
 There are many different types of ABA-based therapy programs. 
Discrete Trial Training (DTT), Pivotal Response Training (PRT), and 
the Early Start Denver Model (ESDM) are just a few of the many be-
haviorally based interventions available. While all ABA interventions 
follow the principles of operant conditioning and incorporate data collec-
tion and clear progress monitoring, in each distinct treatment program, 
there are differences in the structure, setting, or focus of the intervention. 
Some treatments provide naturalistic treatment settings and relate the re-
ward or reinforcement to the skill area being taught to increase the value 
of the reward in that context. For example, if the focus of a skill training 
activity is counting, a child might be provided with the option to count 
an object of interest to him, such as colored blocks or toy cars, and have 
the opportunity to play with the cars after demonstrating mastery of the 
counting skill. PRT focuses on two “pivotal” areas of behavior: moti-
vation and responsivity to multiple cues, based on the framework that 
these two pivotal areas are central to a wide range of functioning and 
by impacting these two areas, improvements in behavioral functioning 
will cascade. DTT, another treatment program, is less naturalistic and 
focuses on breaking down tasks into basic steps and teaching these basic 
skills on subskill at a time while reducing the number of prompts until 
the child has mastered the skill. 
  Dr. Ivar Lovaas, professor of psychology at the University of Cali-
fornia in Los Angeles, was an early pioneer of applying the principles of 
ABA and through initial work demonstrated the effectiveness of Discrete 
Trial Training in producing gains in cognition and behavior in children 
with autism (Lovaas 1987). DTT is also called the “Lovaas approach” 
because Dr. Lovaas popularized this type of instructional strategy in the 

Data and Documents 201
1970s and 1980s. A discrete trial in this treatment program is the basic 
unit of instruction in which there are several distinct behaviorally based 
components to the instructional routine. The first step is the instruction 
to which the therapist would like the student to respond, which in behav-
ioral terms is called the discriminative stimulus. The second component, 
the prompt, is optional and may be unnecessary. The verbal or physi-
cal prompt is used to aid in helping the student respond appropriately. 
The next component is the response and this is what the child does. This 
is followed by the reward, or reinforcement, and serves to increase the 
desired response. The final component is an inter-trial interval that dif-
ferentiates one trial from the next. The student’s response, as well as the 
prompt used, if any, during the trial can be recorded in the inter-trial 
interval. This will form the data that are used to determine when the 
child has mastered the skill being trained and when the next skill should 
be addressed. 
  Data collection and monitoring is an important facet of ABA-based 
treatments. The data is used to guide goal development for an individual’s 
treatment program and to monitor improvement. Results from the data 
can indicate if the treatment program is effective and if not can indicate 
that the program needs to be modified.  
  Figure 6.10 shows a typical ABA-based treatment data tracking 
sheet with sample data included. On the data sheet the skill area of inter-
est (or the discriminative stimulus), the desired response, and the rein-
forcement that is being used is recorded. For each skill a chart marked by 
trial number is included so that the therapist can record the student’s 
response as well as any prompt needed for that trial. A key for the abbre-
viations used in the table is listed at the top of the data sheet to remind the 
therapist of the response and prompt types to record. Following a cycle 
of discrete trials, the percentage of correct responses without prompts is 
calculated.   
  An example of a discrete trial session that would generate the data 
in Figure 6.10 follows:  
  Billy’s teacher is working on vocabulary development with him 
and is focusing on animals given Billy’s recent trip to the petting farm. 
The instructions of the task are to identify the toy cat among the col-
lection of animal toys on the table between them. The discriminative 
stimulus is “show me the cat” and the expected response is the identi-
fication of the cat with a point. Billy’s teacher knows that Billy is moti-
vated by verbal praise, but that his favorite snack is a goldfish cracker 
so, his teacher will use both praise and the goldfish crackers to reinforce 
responses. Billy’s teacher notes the date and time on the sheet (Oct 12th, 
9:00 a.m.).  

 Figure 6.10. Example ABA-based DTT Data Tracking Sheet with Sample Data 
 Source: R. Bernier. 2004.  Autism Interventions Lecture. Reprinted with permission of author. 

Data and Documents 203
 Trial #1 
 TEACHER: 
“Show me the cat.” [Discriminative Stimulus] 
   
Billy sits at the table but does not make any re-
sponse. The teacher takes Billy’s hand, shapes it so 
that he is making a pointing gesture, and directs 
his index finger to the cat. [Prompt & Response]  
 TEACHER: 
“Good job. That’s the cat!” [Reinforcement] 
   
During the inter-trial interval, the teacher quickly 
notes on the data sheet that Billy could not identify 
the cat independently on this trial.  
 Trial #2 
 TEACHER: 
“Show me the cat.” 
 
Billy remains seated and maintains fleeting eye 
contact with his teacher, but does not respond. The 
teacher waits a few seconds and then again takes 
Billy’s hand, shapes it so that he is making a point-
ing gesture, and directs his index finger to the cat. 
 TEACHER: 
“You got it. That’s the cat!” 
 
During the inter-trial interval, the teacher quickly 
notes on the data sheet that Billy could not identify 
the cat independently on this trial.  
 Trial #3 
 TEACHER: 
“Billy, show me the cat.” 
 
Again, Billy makes no response and after a few 
seconds, the teacher takes Billy’s hand, shapes it so 
that he is making a pointing gesture, and directs 
his index finger to the cat.  
 TEACHER: 
“Yup. There’s the cat!” 
 
During the inter-trial interval, the teacher quickly 
notes on the data sheet that Billy could not iden-
tify the cat independently on this trial. 
 Trial #4 
 TEACHER: 
“Show me the cat, Billy.” 

204 Data and Documents
 
The teacher waits a few seconds and then reaches 
to grab Billy’s hand but before touching him, he 
points to the animal closest to him, the dog. 
 TEACHER: 
“That’s the dog. This is the cat!” The teacher moves 
Billy’s hand to the cat. “Yup, that’s the cat.”  
 
During the inter-trial interval, the teacher quickly 
notes on the data sheet that Billy incorrectly iden-
tified the cat independently on this trial follow-
ing a partial physical prompt. 
 Trial #5 
 TEACHER: 
“Show me the cat, Billy.” 
   
The teacher waits a few seconds and then reaches 
to grab Billy’s hand but while reaching toward 
him, he points to the cat. 
 TEACHER: 
“Great job! This is the cat!” The teacher hands 
Billy a goldfish cracker to increase the reward 
value for responding to the instruction. 
   
During the inter-trial interval, the teacher quickly 
notes on the data sheet that Billy correctly identi-
fied the cat following a partial physical prompt. 
 
An additional 15 trials are completed during this 
session. At the completion of the 20 trials, the per-
centage correct is tallied and for this session Bil-
ly’s percentage correct is 25%. This is recorded on 
the data-tracking sheet. The teacher then moves 
to a different skill to focus on. 
 Example of Monthly Progress Data Sheet  
 The detailed data collected during individual sessions can be recorded 
over a period of time to track progress in an instructional program or skill 
area. By recording trial-by-trial data and examining the data across time, 
trends in learning patterns can be identified and incorporated into treat-
ment planning. The data can be used to determine if a student has gained 
mastery of the skill in question by a simple, quick examination of the data. 
For example, using Billy’s example, Billy’s teacher decided that prior to 
beginning the animal language training program mastery would be de-

 Figure 6.11. Example ABA-based Treatment Monthly Progress Sheet with Sample Data 
 Source: R. Bernier. 2004.  Autism Interventions Lecture. Reprinted with permission of author. 

206 Data and Documents
fined as successful independent correct identification of an animal occur-
ring 100 percent of 20 trials for three consecutive days. Using information 
transferred from a data sheet to a monthly tracking sheet allows Billy’s 
teacher to quickly determine if and when Billy mastered animal identifica-
tion skills.  
  Figure 6.11 shows an example of a monthly progress sheet with data 
from Billy’s example. The data from Billy’s discrete trials during the month 
of October (Figure 6.10 shows data collected on October 2nd, 3rd, and 4th) 
is transferred from data tracking sheets to the monthly progress sheet at the 
end of each day. The monthly progress sheet demonstrates that it took Billy 
10 days to master the identification of cats and that after 3 days his ability 
in this area improved dramatically but not enough to demonstrate mastery 
until that 10th day. The example sheet also demonstrates performance in 
a second skill area, in this case a very similar one, the identification of 
another animal. This is helpful because the teacher can quickly notice that 
Billy tends to quickly improve after just a few short days, but struggles to 
achieve fluency or mastery as defined by the teacher until several days of 
consistent practice.  
 Social Stories 
  There are a number of supportive techniques that can be helpful for individ-
uals with autism. Social stories (or social scripts) are one such technique. 
A social story is a type of behavioral support. It is a short, developmentally 
appropriate story that describes a standard routine (e.g., a trip to the doc-
tor’s office) from beginning to end. Developmentally appropriate means 
using terms and concepts that are appropriate for a child’s mental age, not 
chronological age. For example, Sam is an eight-year-old boy with autism 
who also has cognitive impairments. Cognitive testing estimates that he 
has an intelligence quotient (IQ) of 50. This means that he is functioning 
at a mental age of a four-year-old. As a result, terms and concepts that are 
appropriate for a four-year-old would be more appropriate for Sam than 
concepts directed at his chronological age. A social story also describes any 
potential difficulties that may be encountered along the way during an 
event or day (e.g., “The shot at the doctor might hurt a little, but my mom 
will be there and it will be alright”). Often social stories include pictures 
embedded in the text. Many children with autism have difficulties pro-
cessing long strings of verbal information but many also have strengths 
in processing visual information. By including pictures in the story and 
capitalizing on the visual strengths many children with autism possess, 
comprehension of the social story can be maximized. Social scripts are a 

Data and Documents 207
type of social story in which the child’s behavior or speech is scripted for 
him or her to help manage the social situation. Ultimately, social stories 
are designed to help children with autism anticipate future events and to 
minimize surprises associated with this new event.  
  The sample social story shows an example of a description of a down-
hill skiing lesson written at a developmental level for an eight-year-old 
child.  
 Today we will learn to ski. 
 We have to wear a big jacket and helmet when we go skiing. 
 This is so we stay warm and safe. 
 Skiing is fun because I get to glide down a hill on the snow. 
 The wind feels good on my face. 
 Sometimes I fall down when I learn to ski. 
 It might hurt a little, but I will stand up and be OK. 
 I will follow my teacher’s directions so she will keep me safe. 
 Going slowly and not being too close to other people is the 
safest way to ski. 
 There will be a lot of grown-ups and kids in line to go on the 
chairlift. 
 That’s OK because everyone is there to have fun. 
 Everyone will be proud of me because I had fun when I 
learned to ski! 
 Source: Varley, J., and R. Bernier, R. 2007.  Strategies for Working with Indi-
viduals with Autism.  Seattle, WA: Presentation for Outdoors for All 
 Economic Cost of Autism Spectrum Disorders 
  The economic costs of ASDs in the United States are considerable. For 
ASDs, the direct medical costs, such as physician services, medication, 
and hospital visits; direct nonmedical costs, such as special education, re-
spite care, and supported employment services; and indirect costs, which 
include lost productivity in the workplace, reduced work hours, or depar-
ture from the workforce, tally to an estimated $35 billion to treat all the 

208 Data and Documents
3
8
13
18
23
28
33
38
43
48
53
58
63
3,500,000
3,000,000
2,500,000
2,000,000
1,500,000
1,000,000
500,000
0
s
r
a
ll
do
 .
S
.
U
 
3
0
0
2
 
n
i t
s
o
c
age of individual with autism
indirect            nonmedical            medical
 Figure 6.12. Cumulative Individual Economic Cost of Autism 
 Source: Based on data presented in M. Ganz. 2009. “The Lifetime Distribution of the Incremental Societal Costs of 
Autism.”  Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine  161: 343 – 49. 
individuals diagnosed in a year over their lifetimes (Ganz 2006). In a study 
of health care utilization and costs in California’s Kaiser Permanente Medi-
cal Care Program, the study authors found that costs for hospitalizations, 
clinic visits, and medications were more than double for the children with 
ASD compared to children without ASD (Croen et al. 2006). After adjust-
ing for age and gender the total costs are more than threefold higher for 
children with ASDs. According to this 2006 study and previous studies 
(Guevara et al 2003; Newacheck 2005), it is a minority of the children 
with ASDs who require either psychiatric or non-psychiatric hospitaliza-
tions that increase the overall cost. A cost calculation based on data culled 
from the scientific literature, national databases for health care costs, and 
labor statistics and databases, resulted in an estimated lifetime cost for an 
individual with ASD of $3,160,384 combining direct and indirect costs 
(Ganz 2009). Figure 6.12 graphically demonstrates these data presenting 
costs in 2003 dollars for an individual diagnosed at age 3. The figure high-
lights the significant direct medical costs in the first 5 years of life and the 
decrease in these costs during each year across the lifespan, but with an 
ever-increasing cumulative tally.   

Data and Documents 209
 Vaccine Injury Compensation Program and Autism 
  The vaccine injury compensation program is a federally funded program 
to provide financial compensation to families following an adverse reaction 
to vaccination. Through this program started in 1986, families can quickly 
receive financial compensation of $900,000 in a very short time provided 
it can be definitively demonstrated that the injury was caused by the vac-
cination. This program was started to alleviate the number of lawsuits 
directed against vaccine makers that in the mid-1980s threatened to end 
vaccine manufacturing. While this program does not entirely protect vac-
cine makers, because if families are dissatisfied with rulings pharmaceuti-
cal companies can be sued in state courts, it has dramatically reduced the 
number of lawsuits.  
  Because of the belief that vaccines cause autism (see Chapter 2 for 
history of this controversy) many families have made claims to the vac-
cine injury compensation court. Between 1999 and 2007, more than 5,000 
families made claims that vaccines caused their child’s autism. This num-
ber overpowered the vaccine injury compensation court, and as a result the 
court decided to address the claims like a class-action lawsuit. Called the 
Omnibus Autism Proceeding, the trial began in the summer of 2007 and 
focused on three specific cases.  
  On February 12, 2009, the courts revealed their verdict. After re-
viewing the testimony concerning the three cases and including expert 
witnesses from both sides, the three judges that comprise the panel de-
termined that for each case there was no evidence that the children’s au-
tism was caused by the MMR vaccine and thimerosal. In the Opinion and 
Order on the case of Cedillo v. Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
Judge Wheeler reported that there was no evidence that Michelle Cedillo’s 
autism was caused by the MMR vaccine and thimerosal.  
 In the United States Court of Federal Claims;  No. 98-916V; (Filed: 
August 6, 2009) 
 Vaccine Act; Omnibus Autism Proceeding; Effect of Thimero-
sal and Measles, Mumps, and Rubella Vaccine in Causing Autism; 
Burden of Proof; Standard of Review; Analysis of Causation-in-
Fact Evidence; Assessment of Expert Testimony. 
 THERESA and MICHAEL CEDILLO, as Parents and Natural 
Guardians of MICHELLE CEDILLO, Petitioners, v. SECRETARY 
OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, Respondent. 
 Ronald C. Homer,  with whom were  Kevin P. Conway  and  Sylvia 
Chin-Caplan, Conway, 
 Homer & Chin-Caplan, P.C., Boston, Massachusetts, for Pe-
titioners. 

210 Data and Documents
 Lynn E. Ricciardella,  with whom were  Michael F. Hertz, Acting 
Assistant Attorney General,  Timothy P. Garren,  Director,  Catharine E. 
Reeves, Acting Deputy Director, and  Gabrielle M. Fielding, Assistant 
Director, Torts Branch, Civil Division, United States Department 
of Justice, Washington, D.C., for Respondent. 
 Opinion and Order 
 WHEELER, Judge. 
 This case is before the Court for review of the Special Mas-
ter’s February 12, 2009 decision dismissing Theresa and Michael 
Cedillo’s petition for compensation under the National Child-
hood Vaccine Injury Act of 1986, 42 U.S.C. § 300aa-1 et seq. (2006) 
(the “Vaccine Act”). See Cedillo v. Sec’y of HHS, No. 98-916V, 2009 
WL 331968, at *1 (Fed. Cl. Spec. Mstr. Feb. 12, 2009) (hereinafter 
“Cedillo”). Petitioners assert that their daughter, Michelle Cedillo, 
suffered severe autism and gastrointestinal injuries from various 
vaccines containing thimerosal, and from the measles, mumps and 
rubella (“MMR”) vaccine. This case was the first of three test cases 
under the Office of Special Masters’ Omnibus Autism Proceeding 
established in July 2002 to assist in the resolution of approximately 
5,000 autism cases pending in this Court. The other two test cases, 
also decided by Special Masters on February 12, 2009, are Snyder 
v. Secretary of Health & Human Services, No. 01-162V, 2009 WL 
332044 (Fed. Cl. Spec. Mstr. Feb. 12, 2009) and Hazlehurst v. Sec-
retary of Health & Human Services, No. 03-654V, 2009 WL 332258 
(Fed. Cl. Spec. Mstr. Feb. 12, 2009), aff’d No. 03-654V, 2009 WL 
2371336 (Fed. Cl. July 24, 2009). 
 In brief summary, Petitioners argue that Michelle Cedillo was 
a normal child for her first sixteen months until she experienced 
the effects of eleven vaccinations containing thimerosal, and the 
MMR vaccination. Pet’r Br. 2, 17 n.41, Mar. 16, 2009. Thimerosal is 
a compound consisting of mercury and other components that has 
been used since the 1930s in very small amounts as a preservative 
in vaccines to prevent fungal and bacterial contamination. Cedillo, 
at *17. The Cedillos claim that the ethyl mercury in thimerosal and 
the MMR vaccine damaged their daughter’s immune system, and 
that due to her immune deficiency, she was unable to clear from 
her body the measles virus contained in the MMR vaccine. Instead, 
the measles virus persisted and replicated in Michelle’s body, caus-
ing her to suffer inflammatory bowel disease. The Cedillos also 

Data and Documents 211
contend that the measles virus ultimately entered Michelle’s brain, 
causing inflammation and autism. 
 In a 174-page decision, Special Master George Hastings re-
jected all of Petitioners’ contentions, observing that “the evidence 
was overwhelmingly contrary” to the Cedillos’ claims. Id. at *1. 
Regarding some 23 expert witnesses who testified or submitted 
reports, he stated that “[t]he expert witnesses presented by the re-
spondent were far better qualified, far more experienced, and far 
more persuasive than the petitioners’ experts, concerning most of 
the key points.” Id. While acknowledging that Michelle Cedillo 
“has tragically suffered from autism and other severe conditions,” 
the Special Master concluded, “the petitioners have . . . failed to 
demonstrate that [Michelle’s] vaccinations played any role at all 
in causing those problems.” Id. 
 Petitioners timely filed their motion for review on March 16, 
2009, raising seven arguments to support their position that the 
Special Master’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, and not in ac-
cordance with law. Respondent filed a response memorandum on 
April 15, 2009, and the Court heard oral argument on July 7, 2009. 
Like the Special Master, the Court expresses its deep sympathy and 
admiration for the Cedillo family in caring for Michelle, and for 
the countless other families who deal with autism on a daily basis. 
However, for the reasons explained in detail below, the Court finds 
that Petitioners’ arguments linking Michelle Cedillo’s injuries to 
thimerosal and the MMR vaccine are without merit. Accordingly, 
the Court affirms the Special Master’s February 12, 2009 decision. 
 Factual Background 
 Michelle Cedillo was born on August 30, 1994. Id. at *4. Mrs. Ce-
dillo’s pregnancy and Michelle’s birth were uncomplicated. Id. 
Records from Michelle’s visits to pediatricians during her first six-
teen months indicate relatively normal health. Id. She experienced 
a few typical childhood ailments, such as an episode of vomiting 
and loose stools in March 1995, and constipation in June 1995. Id. 
At two months of age, she was able to fix her eyes and follow a 
moving object, and to become startled in response to a loud noise. 
Id. At one year, she spoke a few words, crawled on her knees, and 
pulled herself to stand. Id. She began walking at sixteen to eigh-
teen months, although the record lacks precision on this point. See 
Transcript of Proceedings, 1332 – 33, June 11 – 26, 2007 (“Tr.”); Ex. 
28 at 207. 

212 Data and Documents
 Michelle received two early hepatitis B vaccinations, one in the 
hospital shortly after her birth, and the second on September 27, 
1994. Cedillo, at *4. She received a diphtheria/tetanus/pertussis 
(“DTP”) vaccination on October 31, 1994, a hemophilus influenza 
vaccination on December 27, 1994, and a polio vaccination on 
March 8, 1995. Id. She also received a third hepatitis B vaccination on 
March 8, 1995. Id. She received a chicken-pox vaccination on Sep-
tember 6, 1995. Id. The DTP, hepatitis B, and hemophilus influenza 
vaccines all contained a small amount of thimerosal. Id. 
 On December 20, 1995, at fifteen months of age, Michelle re-
ceived an MMR vaccination at the office of her pediatrician, Dr. Dan-
iel Crawford, of Yuma Pediatrics. Id.; Ex. 8 at 2. She next visited her 
pediatrician on January 6, 1996. Cedillo, at *5. On that visit, Mrs. Ce-
dillo reported to Dr. Crawford that, one week after the MMR vac-
cination, Michelle had developed a fever and rash. Id. Although the 
fever subsided, it spiked again on January 5, 1996 and was accompa-
nied by a cough and “gagging to the point of vomiting.” Id. On the 
morning of January 6, 1996, Michelle’s temperature, taken at home, 
was 105.7 degrees. Id. Dr. Crawford later recorded her temperature 
as 100.3 degrees and noted that Michelle was crying and had a “pu-
rulent postnasal drip.” Id. Dr. Crawford diagnosed her with “sinus-
itis vs. flu” and prescribed antibiotics. Id. 
 Michelle visited Yuma Pediatrics again on March 15, 1996 for 
her scheduled wellchild check-up at age eighteen months. Id.; Ex. 
8 at 1. Her medical records from this visit do not reflect any signifi-
cant problems, stating that she seemed to “hear well” and “stool[]
well.” Cedillo, at *5. However, Dr. Crawford noted that Michelle 
was “talking less since ill in [January].” Id. At this visit, Michelle re-
ceived additional DTP and hemophilus influenza vaccinations, both 
of which contained thimerosal. Pet’r Br. 17. Michelle did not see a 
physician again for more than one year. Cedillo, at *5. 
 On April 24, 1997, Michelle visited another pediatrician, 
Dr. Emilia Matos, whose notes indicate that a “developmental delay 
[is] suspected” and that she was referring Michelle to a specialist 
for further evaluation. Id. On May 2, 1997, Dr. William Masland, 
a neurologist, noted in Michelle’s medical history that at sixteen 
months, she had developed a fever of over 105 degrees two weeks 
after the MMR immunization and lasting four days. Id. He added, 
“[s]ince then she [had] lost her ability to verbalize” and concluded, 
“[i]t would appear that there was some neurological harm done 
at the time of the fevers. Whether this was a post-immunization 
phenomenon or a separate occurrence, would be very difficult to 
say.” Id. 

Data and Documents 213
 Following these doctors’ visits in early 1997, medical records 
show that Michelle’s development became quite abnormal. Id. On 
July 21, 1997, Dr. Karlsson Roth, a developmental psychologist, 
examined Michelle and diagnosed her with severe autism and 
profound mental retardation, concluding that her future potential 
would be “extremely limited.” Id. Michelle’s evaluations in later 
years confirmed these diagnoses. For example, on March 1, 1999, 
Dr. Ira Lott, a pediatric neurologist, determined that Michelle had 
“autism of a severe degree” and that she “[did] not have much in 
the way of communicative speech.” Id. 
 In addition to her severe autism and mental retardation, Mi-
chelle has suffered significant gastrointestinal problems. Id. at *6. 
Medical records indicate that Michelle began experiencing chronic 
diarrhea in May 1999. Id. She also suffered symptoms in 2000 sug-
gesting gastroesophageal reflux disease, erosive esophagitis, and 
fecal impaction. Id. Beginning in June 2000, Michelle underwent 
multiple upper and lower endoscopies. Id. at *6, 116.2 During one 
such procedure in January 2002, a tissue sample was taken from 
Michelle’s intestine. Id. at *6. The Unigenetics Laboratory in Dub-
lin, Ireland performed a “Measles Virus Detection” test on this tis-
sue sample, and concluded in a March 15, 2002 report that “measles 
virus was detected” in the tissue. Id. However, as will be addressed 
below, Special Master Hastings determined that the Unigenetics 
test results were unreliable. Id. at *30, 46, 58 – 59. 
 Michelle also has experienced arthritis, uveitis (inflammation 
of the eyes), pancreatitis, and severe feeding problems, requiring 
the use of a feeding tube. Id. at *6, 122. In more recent years, she has 
suffered from a severe seizure disorder, resulting once in a fractured 
leg when she fell. Id. at *6. The Special Master rightly observed that 
Michelle Cedillo continually has “suffered from a tragic series of 
medical misfortunes.” Id. 
 History of Proceedings 
 Petitioners Theresa and Michael Cedillo filed their claim for com-
pensation under the Vaccine Act on December 9, 1998. Id. at *13. 
Initially, the Cedillos asserted that Michelle’s MMR vaccine caused 
her to suffer an encephalopathy, which is a “Table Injury” under the 
Vaccine Act. Id.; Resp’t Br. 2, Apr. 15, 2009. For a “Table Injury,” the 
claimant must show that he or she received a vaccination listed on 
the Vaccine Injury Table, and suffered a listed injury within a pre-
scribed period. Upon such a showing, the vaccine is presumed to 
have caused the injury, entitling the petitioner to compensation un-
less the respondent shows that the injury was caused by some other 

214 Data and Documents
factor. 42 U.S.C. § 300aa-14; Pafford v. Sec’y of HHS, 451 F.3d 1352, 
1355 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (citation omitted). 
 On January 14, 2002, the Cedillos changed their petition from 
a “Table Injury” claim to a “causation-in-fact” claim. Cedillo, at *13. 
Under the amended petition, the Cedillos alleged that vaccines con-
taining thimerosal, in combination with the MMR vaccine, cause 
autism. Id. at *15. A “causation-in-fact” claim does not carry a pre-
sumption of causation, and places the burden on the petitioner to 
prove that the vaccination actually caused the injury in question. 
Capizzano v. Sec’y of HHS, 440 F.3d 1317, 1320 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (cita-
tions omitted). 
 Michelle Cedillo’s case is one of approximately 5,000 Vaccine 
Act cases pending in this Court alleging that a child’s autism or 
similar disorder was caused by one or more vaccines. Cedillo, at 
*7. The term “autism” describes a set of developmental disorders 
characterized by impairments in social interaction, impairments in 
verbal and non-verbal communication, and restricted or repetitive 
patterns of behavior. Id. On July 3, 2002, in an effort to manage this 
large group of autism cases, the Chief Special Master instituted an 
Omnibus Autism Proceeding (“OAP”). Id. at *8. Under the OAP 
procedures, a group of counsel known as the Petitioners’ Steering 
Committee (“PSC”), selected from the attorneys representing peti-
tioners in the autism cases, had the responsibility for developing 
and presenting evidence on the general causation issue of whether 
the vaccines in question could cause autism. Id. The Special Mas-
ters then would apply the PSC’s evidence to individual cases. Id. 
 The Chief Special Master initially designated Special Master 
Hastings to preside over the OAP, and to resolve individual peti-
tions alleging that vaccines or thimerosal cause autism. Id. at *9. On 
January 11, 2007, the Chief Special Master named two additional 
Special Masters, Denise Vowell and Patricia Campbell-Smith, to 
preside jointly with Special Master Hastings over the OAP. Id. The 
individual petitions were divided among these three Special Mas-
ters. Id. A petitioner could elect to opt out of the OAP at any time if 
he or she did not want to await the outcome of the general causa-
tion proceedings. Id. at *9 n.14. 
 From 2002 to 2006, the PSC engaged in discovery on the gen-
eral causation issue. Id. at *9. On December 20, 2006 and again on 
January 9, 2007, the PSC proposed that the general causation evi-
dence be divided among three separate theories: (1) the combina-
tion of the MMR vaccine and thimerosal-containing vaccines can 
cause autism; (2) thimerosal containing vaccines alone can cause 

Data and Documents 215
autism; and (3) the MMR vaccine alone can cause autism. Id. The 
PSC proposed using Michelle Cedillo as a test case in June 2007 
to present the first general causation theory. Id. The three Special 
Masters agreed to the PSC’s proposal but directed the PSC to select 
two additional test cases falling within the same general causation 
theory. Id. at *10. Under this plan, the PSC would present its gen-
eral causation evidence concerning the first theory, along with evi-
dence specific to Michelle Cedillo’s case, in June 2007, after which 
the PSC would present the specific evidence for the two additional 
test cases. Id. Thereafter, the Special Masters would use a similar 
approach for each of the other two general causation theories. Id. 
 The parties submitted a vast amount of evidence in the Cedillo 
case on the general causation theory that the MMR vaccine and 
thimerosal-containing vaccines can combine to cause autism. Id. 
Special Master Hastings conducted an evidentiary hearing in the 
Cedillo case during June 11 – 26, 2007 to hear both general causation 
evidence and evidence specific to Michelle Cedillo’s case. Id.; Tr. 
1-2917. Petitioners presented testimony from six expert witnesses: 
H. Vasken Aposhian, Ph.D. (toxicology); Vera Byers, M.D., Ph.D. 
(immunology); Karin Hepner, Ph.D. (molecular biology); Ronald 
Kennedy, Ph.D. (virology); Marcel Kinsbourne, M.D. (neurology); 
and Arthur Krigsman, M.D. (gastroenterology). Tr. 3, 301, 578A, 
861, 1026. Petitioners also called Theresa Cedillo, Michelle’s mother, 
to testify as a fact witness. Id. at 3, 301, 2874. Respondent presented 
testimony from nine expert witnesses: Jeffrey Brent, M.D., Ph.D. 
(toxicology); Stephen Bustin, Ph.D. (molecular biology); Edwin 
Cook, M.D. (psychiatry, genetics); Eric Fombonne, M.D., FRCPsych 
(pediatric psychiatry, epidemiology); Diane Griffin, M.D., Ph.D. 
(virology); Stephen Hanauer, M.D. (gastroenterology); Christine 
McCusker, M.D. M.Sc., FRCP (pediatric immunology); Brian Ward, 
M.D., M.Sc. (virology); and Max Wiznitzer, M.D. (pediatric neurol-
ogy). Id. at 1216, 1560, 1793, 2074, 2280, 2498. Respondent also sub-
mitted expert reports from Robert Fujinami, Ph.D. (immunology), 
Michael Gershon, M.D. (neurogastroenterology), and Andrew 
Zimmerman, M.D. (pediatric neurology), but these experts did not 
testify. Resp’t Br. 4. Nicholas Chadwick, Ph.D. testified as a fact wit-
ness for Respondent. Tr. 2280. Special Masters Vowell and Camp-
bell-Smith heard all of the testimony in Cedillo so that they could 
apply the general causation evidence to the individual test cases 
assigned to them. Cedillo, at *10. 
 Special Master Campbell-Smith conducted an evidentiary 
hearing in Hazlehurst during October 15 – 18, 2007, and Special 

216 Data and Documents
Master Vowell conducted an evidentiary hearing in Snyder dur-
ing November 5 – 9, 2007. Id. at *11. All three of the Special Masters 
attended these hearings. Id. In both Hazlehurst and Snyder, Spe-
cial Master Hastings permitted the Cedillo Petitioners to submit 
additional general causation evidence, and Respondent to submit 
additional rebuttal evidence. Id. at *14. The parties filed extensive 
post-hearing briefs between November 2007 and February 2008, 
and Special Master Hastings closed the evidentiary record on 
July 30, 2008. Id. at *11, 14. 
 The evidentiary record in these cases easily is the largest of all 
cases presented to the Court in the history of the Vaccine Act. Mi-
chelle Cedillo’s medical records alone comprise some 7,700 pages. 
Id. at *14. The parties filed 23 expert reports in Cedillo, and 50 expert 
reports in Hazlehurst and Snyder combined. Id. Fifteen expert wit-
nesses testified in Cedillo, four in Hazlehurst, and eight in Snyder. 
Id. The hearing transcripts consist of 2,917 pages in Cedillo, 1,049 
pages in Snyder, and 570 pages in Hazlehurst. Id. The record in the 
three cases also contains 939 medical journal articles, textbook ex-
cerpts, and other medical literature. Id. These materials, perhaps 
daunting even to medical professionals, relate to the subjects of 
neurology, gastroenterology, virology, immunology, molecular biol-
ogy, toxicology, genetics, and epidemiology. Id. at *15. 
 On February 12, 2009, Special Master Hastings issued his de-
cision denying the Cedillos’ claim under the Vaccine Act. Accord-
ing to the Special Master, Petitioners failed to demonstrate that: 
(1) thimerosal-containing vaccines can harm infant immune systems 
in general, or that Michelle Cedillo’s own thimerosal-containing 
vaccinations harmed her immune system; (2) the MMR vaccine can 
cause autism in general, or that Michelle Cedillo’s own MMR vac-
cination contributed to her autism; (3) the MMR vaccine can cause 
gastrointestinal dysfunction in general, or that Michelle Cedillo’s 
own MMR vaccination contributed to her gastrointestinal prob-
lems; or (4) Michelle Cedillo’s own MMR vaccination caused her 
mental retardation or seizure disorder. Id. Furthermore, the Special 
Master deemed unreliable the testing Petitioners offered to show 
the presence of the measles virus in Michelle Cedillo and other au-
tistic children. Id. The Special Master also found that the evidence 
concerning the causation of regressive autism combined with gas-
trointestinal dysfunction in some individuals did not persuasively 
show either or both conditions to be vaccine-related. Id. 
 On March 13, 2009, Petitioners filed a motion for reconsider-
ation, requesting the Special Master to overturn his February 12, 

References 217
2009 decision based on new evidence not available at the June 2007 
hearing. Special Master Hastings denied the motion on March 16, 
2009 because it was not filed within the 21-day period required by 
RCFC, Appendix B, Vaccine Rule 10(e). Cedillo v. Sec’y of HHS, 
No. 98-916V, 2009 WL 996299, at *1 (Fed. Cl. Spec. Mstr. Mar. 16, 2009). 
Even if Petitioners had timely filed their motion, the Special Master 
concluded that it would not be “in the interest of justice” to with-
draw his decision. Id. On that same day, Petitioners filed with the 
Court their motion for review of the Special Master’s decision. 
 References 
 American Psychiatric Association. 2000.  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision.  Washington, D.C.: 
American Psychiatric Association. 
 Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network Sur-
veillance Year 2002 Principal Investigators. 2007. “Prevalence of 
Autism Spectrum Disorders—Autism and Developmental Disabilities 
Monitoring Network, Fourteen Sites, United States, 2002.”  Morbidity and 
Mortality Weekly Report, Surveillance Summaries 56 (SS01): 12 – 28. 
 Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network Sur-
veillance Year 2000 Principal Investigators. 2007. “Prevalence of 
Autism Spectrum Disorders—Autism and Developmental Disabilities 
Monitoring Network, Six Sites, United States, 2000.”  Morbidity and 
Mortality Weekly Report, Surveillance Summaries 56 (SS01): 1 – 11. 
 Barnea-Goraly, N., H. Kwon, V. Menon, L. Lotspeich, and A. Reiss. 
2004. “White Matter Structure in Autism: Preliminary Evidence from 
Diffusion Tensor Imaging.”  Biological Psychiatry 55 (3): 323 – 26. 
 Baron-Cohen, S., H. Ring, E. Bullmore, S. Wheelwright, C. Ashwin, and 
S. Williams. 2000. “The Amygdala Theory of Autism.”  Neuroscience and 
Biobehavioral Reviews 24 (3): 355 – 64. 
 Bauman, M., and T. Kemper. 2005. “Neuroanatomic Observations of the 
Brain in Autism: A Review and Future Directions.”  International Journal 
of Developmental Neuroscience  23 (2 – 3): 183 – 87. 
 Bentin, S., T. Allison, A. Puce, E. Perez, and G. McCarthy. 1996. 
“Electrophysiological Studies of Face Perception in Humans.”  Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience 8 (6): 551 – 65. 
 Brothers, L. 1990. “The Social Brain: A Project for Integrating Primate 
Behavior and Neurophysiology in a New Domain.”  Concepts in 
Neuroscience  1:27 – 51. 

218 Data and Documents
 Bushnell, I., F. Sai, and J. Mullin. 1989. “Neonatal Recognition of the 
Mother’s Face.”  British Journal of Developmental Pscyhology  7:3 – 15. 
 Charman, T., and P. Clare. 2004.  Mapping Autism Research: Identifying UK 
Priorities for the Future. London: National Autistic Society. 
 Cohen, M., and D. Eisenberg. 2002. “Potential Physician Malpractice 
Liability Associated with Complementary and Integrative Medical 
Therapies.”  Annals of Internal Medicine  136:596 – 603. 
 Courchesne, E. 1997. “Brainstem, Cerebellar and Limbic Neuro-
anatomical Abnormalities in Autism.”  Current Opinions in Neurobiology 7 
(2): 269 – 78. 
 Croen, L., D. Najjar, G. Ray, L. Lotspeich, and Bernal, P. 2006. “A 
Comparison of Health Care Utilization and Costs of Children with and 
without Autism Spectrum Disorders in a Large Group-Model Health 
Plan.”  Pediatrics  118:e1203 – e1211. 
 Dapretto, M., M. Davies, J. Pfeifer, A. Scott, M. Sigman, S., Bookheimer, 
and M. Iacoboni. 2006. “Understanding Emotions in Others: Mirror 
Neuron Dysfunction in Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders.” 
 Nature Neuroscience 9 (1): 28 – 30. 
 Dawson, G., S. J. Webb, and J. McPartland. 2005. “Understanding the 
Nature of Face Processing Impairment in Autism: Insights from 
Behavioral and Electrophysiological Studies.  Developmental Neuro-
psychology 27 (3): 403 – 24. 
 Dawson, G., and K. Zanolli. 2003. “Early Intervention and Brain 
Plasticity in Autism.”  Novartis Foundation Symposium 251: 266 – 74; 
discussion 274 – 80, 281 – 97 
 Dawson, G., A. Meltzoff, J. Osterling, and J, Rinaldi. 1998. “Neuro-
psychological Correlates of Early Symptoms of Autism.”  Child 
Development 69 (5): 1276 – 85. 
 de Haan, M., M. Johnson, and H. Halit. 2003. “Development of 
Face-sensitive Event-related Potentials during Infancy: A Review.” 
 International Journal of Psychophysiology  51:45 – 58. 
 Dyches, T., L. Wilder, and F. Obiakor. 2001. “Autism: Multicultural 
Perspectives.” In  Autistic Spectrum Disorders: Educational and Clinical 
Interventions, ed. T. Wahlberg, F. Obiakor, S. Burkhardt, and A. F. 
Rotatori, 151 – 77. Oxford: Elsevier Science. 
 Exhorn, K. S. 2005.  The Autism Sourcebook. New York: Regan. 
 Farah, M. J., J. Tanaka, and H. Drain. 1995. “What Causes the Face In-
version Effect?”  Journal of Experimental Psychology and Human Perceptual 
Performance  21:628 – 34. 

References 219
 Filipek, P., P. Accardo, S. Ashwal, G. Baranek, E. Cook, G. Dawson, B. 
Gordon, et al. 2000. “Practice Parameter: Screening and Diagnosis of 
Autism: Report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American 
Academy of Neurology and the Child Neurology Society.”  Neurology 55 
(4): 468 – 79. 
 Freeman, B. J. 1997. “Guidelines for Evaluating Intervention Programs 
for Children with Autism.”  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 
27:641 – 51. 
 Ganz, M. 2009. “The Lifetime Distribution of the Incremental Societal 
Costs of Autism.” Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine  161: 
343 – 49. 
 Ganz, M. L. 2006. “The Costs of Autism.” In  Understanding Autism: From 
Basic Neuroscience to Treatment,  ed. S. O. Moldin and J. L. R. Rubenstein, 
475 – 502. Boca Raton, FL: Taylor and   Francis Group. 
 Goren, C., M. Sarty, and P. Wu. 1975. “Visual Following and Pattern 
Discrimination of Face-like Stimuli by Newborn Infants.  Pediatrics 
56:544 – 49. 
 Guevara, J., D. Mandell, A. Rostain, H. Zhao, and T. Hadley. 2003. 
“National Estimates of Health Services Expenditures for Children with 
Behavioral Disorders: An Analysis of the Medical Expenditure Panel 
Survey.”  Pediatrics 112 (6): e440. 
 Gurney, J., M. Fritz, K. Ness, P. Sievers, C. Newschaffer, and E. Shapiro. 
2003. “Analysis of Prevalence Trends of Autism Spectrum Disorder in 
Minnesota.”  Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine 157 (7): 622 – 27. 
 Haxby, J., B. Horwitz, L. Ungerleider, J. Maisog, P. Pietrini, and C. Grady. 
1994. “The Functional Organization of Human Extrastriate Cortex: 
A Pet-rCBF Study of Selective Attention to Faces and Locations.”  The 
Journal of Neuroscience  14:6336 – 53. 
 Hobson, R. 1986. “The Autistic Child’s Appraisal of Expressions of 
Emotion.”  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 27 (3): 321 – 42. 
 Howlin, P., I. Magiati, and T. Charman. 2009. “Systematic Review of 
Early Intensive Behavioral Interventions for Children with Autism.” 
 American Journal of Intellectual Development and Disabilities 114 (1): 23. 
 Johnson, M. H., S. Dziurawiec, H. Ellis, and J. Morton. 1991. “Newborns’ 
Preferential Tracking of Face-like Stimuli and Its Subsequent Decline.” 
 Cognition  40 (1 – 2): 1 – 19. 
 Kanwisher, N., J. McDermott, and M. M. Chun. 1997. “The Fusiform 
Face Area: A Module in Human Extrastriate Cortex Specialized for Face 
Perception.”  Journal of Neuroscience 17 (11): 4302 – 11. 

220 Data and Documents
 Kleinhans, N., T. Richards, L. Sterling, K. Stegbauer, R. Mahurin, L. 
Johnson, J. Greenson, G. Dawson, and E. Aylward. 2008. “Abnormal 
Functional Connectivity in Autism Spectrum Disorders during Face 
Processing.”  Brain 131 (4): 1000 – 1012. 
 Klin, A., W. Jones, R. Schultz, F. Volkmar, and D. Cohen. 2002. “Visual 
Fixation Patterns during Viewing of Naturalistic Social Situations as 
Predictors of Social Competence in Individuals with Autism.”  Archives 
of General Psychiatry 59 (9): 809 – 16. 
 Kogan, M., S. Blumberg, L. Schieve, C. Boyle, J. Perrin, R. Ghandour, 
G. Singh, B. Strickland, E. Trevathan, and P. van Dyck. 2009. “Prevalence 
of Parent-Reported Diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder among 
Children in the US, 2007.”  Pediatrics  124:. 
 Leppanen, J., and C. Nelson. 2009. “Tuning the Developing Brain to 
Social Signals of Emotions.”  Nature Reviews: Neuroscience  10:37 – 47. 
 Lovaas, O. 1987. “Behavioral Treatment and Normal Educational 
and Intellectual Functioning in Young Autistic Children.”  Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology 55 (1): 3 – 9. 
 Mandell, D., R. Ittenbach, S. Levy, and J. Pinto-Martin. 2007. “Disparities 
in Diagnoses Received Prior to a Diagnosis of Autism Spectrum 
Disorder.”  Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 37 (9): 1795 – 802. 
 Mandell, D., J. Listerud, S. Levy, and J. Pinto-Martin. 2002. “Race 
Differences in the Age at Diagnosis among Medicaid-eligible Children 
with Autism.”  Journal of American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry 41 (12): 1447 – 53. 
 McPartland, J., Dawson, G., Webb, S., Panagiotides, H., and Carver, L. 
2004. “Event-related Brain Potentials Reveal Anomalies in Temporal 
Processing of Faces in Autism Spectrum Disorder.”  Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry 45 (7): 1235 – 45. 
 Meltzoff, A. N., and M. K. Moore. 1977. “Imitation of Facial and Manual 
Gestures by Human Neonates.”  Science 198 (4312): 74 – 78. 
 Minshew, N. J., and D. L. Williams. 2007. “The New Neurobiology of 
Autism: Cortex, Connectivity, and Neuronal Organization.”  Archives of 
Neurology 64 (7): 945 – 50. 
 Mundy, P. 2003. “Annotation: The Neural Basis of Social Impairments 
in Autism: The Role of the Dorsal Medial-Frontal Cortex and Anterior 
Cingulate System.”  Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 44 (6): 
793 – 80. 
 Murias, M., Webb, S., Greenson, J., and Dawson, G. 2007. “Resting State 
Cortical Connectivity Reflected in EEG Coherence in Individuals with 
Autism.”  Biological Psychiatry 62 (3): 270 – 73. 

References 221
 Myers, S. M., C. P. Johnson, and American Academy of Pediatrics 
Council on Children With Disabilities. 2007. “Management of Children 
with Autism Spectrum Disorders.”  Pediatrics 120 (5): 1162 – 82. 
 Newacheck, P., and S. Kim. 2005. “A National Profile of Health Care 
Utilization and Expenditures for Children with Special Health Care 
Needs.”  Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine  159:10 – 17. 
 Newschafer, C., M. Falb, and J. Gurney. 2005. “National Autism Preva-
lence Trends from United States Special Education Data.”  Pediatrics 
115:277 – 82. 
 Osterling, J., and G. Dawson. 1994. “Early Recognition of Children with 
Autism: A Study of First Birthday Home Videotapes.”  Journal of Autism & 
Developmental Disorders 24 (3): 247 – 57. 
 Pelphrey, K., and E. Carter. 2008. “Charting the Typical and Atypical 
Development of the Social Brain.”  Developmental Psychopathology 20 (4): 
1081 – 102 
 Puce, A., T. Allison, J. Gore, and G. McCarthy. 1995. “Face-sensitive 
Regions in Human Extrastriate Cortex Studied by Functional MRI.” 
 Journal of Neurophysiology, 74 (3): 1192–99 . 
 Schultz, R. T., I. Gauthier, A. Klin, R. Fulbright, A. Anderson, F. Volkmar, 
P. Skudlarski, C. Lacadie, D. Cohen, and J. Gore. 2000. “Abnormal 
Ventral Temporal Cortical Activity during Face Discrimination among 
Individuals with Autism and Asperger Syndrome.”  Archives of General 
Psychiatry 57 (4): 331 – 40.  
 

This page intentionally left blank

223
 Private, Not-for-Profit Organizations 
 Association for Retarded Citizens (ARC) 
 Web site: http://www.thearc.org/NetCommunity/Page.
aspx?pid=183 
 The  ARC  advocates for individuals with intellectual and develop-
mental disabilities to ensure full participation in the community. 
By working with members, the  ARC  strives to provide support for 
the active engagement and success of individuals with intellec-
tual disability. Since its establishment in 1950 by parents, when 
little was known about mental retardation, the  ARC has worked to 
educate the public regarding mental retardation and help to ob-
tain services for those impacted by mental retardation and devel-
opmental disabilities. 
 Association for Science in Autism 
Treatment (ASAT) 
 Web site: http://asatonline.org/ 
 The mission of ASAT is to provide accurate, scientifically based 
information regarding autism and intervention. There is so much 
information available about autism but the quality of information 
that is available varies considerably. There is a great deal of misin-
formation regarding the causes of autism and the effectiveness of 
treatments. ASAT strives to provide clear, accurate, and scientific 
 7 
 Directory of Organizations 

224 Directory of Organizations
understanding regarding autism to families and individuals and 
reduce the misinformation about the disorder. 
 Autism and PDD Support Network 
 Web site: http://www.autism-pdd.net/ 
 The Autism and PDD support network is an online community and 
resource center for families affected by autism spectrum disorders. 
Through the community’s Web site, viewers can review resources 
and information, review forum postings and post questions and 
share concerns. 
 Autism National Committee (AUTCOM) 
 Web site: http://www.autcom.org/ 
 AUTCOM is an advocacy organization committed to support 
“Social Justice for All Citizens with Autism.” Founded in 1990 to 
protect the human rights of individuals with an autism spectrum 
disorder, AUTCOM currently hosts a Web site with information re-
garding political discourse, judicial decisions, advocacy issues, ed-
ucational information, book reviews, and a newsletter. 
 Autism Research Institute (ARI) 
 Web site: http://www.autism.com/ 
 The ARI was founded in 1967 by Dr. Bernard Rimland, an exper-
imental psychologist, parent of a child with autism, and one of 
the founders of the Autism Society of America. Dr. Rimland was 
a strong advocate for the biological basis of autism during a time 
when psychoanalytic theories held sway (see Chapter 2 for a his-
torical perspective). The ARI is committed to fostering research to 
improve diagnosis, treatment and prevention of autism. The ARI 
maintains a large databank of case histories and publishes a quar-
terly newsletter. Additionally, in 1995, the ARI established and 
continues to support Defeat Autism Now! (DAN!), a project fo-
cused on the education of parents and professionals regarding 
biomedical treatments for autism. The ARI also sponsors Autism 
Television (http://www.up-to-date.com/autism.tv/index.html), 

Private, Not-for-Profit Organizations 225
which provides a number of video and audio channels showcasing 
organizations and events such as the ARI and DAN! conferences. 
 Autism Science Foundation (ASF) 
 Web site: http://autismsciencefoundation.org 
 The ASF was founded in 2009 by Alison Singer, formerly of Au-
tism Speaks, and Karen London, one of the founding members of 
National Alliance for Autism Research, to fund research based on 
rigorous scientific standards and values. The ASF bases its mis-
sion on the principles that autism has a strong genetic component 
and research should focus on the mechanisms that trigger autism; 
that research into evidence-based, effective lifespan interventions 
is needed; and that “vaccines save lives; they do not cause autism” 
and research dollars into a vaccine autism link is not warranted. 
 Autism Society of America 
 Web site: http://www.autism-society.org 
 The Autism Society of America was founded in 1965 by Dr. Bernard 
Rimland, Dr. Ruth Sullivan, and a group of parents of children with 
autism as a grassroots advocacy organization. The mission of the 
organization is improve the lives of all individuals with autism by 
increasing public awareness, advocating for the provision of ser-
vices, and disseminating information about treatment, research, 
and education. With a strong chapter network and a national board 
of directors that includes individuals with autism, a panel of pro-
fessional advisors, and a panel of “people on the spectrum of au-
tism” advisors, the organization hosts a large national conference, 
publishes a quarterly newsletter, and maintains a large Web pres-
ence. Additionally, the organization maintains a large information 
and referral database and service and a Web site that is in both 
English and Spanish. 
 Autism Speaks 
 Web site: http://www.autismspeaks.org 
 Autism Speaks is a not for profit organization focused on raising 
public awareness of autism, funding and supporting research into 

226 Directory of Organizations
the “causes, prevention, treatments, and cure” for autism, with a de-
fined goal to “change the future for all who struggled with autism 
spectrum disorders.“ Bob and Suzanne Wright founded Autism 
Speaks in 2005 after their grandson was diagnosed with autism. In 
its first year it raised $40 million to fund autism research and was 
able to establish a number of research programs and support in-
dependent research projects. 
 During its first years, Autism Speaks made a number of merg-
ers with other nonprofit organizations. In 2005 Autism Speaks 
merged with Autism Coalition for Research and Education (ACRE). 
ACRE was an organization founded by parents in 1998 to sup-
port biomedical and applied research and increase public aware-
ness. In January of 2006, Autism Speaks merged with the National 
Alliance for Autism Research (NAAR). NAAR was the first non-
profit, founded in 1994, dedicated to supporting research in the 
causes and treatments for autism. During a time when limited 
funds were available through federal programs for autism re-
search, Karen and Eric London, parents of a child with autism, 
joined forces with professionals to raise money and accelerate the 
pace of autism research. Prior to the merger with Autism Speaks, 
NAAR committed more than $20 million to research through col-
laborative projects, fellowships, and research programs. NAAR 
established the Autism Tissue Program, a brain tissue program 
that Autism Speaks continues to maintain. A third merger in 2007, 
included Cure Autism Now (CAN). Jonathan Shestack and Portia 
Iversen, parents of a child with autism, founded CAN in 1995 to 
support research in the prevention, treatment and cure of autism. 
CAN, through the provision of close to $40 million dollars to au-
tism research, developed and supported a number of programs 
that Autism Speaks maintains including the Autism Genetics Re-
search Exchange, a genetics repository, and the Clinical Trials Net-
work, a program focused on translating basic science to clinical 
applications. 
 In 2009 Alison Singer, the vice president of communications 
and awareness for Autism Speaks resigned citing a difference of 
opinion regarding Autism Speaks’ policy on immunization re-
search. Given the limited research funding available, Alison Singer 
reported a need to focus on other avenues of research. She, along 
with Eric London, one of the founding members of NAAR who 
also resigned from the Autism Speaks board, shortly thereafter 
founded the Autism Science Foundation. 

Private, Not-for-Profit Organizations 227
 AutismSpot 
 Web site: http://www.autismspot.com/about 
 AutismSpot.com’s mission is “empowering the autism commu-
nity” through the provision of information and resources through 
an organization that is not supported by donations or government 
funding. The founders aim to remain unbiased in the information 
that is provided via the multimedia Web site. 
 Consortium for Citizens with Disabilities (CCD) 
 Web site: http://www.c-c-d.org 
 CCD is national advocacy coalition of consumer, advocacy, pro-
vider and professional organizations working in the field of dis-
abilities. The aim of the coalition is to fully integrate children and 
adults with disabilities into mainstream society. 
 Council for Learning Disabilities (CLD) 
 Web site: http://www.cldinternational.org 
 CLD is an international organization with a mission to improve 
the quality of life for individuals with learning disabilities and 
challenges in learning. Made up of professionals, the organiza-
tion promotes evidence-based methods of instruction as well as 
research into learning disabilities and advocacy for individuals 
with learning disabilities. The CLD has a number of regional 
chapters throughout the United States, supports two professional 
publications, hosts conferences, and provides information for pro-
fessionals. 
 Doug Flutie Jr. Foundation for Autism 
 Web site: http://www.dougflutiejrfoundation.org 
 The Doug Flutie Jr. Foundation for Autism was founded in 2000 
by the NFL quarterback Doug Flutie Sr. and his wife, Laurie. As 
parents of a child with autism, they wanted to provide families of 

228 Directory of Organizations
children with autism with resources and support. The foundation 
supports nonprofit organizations that provide clinical services to 
children with autism and organizations that conduct research on the 
causes and effects of autism. 
 Families for Early Autism Treatment (FEAT) 
 Web site: http://www.feat.org/ 
 FEAT is a nonprofit organization focused on providing advocacy, 
education and support around autism spectrum disorders. FEAT 
maintains a Web site, newsletter, email list, and resource informa-
tion. Originally started in 1993 in northern California, FEAT has 
grown to include 24 U.S. chapters and 3 Canadian chapters with a 
specific focus on empirically supported interventions. 
 Families of Adults Afflicted with 
Asperger’s Syndrome (FAAAS) 
 Web site: http://faaas.org 
 The mission of the nonprofit FAAAS is to support family mem-
bers of adult individuals with Asperger’s Disorder. The focus of 
the organization is to generate public awareness about Asperger’s 
Disorder in the adult population, provide support for family mem-
bers, and disseminate education through the Web site, mailing list, 
and conferences. 
 First Signs 
 Web site: http://www.firstsigns.org/ 
 First Signs mission is to provide education about the early warn-
ing signs of autism spectrum disorders. By improving screening 
practices and lowering the age at which children are diagnosed 
with developmental disorders the organization aims to improve 
outcomes for children with disabilities. First Signs maintains a 
comprehensive Web site with resources, news updates, a video 
glossary, and opportunity for sharing. 

Private, Not-for-Profit Organizations 229
 Foundation for Educating Children 
with Autism (FECA) 
 Web site: http://www.fecainc.org 
 Contact: questions@FEACinc.org 
 FECA is a national nonprofit with a focus on providing educational 
opportunities based on applied behavioral analysis principles to 
children with autism. FECA was founded in 1994 by eight families 
concerned about the educational opportunities available for their 
children with autism. Through the establishment of schools, train-
ing of professionals, community outreach, and advocacy, the or-
ganization aims to improve the lives of individuals with autism. 
 Generation Rescue 
 Web site: http://www.generationrescue.org/index.html 
 Generation Rescue is a parent-founded and parent-led nonprofit 
focused on biomedical treatments for autism. Jenny McCarthy and 
Jim Carrey play a prominent role in Generation Rescue as mem-
bers of the board of directors. Generation Rescue is part of the 
Autism Collaboration, a collection of advocacy organizations that 
includes NAA, SafeMinds, ASA, ARI, and others. 
 The Help Group 
 Web site: http://www.thehelpgroup.org 
 The Help Group is a comprehensive nonprofit organization that 
serves children with special needs including autism spectrum 
disorders. The Help Group runs seven specialized day schools in 
the Los Angeles area, but provides public awareness, professional 
training, and parent education programs at both the state and na-
tional level. 
 Interactive Autism Network (IAN) 
 Web site: http://www.iancommunity.org/ 
 IAN is an online community of Kennedy Krieger Institute and 
sponsored by Autism Speaks with a goal to facilitate research 

230 Directory of Organizations
in understanding and treating autism spectrum disorders. The 
IAN community Web site provides an online meeting place for 
researchers and families alike where information regarding the 
latest research can be presented and discussed. 
 MAAP Services for Autism and Asperger Syndrome 
 Web site: http://maapservices.org/ 
 Founded in 1984 by a parent of a daughter with autism, MAAP is 
a nonprofit with a mission to provide information and advice to 
“families of  M ore advanced individuals with  A utism,  A sperger’s 
syndrome, and  P ervasive Developmental Disorder” (MAAP). 
MAAP provides a quarterly newsletter, a Web site, and state-by-
state professional and parent support listing. 
 Manitas por Autismo (SPANISH) 
 Web site: http://www.manitasporautismo.com/ 
 Manitas por Autismo is a parent-run, nonprofit organization fo-
cused on dissemination of autism information for Spanish speak-
ing families. The vision of the organization is to develop a better 
standard of living for Latino families affected by autism. Through 
the organization’s Web site information and news regarding au-
tism, a directory of international organizations, and a community 
forum is provided. 
 Mothers United for Moral Support (MUMS) 
 Web site: http://www.netnet.net/mums/ 
 MUMS is a parent-founded, national support organization with 
a main mission to provide support for parents of children with 
disabilities through a parent network system. Through the orga-
nization parents are matched with other parents whose children 
have the same disability or condition with considerations to age, 
geographical location, gender, and symptom severity included in 
the matching. 

Private, Not-for-Profit Organizations 231
 National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) 
 Web site: http://www.nami.org 
 NAMI is a grassroots advocacy organization dedicated to increas-
ing public awareness about mental illness. The organization also 
provides information via their Web site about current events, leg-
islative action, and mental illness and developmental disorders, 
including autism spectrum disorders 
 National Autism Association (NAA) 
 Web site: http://nationalautismassociation.org 
 NAA is a parent-founded nonprofit with a mission to educate and 
empower families affected with autism and to advocate for in-
dividuals who are unable to advocate for themselves. As part of 
the mission statement the organization poses that autism is not a 
genetic disorder but “one that is biomedically definable and treat-
able” and propose that environmental toxins are causative factors 
in autism. NAA is part of the Autism Collaboration, a collection of 
advocacy organizations that includes NAA, SafeMinds, ASA, ARI, 
Generation Rescue, and others. 
 National Disability Rights Network (NDRN) 
 Web site: http://www.napas.org 
 The NDRN is a nonprofit membership organization that serves 
individuals with disability with an aim to create a society with 
equal opportunities and full participation of individuals with dis-
abilities in society. The network includes disability rights orga-
nizations and through the Web site the organization provides 
information regarding disability rights. 
 National Rehabilitation Information Center (NARIC) 
 Web site: http://www.naric.com 
 NARIC collects and disseminates the research findings and re-
sults from the National Institutes on Disability and Rehabilitation 

232 Directory of Organizations
Research (NIDRR). NARIC also provides information to the dis-
ability and rehabilitation communities through a comprehensive 
Web site, a toll free referral service, an electronic bulletin board to 
improve access for libraries and research institutions, online di-
rectories, and a fully interactive online rehabilitation database. 
 Organization for Autism Research (OAR) 
 Web site: http://www.researchautism.org 
 Founded in 2001 by a group of parents and grandparents of children 
and adults with autism spectrum disorders, OAR aims to use ap-
plied science to address questions facing the autism community. 
OAR funds pilot studies and targeted research into the behavioral 
and social development of individuals with autism with a focus on 
communication, education, and vocational challenges. Addition-
ally, on the comprehensive Web site, OAR provides information for 
educators, professionals and families regarding autism spectrum 
disorders including providing worksheets and planning tools for 
educational programs. Additionally, there is information for fami-
lies concerning participation in research that includes basic infor-
mation about scientific research, a parent’s guide to research, and a 
searchable database for research institutions. 
 SafeMinds 
 Web site: http://safeminds.org/ 
 SafeMinds is a nonprofit organization with a mission to support 
research, raise awareness, change policy and focus national atten-
tion on a proposed link between mercury and autism. The debate on 
a possible link between mercury and autism persists and is a sig-
nificant controversy in the history of autism. SafeMinds is part of 
the Autism Collaboration, a collection of advocacy organizations 
that includes NAA, ASA, ARI, Generation Rescue, and others. 
 Sibling Support Project 
 Web site: http://siblingsupport.org/ 
 The Sibling Support Project is a program of the Kindering Center 
with funding from the Wilson Foundation and is an effort to ad-

Private, Not-for-Profit Organizations 233
dress the concerns of siblings of individuals with developmental 
disabilities, autism, or other mental health concerns. By training 
local providers in how to provide support programs for siblings, 
hosting workshops, disseminating information on the organiza-
tion’s Web site and Listserv, and increasing awareness of sibling 
concerns, the organization aims to accomplish this mission. 
 Simons Foundation Autism Research 
Initiative (SFARI) 
 Web site: http://sfari.org/ 
 The Simons Foundation is a philanthropic foundation that focuses 
on supporting work in math, science, and autism. SFARI is the arm 
of the foundation focusing on autism research, specifically re-
search to improve diagnosis, treatment and prevention of autism. 
In 2003, the Simons Foundation hosted a roundtable on autism 
research. At this meeting of top minds in epidemiology, neurosci-
ence, psychiatry, and autism convened and through the produc-
tive discussion research initiatives were developed. SFARI funds 
a large number of projects from independent scientists focusing on 
understanding autism primarily from the perspective of cognitive 
neuroscience and genetics. A major initiative of the Simons Foun-
dation is the Simons Simplex Collection (SSC) — an international 
collaboration of scientists focusing on exploring the genetics of 
autism. 
 Talk about Curing Autism (TACA) 
 Web site: http://www.talkaboutcuringautism.org 
 TACA is a nonprofit organization that provides information, re-
sources, and support to families affected by autism. TACA was 
founded in 2000 by a group of parents based in California and 
in 2008 launched chapters in nine other states. With a number of 
education and support meetings sponsored by state chapters, the 
 TACA Autism Journey Guide  —a freely available resource book de-
veloped by TACA—a parent mentorship program, the Web site (in 
English and Spanish), loaner libraries, and family scholarships, the 
organization provides information and support for families just 

234 Directory of Organizations
receiving a diagnosis of autism with an aim to speed the process 
from diagnosis to treatment. Information that is  provided ranges 
from empirically supported behavioral treatments to biomedical 
and dietary interventions. TACA is part of the Autism Collabora-
tion, a collection of advocacy organizations that includes NAA, 
ASA, ARI, Unlocking Autism, Generation Rescue, and others. 
 Unlocking Autism 
 Web site: http://www.unlockingautism.org 
 Unlocking Autism was founded in 1999 by parents and grand-
parents with a mission to gather information about how to help 
children with autism and disseminate that information quickly to 
parents of newly diagnosed children. Through parent education 
about biomedical and behavioral interventions, pending legisla-
tion, and laws; funding for biomedical and behavioral research and 
projects; and a nationwide parent to parent hotline for parents of 
newly diagnosed children the organization aims to “bring the is-
sues of autism form individual homes to the forefront of national 
dialogue.” Unlocking autism is part of the Autism Collaboration, 
a collection of advocacy organizations that includes NAA, ASA, 
ARI, Generation Rescue, TACA, and others. 
 Professional Organizations 
 American Academy of Pediatricians (AAP) 
 Web site: http://www.aap.org 
 The AAP is a professional organization consisting of approxi-
mately 60,000 physicians with a specialty in pediatric medicine 
throughout several countries. By supporting the professional needs 
of its constituents the organization aims to “attain optimal physical, 
mental and social health and well being for all infants, children, 
adolescents, and young adults.” The AAP publishes a number of 
position papers including manuscripts focused on the identifica-
tion and treatment of autism. Additionally, on the organization’s 
Web site information, links, and resources focusing on autism is 
provided on the “Children’s Health Topics” Web page. 

Governmental Organizations 235
 American Speech and Hearing Association (ASHA) 
 Web site: http://www.asha.org 
 ASHA is the national, professional, scientific, and credentialing 
organization for speech-language pathologists, audiologists, and 
speech, language, and hearing scientists. With a mission to advo-
cate for individuals with communication and related disorders, 
to advance communication science, and promote effective human 
communication, the organization provides information for pro-
fessionals and the public regarding communication and related 
disorders, including autism spectrum disorders. 
 Council for Exceptional Children (CEC) 
 Web site: http://www.cec.sped.org 
 The CEC is a professional organization focused on improving 
educational success of individuals with disabilities and/or excep-
tional talents. The CEC lobbies for appropriate governmental poli-
cies, sets professional standards, advocates for individuals with 
exceptional abilities, and provides professional development op-
portunities. 
 Governmental Organizations 
 Autism Coordinating Center 
 Web site: http://www.nichd.nih.gov/autism/research.cfm 
 In 1997, under direction from Congress, the Autism Coordinating 
Center was established by the National Institutes of Health to im-
prove the quality, speed and coordination of efforts at NIH in 
finding a cure for autism. The Autism Coordinating Center is 
comprised of NIH institutes: Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institutes of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD); 
National Institutes on Deafness and Other Communication Disor-
ders (NIDCD); National Institutes for Mental Health (NIMH); Na-
tional Institutes of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS); 
National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS). 
Other organizations and representatives participate in Autism 

236 Directory of Organizations
Coordinating Center meetings for specific topics. The Autism 
Coordinating Center is cochaired by the directors of NIMH and 
NICHD. 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
 Main Web site: http://www.cdc.gov 
 Autism Spectrum Disorders site: http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/
autism/index.html 
 Learn the Signs. Act Early page: http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/
actearly/index.html 
 The CDC is a major component of the U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services with a mission to provide the expertise and 
tools so that people and communities can protect their health. The 
CDC sponsors and coordinates research into autism spectrum dis-
orders and provides information for professionals and the public 
regarding autism, developmental screening and early warning 
signs, and resources and links for services and programs through 
the comprehensive Web site. 
 Clinical Trials.gov 
 Web site: http://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ 
 ClinicalTrials.gov is a service of the National Institutes of Health 
coordinated by the National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.
gov is a registry of clinical trials being conducted in the United 
States and internationally that are both federally and privately 
funded. Through the organization’s Web site, readers can learn 
about the purpose of the clinical trials, the eligibility requirements 
for participation in studies, the location of the studies, and contact 
information for each trial. 
 Interagency Autism Coordinating Committee (IACC) 
 Web site: http://iacc.hhs.gov/ 
 The IACC coordinates all the activities related to ASDs that are 
supported by the Department of Health and Human Services. The 
IACC was established in accordance with the Combating Autism 
Act of 2006. The IACC membership is comprised of both federal 

Governmental Organizations 237
and public members. The director of the National Institutes for 
Mental Health chairs the committee. There are twelve federal com-
mittee members, including the director of the National Institutes 
on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, the director 
of the National Institutes of Health, the director of the National 
Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities from the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the director of the 
National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences, the director 
of the Office on Disability, and seven others. There are six public 
committee members on the IACC including the president and CEO 
of the Autism Society of America, the president of the Autism Sci-
ence Foundation, and four others. There is an additional subcom-
mittee focused on assessing and improving services and supports 
for people with ASD. Each full and subcommittee meeting of the 
IACC is open to the public and the committee requests public 
comment during each meeting. The committee prepared a sum-
mary of advances in autism research during the calendar year in 
2008, which is available, along with strategic plan reports and 
other IACC publications on the IACC Web site. 
 National Dissemination Center for Children 
with Disabilities 
 Web site: http://www.nichcy.org 
 The National Dissemination Center for Children with Disabilities 
is a service center funding by the Office of Special Education Pro-
grams, in the U.S. Department of Education and is operated by 
the Academy for Educational Development. The center provides 
information regarding disabilities in children, programs and ser-
vices for children with disabilities, and information about special 
education laws. The center maintains a toll free hotline (1-800-695-
0285) for both English and Spanish speakers, a monthly newslet-
ter, an eNews service for which children or families can register to 
receive news bulletin specific to their indicated topics of, and a bi-
lingual Web site. On the Web site, information regarding specific 
disabilities (including autism), early intervention, special educa-
tion, individualized education programs (IEPs), education rights 
and laws, research on education and intervention, disability  or-
ganizations, and the transition process to adulthood for individ-
uals with disabilities, is available. Additionally, on the Web site 

238 Directory of Organizations
there is state specific information regarding organizations, asso-
ciations, and agencies that address disability issues. 
 National Institutes for Health Autism 
Research Networks 
 Web site: http://www.autismresearchnetwork.org/AN/
default.aspx 
 —Collaborative Programs of Excellence in Autism (CPEA) 
 —Studies to Advance Autism Research and Treatment 
Network (STAART) 
 —Autism Centers of Excellence (ACE) 
 The CPEA was started in 1997 by the National Institutes of Child 
Health and Human Development (NICHD) in collaboration with 
the National Institutes on Deafness and Other Communication 
Disorders (NIDCD) as a five-year, $45 million, international net-
work to explore the neurobiology and genetics of autism. Funding 
was renewed for an additional five years. The network included 
10 sites linking 129 scientists from the United States and seven 
other countries and involved more than 2,000 families with au-
tism in a number of projects focused on identifying the genetic, 
immunological, and environmental risk factors for autism. The 
CPEA centers were Boston University, University of California–
Davis, University of California–Los Angeles, University of Pitts-
burgh, University of Rochester Medical Center, University of Texas 
Health Science Center at Houston, University of Utah, University 
of Washington, and Yale University. 
 The STAART network was established in response to the 
Children’s Health Act of 2000. The Act called for the establishment 
of five centers of excellence in autism research, but the five NIH 
Institutes involved in the NIH Autism Coordinating Committee 
[Eunice Kennedy Shriver NICHD; NIDCD; National Institutes 
for Mental Health (NIMH); National Institutes of Neurological 
Disorders and Stroke (NINDS); National Institutes of Environ-
mental Health Sciences (NIEHS)] funded eight centers to focus on 
the causes, diagnosis, early detection, prevention, and treatment 
of autism. Each center supported three or more projects, with at 
least one study focused on treatment. The eight STAART centers 
were Boston University, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Mount Sinai, 
University of California-Los Angeles, University of North Caro-
lina, University of Rochester, University of Washington and Yale 
University. 

Governmental Organizations 239
 In 2007 the National Institutes of Health implemented the 
ACE program, which is a consolidation of the CPEA and STAART 
programs. The ACE program includes both ACE centers, in which 
collaborations between specialists in a range of fields collaborate 
in autism research to answer a range of research questions, and 
ACE networks, in which scientists at research facilities across the 
country collaborate to address a single research question. All ACE 
program award recipients participate in the National Database 
for Autism Research (NDAR), which is a National Institutes of 
Health, Web-based database tool that allows researchers around 
the world to collect and share information on autism. In the first 
year of the program, five centers and two networks were awarded. 
The five centers include the University of Illinois–Chicago, the 
University of California–San Diego, the University of California–
Los Angeles, the University of Pittsburgh, and the University of 
Washington. In the second year of the program, additional centers 
were established. The two network recipients were the University 
of North Carolina–Chapel Hill and the University of California–
Davis. In 2008, the second year of the ACE program, an additional 
center, Yale University, was added. Three additional ACE net-
works were awarded to Wayne State University, University of 
California–Los Angeles, and Drexel University. 
 National Institutes for Mental Health (NIMH) 
 Web site: http://www.nimh.nih.gov 
 NIHM is an institute of the National Institutes of Health established 
in 1949 that generates research and promotes research training that 
focuses on the understanding, treatment and prevention of mental 
illness. The vision of the institute is that of a world in which men-
tal illnesses are prevented and cured. The four objectives of the 
NIMH are to promote the discovery of the etiology of mental dis-
orders; to understand when, where and how to intervene in men-
tal illness; to develop new and more effective interventions for 
mental illness that take into account the diversity of individuals; 
and expand the public health impact of research into mental ill-
ness. The institute maintains a Web site with information on men-
tal health and mental illness; science news in the field of mental 
health; information on research opportunities, studies, and events; 
and announcements from the NIMH. In addition to specific health 
information, free publications, statistics  concerning mental health, 
links to other resources, and outreach information are available 

240 Directory of Organizations
through the institute. The NIMH maintains a specific Web page 
focusing on autism, including information about the disorder, 
links to other resources, and current research on the disorder. 
 National Institutes of Child Health 
and Human Development (NICHD) 
 Web site: http://www.nichd.nih.gov 
 The NICHD is an institute of the National Institutes of Health es-
tablished in 1962 that conducts and supports research that focuses 
on the health of children and families. Areas of focus include: in-
fant death reduction, reproductive health, birth defects, mental 
retardation, developmental disabilities, growth and development, 
rehabilitation research, and the health of women, men and fami-
lies. The organization maintains a Web site with information on 
health and human development topics, which includes health ed-
ucation, information about publications and other materials, and 
information regarding research conducted at NICHD and sup-
ported by the NICHD. The NICHD maintains a Web page focusing 
on autism, including information about the disorder, links to other 
resources, and freely downloadable informational publications. 
 National Institutes of Health (NIH) 
 Web site: http://www.nih.gov 
 The NIH is part of the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services and is the nation’s medical research agency charged with 
conducting and supporting medical research. The roots of the NIH 
began in 1887 when a one-room laboratory was created in the Ma-
rine Hospital Service, which later became the U.S. Public Health 
Service. Since these early beginnings, the NIH has expanded to 
include 27 institutes and centers focusing on different aspects of 
health and medicine. The goals of the NIH are to foster creative 
scientific discoveries to advance the nation’s ability to protect and 
improve health, to develop scientific knowledge and resources 
to prevent disease, to enhance the nation’s economic well being 
by expanding our knowledge of medical science, and promote 
scientific integrity and social responsibility in scientific research 
conduct. The NIH maintains a comprehensive Web site with health 
information, grant opportunities, current research, and current 

Governmental Organizations 241
news. The NIH also provides this information in English and 
Spanish, has freely available and downloadable audio reports con-
cerning health information, and provides a number of multimedia 
options for sharing information including video and image galler-
ies. A vast array of information on autism is available through the 
NIH for parents, professionals, and researchers. 
 National Institutes of Neurological Disorders 
and Stroke (NINDS) 
 Web site: http://www.ninds.nih.gov/ 
 The mission of the NINDS is to reduce the burden of neurological 
disease. The NINDS supports and conducts basic and clinical re-
search on the normal and diseased nervous system, supports 
training and education in the basic and clinical neurosciences, 
and aims to increase understanding and effectiveness of the diag-
nosis, treatment, and prevention of neurological disorders. Basic 
research concerns research that provides insight into a disorder, 
such as work with brain cells, the nervous system, or genetics. 
Clinical research concerns research that provides insight into a 
clinical disorder or insight into the treatment, prevention, or cure 
of a disorder through work with individuals with the disorder. 
Clinical research might be a clinical trial of a medication or the use 
of imaging work to examine how the brain of an individual with a 
disorder functions while performing a specific task. Both aspects 
of research into neuroscience are needed to impact our under-
standing of neurological disorders. The institute maintains a Web 
site with health information concerning neurological disorders, 
including autism; patient resources, publications in both English 
and Spanish; research opportunities for families and scientists, as 
well as training opportunities for professionals working in the 
field of neurological disorders. 
 National Institutes on Deafness and Other 
Communication Disorders (NIDCD) 
 Web site: http://www.nidcd.nih.gov/about/ 
 The NIDCD is an institute of the National Institutes of Health es-
tablished in 1988 that conducts and supports research that focuses 

242 Directory of Organizations
on the normal and disordered processes of hearing, balance, smell, 
taste, voice, speech and language. Areas of focus include research 
on biomedical and behavioral problems associated with individ-
uals who have communication impairments or disorders. The in-
stitute maintains a Web site with information on communication 
and communication disorders, balance, hearing and deafness, as 
well as smell and taste. In addition to specific health information, 
free publications, a directory of related organizations, links to other 
resources, and educational materials are available through the in-
stitute. The NIDCD maintains a Web page focusing on autism, in-
cluding information about the disorder, links to other resources, 
and current research on the disorder. 
 National Institutes on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) 
 Web site: http://www.ed.gov/about/offices/list/osers/
nidrr/index.html 
 The NIDRR is a division of the Office of Special Education and 
Rehabilitative Services in the U.S. Department of Education. The 
NIDRR focuses on research into the rehabilitation of individuals 
with disabilities. The institute provides leadership and support 
for a comprehensive program of research with an aim to improve 
the lives of individuals with disabilities from birth through adult-
hood. The organization generates and publishes materials regard-
ing disability, including summaries of research and survey results; 
maintains a number of databases regarding disability, such as data-
bases regarding traumatic brain injury and developmental dis-
abilities; and provides information regarding legislation, policy, 
and research concerning disabilities. All research findings from 
the NIDRR are collected and disseminated the National Rehabili-
tation Information Center (NARIC). 
 National Library of Medicine 
 Web site: http://www.nlm.nih.gov/ 
 The National Library of Medicine is the world’s largest medical 
library and is a project of the National Institutes of Health. The 
library collects materials and provides information in all areas 

University-Based Organizations 243
of biomedicine and health care. Through the library’s Web site, 
viewers can access a number of databases and resources including 
(among others): 
 Pubmed: a searchable database of scientific publications in 
the biomedical literature. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/
entrez. An entry of “autism” returns 14,616 entries. 
 MedlinePlus: health and drug information for patients and 
families (in English and Spanish). Autism: http://www.nlm.nih.
gov/medlineplus/autism.html. 
 Genetics Home Reference: information regarding genetic 
conditions presented in everyday language. http://ghr.nlm.nih.
gov/. 
 U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services (HHS) 
 Web site: http://www.hhs.gov/ 
 The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is the 
federal government’s primary agency focused on the protection 
of health of all Americans and the provision of essential human 
services, especially for those who are least able to help themselves. 
The work of HHS is conducted by the 11 agencies under its arm, 
including the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and Na-
tional Institutes of Health. Through the 300 plus programs sup-
ported by HHS, the department supports research and federal 
services focusing on health and protecting the health of all Ameri-
cans. HHS maintains an autism specific Web site with information 
for families and professionals: http://www.hhs.gov/autism/. 
 University-Based Organizations 
 Autism Center of Excellence and Healthy Infant 
Development Lab, University of California–San Diego 
 Web site: http://www.autismsandiego.org/ 
 The Autism Center of Excellence and Healthy Infant Development 
Lab is based at the University of California–San Diego and was 

244 Directory of Organizations
established under the direction of Eric Courchesne, PhD. The pro-
gram is “dedicated to understanding how brain structure and 
function contribute to the health and well-being of all children” 
and focused on exploring the causes of autism using a multidisci-
plinary research approach. The center maintains a Web site with 
information regarding autism spectrum disorders, the research 
being conducted by the faculty and affiliates of the center, as well 
as information for parents, professionals, and students interested 
in becoming involved with the center. 
 Autism Intervention Research Program, 
University of California –San Diego 
 Web site: http://autismlab.ucsd.edu/ 
 The Autism Intervention Research Program based at the Univer-
sity of California, San Diego (UCSD) was established by Laura 
Schreibman, PhD, and has been in existence since 1984. This re-
search program focuses on the experimental analysis and treat-
ment of autism, primarily the development and evaluation of 
Pivotal Response Training (PRT), an empirically supported, natu-
ralistic, behaviorally based intervention program. 
 Drexel Autism Center 
 Web site: http://www.drexelmed.edu/Home/
AboutTheCollege/DepartmentsCentersandInstitutes/Centers/
DrexelAutismCenter.aspx 
 The Drexel Autism Center, established by Richard Malone, MD, 
is based in the department of psychiatry at Drexel University 
College of Medicine. The interdisciplinary team includes child 
psychiatrists, a pediatric nurse practitioner, a psychologist and a 
pediatric neurologist. With a mission to “advance knowledge about 
autism through research and to provide services to affected chil-
dren and their families,” the center provides evaluation services 
for families and provides opportunities for families to participate 
in studies on autism treatment. In an effort to increase autism 
awareness, center staff and affiliates provide outreach in the form 
of educational programs to schools, community agencies and area 
hospitals. 

University-Based Organizations 245
 Emory Autism Center 
 Web site: http://www.psychiatry.emory.edu/PROGRAMS/
autism/ 
 The Emory Autism Center opened in 1991 in a collaborative effort 
between the University and public and private entities and it is 
housed in the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences at 
Emory University School of Medicine. The Emory Autism Center 
provides diagnosis, family support and innovative treatment, as 
well as professional training. The Emory Autism Center has a 
family support program, provides comprehensive medical care and 
diagnostic evaluations, provides interdisciplinary training, en-
gages in research, and engages in community outreach. There is 
information available on the Emory Autism Center Web site con-
cerning available research opportunities and clinical contact in-
formation. 
 Florida Atlantic University Center for Autism 
and Related Disabilities (CARD) 
 Web site: http://www.coe.fau.edu/card/ 
 The Florida Atlantic University CARD is an outreach and support 
program for individuals with autism spectrum disorders and 
their families as well as the professionals working with them. The 
Florida Atlantic University CARD program is one of seven CARD 
program throughout Florida State funded by the Florida Legisla-
ture through the Florida Department of Education. Please see the 
University of Miami and Nova Southeastern University Center 
for Autism and Related Disorders (UM-NSU CARD) entry for in-
formation regarding the Florida CARD system. The Florida At-
lantic University CARD catchment area consists of five counties 
near the Boca Raton area. 
 Florida State University Center for Autism 
and Related Disabilities (CARD) 
 Web site: http://autism.fsu.edu/ 
 The Florida State University CARD is an outreach and support 
program for individuals with autism spectrum disorders and 

246 Directory of Organizations
their families as well as the professionals working with them. The 
Florida State University CARD program is one of seven CARD 
program throughout Florida State funded by the Florida Legisla-
ture through the Florida Department of Education. Please see the 
University of Miami and Nova Southeastern University Center 
for Autism and Related Disorders (UM-NSU CARD) entry for in-
formation regarding the Florida CARD system. The Florida State 
University CARD catchment area consists of 18 counties near the 
Tallahassee area. 
 Indiana Resource Center for Autism 
(IRCA), Indiana University 
 Web site: http://www.iidc.indiana.edu/irca/fmain1.html 
 The IRCA is part of the Indiana Institute on Disability located at 
Indiana University. IRCA provides a number of services including: 
outreach training focusing on evidence-based practices for teach-
ing, support, and treatment in the community, home and school; 
consultation services; training and support for school teams and 
programs; and information dissemination regarding autism spec-
trum disorders through individual requests and media including 
newsletters and the Web. Additionally, IRCA engages in research 
focusing on improving and enhancing treatment programming 
with an aim to inform policy and maintains a comprehensive da-
tabase for use in research and program evaluation. The Web site 
provides information regarding these services and how to access 
them as well as information regarding autism spectrum disorders 
and specific Indiana State services. 
 Kennedy Krieger Institute Center 
for Autism and Related Disorders 
 Web site: http://www.kennedykrieger.org/kki_cp.jsp?pid=1394 
 The Center for Autism and Related Disorders (CARD) at Kennedy 
Krieger Institute is a multidisciplinary program for children with 
autism spectrum disorder and their family members. With a goal 

University-Based Organizations 247
of improving the lives of individuals with ASD, their families, 
and their communities, CARD provides clinical services (both 
assessment and intervention), conducts research, and engages in 
community outreach. There are four primary programs at CARD, 
including the Clinical Program, providing evaluations and treat-
ment; the Achievements Therapeutic Day Program, providing in-
dividualized care in a small group setting; the REACH Research 
Program, conducting multidisciplinary research in ASD; and Out-
reach and Training, which includes training for professionals and 
families. Information regarding the programs and services avail-
able through CARD at Kennedy Krieger is posted on the Web site. 
Links to other organizations and Web sites and current autism 
news updates are also available on the Web site. 
 Massachusetts General Hospital, Learning 
and Developmental Disabilities Evaluation 
and Rehabilitation Services (LADDERS) 
 Web site: http://www.ladders.org/ 
 LADDERS is an interdisciplinary program directed by Margaret 
Bauman, MD, designed to provide services in the evaluation and 
treatment of children and adults with autism spectrum disorders. 
LADDERS is part of the Lurie Marks Autism Center at Massachu-
setts General Hospital and the organization’s aim is to address 
the overall needs of the child and family members by establish-
ing therapeutic and programmatic goals for each individual 
child from a multidisciplinary perspective. Services provided by 
LADDERS include diagnostic evaluations; medical, cognitive and 
behavioral interventions including speech and language; oc-
cupational and physical therapy; psychological evaluation and 
counseling; parent skills training and family empowerment; and 
referral support for additional resources. In addition to providing 
clinical services, LADDERS provides practicum opportunities for 
medical students and graduate students focusing on autism spec-
trum disorders and also engages in research in autism. Through 
the LADDERS Web site, information regarding the LADDERS clin-
ical and research services, as well as information about upcoming 
events and autism in the news, is available. 

248 Directory of Organizations
 Thompson Center for Autism and 
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, 
University of Missouri 
 Web site: http://thompsoncenter.missouri.edu/ 
 The Thompson Center for Autism and Neurodevelopmental Dis-
orders at the University of Missouri was established in 2005 and 
is the largest center in Missouri specializing in autism and other 
developmental disorders. The Thompson Center provides diag-
nostic, assessment and treatment services for children, youth and 
young adults with an emphasis on comprehensive individualized 
services including specialized medical, therapeutic, educational 
and behavioral interventions. The Thompson Center is also a train-
ing program for professionals and families and includes training 
for students at the University of Missouri. Additionally, faculty 
members at the Thompson Center conduct a range of research 
projects and programs focused on autism spectrum disorders. 
 Treatment and Education of Autistic and Related 
Communication-Handicapped Children (TEACCH) 
Program, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill 
 Web site: http://www.teacch.com 
 TEACCH was established in the early 1970s by Eric Schopler, PhD, 
and is an evidence-based service, training, and research program 
for children and adults with autism spectrum disorders of all skill 
levels. The aims of the TEACCH approach are “skill development 
and fulfillment of fundamental human needs such as dignity, 
engagement in productive and personally meaningful activi-
ties, and feelings of security, self-efficacy, and self-confidence.” 
Dr. Schopler and the TEACCH program developed the idea of 
the “culture of autism,” which is way of conceptualizing the char-
acteristic patterns of thinking and behavior of individuals with 
autism spectrum disorders. This culture of autism includes: a rela-
tive strength in and preference for processing visual information 
as opposed to challenges in processing auditory information and 
language; attention to details but challenges in integrating these 
details; difficulty combining ideas; challenges in organizing ideas, 

University-Based Organizations 249
materials, and activities; attentional difficulties; communication 
problems; challenges with organizing time; a tendency to become 
attached to routines, which results in difficulties in generalizing 
learned skills; very strong interests; and marked sensory pref-
erences and dislikes. Based on this culture of autism, TEACCH 
developed “Structured Teaching,” an intervention approach in 
which an individualized, person and family centered plan is de-
veloped for each student, the physical environment is structured, 
and extensive visual supports are utilized to make the educational 
experience predictable and understandable. TEACCH maintains 
a Web site with information regarding autism spectrum disorders, 
services and resources in North Carolina, training opportunities, 
and links to related sites and resources. 
 University of California, Davis, Medical 
Investigation of Neurodevelopmental 
Disorders (M.I.N.D.) Institute 
 Web site: http://www.ucdmc.ucdavis.edu/mindinstitute/ 
 The physicians and doctoral level clinicians at the M.I.N.D. In-
stitute provide comprehensive clinical care and conduct research 
in neurodevelopmental disorders including attention deficit, hy-
peractivity disorder, autism spectrum disorder, and learning dis-
orders. The research conducted at the M.I.N.D. Institute focuses 
on the multidisciplinary and collaborative investigation into neu-
rodevelopmental disorders through integration of scientists in the 
biological, environmental, medical and toxicological sciences. The 
clinic provides diagnostic and evaluation services for neurode-
velopmental disorders and employs professionals from the U.C. 
Davis Departments of Pediatrics, Neurology, and Psychiatry and 
Behavioral Sciences. The health care professionals represented at 
the clinic include: physicians, psychologists, occupational and 
speech therapists, nurses, social workers, and child life specialists. 
Education is a third component of the M.I.N.D. Institute. Year-
round educational opportunities are available to the general pub-
lic; professionals in K–12 education, professionals in the fields of 
psychology, neurology and related fields; and students complet-
ing undergraduate or graduate degrees regarding the assessment, 
diagnosis, and treatment of neurodevelopmental disorders. The 
M.I.N.D. Institute’s Web site provides information regarding the 

250 Directory of Organizations
available studies, clinical services, educational opportunities, and 
fact sheets focusing on specific neurodevelopmental disorders, in-
cluding autism. 
 University of California, Los Angeles, Center 
for Autism Research and Treatment (CART) 
 Web site: http://www.autism.ucla.edu/index2.php 
 UCLA has a long history of autism research, beginning in the 
1960s with Ivar Lovaas’ work in the treatment of autism based on 
principles of applied behavioral analysis. The UCLA CART was 
established in 2003. With a focus on improving our understanding 
of the biological basis and neurobehavioral mechanisms of autism 
with a goal to identify and improve new and effective treatments 
for autism and autism spectrum disorders, CART is comprised of 
faculty members from the Semel Institute and the departments 
of Neurology, Genetics, Neurobiology and Psychology at UCLA. 
A key impetus for the interdisciplinary collaboration to establish 
CART was the National Institutes for Mental Health (NIMH) 
funded “Studies To Advance Autism Research and Treatment 
(STAART)” award that UCLA received. Prior to being the recipi-
ent of the STAART award, UCLA was one of the ten Collaborative 
Programs of Excellence in Autism (CPEA) funded by the National 
Institutes of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD). 
UCLA also became one of the Autism Centers of Excellence (ACE) 
funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and was also 
a recipient of one of the Autism Centers of Excellence network 
awards. The primary focus of CART’s research program into au-
tism is the understanding and exploration of the origins of the 
social communicative deficits observed in autism spectrum dis-
orders at the genetic, neurological and psychological level. A sec-
ond area of focus is in the treatment of autism spectrum disorders. 
Finally, CART aims to provide outreach and education to profes-
sionals and families, create collaborations between professionals, 
and promote the exchange of ideas among scientists and practi-
tioners regarding autism spectrum disorders. On the CART Web 
site information regarding specific research opportunities, clini-
cal programs available at UCLA for the autism community, and 
events and news is available. 

University-Based Organizations 251
 University of Central Florida Center for Autism 
and Related Disabilities (CARD) 
 Web site: http://www.ucf-card.org/ 
 The University of Central Florida CARD is an outreach and sup-
port program for individuals with autism spectrum disorders 
and their families as well as the professionals working with them. 
The University of Central Florida CARD program is one of seven 
CARD program throughout Florida State funded by the Florida 
Legislature through the Florida Department of Education. Please 
see the University of Miami and Nova Southeastern University 
Center for Autism and Related Disorders (UM-NSU CARD) entry 
for information regarding the Florida CARD system. The Univer-
sity of Central Florida CARD catchment area consists of seven 
counties near the Orlando area. 
 University of Florida at Jacksonville Center 
for Autism and Related Disabilities (CARD) 
 Web site: http://www.hscj.ufl.edu/pediatrics/autism/ 
 The University of Florida at Jacksonville CARD is an outreach 
and support program for individuals with autism spectrum disor-
ders and their families as well as the professionals working with 
them. The University of Florida at Jacksonville CARD program is 
one of seven CARD program throughout Florida State funded by 
the Florida Legislature through the Florida Department of Educa-
tion. Please see the University of Miami and Nova Southeastern 
University Center for Autism and Related Disorders (UM-NSU 
CARD) entry for information regarding the Florida CARD sys-
tem. The University of Florida at Jacksonville CARD catchment 
area consists of six counties with the regional headquarters in 
Jacksonville. 
 University of Florida Center for Autism 
and Related Disabilities (CARD) 
 Web site: http://card.ufl.edu/ 
 The University of Florida CARD is an outreach and support pro-
gram for individuals with autism spectrum disorders and their 

252 Directory of Organizations
families as well as the professionals working with them. The Uni-
versity of Florida CARD program is one of seven CARD program 
throughout Florida State funded by the Florida Legislature through 
the Florida Department of Education. Please see the University of 
Miami and Nova Southeastern University Center for Autism and 
Related Disorders (UM-NSU CARD) entry for information regard-
ing the Florida CARD system. The University of Florida CARD 
catchment area consists of 14 counties near the Gainesville area. 
 University of Miami and Nova Southeastern 
University Center for Autism and Related 
Disorders (UM-NSU CARD) 
 Web site: http://www.umcard.org/ 
 The UM-NSU CARD is an outreach and support program for in-
dividuals with autism spectrum disorders and their families as 
well as the professionals working with them. UM-NSU CARD is 
one of seven CARD program throughout Florida State funded by 
the Florida Legislature through the Florida Department of Educa-
tion. UM-NSU CARD provides services that are free of charge in 
three Florida counties: Miami-Dade, Broward, and Monroe Coun-
ties. The other regional, nonresidential CARD programs are based 
at Florida State University, the University of Central Florida, the 
University of Florida at Gainesville, the University of Florida 
Health Science Center at Jacksonville, the University of South 
Florida, and Florida Atlantic University. CARD services include 
individual and family support, program consultation, parent and 
professional training, as well as public awareness and community 
outreach. These CARD services expand on the capacities of state 
and local resources, but are not in place to duplicate these ser-
vices. Each CARD program is supervised by a board comprised of 
family members of individuals with autism who help direct the 
CARD program policy and priorities. The CARD program was es-
tablished in 1993 following the passing of the statute authoring the 
program and providing start-up funds. This was the result of sev-
eral years of legislative work. In 1987, the Florida Legislature au-
thorized and funded a Task Force on Autism. This task force, based 
out of the Florida Mental Health Institute at the University of South 
Florida, produced a report in 1988 recommending the develop-
ment of comprehensive, regional resource and training centers 
throughout Florida. Two years later, the state legislature and the 

University-Based Organizations 253
State’s Department of Education funded a successful pilot project 
that led to the 1993 establishment of the seven CARD programs. 
The UM-NSU CARD Web site provides information regarding 
autism spectrum disorders (available in English, Spanish and Cre-
ole), the CARD program, services provided by UM-NSU CARD, 
available resources to individuals, families, and professionals, and 
links to other resources. 
 University of Michigan Autism and Communication 
Disorders Centers (UMACC) 
 Web site: http://www.umaccweb.com/ 
 The UMACC is an academically based center with a mission to 
improve the lives of individuals with autistic spectrum disorders 
and their families. The center aims to achieve this mission through 
education, research, and the provision of clinical services. Educa-
tional opportunities include graduate and postdoctoral training 
experiences and specific training in the gold standard diagnostic in-
struments (Autism Diagnostic Interview—Revised, ADI & Autism 
Diagnostic Observation Schedule, ADOS) developed in part by 
the director of the center, Catherine Lord, PhD. The research focus 
at UMACC is on the etiology and course, as well as intervention 
and prevention, of autism spectrum disorders. UMACC is the 
lead site in the Simons Simplex Collection, the international col-
laboration to explore the genetics of autism, funded by the Simons 
Foundation. UMACC also provides clinical services to individuals, 
families and the community. These include diagnostic and evalu-
ation services, early intervention, consultation services to schools 
and other professionals, and social skills groups. On the UMACC 
Web site, information regarding educational, clinical, and research 
opportunities are listed. Additionally, specific information regarding 
diagnostic instruments, links to other resources, and recommended 
readings are highlighted. 
 University of South Florida Center for Autism 
and Related Disabilities (CARD) 
 Web site: http://card-usf.fmhi.usf.edu/ 
 The University of South Florida CARD is an outreach and sup-
port program for individuals with autism spectrum disorders and 

254 Directory of Organizations
their families as well as the professionals working with them. The 
University of South Florida CARD program is one of seven CARD 
program throughout Florida State funded by the Florida Legisla-
ture through the Florida Department of Education. Please see the 
University of Miami and Nova Southeastern University Center 
for Autism and Related Disorders (UM-NSU CARD) entry for in-
formation regarding the Florida CARD system. The University of 
South Florida CARD catchment area consists of 14 counties near the 
Tampa area. 
 University of Washington Autism Center 
 Web site: http://depts.washington.edu/uwautism/ 
 Established by Geraldine Dawson, PhD, in 2001, the University of 
Washington Autism Center has focused on providing clinical and 
training services and conducting cutting edge research into au-
tism spectrum disorders. The mission of the UW Autism Center is 
to “provide state-of-the-art clinical services, increase capacity for 
services through training, increase knowledge and awareness about 
autism in the professional community and general public, and con-
duct research aimed at improving the lives of individuals with 
autism and their families.” The UW Autism Center is a component 
of the Center on Human Development and Disability at the Uni-
versity of Washington and includes faculty and staff from the 
University of Washington School of Medicine, College of Arts and 
Sciences, and College of Education. The clinical arm of the UW Au-
tism Center provides diagnostic evaluations and multi-disciplinary 
intervention services for children with autism spectrum disorders 
from infancy through adolescence. The clinic team also offers a 
wide range of professional training opportunities. The research 
arm of the UW Autism Center has a long history of federal and 
private funding focused on increasing knowledge regarding the 
early diagnosis of autism; the neurobiological basis of autism; brain 
functioning, language, and cognitive development in autism; early 
biological and behavioral predictors of outcome; the genes related 
to autism; and behavioral and biological treatments for autism. 
Under Dr. Dawson’s leadership, the UW Autism Center was one 
of the ten Collaborative Programs of Excellence in Autism (CPEA) 
funded by the National Institutes of Child Health and Human 
Development (NICHD). Similarly, the UW Autism Center was one 
of the sites in the National Institutes for Mental Health’s (NIMH) 

University-Based Organizations 255
“Studies To Advance Autism Research and Treatment (STAART)” 
collaboration. The UW Autism Center also became one of the Au-
tism Centers of Excellence (ACE) funded by the National Institutes 
of Health (NIH) in 2007. In January 2008, Dr. Dawson accepted a 
position at Autism Speaks, becoming Professor Emeritus at the 
University of Washington, at which she had a professor since 1985. 
Wendy Stone, PhD, accepted a position in 2009 as the new execu-
tive director of the UW Autism Center. 
 Yale Autism Program 
 Web site: http://www.info.med.yale.edu/chldstdy/autism 
 The Yale Autism Program, based at the Yale Child Study Center, 
is an interdisciplinary collaboration of scientists and clinicians 
focused on the provision of comprehensive clinical services to 
children with autism spectrum disorders and their families and 
conducting cutting-edge research. Directed by Ami Klin, PhD, the 
Yale Autism Program was established as one of the National In-
stitutes of Health Autism Center of Excellence. The clinical and 
research programs involve infants, toddlers, preschool, and school-
age children, and young adults with autism. Faculty and staff at 
the Yale Autism Program include professionals from the fields of 
clinical psychology, neuropsychology, neuroimaging, child psy-
chiatry, speech-language pathology, social work, genetics and the 
biological sciences, psychopharmacology and psychiatric nursing. 
The Yale Autism Program maintains a Web site that contains in-
formation regarding autism spectrum disorders, available clinical 
and research-based services and opportunities, and links to re-
sources for families and professionals. The Yale Child Study Center, 
of which the Yale Autism Program is a component, has been in ex-
istence since the early 1900s and is currently directed by Fred 
Volkmar, MD. The Yale Child Study Center provides clinical ser-
vices, training and education, community services, social policy 
advancement, and conducts research in all aspects of childhood 
mental health, including autism. 

This page intentionally left blank

257
 8 
 Resources 
 T
he following is intended to be a guide for key journal articles, 
books, videos, Internet Web sites, and other resources that may 
be helpful in learning more about ASDs. The list is organized 
by the type of resource and subject matter. There are new re-
sources, agencies, books, and tools being developed daily about 
ASD. Therefore, this list is not meant to represent a complete re-
source guide or an exhaustive list of all the available autism re-
sources. Rather, it serves as a sample of possible resources that 
may be useful for acquiring more information about ASD. 
 Print Resources 
 General Information about ASDs 
 Key Journal Articles 
 Dawson, Geraldine, Sara Webb, Gerard Schellenberg, Stephen 
Dager, Seth Friedman, Elizabeth Aylward, and Todd Richards. 
2002. “Defining the Broader Phenotype of Autism: Genetic, 
Brain, and Behavioral Perspectives.”  Developmental Psychopa-
thology  14 (3): 581–611. 
 This very comprehensive review article provides up-to-date infor-
mation about our current knowledge of ASD in terms of genetic, 
cognitive neuroscience, animal, and clinical studies. Candidates 
for broader traits that are affected in ASD are offered: face pro-
cessing, social affiliation or sensitivity to social reward, motor imi-
tation ability, memory, executive function, and language ability. 

258 Resources
258 Resources
 Frith, Uta, and Francesca Happé. 1994. “Autism: Beyond ‘Theory 
of Mind.’”  Cognition 50 (1–3): 115–32. 
 The theory of mind account of ASD dominated the field for many 
years and successfully predicted many impairments in socializa-
tion, imagination, and communication in the ASD population. 
However, a number of exceptions have emerged, such as consis-
tent passing of tasks purported to test theory of mind and deficits 
in other nonsocial areas. In response to these exceptions, the au-
thors present an alternative and perhaps complementary theory to 
explain the multitude of differences in individuals with ASD: the 
central coherence theory. This theory suggests that impairments 
in ASD are the result of increased attention to details and a limited 
ability to process context, resulting in a limited ability to under-
stand the “big picture.” 
 Rogers, Sally J., and Bruce Pennington. 1991. “A Theoretical Ap-
proach to the Deficits in Infantile Autism.”  Development and Psy-
chopathology 3 (2): 137–62. 
 This theoretical article suggests that early social abilities involv-
ing imitation, emotion sharing, and theory of mind are the pri-
mary deficits in ASD. They posit that these skills are foundational 
in developing social representations of self and other people. The 
involvement of the prefrontal cortex and executive function ca-
pacities are suggested to be the brain regions primarily involved 
in these deficits. 
 Books 
 Baron-Cohen, Simon, and Patrick Bolton. 1993.  Autism: The Facts. 
 New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Baron-Cohen and Bolton have written this book primarily for par-
ents, but information covered may also be helpful for profession-
als. It serves as a general introduction to ASD and covers areas 
such as recognition of symptoms and diagnosis, causes, and treat-
ments/educational techniques. 
 Frith, Uta. 1991.  Autism and Asperger Syndrome. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Frith explores Asperger’s Disorder, referring back to and including 
translations of Hans Asperger’s original work and papers. Al-
though Asperger published in the 1940s, his work is still appli-
cable today, and Frith attempts to link his classic work with current 

Print Resources 259
issues. She provides clinical accounts of individuals with Asper-
ger’s Disorder as well as preliminary research data. 
 Klass, Perri, and Eileen Costello. 2003.  Quirky Kids: Understand-
ing and Helping Your Child Who Doesn’t Fit In.  New York: Bal-
lantine Books. 
 Children with ASD are often described as “quirky.” This book is 
helpful to parents of quirky children—both with and without ASD. 
Parents will benefit from increased insight into their children. 
Nice discussions of treatment options and intervention strategies 
in a variety of environments (e.g. home, groups, playgrounds) are 
also offered. 
 Klin, Ami, and Fred Volkmar. 2000.  Asperger Syndrome.  New York: 
Guilford Press . 
 Definitive information about Asperger’s Disorder is covered in 
depth in this book. Perspectives from prominent researchers and 
clinicians with extensive expertise in Asperger’s Disorder are com-
bined into a readable comprehensive text. In addition to extensive 
information from professionals, parent essays are also included to 
exemplify the family experience of life with a child with Asper-
ger’s Disorder. 
 Kutscher, Martin. 2005.  Kids in the Mix of ADHD, LD, Asperger’s, 
Tourette’s, Bipolar, and More! The One Stop Guide for Parents, 
Teachers, and Other Professionals.  London: Jessica Kingsley Pub-
lishers. 
 Children can collect a multitude of diagnoses as they move through 
elementary and middle school. This book describes the often co-
existing neurobehavioral disorders beginning in childhood, in-
cluding autism, Asperger’s Disorder, bipolar disorder, ADHD, 
learning disabilities, and depression. Through case vignettes and 
practical advice, Kutscher describes the causes and symptoms of 
these disorders as well as their interactions with other conditions. 
Highly specific behavioral techniques are included that are effec-
tive for a variety of conditions. 
 Mesibov, Gary, Lynn Adams, and Laura Klinger. 1997.  Autism: 
Understanding the Disorder. New York: Plenum Press. 
 The full range of current knowledge about ASD is included in this 
text, including history, diagnosis, causes, acting mechanisms, and 

260 Resources
treatment. Comprehensive and concisely written, it is appropriate 
for all audiences. 
 Neisworth, John, and Pamela Wolfe. 2005.  Autism Encyclopedia. 
 Baltimore, MD: Brookes Publishing Co. 
 This is a reference book that defines many terms associated with 
ASD. With approximately 500 entries, it provides a quick intro-
duction to the field and its relevant areas, including therapies, di-
agnoses, and associated disorders. Complex concepts are defined 
clearly and concisely and can be easily understood by nonexperts. 
 Ozonoff, Sally, Geraldine Dawson, and James McPartland. 2002. 
 A Parent’s Guide to Asperger Syndrome and High-Functioning Au-
tism. New York: Guilford Press. 
 This book provides information and advice for parents of chil-
dren with Asperger’s Disorder or high-functioning autism, includ-
ing practical suggestions for successful life at home, school, and 
transition into adulthood. The authors emphasize using the indi-
vidual’s strengths to help him/her engage socially and live as self-
sufficiently as possible. An exploration of scientific knowledge of 
autism is also included as well as real-life success stories and in-
formation on educational and life planning. 
 Powers, Michael. 2000.  Children with Autism: A Parent’s Guide. 
Rockville, MD: Woodbine House. 
 In this second edition,  Children with Autism  covers concerns spe-
cific to ASD, including daily and family life, early intervention, 
educational programs, legal rights, advocacy, and adulthood. Par-
ent statements are provided at the end of each chapter to add a 
personal touch to the information described, and the reader bene-
fits from this family perspective and support. Also translated into 
Spanish: Ninos Autistas: Guia para padres, terpeutas y educado-
res (Trillas 1999). 
 Schopler, Eric, Gary Mesibov, and Linda Kunce. 1998.  Asperger 
Syndrome or High-Functioning Autism?  New York: Springer . 
 The difference between Asperger’s Disorder and high-functioning 
autism has been an area of controversy in the field for many years. 
This book explores current perspectives from experts about the 
disorders for the benefit of parents, teachers, and clinicians alike. 

Print Resources 261
 Sicile-Kira, Chantal, and Temple Grandin. 2004.  Autism Spectrum 
Disorders: The Complete Guide to Understanding Autism, Asper-
ger’s Syndrome, Pervasive Developmental Disorder, and Other 
ASDs . New York: Penguin. 
 Sicile-Kira and Grandin describe the causes of ASD, discuss pro-
per diagnostic procedures and treatments, offer coping strategies 
for families and advice about educational programs, and provide 
recommendations for living and working conditions for adults 
with ASD. 
 Stone, Wendy L., and Theresa Foy DiGeronimo. 2006.  Does My 
Child Have Autism: A Parent’s Guide to Early Detection and In-
tervention in Autism Spectrum Disorders.  San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass. 
 Stone and DiGeronimo intended this book to be a guide for par-
ents to learn about early signs of ASD and early intervention ser-
vices, prior to 2 years of age. The diagnostic process is described 
in detail, including what type of information parents will be ex-
pected to provide during the clinical evaluation. Intervention is 
also covered in depth, and the authors provide advice about ob-
taining the proper services for their children through doctors, 
counselors, therapists, and other professionals. 
 Szatmari, Peter. 2004.  A Mind Apart: Understanding Children with 
Autism and Asperger Syndrome . New York: The Guilford Press. 
 Written with a positive outlook on ASD, Szatmari summarizes 
pressing concerns of parents of children with ASD and discusses 
current theories on causes, diagnosis, and treatment. The author 
presents the science of ASD in a respectful and easy-to-understand 
manner that many families will appreciate. 
 Volkmar, Fred, and Lisa Wiesner. 2009.  A Practical Guide to Au-
tism: What Every Parent, Family Member, and Teacher Needs to 
Know . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 
 Volkmar and Wiesner, an autism scientist and pediatrician, teamed 
up to provide perspectives on the coordination of care for their 
child with autism in this book. Easy-to-access information is in-
cluded about selection of professionals and services, and managing 
day-to-day life at home, in school, and elsewhere. General infor-
mation about autism is also discussed. 

262 Resources
 Waltz, Mitzi. 1999.  Pervasive Developmental Disorders: Find-
ing a Diagnosis and Getting Help for Parents and Patients with 
PDD-NOS and atypical PDD . Arlington, TX: Future Horizons. 
 There are many books available for individuals with autism and 
Asperger’s Disorder. However, there are limited resources geared 
specifically toward individuals with PDD-NOS, or atypical autism. 
This PDD-NOS guide helps parents to pursue a diagnosis for their 
child if they suspect they fit the category of PDD-NOS. Waltz de-
scribes effective treatments, ways of coping, and parent stories. 
 Wing, Lorna, Ami Klin, and Fred Volkmar. 2001.  The Autistic 
Spectrum: A Parents’ Guide to Understanding and Helping Your 
Child . Berkeley, CA: Ulysses Press. 
 Leaders in the field of autism have written this book for parents 
to better understand the oftentimes confusing disorder of ASD. 
The latest developments in the field are described as a means to 
understand ASD and improve upon communication and social in-
teraction skills. 
 Wiseman, Nancy. 2006.  Could It Be Autism? A Parent’s Guide to 
the First Signs and Next Steps. New York: Random House. 
 Could It Be Autism?  describes the red flags of ASD and early de-
velopmental concerns that may be indicative of ASD. The author 
is the founder of First Signs, which is an organization that is dedi-
cated to the education of parents and professionals to help im-
prove early detection of developmental disabilities. She is also the 
parent of a child with autism who was diagnosed early, and she 
shares her stories of success and challenge. Wiseman provides treat-
ment recommendations that may be individualized to a child’s 
particular developmental level. 
 Biological Mechanisms: Genetics 
and Neurological Functioning 
 Key Journal Articles 
 Bailey, Anthony, Anne Le Couteur, Irwin Gottesman, P. Bolton, 
E. Simonoff, E. Yuzda, and Michael Rutter. 1995. “Autism as a 
Strongly Genetic Disorder: Evidence from a British Twin Study.” 
 Psychological Medicine  25 (1): 63–77. 

Print Resources 263
 Bailey and colleagues reexamined the original twin pairs in Fol-
stein and Rutter’s (1977) study (described below) as well as 28 
new autism twin pairs. They replicated the original paper’s results 
suggesting increased likelihood of ASD in identical twin pairs as 
compared to fraternal twin pairs. Furthermore, they found that 
when they broadened the diagnostic boundaries of the disorder, 
the indication of genetic influence became even more prominent. 
 Baron-Cohen, Simon, Rebecca C. Knickmeyer, and Matthew K. 
Belmonte. 2005. “Sex Differences in the Brain: Implications for 
Explaining Autism.”  Science 310 (5749): 819–23. 
 Baron-Cohen and colleagues present their “extreme male brain” 
theory positing that ASD represents an extreme form of a tradi-
tional male brain that, at a population level, is better at “system-
izing” (e.g., operationalizing rules and systems and responding 
appropriately) than “empathizing” (e.g., inferring mental states 
and responding with appropriate emotions). The authors provide 
neuroanatomical findings to support this theory. 
 Courchesne, Eric, C. M. Karns, H. R. Davis, R. Ziccardi, R. A. 
Carper, Z. D. Tigue, H. J. Chisum, et al. 2001. “Unusual Brain 
Growth Patterns in Early Life in Patients with Autistic Disorder: 
An MRI Study.”  Neurology,  57 (2): 245–54. 
 This study of brain volume and growth in very young children 
suggested that, on average, infants who went on to develop au-
tism had normal brain volume at birth and then by 2–4 years of 
age had abnormally large brains as compared to typically devel-
oping children. This abnormality seemed to normalize by later 
childhood and adolescence, and brain volume was not signifi-
cantly different from peers. Therefore, overall, findings suggested 
the presence of early overgrowth followed by abnormally slowed 
growth in children with autism. 
 Folstein, Susan, and Michael Rutter. 1977. “Infantile Autism: A 
Genetic Study of 21 Twin Pairs.”  Journal of Child Psychology 
and Psychiatry  18 (4): 297–321. 
 This seminal article was the first to suggest that genetic factors are 
influential in the occurrence of ASD. Prior to the publication of 
this article, ASD was primarily thought to be a disorder caused by 
cold, aloof parenting. The authors found that identical twin pairs 

264 Resources
were significantly more likely to both have ASD as compared to 
fraternal twin pairs, suggesting that genetics play a strong role in 
the development of the disorder. 
 Schultz, Robert T. 2005. “Developmental Deficits in Social Per-
ception in Autism: The Role of the Amygdala and Fusiform Face 
Area.”  International Journal of Developmental Neuroscience  23 
(2–3): 125–41. 
 This article purposes that social deficits are primary in ASD, and 
Schultz provides neuroanatomical support for this theory. Spe-
cifically, he highlights early developmental problems with a brain 
region called the amygdala followed by cascading deficits in the 
development of cortical areas involved in visual social perception 
(i.e., the fusiform “face area” of the brain). 
 Sebat, Jonathan, B. Lakshmi, Dheeraj Malhotra, Jennifer Troge, 
Christa Lese-Martin, Tom Walsh, Boris Yamrom, et al. 2007. 
“Strong Association of De Novo Copy Number Mutations with 
Autism.”  Science 316 (5823): 445–49. 
 Findings from this ground-breaking genetics article suggested 
that the genetic causes of familial autism (i.e., families with more 
than one member with ASD) may differ from sporadic autism (i.e., 
families without a family history of ASD). Genetic mutations called 
de novo copy number variations (CNVs) were more likely to occur 
in the latter family type (simplex) as compared both to the former 
(multiplex) and families without a child with ASD. 
 General Intervention 
 Key Journal Articles 
 Lovaas, O. Ivar. 1987. “Behavioral Treatment and Normal Educa-
tional and Intellectual Functioning in Young Autistic Children.” 
 Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology  55 (1): 3–9. 
 In this seminal article, Lovaas reports on the outcomes of children 
with autism who received intensive behavioral intervention (called 
discrete trial training) as compared to those who did not receive 
it. Nearly half of the children in the intervention group achieved 
normal intellectual and educational functioning at treatment ter-
mination compared to very few in the nonintervention group. This 
was the first research study demonstrating that behavioral inter-

Print Resources 265
vention can significantly improve outcomes for children on the 
spectrum. 
 McEachin, John J., Tristram Smith, and O. Ivar Lovaas. 1993. 
“Long-Term Outcome for Children with Autism who Received 
Early Intensive Behavioral Treatment.”  American Journal on Men-
tal Retardation 97 (4): 359–72. 
 In the follow-up article of Lovaas’ original (1987) paper, the authors 
report that children who received study-administered behav-
ioral intervention maintained their gains well into later childhood 
(˜11.5 years). Those children with the most positive gains were in-
distinguishable from same-aged peers on tests of intelligence and 
adaptive behavior. Thus, this article demonstrated that behavioral 
treatment can produce lasting and substantial gains for some chil-
dren with autism. 
 Books 
 Ball, James. 2008.  Early Intervention and Autism: Real-Life Ques-
tions, Real-Life Answers. Arlington, TX: Future Horizons. 
 Ball describes necessary components to early intervention pro-
grams for young children with ASD and provides parents with 
the tools to decide which elements are essential for their child and 
family. Guides for setting up an Individual Family Service Plan 
(IFSP) are also discussed as well as tips for successful transitions 
to public school programs. 
 Dawson, Peg, and Richard Guare. 2004.  Executive Skills in Chil-
dren and Adolescents: A Practical Guide to Assessment and Inter-
vention . New York: Guilford Press. 
 Children with ASD often struggle with tasks that require execu-
tive functioning. This guide provides a framework for strengthen-
ing such executive-functioning skills as planning, task initiation, 
and completion of homework on time. Environmental modifica-
tions are also discussed to help improve skills. 
 Dulcan, Mina K., and Tami Benton. 2007.  Helping Parents, Youth, 
and Teachers Understand Medications for Behavioral and Emo-
tional Problems: A Resource Book of Medication Information 
Handouts (Second Edition).  Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric 
Publishing. 

266 Resources
 This book is composed of a series of practical handouts for parents, 
teachers, and children about medications prescribed for behav-
ioral and emotional problems. The handouts are parent friendly 
and written in language that can be easily understood by the gen-
eral public. Each handout has standardized information, includ-
ing how the medication works, how long it lasts, and side effects 
and interactions with other medications and foods. 
 Greenspan, Stanley. 1997.  The Child with Special Needs: Encour-
aging Intellectual and Emotional Growth . New York: Perseus 
Books. 
 Insight into many different kinds of special needs are covered in 
 The Child with Special Needs, including autism, PDD, language and 
speech problems, Down syndrome, cerebral palsy, and ADD. Most 
of Greenspan’s work is focused on the “what to do next” in mov-
ing forward with intervention capitalizing on a child’s unique 
strengths and weaknesses. His well-known “floortime” model (us-
ing play techniques to improve developmental outcomes) is de-
scribed in detail through direct instruction and case histories. 
 Harris, Sandra, and Mary Jane Weiss. 2007.  Right from the Start: 
Behavioral Intervention for Young Children with Autism . Rock-
ville, MD: Woodbine House. 
 Right from the Start  is helpful for parents who are just beginning to 
explore the many intervention options available for their young 
children. The book provides discussions of various educational 
and treatment options available—from more naturalistic methods 
to structured teaching trials. Detailed background is provided for 
each type of intervention technique. 
 Koegel, Lynn Kern, and Claire LaZebnik. 2004.  Overcoming Au-
tism. New York: Viking Press. 
 An expert clinician/scientist and the parent of a child with ASD 
come together to offer ways to positively improve the life of a 
child with ASD.  Overcoming Autism  is a warm and nurturing book 
that uses a touch of humor to describe suggestions that can be eas-
ily adapted into a family’s day-to-day life. 
 Koegel, Robert L., and Lynn Kern Koegel. 2005.  Pivotal Re-
sponse Treatments for Autism. Baltimore: Brookes Publishing. 

Print Resources 267
 The Koegels provide an in-depth exploration of Pivotal Response 
Treatment, an intervention that they developed to treat individu-
als with autism using naturalistic methods. This approach is de-
scribed in detail in this updated and comprehensive book. 
 Koegel, Robert L., and Lynn Kern Koegel. 1995.  Teaching Chil-
dren with Autism. Strategies for Initiating Positive Interactions 
and Improving Learning Opportunities.  Baltimore: Brookes Pub-
lishing Co. 
 The Koegels use a positive approach in this book to focus on how 
children with ASD  can  and  do  learn. Topics covered include behav-
ioral characteristics of autism, intervention methods, long-term and 
short-term goals of intervention, and concrete suggestions for pro-
viding support to families. 
 Maurice, Catherine, Richard Foxx, and Gina Green. 2001.  Mak-
ing a Difference: Behavioral Intervention for Autism.  Austin, TX: 
Pro-Ed. 
 In this follow-up volume of  Behavioral Intervention for Young Chil-
dren  (1996), the editors combine data-based and scientific knowl-
edge with practical, everyday tips for making informed decisions 
about the care for children with autism. Chapters written by par-
ents provide personal insights into the intervention process. Ad-
ditionally, professionals share their expertise about some creative 
strategies for working with children on the spectrum. Areas cov-
ered include eating, social skills, problem behaviors, promoting 
spontaneous language, prompting, and conversational skills, 
among many others. 
 Nowicki, Stephen, and Marshall P. Duke. 1992.  Helping the Child 
Who Doesn’t Fit In. Atlanta: Peachtree Publishers. 
 Many dimensions of childhood social rejection are analyzed, and 
difficulties with nonverbal communication are highlighted in 
 Helping the Child Who Doesn’t Fit In.  The authors have created a term 
to describe the variety of difficulties common in ASD:  dyssemia, 
meaning “difficulty with signals.” Exercises for addressing dys-
semia are provided, and guidance is offered for seeking profes-
sional help. 
 Richman, Shira. 2001.  Raising a Child with Autism: A Guide to 
Applied Behavior Analysis for Parents.  London: Jessica Kingsley 
Publishers. 

268 Resources
 Richman provides a comprehensive explanation of Applied Be-
havior Analysis (ABA), a method that has been effective in teach-
ing children with ASD through behavior modification. The author 
explains how ABA can be used by parents at home to teach such 
skills as toilet training, self-dressing, communication, and address-
ing food selectivity. 
 Siegel, Bryna. 2003.  Helping Children with Autism Learn: Treat-
ment Approaches for Parents and Professionals . New York: Ox-
ford University Press. 
 Helping Children with Autism Learn  serves as a practical guide for ad-
dressing the learning challenges often associated with ASD. In-
stead of “symptoms,” Siegel takes the unique approach that each 
child has a discrete set of “learning disabilities,” each of which 
needs direct intervention. She offers advice for creating an educa-
tional program using proven techniques and emphasizes through-
out the book the importance of having parents take the lead in 
their child’s treatment. 
 Siegel, Bryna. 1996.  The World of the Autistic Child: Understand-
ing and Treating Autistic Spectrum Disorders.  New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Siegel presents a complete guide to understanding and treating 
ASD.  The World of the Autistic Child  was one of the first truly com-
prehensive books about ASD and continues to be regarded as one 
of the most helpful books to empower parents to effectively man-
age their child’s treatment program. Behavior modification, the 
development of daily living skills, psychoactive medications, resi-
dential placement, and schooling, including discussions about 
mainstreaming and effective parent-teacher relationships, are all 
covered. 
 Stewart, Kathryn. 2002.  Helping A Child with Nonverbal Learn-
ing Disorder or Asperger’s Syndrome: A Parent’s Guide . Oakland, 
CA: New Harbinger Publications. 
 In her book, Stewart offers parents ways to help their child with 
challenges in such areas as visual and spatial functioning, writing, 
information processing and organization, social and emotional ca-
pabilities, and language. 

Print Resources 269
 Tsai, Luke. 2001.  Taking the Mystery Out of Medications in Au-
tism/Asperger’s Syndrome . Arlington, TX: Future Horizons. 
 Although medication is not considered to be a first-line treatment 
for ASD, many families try medication at some point during the 
child’s lifetime. Tsai discusses the variety of medications that par-
ents of children with ASD might encounter and how they work 
in the body, including potential positive effects, side effects, and 
proper assessment of medication response. 
 Wilens, Timothy E. 2008.  Straight Talk about Psychiatric Medi-
cations for Kids. New York: Guilford Publications. 
 The decision about moving forward with psychiatric medication 
for a child can be confusing and overwhelming for parents. This 
newly updated third edition discusses advances in medication 
treatment options and answers often-asked questions by parents: 
How do the medications work? How will it impact my child’s 
emotions or personality? What are the risks? Many other areas are 
covered with updates about the latest developments in particular 
disorders. 
 Helpful Tools 
 Books 
 Baker,  Bruce L., Jan B. Blacher, and Alan J. Brightman. 2003. 
 Steps to Independence: Teaching Everyday Skills to Children With 
Special Needs. Baltimore: Brookes Publishing Co. 
 With more than 30 years of work with parents of children with 
special needs, the authors offer the fourth edition of the popular 
 Steps to Independence.  This hands-on resource provides parents with 
specific strategies needed for teaching independent living skills to 
children of all ages. 
 Baker, Jed, and Carol Stock Kranowitz. 2008.  No More Meltdowns: 
Positive Strategies for Managing and Preventing Out-of-control 
Behavior . Arlington, TX: Future Horizons. 
 Baker’s approach is based on years of applied research. Parents will 
learn the definition of a meltdown and why they are common in 
children. Importantly, the authors provide flexible strategies for 
how to manage these challenging behaviors. 

270 Resources
 Durand, Mark. 1998.  Sleep Better! A guide to Improving Sleep for 
Children with Special Needs. Baltimore: Brookes Publishing Co. 
 Written by a psychologist who was inspired by many sleepless 
nights with his own child,  Sleep Better!  offers proven techniques to 
help improve sleep in children with special needs. Insights from 
the author’s clinical and personal experience are included, making 
it a unique resource for both families and professionals. 
 Exkorn, Karen Siff. 2005.  The Autism Sourcebook: Everything You 
Need to Know about Diagnosis, Treatment, Coping and Healing . 
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. 
 When Karen Siff Exhorn’s son was diagnosed with autism, she had 
no information about the disorder. She educated herself quickly, 
and this book provides accessible medical information gleaned 
from the world’s foremost experts. The author offers an inside look 
at families with children who have autism, tying in her own first-
hand experience as a parent.  The Autism Sourcebook  is a comprehen-
sive, practical resource available to parents and families of children 
with autism. 
 Gray, Carol . 2000. The New Social Story Book Illustrated Edi-
tion. Arlington, TX: Future Horizons. 
 Gray, the developer of social stories, offers 100 stories that offer ex-
planations for what to do in everyday situations that children with 
ASD may find confusing. She details how to write a social story, 
so parents can tailor-make stories to fit their child’s needs. 
 Hadwin, Julie, Simon Baron-Cohen, and Patricia Howlin .  1999. 
 Teaching Children With Autism to Mind-Read: A Practical Guide 
for Teachers and Parents. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 
 The authors explore the relationship between “theory of mind” 
deficits common in ASD and other areas of functioning. Detailed 
and practical guidelines are provided for specific teaching mate-
rials and strategies designed to help improve children’s under-
standing of others’ minds and points of view. 
 Hodgdon, Linda. 1999.  Solving Behavior Problems in Autism: Im-
proving Communication with Visual Strategies . Troy, MI: Quirk 
Roberts Publishing. 

Print Resources 271
 Solving Behavior Problems in Autism  provides a practical approach 
to managing the complexity of behavior problems for children with 
ASD. Aimed at educators or parents who encounter children with 
behavior and self-management challenges, it is the second book 
in the Visual Strategies series and continues the approach of sup-
porting communication with visual strategies. 
 Myles, Brenda, Catherine Cook, and Louanne Miller. 2000.  As-
perger Syndrome and Sensory Issues: Practical Solutions for Mak-
ing Sense of the World.  Shawnee Mission, KS: Autism Asperger 
Publishing Co. 
 This book uncovers the puzzling behaviors of children and youth 
with Asperger’s Disorder that have a sensory base. Written in a 
reader-friendly style, the book offers a set of practical interventions 
that can be used by both parents and educators to help promote 
success for children and youth with Asperger’s Disorder. 
 Myles, Brenda, and Jack Southwick. 1999.  Asperger Syndrome 
and Difficult Moments: Practical Solutions for Tantrums, Rage 
and Meltdowns . Shawnee Mission, KS: Autism Asperger Pub-
lishing Co. 
 The expanded edition of this best-selling book offers parents and 
professionals alike effective solutions to handle “rage” in a child 
with Asperger’s Disorder. Strategies to manage behaviors and re-
actions of adults around the child are also offered. 
 Notbohm, Ellen, and Veronica Zysk. 2004.  1001 Great Ideas for 
Teaching and Raising Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders . 
Arlington, TX: Future Horizons. 
 In an easy-to-read format, the authors offer try-it-now solutions 
that have worked for thousands of children struggling with the 
social, sensory, behavioral, and self-care issues associated with 
ASD. 
 O’Neill, Robert, Robert Horner, Richard Albin, Keith Storey, 
and Jeffrey Sprague. 1996.  Functional Assessment and Program 
Development for Problem Behavior: A Practical Handbook. Flor-
ence, KY: Wadsworth Publishing. 
 Readers of this guide will benefit from an introduction to func-
tional assessment procedures, including ways to assess problem 

272 Resources
behaviors and tips about designing behavior programs based on 
the results of the assessments. Through these and other topics, the 
authors present methods for creating personalized intervention 
programs. 
 Quill, Kathleen Ann. 2000.  Do-Watch-Listen-Say: Social and 
Communication Intervention for Children With Autism . Baltimore: 
Paul H. Brookes Publishing. 
 Backed by research-based methodology, this assessment and in-
tervention guide offers educators hundreds of creative ideas to 
promote social and communication skills along with an assessment 
tool, the Assessment of Social and Communication Skills for Chil-
dren with Autism. This tool contains a set of questionnaires and 
checklists that help to obtain a detailed profile of a child’s abilities 
in more than 100 subskill areas. The book helps readers to target 
specific skills for intervention from which an individualized so-
cial and communication skills curriculum can be developed. 
 Savner, Jennifer, and Brenda Smith Myles. 2000.  Making Visual 
Supports Work in the Home and Community: Strategies for Indi-
viduals with Autism and Asperger Syndrome . Shawnee Mission, 
KS: Autism Asperger Publishing Co. 
 This book shows parents how to make and use visual supports. 
Easy to read, it provides step-by-step directions and pictures that 
can be geared to individual children and their families. 
 Smith Myles, Brenda, Melissa L. Trautman, and Ronda L.   Schel-
van.  2004.  Hidden Curriculum: Practical Solutions for Under-
standing Unstated Rules in Social Situations.  Shawnee Mission, 
KS: Autism Asperger Publishing Co. 
 Individuals with ASD often have difficulty picking up on more 
subtle rules of social interactions. Although these skills come nat-
urally to typically developing children, they can be difficult to teach 
to children with ASD. This book offers a curriculum with practical 
suggestions and advice for how to help individuals with ASD to 
navigate the unspoken social world. 
 Sonders, Susan Aud. 2003.  Giggle Time—Establishing the Social 
Connection: A Program to Develop the Communication Skills of 
Children With Autism, Asperger Syndrome and PDD . London: 
Jessica Kingsley Publishers. 

Print Resources 273
 This book describes an effective technique to build simple inter-
active games to develop communication with children with lim-
ited language. The book is clearly written and illustrated with 
photo examples of real-life games. 
 Wheeler, Maria. 2007.  Toilet Training for Individuals with Au-
tism or Other Developmental Issues, 2nd Edition . Arlington, TX: 
Future Horizons. 
 Individuals with autism are known to have much difficulty with 
toilet training. This how-to guide offers highly effective strate-
gies taking into account children with autism’s sensitivities rather 
than pushing traditional methods. It provides more than 200 dos 
and don’ts and over 50 real-life examples. 
 Social and Communication Skills 
 Books 
 Antonello, Stephen. 1995.  Social Skills Development: Practical 
Strategies for Adolescents and Adults with Developmental Dis-
abilities . New York: Simon & Schuster Adult Publishing Group. 
 This comprehensive social skills guide provides a complete collec-
tion of topics and subskills to enhance social communication skills 
in teenagers and adults with ASD. The skills covered range from 
basic communication to more complex skills with modifications 
provided for more functionally impaired individuals. Case vi-
gnettes and rationales behind the skills are provided to fully pre-
pare the instructor to teach the skill. 
 Baker, Jed.  2006.  The Social Skills Picture Book for High School 
and Beyond.  La Vergne, TN: Ingram Publisher Services. 
 Especially useful for visual learners, Baker’s social skills book for 
teenagers offers pictures of students engaging in a range of social 
situations intended to teach by  showing  (not only telling). Social 
situations that are relevant to teenagers are included in this book 
such as going on a date, making friends, and interviewing. The con-
sequences of using various skills are also depicted to allow teens 
to begin to see the potential outcomes (both positive and nega-
tive) of their behavior during social interactions. 
 Baker, Jed. 2001.  The Social Skills Picture Book: Teaching Play, 
Emotion, and Communication to Children with Autism . Arling-
ton, TX: Future Horizons. 

274 Resources
 A well-known writer and expert in social skills training for indi-
viduals with autism, Baker offers this book as a means to teach 
youngsters with ASDs social skills appropriate during conversa-
tions, play, expressing emotions, and developing empathy. His 
pictures show the right and wrong ways to handle situations in-
volving the use of these skills. 
 Baker, Jed. 2003.  Social Skills Training for Children and Adoles-
cents with Asperger Syndrome and Social-Communication Prob-
lems . Shawnee Mission, KS: Autism Asperger Publishing Co. 
 In another of Baker’s popular books, he offers a proven social skills 
curriculum with ready-to-use activities appropriate for children 
with Asperger’s Disorder of a variety of ages. Baker covers 70 skills 
that are often impacted in children with ASD via lessons with as-
sociated handouts and activity sheets describing ways to teach 
that particular skill, both in the classroom and at home. 
 Duke, Marshall P., Stephen Nowicki, and Elisabeth A. Martin. 
1996.  Teaching Your Child the Language of Social Success.  Atlanta: 
Peachtree Publishers. 
 Teaching Your Child the Language of Social Success  is intended to de-
scribe ways to teach  nonverbal  communication, such as gestures, 
facial expressions, and tone of voice. The rules of nonverbal com-
munication are explained and broken down to help make this un-
spoken aspect of communication explicit through case studies, 
illustrations, and exercises appropriate for home or in the class-
room. 
 Frankel, Fred. 1996.  Good Friends Are Hard to Find: Help Your 
Child Find, Make and Keep Friends . Glendale, CA: Perspective 
Publishing. 
 Good Friends Are Hard to Find  is intended to help children 5 to 12 
years old learn to make friends and problem-solve social conflicts 
with peers using clinically tested methods that the author helped 
to develop. Frankel recommends one-on-one playdates as the best 
method to develop friendship skills and establish relationships. 
Concrete guidance on how to manage teasing and bullying is also 
provided. 
 Freeman, Sabrina, and Lorelei Dake. 1997.  Teach Me Language: A 
Language Manual for Children with Autism, Asperger’s Syndrome 

Print Resources 275
and Related Developmental Disorders . Langley, British Colum-
bia: SKF Books. 
 Teach Me Language  is a step-by-step manual intended to be a com-
plete resource for teaching language to children with ASD. Speech 
pathology methods including instructional lessons, examples, ex-
planations, and games/activities are provided to make learning 
as fun as possible while still teaching necessary skills. Areas tar-
geted include social language, grammar and syntax, writing, and 
language-based academic concepts. 
 Grandin, Temple, and Sean Barron. 2005.  Unwritten Rules of So-
cial Relationships: Decoding Social Mysteries through the Unique 
Perspectives of Autism . Arlington, TX: Future Horizons. 
 Grandin and Barron, both successful adults with ASD, apply les-
sons they’ve learned in their lives to shed light into the complex 
and unspoken rules of social interactions and relationships. With 
an insider’s view of living, working, and interacting with others as 
adults with ASD, they offer concrete guidelines and effective ways 
for others with ASD to navigate the social world. 
 Gray, Carol, and Abbie Leigh White. 2002.  My Social Stories 
Book. London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers. 
 Social stories are narratives taking children step-by-step through 
a variety of basic activities. Gray created social stories as a means 
to teach social and life skills to children and lower functioning 
individuals with ASD. Social stories help prepare children on the 
spectrum for an upcoming new activity by making them comfort-
able with what to expect. This book contains over 200 social sto-
ries written for children aged 2–6 about a range of activities such 
as brushing your teeth and wearing a seatbelt. 
 Heinrichs, Rebekah. 2003.  Perfect Targets: Asperger Syndrome 
and Bullying: Practical Solutions for Surviving the Social World . 
Shawnee Mission, KS: Autism Asperger Publishing Company. 
 The unique behaviors and characteristics of students with high-
functioning autism and Asperger’s Disorder often make them easy 
targets for bullying and teasing. This book examines bullying in 
the ASD population and offers adults specific interventions to ad-
dress bullying and teasing in the hopes of preventing the long-
term effects that repeated bullying often has on children. 

276 Resources
 Hodgdon, Linda. 1995.  Visual Strategies for Improving Communi-
cation: Practical Supports for School and Home . Troy, MI: Quirk 
Roberts Publishing. 
 This is a comprehensive book explaining the use of visual strate-
gies to help improve communication in students with autism and 
other related disorders. Practical ideas and techniques for creat-
ing solutions to communication challenges are included as well as 
many illustrated visual supports. Focus is placed both on under-
standing and expressing language relevant to a child’s day-to-day 
life. 
 McAfee, Jeanette. 2002.  Navigating the Social World: A Curricu-
lum for Individuals with Asperger’s Syndrome, High Functioning 
Autism, and Related Disorders . Arlington, TX: Future Horizons. 
 As a parent of a child diagnosed with Asperger’s Disorder, pedia-
trician Jeanie McAfee created this user-friendly social curriculum 
for both parents and educators. McAfee covers how to increase 
communication skills, cope with emotions, recognize and prevent 
stress, develop abstract thinking skills, address behavioral prob-
lems, and other areas. 
 Quill, Kathleen. 1995.  Teaching Children with Autism: Strategies 
to Enhance Communication and Socialization . Albany, NY: Del-
mar Cengage Learning. 
 Intended primarily for speech and language pathologists, this book 
is designed to promote communication and socialization in chil-
dren with autism. Strategies and adaptations to traditional thera-
peutic interventions are included in such areas as communication 
in nonverbal children, play, reading social cues, and developing 
appropriate environmental supports. 
 Weiss, Mary Jane, and Sandra Harris. 2001.  Reaching Out, Joining 
In: Teaching Social Skills to Young Children with Autism . Rock-
ville, MD: Woodbine House. 
 Reaching Out, Joining In  is intended for parents to use as a guide for 
teaching social skills to their young children (preschool through 
early elementary years) with ASD. The primary means of teach-
ing skills is through Applied Behavioral Analysis with a focus on 
the following four areas: play, social language, taking another per-
son’s point view, and successful integration into an inclusive class-

Print Resources 277
room. The programs described in this book build on a child’s 
strengths using strategies such as games, videos, modeling, and 
rewards. 
 School and Education 
 Books 
 Blenk, Katie, and Doris Fine. 1994.  Making School Inclusion 
Work: A Guide to Everyday Practices.  Brookline, MA: Brookline 
Books. 
 Inclusive school programs can seem daunting to develop and 
maintain. The authors share their how-to strategies for develop-
ing truly inclusive school programs that welcome students of a va-
riety of economic levels, ethnic and racial backgrounds, and ability 
levels. With respect to autism, the authors relay specifics about how 
to meet the needs of children with mild to serious special educa-
tion needs in order to maximize benefit for  all  children in the class-
room. Anecdotes of experiences from both typically developing 
and children with special needs and their parents are shared in 
 Making School Inclusion Work. 
 Fouse, Beth. 1999.  Creating a Win Win IEP for Students with Au-
tism. Arlington, TX: Future Horizons. 
 Creating a Win Win IEP for Students with Autism  is an introductory 
text for parents navigating the special educational system and 
learning to understand the Individualized Education Program 
(IEP) process. An introduction into “what is an IEP” and the legal 
background behind the necessity of IEPs are discussed. Acronyms 
and the special language of the educational world are explained in 
detail so that parents can be fully equipped to be knowledgeable 
and crucial members of their child’s IEP team. Form letters are also 
included as well as discussions of teacher’s legal responsibilities 
and family’s rights. 
 Fullerton, Ann. 1996.  Higher Functioning Adolescents and Young 
Adults with Autism: A Teacher’s Guide . Austin, TX: Pro-Ed. 
 Higher Functioning Adolescents and Young Adults with Autism  is geared 
toward high school teachers supporting students with autism. Em-
phasis is placed on issues particular to adolescence, including peer 

278 Resources
relations and establishing an adult identity. Some strategies offered 
may also be applicable for students of all grades. 
 Gibb, Gordon, and Tina Taylor Dyches. 2007.  Guide to Writing 
Quality Individualized Education Programs, 2nd Edition.  Colum-
bus, OH: Allyn & Bacon. 
 This guide offers seven basic steps to writing an IEP based on the 
requirements of IDEA 2004. Its audience is teachers who are learn-
ing or fine-tuning their IEP-writing skills. Case studies are pro-
vided along with examples of complete IEPs for children of a variety 
of ages and ability levels. Step-by-step instruction for IEP develop-
ment is also included via written explanation, models, and practice 
appropriate for group or individual learning. 
 Handleman, Jan, and Sandra Harris. 2008.  Preschool Education 
Programs for Children with Autism, 3rd Edition . Austin, TX: 
Pro-Ed. 
 Preschool Education Programs for Children with Autism  contains ex-
pert contributions from many national autism educational pro-
grams in addressing pertinent questions about the treatment and 
preschool education of very young children with autism. A va-
riety of educational settings (e.g., public, private, and university-
based programs) and topics are included, such as play, social skills, 
speech and language, visual supports, sign language, and transi-
tioning to elementary school programs. 
 Mayerson, Gary. 2004.  How To Compromise With Your School 
District Without Compromising Your Child: A Field Guide for 
Getting Effective Services for Children with Special Needs . New 
York: DRL Books. 
 Mayerson is a lawyer who has devoted his career to representing 
and advocating for children with autism to receive fair and appro-
priate education. He spells out the “must dos” and “must don’ts” 
for parents to follow when seeking special services from the ed-
ucational system, including how to prepare for an IEP meeting, 
next steps when children are not receiving the services they need, 
and how to avoid invoking due process of law in ensuring proper 
educational services for children in need. 
 Reif, Sandra, and Julie Heimburge. 2006.  How to Reach and 
Teach All Children in the Inclusive Classroom: Practical Strate-

Print Resources 279
gies, Lessons, and Activities, 2nd Edition . Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley & Sons. 
 A team approach to “reach and teach” all students in an inclusive 
classroom setting is described in  How to Reach and Teach All Chil-
dren in the Inclusive Classroom.  The authors provide strategies, ready-
to-use lesson plans, and activities for students with varied learning 
styles, ability levels, and behaviors. Teachers of grades 3–8 would 
maximally benefit from this book. 
 Siegel, Lawrence. 2009.  The Complete IEP Guide: How to Ad-
vocate for Your Special Ed Child, 6th Edition . Berkeley, CA: 
NOLO. 
 The IEP is a key component in determining the special education 
services that children with autism will receive in school.  The Com-
plete IEP Guide  helps reader to sift through the paperwork and 
bureaucracy often associated with the IEP to put programs and 
school interventions into place to better help children in need. Un-
derstanding children’s rights, eligibility, assessments, IEP goals/
objectives, and programs and services are discussed in detail in this 
user-friendly guide. 
 Smith Myles, Brenda, and Richard Simpson.   2003.  Asperger Syn-
drome: A Guide for Educators and Parents.  Austin, TX: Pro-Ed. 
 In addition to a general introduction to Asperger’s Disorder and 
family stories of living with a child with the diagnosis,  Asperger Syn-
drome: A Guide for Educators and Parents  offers educational strate-
gies to help enhance students’ learning. Interventions for home and 
school are discussed. 
 Turnbull, H. Rutherford, and Ann P. Turnbull. 2006.  Free Appro-
priate Public Education: The Law and Children with Disabilities, 
7th Edition . Denver: Love Publishing Company. 
 The Turnbulls are lawyers dedicated to representing families of 
children with special needs in the educational system. The latest 
edition of this reader-friendly textbook explains the often-complex 
legal process of special education.  Free Appropriate Public Education 
is a crucial resource for parents and professionals who do not have 
access to training in the law behind special education. The text is 
broken into three parts: Introduction to the Law, the Principles of 
IDEA, and Enforcing the Law. Readers will learn about the history 

280 Resources
of IDEA and gain valuable information about using the law to ob-
tain free appropriate education for children with special needs. 
 Wright, Pam, and Pete Wright.   2006.  From Emotions to Advocacy, 
2nd Edition. Boyne City, MI: Harbor House. 
 The Wrights teach readers such strategies as planning, preparing, 
and organizing to better receive quality special education services 
for children in need. Worksheets, forms, and sample letters are in-
cluded to help advocate for children’s educational needs. Addi-
tionally, the potential for parent-school conflicts, the importance of 
paper trails, and effective letter-writing techniques are discussed. 
 Biography/Personal Stories/Stories 
 Books 
 Andron, Linda. 2001.  Our Journey through High Functioning Au-
tism and Asperger Syndrome: A Roadmap . London: Jessica Kings-
ley Publishers. 
 In this realistic and positive book, families of children with autism 
describe autism’s impact on their lives and solutions to adapt suc-
cessfully to the daily life challenges that arise. Strategies for help-
ing children to develop empathy, humor, friendships, and share 
their diagnosis with others are described. 
 Barron, Judy, and Sean Barron. 2002.  There’s a Boy in Here:  Emerg-
ing from the Bonds of Autism.  Arlington, TX: Future Horizons. 
 This unique book is a dual autobiography written in point-
counterpoint style by a mother of an individual with autism (  Judy 
Barron) and her son (Sean Barron). The Barrons share the story of 
their lives, from a very difficult early childhood to a breakthrough 
that Sean experienced in his late teenage years. The combination of 
mother/son perspectives provides excellent insight into the full 
range of family impact of autism. 
 Grandin,  Temple. 2006.  Thinking in Pictures: My Life with Au-
tism.  New York: Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. 
 In  Thinking in Pictures,  Grandin reveals her inner world as an indi-
vidual with autism. She discusses how the thought processes of 

Print Resources 281
individuals with autism are different than those of the “outside 
world” and how she was able to move across this boundary to fun-
ction in this world. 
 Grandin, Temple, and Margaret Scariano.1986.  Emergence: La-
beled Autistic. New York: Warner Books. 
 As discussed in Chapter 5 of this book, Grandin is a well-known 
woman and university professor diagnosed with autism at a young 
age. This firsthand account of Grandin’s life tells the story of her life 
from early childhood when she was enrolled in a school for children 
with autism through adulthood. Grandin shares insight into the 
fears and feelings of isolation that many individuals with autism 
experience and offers theories and treatment modalities for fami-
lies to try. 
 Haddon, Mark. 2003.  The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-
time . New York: Random House. 
 The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Nighttime  is a novel whose 
main character is Christopher Boone, a 15-year-old boy with As-
perger’s Disorder. Throughout the course of the book, Christopher 
investigates the murder of a neighborhood dog and overcomes 
some serious fears along his journey. 
 Hart, Charles. 1989.  Without Reason: A Family Copes with Two 
Generations of Autism . Arlington, TX: Future Horizons. 
 Hart grew up living with his severely affected brother with autism. 
Later in life, Hart himself had a son with autism. This book is an 
account of Hart’s life living with two generations of autism and his 
experience establishing accommodations for his son, brother, and 
others with disabilities to better allow them to be successful in the 
world. Hart’s view is not to cure autism, but to understand and ac-
commodate individuals with the disorder. 
 Jacobs,  Barbara. 2004.  Loving Mr. Spock: Understanding an Aloof 
Lover. Arlington, TX: Future Horizons. 
 Jacobs tells the story of her romantic relationship with Danny, a 
man with Asperger’s Disorder. She compares Danny with “Mr. 
Spock” who often uses logic rather than emotion to guide his 

282 Resources
actions. Through personal experience, discussions of diagnostics, 
quotes from other couples, and more, Jacobs offers lessons for peo-
ple who are in relationships with individuals on the spectrum and 
those on the spectrum themselves. 
 Maurice, Catherine. 1994.  Let Me Hear Your Voice: A Family’s Tri-
umph over Autism. New York: Random House Publishing. 
 Let Me Hear Your Voice is a mother’s account of her family’s life and 
adjustment to autism. Maurice herself is the mother of a girl with 
autism who tells the story of her daughter’s regression into autism 
during her second year of life and the subsequent journey of find-
ing a treatment that worked. Eventually, her daughter made huge 
gains through behavioral intervention, called Applied Behavioral 
Analysis. 
 Newport, Jerry, and Mary Newport. 2007.  Mozart and the Whale: 
An Asperger’s Love Story.  New York: Simon & Schuster Adult 
Publishing Group. 
 Jerry and Mary Newport share the story of their relationship as 
two geniuses with Asperger’s Disorder who met and married. The 
couple became very well known, and they later divorced due to the 
stresses of being a public couple. Later in life, they remarried (each 
other) and, in this book, tell the story of their lives together and 
apart. 
 Park, Clara. 2002.  Exiting Nirvana: A Daughter’s Life with Autism.  
New York: Back Bay Books. 
 Park shares her experience of raising her daughter with autism 
in this moving book. Interwoven amongst her own life stories 
and those of her daughter are theories of autism and widespread 
thoughts about human nature in general. 
 Sanders,  Robert. 2004.  On My Own Terms: My Journey with 
Asperger’s. Murfreesboro, TN: Armstrong Valley Publishing. 
 Sanders wrote this autobiography about living his life with As-
perger’s Disorder. He shares his experience through personal ac-
counts, ideas for change, and insights into the disorder itself. 
Sanders now holds a degree in electrical engineering and has writ-
ten several novels. 

Print Resources 283
 Shally, Celeste, and David Harrington. 2008.  Since We’re Friends: 
An Autism Picture Book.  Centerton, AR: Awaken Specialty Press. 
 This illustrated story provides examples of how to make a friend-
ship work with a child with ASD. The story is about two boys, one 
with autism and one without, who begin to develop a friendship. 
Young readers can learn that children with ASD can be fun and real 
partners in a friendship. 
 Welton, Jude. 2004.  Can I Tell You About Asperger Syndrome? A 
Guide for Friends and Family . London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers. 
 Adam is a young man with Asperger’s Disorder who tells his 
readers what it feels like to have Asperger’s from his perspective. 
Children between 7 and 15 years of age would maximally benefit 
from this book to begin to understand differences and appreciate 
talents of children with Asperger’s from a child’s perspective. 
 Willey, Liane.  Asperger Syndrome in the Family: Redefining Nor-
mal.  London; Philadelphia: Jessica Kingsley Publishers, 2001. 
 Written by an individual with Asperger’s Disorder (who also has a 
daughter with Asperger’s), this book provides a personal account 
of the disorder. Willey offers abundant examples of practical hints 
for maximizing success for “Aspies” in social situations. She also 
includes information about resources and a different perspective 
about symptoms. 
 Willey, Liane. 1999.  Pretending to Be Normal: Living with As-
perger’s Syndrome.  London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers. 
 Pretending to be Normal  is told through the eyes of Willey, a woman 
with Asperger’s Disorder who came to accept and appreciate her 
personality after years of self-doubt and self-denial. 
 Williams, Sondra. 2005.  Reflections of Self.  Zeeland, MI: The 
Gray Center for Social Learning & Understanding. 
 Williams is the mother of four children with autism, married to a 
husband with autism, and has high-functioning autism herself. In 
 Reflections of Self,  she shares articles, poetry, and thoughts from her 
unique perspective and intimate relationship with autism. 

284 Resources
 Parenting/Family Issues/Parent Perspectives 
 Books 
 Fling, Echo. 2000.  Eating an Artichoke: A Mothers’ Perspective on 
Asperger Syndrome . London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers. 
 For much of her son’s childhood, the author and her husband took 
their child to see a variety of doctors, specialists, and other profes-
sionals to learn what was different about their son. Fling finally 
received a diagnosis of Asperger’s Disorder in her son at 10 years of 
age. In this book, Fling describes their journey and parent perspec-
tives on the diagnosis. 
 Harris, Sandra. 2003.  Siblings of Children with Autism: A Guide 
for Families . Rockville, MD: Woodbine House. 
 Siblings of children with ASD are a unique group of individuals—
they are often strong supports for children on the spectrum and 
frequently take the backseat in family dynamics.  Siblings of Children 
with Autism  takes an in-depth look at the life of a sibling of a child 
with autism. It guides families through ways to explain the diagno-
sis to siblings, manage the sibling’s own feelings, balance family 
needs, and prepare adult siblings for helping to manage the care of 
adults with ASD. 
 Johnston-Tyler, Jan. 2007.  The Mom’s Guide to Asperger Syndrome 
and Related Disorders.  Shawnee Mission, KS: Autism Asperger 
Publishing Co. 
 This guide provides detailed and practical information for parents 
of children with Asperger’s Disorder and other ASDs in seeking 
appropriate services and getting the help that parents need. Writ-
ten by a parent of a child with Asperger’s,  The Mom’s Guide to As-
perger Syndrome and Related Disorders  uses parent-friendly language 
and is intended to be a valuable resource throughout a child’s 
lifetime. 
 Schopler, Eric. 1995.  Parent Survival Manual: A Guide to Crisis 
Resolution in Autism and Related Developmental Disorders . New 
York: Plenum Press. 
 In this unique book, 350 parent stories have been compiled to serve 
as practical guides to managing a variety of challenging behaviors 
associated with ASD. Topics covered include aggression, commu-

Print Resources 285
nication, play and leisure, perseveration, eating, sleeping, and toi-
leting and hygiene. Behavior therapists have analyzed all anec-
dotes, and the stories serve as a quick reference for parents dealing 
with similar issues at home. 
 Books for Individuals with Autism 
 Books 
 Dunn Buron, Kari. 2003.  When My Autism Gets Too Big! A Relax-
ation Book for Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders  (also 
called  When My Worries Get Too Big! A Relaxation Book for Chil-
dren Who Live with Anxiety ). Shawnee Mission, KS: Autism As-
perger Publishing Co. 
 “Losing control” is an often-reported concern of both parents and 
individuals with ASD. In this illustrated book, relaxation tech-
niques are introduced and taught as a way to manage feelings when 
children begin to feel out of control. 
 Edwards, Andreanna. 2002.  Taking Autism to School.  Plainview, 
NY: JayJo Books. 
 This illustrated storybook is intended to teach young children about 
the daily lives of children with autism. It is helpful in encouraging 
peers to better understand the particular differences common in 
children with ASD, with the goal of allowing peers to better empa-
thize with them. 
 Faherty, Catherine. 2000.  Aspergers . . . What Does It Mean to Me?  
Arlington, TX: Future Horizons. 
 This workbook is intended for children with high-functioning au-
tism or Asperger’s Disorder in order to learn more about them-
selves. Children can write in the book and respond to a variety of 
subjects that Faherty offers. Pages can be easily photocopied. 
 Vermuelen, Peter. 2000.  I Am Special: Introducing Children and 
Young People to their Autistic Spectrum Disorder . London: Jessica 
Kingsley Publishers. 
 This child-friendly workbook is designed for a child with ASD 
to fill out with an adult. It introduces the child to their diagnosis 

286 Resources
through worksheets, exercises, and the creation of a personal book 
about themselves. Strengths of individuals of ASD are highlighted, 
and children are encouraged to view their differences positively. 
 Adolescence 
 Books 
 Newport, Jerry, and Mary Newport. 2002.  Autism-Asperger’s and 
Sexuality: Puberty and Beyond.  Arlington, TX: Future Horizons. 
 A husband and wife who are both diagnosed with Asperger’s Dis-
order have written this book to provide advice on dating, sex, birth 
control, disease prevention, abuse, and personal responsibility in 
day-to-day life and relationships. Discussions on how to develop 
loving relationships with sexual intimacy are also covered. 
 Nichols, Shana. 2008.  Girls, Growing Up on the Autism Spectrum: 
What Parents and Professionals Should Know about the Pre-teen 
and Teenage Years . London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers. 
 One of the few pieces of work specifically geared toward teenage 
girls with ASD,  Girls, Growing Up on the Autism Spectrum  covers ar-
eas of concern commonly reported to be difficult for adolescent 
girls on the spectrum. Topics include fitting in with peers, friend-
ships, and physical changes associated with puberty (e.g., starting 
your period). The authors provide knowledge and advice families 
need to successfully navigate the teenage years through profes-
sional expertise and family stories. 
 Sicile-Kira, Chantel. 2006.  Adolescents on the Autism Spectrum: A 
Parent  ’s Guide to the Cognitive, Social, Physical, and Transition 
Needs of Teenagers with Autism Spectrum Disorders . New York: 
A Perigee Book. 
 This book is geared to the needs of preteens and teenagers with 
ASD ranging from mildly to severely impaired. Cognitive, emo-
tional, social, and physical needs are covered in depth using case 
examples and practical advice. New areas of focus that emerge in 
adolescence are also covered, including increased risk of seizures, 
understanding sexuality and dating, and preparing for life after 
high school. 

Print Resources 287
 Smith Myles, Brenda, and Diane Adreon. 2001.  Asperger Syn-
drome and Adolescence: Practical Solutions for School Success. 
 Shawnee Mission, KS: Autism Asperger Publishing Company. 
 Transition to middle and high school can be an emotional and trau-
matic time for teenagers with Asperger’s Disorder. This book in-
cludes an in-depth exploration about why teens with Asperger’s are 
at particular risk for such challenges. Helpful supports and strate-
gies are also provided to make the transition smoother for teens 
and to maximize success at school. 
 Wrobel, Mary. 2003.  Taking Care of Myself: A Healthy Hygiene, 
Puberty and Personal Curriculum for Young People with Autism . 
La Vergne, TN: Ingram Publisher Services. 
 Written by a speech and language pathologist, this book provides 
a variety of lessons for individuals with ASD to guide children and 
caregivers through issues of health, hygiene, and puberty. 
 Adulthood 
 Books 
 Baker, Jed. 2006.  Preparing for Life: The Complete Guide for Tran-
sitioning to Adulthood for Those with Autism and Asperger’s Syn-
drome . Arlington, TX: Future Horizons. 
 In another of his best-selling books, Baker covers “Life Skills Train-
ing” in this book to help individuals with ASD be successful after 
high school. Topics covered include lessons on nonverbal cues (e.g., 
body language), how to deal with emotions, and tips on friend-
ships and intimate relationships. Laws regarding accommodations 
for adults with disabilities are also discussed. 
 Grandin, Temple, and Kate Duffy. 2008.  Developing Talents: Ca-
reers for Individuals with Asperger Syndrome and High-Functioning 
Autism . Shawnee Mission, KS: Autism Asperger Publishing Co. 
 This book is intended to explore career options for adults with 
ASD. The authors highlight the growing number of career oppor-
tunities in entrepreneurship (among other fields) in today’s society 
that are well suited for the unique characteristics of individuals 
with ASD. Vocational rehabilitation programs are also reviewed in 

288 Resources
terms of their potential to provide career training and placement 
for individuals with such disabilities as ASD. 
 Nonprint Resources 
 General Autism Resources 
 Autism Society 
 http://www.autism-society.org; 
 Spanish: http://www.autism-society.org/site/
PageServer?pagename=autismo 
 This is the general Web page for the organization Autism Society 
that is available in both English and Spanish. The Web site contains 
general information about autism, ASD-related stories of individ-
uals with ASD and their families, information for professionals, and 
other important information. Research opportunities as well as 
treatment options are described in detail. It is a resource for both 
families and professionals. 
 Autism Speaks 
 http://www.autismspeaks.org/ 
 This is the general Web site for the organization Autism Speaks con-
taining a large variety of information, including an introduction to 
ASD, tools for professionals and families, resources, news about 
their organized walks, and research initiatives. Many of the tools de-
scribed in this chapter can be accessed via this home page. 
 Autism Speaks Family Services Resource 
Guide and Resource Library 
 http://www.autismspeaks.org/community/family_services/
tools_for_families.php 
 In addition to the 100 Day Kit and DVD series, Autism Speaks of-
fers a number of other resources, including state-by-state resources 
and categories of services available. They do not endorse every re-
source listed in the guides nor do they claim that the list is com-
prehensive. The guides are intended to be a starting off point for 
families seeking services. 
 Autism Speaks 100 Day Kit 
 http://www.autismspeaks.org/community/family_
services/100_day_kit.php 

Nonprint Resources 289
 The Autism Speaks 100 Day Kit is geared toward families whose 
children have recently been diagnosed with ASD. In addition to 
containing general information about ASD, it helps families to pri-
oritize the most essential next steps in the 100 days following the 
diagnosis. It is available free of charge for families with newly di-
agnosed children under 5 years of age and can be tailored to the in-
dividual child depending on his or her age. 
 First Signs 
 http://firstsigns.org/ 
 The First Signs organization is dedicated to educating parents, 
health care providers, early childhood educators, and other profes-
sionals about early signs of developmental disorders, including 
ASD. Their Web site contains information about monitoring child-
hood development, the screening and referral process, and support 
for concerns. One of the tools is the ASD Video Glossary, which is 
also described in this chapter. 
 Interactive Tools to Track Child Development from the CDC 
 http://www.cdc.gov/Features/DetectAutismTools/ 
 The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) offers in-
teractive tools for parents to help track how a child plays, learns, 
speaks, and acts. Interactive Milestone Charts and Checklist are of-
fered to teach parents about developmental milestones in order to 
help recognize when development may be off course. They also of-
fer a video called  Baby Steps: Learn the Signs. Act Early,  which pro-
vides information and guidance on identifying developmental 
disabilities. 
 Manitas por Autismo, Spanish 
 http://www.manitasporautismo.com/ 
 This Web site offers information about ASD in Spanish. Available 
information includes services, general introduction to ASD, and 
relevant news. 
 National Institute of Mental Health: Autism 
 http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/autism/
complete-publication.shtml 
 National Library of Medicine: Autism 
 http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/autism.html 

290 Resources
 The National Institute of Mental Health and the National Library 
of Medicine have compiled a comprehensive information and fact 
sheets about ASD on their Web sites. Information about etiology, 
treatment, and resources are included. 
 OASIS Web site: Online Asperger’s 
Syndrome Information and Support 
 http://www.udel.edu/bkirby/asperger 
 Run by the parent of a child with Asperger’s, the OASIS Web site 
has abundant information about Asperger’s Disorder for parents, 
individuals with Asperger’s, and professionals. Topics covered in-
clude information about the diagnosis and the diagnostic process, 
support groups, online support, programs (e.g., camps and schools) 
specific to Asperger’s, and information about social skills. 
 University of Michigan Health Systems 
 http://www.med.umich.edu/1libr/yourchild/autism.htm 
 This Web site from the University of Michigan presents informa-
tion about ASD in a question-and-answer format. In addition to an-
swers to commonly asked questions, it also provides links and ways 
to obtain further information about related topics. Books and help-
ful Web sites are also provided. 
 Films and Video Clips 
 Adam . 2009. DVD. Directed by Max Meyer. 
Santa Monica, CA: Olympus Pictures. 
 Adam  (2009) is a major motion picture about a young man with As-
perger’s Disorder who becomes romantically involved with a 
woman living in his apartment complex. It fairly accurately portrays 
the experience of individuals with Asperger’s who are trying 
to navigate the social world successfully. The movie stars Hugh 
Dancy and Rose Byrne. 
 Aging with Autism: Defining the Future. DVDs. 2007. 
Commack, NY: Nassau Suffolk Services 
for Autism and the Martin C. Barell School. 
 http://www.autismspeaks.org/community/family_services/
aging_with_autism_dvds.php 
 Autism Speaks offers the  Aging with Autism: Defining the Future 
DVDs free of charge (except for shipping and handling) to parents 

Nonprint Resources 291
and professionals interested in learning how to navigate issues 
that emerge as children with ASD grow older. The DVDs consist of 
conference proceedings from the  Aging with Autism conference 
presented by Developmental Disabilities Institute, Nassau Suffolk 
Services for Autism, and the Eden II Programs. Autism Speaks re-
corded many of the sessions to share with families and caregivers 
who could not attend. Topics included on the series of DVDs in-
clude housing and life transitions, sexuality, and employment. This 
is one of the few resources available specifically for adolescents 
and adults with ASD. 
 ASD Video Glossary 
 http://www.firstsigns.org/asd_video_glossary/asdvg_about.htm 
 The ASD Video Glossary is a free online resource intended to help 
parents and professionals become familiar with the early red flags 
and diagnostic features of ASD. The glossary contains more than 
a hundred video clips highlighting the, at times, subtle differences 
between young children who are typically developing and those 
who have ASD. Clips are categorized by the type of ASD symptom 
or red flag. The ASD Video Glossary is not intended to help make 
an ASD diagnosis but rather to show examples of the various types 
of differences in children with ASD. 
 Autism Everyday.  2006–2007. DVD Directed by Lauren 
Thierry. Huntington, NY: Milestone Video. 
 http://www.autismspeaks.org/sponsoredevents/autism_every_
day.php 
 Autism Everyday  is a documentary produced by Eric Solomon and 
Lauren Thierry in conjunction with Autism Speaks that tells the 
story and struggles of several families raising their child with au-
tism. It originally premiered in 2006 as a short, 12-minute film and 
was later expanded in 2007 to 44 minutes. The film is an accurate 
and powerful portrayal of the day-to-day experience of raising a 
child with autism. 
 My Next Steps: A Parent’s Guide to Understanding Autism. 
2008. DVD. Directed by Raphael Bernier, Jamie Winter, 
and Jennifer Varley. Seattle, WA: Gigantic Planet. 
 http://depts.washington.edu/uwautism/video/video.html 
 My Next Steps: A Parent’s Guide to Understanding Autism  (2008) is a 
full-length DVD intended for families who have just received a 

292 Resources
first-time diagnosis of autism in their child. The DVD is produced 
by the University of Washington Autism Center and offers guidance 
to parents through interviews with experts and families. Topics 
covered include an overview and history of autism, treatment 
strategies, information about schools, and family stories. DVD chap-
ters can be downloaded at the Web site, and the DVD can be or-
dered free of charge. 
 Rain Man. 1988. DVD. Directed by Barry Levinson. 
Los Angeles, CA: United Artists. 
 Rain Man  (1998) is a film starring Dustin Hoffman and Tom Cruise 
and was directed by Barry Levinson. Dustin Hoffman provides an 
accurate portrayal of an adult with autism, Raymond Babbitt, while 
Tom Cruise plays his long-lost brother. The movie tells the story 
of the two brothers getting to know each other through a cross-
country road trip together. It was the first major motion picture 
about an individual with autism and was a major contributor to the 
increasing awareness about autism in the media. The movie won 
several Academy Awards, including Best Picture. 
 Environmental Supports: Computer Software, 
Visual Supports, and Other Materials 
 Attainment Company 
 http://www.attainmentcompany.com 
 The Attainment Company offers many products to help people 
with disabilities, including ASD, be successful in various aspects of 
their lives including school, work, and day-to-day living activities. 
Programs combine pictures, instructional videos, and lesson plans 
in such products as software to understand money, cook indepen-
dently, and keep track of their own schedules and time. 
 Autism Resource Network 
 http://www.autismshop.com/ 
 This Web site is a relatively comprehensive, one-stop shopping net-
work for materials that may be helpful for families of children 
with autism. Goods that are sold via the Web site include books, 
DVDs, visual supports, PECS, and speech/language items includ-
ing oral motor tools. 

Nonprint Resources 293
 Do2Learn 
 http://www.do2learn.com 
 Do2Learn is an interactive Web site containing teacher and parent 
materials that may be helpful for children with ASD. Materials in-
clude computer-based instruction, picture cards, and software to 
make visual schedules. Additionally, the Web site offers a computer 
program to help children recognize emotions. Special needs re-
sources: http://www.specialneeds.com/. 
 Laureate Learning Systems 
 http://www.laureatelearning.com 
 Laureate Learning Systems offers many computer programs for in-
dividual with special needs including ASD, language impairments, 
developmental disabilities, Down syndrome, aphasia, and trau-
matic brain injury. Software includes instruction on such areas as 
cause and effect, vocabulary, syntax, concept development, auditory 
processing, and reading. 
 Mayer-Johnson 
 http://www.mayer-johnson.com 
 Mayer-Johnson is a company that makes products for individuals 
with special needs, including ASD, designed to improve commu-
nication through such symbols as pictures. It may be helpful for 
individuals with ASD with limited language and who require al-
terative ways to communicate. 
 Social Stories 
 http://www.thegraycenter.org/ 
 The Gray Center for Social Learning and Understanding was 
founded by Carol Gray who first defined social stories in 1991. Her 
social story software is available for purchase on the Web site as 
well as instructional videos and books. The Web site has further 
information about social stories and general information about 
autism. 
 Visual Strategy Suggestions 
 http://www.usevisualstrategies.com 
 Children with autism tend to be better at understanding visual as 
compared to verbal information. Therefore, they are often described 

294 Resources
as visual learners and acquire information better with, for exam-
ple, pictures to accompany verbal information. This Web site is 
dedicated to providing support, products, and information about 
visual strategies for children with autism. 
 Support Resources 
 Families for Effective Autism Treatment (FEAT), State Chapters 
 http://www.feat.org/ 
 Families for Effective Autism Treatment (FEAT) is an organization 
dedicated to informing families about the most current treatment 
resources available to them. Other supports include respite care, 
support groups, and recommendations for specific providers. Al-
though there isn’t a national Web site, there are Web sites specific to 
each state or city chapter of FEAT. As an example, the Web site for 
the northern California chapter (the founding chapter) of FEAT is 
provided. 
 MAAP Services for Autism and Asperger Syndrome 
 http://maapservices.org/ 
 This group is a global information and support network for More 
Advanced individuals with Autism and Asperger Syndrome, and 
Pervasive Developmental Disorder (MAAP). MAAP is a nonprofit 
organization that provides information and advice to families 
through a quarterly newsletter that be accessed on their Web site. 
Additional information included on the Web site includes a dis-
cussion of families’ legal rights, a resource finder, and relevant pub-
lications. 
 Sibling Support Project 
 http://www.siblingsupport.org/ 
 The Sibling Support Project is a “national effort dedicated to the 
life-long concerns of brothers and sisters of people who have spe-
cial health, developmental, or mental health concerns.” The project 
trains local service providers in best practices of providing support 
to siblings through workshops, Listservs, and peer support pro-
grams. “SibShops” are held across the country to fulfill the mission 
of the Sibling Support Project. 

Nonprint Resources 295
 School and Education 
 Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) 
 http://idea.ed.gov/ 
 IDEA is a federal law that ensures educational services for children 
with disabilities. This Web site contains information about IDEA 
for the two different age groups served (birth to 3 years, and 3–21 
years). Topics related to evaluation, how IDEA applies to private 
schools, and the Individual Education Program (IEP), among many 
other areas, are included. 
 School Community Toolkit 
 http://www.autismspeaks.org/community/family_services/
school_kit.php 
 The School Community Toolkit, created by Autism Speaks, is a sup-
port for teachers and school staff who interact and work with chil-
dren with ASD in an educational environment. It is not a specific 
educational curriculum but rather offers generation information 
about ASD, overall intervention strategies, and ideas for how to 
support children with ASD in general education classrooms. The 
kit can be downloaded for free from the Web site. 
 Wrightslaw 
 http://www.wrightslaw.com/ 
 Wrightslaw is a resource page for how the law applies to special 
education and individuals with disabilities. Books and other re-
sources are available via the Web site as well as articles relating to 
a variety of relevant topics. 

This page intentionally left blank

297
Glossary
 Applied Behavioral Analysis (ABA)   ABA is the only intervention ap-
proach that research has deemed effective for addressing ASDs. It is a 
general term that encompasses intervention approaches designed to 
change behavior. In children with autism, it involves an intensive teaching 
method of carefully reinforcing certain positive behaviors while decreas-
ing unwanted behaviors. Social and communication skills are usually the 
focus of ABA. An ABA therapy program is individualized in order to 
address the child’s specific strengths and areas of challenge. It is recom-
mended that ABA begin as early as possible and that therapy should take 
place for at least 25 hours/week to maximize the effectiveness. 
 Asperger’s Disorder   As with all of the other ASDs, children with As-
perger’s Disorder (or Asperger’s Syndrome) have social difficulties and 
restricted/repetitive interests. Unlike autism, children with Asperger’s 
do not have a language delay and have average to above-average intelli-
gence as measured by cognitive testing. Asperger’s is usually diagnosed 
later than autistic disorder because children who receive this diagnosis do 
not have a language delay, so parents are not often concerned as early. 
 Autism   Autism is also known as “autistic disorder” or “strict autism.” 
Children with a diagnosis of autism struggle in the three areas described 
under the definition for ASDs. Children with autism generally have a 
greater number of difficulties than those with diagnosis of Asperger’s Dis-
order or PDD-NOS. Many children with autism also have cognitive dis-
abilities. 
 Autism Diagnostic Interview (ADI)   The ADI is an assessment tool that 
is helpful in making a diagnosis of an ASD. It is a 2- to 2.5-hour interview 
that is done with a child’s primary caregiver involving very specific ques-
tions about a child’s social and language development and sensory and 
repetitive/restricted behaviors and interests. 
 Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) The ADOS is a well-
validated assessment tool that assesses social and communication skills 
as well as restricted/repetitive interests. It usually lasts 45–60 minutes 

298 Glossary
and consists of 10–14 different play activities designed to elicit social com-
munication. 
 Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs)   ASDs refer to an array of “perva-
sive developmental disorders.” The three main disorders that are included 
under this umbrella term of ASD are autism, Asperger’s Disorder, and 
PDD-NOS. In general, ASDs are disorders of the brain that begin early in 
life impacting three basic areas of functioning and development. The first 
area of functioning is  social  interaction and may include decreased eye con-
tact and minimal back-and-forth social exchanges. The second area of diffi-
culty is  communication  skills (e.g., delayed language and repetitive speech). 
The final category associated with ASDs is more atypical behaviors includ-
ing  restricted/repetitive  behaviors and interests, and insistence on routine or 
sameness. Once considered a rare disorder, the prevalence of ASDs is now 
increasing in the general population, with current estimates of 1 in 166 chil-
dren. ASDs are three to four times more common in boys than girls. 
 Autistic savant   An individual with autism who demonstrates remark-
able abilities in a focused area, such as artistic talents or mathematical ca-
pabilities. An example might be an individual who can mentally calculate 
incredibly quickly what day of the week someone’s birthday is. 
 Board-certified behavior analysts (BCBAs)  BCBAs conduct behavioral 
assessments and provide interpretations of the results of such assessments. 
They design and supervise behavior analytic interventions to address both 
the acquisition of skills and the reduction of challenging behaviors. Many 
BCBAs also hold licenses or certifications in other disciplines (e.g., psy-
chology). These professionals provide behavioral treatments in a variety of 
locations, but often in the home. 
 Cognitive testing   Sometimes referred to as “intelligence testing,” it is a 
general term referring to assessments designed to learn more about current 
verbal and nonverbal problem-solving skills. Cognitive testing includes 
such activities as making patterns with blocks, completing patterns, and 
answering questions about words. It is done during many autism evalu-
ations to help determine the best treatment and educational programs for 
that particular child. 
   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM)    The 
 DSM  is a widely used manual that provides a description of all of the 
specific diagnoses of mental disorders and groups these diagnoses by cat-
egory. A list of symptoms and diagnostic criteria is specified for all possible 
diagnoses. Specific codes are assigned to each diagnosis, and providers are 
able to bill for services provided using these codes. ASDs are under the 
category of “Pervasive Developmental Disorders.” The code for Autistic 
Disorder is 299.00, Asperger’s Disorder is 299.80, and PDD-NOS is 299.80. 
The  DSM  is currently in its fourth edition, and a fifth edition of the  DSM 
is underway in which the sections pertaining to ASDs will be significantly 
modified. 

Glossary 299
 Echolalia   Echolalia is a term that refers to the repetition of words or 
phrases heard previously. The echoing can occur immediately after hearing 
the word or phrase (called immediate echolalia) or can be delayed (called 
delayed echolalia). 
 Electroencephalogram (EEG)   A tool that uses electrodes located on the 
scalp to record electrical activity from the brain. It is used to help aid in the 
identification of seizures, which many children with autism have. 
 Facilitated communication (FC)   Facilitated communication is an aug-
mentative communication technique in which an individual selects or 
points to letters on the keyboard or visual display while a facilitator sup-
ports his or her hand, arm, or elbow through the process. Supporters pro-
pose that this method allows individuals with autism to communicate 
effectively, but scientific research suggests that FC is not an effective treat-
ment as it is the facilitators that are communicating  for  the individual with 
the disability, not the individual with autism. 
 Individualized Education Program (IEP)   An IEP is a comprehensive 
document that is designed to make sure that a child with disabilities of any 
kind (including ASDs) receives appropriate services in a school environ-
ment. It includes yearly goals for the child and an intervention plan that it 
will take to reach those goals. U.S. law requires that every qualified child 
with a disability have an IEP. Families are involved in the process of devel-
oping/updating their child’s IEP every school year. Many people (includ-
ing speech/language pathologists and general/special education teachers) 
are also involved in meetings to create/update a child’s IEP. 
   Individuals with Disabilities Educational Act (IDEA)     IDEA is a U.S. 
federal law designed to make sure that children with disabilities have the 
opportunity to receive a free appropriate public education. IDEA guides 
how states and school districts provide special education and related 
services to children with disabilities and early intervention services to 
infants and toddlers with disabilities. Autism was added as a category 
of disability eligible for special education services in 1990. The focus of 
IDEA shifted in 1997 toward an inclusion model, meaning that more im-
portance has been placed on involving children with disabilities into a 
general education curriculum. 
 Macrocephaly   Macrocephaly refers to the condition in which an indi-
vidual’s head circumference is two standard deviations over the aver-
age—meaning that an individual has a head circumference that is greater 
than 97 percent of his or her age-matched peers. Many children with au-
tism have macrocephaly. 
 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)   A tool that generates an image of 
the body, often of the brain. It can be used to aid in the identification of 
structural abnormalities in the brain. Given that autism is a brain-based 
disorder, sometimes physicians will request that a child with autism re-
ceive an MRI as a follow-up assessment. 

300 Glossary
 Mainstreaming   Mainstreaming refers to the placement of a child with 
disabilities in a regular education classroom with peers with typical de-
velopment. 
 Occupational therapy (OT)   Therapy provided by an occupational ther-
apist that focuses on the development of sensory, motor, coordination, 
and self-help skills that aid in daily living. OT is also often recommended 
for children with a diagnosis of an ASD to address sensory difficulties, 
fine motor deficits, repetitive motor mannerisms, and daily-living skills. 
  Perseveration   Perseveration refers to the sticking to one idea or action 
through repetitive movement or speech. Some children with autism are said 
to  perseverate  on a specific topic of interest, such as toilets or street signs, by 
talking at length about the topic or extensively focusing attention on the 
object. 
   Pervasive Developmental Disorder—Not Otherwise Specified (PDD-
NOS)   PDD-NOS is often described as “atypical autism” because children 
with this diagnosis have autism-like features but do not present the same 
as those with strict autism. For example, children with PDD-NOS may be 
very interested in social interaction but approach others in a somewhat un-
usual manner. Additionally, they often have higher language and cognitive 
skills than those with autistic disorder. 
 Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS)   PECS is a visual sup-
port that is intended to help children communicate through the use of pic-
tures in place of verbal language. 
 Social story A social story is a short, developmentally appropriate story 
that describes a standard routine (e.g., a trip to the doctor’s office) from 
beginning to end. It also describes any potential difficulties that may be en-
countered along the way (e.g., “The shot at the doctor might hurt a little, but 
my mom will be there and it will be alright”). It is designed to help children 
anticipate future events and to minimize surprises associated with this 
new event. 
 Speech-language pathologist A professional who specializes in human 
communication and provides speech therapy. Speech therapy is often rec-
ommended for children who receive a diagnosis of autism because many 
children with an ASD often have difficulties with language. Speech therapy 
can focus on improving a child’s understanding of language (receptive lan-
guage), spoken language (expressive language), and conversation skills. 
   Stereotyped/repetitive interests, language, and motor movements   Chil-
dren with autism often have very specific interests (called “restricted/
repetitive interests”), such as in very particular video games, that often 
take up the majority of the child’s time. Stereotyped/repetitive language 
refers to the tendency for children with autism to repeat certain words/
phrases in a very specific way, such as lines from a movie. Stereotyped/
repetitive motor movements are repetitive ways of moving the body, such 

Glossary 301
as repeated hand flapping. It may occur more often during stressful situa-
tions or periods of excitement. 
 Stim   A term that is short for “self-stimulation.” Self-stimulation refers to 
behaviors such as repetitive spinning, repetitive movement of the hands 
or fingers, or other repetitive movements. Many children with autism en-
gage in these types of behaviors. Many propose that these behaviors serve 
to stimulate one’s senses, while others argue the behaviors serve in such 
self-regulation as calming oneself or shutting out sensory input. 
   T.E.A.C.C.H. (Treatment and Education of Autism and Related Com-
munication Handicapped Children)     This is an educational treatment 
approach developed by Eric Schopler based on the idea that many individ-
uals with autism have a relative strength in understanding and using vi-
sual cues. Through the use of picture schedules, breaking tasks into steps, 
and an arranged classroom space, the approach fosters independence. 
 Theory of mind   Theory of mind is the concept that others have beliefs, 
desires, and intentions that are different from one’s own. Many scientists 
suggest that individuals with autism have deficits in theory of mind. 
 Visual schedule   A visual schedule is a method of providing a schedule 
for the day in pictures. Given that many children with autism have a rela-
tive strength in using and understanding visual cues but also struggle 
with transitions, this is a technique that is sometimes used to aid in maxi-
mizing understanding of a schedule. 

This page intentionally left blank

303
 AAP.  See American Academy of 
Pediatricians 
 ABA.  See Applied Behavior 
Analysis 
 acceptance, of Autism Spectrum 
Disorder, 89, 91 
 ACE.  See Autism Centers of 
Excellence 
 Achievements Therapeutic Day 
Program, 247 
 ACRE.  See Autism Coalition for 
Research and Education 
 Adams, J., 76 
 adaptation.  See family adaptation 
 adaptive functioning, 15 
 standardized testing for, 
21 – 22 
 ADDM.  See Autism and Devel-
opmental Disabilities Mon-
itoring Network 
 ADHD.  See Attention Deficit 
Hyperactivity Disorder 
 ADI.  See Autism Diagnostic 
Interview 
 adolescents, 20 
 internalization of disorders, 
risk of, 33 – 34 
 therapy objectives for, 34 
 ADOS.  See Autism Diagnostic 
Observation Schedule 
 adulthood 
 Asperger’s Disorder in, 17, 34 
 Autism Spectrum Disorder 
diagnosis in, 20 
 internalization of disorders in, 
risk of, 33 – 34 
 therapy objectives in, 34 
 Affleck, Glenn, 100 
 African American children 
 age average of diagnosis for, 
107 
 classroom behavior and, 94 – 95 
 cognitive testing and scores 
of, 100 
 rates of diagnosis and access to 
treatment, 111 
 African Americans 
 family appraisal and, 97 
 mental health services and, 94 
 religious beliefs and family 
adaptation in, 98 
 treatment choices and, 111 
 age average of diagnosis, 1, 
20, 57 
 for African Americans, 107 
 for Asperger’s Disorder, 16 
 for Autism Spectrum Disorder 
in United States, 20, 57 
 for Autistic Disorder, 14 
 racial/ethnic factors and, 190 
 AGRE.  See Autism Genetic 
Research Exchange 
 alternative and augmentative 
communication, 194, 196 
Index

304 Index
 American Academy of Neurol-
ogy, 180 
 American Academy of Pedia-
tricians (AAP), 234 – 235 
 American culture, religious beliefs 
and family adaptation in, 
97 
 American Psychiatric Association, 
21 
 American Speech and Hearing 
Association (ASHA), 235 
 amygdala, 27 
 large, 28 
 anal retentive, 46 
 anatomical abnormalities in brain 
structures, 147 
 Anglo Americans, 90, 94, 95 
 children, cognitive testing and 
scores of, 100 – 102 
 family appraisal and, 96, 97 
 focus of treatments among, 113 
 animal-based treatments, 191, 194 
 Anitas por Autismo, 230 
 anxiety, 33 
 Applied Behavior Analysis 
(ABA), 2, 29 – 31, 68, 69, 
158, 192 
 data tracking and, 201 
 DTT and, 199 – 204 
 effectiveness of, 31 
 example of monthly progress 
data sheet, 204 – 206, 205 f 
 intensive treatments, 33 
 parents use of, 29 
 See also specific treatments based 
on ABA 
 appraisal.  See family appraisal; 
negative appraisal 
 ARC.  See Association for 
Retarded Citizens 
 ARI.  See Autism Research 
Institute 
 ASA.  See Autism Society of 
America 
 ASAT.  See Association for Science 
in Autism Treatment 
 ASF.  See Autism Science Founda-
tion 
 ASHA.  See American Speech and 
Hearing Association 
 Asian Americans 
 children, cognitive testing and 
scores of, 100 
 classroom behavior and, 94 – 95 
 pursuing mental health treat-
ment, 94 
 treatment choices and, 111 
 Asian cultures, family appraisal 
in, 96 
 Asperger, Hans 
 on autistic psychopathy, 
145 – 146 
 biographical sketch, 145 – 146 
 “little professors” of, 2, 146 
 Wing and, 171 
 Asperger’s Disorder, 1, 3, 146, 
228 
 in adulthood, 17, 34 
 associated symptoms of, 
managing, 146 
 Attwood on, 146 
 vs. Autistic Disorder, 16 – 17 
 average age of diagnosis, 16 
 clinical vignettes, 23 – 24 
 cognitive ability level and, 17 
 diagnostic criteria for, 13, 
15 – 17, 52 – 53, 174 – 175, 
177 – 178 
 male/female sex ratio, 16 
 teenagers with, 17 
 Asperger’s Syndrome.  See  
Asperger’s Disorder 
 “Asperger’s Syndrome: A Clinical 
Account” (Wing), 171 – 172 
 Asperger’s Syndrome: A Guide for 
Parents and Professionals 
(Attwood), 146 
 Aspies for Freedom, 82 
 mission statement, 110 
 associated symptoms 
 of Asperger’s Disorder, 
managing, 146 

Index 305
 of Autistic Disorder, 15 
 medication for, 68, 192 
 See also specific symptoms 
 Association for Retarded Citizens 
(ARC), 223 
 Association for Science in Autism 
Treatment (ASAT), 223 – 224 
 Attention Deficit Hyperactivity 
Disorder (ADHD), 15, 24 
 Attwood, Tony, 146 
 atypical autism, 17 
 atypical autistic ego develop-
ment, 164 
 AutCom.  See Autism National 
Committee 
 Autism: Explaining the Enigma 
(Frith), 154 
 Autism and Developmental 
Disabilities Monitoring 
(ADDM) Network, 
188 – 189 
 prevalence of Autism Spectrum 
Disorder in 8-year-old 
children in 2000 and 2002 
in six states in, 189 f 
 Autism and PDD Support 
Network, 224 
 Autism Center of Excellence and 
Healthy Infant Devel-
opment Lab (University 
of California—San Diego), 
243 – 244 
 Autism Centers of Excellence 
(ACE), 250, 255 
 programs, 239 
 Autism Coalition for Research 
and Education (ACRE), 
172, 226 
 Autism Collaboration, 229, 231, 
232, 234 
 See also specific organization in 
Autism Collaboration 
 Autism Coordinating Center, 
235 – 236 
 Autism Coordinating Committee, 
238 
 Autism Diagnostic Interview 
(ADI) 
 cultural variables in, 103 – 104 
 Lord and, 160 
 revised, 13, 21 
 Autism Diagnostic Observation 
Schedule (ADOS), 13, 21 
 cultural variables in, 103 – 104 
 Lord and, 160 
 Autism Everyday (short film), 172 
 Autism Genetic Research 
Exchange (AGRE), 154, 
156, 226 
 Autism Intervention Research 
Program (University of 
California—San Diego), 
244 
 Autism National Committee 
(AutCom), 224 
 policy statement regarding FC, 
71 – 72 
 The Autism Research Fund 
(TARF), 148 
 Autism Research Institute (ARI), 
73, 75, 224 – 235 
 mission of, 163 
 Autism Rights Movement, 110 
 Autism Science Foundation 
(ASF), 225, 226 
 Autism Services Center, 169 
 Autism Society of America 
(ASA), 163, 169 
 founding of, 48 
 mission of, 225 
 Autism Speaks, 4, 65, 148, 151, 
225 – 226, 229 
 CAN merging with, 157 
 establishment, 172 
 NAAR merging with, 159, 226 
 Autism Tissue Program, 226 
 Autism Treatment Network, 148 
 Autism’s False Prophets: Bad Science, 
Risky Medicine, and the 
Search for a Cure (Offit), 60, 
63 – 64 
 AutismSpot, 227 

306 Index
 Autistic Disorder 
 vs. Asperger’s Disorder, 16 – 17 
 associated symptoms for, 15 
 average age of diagnosis, 14 
 clinical vignettes, 22 – 23 
 diagnostic criteria for, 13 – 15, 
174, 176 – 177 
 male/female ratio, 13 – 14 
 “Autistic Disturbances of 
Affective Content” 
(Kanner), 47, 157 
 autistic psychopathy, 145 – 146 
 Autistic Self Advocacy Network 
and the Autism Network 
International, 110 
 awareness of autism, 53 
 Grandin and, 155 
 Bailey, Anthony, 3 
 Bailey, Tony, 55 
 Baron-Cohen, Sacha, 147 
 Baron-Cohen, Simon, 147, 
153 – 154 
 Bauman, Margaret, 147 – 148, 247 
 Beck, Parker, 72 – 73 
 behavior 
 classroom, 94 – 95 
 concerns regarding, in screen-
ing for Autism Spectrum 
Disorder, 182 
 manifestations of, across 
cultures and countries, 89 
 motivation as as pivotal to, 30 
 non-verbal social, 5 – 6 
 problems, 15 
 recollection of, prior to diag-
nosis, 24 – 25 
 repetitive, higher order, 10, 
11 – 12 
 repetitive, lower order, 10 
 responsiveness as pivotal, 30 
 self-injurious, 11 
 self-stimulatory, 11 
 social, in infants, 25 
 stereotyped, 10, 13, 17, 174, 178 
 tracking, 170 
 See also restricted and/or repet-
itive interests and behavior 
 behavioral domain, of autism, 
173 
 face processing/perception in, 
185 
 behavioral intervention, 2, 28 – 29, 
31, 68, 193 
 costs of, 111 
 effectiveness of, 160 – 161 
 first support for using, 29 
 intensive, 35 
 using child’s own motivations 
and interests to deliver, 158 
 See also specific behavioral inter-
ventions 
 Berkelhamer, Jay, 76 
 Bernard, Sally, 63, 76 
 Bettelheim, Bruno, 166 
 biographical sketch, 148 – 149 
 refrigerator mother theory and, 
46 – 48 
 bias (in research), 60 – 61 
 experimenter, 80 
 Biklen, Douglas, 70 
 Binstock, T., 76 
 biology, 46, 48, 90, 147 
 advances in field of, 50 
 Bleuler, Eugen, 2, 149 
 blind study, 74 
 body proxemics, 5 – 6 
 Bradstreet, J., 76 
 brain 
 anatomical abnormalities in, 
structures, 147 
 circuitry implicated in Autism 
Spectrum Disorder, 184 f 
 connections between regions 
of, 28 
 development, 27 – 28 
 donations for autopsy, 148 
 face processing in, 151, 185 – 186 
 functioning, 2 
 imaging, 170 
 social systems of, 151, 183 – 184 

Index 307
 brain size, 27 
 documented by Courchesne, 
150 – 151 
 Burton, Dan, 51 
 California Department of Devel-
opmental Disabilities, 53, 
63 
 CAM.  See Complementary and 
Alternative Medicine 
 Campbell-Smith, Patricia, 214 – 215, 
216 
 CAN.  See Cure Autism Now 
 CARD.  See Center for Autism and 
Related Disabilities 
 caregiver stress, 99 
 Carrey, Jim, 66 
 role in Generation Rescue, 229 
 CART, 250 
 “causation-in-fact” claim, 214 
 causes of autism, controversies 
surrounding, 45 – 54, 81 – 82 
 “the autism epidemic” and, 
51 – 54 
 refrigerator mother theory and, 
45 – 51 
 vaccines and, 54 – 67 
 See also specific causes 
 CCD.  See Consortium for Citizens 
with Disabilities 
 CDC.  See Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention 
 CEC.  See Council for Exceptional 
Children 
 Cedillo, Michael, 213 – 214 
 Cedillo, Michelle, 209 
 factual background information 
of, 211 – 213 
 See also Cedillo v. Secretary of 
Health and Human Ser-
vices 
 Cedillo, Theresa, 213 – 214, 215 
 Cedillo v. Secretary of Health and 
Human Services, 65, 209, 
216 – 217 
 factual background, 211 – 213 
 history of proceedings, 
213 – 217 
 summary of, 210 – 211 
 Center for Autism and Related 
Disabilities (CARD) 
 Florida Atlantic University, 245 
 Florida State University, 
245 – 246 
 at Kennedy Krieger Institute, 
246 – 247 
 services and programs, 252 
 University of Central Florida, 
251 
 University of Florida, 251 – 252 
 University of Florida at 
Jacksonville, 251 
 University of Miami and Nova 
Southeastern University 
(UM-NSU), 252 – 253 
 University of South Florida, 
253 – 254 
 Center for Autism Research 
and Treatment (CART), 
University of California, 
Los Angeles, 250 
 Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC), 188, 236 
 prevalence rates from, 1 – 2 
 cerebellum, 27 – 28 
 Charman, Tony, 149 – 150 
 chelation treatment, 32, 75 – 78 
 critics on use of, 77 
 deaths reported as result of, 77 
 FDA approval of DMSA, 76 
 initial introduction of, 75 
 Child Neurology Society, 162, 180 
 Child Psychiatry at Johns Hopkins, 
157 
 Childhood Disintegrative Dis-
order, 18, 19, 20, 174 
 Children’s Health Act of 2000, 238 
 China 
 TEACCH in, 112 
 views of Autism Spectrum 
Disorder in, 105 

308 Index
 CLD.  See Council for Learning 
Disabilities 
 clinical psychologists, 20 
 clinical relationships, 95 
 Clinical Trials Network, 226 
 Clinical Trials.gov, 236 
 clinician, 13, 115 
 Coalition of SafeMinds (Sensible 
Action for Ending Mercury-
Induced Neurological 
Disorders), 63 
 cognitive functioning, 15 
 Asperger’s Disorder and, 17 
 deficits in autism, 153 – 154 
 social development, 149 – 150, 
162 
 standardized testing for, 21 – 22 
 cognitive test scores, 100 
 familiarity with examiner and 
improved, 101 – 102 
 poverty and, 101 
 cognitive testing, 22 
 bias in, 102 
 cultural factors in, 100 – 102 
 language barriers in, 101 
 standardized, for all ethnic 
groups, 100 
 Cohen, M. H., 198 
 Collaborative Linkage Study of 
Autism, 152 
 Collaborative Programs of Excel-
lence in Autism (CPEA), 
164, 167 – 168, 250, 254 
 Combating Autism Act (2006), 4, 
172 
 communication 
 alternative and augmentative, 
194, 196 
 concerns in screening for 
Autism Spectrum Disorder, 
181 
 domain of autism, 173 
 communication skills, 4, 14 
 as domain of impairment, 7 – 9 
 reciprocal, 1 
 verbal and non-verbal, 31 
 See also specific communication 
skills and treatments 
 Complementary and Alternative 
Medicine (CAM), 192, 197 
 evaluation for, 198 
 complementary domain of inter-
vention, 192 
 The Complete Guide to Asperger’s 
Syndrome (Attwood), 146 
 conflicts of interest (in research), 
60 – 61 
 Consortium for Citizens with 
Disabilities (CCD), 227 
 controlled study, 74, 82 
 conversation skills, 31 
 initiating and maintaining, 
7 – 9 
 copy number variants, 27 
 cost of Autism Spectrum Dis-
order, 207 – 209 
 behavioral interventions and, 
111 
 cumulative individual eco-
nomic, 208 f 
 interventions, 68 
 Council for Exceptional Children 
(CEC), 235 
 Council for Learning Disabilities 
(CLD), 227 
 Courchesne, Eric, 150 – 151, 244 
 CPEA.  See Collaborative Pro-
grams of Excellence in 
Autism 
 Crawford, Daniel, 212 
 Crick, Francis, 45, 50 
 Croen, Lisa A., 93 
 Crossley, Rosemary, 70 
 cultural cues, perception of, 
108 – 109 
 cultural factors 
 in acceptance of Autism 
Spectrum Disorder, 89, 91 
 in ADI and ADOS, 103 – 104 
 Autism Spectrum Disorders 
and, 102 – 108 
 in cognitive testing, 100 – 102 

Index 309
 in countries outside of United 
States, Autism Spectrum 
Disorder and, 104 – 107 
 developmental disabilities, 
related to, 95 – 102 
 emotion, in expression of, 113 
 family appraisal and, 96 – 97 
 in focus of treatments, 112 – 113 
 micro/macro, 91 
 in prevalence rates for autism, 
91 – 94 
 within racial and ethnic groups 
within United States, 
Autism Spectrum Disorder 
and, 107 – 108 
 reasons for limited research in 
field of, 90 
 in symptoms and diagnosis of 
Autism Spectrum Disorder, 
103 – 108 
 in treatments, 110 – 115 
 cultural influence, 89 
 in mental disorders, 94 – 102 
 cultural knowledge, acquisition 
of, 108 – 109 
 cultural rules, 109 
 cultural sensitivity, 95 
 culture of autism, 109 – 110 
 Cure Autism Now (CAN), 154, 
156, 159, 172, 226 
 Autism Speaks merging with, 
157 
 daily living skills, 34 
 Daley, Tamara, 106 – 107 
 DAN!.  See Defeat Autism Now! 
 Dateline, report on secretin, 1998, 
72 – 73 
 dating skills, 34 
 Dawson, Geraldine, 65, 165, 254, 
255 
 biographical sketch, 151 – 152 
 Early Start Denver Model and, 
30 
 decision matrix, 69 
 for CAM, 199 f 
 Deer, Brian, 59 – 61 
 Defeat Autism Now! (DAN!), 
224 – 225 
 delayed echolalia, 9 
 dementia praecox, 149 
 denial, concepts of, 46 
 depression, 33 
 developmental cognitive neuro-
science, 153 
 developmental delays, without 
Autism Spectrum Disorder, 
25 
 developmental disabilities, cul-
tural factors related to, 
95 – 102 
 developmental pediatricians, 20 
 diagnosis, Autism Spectrum 
Disorder, 12 – 22, 111 
 in adulthood, 20 
 Asperger’s Disorder, 15 – 17 
 Autistic Disorder, 13 – 15 
 cultural factors in, 103 – 108 
 importance of formal, 44 
 male  vs. female, 2 
 parents receiving first-time, 69 
 patterns of, between racial 
groups, 190 
 PDD, 13 – 19 
 PDD-NOS, 17 – 18 
 recollection of behavior prior 
to, 24 – 25 
 See also age average of diag-
nosis; diagnostic criteria 
 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
for Mental Disorders, First 
Edition (DSM-I), 12 – 13 
 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for 
Mental Disorders, Fourth 
Edition  (DSM-IV), 12, 21, 176 
 diagnostic criteria for 
Asperger’s Disorder in, 16 
 diagnostic criteria for Autistic 
Disorder in, 14 
 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
for Mental Disorders, Third 
Edition (DSM-III), 13 

310 Index
 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
for Mental Disorders (DSM), 
164, 170, 173 
 revision process, 52 
 diagnostic criteria, 13 
 for Asperger’s Disorder, 13, 
15 – 17, 52 – 53, 174 – 175, 
177 – 178 
 for autism, changes in, 52 
 for Autism Spectrum Disorder, 
176 – 179 
 for Autistic Disorder, 13 – 15, 
174, 176 – 177 
 for PDD-NOS, 13, 17 – 18, 
52 – 53, 175, 178 – 189 
 diagnostic evaluations, 20 – 22 
 standardized testing during, 
21 – 22 
 tools for, 21 – 22 
 diagnostic tools, 21 – 22 
 cultural variables and, 103 – 104 
 See also specific tools 
 diagnosticians, 20 
 diets, 32, 194 – 195 
 See also gluten-free, casein-free 
diet (GFCF diet) 
 Disabilities Education Act, 169 
 Discrete Trial Training (DTT), 30 
 ABA and, 199 – 204 
 example of monthly progress 
data sheet, 204 – 206, 205 f 
 examples of, 201, 203 – 204 
 tracking sheet with sample 
data, 202 f 
 dizygotic twins.  See fraternal twins 
 DMSA, FDA approval of, 76 
 Dohan, Curtis, 78 
 domains of autism, 174 f 
 individual constellation of 
Autism Spectrum Disorder 
symptoms and, 180 f 
 interaction of impairments in, 
173 
 See also specific domains 
 Doug Flutie Jr. Foundation for 
Autism, 227 – 228 
 dream analysis, 46 
 Drexel Autism Center, 244 
 DSM.  See Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual for Mental Disorders 
(DSM) 
 DSM-I.  See Diagnostic and Statis-
tical Manual for Mental Dis-
orders, First Edition 
 DSM-III.  See Diagnostic and Statis-
tical Manual for Mental Dis-
orders, Third Edition 
 DSM-IV.  See Diagnostic and Statis-
tical Manual for Mental Dis-
orders, Fourth Edition 
 DTT.  See Discrete Trial Training 
 Dyches, Tina Taylor 
 on ethnicity and family 
adaptation, 95 
 on negative appraisal, 96 
 on Resiliency Model, 96 
 review of IDEA report, 107 – 108 
 on social support, 98 – 99 
 treatment/educational 
recommendations, 113 – 114 
 dyslexia, 153, 156 
 early, intensive behavioral 
interventions (EIBI), 192 
 Early Start Denver Model (ESDM), 
30, 69, 164 – 165, 200 
 echolalia, 9 
 Edelson, Stephen, 75 
 education providers, 114 
 educational integrated services, 
194 
 educational recommendations, 
113 – 114 
 educational records, 188 
 prevalence estimates from, 
187 – 188 
 education-based treatments, 191 
 EEG, 51, 183 
 efficacious treatments, 69 
 EIBI.  See early, intensive behav-
ioral interventions 
 8–10 months, 25 

Index 311
 Eisenberg, D. M., 198 
 electroencephalography (EEG), 
51, 183 
 Emory Autism Center, 245 
 emotion 
 expression of, cultural dif-
ferences in, 113 
 recognition in infants, 185 
 regulation of infants, 25 
 The Empty Fortress: Infantile Autism 
and the Birth of the Self  
(Bettelheim), 48, 148 – 149 
 Enayati, A., 76 
 enjoyment, spontaneous seeking 
to share, 5 
 environment, interaction between 
genes and, 55 – 56, 67 
 environmental factor(s) in autism, 
54 
 in context of heritability esti-
mates, 55 
 controversies regarding, 56 – 62 
 in etiology of autism, 62 – 63 
 See also specific factors 
 environmental illnesses, 54 – 55 
 epidemic, autism, 51 – 54 
 epidemiological studies, 91 – 92, 115 
 review of, Fombonne’s, 92 
 ERP.  See event-related potentials 
 ESDM.  See  Early Start Denver 
Model 
 ethnicity 
 definition/concept of, 89 – 90 
 family adaptation and, 95 
 prevalence of Autism Spectrum 
Disorder and, 190 – 191 
 See also cultural factors 
 etiology of autism, 45, 51, 95, 154 
 controversy concerning, 54 – 55, 
67 
 environmental factors in, 
62 – 63 
 identified, 68 
 treatment choice and, 111, 115 
 event-related potentials (ERPs), 
185 
 Evidence of Harm: Mercury in Vac-
cines and the Autism 
Epidemic: A Medical Con-
troversy (Kirby), 62 – 63 
 executive functioning skills, 15 
 standardized testing for, 21 – 22 
 experimenter bias, 80 
 eye contact, 5, 23 – 24, 29, 43, 106, 173 
 cultural factors in making, 103 
 eye gaze patterns, 5 
 infants, 26 
 eye-tracking technology, 158 
 FAAAS.  See Families of Adults 
Afflicted with Asperger’s 
Syndrome 
 face processing /perception, 
184 – 187 
 in autism, 186 f 
 at behavioral, anatomical, and 
neurophysiological level, 
185 
 in brain, 151, 185 – 186 
 infants and, 184 – 185 
 facial expressions, difficulties 
with, 5 
 facilitated communication (FC), 
69 – 72 
 allegations of sexual abuse 
made through, by children, 
70 – 71 
 AutCom’s policy statement 
regarding, 71 – 72 
 harmful aspects of, 72 
 Offit’s critical examination of, 
70 – 71 
 in Ultraorthodox Jewish 
community in Israel, 104 
 Facilitated Communication 
Institute at Syracuse, 70, 71 
 Families for Early Autism 
Treatment (FEAT), 228 
 Families of Adults Afflicted with 
Asperger’s Syndrome 
(FAAAS), 228 

312 Index
 family adaptation, 95 – 96 
 religious beliefs and, 97 – 98 
 social support and, 98 – 100 
 family appraisal, 96 – 97 
 Family-Centered Practice, 99 
 FC.  See facilitated communication 
 FDA, 73, 76 
 FEAT.  See Families for Early 
Autism Treatment 
 feature-based processing strategy, 
185 
 FECA.  See Foundation for 
Educating Children with 
Autism 
 Federal Drug Administration 
(FDA), 73, 76 
 female/male sex ratio, 89 
 Asperger’s Disorder, 16 
 Autism Spectrum Disorder, 2 
 Autistic Disorder, 13 – 14 
 Filipek, Pauline, 180 
 financial compensation for 
treatments, 53 
 First Signs, 228 
 Floortime, 155 – 156 
 Flutie, Doug, Sr., 227 
 Flutie, Laurie, 227 
 fMRI, 51, 185 
 Folstein, Marshall, 152 
 Folstein, Susan, 55, 166 
 biographical sketch, 152 
 twin study, 3, 49 – 51 
 Fombonne, Eric, 92, 93 
 biographical sketch, 152 – 153 
 Foundation for Educating Chil-
dren with Autism (FECA), 
229 
 Fragile X syndrome, 26 
 fraternal twins, concordance rate 
of autism in, 49 – 50 
 See also twin study 
 Freeman, B. J., 197 – 198 
 Freud, Sigmund, 46 
 Friendship Groups, 31 
 Frith, Uta, 146 
 biographical sketch, 153 – 154 
 full syndrome Autism Spectrum 
Disorder, prevalence rates 
of, 93 
 functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI), 51, 185 
 Garland, Ann F., 94 – 95 
 gastrointestinal disorders, 15, 62 
 first connection made between 
autism and, 58 
 GFCF and, 78 – 79, 82 
 MMR immunization and, 59 
 Geier, D., 76 
 Geier, M., 76 
 gender differences in autism, 
147 
 See also male/female sex ratio 
 general causation 
 evidence, 215 
 theory, 215 – 216 
 Generation Rescue, 54, 229 
 genes, interaction between envi-
ronment and, 55 – 56, 67 
 genetic factors in autism, 2 – 3, 12, 
34, 55 – 56, 67, 152 
 “birth of,” 45 – 51 
 role of, 3, 26 – 27 
 studies from late 1990’s and 
early 2000s of, 56 
 Genetics Home Reference, 243 
 Gerberding, Julie, 65 
 German Psychiatric Association 
in Berlin, 149 
 Geschwind, Daniel, 154 
 gestures, 5, 25 
 GFCF diet.  See  gluten-free, casein-
free diet 
 gluten-free, casein-free diet 
(GFCF diet), 78 – 81 
 effectiveness of, 81 – 82 
 experimental studies examin-
ing, 79 – 80 
 gastrointestinal disorders and, 
78 – 79, 82 
 nutritional monitoring on, 81 

Index 313
 Gómez, Juan Carlos, 108 
 Gould, Judith, 171 
 governmental organizations, 
235 – 244 
 Grandin, Temple, 154 – 155 
 Greenspan, Stanley, 155 – 156 
 Grether, Judith K., 93 
 Grinker, Roy, 53, 105 – 106 
 group work, 33 
 Guardian , 59 
 Hastings, George, 211, 216 
 Hays, Pamela, 90 
 Hazlehurst v. Secretary of Health & 
Human Services, 65, 210, 
216 
 head circumference 
 Autism Spectrum Disorder 
symptoms and, 27 – 28 
 infants, 151 
 The Help Group, 229 
 HFA.  See high-functioning autism 
 HHS.  See United States Depart-
ment of Health and Human 
Services 
 high-functioning autism (HFA), 
15, 17 
 history of autism, 2 – 4 
 home videotapes 
 analysis of, 24 – 25, 151 
 of children’s first and second 
birthday parties, 18 – 19 
 studies, 26 
 Hoogstrate, Jenny, 93 
 Horvath, K., 72 
 Hough, Richard L., 94 – 95 
 Huffington Post (April 2009), 66 
 IACC.  See Interagency Autism 
Coordinating Committee 
 IAN.  See Interactive Autism 
Network 
 Iceland, prevalence rates in, 92 
 IDEA.  See Individuals with Dis-
abilities Education Act 
 identical twins, concordance rate 
of autism in, 49 – 50 
 See also twin study 
 identification of Autism Spectrum 
Disorder 
 early, 24 – 26 
 red flags for, 180 – 183 
 IEP.  See Individualized Education 
Program 
 IMFAR.  See International Meeting 
for Autism Research 
 imitation 
 abilities in young children, 
149 – 150 
 among children with Autism 
Spectrum Disorder, 109 
 infant, 25 – 26, 108 – 109 
 immigrant status, prevalence rates 
and, 93 
 immunizations.  See vaccine 
 impairment, domains of, 4 – 12 
 communication skills, 7 – 9 
 reciprocal social interaction, 5 – 7 
 restricted and/or repetitive 
interests and behavior, 
10 – 12 
 “In his desperation, Deer gets 
it wrong once again” 
(Wakefield), 61 – 62 
 incidence rates, 92 
 India, views of Autism Spectrum 
Disorder in, 106 – 107 
 Indiana Resource Center for 
Autism (IRCA), Indiana 
University, 246 
 individual therapy, 33 – 34 
 Individualized Education Pro-
gram (IEP), 32, 114 
 Individuals with Disabilities 
Education Act (IDEA), 
107 – 108 
 number of children served 
under, 187 – 188, 187 f 
 infantile autism, 13 
 Infantile Autism: The Syndrome 
and It’s Implications for a 

314 Index
Neural Theory of Behavior  
(Rimland), 163 
 Infantile Autism (Rimland), 49 
 infants, 25 – 26 
 attention, 168 
 brain circumference, 151 
 emotion recognition in, 185 
 emotion regulation of, 25 
 eye gaze patterns, 26 
 face perception in, 184 – 185 
 imitate, ability to, 108 – 109 
 imitation, 25 – 26, 108 – 109 
 normally developing, 108 – 109 
 pointing, use of, 58 
 social behavior in, 25 
 social orienting, 25 
 information/misinformation 
availability, 66 – 67, 68, 82 
 inheritance pattern, 26 
 Institute of Cognitive Neuro-
science at University 
College, London, 153 
 Institute of Medicine (United 
States), 2004 statement 
regarding thimerosal, 
62 – 63 
 integrated classrooms, 32 
 integrated interventions, 195 
 intellectual disability, 10, 14, 179, 
223 
 intellectual functioning, 179 
 Interactive Autism Network 
(IAN), 229 – 230 
 Interagency Autism Coordinating 
Committee (IACC), 
236 – 237 
 interconnectivity theories, 183 
 internalization of disorders, risk 
of, 33 – 34 
 International Child Neurology 
Association, 162 
 International Meeting for Autism 
Research (IMFAR), 156 
 International Society for Infant 
Studies, 167 
 International Statistical Classifica-
tion of Diseases, 10th edition 
(ICD-10), 176 
 intervention, Autism Spectrum 
Disorder, 191 – 198 
 by category, 192, 193 – 196 
 costs/coverage, 68, 207 
 domains of, 191 – 193, 195 – 196 
 guidelines for evaluation of, 
196 – 198 
 integrated, 195 
 recommendations for, 30 – 31 
 relationship-based, 195 
 studies assessing, 192 – 195 
 wait listed services, 44 
 See also specific interventions 
 intrauterine environment, 55 
 IRCA.  See Indiana Resource 
Center for Autism 
 Israel, FC in Ultraorthodox 
Jewish community in, 104 
 Iversen, Portia, 156 – 157, 226 
 job training, 34 
 Joey and Sam: A Heartwarming 
Storybook About Autism, a 
Family, and a Brother’s Love 
(Ritvo), 164 
 joint attention, 6, 25, 109, 168 
 Mundy and, 162 
 Journal of American Physicians and 
Surgeons , 76 
 Journal of Autism and Develop-
mental Disorders , 81, 167, 170 
 Kaiser Permanente Medical Care 
Program, 208 
 Kanner, Leo, 45, 47, 82, 93, 187 
 biographical sketch, 157 
 use of term  autism , 2 
 Kartzinel, J., 76 
 Kennedy Krieger Institute, 229 
 Center for Autism and Related 
Disorders, 246 – 247 
 Kirby, David, 62 – 63 

Index 315
 Klin, Ami, 157 – 158, 255 
 Koegel, Lynn, 158 – 159 
 Koegel, Robert, 158 – 159 
 PRT and, 30 
 LADDERS.  See Learning and 
Developmental Disabilities 
Evaluation and Reha-
bilitation Services 
 Ladies Home Journal , 74 
 LAF.  See low-functioning autism 
 Lakshmi, B., 27 
 Lancet , 58, 59 
 retraction of MMR statements 
from co-authors in, 59 – 60 
 language 
 cognitive testing, barriers in, 101 
 expressive, 9, 31 
 receptive, 31 
 repetitive, 9 
 See also speech 
 language development, 7, 25 
 in infants (such as social, back-
and-forth babbling), 26 
 PECS for, 32 – 33 
 Latino children 
 cognitive testing and scores of, 
100 
 rates of diagnosis and access to 
treatment and, 111 
 Latino culture 
 religious beliefs and family 
adaptation in, 97 – 98 
 treatment choices and, 111 
 women and appraisal in, 97 
 Lau, Anna S., 94 – 95 
 lead poisoning, 77 
 leaky gut, 78 – 79 
 learning abilities, standardized 
testing for, 21 – 22 
 Learning and Developmental 
Disabilities Evaluation and 
Rehabilitation Services 
(LADDERS), 147 – 148 
 Massachusetts General 
Hospital, 247 
 services provided by, 247 
 Lese-Martin, Christa, 27 
 Leslie, Alan, 153 – 154 
 LFA.  See low-functioning autism 
 London, Eric, 159, 226 
 London, Karen, 159, 225, 226 
 London, Zachary, 159 
 Lord, Catherine, 160, 166, 253 
 Loth, Eva, 108 
 Lovaas, O. (Ole) Ivar, 200 
 behavioral intervention and, 
29, 161 
 biographical sketch, 160 – 161 
 on effectiveness of ABA, 31 
 low-functioning autism (LFA), 15 
 low-income families, use of mental 
health services in, 95 
 Lurie Marks Autism Center, 247 
 MAAP Services for Autism and 
Asperger Syndrome, 230 
 macro cultural factors, 91 
 macrocephaly, 27 
 magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI), 28, 51 
 male/female sex ratio, 89 
 Asperger’s Disorder, 16 
 Autism Spectrum Disorder, 2 
 Autistic Disorder, 13 – 14 
 Malhotra, Dheeraj, 27 
 Malone, Richard, 244 
 Masland, William, 212 – 213 
 Massachusetts General Hospital, 
247 
 Matos, Emilia, 212 
 McCabe, Kristen M., 94 – 95 
 McCarthy, Jenny 
 on autism, 66 
 role in Generation Rescue, 229 
 McCubbin, Hamilton I., 96 
 McPartland, James, 186 
 measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) 
vaccine, 58, 210, 213 

316 Index
 gastrointestinal inflammations 
and, 59 
 immunization rates for, 59 
 supporters of connection 
between autism and, 60 – 61 
 verdict regarding, connection 
between autism and, 64 – 65 
 See also Cedillo v. Secretary of 
Health and Human 
Services 
 media attention to autism, 3 – 4 
 medial temporal lobe, 27 
 Medical Hypothesis , 63, 76 
 Medical Investigation of 
Neurodevelopmental 
Disorders (M.I.N.D.) 
Institute, University of 
California, Davis, 249 – 250 
 medical procedure treatments, 
28, 195 
 Medical Research Council, 61 
 Medical Research Council Child 
Psychiatry Research Unite, 
165 
 medication, 192 
 for associated behaviors, 68 
 MedlinePlus, 243 
 memory, standardized testing for, 
21 – 22 
 Mendel, Gregor, 56 
 mental disorders 
 advances in understanding of, 
50 – 51 
 cultural influence in, 94 – 102 
 mental health services 
 availability/access to, 91, 94, 
100, 110 – 111 
 use of, 94 – 95 
 mental retardation.  See intellec-
tual disability 
 mercury, 54 
 poisoning, 76, 77 – 78 
 rates of excretions between 
children with/without 
autism, 76 
 in thimerosal, 62 
 See also Cedillo v. Secretary of 
Health and Human 
Services 
 Mexican Americans, focus of 
treatments among, 113 
 micro cultural factors, 91 
 Middle Eastern countries, family 
appraisal in, 96 
 M.I.N.D., 249 – 250 
 mini mental status exam, 152 
 minority groups 
 mental health services, use of, 
95 
 poverty and, in United States, 
100 – 101 
 See also specific minority groups 
 mitochondrial disorder, 65 
 MMR.  See measles-mumps-
rubella (MMR) vaccine 
 Mojaves, negative appraisal 
among, 96 
 monitoring networks, prevalence 
estimates from, 188 – 190 
 monozygotic twins.  See identical 
twins 
 Mothers United for Moral 
Support (MUMS), 230 
 motivation, as pivotal behavior, 
30 
 motor movements, 10 
 MRI, 28, 51 
 multiplex families, 26 
 MUMS.  See Mothers United for 
Moral Support 
 Mundy, Peter, 161 – 162 
 N170, 185 – 186 
 NAA.  See National Autism 
Association 
 NAAR.  See National Alliance for 
Autism Research 
 Nadama, Tariq, 77 
 name orientation (responding to 
name), 25, 58 
 infants, 26 

Index 317
 NAMI.  See National Alliance on 
Mental Illness 
 NARIC.  See National Rehabil-
itation Information Center 
 NAS.  See National Autistic 
Society 
 National Alliance for Autism 
Research (NAAR), 159, 172 
 Autism Speaks, merging with, 
159, 226 
 National Alliance on Mental 
Illness (NAMI), 231 
 National Autism Association 
(NAA), 231 
 National Autistic Society (NAS), 
172 
 National Childhood Vaccine 
Injury Act of 1986, 209, 
210 
 “causation-in-fact” claim under, 
214 
 claims under, 213 – 214 
 “Table Injury” under, 214 
 National Database for Autism 
Research (NDAR), 239 
 National Disability Rights 
Network (NDRN), 231 
 National Dissemination Center 
for Children with 
Disabilities, 237 – 238 
 National Institutes for Health 
Autism Research 
Networks, 238 – 239 
 National Institutes for Mental 
Health (NIMH), 76, 235, 
250, 254 
 objectives, 239 – 240 
 National Institutes of Child 
Health and Human 
Development (NICHD), 
235, 238, 240, 250, 254 
 National Institutes of Environ-
mental Health Science 
(NIEHS), 235 
 National Institutes of Health 
(NIH), 235, 250 
 Autism Coordinating Com-
mittee, 238 
 goals of, 240 – 241 
 National Institutes of Neuro-
logical Disorders and 
Stroke (NINDS), 235 
 mission of, 241 
 National Institutes on Deafness 
and Other Communication 
Disorders (NIDCD), 235, 
238, 241 – 242 
 National Institutes on Disability 
and Rehabilitation 
Research (NIDRR), 
231 – 232, 242 
 National Library of Medicine, 236, 
242 – 243 
 National Rehabilitation Infor-
mation Center (NARIC), 
231 – 232, 242 
 National Survey of Children’s 
Health (NSCH), 190 – 191 
 Native Americans 
 family appraisal and, 97 
 word/label for Autism 
Spectrum Disorder, 104 
 Native Hawaiians 
 family appraisal and, 97 
 word/label for Autism 
Spectrum Disorder, 104 
 Nature News , 76 – 77 
 Navajos, negative appraisal 
among, 96 
 ND.  See neurological dis-
orders 
 NDAR.  See National Database for 
Autism Research 
 NDRN.  See National Disability 
Rights Network 
 negative appraisal, 96 
 neurofibromatosis, 26 
 neurological disorders (ND), 14, 
54 
 neurologists, 20 
 neuroscience of Autism Spectrum 
Disorder, 3, 183 – 187 

318 Index
 social brain systems impaired 
in Autism Spectrum 
Disorder and, 183 – 184 
 New England Journal of Medicine , 74 
 New York Times , 59 
 NICHD.  See National Institutes of 
Child Health and Human 
Development 
 NIDCD.  See National Institutes 
on Deafness and Other 
Communication Disorders 
 NIDRR.  See National Institutes on 
Disability and Rehabil-
itation Research 
 NIEHS.  See National Institutes 
of Environmental Health 
Science 
 NIH.  See  National Institutes of 
Health 
 NIMH.  See National Institutes for 
Mental Health 
 NINDS.  See National Institutes 
of Neurological Disorders 
and Stroke 
 non-Autism Spectrum Disorder 
PDDs, 19 – 20 
 nonverbal individuals, 7, 14 – 15 
 non-verbal social behaviors, 5 – 6 
 See also specific non-verbal social 
behaviors 
 normative scores, 22 
 NSCH.  See National Survey of 
Children’s Health 
 nutritional monitoring, 81 
 OAP.  See Omnibus Autism 
Proceeding 
 OAR.  See Organization for 
Autism Research 
 Obiakor, Festus E. 
 on ethnicity and family 
adaptation, 95 
 on negative appraisal, 96 
 on Resiliency Model, 96 
 review of IDEA report, 107 – 108 
 on social support, 98 – 99 
 treatment/educational recom-
mendations, 113 – 114 
 objects, repetitive and non-
functional use of, 10 – 11 
 occupational therapy, 20, 31 
 O’Donohue, William T., 95 
 Offit, Paul, 60, 63 – 64 
 critical examination of FC, 
70 – 71 
 Omnibus Autism Proceeding 
(OAP), 64, 209, 210, 214 
 onset.  See symptom onset 
 opioid peptides, 79 
 oral fixation, 46 
 Organization for Autism 
Research (OAR), 232 
 organizations 
 governmental, 235 – 244 
 private, not-for profit, 223 – 234 
 professional, 234 – 235 
 university-based, 243 – 255 
 See also specific organizations 
 parent(s) 
 concerns of, that constitute red 
flags for Autism Spectrum 
Disorder, 181 – 183 
 education or SES, 94, 111 – 112 
 interest in utilizing secretin, 73 
 interview, 21 
 led support groups, 100 
 personalities, 47 
 receiving first-time diagnosis, 
69 
 role in treatments, 113, 166 
 symptoms first reported by, 57 
 using ABA, 29 
 PBS.  See  Positive Behavior Support 
 PDD.  See pervasive develop-
mental disorders 
 PDD-NOS.  See Pervasive 
Development Disorder— 
Not Otherwise Specified 
 PECS.  See Picture Exchange 
Communication Systems 

Index 319
 peer 
 mentors, 114 
 relationships, 5 – 6 
 review, 60 – 61, 82 
 same-aged, 7 
 Pervasive Development 
Disorder—Not Otherwise 
Specified (PDD-NOS), 1, 3 
 clinical vignettes, 24 
 diagnostic criteria and inclu-
sion of, 13, 17 – 18, 52 – 53, 
175, 178 – 189 
 pervasive developmental dis-
orders (PDD) 
 diagnosis of, 13 – 19 
 subtypes of, 13, 52 
 as umbrella term, 173 – 175, 175 f 
 See also specific disorders 
 PET.  See positron emission 
tomography 
 Petitioners’ Steering Committee 
(PSC), 214 
 pharmacological intervention, 191 
 phren , 149 
 physiological interventions, 
195 – 196 
 Picture Exchange Communica-
tion Systems (PECS), 32 – 33 
 Pivotal Response Training (PRT), 
30, 69, 158, 200, 244 
 play skills, 34 
 pointing, use of infant, 58 
 Poling, Hannah, 65 
 Positive Behavior Support (PBS), 
159 
 positron emission tomography 
(PET), 51, 185 
 poverty, 100 – 101 
 praecox , 149 
 prefrontal cortex, 27 
 pretend play skills, 7, 9 
 prevalence estimates 
 from educational records, 
187 – 188 
 from monitoring networks, 
188 – 190 
 prevalence rates for Autism 
Spectrum Disorder, 1 – 2, 
52, 66, 187 – 191 
 in 8-year-old children in 2000 
and 2002 in six states in 
ADDM Network, 189 f 
 achieving accurate determi-
nation of, 188 
 across cultures, 91 – 94 
 epidemiological studies and, 
91 – 92 
 ethnic differences in, 190 – 191 
 factors that contribute to 
changes in, 51 – 53 
 of full syndrome Autism 
Spectrum Disorder, 93 
 in Iceland, 92 
 immigrant status and, 93 
 point, by racial group, 191 f 
 sample size and outcome for, 
92 
 SES and, 91 
 social class and, 93 – 94 
 in United Kingdom, 92 
 in United States, 92, 188, 190 
 prevention, 35 
 private, not-for profit orga-
nizations, 223 – 234 
 pro-autism movements, 110 
 See also specific movements 
 professional organizations, 
234 – 235 
 PRT.  See  Pivotal Response Training 
 PSC.  See Petitioners’ Steering 
Committee 
 psychiatrists, 20 
 psychoanalysis, 29, 46 
 psychoeducational domain of 
intervention, 192, 193 
 psychological theory 
 of mid-20th century, 46 – 47 
 in mid-1940’s, 45 
 psychopharmacological domain 
of intervention, 192 
 psycho-pharmacological treat-
ments, 196 

320 Index
 public awareness, 4 
 public special education pro-
grams, 100 
 Pubmed, 243 
 punishments, 29 
 race 
 definition/concept of, 89 – 90, 
107 
 diagnosis of Autism Spectrum 
Disorder and, 190 
 prevalence rates and, 191 f 
 Rain Man (1988), 3, 12 
 Sullivan as consultant for, 169 
 Rapin, Isabelle, 162 – 163 
 Redwood, Lyn, 63, 76 
 refrigerator mother theory, 3, 
45 – 51, 91, 148 
 arguments against, 48 – 49 
 origins of, 46 
 Rimland and, 163 
 summary of, 48 
 twin study and, 49 – 50, 152 
 regression, autistic, 18 
 average age of occurrence of, 
57 – 58 
 reinforcements, 29, 199 – 200 
 relationship-based interventions, 
195 
 religion, family adaptation and, 
97 – 98 
 repetitive behavior 
 higher order, 10, 11 – 12 
 lower order, 10 
 repetitive interests and behavior. 
 See  restricted and/or 
repetitive interests and 
behavior 
 replications of study, 61, 82 
 Resiliency Model of Family 
Stress, Adjustment, and 
Adaptation, 96 
 family appraisal and, 96 – 97 
 religious beliefs and, 97 – 98 
 social support and, 98 – 100 
 responsiveness, as pivotal 
behavior, 30 
 restricted and/or repetitive inter-
ests and behavior, 1, 4, 14, 
173 
 benefits, 10 
 as domain of impairment, 
10 – 12 
 See also behavioral domain of 
autism 
 Rett’s Disorder, 18, 19, 174 
 Rimland, Bernard, 49, 73, 161, 
169, 224 
 ASA and, 225 
 Autism Society of America, 
founding of, 48 
 biographical sketch, 163 
 neuroscience of autism and, 3 
 Ritvo, Edward, 163 – 164 
 Roger, H., 76 
 Rogers, Sally 
 biographical sketch, 164 – 165 
 Early Start Denver Model and, 
30 
 Roscher, Beth, 100 
 RotaTeq, 64 
 Roth, Karlsson, 213 
 Rowe, Jonelle, 100 
 rubella epidemic, 59 
 rule adherence, 12 
 Rutter, Michael, (Sir), 55, 152, 
153 
 biographical sketch, 165 – 166 
 twin study, 3, 49 – 51 
 SafeMinds, 232 
 sameness, insistence on, 11 – 12 
 schizein , 149 
 schizophrenia, naming of, 149 
 schizophrenic reaction, childhood 
type , 12 – 13 
 Schopler, Eric, 112, 248 
 biographical sketch, 166 – 167 
 Schreibman, Laura, 70, 244 
 PRT and, 30 
 Schultz, Robert, 167 

Index 321
 The Science and Fiction of Autism 
(Schreibman), 70 
 scientific process, 60 – 61, 66, 82 
 screening for Autism Spectrum 
Disorder, 180 – 183 
 behavioral concerns in, 182 
 communication concerns in, 
181 
 social concerns in, 181 – 182 
 two levels of, 180 – 182 
 Sebat, Jonathan, 27 
 secretin, 72 – 75 
 controlled study testing ben-
efits of, 74 
 Dateline report on, 1998, 72 – 73 
 parental interest in utilizing, 73 
 seizures, 15 
 self-injurious behavior, 11 
 self-stimulatory behavior, 11 
 Selvin, Steve, 93 
 sensory input, sensitive, 12 
 SES.  See socioeconomic status 
 sexual abuse allegations made 
through FC by children, 
70 – 71 
 SFARI.  See  Simons Foundation 
Autism Research Initiative 
 shame, 96 
 Shestack, Jonathan, 156 – 157, 
226 
 Sibling Support Project, 232 – 233 
 Sigman, Marian, 162, 167 – 168 
 Silove, N., 76 
 Simons, Jim, 168 – 169 
 Simons, Marilyn, 168 – 169 
 Simons Foundation, 168, 253 
 Simons Foundation Autism 
Research Initiative 
(SFARI), 169 
 initiatives of, 233 
 Simons Simplex Collection (SSC) 
Project, 169, 233, 253 
 simplex families, 26 – 27 
 Singer, Alison, 225, 226 
 Sinha, Y., 76 
 sleep disturbances, 15 
 Snyder v. Secretary of Health & 
Human Services, 65, 210, 
216 
 Social, Genetic, and Develop-
mental Psychiatry Research 
Center, 165 
 social brain 
 circuitry, 151 
 systems impaired in Autism 
Spectrum Disorder, 183 – 184 
 social class, 93 – 94 
 social cognitive development, 
149 – 150, 162 
 social concerns in screening for 
Autism Spectrum Disorder, 
181 – 182 
 social domain of autism, 173 
 social information processing 
theories, 183, 184 
 social interactions, 1, 14 
 as cultural experience, 108 
 reciprocal, 4 – 7 
 social norms, 109 
 social scripts.  See social stories 
 social skills groups, 31 
 social stories, 32, 33, 206 – 207 
 sample of, 207 
 social support, 98 – 100 
 socioeconomic status (SES) 
 of parents, 94, 111 – 112 
 prevalence rates and, 91 
 rates of diagnosis and access to 
treatment and, 111 
 Sonia Shankman Orthogenic 
School, 148 
 South Africa, views of Autism 
Spectrum Disorder in, 106 
 special education services, 32, 189 
 public, 100 
 special education system (United 
States), 53 – 54 
 speech 
 delayed, 25 
 repetitive, 7, 9 
 stereotyped, 9, 11 
 therapy, 20, 31, 114 

322 Index
 spiritually based treatment, 194 
 SSC.  See Simons Simplex Collec-
tion (SSC) Project 
 STAART.  See Studies to Advance 
Autism Research and 
Treatment 
 standardized testing 
 for all ethnic groups, 100 
 during diagnostic evaluations, 
21 – 22 
 normative scores, 22 
 stereotyped behavior, 10, 13, 17, 
174, 178 
 stimming, 11 
 Strange Son (Iversen), 156 
 Studies to Advance Autism 
Research and Treatment 
(STAART), 168, 250 
 in response to Children’s 
Health Act of 2000, 238 
 subtyping individuals with 
autism, 13, 52, 171 
 Sullivan, Ruth 
 ASA and, 225 
 Autism Society of America, 
founding of, 48 
 Sullivan, Ruth C., 169 
 Sunday Times (March 7, 2004), 
59 – 60, 61 
 supplemental vitamins, 32, 
194 – 195 
 support groups, parent-led, 100 
 symptom onset 
 age average of, 18 
 course of, 18 – 19 
 timing of, 57 – 58 
 timing of vaccine and, 66 
 symptoms 
 constellation of, in individuals 
with Autism Spectrum 
Disorder, 179 – 180, 180 f 
 cultural factors in, 103 – 108 
 first reported by parents most 
often, 57 
 head circumference and, 
27 – 28 
 pattern of, 34 
 See also associated symptoms 
 “Table Injury,” 214 
 TACA.  See Talk about Curing 
Autism 
 TACA Autism Journey Guide , 233 
 Tager-Flusberg, Helen, 169 – 170 
 Taiwan, access to services in, 
110 – 111 
 Talk about Curing Autism 
(TACA), 233 
 TARF.  See  The Autism Research 
Fund 
 TEACCH, 112, 166 – 167, 248 – 249 
 technology based treatments, 194, 
196 
 teenagers with Autism Spectrum 
Disorder, 7 
 with Asperger’s Disorder, 17 
 Tennen, Howard, 100 
 terminology of autism, 2 
 theory of mind, 108 
 initial publication on, 147 
 thimerosal, 62, 210 
 Institute of Medicine (United 
States) statement regard-
ing, 2004, 62 – 63 
 removal of, 63 
 verdict regarding, and autism, 
64 – 65 
 Thinking in Pictures (Grandin), 155 
 Thompson Center for Autism 
and Neurodevelopmental 
Disorders (University of 
Missouri), 248 
 Times (February 2009), 59 
 treatment(s), 2, 28 – 34, 191 – 198 
 animal-based, 191, 194 
 availability of information/
misinformation, 68 
 by category, 193 – 196 
 complementary and alternative, 
guidelines for evaluating, 
198 – 199 

Index 323
 cultural factors in, 110 – 115 
 decision matrix, 69, 199 f 
 education-based, 191 
 efficacious, 69 
 financial compensation for, 53 
 focus of, 112 – 113 
 medical procedure, 28, 195 
 opportunities, 53 
 parental role in, 113, 166 
 psycho-pharmacological, 196 
 questions to ask regarding 
specific, 198 
 recommendations, 113 – 114 
 SES and access to, 111 
 spiritually based, 194 
 study, factors of a well-
designed, 80 
 technology based, 194, 196 
 See also specific treatments 
 Treatment and Education of 
Autistic and related 
Communication-
handicapped Children 
(TEACCH), 112, 166 – 167 
 aims of, 248 – 249 
 treatment choices 
 cultural influences in, 111 – 112 
 etiology of autism and, 111, 115 
 treatment controversies, 67 – 81, 
81 – 82, 82 
 chelation treatment and, 75 – 78 
 FC and, 69 – 72 
 gluten-free, casein-free diet 
and, 78 – 81 
 secretin and, 72 – 75 
 Troge, Jennifer, 27 
 tuberous sclerosis, 26 
 twin study, 3, 166 
 genetic factors and, 26 
 mid-1990’s, 55 
 refrigerator mother theory and, 
49 – 51, 152 
 UMACC.  See University of 
Michigan Autism and 
Communication Disorders 
Center 
 UM-NSU CARD, 252 – 253 
 the unconscious, 46 
 Understanding the Nature of Autism 
and Asperger’s Disorder  
( Ritvo), 164 
 United Kingdom, prevalence rates 
in, 92 
 United States 
 age average of Autism Spec-
trum Disorder diagnosis 
in, 20, 57 
 cost of interventions in, 207 
 poverty and minority families, 
100 – 101 
 prevalence rates in, 92, 188, 190 
 racial and ethnic groups within, 
107 – 108 
 special education system, 
53 – 54 
 United States Department of 
Health and Human Services 
(HHS), 243 
 University Children’s Hospital in 
Vienna, 145 
 University of Michigan Autism 
and Communication Dis-
orders Center (UMACC), 
253 
 University of Washington Autism 
Center, 254 – 255 
 university-based organizations, 
243 – 255 
 Unlocking Autism, 234 
 Unstrange Minds: Remapping the 
World of Autism (Grinker), 
53, 106 
 Vaccine Act.  See National 
Childhood Vaccine Injury 
Act of 1986 
 vaccine controversy, 54 – 67 
 contextual factors of, 55 – 56 
 events in, 58 – 67 

324 Index
 as presented by Kirby, 62 – 63 
 as presented by Offit, 63 – 64 
 Rutter and, 153 
 Vaccine Injury Compensation 
Program and, 64 – 67 
 Vaccine Injury Compensation 
Program, 64 – 67, 209 – 217 
 vaccines 
 child response to, 58 
 fist study to suggest link 
between autism and, 58 – 62 
 symptom onset and timing of, 
66 
 See also measles-mumps-
rubella (MMR) vaccine; 
thimerosal 
 visual cues, 32 
 visual schedule, 32, 33 
 Volkmar, Fred, 170 – 171 
 Vowell, Denis, 214, 216 
 Wakefield, Andrew, 58 – 59 
 accusations against, 59 – 60 
 rebuttal to investigations, 
61 – 62 
 Walsh, Tom, 27 
 Watson, James, 45, 50 
 The Way I See it (Grandin), 155 
 Wechsler Intelligence Scale for 
Children, Fourth Edition 
(WISC-IV), 100 
 Wegner, Donald, 71 
 Wheeler, Judge, 209, 210 
 Wilder, Lynn K. 
 on ethnicity and family adap-
tation, 95 
 on negative appraisal, 96 
 on Resiliency Model, 96 
 review of IDEA report, 107 – 108 
 on social support, 98 – 99 
 treatment/educational recom-
mendations, 113 – 114 
 Williams, K., 76 
 Williams Syndrome, 170 
 Wing, Lorna, 2 – 3, 153, 171 – 172 
 WISC-IV.  See Wechsler Intelligence 
Scale for Children, Fourth 
Edition 
 Wood, Patricia A., 94 – 95 
 Wright, Bob, 172, 226 
 Wright, Suzanne, 172, 226 
 Yale Autism Program, 255 
 Yamrom, Boris, 27 
 Yeh, May, 94 – 95 
 “yin” disorder, 112 

About the Authors
DR. RAPHAEL BERNIER is a licensed clinical psychologist and a 
faculty member at the University of Washington in the Department 
of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and adjunct faculty member 
in the Department of Psychology. Dr. Bernier’s research focuses on 
the etiology, neuroscience, and behavioral presentation of Autism 
Spectrum Disorders and childhood disorders. Dr. Bernier holds an 
undergraduate degree from Tufts University, a graduate degree 
from the University of Wisconsin–Madison, and a PhD from the 
University of Washington.
JENNIFER GERDTS, MS, is a graduate student in the Department 
of Psychology, Child Clinical program at the University of Washing-
ton. She has worked at the University of Washington Autism Center 
on a variety of research projects and provided various clinical ser-
vices to families. Her research focus is in the behavioral presentation 
of Autism Spectrum Disorders and the patterns of autism-related 
traits in families. Gerdts obtained her undergraduate degree in psy-
chology from Colby College and her MS in child clinical psychology 
at the University of Washington. She will receive her PhD in 2012.

