

TRANSPORTATION ISSUES, POLICIES AND R&D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AUTOMOTIVE CYBERSECURITY 
 
ISSUES AND VULNERABILITIES 
 
 
No part of this digital document may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or
by any means. The publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this digital document, but makes no
expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No
liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of information
contained herein. This digital document is sold with the clear understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering legal, medical or any other professional services. 

TRANSPORTATION ISSUES,  
POLICIES AND R&D 
 
 
Additional books in this series can be found on Nova’s website  
under the Series tab. 
 
 
Additional e-books in this series can be found on Nova’s website  
under the eBooks tab. 
 

TRANSPORTATION ISSUES, POLICIES AND R&D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AUTOMOTIVE CYBERSECURITY 
 
ISSUES AND VULNERABILITIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRAIG GIBBS 
EDITOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New York 
 

Copyright © 2016 by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted 
in any form or by any means: electronic, electrostatic, magnetic, tape, mechanical photocopying, 
recording or otherwise without the written permission of the Publisher. 
 
We have partnered with Copyright Clearance Center to make it easy for you to obtain permissions to 
reuse content from this publication. Simply navigate to this publication’s page on Nova’s website and 
locate the “Get Permission” button below the title description. This button is linked directly to the 
title’s permission page on copyright.com. Alternatively, you can visit copyright.com and search by 
title, ISBN, or ISSN.  
  
For further questions about using the service on copyright.com, please contact:  
Copyright Clearance Center 
Phone: +1-(978) 750-8400 
Fax: +1-(978) 750-4470  
E-mail: info@copyright.com. 
 
 
NOTICE TO THE READER 
The Publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this book, but makes no expressed or 
implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No liability is 
assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of information 
contained in this book. The Publisher shall not be liable for any special, consequential, or exemplary 
damages resulting, in whole or in part, from the readers’ use of, or reliance upon, this material. Any 
parts of this book based on government reports are so indicated and copyright is claimed for those parts 
to the extent applicable to compilations of such works. 
 
Independent verification should be sought for any data, advice or recommendations contained in this 
book. In addition, no responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage to 
persons or property arising from any methods, products, instructions, ideas or otherwise contained in 
this publication. 
 
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information with regard to the subject 
matter covered herein. It is sold with the clear understanding that the Publisher is not engaged in 
rendering legal or any other professional services. If legal or any other expert assistance is required, the 
services of a competent person should be sought. FROM A DECLARATION OF PARTICIPANTS 
JOINTLY ADOPTED BY A COMMITTEE OF THE AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION AND A 
COMMITTEE OF PUBLISHERS. 
 
Additional color graphics may be available in the e-book version of this book. 
 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 
 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-988-2 (eBook) 
 
 
Published by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. † New York 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
Preface 
 
vii 
Chapter 1 
Vehicle Cybersecurity: DOT and Industry Have 
Efforts under Way, but DOT Needs to Define  
Its Role in Responding to a Real-World Attack 
1 
United States Government Accountability Office 
Chapter 2 
Characterization of Potential Security Threats 
in Modern Automobiles: A Composite  
Modeling Approach 
53 
Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
Index 
 
95 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
 
Modern vehicles contain multiple interfaces—connections between the 
vehicle and external networks—that leave vehicle systems, including safety-
critical systems, such as braking and steering, vulnerable to cyberattacks. 
Researchers have shown that these interfaces—if not properly secured—can 
be exploited through direct, physical access to a vehicle, as well as remotely 
through short-range and long-range wireless channels. This book addresses, 
among other things, available information about the key cybersecurity 
vulnerabilities in modern vehicles that could impact passenger safety; key 
practices and technologies, if any, available to mitigate vehicle cybersecurity 
vulnerabilities and the impacts of potential attacks; views of selected 
stakeholders on challenges they face related to vehicle cybersecurity and 
industry-led efforts to address vehicle cybersecurity; and Department of 
Transportation’s (DOT) efforts to address vehicle cybersecurity. 
 
 


In: Automotive Cybersecurity 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-987-5 
Editor: Craig Gibbs 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1 
 
 
 
VEHICLE CYBERSECURITY:  
DOT AND INDUSTRY HAVE EFFORTS UNDER 
WAY, BUT DOT NEEDS TO DEFINE ITS  
ROLE IN RESPONDING TO A  
REAL-WORLD ATTACK* 
 
 
United States Government Accountability Office 
 
 
WHY GAO DID THIS STUDY 
 
Over time, the amount of software code in vehicles has grown 
exponentially to support a growing number of safety and other features. 
However, the reliance on software to control safety-critical and other functions 
also leaves vehicles more vulnerable to cyberattacks. 
GAO was asked to review cybersecurity issues that could impact 
passenger safety in modern vehicles. This report addresses, among other 
things, (1) available information about the key cybersecurity vulnerabilities in 
modern vehicles that could impact passenger safety; (2) key practices and 
technologies, if any, available to mitigate vehicle cybersecurity vulnerabilities 
and the impacts of potential attacks; (3) views of selected stakeholders on 
challenges they face related to vehicle cybersecurity and industry-led efforts to 
                                                           
* This is an edited, reformatted and augmented version of a United States Government 
Accountability Office, Publication No. GAO-16-350, dated March 2016. 

United States Government Accountability Office 
2
address vehicle cybersecurity; and (4) DOT efforts to address vehicle 
cybersecurity. 
GAO reviewed relevant existing regulations and literature and interviewed 
officials from DOT; the Departments of Commerce, Defense, and Homeland 
Security; industry associations; and 32 selected industry stakeholders, 
including automakers, suppliers, vehicle cybersecurity firms, and subject 
matter experts. The experts were selected based on a literature search and 
stakeholder recommendations, among other things. 
 
 
WHAT GAO RECOMMENDS 
 
GAO recommends that DOT define and document its roles and 
responsibilities in response to a vehicle cyberattack involving safety-critical 
systems. DOT concurred with our recommendation. 
 
 
WHAT GAO FOUND 
 
Modern vehicles contain multiple interfaces—connections between the 
vehicle and external networks—that leave vehicle systems, including safety-
critical systems, such as braking and steering, vulnerable to cyberattacks. 
Researchers have shown that these interfaces—if not properly secured—can 
be exploited through direct, physical access to a vehicle, as well as remotely 
through short-range and long-range wireless channels. For example, 
researchers have shown that attackers could compromise vulnerabilities in the 
short-range wireless connections to vehicles’ Bluetooth units—which enable 
hands-free cell phone use—to gain access to in-vehicle networks, to take 
control over safety-critical functions such as the brakes. Among the interfaces 
that can be exploited through direct access, most stakeholders we spoke with 
expressed concerns about the statutorily mandated on-board diagnostics port, 
which provides access to a broad range of vehicle systems for emissions and 
diagnostic testing purposes. However, the majority of selected industry 
stakeholders we spoke with (23 out of 32) agreed that wireless attacks, such as 
those 
exploiting 
vulnerabilities 
in 
vehicles’ 
built-in 
cellular-calling 
capabilities, would pose the largest risk to passenger safety. Such attacks could 
potentially impact a large number of vehicles and allow an attacker to access 
targeted vehicles from anywhere in the world. Despite these concerns, some 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
3
stakeholders pointed out that such attacks remain difficult because of the time 
and expertise needed to carry them out and thus far have not been reported 
outside of the research environment. 
Selected industry stakeholders, both in the United States and Europe, 
informed GAO that a range of key practices is available to identify and 
mitigate potential vehicle-cybersecurity vulnerabilities. For instance, the 
majority of selected industry stakeholders we spoke with (22 out of 32) 
indicated that—to the extent possible—automakers should locate safety-
critical systems and non-safetycritical systems on separate in-vehicle networks 
and limit communication between the two types of systems, a concept referred 
to as “domain separation.” However, some of these stakeholders also pointed 
out that complete separation is often not possible or practical because some 
limited communication will likely need to occur between safety-critical and 
other vehicle systems. In addition, selected industry stakeholders we spoke to 
identified technological solutions that can be incorporated into the vehicle to 
make it more secure. However, according to stakeholders, many of these 
technologies—such as message encryption and authentication, which can be 
used to secure and verify the legitimacy of communications occurring along 
in-vehicle networks—cannot be incorporated into existing vehicles. Rather, 
such technologies must be incorporated during the vehicle design and 
production process, which according to stakeholders, takes approximately 5 
years to complete. 
Selected industry stakeholders identified several challenges they face 
related to vehicle cybersecurity. For instance, the lack of transparency, 
communication, and collaboration regarding vehicles’ cybersecurity among 
the various levels of the automotive supply chain and the cost of incorporating 
cybersecurity protections into vehicles were the two most frequently cited 
challenges— mentioned by 15 and 13 of the 32 selected industry stakeholders, 
respectively. However, several industry-led efforts are planned and under way 
that, according to stakeholders, could potentially help automakers and parts 
suppliers identify and mitigate vehicle cybersecurity vulnerabilities and 
address some of the challenges that industry stakeholders face. For example, 
two U.S. industry associations have been leading the effort to establish an 
Automotive Information Sharing and Analysis Center (ISAC) to collect and 
analyze intelligence information and provide a forum for members to 
anonymously share threat and vulnerability information with one another. 
Selected industry stakeholders we spoke to, as well as DOT officials, generally 
expressed positive views regarding the potential effectiveness of an 
Automotive ISAC. 

United States Government Accountability Office 
4
The Department of Transportation’s (DOT) National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration (NHTSA) has taken steps to address vehicle 
cybersecurity issues but has not determined the role it would have in 
responding to a real-world vehicle cyberattack. For example, NHTSA added 
more research capabilities in this area and is developing guidance to help the 
industry determine when cybersecurity vulnerabilities should be considered a 
safety defect, and thus merit a recall; it expects to issue this guidance by 
March 31, 2016. Further, pursuant to a statutory mandate, NHTSA is 
examining the need for government standards or regulations regarding vehicle 
cybersecurity. However, officials estimated that the agency will not make a 
final determination on this need until at least 2018. Although NHTSA’s stated 
goal is to stay ahead of potential vehicle-cybersecurity challenges, NHTSA 
has not yet formally defined and documented its roles and responsibilities in 
the event of a real-world cyberattack. Until it develops such a plan, in the 
event of a cyberattack, the agency’s response efforts could be slowed as 
agency staff may not be able to quickly identify the appropriate actions to take. 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
AUTOSAR  Automotive Open System Architecture. 
CAN 
controller area network 
DHS 
Department of Homeland Security 
DOT 
Department of Transportation 
ECU 
electronic control unit 
FAST Act Fixing America’s Surface Transportation Act 
FCA 
Fiat Chrysler Automobiles 
GM  
General Motors 
ISAC 
Information Sharing and Analysis Center 
ISO  
International Organization for Standardization 
IT  
information technology 
MAP-21 
Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act 
NHTSA 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
NIST 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
OBD-II 
on-board diagnostics port 
OTA 
over-the-air 
SAE 
Society of Automotive Engineers 
VRTC 
Vehicle Research and Test Center 
 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
5
* * * 
 
March 24, 2016 
 
Congressional Requesters 
 
Over the past decade, the amount of software code in passenger vehicles 
has increased significantly.1 In today’s vehicles, software code supports both 
core driving functions, such as braking and steering, as well as advanced 
safety and convenience features, including adaptive cruise control, forward 
collision-warning systems, and built-in navigation and Bluetooth systems. The 
amount of software code in vehicles is expected to continue to increase with 
the introduction of more advanced and automated features that have the 
potential to reduce crashes and save lives.2 Despite the safety and convenience 
benefits offered by some electronically controlled systems, researchers and 
others have noted that as the lines of vehicle software code increase, so does 
the potential for cybersecurity vulnerabilities that could be exploited through 
vehicle cyberattacks or “hacking.” 
Since 2011, researchers have been demonstrating the feasibility of hacking 
into vehicles’ electronic systems, including hacking from a remote location. 
For example, in July 2015, two researchers exploited software vulnerabilities 
in a Jeep Cherokee’s” telematics” unit3 to remotely take control of safety-
critical systems—including manipulating the brakes— without prior physical 
access to the target vehicle.4 Shortly after this hacking demonstration was 
reported, the manufacturer Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA) announced the 
recall of about 1.4 million impacted vehicles, including other models known to 
have similar vulnerabilities. 
The Department of Transportation’s (DOT) National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration (NHTSA) is responsible for overseeing recalls; 
developing, setting, and enforcing Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards 
and regulations; and conducting research that supports vehicle safety, 
including research on the safety, security, and reliability of complex, 
interconnected, electronic vehicle systems.5 Since 2011, part of this research 
has focused specifically on automotive cybersecurity, which is intended to 
ensure that vehicle systems and components that govern safety are protected 
from malicious attacks, unauthorized access, damage, or other factors that 
could interfere with safety functions. 

United States Government Accountability Office 
6
In light of growing questions about the potential for vehicle cyberattacks, 
you asked us to review issues related to vehicle cybersecurity. This report 
examines: 
 
 
available information about the key cybersecurity vulnerabilities in 
modern vehicles that could impact passenger safety; 
 
key practices and technologies, if any, available to mitigate vehicle 
cybersecurity vulnerabilities and the impacts of potential attacks; 
 
views of selected stakeholders on challenges they face related to 
vehicle cybersecurity and industry-led efforts to address vehicle 
cybersecurity; and 
 
DOT efforts to address vehicle cybersecurity. 
 
Although vehicle cybersecurity vulnerabilities, if found, could be 
exploited for various reasons, we focused on those vulnerabilities that could 
impact passenger safety.6 For the purposes of this report, the term “modern 
vehicles” refers to passenger vehicles (i.e., automobiles) on the road today or 
currently in production.7 We did not focus on cybersecurity vulnerabilities that 
may emerge as newer types of technologies, such as “connected vehicle” 
technologies, are introduced into vehicles in the future.8 
To address these issues, we reviewed applicable federal laws and 
regulations, including requirements established in the Moving Ahead for 
Progress in the 21st Century Act (MAP-21) related to vehicle electronic 
systems.9 We also identified and reviewed relevant research papers and 
publications. The reviewed citations were located through searches in 
bibliographic 
databases, 
including 
Transport 
Research 
International 
Documentation and SciSearch or relevant industry conferences. We also 
reviewed reports and met with agency officials from DOT, the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) within the Department of 
Commerce, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), and the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency within the Department of Defense. For 
example, we reviewed a series of reports on vehicle cybersecurity published 
by NHTSA in October 2014 and NIST’s Framework for Improving Critical 
Infrastructure Cybersecurity.10 In addition, we conducted semi-structured 
interviews with 32 selected industry stakeholders, including 8 automakers; 8 
automotive parts suppliers; 3 vehicle cybersecurity firms that offer automotive 
cybersecurity products; and 13 subject matter experts, including 7 leading 
vehiclecybersecurity researchers. Automakers were selected to ensure we had 
representation from each of the 3 major auto-producing regions of the world 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
7
(the U.S., Europe, and Asia) and the two U.S. industry associations (the 
Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers and the Association of Global 
Automakers) that were jointly pursuing several efforts related to vehicle 
cybersecurity, such as the formation of an Automotive Information Sharing 
and Analysis Center (ISAC). We selected the top 5 automotive parts suppliers 
based on global sales in 2013 and other suppliers based on stakeholder 
recommendations.11 We also interviewed 3 automotive cybersecurity firms 
that are offering vehicle cybersecurity products for new and existing vehicles 
based on stakeholder recommendations. The subject matter experts were 
identified through our literature search, relevant industry conferences, 
stakeholder recommendations, and our prior work on connected-vehicle 
technologies, and were considered subject matter experts based on their job 
titles and experience, technical papers and publications, contributions to 
relevant industry conferences (e.g., speeches, presentations, and organizing 
roles), and other significant contributions related to vehicle cybersecurity. 
Leading researchers were identified from the group of subject matter experts 
as those with extensive applied research experience in vehicle cybersecurity.12 
After conducting interviews with our 32 selected industry stakeholders, 
we summarized and analyzed their responses to identify themes relevant to 
each of our research objectives. The viewpoints gathered through our 
interviews with selected industry stakeholders represent the viewpoints of the 
individuals interviewed and cannot be generalized to a broader population. 
Our interviews with selected industry stakeholders were conducted, in part, 
during site visits in 2015 to Detroit, Michigan; Silicon Valley, California; 
Brussels, Belgium, and various locations within Germany. These site visit 
locations were selected largely based on the location of our selected industry 
stakeholders and to ensure we obtained a diverse range of perspectives, 
including those of U.S.-based and foreign companies. To assess DOT’s efforts 
to address vehicle cybersecurity, we also reviewed (1) GAO’s Standards for 
Internal Control in the Federal Government;13 (2) NHTSA’s documents 
regarding its strategic planning and vehicle cybersecurity-research priorities, 
including its Priority Plan for Vehicle Safety and Fuel Economy 2015–2017; 
(3) NHTSA’s request for public comment on automotive electronic control 
systems safety and security issued in response to MAP-21 requirements;14 and 
(4) a mandated report to Congress that summarized and analyzed the public 
comments NHTSA received, among other things.15 We also visited NHTSA’s 
Vehicle Research and Test Center (VRTC) in East Liberty, Ohio, to tour 
NHTSA’s research facilities and observe ongoing vehicle-cybersecurity 

United States Government Accountability Office 
8
research and equipment demonstrations. Further details about our scope and 
methodology can be found in appendix I. 
We conducted this performance audit from February 2015 to March 2016 
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those 
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, 
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and 
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence 
obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on 
our audit objectives. 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
The number of annual fatalities and injuries due to motor vehicle crashes 
has declined from 42,836 fatalities and 2.8 million injuries in 2004 to 32,675 
fatalities and 2.3 million injuries in 2014, although, according to NHTSA, the 
rate of decline has leveled off in recent years. The decline in fatalities and 
injuries over this time period is due in part to vehicle safety features, such as 
airbags. Automakers have also been installing a growing number of advanced 
technology features into vehicles to further improve passenger safety as well 
as to enhance driver and passenger convenience. For example, all vehicles 
manufactured starting in model year 2012 contain an electronic stability 
control feature that uses onboard sensors to detect and reduce skidding and 
automatically takes limited control from the driver to prevent the vehicle from 
leaving the roadway.16 Similarly, some new vehicles offer forward collision 
warning and automatic emergency-braking systems that use on-board sensors 
and cameras to provide warnings to the driver and in some cases assist the 
driver to prevent a crash from occurring. As NHTSA attributed 94 percent of 
highway crashes to human error in 2013, such technologies could help 
continue the overall decline in motor vehicle fatalities over the past decade. 
Driver and passenger convenience technologies include built-in navigation 
systems, keyless entry and ignition systems, and wireless Bluetooth 
capabilities, among other features. 
To support these and other advancements in technology, modern vehicles 
contain a number of electronic systems and components that have grown in 
number and complexity since they were first introduced into vehicles in the 
late 1970s. For example, a vehicle manufactured in the late 1970s contained 
basic electronic components to meet federal emissions regulations, and by the 
1980s, the engines in most new vehicles were electronically controlled. Over 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
9
time, these electronic systems have begun to replace or control many of the 
traditional mechanical systems in vehicles. In 2009, NHTSA reported that a 
typical vehicle had around 50 embedded electronic control units (ECU) 
responsible for executing both core vehicle functions such as steering, as well 
as convenience and entertainment functions. By 2014 the agency estimated 
that a typical vehicle contained between 70 and 100 ECUs. In addition, over 
time, ECUs have evolved from controlling a single vehicle function and 
operating in isolation from other components, to controlling multiple vehicle 
functions and operating in conjunction with one another. 
To facilitate communication among multiple ECUs without the need for 
complicated and extensive wiring systems, automakers began locating ECUs 
on in-vehicle communication networks, commonly referred to as buses or bus 
systems. According to NHTSA, the controller area network (CAN), which was 
first developed in 1985, has become the most commonly used in-vehicle 
communication network or bus; however, other types of networks are used by 
some automakers.17 The CAN was designed to ensure that ECUs within the 
vehicle could reliably and expediently send messages to one another. The 
specific configuration of CAN and other in-vehicle communication networks 
can vary widely across automakers and even across different models produced 
by a single automaker, depending on the number and types of features within 
the vehicle. For example, automakers may locate all ECUs on a single in-
vehicle network or include one network to support safety-critical vehicle 
functions, such as steering and braking, and another network to support 
convenience and entertainment systems. Figure 1 illustrates how in-vehicle 
communications networks reduce the need for wiring while facilitating 
communication among ECUs. 
While the shift from mechanical to electronically-controlled vehicle 
systems has helped improve the reliability and performance of certain vehicle 
features and allowed automakers to introduce new safety and “infotainment” 
features that are popular with consumers, it has also increased the potential for 
vehicles to be affected by cybersecurity breaches more commonly associated 
with the information technology (IT) and financial services industries. In 
particular, as the number of ECUs and electronic systems in vehicles has 
increased, the prevalence of software code in vehicles has also increased 
dramatically—and in some cases exponentially. DOT publications have 
indicated that a modern luxury vehicle could contain as much as 100 million 
lines of software code. In comparison, a Boeing 787 Dreamliner has about 6.5 
million lines of software code (see fig. 2).18 According to researchers and 
others, the use of software in vehicles is likely to increase as more advanced 

United States Government Accountability Office 
10
vehicle technologies and connected vehicle technologies are incorporated. As 
the lines of software code in vehicles increases, so does the potential for 
software errors, such as coding errors, and related vulnerabilities. 
 
 
Source: National Instruments. | GAO-16-350. 
aVehicle telematics systems—which include the dashboard, controls, and navigation 
systems— provide continuous connectivity to long- and short-range wireless 
connections. 
Figure 1. Depiction of Reduced Wiring Enabled by an In-Vehicle Communication 
Network. 
 
 
Source: Battelle. | GAO-16-350. 
Figure 2. Average Lines of Software Code in Modern Luxury Vehicle Compared to 
Types of Aircraft. 
According to NHTSA, in the context of motor vehicles, cybersecurity is 
the protection of automotive electronic systems, communication networks, 
control algorithms, software, users, and underlying data from malicious 
attacks, damage, unauthorized access, or manipulation. Although no vehicle 
cyberattacks impacting passenger safety have been reported outside of the 
research environment, our previous work has shown that the sources of cyber-
threats vary in terms of the types and capabilities of the actors, their 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
11
willingness to act, and their motives.19 For example, hackers break into 
networks for the thrill of the challenge, bragging rights in the hacker 
community, and monetary gain, among other reasons, whereas botnet 
operators use a network of compromised, remotely-controlled systems to, 
among other things, coordinate attacks, such as denial-of-service attacks that 
prevent the authorized use of networks, systems, or applications by exhausting 
resources. Still others, such as nations may use cyber tools for information-
gathering and espionage activities, while terrorists may seek to cause harm or 
damage public morale and confidence. 
Responsibility for ensuring the security of vehicle systems and 
components spans across the automotive supply chain and occurs throughout 
the vehicle development cycle. For example, automakers define core vehicle 
design requirements, including software system requirements, to automotive 
parts suppliers. In turn, automotive parts suppliers assemble vehicle systems 
and often rely on lower-level suppliers, such as chip manufacturers, to obtain 
the specific parts (i.e., hardware) for the vehicle systems. Each supplier is 
responsible for testing and validating its specific product and certifying that its 
product meets automaker specifications. Automakers may incorporate 
components from multiple suppliers to assemble the vehicle and are ultimately 
responsible for validating that safety-critical systems meet minimum 
performance requirements and operate as intended. 
Within DOT, NHTSA is the primary agency responsible for vehicle 
safety. NHTSA’s mission is to save lives, prevent injuries, and reduce 
economic costs due to road traffic crashes. NHTSA developed Federal Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standards, which establish the minimum performance 
requirements for certain safety features, such as brakes and air bags, to which 
automakers must conform and certify compliance.20 NHTSA also conducts 
research in support of vehicle safety programs. The Office of Vehicle Safety 
Research conducts research in the areas of crashworthiness, crash avoidance, 
and electronic controls research. The electronic controls research—which 
includes research in the areas of electronics reliability, automated vehicles, and 
cybersecurity—is conducted by the Electronics Systems Safety Research 
Division21and is also supported by VRTC, the agency’s in-house laboratory, in 
East Liberty, Ohio. In fiscal year 2015, the Office of Vehicle Safety Research 
had a budget of $29 million, of which $2.5 million was dedicated to 
electronics and vehicle cybersecurity research. According to NHTSA officials, 
as of July 2015, five full-time staff were dedicated to vehicle cybersecurity, 
automation, and electronics research. In addition, NHTSA has research under 
way related to cybersecurity for connected-vehicle technologies, which, as 

United States Government Accountability Office 
12
previously mentioned, are expected to provide safety benefits by deterring 
crashes. 
Several recent laws and legislative proposals have included provisions 
related to vehicle cybersecurity. For example, MAP-21—which was signed 
into law in July of 2012—directed NHTSA to, among other things, complete 
an examination of the need for safety standards with regard to electronic 
systems in passenger motor vehicles and to consider various topics, such as the 
security needs for those electronic components to prevent unauthorized 
access.22 The act also required NHTSA to seek public comment in conducting 
its examination and to issue a report to Congress on the highest priority areas 
for safety with regard to electronic systems.23 In addition, the Fixing 
America’s Surface Transportation Act (FAST Act), enacted in 2015, requires 
DOT to submit a report to Congress on the operations of the Council for 
Vehicle Electronics, Vehicle Software and Emerging Technologies 
(Electronics Council), 24 which was established in MAP-21 to provide a forum 
for research, rulemaking, and enforcement officials to coordinate and share 
information internally on advanced vehicle electronics and new technologies.25 
Legislative proposals related to ensuring vehicle cybersecurity have also been 
introduced by members of Congress. For example, if passed, the Security and 
Privacy in Your Car Act of 2015 would require NHTSA to establish a “cyber 
dashboard” that displays an evaluation of how well each automaker protects 
the security and privacy of vehicle owners and would require automakers to 
adhere to government standards for vehicle cybersecurity.26 The Security and 
Privacy in Your Car Study Act of 2015 would require NHTSA, along with 
some other federal agencies, to conduct a study to determine the appropriate 
standards for the regulation of vehicle cybersecurity.27 
Finally, other federal agencies and foreign governments have also 
conducted cybersecurity research, particularly as it relates to connected- 
vehicle technologies, which are expected to increase the need for security 
protections.28 For example, the European Union sponsored two major projects 
examining the security of connected-vehicle technology communications. 
These projects resulted in guidelines for the various security elements needed 
for the deployment of connected-vehicle technologies, such as message 
integrity, privacy protection, and misbehavior detection.29 
 
 
 
 
 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
13
REMOTE ATTACKS INVOLVING SAFETY-CRITICAL 
VEHICLE SYSTEMS COULD HAVE THE GREATEST IMPACT 
ON PASSENGER SAFETY 
 
Cyberattacks through Direct and Remote Access Are Possible, 
but Remote Attacks Are of Most Concern to Stakeholders 
 
Based on our analysis of research and industry stakeholder views, modern 
vehicles contain multiple interfaces—connections between the vehicle and 
external networks—that if not properly secured, can become entry points—or 
attack paths—for cyber attackers.30 Some of these interfaces can only be 
accessed through direct contact with the vehicle, while others can be accessed 
remotely through short- and long-range wireless channels. 
 
Cyberattacks through Direct Access 
Selected industry stakeholders we interviewed identified several vehicle 
interfaces that can be compromised through direct, physical access to a vehicle 
(see fig. 3). Of these potential direct interfaces, most of the selected industry 
stakeholders in our review (24 out of 32) expressed concerns about attacks 
exploiting cybersecurity vulnerabilities through the on-board diagnostics 
(OBD-II) port. This port is mandated in passenger vehicles by regulation for 
emissions-testing purposes and to facilitate diagnostic assessments by auto 
dealers, repair shops, and car owners.31 In addition to being prevalent in 
modern vehicles, this port also provides direct and largely unrestricted access 
to in-vehicle communication networks. Thus, it can provide an attacker with 
sufficient access to compromise the full range of a vehicle’s systems, 
including safety-critical systems, such as the brakes and steering wheel. 
However, because accessing the OBD-II port and other direct interfaces 
generally requires direct access to the vehicle,32 such attacks would require 
attackers to target one vehicle at a time, thereby limiting the impact of a 
successful attack. 
 
Cyberattacks through Remote (Short- and Long-Range Wireless) Access 
Selected industry stakeholders we interviewed identified several main 
interfaces that could be used to undertake a remote cyberattack through short- 
or long-range wireless channels, such as built-in Bluetooth and cellular-calling 
capabilities (see fig. 3). The majority of these industry stakeholders (23 out of 
32) agreed that remote attacks are the most concerning for passenger safety. 

United States Government Accountability Office 
14
Such attacks could involve multiple vehicles and cause widespread impacts 
including passenger injuries or fatalities. For example, two stakeholders told 
us that through remote attacks, cyber attackers could theoretically achieve 
massive attacks of multiple vehicles simultaneously. Half of the selected 
industry stakeholders (16 out of 32) emphasized that long-range wireless 
interfaces, such as cellular connections on the telematics unit, are especially 
concerning. Through such interfaces, the cyber attacker could theoretically 
exploit vulnerabilities to access the target vehicles from anywhere in the world 
and take control over the vehicles’ safety-critical systems. 
 
 
Source: GAO analysis of stakeholder interviews and Checkoway et al., 2011. | GAO-
16-350. 
aIn this context, long-range refers to access at distances over 1 kilometer. 
bUniversal Serial Bus (USB) storage devices are used to store text, video, audio, and 
image information. By inserting such devices into the vehicle’s USB port, users 
can access stored information through the vehicle’s radio or other media systems. 
cThese systems can prevent the car from operating unless the correct key is present, as 
verified by the presence of the correct radio-frequency identification tag. 
dThis port is mandated in vehicles by regulation for emission-testing purposes and to 
facilitate diagnostic assessments of vehicles, such as by repair shops. 
eThese systems use on-board sensors and other cameras to assist the driver in 
undertaking certain functions, such as changing lanes or braking suddenly. 
fVehicle telematics systems—which include the dashboard, controls, and navigation 
systems— provide continuous connectivity to long- and short-range wireless 
connections. 
Figure 3. Key Interfaces That Could Be Exploited in a Vehicle Cyberattack. 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
15
Researchers have played a key role in publicly demonstrating that remote 
vehicle cyberattacks that impact safety are possible, because of vulnerabilities 
in modern vehicles. For example, in a hacking demonstration33 first reported in 
2011, researchers from the University of Washington and University of 
California San Diego first demonstrated the ability to remotely attack multiple 
vehicles’ safety-critical systems through short- and long-range wireless 
channels without physical access to the target vehicles.34 In this demonstration, 
the researchers studied two General Motors (GM) vehicles, gaining an in-
depth understanding of the vehicles’ systems, including the software code 
underlying various vehicle components and the CAN messages used to send 
commands between the ECUs that control the vehicle’s systems. After gaining 
access to a target vehicle’s CAN bus by exploiting software vulnerabilities in 
multiple wireless interfaces—including GM’s OnStar telematics system and 
the Bluetooth unit—the researchers were able to inject messages onto the 
vehicle’s CAN bus to take physical control over the vehicle, such as 
controlling the display on the speedometer, shutting off the engine, and 
controlling the brakes. 
The researchers also showed that by exploiting vulnerabilities in the 
implementation of a telematics system—which connects participating vehicles 
via a cellular connection to a backend server maintained by the automaker—it 
would be possible to compromise multiple vehicles simultaneously. In this 
demonstration, the researchers exploited vulnerabilities in the communication 
protocols of GM’s OnStar system in order to send commands to the CAN 
buses of their two test vehicles.35 For safety reasons, the researchers only sent 
commands to take control of their test vehicles and only when these vehicles 
were in secured environments. However, if carried out by a cyber attacker, 
such an attack could have safety impacts on multiple vehicles. The researchers 
also demonstrated vulnerabilities in several other interfaces—including the 
Bluetooth unit—that could be exploited to send messages on the CAN bus and 
thereby take control over the vehicle’s safety-critical systems (see fig. 4 for an 
overview of the researchers’ hacking demonstration involving the Bluetooth 
unit). 
In another example—the aforementioned Jeep Cherokee hacking 
demonstration reported in 2015—researchers exploited several vulnerabilities 
that allowed them to remotely disable a vehicle’s engine and in some cases 
control the brakes and steering.36 Similar to the 2011 GM demonstration, the 
researchers closely studied a test vehicle to understand its systems—including 
the characteristics of its software code and CAN messages—and showed it 
would be possible to remotely attack target vehicles with the same 

United States Government Accountability Office 
16
vulnerabilities as the test vehicle. Also, the researchers showed that it would 
be possible to exploit vulnerabilities in the implementation of a telematics 
system to target multiple vehicles participating in the telematics service. This 
demonstration involved multiple steps and identified a chain of vulnerabilities 
related to the vehicle’s network architecture, the telematics unit, and the 
cellular provider’s implementation of the vehicle’s telematics service (see fig.5 
for an overview of this hacking demonstration).37 
 
 
Source: GAO analysis of Checkoway et al., 2011. | GAO-16-350. 
aVehicle telematics systems—which include the dashboard, controls, and navigation 
systems— provide continuous connectivity to long- and short-range wireless 
connections. 
Figure 4. Example of a Potential Vehicle Cyberattack Launched through a Short-Range 
Wireless Interface, as Demonstrated by Researchers. 
 
 
Source: GAO analysis of Miller and Valasek, 2015. | GAO-16-350. 
aVehicle telematics systems—which include the dashboard, controls, and navigation 
systems— provide continuous connectivity to long- and short-range wireless 
connections. 
b“Firmware” is the combination of a hardware device and the computer instructions 
and data that reside as read-only software on that device. 
Figure 5. Example of a Potential Vehicle Cyberattack Launched through a Long-range 
Wireless Interface, as Demonstrated by Researchers. 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
17
In addition, researchers have demonstrated that wireless telematics devices 
that consumers can plug into OBD-II ports to provide vehicle data to third 
parties, such as insurance companies, contain vulnerabilities that can be 
exploited remotely. By using these devices—often referred to as “dongles”—
consumers may qualify for decreased insurance rates. Also, these dongles can 
provide older vehicles lacking built-in wireless interfaces with connectivity, 
allowing consumers to access telematics features—such as long-range cellular 
connectivity—that would otherwise only be available through purchasing a 
modern vehicle with a built-in telematics unit. Since, as previously mentioned, 
the OBD-II port connects directly to the key in-vehicle systems, an attack on 
such dongles could enable an attacker to take control of safety-critical systems 
and turn what was formerly a direct attack path into a remote attack path. For 
example, a recent demonstration showed that a particular manufacturer’s 
dongles can be discovered online and then compromised by a remote 
attacker.38 The researchers were able to exploit vulnerabilities of the dongle, 
allowing them to send messages to the vehicle’s CAN buses, including 
messages to remotely apply and disable the brakes. Other demonstrations have 
shown similar vulnerabilities in other dongles. 
Notably, each of the above hacking demonstrations illustrate that some 
overarching characteristics of the CAN bus make it more likely that a vehicle 
cyberattack launched through any interface—including nonsafety-critical 
systems, such as the telematics unit—could impact safety. Specifically, these 
hacking demonstrations highlight a major security weakness of CAN: it 
assumes that any message on the bus is sent from a trusted sender, so 
messages are not secured or restricted in any way. In other words, these 
demonstrations help illustrate that because of the CAN’s design, there is no 
way to know whether a given message on the CAN bus originates from a 
legitimate source or from a cyber attacker. As previously noted, the CAN was 
designed in 1985, which was long before vehicles were connected to external 
networks and vehicle cybersecurity was an issue facing the auto industry. 
Despite its inherent security weaknesses, CAN is the most commonly used bus 
system in the auto industry today. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

United States Government Accountability Office 
18
Stakeholders Acknowledge That Remote Attacks Are Difficult to 
Execute, but Expressed Concern about the Future Potential for 
Such Attacks 
 
While the possibility that remote cyberattacks could occur outside the 
research environment is concerning, some of the selected industry stakeholders 
we spoke to (8 out of 32) have also pointed out that attacks comparable to the 
hacking demonstrations described above would be complex to execute. 
Specifically, most of these stakeholders noted that such attacks would likely 
require a high level of hacking sophistication, including specialized 
knowledge. For example, as previously mentioned, the researchers involved in 
the GM and Jeep hacking demonstrations had prolonged access to test 
vehicles, which they used to closely study the vehicles’ systems and key 
components. In another example, representatives from a cybersecurity firm 
noted that one very difficult step in such demonstrations is figuring out how to 
create authentic-looking messages that will be accepted and acted upon by the 
vehicle’s ECUs. In addition, one leading researcher predicted that those who 
would execute remote cyberattacks would be those with previous experience 
hacking into other computer systems; for someone with no such experience, 
hacking into a vehicle remotely would be very difficult. 
To date, there have been no remote cyberattacks with safety impacts 
reported outside of the research environment. In addition, determining the risk 
that such a remote cyberattack will occur in the near future is challenging, 
especially because of the difficulty of predicting the actions of cyber attackers 
and since modern vehicles’ designs vary widely (with some vehicle makes and 
models more vulnerable than others to such an attack). However, most 
selected industry stakeholders we interviewed (26 out of 32) expressed 
concerns that real-world attacks with safety implications could occur in the 
near future, particularly as automakers begin deploying autonomous (i.e., self-
driving) vehicles and connected- vehicle technologies.39 For instance, some 
stakeholders expressed concerns that as vehicles become increasingly 
autonomous–and assume control of more functions traditionally controlled by 
the driver such as steering and braking—it could become easier for remote 
cyberattacks to reach vehicles’ safety-critical systems. This is because 
autonomous vehicles’ systems will be tightly linked and highly responsive to 
inputs from external systems, such as sensors and the Global Positioning 
System, much more so than they currently are today. Also, DOT and the auto 
industry are planning to implement connected-vehicle technologies in coming 
years.40 These technologies are envisioned to further connect vehicles to one 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
19
another and infrastructure, such as traffic signals, to increase safety overall. 
For example, vehicle-to-vehicle technologies would allow nearby vehicles to 
share data, such as information on vehicle speed and location, to warn drivers 
of and thereby help prevent imminent collisions.41 However, some 
stakeholders expressed concerns that cyber attackers could exploit 
vulnerabilities in the larger wireless networks used to facilitate these 
technologies to remotely cyberattack multiple vehicles simultaneously and 
take control over their safety-critical systems, which could result in accidents 
or other safety impacts. 
 
 
A VARIETY OF KEY PRACTICES AND TECHNOLOGIES ARE 
AVAILABLE TO MITIGATE VEHICLE CYBERSECURITY 
VULNERABILITIES AND THE IMPACTS OF  
POTENTIAL ATTACKS 
 
Key Practices Used by Other Industries Are Available for Use in 
the Auto Industry 
 
Selected industry stakeholders informed us that a range of key practices 
are available to identify and mitigate potential cybersecurity vulnerabilities in 
vehicles.42 For instance, stakeholders frequently cited key practices used by 
other industries with a longer history of cybersecurity concerns, such as the IT 
industry’s use of penetration testing and code reviews (see table 1). In 
addition, when NHTSA published A Summary of Cybersecurity Best Practices 
in 2014, it drew from existing practices used in other industries, including the 
IT, aviation, telecommunications, industrial control systems, energy, medical 
devices, and financial payments industries.43 Although the key practices 
identified by NHTSA were generally broader, higher-level practices than those 
identified by our selected industry stakeholders, there were some similarities. 
For example, both NHTSA and our selected industry stakeholders emphasized 
the importance of risk assessments in mitigating cybersecurity vulnerabilities. 
According to some stakeholders we interviewed, the auto industry’s 
adoption of cybersecurity key practices varies by company and some 
companies are farther along with respect to following key practices than 
others. Some stakeholders pointed to the relative newness of cybersecurity in 
the automotive realm to explain why some companies are still building up 
their organizational capacity to address cybersecurity issues and developing or 

United States Government Accountability Office 
20
refining cybersecurity practices. In addition, some stakeholders also opined 
that until very recently some companies— primarily automakers—have been 
reluctant to accept vehicle cyberattacks as a real threat and take the necessary 
steps in response. 
 
Table 1. Key Practices to Identify and Mitigate Vehicle Cybersecurity 
Vulnerabilities Identified by Industry Stakeholders 
 
Key practicea 
Description 
Conduct risk 
assessments  
Assess threats and vulnerabilities related to vehicles’ 
electronic systems, including the potential impacts if 
known vulnerabilities are exploited, to inform and 
prioritize cybersecurity protections.  
Incorporate security-
by-design principles  
Consider and build in cybersecurity protections starting in 
the early vehicle-design phases.  
Create domain 
separation for in-
vehicle networks  
To the extent possible, locate safety-critical systems (i.e., 
steering, braking, etc.) and non-safety-critical systems on 
separate in-vehicle networks and limit communication 
between the safety-critical and non-safety-critical domains.  
Implement a layered 
approach to security  
Incorporate cybersecurity protections at multiple vehicle 
layers (e.g., at the electronic control unit level and the in-
vehicle network level) to create multiple hurdles for cyber 
attackers and reduce the impact of a cyber breach.  
Conduct penetration 
testing  
Employ skilled assessors/evaluators who can simulate real-
world vehicle cyberattacks in an attempt to identify ways 
to circumvent and defeat the vehicle’s cybersecurity 
protections.  
Conduct code 
reviews  
Employ skilled assessors/evaluators to systematically 
examine the vehicle’s software code so that any mistakes 
overlooked in the initial development phase can be 
addressed.  
Develop over-the-air 
update capabilities  
Establish mechanisms to remotely and securely update 
vehicle software and firmwareb over the life of the vehicle 
in response to identified vulnerabilities.  
Source: GAO analysis of stakeholder interviews. | GAO-16-350 
aThese key practices are organized based on the vehicle development process, 
beginning with the vehicle concept and design phases and ending with the vehicle 
operation and maintenance phase. 
b“Firmware” is the combination of a hardware device and computer instructions and 
data that reside as read-only software on that device. 
 
 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
21
One of the key practices mentioned most frequently—by 23 of the 32 
selected industry stakeholders we interviewed—related to developing 
capabilities to conduct remote, over-the-air (OTA) updates of vehicle software 
and firmware (see table 1). Some of these stakeholders pointed to OTA 
updates as an essential piece of automakers’ response capabilities as they 
would allow automakers to quickly and effectively respond to cybersecurity 
incidents if and when they occur. However, based on our interviews, only a 
few automakers have OTA update capabilities, and only one—Tesla—can 
update all systems, including safety-critical and non-safety critical systems, on 
a fleet-wide basis remotely. Representatives from one automaker explained 
that their company does not yet conduct OTA updates because this capability 
involves hiring new staff and developing a whole new IT infrastructure to 
ensure that these updates do not become a new remote attack path into their 
vehicles. 
The concept of domain separation was also identified as a key practice by 
the majority of selected industry stakeholders we spoke with (22 out of 32). 
Several automakers informed us that their companies have been following this 
key practice for 7 or more years. For example, one German automaker 
informed us that the company adopted this practice in the late 1990s as more 
functions in the vehicle became electronically controlled and infotainment 
systems and telematics units were introduced into vehicles; however, company 
representatives explained that the company’s initial motivation was to ensure 
system stability, not to mitigate vehicle cyberattacks. In addition, several 
stakeholders suggested that the FCA hacking demonstration might not have 
had such significant safety impacts if the Jeep model involved had exhibited a 
greater degree of domain separation. Despite general agreement that domain 
separation can be a very effective mitigation strategy, some stakeholders 
pointed out that complete isolation or segregation is often not possible or 
practical because some limited communication will likely need to occur 
between safety-critical and non-safety-critical systems. For example, in some 
vehicles the infotainment system needs to receive information regarding the 
vehicle’s speed to keep the volume at a consistent level. 
Other key practices that were mentioned by several selected industry 
stakeholders, but less frequently than those described in table 1, include 
having 
dedicated 
organizational 
resources 
specifically 
focused 
on 
cybersecurity, such as creating new cybersecurity divisions or high-level 
managerial positions, and developing responsible disclosure policies that 
facilitate communication and collaboration with researchers and other third 
parties who may identify vehicle cybersecurity vulnerabilities. For example, 

United States Government Accountability Office 
22
some stakeholders noted that responsible disclosure policies are used by large 
IT companies, such as Microsoft, to encourage researchers and others to report 
any software vulnerabilities that they identify in the company’s products. 
 
 
Mitigation Technologies Can Be Incorporated at Multiple 
Vehicle Security Layers 
 
Selected industry stakeholders informed us of several technologies that 
can help automakers and parts suppliers mitigate vehicle cybersecurity 
vulnerabilities and the impacts of potential cyberattacks (see table 2). As noted 
above, these stakeholders identified “implementing a layered approach to 
security” as a key practice. In other words, they noted that vehicle 
cybersecurity is enhanced as mitigation technologies are added at more layers, 
including the ECU layer, the in-vehicle network layer (e.g., CAN bus), and the 
external interfaces layer (e.g., telematics unit). In addition, in its white paper 
NHTSA and Vehicle Cybersecurity, NHTSA states that a layered approach to 
vehicle cybersecurity reduces the probability of attack and mitigates the 
potential ramifications of a successful intrusion. 
Notably, most of the technologies identified by selected industry 
stakeholders we spoke with cannot be added on existing vehicles; rather, they 
must be incorporated into the vehicle design and production process, which as 
we describe later in this report, takes approximately 5 years to complete. The 
one exception is intrusion detection and prevention systems: several 
companies that are marketing these products for in-vehicle networks informed 
us that they have also developed aftermarket versions of their products that can 
be incorporated onto existing vehicles. In addition, most of the technologies 
identified by stakeholders serve to mitigate the inherent security weakness of 
CAN, which is that messages transmitted over a CAN bus are generally free 
flowing and not secured or restricted in any way. For example, a firewall 
placed between two in-vehicle networks can be set up to prevent the passage 
of any message that is not on a pre-determined list of approved messages (i.e., 
a “white list”). Figure 6 below depicts how firewalls and some of the other 
technologies listed in the table above can help mitigate vehicle cyberattacks. 
 
 
 
 
 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
23
Table 2. Summary of Vehicle Security Layers and Examples of 
Technologies Identified by Stakeholders That Can Be Applied to Mitigate 
Impacts of Vehicle Cyberattacks 
 
Security 
layer 
Overview of 
protection 
Example technologies that can help achieve 
protection 
Electronic 
control unit 
(ECU)  
Protect integrity 
of ECU software 
and hardware  
•Hardware security module/trust anchor: Piece of 
hardware, such as a computer chip, that has 
undergone additional rigorous testing to eliminate 
flaws to ensure that communications it facilitates 
can be trusted.  
•Microkernel: Very small portion of software 
securely designed with limited, yet critical 
functionality. It is useful when a single ECU with 
multiple functionalities needs to send trusted 
messages to other ECUs.  
In-vehicle 
networks  
Protect integrity 
of critical ECU 
messages 
transmitted across 
in-vehicle 
networks  
•Gateway: Device that interconnects and enables 
communication between two or more networks, 
including multiple internal vehicle networks and 
internal and external networks (e.g., gateways help 
facilitate the separation of safety-critical and non-
safety-critical in-vehicle networks).  
•Firewall: System that controls and limits 
communication between two or more networks, 
including multiple internal vehicle networks and 
internal and external networks. Firewall systems 
can sit on gateways and block any messages not on 
a pre-determined list of approved messages (i.e., 
“white list”).  
•Message authentication and encryption: Coding 
techniques that verify the legitimacy of message 
senders and receivers. These techniques can be 
used to secure communications among ECUs on 
higher-bandwidth internal vehicle networks, such 
as Ethernet, or to secure communications between 
the vehicle and the automaker’s backend server.  
•Intrusion detection and prevention system: 
Software that monitors network messages and 
analyzes them for signs of possible incidents. 
Intrusion prevention systems also attempt to stop 
detected possible incidents, ideally before the 
target is reached.  
External 
interfaces  
Secure interfaces 
that facilitate the 
vehicles’ 
communications 
with external 
networks and 
devices (e.g., the 
telematics unit 
which facilitates 
cellular 
connectivity)  
Source: GAO analysis of stakeholder interviews and the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology reports. | GAO-16-350 

United States Government Accountability Office 
24
 
Source: GAO analysis of stakeholder information. | GAO-16-350. 
aVehicle telematics systems—which include the dashboard, controls, and navigation 
systems— provide continuous connectivity to long- and short-range wireless 
connections. 
Figure 6. Example of a Vehicle’s Cybersecurity-Mitigation Technologies Shown along 
an In-Vehicle Network. 
Based on our interviews with selected industry stakeholders, automakers 
are still determining whether and how to implement some technologies that 
can help identify and mitigate vehicle cybersecurity vulnerabilities and reduce 
the impacts of potential cyberattacks. For example, several stakeholders 
expressed skepticism about the usefulness and effectiveness of intrusion 
detection and prevention systems—especially detection-only systems—and 
stated that these systems merit further testing before they are widely deployed 
on in-vehicle networks. In addition, as noted above, CAN has become the 
most commonly used in-vehicle network that facilitates communication among 
ECUs. However, one mitigation option—message authentication and 
encryption44—cannot be easily incorporated onto CAN buses, as CAN does 
not provide sufficient bandwidth to host these protections.45 Some 
stakeholders informed us that this option is more feasible for higher-bandwidth 
networks, such as Ethernet, but noted that these networks are currently less 
prevalent than CAN and likely to remain less prevalent for some time given 
the costs associated with vehicle re-designs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
25
STAKEHOLDERS FACE CHALLENGES RELATED TO 
VEHICLE CYBERSECURITY, SOME OF WHICH MAY BE 
ADDRESSED BY INDUSTRY-LED EFFORTS 
 
Stakeholders Identified Several Challenges Facing the Industry 
Related to Vehicle Cybersecurity 
 
The most frequently cited set of challenges facing the industry in ensuring 
vehicle cybersecurity—mentioned by 15 of the 32 selected industry 
stakeholders we spoke with—was the lack of transparency, communication, 
and collaboration regarding vehicles’ cybersecurity among the various players 
in the automotive supply chain, as described in the following examples. 
 
 
Several parts suppliers informed us that the security requirements they 
receive from automakers often lack sufficient context about the 
broader component or system. For example, one supplier stated that, 
ideally, automakers should provide specific security requirements 
(e.g., “encrypt data X using encryption mechanism Y”), as well as 
their higher-level system functionality, security, and protection goals, 
such as “ensure data confidentiality of function Z.” Suppliers stated 
that with sufficient information, they could more readily identify 
potential cybersecurity issues and recommend alternative protections 
and enhancements. 
 
Some stakeholders also noted that it can be difficult for automakers to 
oversee and exert control over suppliers’ software code. They 
explained that because suppliers’ code is proprietary, the automakers 
do not have access to it and suppliers are reluctant to share it. One 
subject matter expert noted that as a result, all the automakers can 
really know about the code is how it performs when tested under 
certain conditions. In addition, one automaker noted that it can be 
especially challenging to exert control over third parties that 
manufacture dongles that plug into the OBD-II port for vehicle 
tracking and other purposes. They explained that while dongles have 
been shown to compromise vehicle cybersecurity, automakers are 
unable to set security requirements for these devices, as dongle 
manufacturers are not technically part of the automotive supply chain. 
 

United States Government Accountability Office 
26
Highlighting the lack of transparency and collaboration that exists among 
the players in the automotive supply chain, one leading researcher we spoke 
with stated that “the most important and interesting commonality” with respect 
to the vulnerabilities identified in his research was that the vulnerabilities were 
located precisely at the interfaces where software code written by different 
supply chain players has to interact. 
Another set of challenges cited by 13 of the 32 selected industry 
stakeholders was the cost of incorporating cybersecurity protections into 
vehicles. Some stakeholders informed us that profit margins for passenger 
vehicles are relatively narrow;46 as a result, even seemingly small 
modifications to enhance cybersecurity—such as using hardware with added 
security protections—can potentially be cost prohibitive to some automakers.47 
Yet, according to some stakeholders, some automakers will likely have to 
pursue 
larger-scale 
changes—such 
as 
redesigning 
their 
in-vehicle 
communication networks—to significantly enhance the cybersecurity of their 
vehicles. Although many stakeholders declined to provide specific cost 
estimates, there was general agreement that these larger-scale changes would 
comprise a major upfront expense, which ultimately contributes to 
automakers’ continued reliance on legacy systems with inherent security 
weaknesses, such as CAN.48 In addition, stakeholders noted that automakers 
may not be able to pass the costs of cybersecurity protections onto consumers 
as they can with other features, such as connectivity and convenience features. 
As a result, automakers will have to balance the cost of cybersecurity 
protections against the risks facing vehicles and consumers’ willingness to 
pay. 
Some stakeholders (13 of 32) also identified challenges related to the auto 
industry’s historical lack of cybersecurity expertise and companies’ efforts to 
build up their expertise in this area. According to stakeholders, the existing 
pool of candidates with the specific mix of knowledge and skills needed to 
design and validate secure vehicle systems is small. One automaker explained 
that due to the shortage of automotive cybersecurity professionals, the 
company often has to decide whether to hire hardware and software 
professionals and teach them cybersecurity or cybersecurity professionals and 
teach them hardware and software. In addition, one leading researcher 
mentioned that the lack of automotive cybersecurity professionals in 
particular—combined with a shortage of cybersecurity professionals more 
broadly—produces competition for top talent both within the industry and with 
major technology companies, such as Google. However, automakers are taking 
some steps to address these challenges. For example, several automakers 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
27
informed us that they have begun partnering with colleges and universities to 
develop college curriculums that better meet their needs, and several U.S. and 
foreign automakers have opened technology and research and development 
centers in Silicon Valley, in part to be closer to the area’s high concentration 
of IT and cybersecurity professionals. 
Finally, 12 of the 32 selected industry stakeholders we spoke with 
informed us that the auto industry’s long product development cycle creates 
challenges related to ensuring vehicle cybersecurity. According to some of 
these stakeholders, vehicles are designed approximately 5 years before they 
roll off of the assembly line. As a result, to the extent that automakers 
incorporated cybersecurity protections in their 2015 model year vehicles, these 
protections would have been based on technology— as well as threat 
information—available in 2010. One stakeholder suggested that this lag can 
make it easier for cyber attackers to understand and breach vehicles’ cyber 
protections and more difficult for automakers to ensure their vehicles are 
protected against the latest known threats. Other challenges that were 
mentioned by several selected industry stakeholders, but less frequently than 
those cited above, include identifying and assessing vehicle cybersecurity 
threats and risks and measuring the performance and effectiveness of 
cybersecurity protections. For example, stakeholders noted that there are no 
widely accepted cybersecurity performance metrics, and it is difficult to prove 
that a vehicle with up to 100 million lines of code is secure. According to one 
stakeholder, testing every line of code in a vehicle would take several months, 
which is not feasible or practical. 
 
 
Several Industry-Led Efforts Are Under Way That Could Help 
Address Some Challenges Related to Vehicle Cybersecurity 
 
Auto industry stakeholders pointed to several industry-led efforts that 
could potentially improve automakers’ and parts suppliers’ ability to identify 
and mitigate vehicle cybersecurity vulnerabilities, as described below. As 
noted above, the adoption of key practices to identify and mitigate vehicle 
cybersecurity vulnerabilities currently varies significantly across the auto 
industry. As a result, several stakeholders told us that the main benefit of these 
and other industry efforts will be to help level the playing field across the 
industry. However, in some cases, stakeholders identified more specific 
benefits and goals associated with the various efforts that may help to address 
some of the key challenges facing the industry described above. For instance, 

United States Government Accountability Office 
28
stakeholders noted that efforts focused on incorporating cybersecurity into 
vehicle-design and engineering processes could help facilitate more productive 
conversations between automakers and their suppliers by creating shared 
expectations and a common language for discussing vehicle cybersecurity 
issues and requirements. 
 
Automotive Information Sharing and Analysis Center 
The effort to establish an Information Sharing and Analysis Center (ISAC) 
for the auto industry is being led by two U.S. industry associations—the 
Alliance for Automobile Manufacturers and the Association of Global 
Automakers—and their members.49 Similar to ISACs created for other 
industries, such as the Financial Services ISAC, the Automotive ISAC is 
intended to serve as a central hub for intelligence collection and analysis and 
provide a forum for members to anonymously share threat and vulnerability 
information with one another. According to representatives from the 
Association of Global Automakers, the ISAC—a U.S. entity that supports 
members that operate globally—began operations at the end of 2015. They 
also informed us that the Automotive ISAC’s membership will initially be 
limited to automakers so that these companies, which are highly competitive, 
can acclimate to the new organization and establish and maintain the level of 
trust and cooperation necessary for a successful ISAC. However, the goal is to 
expand the ISAC’s membership to include other stakeholders, such as parts 
suppliers, as soon as practically possible. 
Selected industry stakeholders we spoke with, as well as DOT officials, 
generally expressed positive views regarding the potential effectiveness of an 
Automotive ISAC. However, some expressed skepticism regarding the ISAC’s 
potential effectiveness. For example, one stakeholder stated that the ISAC’s 
effectiveness could be limited given the sensitivity of the information that will 
need to be shared among competitors and the significant heterogeneity in 
vehicles’ electronic architectures, parts, and components. 
 
Society of Automotive Engineers’ Vehicle Cybersecurity Guidelines 
SAE (Society of Automotive Engineers) International—a standards 
development organization for the auto industry comprised of engineers and 
other 
technical 
professionals—established 
two 
taskforces 
led 
by 
representatives from the U.S. automakers that have been working since 2012 
to develop recommended practice documents related to vehicle cybersecurity. 
According to SAE representatives, the taskforce focused on vehicle hardware 
security is still in the process of developing its draft product; however, the 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
29
taskforce that is focused on identifying and addressing cybersecurity risks 
during the vehicle’s design process has recently completed its draft of SAE 
J3061: Cybersecurity Guidebook for Cyber-Physical Vehicle Systems. This 
guidebook, which was issued in January 2016, provides an overarching 
framework and basic guiding principles for incorporating cybersecurity 
protections into the design of vehicle systems, among other things. Selected 
industry stakeholders we spoke with were generally supportive of SAE’s 
efforts to develop recommended practice documents. 
 
Design and Engineering Process Standard for Cybersecurity 
In July 2015, German automakers informed us that they were working 
with the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) to develop a 
voluntary design and engineering process standard, similar to ISO 26262, that 
is focused on vehicle cybersecurity.50 One stakeholder involved in this effort 
told us that the standard would help automakers and parts suppliers speak a 
common language and ensure that all stakeholders are asking themselves 
similar questions when designing their systems and determining appropriate 
levels of cybersecurity protections. Another stakeholder told us that a critically 
important aspect of this standard is that it would allow for variation and 
flexibility with respect to the types and methods of cybersecurity protections, 
as it would not mandate the use of specific technologies. Many selected 
industry stakeholders we spoke with indicated that they would support the 
development of this type of voluntary design and engineering process 
standard. Two German companies said that they have already incorporated 
elements of this proposed standard into their existing processes. 
In November 2015, one German automaker involved in the ISO effort 
informed us that—given the similarities between the intent of SAE’s 
Cybersecurity Guidebook for Cyber-Physical Vehicle Systems and the 
proposed ISO standard—SAE and ISO have agreed to jointly develop a robust, 
international standard for cybersecurity that will build upon the work already 
completed by SAE. Despite widespread support for both the SAE and ISO 
efforts, some stakeholders mentioned that the standards development process 
can be slow and that it can often take several years to achieve consensus and 
finalize a standard. 
 
AUTOSAR (Automotive Open System Architecture) Partnership 
Since 2003 companies involved in the AUTOSAR (Automotive Open 
System Architecture) partnership—which was founded by German automotive 
companies and now includes 7 of the 8 automakers and 6 of the 8 parts 

United States Government Accountability Office 
30
suppliers we interviewed—have been working on a set of specifications to 
manage the growing complexities associated with the development of vehicle 
software.51 More specifically, the partnership aims to standardize the basic 
software functionality of automotive ECUs and increase the transferability and 
reuse of vehicle software across manufacturers and product lines, among other 
things. Although AUTOSAR’s goals are broader than ensuring vehicle 
cybersecurity, representatives informed us that the partnership has developed 
some specifications related to vehicle cybersecurity. For instance, AUTOSAR 
has several specifications that pertain to the use of message encryption and 
authentication techniques and recently issued a specification aimed at 
protecting the integrity of ECU messages transmitted across in-vehicle 
communication networks. According to AUTOSAR representatives, one of the 
main benefits of the partnership for automakers and parts suppliers is the 
reduction in costs associated with software development and testing. Other 
benefits of the partnership include the assurance that all applicable standards 
and requirements—including any future cybersecurity standards and 
requirements—have and will be incorporated into AUTOSAR specifications 
and the increase in product quality due to the use of standard specifications. 
 
 
DOT HAS MADE PROGRESS IN ADDRESSING VEHICLE 
CYBERSECURITY, BUT HAS NOT YET DEFINED AND 
DOCUMENTED ITS ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES IN 
RESPONDING TO A VEHICLE CYBERATTACK 
 
NHTSA Has Established a Vehicle Cybersecurity Research 
Program 
 
According to NHTSA officials, efforts to specifically consider vehicle 
cybersecurity have been under way over the last 5 years. Specifically, the 
agency modified its Vehicle Safety Research organization in recognition that 
vehicle cybersecurity represents a safety concern. In January 2012, NHTSA 
created a new Electronic Systems Safety Research division— which conducts 
research on electronics reliability, automated vehicles, and cybersecurity—
within the Vehicle Safety Research’s Office of Vehicle Crash Avoidance. 
Within this new division, NHTSA established a cybersecurity research 
program in 2012 and set goals for it, including: developing tools to enable 
applied research in this area, fostering industry’s development of new 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
31
solutions, and gathering facts to inform potential future federal policy and 
regulatory decisions.52 Cybersecurity research has become one of NHTSA’s 
highest safety research priorities53 and falls into four main areas, as 
summarized in table 3. Some of this research is conducted by NHTSA’s staff. 
For example, its VRTC conducts NHTSA’s sensitive and quick turn-around 
cybersecurity research projects, according to officials. Other research is 
conducted through contracts with DOT’s Volpe Center and other research 
institutions.54 NHTSA officials informed us that the agency has used the 
results of its completed research to inform industry about its efforts and to 
form the basis for additional research currently under way or planned. The 
officials expect more reports to be issued in 2016 as additional research 
projects are completed. 
 
Table 3. Examples of Recently Completed and Ongoing National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) Vehicle Cybersecurity Research 
by Priority Area 
 
Research area  Description  
Examples of completed, ongoing, 
and planned research by area  
Protective 
and 
preventive 
measures and 
techniques  
 
Research into methods 
that could prevent a 
cyberattack, such as 
isolating safety-critical 
systems, message 
encryption, and using 
gateways and firewalls.  
 
Completed research  
In 2014, NHTSA issued reports that:  
•Summarized cybersecurity best 
practices that could be leveraged by 
the auto industry;a 
•Outlined a modeling approach to 
assess potential cybersecurity threats 
in modern vehicles; b and  
•Applied the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology 
Cybersecurity Risk Management 
Framework to modern vehicles.c 
Ongoing research  
In 2015, NHTSA initiated contracted 
research into effective firewall and 
gateway technologies for vehicles.  
Real-time 
intrusion 
detection 
systems  
 
Research into the 
feasibility and 
effectiveness of systems 
that are designed to detect 
and respond in real time 
to mitigate the potential 
adverse effects of 
intrusions.  
Ongoing research  
In 2015, NHTSA initiated contracted 
research on vehicle intrusion 
detection and prevention systems.  

United States Government Accountability Office 
32
Table 3. (Continued) 
 
Research area  Description  
Examples of completed, ongoing, 
and planned research by area  
Effectiveness 
of industry’s 
responses to 
identified 
vulnerabilities  
Applied investigatory 
research into how well 
specific stakeholders have 
responded to an identified 
vulnerability.  
Broad research on 
effective ways to respond 
to vulnerabilities, 
including key practices 
from other industries.  
Completed & ongoing research  
In recent years, VRTC staff have 
recreated hacking demonstrations 
(such as the Jeep demonstration) to 
help NHTSA determine the 
extensiveness of the vulnerability in 
other vehicles and assess the impact 
vulnerabilities may have on vehicle 
safety.  
Ongoing research  
In October 2015, NHTSA initiated 
contracted research on secure 
firmwared updates—both through 
direct vehicle access and wireless 
over-the-air updates.  
Assessment 
of solutions  
Research to assess 
proposed solutions (such 
as those suggested by 
industry and researchers) 
and to provide feedback 
for continuous 
improvement.  
Completed research  
In 2014, NHTSA issued a report 
focused on assessing the 
applicability of the Information 
Sharing and Analysis Center(ISAC) 
model for the automotive sector.e 
Ongoing research  
According to officials, NHTSA 
continues to promote and monitor 
progress of the Automotive ISAC 
and to research additional proposed 
solutions.  
Source: GAO Summary of DOT research. | GAO-16-350 
aNHTSA, A Summary of Cybersecurity Best Practices, DOT 812 075 (Washington, 
D.C.: October 2014). 
bNHTSA, Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern Automobiles, DOT 
HS 812 074 (Washington, D.C.: October 2014). 
cNHTSA, National Institute of Standards and Technology Cybersecurity Risk 
Management Framework Applied to Modern Vehicles, DOT 812 073 
(Washington, D.C.: October 2014). 
dFirmware is the combination of a hardware device and computer instructions and data 
that reside as read-only software on that device. 
eNHTSA, Assessment of the Information Sharing and Analysis Center Model. DOT HS 
812 076 (Washington, D.C.: October 2014). 
 
 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
33
Most selected industry stakeholders we spoke to (25 out of 32) were aware 
that NHTSA is conducting vehicle cybersecurity research, but their opinions 
differed about whether NHTSA is appropriately focusing and prioritizing its 
research. Of those stakeholders who discussed NHTSA’s research in this area, 
the majority (10 out of 18) told us that its research focus and prioritization are 
appropriate. For example, according to some stakeholders in our review, the 
research reports NHTSA issued in 2014 provide helpful background on the 
issue of vehicle cybersecurity. Specifically, representatives from one 
automaker told us that they use the report on characterizing vehicle 
cybersecurity threats to make their own determinations about how to respond 
to identified vulnerabilities. However, six selected industry stakeholders told 
us that NHTSA could improve its research prioritization in this area. For 
example, two stakeholders noted that NHTSA has not dedicated enough 
resources to this important issue. In another example, two other stakeholders 
stated that NHTSA’s efforts to recreate the Jeep Cherokee hacking 
demonstration are not useful since such efforts are more reactive than 
proactive. However, VRTC staff told us that recreating this hacking 
demonstration allowed them to determine that the initial steps that FCA took 
to mitigate the vulnerabilities were not successful and additional steps needed 
to be taken. 
NHTSA officials told us that their ability to conduct additional research is 
in part dependent on funding and resources the agency receives for vehicle 
cybersecurity and other priority research areas. In recent years, the agency has 
requested an increase in funding to support additional staff in the Office of 
Vehicle Safety Research, in part to conduct additional cybersecurity research, 
but actual funding received was lower than requested. For example, in fiscal 
year 2015, NHTSA requested $36.8 million for the Office of Vehicle Safety 
Research but received $29 million; this sum was about a $4 million decrease 
from the $32.5 million the Office received for fiscal year 2014. NHTSA 
officials told us that due to the 2015’s funding being lower than requested, 
they had to make difficult decisions and forgo other planned projects in order 
to carve out the $2.5 million that was ultimately dedicated to electronics and 
vehicle cybersecurity research in fiscal year 2015. This amount was still a 
decrease from the $2.7 million dedicated to this area in fiscal year 2014.55 
Despite lower funding levels, officials told us they have been able to leverage 
resources from other programs, such as by using test vehicles for the New Car 
Assessment Program for cybersecurity research.56 To build on its ongoing 
research, the agency’s fiscal year 2016 budget requested $1 million for 
additional space and new equipment at VRTC, as well as $4.1 million to 

United States Government Accountability Office 
34
enhance a program on vehicle electronics and emerging technologies. In 
addition to the applied research it conducts, officials also told us that they 
attend cybersecurity conferences where researchers present findings on vehicle 
cybersecurity vulnerabilities and participate in various working groups, such 
as serving as a liaison on SAE International committees, to enhance their 
understanding of vehicle cybersecurity issues. Finally, NHTSA collaborates in 
relevant research efforts led by other federal agencies. For example, it 
participates in two ongoing efforts by DHS: one effort involving seven major 
automakers which is focused on researching intrusion detection systems and 
secure over-the-air updates for vehicles, among other issues, and another effort 
focused on ensuring the cybersecurity of government-owned vehicles. 
 
 
NHTSA Is Developing Guidance to Help Ensure Consistent 
Responses to Vulnerabilities 
 
In November 2015, NHTSA officials informed us that they were 
developing guidance to help automakers understand the agency’s 
determinations—and 
to 
assist 
automakers 
in 
making 
their 
own 
determinations—regarding the types of vehicle cybersecurity vulnerabilities 
that would constitute a safety defect and, therefore, merit a recall.57 According 
to NHTSA officials, the differing conclusions reached by NHTSA and FCA 
regarding the need for a recall in the aftermath of the Jeep Cherokee hacking 
demonstration, underscored the need for this guidance.58 While the guidance is 
not yet complete, NHTSA officials informed us that they intend to create a 
document that provides a framework and educates the industry on the 
methodology NHTSA uses and the factors it considers when assessing risks 
associated with cybersecurity vulnerabilities in order to make safety defect and 
recall determinations. According to NHTSA officials, factors such as the 
number of affected vehicles, frequency of occurrence, likelihood of 
exploitation, and the resulting hazard level (i.e., impacts to safety-critical 
systems) can be important when assessing risk and making safety defect 
determinations; these and other factors will be explained in the guidance. For 
example, the officials noted that NHTSA would be particularly concerned with 
identified vulnerabilities that would enable a cyber attacker to manipulate the 
safety-critical systems of multiple vehicles. In January 2016, NHTSA officials 
informed us that they expect the guidance to be issued by March 31, 2016.59 
Several industry stakeholders we spoke with—including automakers and 
industry associations—told us that this type of guidance would be helpful and 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
35
is needed. For example, representatives from one industry association told us 
that absent guidance, automakers could monitor NHTSA’s actions and recall 
decisions over time to get clarity on what factors NHTSA considers important 
in making safety defect determinations; however, conducting such monitoring 
of NHTSA’s actions is not efficient. In addition to being helpful to the 
industry, such guidance could also help NHTSA respond to identified 
vulnerabilities more consistently. For example, several stakeholders noted that 
while NHTSA requested that FCA conduct a recall in response to the 2015 
Jeep Cherokee hacking demonstration, it did not request a recall in response to 
the GM hacking demonstration in 2011, despite the fact that both 
demonstrations revealed similar vulnerabilities that allowed researchers to 
remotely control the vehicle’s safety-critical functions. NHTSA officials 
informed us that due to staffing changes that have occurred since 2011, they 
could not confirm why the two similar hacking demonstrations were handled 
differently. However, they noted that the Jeep Cherokee researchers planned to 
publicly report more details about the identified vulnerabilities than the GM 
researchers had reported; and that the release of such details could have 
allowed cyber attackers to replicate the Jeep Cherokee demonstration. 
 
 
NHTSA Has Established a Vehicle Electronics Council and Is 
Assessing the Need for Vehicle Cybersecurity Standards and 
Regulations 
 
NHTSA is taking steps in response to the requirements set forth in MAP-
21, including establishing an Electronics Council and assessing the need for 
vehicle cybersecurity standards and regulations.60 As directed by MAP-21, 
NHTSA established an Electronics Council in 2012 to coordinate and share 
information on a broad array of topics related to vehicle electronics and 
emerging technologies, including cybersecurity.61 More specifically, NHTSA 
officials informed us that the Council’s mission is to broaden, leverage, and 
expand the agency’s expertise in vehicle electronics to continue ensuring that 
these technologies enhance vehicle safety. NHTSA officials told us that the 
Council’s membership includes staff from NHTSA’s Office of Vehicle Safety 
Research and other offices responsible for the agency’s vehicle safety work.62 
However, NHTSA’s Chief Counsel was also designated as a member to ensure 
that the agency fully understands its rulemaking and oversight authority 
regarding electronics-related issues. According to NHTSA officials, the 
Council holds bimonthly meetings, which NHTSA Associate Administrators 

United States Government Accountability Office 
36
attend; the Council also periodically briefs NHTSA’s Administrator. NHTSA 
officials also informed us that the Council’s meetings can serve as a forum for 
collaboration between the agency and industry stakeholders. For example, they 
said that the Council sometimes invites outside subject matter experts to share 
information with NHTSA during its bimonthly meetings, or recommends other 
training by such experts that would be helpful for NHTSA staff to attend. 
Although NHTSA has taken some steps to examine the need for safety 
standards for electronic control systems as required by MAP-21,63 which could 
include government standards related to vehicle cybersecurity, officials 
informed us the agency’s examination is still ongoing.64 As part of its 
examination, NHTSA is considering establishing process standards, which 
would prescribe specific processes for developing vehicle electronic systems. 
This step would be a departure from NHTSA’s current approach of developing 
performance standards, such as the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, 
which set a specific level of performance but do not prescribe specific methods 
that must be used to meet a given standard. In October 2014, NHTSA issued a 
request for public comment to help inform its examination of the need for 
safety standards for electronic control systems, including the need for 
cybersecurity standards.65 Among other things, NHTSA requested comments 
on available performance standards and process standards, such as ISO 26262, 
that could potentially be adapted and incorporated into government standards 
to address vehicle cybersecurity. In January 2016, NHTSA issued a report that 
summarized its analysis of the public comments it received, including industry 
stakeholders’ thoughts on the need for voluntary industry standards as well as 
government standards pertaining to vehicle cybersecurity.66 In this report, 
NHTSA noted that most of the 40 stakeholders that submitted comments 
agreed that vehicle cybersecurity is a dynamic, complex problem that may not 
be effectively addressed with the use of “static” or “prescriptive” government 
standards. 
Half of the selected industry stakeholders we spoke with (16 out of 32) 
also expressed doubts about the effectiveness of “static” or “prescriptive” 
government standards to address vehicle cybersecurity, since threats are 
constantly changing and such standards could become outdated quickly. In 
addition, some stakeholders expressed concerns that regulations could result in 
unintended negative consequences for cybersecurity, similar to several 
existing laws and regulations. For example, as noted above, the OBD-II port—
which many stakeholders identified as a key entry point for vehicle 
cyberattacks—is mandated by regulation for diagnostic and testing purposes. 
As a result, several automakers told us that they have limited ability to restrict 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
37
access to in-vehicle networks and systems provided by the port; however, one 
informed us that it was exploring what types of OBD-II port restrictions and 
protections would be legally allowed. Two automakers also expressed 
concerns about potential negative impacts for vehicle cybersecurity that could 
stem from recent changes to regulations implementing the Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act.67 In general, this act prohibits access to and circumvention of 
protections associated with digital copyrighted materials;68 however, in 2015, 
the act’s regulations were amended to include exemptions for vehicle software 
accessed for diagnostic and repair purposes and “good faith” research.69 For 
example, one industry association that opposed the change stated that 
increasing access to vehicle software will make it harder for automakers to 
develop effective protections for their vehicles’ cyber systems. However, two 
leading researchers we interviewed opined that these changes will help 
mitigate cybersecurity vulnerabilities, as they will allow more researchers to 
identify vulnerabilities without fear of legal action. 
On the other hand, some selected industry stakeholders (13 out of 32) told 
us that voluntary industry standards alone would be insufficient for ensuring 
vehicle cybersecurity and that thus some government standards and federal 
oversight will be needed. For example, one subject matter expert suggested 
that—contrary to current self-certification practices that are common in the 
auto industry70—NHTSA should establish an oversight body to evaluate 
automakers’ compliance with any cybersecurity-related standards it issues and 
verify that these standards are being met.71 In addition, another expert noted 
that this kind of oversight process could help promote the use of best practices 
while also providing NHTSA with additional assurance that the automotive 
supply chain is secure. Both experts noted that as part of this process, NHTSA 
could turn to qualified independent third parties to assess whether automakers 
are taking the proper steps for vehicle cybersecurity. 
According to NHTSA officials and the agency’s Priority Plan for Vehicle 
Safety and Fuel Economy, 2015-2017, the agency plans to complete its initial 
research on vehicle cybersecurity in 2016 and also announce an agency 
decision about next steps pertaining to vehicle cybersecurity and other issues 
related to electronic control systems. The decision could be to conduct more 
research, initiate a rulemaking, issue guidance, or some combination thereof. 
As of July 2015, officials estimated that the agency was about 3 years away 
from making a final determination about the need for additional government 
standards or regulation in this area; thus, such a final determination is not 
expected until at least 2018. NHTSA officials explained that this time frame is 
necessary in part, because they expect several research projects that are 

United States Government Accountability Office 
38
planned and under way to help inform their decision. In addition, NHTSA 
officials informed us that as they determine the need for regulations, they want 
to better understand alternative steps such as the development of voluntary 
industry standards that could be taken to address this issue. 
 
 
NHTSA Has Not Yet Defined and Documented Its Roles and 
Responsibilities in Responding to a Vehicle Cyberattack 
 
In its whitepaper NHTSA and Vehicle Cybersecurity, NHTSA states that 
its goal is to “be ahead of potential vehicle cybersecurity challenges, and seek 
ways to address or avoid them altogether.” As described above, NHTSA has 
made progress in many areas in an effort to proactively address potential 
cybersecurity threats to vehicle safety-critical systems; however, NHTSA has 
not yet formally defined and documented the agency’s role and responsibilities 
in the event of a real-world vehicle cyberattack and how the agency’s response 
actions would be coordinated with other federal agencies. Given that NHTSA 
and selected industry stakeholders we spoke with generally agreed that the 
threat of a vehicle cyberattack will increase as autonomous and connected-
vehicle technologies are deployed in the coming years, such a response plan 
may be particularly important for NHTSA to develop proactively, before the 
threat environment significantly changes. Until such a plan is developed, 
NHTSA’s response efforts—regardless of the threat environment in which an 
attack is carried out—could be slowed as agency staff and other stakeholders 
may not be able to quickly identify the appropriate actions that NHTSA should 
take. In addition, the lack of such a response plan is inconsistent with federal 
standards for internal control, which—among other things—are intended to 
help agencies in managing change associated with shifting environments and 
evolving demands and priorities.72 Under these federal standards, agencies are 
required to appropriately and clearly document their internal controls, which 
include the policies, plans, methods, and procedures used to meet agency 
missions, goals, and objectives; and assess risks. 
NHTSA officials offered several roles and responsibilities they believe the 
agency would have in response to a vehicle cyberattack involving safety-
critical systems, including quickly contacting the appropriate industry 
personnel and determining what actions need to be taken, such as regulatory or 
enforcement action, a Direct Final Rule,73 or other action. In addition, NHTSA 
officials told us that the agency would also validate the feasibility of the 
cybersecurity threat or event at its VRTC and take steps to ensure that any new 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
39
information regarding threats and vulnerabilities is reflected in NHTSA’s 
research program. However, NHTSA officials told us that these roles have not 
been outlined in a formal response plan yet, in part because the agency 
currently lacks clarity regarding other roles and responsibilities it may have to 
fulfill in the event of an attack. For example, according to NHTSA officials, it 
is currently unclear whether NHTSA or DHS would be “the responsible 
agency” in charge of the government’s response if a large-scale vehicle 
cyberattack on safety-critical systems were to occur. 
According to NHTSA officials, the agency is working with other federal 
agencies, such as DHS, to clarify the roles and responsibilities of the various 
agencies that would be involved in responding to a vehicle cyberattack. 
NHTSA officials informed us that these interagency discussions are still 
ongoing and could not provide a time frame as to when they expect the 
discussions—and subsequently, a plan outlining NHTSA’s roles and 
responsibilities in the event of an attack—to be completed. However, NHTSA 
officials stated that obtaining clarification on its roles and responsibilities in 
the event of a cyberattack on safety-critical vehicle systems is a priority for the 
agency, and in their view, a response plan would be a useful tool for the 
agency to develop. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
In recent years, researchers have played an instrumental role in 
demonstrating that remote vehicle cyberattacks with safety implications are 
possible and increasing overall awareness about vehicle cybersecurity issues 
among consumers, the media, and the general public. Despite awareness of 
risks related to vehicle cybersecurity since at least 2011, the auto industry and 
NHTSA have only recently sharpened their focus on this issue. As this report 
describes, NHTSA has taken several important steps since 2012 to address 
vehicle cybersecurity, including establishing a vehicle-cybersecurity research 
program and soliciting industry input on the need for government and 
voluntary industry standards. However, NHTSA does not anticipate making a 
final determination on the need for government standards until 2018 when 
additional cybersecurity research is expected to be completed. In addition, 
several industry efforts to address vehicle cybersecurity—such as the 
development of an Automotive ISAC and a voluntary design and engineering 
process standard for cybersecurity—are still in their early stages. As such, 
some of these government and industry efforts to address vehicle cybersecurity 

United States Government Accountability Office 
40
are unlikely to provide many benefits for vehicles already operating on the 
roads today or those currently in the design and production stages. 
Given that NHTSA and industry stakeholders expect the threat of a 
vehicle cyberattack to increase in the coming years as autonomous and 
connected-vehicle technologies are deployed, it will be important for NHTSA 
to continue to take proactive steps in the interim to ensure that it is meeting the 
agency’s goal of being ahead of vehicle cybersecurity challenges. The 
agency’s planned guidance outlining when cybersecurity vulnerabilities 
constitute safety defects should help ensure consistent responses when 
cybersecurity vulnerabilities are identified. However, until NHTSA defines 
and documents the agency’s role and responsibilities in the event of a real-
world vehicle cyberattack affecting safety-critical systems, it may not be in a 
position to quickly and effectively respond should a threat materialize. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
To enhance the agency’s ability to effectively respond in the event of a 
real-world vehicle cyberattack, the Secretary of Transportation should direct 
NHTSA to: 
 
 
work expeditiously to finish defining and then to document the 
agency’s roles and responsibilities in response to a vehicle cyberattack 
involving safety-critical systems, including how NHTSA would 
coordinate with other federal agencies and stakeholders involved in 
the response. 
 
 
AGENCY COMMENTS 
 
We provided a draft of this report to the Departments of Transportation 
(DOT), Homeland Security, Defense, and Commerce for review and comment. 
We received written comments from DOT. 
DOT concurred with our recommendation to define and document 
NHTSA’s roles and responsibilities in response to a vehicle cyberattack 
involving safety-critical systems. DOT also noted that the agency has been 
actively involved in research and collaborative efforts to address vehicle 
cybersecurity issues. DOT cited some recent actions by NHTSA to address 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
41
vehicle cybersecurity vulnerabilities, including convening a public roundtable 
on vehicle cybersecurity and finalizing the Proactive Safety Principles 
agreement in January 2016. Through this agreement, NHTSA and 18 
automakers committed to work together to develop a collaborative, data-driven 
process to advance safety objectives, including mitigating cybersecurity 
threats. 
The Departments of Homeland Security, Defense, and Commerce 
reviewed our report, but did not have any comments. 
 
David J. Wise 
Director, Physical Infrastructure Issues 
 
 
List of Requesters 
 
The Honorable Barbara Comstock 
Chairwoman 
The Honorable Daniel Lipinski 
Ranking Member 
Subcommittee on Research and Technology  
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology  
House of Representatives 
 
The Honorable Fred Upton  
Chairman 
The Honorable Frank Pallone, Jr. 
Ranking Member 
Committee on Energy and Commerce 
House of Representatives 
 
The Honorable Larry Bucshon, M.D.  
House of Representatives 
 
The Honorable Ted W. Lieu,  
House of Representatives 
 
The Honorable Joe Wilson  
House of Representatives 
 

United States Government Accountability Office 
42
APPENDIX I: OBJECTIVES, SCOPE, AND METHODOLOGY 
 
The objectives of this report were to examine: (1) available information 
about the key cybersecurity vulnerabilities in modern vehicles that could 
impact passenger safety; (2) key practices and technologies, if any, available 
to mitigate vehicle cybersecurity vulnerabilities and the impacts of potential 
attacks; (3) views of selected stakeholders on the challenges they face related 
to vehicle cybersecurity and industry-led efforts to address vehicle 
cybersecurity; and (4) the Department of Transportation’s (DOT) efforts to 
address vehicle cybersecurity. 
To address all of our objectives, we reviewed technical papers, reports, 
and other documentation relevant to the cybersecurity of modern vehicles 
published by DOT’s National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
(NHTSA).1 For example, we reviewed a series of reports on vehicle 
cybersecurity published by NHTSA in October 2014.2 We also interviewed 
officials from several NHTSA offices, including the Office of Vehicle Safety 
Research and Office of Enforcement and the Volpe National Transportation 
Systems Center. In addition, we reviewed previous GAO reports related to 
connected-vehicle 
technologies, 
information 
technology 
(IT), 
and 
cybersecurity, and identified and reviewed relevant research papers and 
publications. The reviewed citations were located through searches in 
bibliographic 
databases, 
including 
Transport 
Research 
International 
Documentation and SciSearch, or relevant industry conferences. We used 
three research papers to inform our findings regarding the potential for remote 
vehicle cyberattacks to impact passenger safety.3 We reviewed and 
summarized these research papers to identify the main steps of the hacking 
demonstrations and discussed them with the researchers to obtain additional 
information and clarification about the demonstrations. 
In addition, we conducted semi-structured interviews with 32 selected 
industry stakeholders, including 8 automakers, 8 automotive parts suppliers, 3 
automotive cybersecurity firms offering vehicle cybersecurity products, and 13 
subject matter experts, including 7 leading researchers (see table 4).4 These 
interviews informed all four of our objectives. Automakers were selected to 
ensure we had representation from each of the 3 major auto-producing regions 
of the world (the U.S., Europe, and Asia) and the two U.S. industry 
associations (the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers and the Association 
of Global Automakers) that were jointly pursuing several efforts related to 
vehicle cybersecurity, such as the formation of an Automotive Information 
Sharing and Analysis Center (ISAC). We also sought to include automakers 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
43
that were considered leaders in vehicle cybersecurity as well as those that had 
been the subjects of cybersecurity hacking demonstrations. We selected the 
top 5 automotive parts suppliers based on global sales in 2013 and other 
suppliers based on stakeholder recommendations.5 We also interviewed 3 
automotive cybersecurity firms that are offering vehicle cybersecurity products 
for new and existing vehicles based on stakeholder recommendations. The 
subject matter experts were identified through our literature search, relevant 
industry conferences, stakeholder recommendations, and our prior work on 
connected-vehicle technologies, and were considered subject matter experts 
based on their job titles and experience, technical papers and publications, 
contributions to relevant industry conferences (e.g., speeches, presentations, 
and organizing roles), and other significant contributions related to vehicle 
cybersecurity (e.g., contracted to conduct vehicle cybersecurity research for 
federal agencies). We identified leading researchers from the group of subject 
matter experts as those with extensive applied research experience in vehicle 
cybersecurity.6 After conducting our interviews with selected industry 
stakeholders, we summarized and analyzed their responses to identify themes 
relevant to each of our research objectives, such as themes regarding the main 
vehicle interfaces that could be used to undertake vehicle cyberattacks. The 
viewpoints gathered through our interviews with selected industry 
stakeholders represent the viewpoints of the individuals interviewed and 
cannot be generalized to a broader population. 
To identify the key vehicle cybersecurity vulnerabilities in modern 
vehicles that could impact passenger safety and key practices and technologies 
that could mitigate these vulnerabilities, we interviewed officials from other 
federal agencies involved in vehicle cybersecurity research or cybersecurity 
efforts more broadly. These agencies included: the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST) within the Department of Commerce, the 
Department of Homeland Security’s Science and Technology Directorate, and 
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency within the Department of 
Defense. We also reviewed documents published by NIST, such as its 
Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity,7 and based on 
stakeholder recommendations, interviewed representatives from several IT and 
telecommunication firms to identify key mitigation practices and technologies. 
To address our objective on challenges and industry-led efforts related to 
vehicle cybersecurity, we also interviewed representatives from entities 
involved in those efforts, including representatives from the Alliance of 
Automobile Manufacturers, the Association of Global Automakers, 

United States Government Accountability Office 
44
AUTOSAR,8 the National Council of ISACs, and Society of Automotive 
Engineers International.9 
 
Table 4. Selected Industry Stakeholders Interviewed 
 
Stakeholder 
Automakers 
BMW  
FCA US LLC  
Ford  
General Motors  
Honda  
Mercedes-Benz Passenger Car Development, Germany 
Tesla Motors, Inc.  
Volkswagen  
Automotive parts suppliers 
Aeris Communications  
Bosch  
Continental  
Denso  
Infineon  
Lynx Software 
Magna International  
Panasonic Automotive Systems Company of America  
Automotive cybersecurity firms 
Argus Cyber Security  
Arilou Technologies  
TowerSec  
Subject matter experts  
Dr. Andrew Brown Jr., P.E., FESD, FSAE, NAE (ret. Delphi Automotive) 
Daniel Chilcott, Formerly at Virginia Tech Transportation Institute, Center for 
AutomatedVehicle Systems  
Joshua Corman, I am the Cavalry  
Karl Heimer, AutoImmunea  
Stylianos Kaminaris, Battelle, Cyber Innovations Business Unit  
Christoph Krauss and Andreas Fuchs, Fraunhofer Institute for Secure Information 
Technologya 
Praveen Narayanan, Frost and Sullivan  
Stefan Savage and Tadayoshi Kohno, Center for Automotive Embedded Systems 
Securitya 
Greg Shannon, Christopher King, Mark Sherman, Daniel Klinedinst, and Art Manion, 
Carnegie Mellon University, Software Engineering Institute, CERT Divisiona 
Craig Smith, Theia Labsa  
Chris Valasek, Uber Advanced Technologies Centera  
Andre Weimerskirch, University of Michigan Transportation Research Institutea  
William Whyte, Security Innovation  
Source: GAO. | GAO-16-350; aLeading researchers. 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
45
To assess DOT’s efforts to address vehicle cybersecurity, we reviewed 
applicable federal laws and regulations—such as the Moving Ahead for 
Progress in the 21st Century Act (MAP-21) and the Fixing America’s Surface 
Transportation Act (FAST Act)—including their requirements for NHTSA 
pertaining to vehicle electronics and cybersecurity.10 We also reviewed GAO’s 
Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government11 and NHTSA 
documents regarding the agency’s strategic planning and vehicle cybersecurity 
research priorities, including its Priority Plan for Vehicle Safety and Fuel 
Economy 2015-2017; request for public comment on automotive electronic 
control systems safety and security issued in response to MAP-21 
requirements;12 and mandated report to Congress that summarized and 
analyzed the public comments it received, among other things.13 We also 
visited NHTSA’s Vehicle Research and Test Center (VRTC) in East Liberty, 
Ohio, to tour NHTSA’s research facilities and observe ongoing vehicle 
cybersecurity research and equipment demonstrations. In addition to our 
VRTC site visit, we conducted the stakeholder interviews described in this 
appendix, in part, during site visits in 2015 to Detroit, Michigan, to meet with 
U.S. automakers, among other stakeholders; Silicon Valley, California, to 
meet with Tesla, technology firms, and parts suppliers; and Brussels, Belgium, 
and various locations within Germany to obtain international perspectives on 
vehicle cybersecurity from a variety of stakeholders—including automakers, 
parts suppliers, government officials, and subject matter experts. 
We conducted this performance audit from February 2015 to March 2016 
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those 
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, 
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and 
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence 
obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on 
our audit objectives. 
 
 
End Notes 
 
1 Passenger vehicles include passenger cars, vans, sport-utility vehicles, and pick-up trucks with a 
gross-vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less. 
2 NHTSA defines 5 levels of automation ranging  
 
from “no automation,” in which the driver is in complete and sole control of the 
primary vehicle controls—brake, steering, throttle, and motive power—at all times, 
 
to “full self-driving automation,” in which the vehicle is designed to perform all 
safety-critical driving functions and monitor roadway conditions for the entire trip. 

United States Government Accountability Office 
46
3 The term “telematics” refers to a technology that combines telecommunications and information 
processing in order to send, receive, and store information related to remote objects, such as 
vehicles. Vehicle telematics systems—which include the dashboard, controls, and 
navigation systems—provide continuous connectivity to long- and short-range wireless 
connections. They provide a broad range of features, including some supporting safety 
(such as the ability to report a crash), diagnostics (such as the ability to receive early alerts 
of mechanical issues), and convenience (such as hands-free access to driving directions or 
weather). 
4 Although the researchers did not have prior physical access to the vehicle that was the subject of 
the hacking demonstration, they did have access to a test vehicle that had similar 
vulnerabilities to the targeted vehicle. 
5 49 U.S.C. Subtitle VI, 32101 et seq. 
6 In addition to safety impacts, vehicle cyberattacks could have other impacts, such as privacy 
implications. For example, a cyberattack might involve the theft of personally identifiable 
information maintained in the vehicle, such as credit card information or e-mail addresses. 
However, such other impacts from vehicle cyberattacks are outside the scope of this review. 
7 Although our review is focused on vehicles on the road today, according to available research 
studies, vehicles manufactured before model year 2000 would be less vulnerable to 
cyberattacks, given that they have much less connectivity to external networks. According 
to the 2009 National Household Travel Survey, the average vehicle owned by U.S. 
households in 2009 was 9.4 years old and about 39 percent of all vehicles owned by U.S. 
households were more than 10 years old. See, Federal Highway Administration, Summary 
of Travel Trends: 2009 National Household Travel Survey, FHWA-PL-11-022 
(Washington, D.C. June 2011). Vehicles currently in production include those that will be 
manufactured through model year 2020. 
8 “Connected vehicle” technologies—which include vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-
infrastructure (V2I) technologies—rely on data sent between vehicles, road infrastructure, 
and personal communication devices to improve safety by warning drivers and pedestrians 
of potential accidents. NHTSA issued an Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking in 
August 2014 that would require vehicle manufacturers to install V2V technologies in new 
passenger cars and light trucks (79 Fed. Reg. 49270 (Aug. 20, 2014)) and plans to issue a 
draft rule on V2V in 2016, with the expectation that V2V technologies may be available in 
certain vehicle models as soon as 2017. According to DOT, V2I technologies are still 
developing and extensive deployment may occur over the next few decades. We have 
previously issued reports on V2V and V2I technologies. See GAO, Intelligent 
Transportation Systems: Vehicle-to-Vehicle Technologies Expected to Offer Safety Benefits, 
but a Variety of Deployment Challenges Exist, GAO-14-13 (Washington, D.C.: Nov. 1, 
2013) and GAO, Intelligent Transportation Systems: Vehicle-to-Infrastructure Technologies 
Expected to Offer Safety Benefits, but a Variety of Deployment Challenges Exist, GAO-15-
775 (Washington, D.C.: Sept. 15, 2015). 
9 Pub. L. No. 112-141 § 31402, 126 Stat. 405 773 (2012). 
10 NHTSA, A Summary of Cybersecurity Best Practices, DOT HS 812 075, (Washington, D.C.: 
October 2014); NHTSA, Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern 
Automobiles, DOT HS 812 074 (Washington, D.C.: October 2014); NHTSA, National 
Institute of Standards and Technology Cybersecurity Risk Management Framework Applied 
to Modern Vehicles, DOT HS 812 073, (Washington, D.C.: October 2014); NHTSA, 
Assessment of the Information Sharing and Analysis Center Model, DOT HS 812 076 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
47
(Washington, D.C.: October 2014); and NIST, Framework for Improving Critical 
Infrastructure Cybersecurity, Version 1.0 (Gaithersburg, MD: Feb. 12, 2014). 
11 One of the top 5 suppliers did not respond to our request for a meeting. 
12 In some cases, we spoke with more than one individual representing a research institute or 
center engaged in vehicle cybersecurity research. We considered the collective viewpoint of 
these individuals as one stakeholder. 
13 GAO, Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government, GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1 
(Washington, D.C.: November 1999), and GAO, Standards for Internal Control in the 
Federal Government, GAO-14-704G (Washington, D.C.: September 2014). These 
standards provide the overall framework for establishing and maintaining an effective 
internal control system for the federal government. 
14 Sec. 31402(a)(2) of MAP-21. 
15 U.S. Department of Transportation, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Report to 
Congress: Electronic Systems Performance in Passenger Motor Vehicles (Washington, 
D.C.: December 2015). 
16 79 Fed. Reg. 19178 (Apr. 7, 2014). 
17 Other in-vehicle communication networks used in modern vehicles include Ethernet, FlexRay, 
Local Interconnect Network, Media Oriented Systems Transport, and SAE-J1850. While 
networks generally serve the same function—connect and facilitate communication among 
ECUs—the rate at which they can process data and the amount of data that can be 
transmitted in each message vary. For example, whereas a CAN bus can carry messages 
with up to 8 bytes of data, FlexRay and Ethernet messages can be up to 254 bytes and 1,500 
bytes respectively. 
18 We have previously reported on aviation cybersecurity issues. See GAO, Air Traffic Control: 
FAA Needs a More Comprehensive Approach to Address Cybersecurity As Agency 
Transitions to NextGen, GAO-15-370 (Washington, D.C.: Apr. 14, 2015) and GAO, 
Information Security: FAA Needs to Address Weaknesses in Air Traffic Control Systems, 
GAO-15-221 (Washington, D.C.: Jan. 29, 2015). 
19 For example, see GAO, Cybersecurity: National Strategy, Roles, and Responsibilities Need to 
Be Better Defined and More Effectively Implemented, GAO-13-187 (Washington, D.C.: 
Feb. 14, 2013). 
20 49 U.S.C. § 30111. Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards provide objective criteria by which 
an automobile can be tested to see if it meets the minimum standard for motor vehicle 
performance. Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards are grouped into three main 
categories—crash avoidance, crashworthiness, and post-crash integrity. 
21 NHTSA established the Electronic Systems Safety Research Division in January 2012 as part 
of the Office of Crash Avoidance. 
22 Pub. L. No. 112-141 § 31402, 126 Stat. 773. 
23 Pub. L. No. 112-141 § 31402(a)(2). 
24 Pub. L. No. 114-94 § 31402, 129 Stat. 1312 (2015). 
25 Pub. L. No. 112-141 § 31401(a). 
26 Security and Privacy in Your Car Act of 2015, S. 1806. 114th Cong. (2015). 
27 Security and Privacy in Your Car Study Act of 2015, H.R. 3994. 114th Cong. (2015). 
28 For example, although this report focuses on DOT efforts, DHS, NIST, and the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency in the Department of Defense also have some efforts 
that broadly relate to vehicle cybersecurity. According to officials, these agencies are 
working to coordinate their efforts. 

United States Government Accountability Office 
48
29 These two projects are the E-safety Vehicle Intrusion-protected Applications, or EVITA 
project, and Preparing Secure Vehicle-to-X Communication Systems, or PRESERVE 
project. 
30 In this report, we will refer to those who would hack vehicles with malicious intentions as 
cyber attackers. We will refer to those conducting vehicle hacks in an effort to identify 
vulnerabilities—so that automakers can address them—as researchers. 
31 The Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 and its accompanying regulations, which are enforced 
by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, mandated that beginning with the 1996 
Model Year, all light-duty vehicle and trucks for sale in the U.S. must be equipped with an 
OBD-II port. 42 U.S.C. § 7521(a)(6). Prior to this, an earlier version of this port had been in 
use in California since 1988. 
32 In some cases, the OBD-II port could be accessed remotely, as we will discuss later in this 
section. 
33 We will refer to vehicle hacking conducted by researchers as hacking demonstrations, and will 
refer to vehicle hacking with malicious intent, such as causing harm, as cyberattacks. 
34 See Stephen Checkoway, Damon McCoy, Danny Anderson, Brian Kantor, Hovav Shacham, 
Stefan Savage, Karl Koscher, Alexei Czeskis, Franziska Roesner, and Tadayoshi Kohno, 
Comprehensive Experimental Analyses of Automotive Attack Surfaces, Proceedings of the 
USENIX Security Symposium (San Francisco, CA: August 2011). 
35 Many other major automakers besides GM offer such telematics services. For example, others 
include Ford’s Sync, Toyota’s Safety Connect, Lexus’ Enform, and FCA’s UConnect. 
36 See whitepaper on this hacking demonstration: Charlie Miller and Chris Valasek, Remote 
Exploitation of an Unaltered Passenger Vehicle (Aug. 10, 2015). 
37 The demonstration led to the recall of about 1.4 million vehicles, initiated by FCA in response 
to a request from NHTSA. In addition, the cellular provider Sprint strengthened its network 
access protocols for that telematics service. NHTSA also initiated a safety defect 
investigation into the UConnect telematics unit found in the test vehicle and the target 
vehicles, which is manufactured by Harmon. 
38 See Ian Foster, Andrew Prudhomme, Karl Koscher, and Stefan Savage, Fast and Vulnerable: A 
Story of Telematic Failures, USENIX Workshop on Offensive Technologies (Washington. 
D.C.: August 2015). 
39 Autonomous vehicles would control steering, acceleration, and braking without a driver’s 
input. 
40 See GAO-14-13 and GAO-15-775.  
41 See GAO-14-13. 
42 For the purposes of this report, stakeholder-identified key practices are defined as concepts and 
approaches that can help identify and mitigate vehicle cybersecurity vulnerabilities, as 
opposed to specific technologies, which are discussed in the next section. 
43 NHTSA, A Summary of Cybersecurity Best Practices, DOT HS 812 075 (Washington, D.C.: 
October 2014). 
44 Encryption techniques protect data by transforming ordinary data into code form for the 
purposes of security of privacy. Authentication techniques verify the identity of a user, 
process, or device, often as a prerequisite to allowing access to resources in a particular 
information system or network. 
45 Bandwidth is the data rate or frequency range of a communications system. The higher the 
bandwidth, the greater the amount of data that can be transmitted in a given time period. 
46 According to the National Automobile Dealers Association, in 2014, net pretax profit at new 
car dealerships as a percentage of total sales (including sales in the new- and used-vehicle, 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
49
service, and parts departments) was 2.2 percent and the average retail-transaction price of 
new cars and light trucks was $32,618. 
47 According to one parts supplier we spoke with, the cost of a silicon computer chip can range 
from 50 cents to 5 dollars depending on the protections added. SAE (Society of Automotive 
Engineers) International—a standards development organization for the auto industry—has 
a Vehicle Electrical Hardware Security Task Force that is currently working to define and 
standardize the categories and characteristics of hardware security mechanisms that could 
be utilized to enhance vehicle cybersecurity, according to an SAE International member 
involved in this effort. 
48 According to a 2014 report by Frost and Sullivan, incorporating cybersecurity protections into 
vehicle electronic systems—including the costs associated with system design and 
engineering, hardware and software security features, and implementation—would increase 
costs per vehicle by 3 to 5 percent. However, the industry is currently exploring 
enhancements to CAN, such as CAN with flexible data-rate (CAN-FD), which could 
address the bandwidth limitations of CAN and could reduce costs associated with the re-
design of in-vehicle networks that currently support CAN. 
49 NHTSA also facilitated the development of the Automotive ISAC by issuing a report that 
assessed the ISAC model for use in the auto industry and sending formal letters that urged 
automakers’ executives to form an ISAC, among other things. 
50 ISO 26262 is a voluntary industry standard focused on road vehicles’ functional safety. The 
standard establishes uniform practices for achieving specific levels of safety integrity in 
complex, safety-related systems comprised of electrical, electronic, and software elements. 
51 In addition to automakers and parts suppliers, AUTOSAR includes partners from the 
electronics, semiconductor, and software industries. For a complete list of current partners 
see www.autosar.org/partners/current-partners/. 
52 In addition, DOT’s Intelligent Transportation Systems Joint Program Office conducts research 
on connected-vehicle technologies, including electronics and cybersecurity research that is 
managed by NHTSA’s Vehicle Safety Research staff.  
53 For example, in its Priority Plan for Vehicle Safety and Fuel Economy, 2015 - 2017, NHTSA 
identified gaining a comprehensive understanding of cybersecurity and reliability for safety-
critical vehicle electronic systems as one of seven priority research areas.  
54 For example, NHTSA maintains Indefinite Delivery Indefinite Quantity (IDIQ) contracts with 
the University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute, Virginia Tech Transportation 
Institute, and Battelle. As IDIQ contractors, these institutions have been selected to conduct 
research on behalf of NHTSA related to vehicle electronics, including on vehicle 
cybersecurity. IDIQ contractors are responsible for preparing proposals in response to 
specific task orders issued by NHTSA. NHTSA then selects from among these proposals 
and awards the task order to one of the research institutions. 
55 In fiscal year 2015, NHTSA’s Office of Vehicle Safety dedicated $2.5 million in total to 
electronics and cybersecurity research, which includes research related to electronics 
reliability, automated vehicles, and vehicle cybersecurity. Of this total, $0.9 million was 
dedicated specifically to vehicle cybersecurity research. In addition, DOT’s Intelligent 
Transportation Systems Joint Program Office dedicated $2.5 million in fiscal year 2015 
toward electronics and cybersecurity, as part of its research on connected-vehicle 
technologies, and requested $3.6 million for such research in fiscal year 2016. 
56 Under the New Car Assessment Program, which began in 1978, NHTSA provides consumers 
with information about crash protection, rollover safety, and crash avoidance technologies 
beyond what is required by law. The program aims to encourage market forces that prompt 

United States Government Accountability Office 
50
vehicle manufacturers to make safety improvements to new vehicles and provide the public 
with objective information on the relative safety performance of vehicles. 
57 The term “defect” is defined by the Motor Vehicle Safety Act (49 U.S.C. § 301-02(a)(2)) as 
“any defect in performance, construction, a component, or material of a motor vehicle or 
motor vehicle equipment.” 
58 NHTSA requested that FCA undertake a recall, based on its conclusion that the vulnerabilities 
could result in unauthorized remote control of vehicle systems, thereby increasing the risk 
of a crash. In addition, NHTSA officials noted that because the hacking researchers planned 
to publish details of their findings, this could allow others—possibly with less hacking 
expertise—to replicate this demonstration and exploit the identified vulnerabilities. While 
FCA complied with the recall request, it argued that it was conducting this recall “out of an 
abundance of caution,” since “no safety defect had been found.” 
59 In January 2016, NHTSA and 18 automakers issued Proactive Safety Principles stating their 
intention to work collaboratively to further enhance safety, by, for example, working to 
mitigate cybersecurity threats that could present unreasonable safety risks. This effort would 
include establishing best practices to foster enhanced cybersecurity resiliency and effective 
remediation, developing means to engage with cybersecurity researchers, and continuing to 
support and evolve the Automotive ISAC. See DOT, Proactive Safety Principles (January 
2016). 
60 Pub. L. No. 112-141 §§ 31401(a) and 31402, 126 Stat. 405, 773. 
61 As previously mentioned, the FAST ACT also requires DOT to submit a report to Congress on 
the operations of the Council. Pub. L. No. 114-94 § 24201. 
62 The four NHTSA offices responsible for vehicle safety are the Office of Vehicle Safety 
Research, Office of Enforcement, Office of Rulemaking, and the National Center for 
Statistics and Analysis. 
63 Pub. L. No. 112-141 § 31402(a). 
64 In the current discussion, we will refer to standards set by NHTSA as government standards, to 
differentiate these from voluntary industry standards. 
65 NHTSA, Request for Comment on Automotive Electronic Control Systems Safety and Security, 
Docket No. NHTSA-2014-0108. 79 Fed. Reg. 60574 (Oct. 7, 2014). 
66 U.S. Department of Transportation, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Report to 
Congress: Electronic Systems Performance in Passenger Motor Vehicles (Washington, 
D.C.: December 2015). 
67 Pub. L. No. 105-304. 112 Stat. 2860 (1998) and its implementing regulations under 37 C.F.R. 
Part 201. 
68 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1). 
69 Exemptions to the Digital Millennium Copyright Act went into effect on October 28, 2015. 80 
Fed. Reg. 65944 (Oct. 28, 2015). However, the particular exemptions for vehicle software 
cannot be initiated earlier than 12 months after the effective date of the regulation, or before 
October 28, 2016. 37 CFR 201.40(b)(6). 
70 The auto industry currently self-certifies compliance with the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standards and is not subject to a verification or certification process undertaken by NHTSA. 
Once a standard is in effect, NHTSA tests and monitors vehicles and equipment to ensure 
that they meet the relevant safety standards. 
71 GAO has previously reported on risk-based safety management systems in other industries, 
including aviation. See for example, GAO, Aviation Safety: Additional Oversight Planning 
by FAA Could Enhance Safety Risk Management, GAO-14-516 (Washington, D.C: June 25, 
2014). 

Vehicle Cybersecurity 
51
72 GAO, Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government, GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1 
(Washington, D.C.: November 1999) and GAO, Standards for Internal Control in the 
Federal Government, GAO-14-704G (Washington, D.C.: September 2014). 
73 In June 2015, NHTSA established Direct Final Rule rulemaking procedures for use in adopting 
amendments to its regulations on which the agency expects it would receive no adverse 
public comment were it to publish them as proposals in the Federal Register. Adoption of 
the procedures is intended to expedite the promulgation of routine and noncontroversial 
rules by reducing the time and resources necessary to develop, review, clear, and publish 
separately proposed and final rules. 
 
 
End Notes for Appendix I 
 
1 For the purposes of this report, the term ‘modern vehicles’ refers to vehicles on the road today 
or currently in production. Vehicles currently in production include those that will be 
manufactured through model year 2020. We did not focus on cybersecurity vulnerabilities 
that may emerge as connected-vehicle technologies are introduced into vehicles. Although 
our review is focused on vehicles on the road today, vehicles manufactured before model 
year 2000 would be less vulnerable to cyberattacks, given that they have much less 
connectivity to external networks. According to the 2009 National Household Travel 
Survey, the average vehicle owned by U.S. households in 2009 was 9.6 years old and about 
41 percent of all vehicles owned by U.S. households were more than 10 years old. See, 
Federal Highway Administration, Summary of Travel Trends: 2009 National Household 
Travel Survey, FHWA-PL-11-022 (Washington, D.C.: June 2011). 
2 NHTSA, A Summary of Cybersecurity Best Practices, DOT HS 812 075, (Washington, D.C.: 
October 2014); NHTSA, Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern 
Automobiles, DOT HS 812 074, (Washington, D.C.: October 2014); NHTSA, National 
Institute of Standards and Technology Cybersecurity Risk Management Framework Applied 
to Modern Vehicles, DOT HS 812 073, (Washington, D.C.: October 2014); and NHTSA, 
Assessment of the Information Sharing and Analysis Center Model. DOT HS 812 076, 
(Washington, D.C.: October 2014). 
3 Stephen Checkoway, Damon McCoy, Danny Anderson, Brian Kantor, Hovav Shacham, Stefan 
Savage, Karl Koscher, Alexei Czeskis, Franziska Roesner, and Tadayoshi Kohno, 
Comprehensive Experimental Analyses of Automotive Attack Surfaces, Proceedings of the 
USENIX Security Symposium (San Francisco, CA: August 2011); Charlie Miller and Chris 
Valasek, Remote Exploitation of an Unaltered Passenger Vehicle (Aug. 10, 2015); and Ian 
Foster, Andrew Prudhomme, Karl Koscher, and Stefan Savage, Fast and Vulnerable: A 
Story of Telematic Failures, USENIX Workshop on Offensive Technologies (Washington. 
D.C.: August 2015). 
4 Selected industry stakeholders were those that we anticipated would have the most in-depth 
knowledge of vehicle cybersecurity developments based on their area of expertise or 
position in the market (e.g., automakers and parts suppliers). 
5 One of the top 5 suppliers did not respond to our request for a meeting. 
6 In some cases, we spoke with more than one individual representing a research institute or 
center engaged in vehicle cybersecurity research. We considered the collective viewpoint of 
these individuals as one stakeholder. 

United States Government Accountability Office 
52
7 NIST, Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity, Version 1.0 
(Gaithersburg, MD: Feb. 12, 2014). 
8 AUTOSAR is an acronym for Automotive Open System Architecture. 
9 The interviews mentioned in this paragraph were conducted in addition to our interviews with 
the 32 selected industry stakeholders described above. 
10 Pub. L. No. 112-141 § 31402, 126 Stat. 773 (2012) and Pub. L. No. 114-94. 129 Stat. 1312 
(2015). 
11 GAO, Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government, GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1 
(Washington, D.C.: November 1999) and GAO, Standards for Internal Control in the 
Federal Government, GAO-14-704G (Washington, D.C.: September 2014). These 
standards provide the overall framework for establishing and maintaining an effective 
internal control system for the federal government. 
12 Docket No. NHTSA-2014-0108. 79 Fed. Reg. 60574 (Oct. 7, 2014). 
13 U.S. Department of Transportation, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Report to 
Congress: Electronic Systems Performance in Passenger Motor Vehicles (Washington, 
D.C.: December 2015). 
 
 

In: Automotive Cybersecurity 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-987-5 
Editor: Craig Gibbs 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 
 
 
 
CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL 
SECURITY THREATS IN MODERN 
AUTOMOBILES: A COMPOSITE  
MODELING APPROACH* 
 
 
Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
 
 
FOREWORD 
 
NHTSA’s Automotive Cybersecurity Research Program 
 
Based on a systems engineering approach, the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration established five research goals to address cybersecurity 
issues associated with the secure operation of motor vehicles equipped with 
advanced electronic control systems. This program covers various safety-
critical applications deployed on current generation vehicles, as well as those 
envisioned on future vehicles that may feature more advanced forms of 
automation and connectivity. These goals are: 
 
1. Build a knowledge base to establish comprehensive research plans for 
automotive cybersecurity and develop enabling tools for applied 
research in this area; 
                                                           
* This is an edited, reformatted and augmented version of a report (DOT HS 812 074), issued by 
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, October 2014. 

Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
54
2. Facilitate the implementation of effective industry-based best 
practices and voluntary standards for cybersecurity and cybersecurity 
information sharing forums; 
3. Foster the development of new system solutions for automotive 
cybersecurity; 
4. Research the feasibility of developing minimum performance 
requirements for automotive cybersecurity; and 
5. Gather foundational research data and facts to inform potential future 
Federal policy and regulatory decision activities. 
 
 
This Report 
 
The primary objective of the work detailed in this report is to describe a 
composite modeling approach for potential cybersecurity threats in modern 
vehicles. Threat models, threat descriptions, and examples of various types of 
conceivable threats to automotive systems are included, along with a matrix 
containing a condensed version of the various potential attacks. 
This publication is part of a series of reports that describe our initial work 
under the goal of facilitating cybersecurity best practices in the automotive 
industry (Goals 1 and 2). The information presented herein increase the 
collective knowledge base in automotive cybersecurity; help identify potential 
knowledge gaps; help describe the risk and threat environments; and help 
support follow-on tasks that could be used to establish security guidelines. 
 
 
LIST OF ACRONYMS 
 
ABS 
antilock brake system 
ASF 
application security frame 
BCM 
body control module 
CAN 
controller area network 
CDMA 
code division multiple access 
COTS 
commercial-off-the-shelf 
CVE 
common vulnerability environment 
DoS 
denial of service 
DRM 
Digital Rights Management 
DSRC 
dedicated short range communications 
EBCM 
Electronic Brake Control Module 

Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern Automobiles 55
ECM 
engine control module 
ECU 
electronic control unit 
EGR 
exhaust gas recirculation 
GPS 
global positioning system 
GSM 
Global System for Mobile Communications 
HVAC 
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning 
ICS-CERT  Industrial Control Systems Cyber  
Emergency Response Team 
IDS  
Intrusion Detection System 
ISAC 
Information Sharing and Analysis Centers 
ITS  
Intelligent Transportation Systems 
LAN 
local area network 
LIN  
local interconnect network 
MAP-21 
Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act 
MOST 
Media Oriented System Transport 
NFC 
Near Field Communications 
OBD-II 
on-board diagnostics 
OEM 
original equipment manufacturer 
PC  
personal computer 
PT-ISAC 
Public Transportation Information Sharing  
and Analysis Center 
RF  
radio frequency 
SD  
secure digital 
SDM 
sensing and diagnostics module 
SME 
subject matter experts 
ST-ISAC 
Surface Transportation Information Sharing  
and Analysis Center 
UMTS 
Universal Mobile Telecommunications Systems 
USB 
universal serial bus 
US-CERT  United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team 
V2I  
vehicle-to-infrastructure 
V2V 
vehicle-to-vehicle 
V2X 
vehicle-to-vehicle or infrastructure 
 
 
1.0. INTRODUCTION 
 
Modern day automobiles are complex machines which can contain over 
60 embedded electronic control units, networks to support these units, and a 

Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
56
host of external interfaces, both wired and wireless. Wired interfaces can 
include USBs, CDs, DVDs, and secure digital (SD) cards. Wireless interfaces 
can include short-range and long-range connectivity, such as via Bluetooth, 
Wi-Fi, radio frequency, Near Field Communications, Global System for 
Mobile Communications/Code Division Multiple Access, and Universal 
Mobile Telecommunications System. The wireless interfaces can support a 
host of features including remote tire pressure monitoring, telematics, and 
Smart key keyless entry/ignition start. vehicleto-vehicle and vehicle-to-
infrastructure 
communications 
(collectively 
referred 
to 
as 
V2X 
communications) also promise tremendous benefits for efficiency, comfort, 
and driving safety which may be on the near horizon. The continuing trend in 
vehicle architecture is a shift towards more open systems. 
Driven by robust consumer demand for increased safety and convenience 
functions, the use of embedded systems and the code to support them will 
likely continue to grow. By using embedded systems, manufacturers can 
provide upgrades and premium functionality more readily and cost effectively. 
In a 2011 EE Times article [1], IBM Corporation’s Meg Selfe, a vice president 
for complex and embedded systems at IBM Rational, remarked that the 
Chevrolet Volt uses an estimated 10 million lines of code running on about 
100 ECUs. In comparison, she estimated that a typical 2009 model used six 
million lines of code, and a 2005 model used about 2.4 million lines of code. 
To date, there are no known field experiences with exploited cyber-
vulnerabilities in automobiles in the absence of a prolonged direct physical 
access to the vehicle. This is, in part, due to design, testing and quality 
assurance practices original equipment manufacturers and system designers 
employ. However, it is recognized that increasing interconnectedness with 
internal and external networks and growing system complexity could 
introduce new security vulnerabilities in cyber-physical systems that could 
potentially be exploited by various adversaries. 
The safety and security of vehicle electronic systems is a continuing focus 
for NHTSA. The U.S. Department of Transportation’s 2012 highway 
authorization act, Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act (MAP-
21), contains specific language in Section 31402 pertaining to electronic 
systems [2]: 
 
(a) IN GENERAL. — Not later than 2 years after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall complete an examination of the 
need for safety standards with regard to electronic systems in passenger 
motor vehicles. In conducting this examination, the Secretary shall— 

Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern Automobiles 57
(1) consider the electronic components, the interaction of electronic 
components, the security needs for those electronic systems to prevent 
unauthorized access, and the effect of surrounding environments on the 
electronic systems; and 
(2) allow for public comment. 
(b) REPORT. — Upon completion of the examination under 
subsection (a), the Secretary shall submit a report on the highest priority 
areas for safety with regard to the electronic systems to the Committee on 
Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee 
on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives. 
 
In road transportation scenarios related to the security of vehicle 
information or functions, stakeholders may be concerned primarily with the 
following four areas. 
 
 
Privacy/Security – unwanted or unauthorized acquisition of data 
pertaining to 
o Vehicle or driver activities (e.g., location of vehicle, 
navigation destination, etc.) 
o Vehicle or driver identity data 
o Vehicle or sub-system design and implementation (i.e., 
OEM/supplier proprietary data) 
 
Unwanted or Unauthorized commercial transactions 
 
Operational – interference with 
o On-board non-safety vehicle systems such as infotainment, 
and heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems, etc. 
o V2X communications that may have non-safety impacts on 
the operational performance of vehicles 
o V2X communications that may have non-safety 
impacts on intelligent transportation systems (ITS) 
 
Safety – interference with on-board vehicle systems or V2X 
communications that may affect the safe operation of vehicles and 
ITS 
 
A vehicle’s cyber-controlled subsystems could be compromised in a 
number of ways, such as via deliberate cyber-attacks, owners of the system 
unintentionally changing default parameters in a way that reduces safeguards 
in place, through possible physical damage to network components, or via 
radio frequency interference. 

Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
58
1.0.1. Automotive Networks 
 
In a vehicle, the exchange of data between the various ECUs can take 
place in one of two primary ways: 
 
1. 
Data is transferred between ECUs over dedicated wires as in peer-
to-peer communications; and 
2. 
Data is transferred between ECUs via a network data bus. 
 
There are multiple types of vehicle networks. Table 1 contains a partial 
listing of current automotive networks. There may be multiple networks within 
the same vehicle supporting different functions with varying levels of safety 
impact potential. 
 
Table 1. Sample Automotive Networks 
 
Network Name 
Physical Layer 
Network 
Topology 
Typical Usage 
CAN (Controller 
Area Network) 
Twisted pair, 9-
pin D-Sub 
Point to Point 
Body systems, 
engine management, 
transmission, etc. 
LIN (Local 
Interconnect 
Network) 
Single wire 
Single Master 
to 
Multiple Slave 
(up to 16 
slaves) 
Door locks, climate 
control, seat belts, 
sunroof, lighting, 
window lift, mirror 
control 
FlexRay 
Electrical, 
optical 
Single and 
Dual Channel 
Drive by wire, brake 
by wire, steer by 
wire, stability 
control, etc. 
MOST (Media 
Oriented Systems 
Transport) 
Optical 
Ring (up to 64 
MOST devices) 
Infotainment data 
BYTEFLIGHT 
Optical 
Master/Slave 
Safety critical 
applications  
(e.g., air bags) 
 
 

Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern Automobiles 59
For example, one of the more common automotive platform networks is 
the controller area network bus1. The CAN bus links individual ECUs to form 
an integrated system. Data transfer in the CAN bus works in the same manner 
as a telephone party line. An ECU sends data into the bus while other ECUs 
listen and if the data concerns them, the other ECUs act upon it. 
A typical CAN bus consists of a controller, a transceiver, two data bus 
lines, and two data bus terminals. Except for the physical data bus lines, the 
components reside in the ECUs. The CAN bus components perform the 
following functions: 
 
1. CAN Controller receives outgoing data from the processor in the 
ECU, processes the data, and sends it to the CAN transceiver. In 
addition, the controller receives incoming data from the CAN 
transceiver, and then checks it to see if the data message is for that 
ECU. If the message is for that ECU, the CAN controller processes it 
and sends it to the ECU processer. If the message is not for that ECU, 
the data is ignored. 
2. CAN Transceiver acts as a transmitter and receiver, converts 
outgoing data from the CAN controller to electrical signals and sends 
them over the CAN bus lines. Also, the CAN transceiver receives 
incoming signals from the CAN bus lines, converts these electrical 
signals, and sends them to the CAN controller. 
3. CAN Terminal is a resistor that prevents data from being reflected 
back at the end of the lines. 
4. CAN Bus Lines are physical wires that transmit the bi-directional 
signals from the CAN transceivers. 
 
 
1.0.2. Electronic Control Units 
 
The first ECUs (see Figure 1) were dedicated to engine management in 
response to meeting emission standards. Back in the 1980s, cars only had one 
“computer.” Currently, there are between 70 and 100 ECUs in an automobile. 
An ECU can be interconnected to other ECUs via a digital bus network. There 
may be multiple bus networks in an automobile, split along component groups. 
Typically, critical ECUs such as the electronic brake control module are given 
a higher data rate bus than less critical ones such as HVAC. 
 
 

Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
60
 
Figure 1. Typical ECUs. 
 
1.1. OBJECTIVES 
 
This paper describes a modeling approach for characterizing potential 
threats for automotive control systems. Threat models, descriptions, and 
examples of various types of threats to automotive systems are included, along 
with a matrix containing a condensed version of the various sample attack 
possibilities. 
The completed threat matrix can be found in Appendix B. 
 
 
1.2. METHODOLOGY 
 
Information for this modeling approach was provided through various 
groups, government entities, industry publications and periodicals, interviews 
with subject matter experts, SME presentations and studies, DOT-funded 
studies, and subject matter government reports. Appendix C provides a list of 
sources used in the development of this report. 
 
 
1.2.1. Why Threat Modeling? 
 
Threat modeling is a structured approach that allows cyber security threats 
to be classified. When integrated into the design process, threat modeling 
would likely reduce the lifecycle cost of providing security for an application. 
An effective threat model: 

Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern Automobiles 61
 
Identifies potential threats and the conditions that must be in place for 
a potential attack to make an impact; 
 
Provides information on how existing safeguards would affect the 
outcome of the attack; 
 
Provides information that would help target areas for mitigations; and 
 
Allows for categorization of attacks and provides a means to group 
threats to allow for development of mitigations that would address 
multiple threats. 
 
 
1.2.2. Types of Threat Models 
 
There are many different threat models in use today in various industries; 
however it is unclear whether these existing threat models can address all of 
the unique factors in the automotive cyber landscape. Therefore, a hybrid of 
various models is proposed. 
A few of the many threat models in use are briefly described below. 
 
A. Stride [3] 
The Microsoft STRIDE model characterizes potential threats according to 
the types of exploit that are used. The STRIDE acronym is made up of the first 
letter of each of the threat categories, shown in Figure 2. In use, the STRIDE 
threats are considered against each component of the system, as well as the 
relationship between components from the attacker’s point of view. Variants 
of the STRIDE model are currently used by at least one major OEM, 
according to the subject matter expert interviews. See Section 2.0.2 (Table 5) 
for a detailed description of the STRIDE model categories. 
 
B. Trike 
Trike [4] is a threat modeling framework with similarities to the Microsoft 
threat modeling processes. However, Trike differs because it uses a risk-based 
approach with distinct implementation, threat, and risk models, instead of 
using the STRIDE aggregated threat model (attacks, threats, and weaknesses). 
Trike’s goals are: 
 
 
With assistance from the system stakeholders, to ensure that the risk 
this system entails to each asset is acceptable to all stakeholders; 

Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
62
 
Communicate what has been done and its effects to the stakeholders; 
and 
 
Empower stakeholders to understand and reduce the risks to them and 
other stakeholders implied by their actions within their domains. 
 
 
Figure 2. STRIDE Threat Categories. 
C. Application Security Frame 
The Microsoft ASF [5] methodology looks at the data network from a 
defender’s point of view. The threat categories listed in Table 2 are designed 
to be system-administrator-centric. 
 
Table 2. ASF Threat Categories 
 
Input and Data 
Validation 
Configuration 
Management 
Cryptography 
Authentication 
Sensitive Data 
Exception 
Management 
Authorization 
Session Management 
Auditing and Logging 
 
 
2.0. COMPOSITE THREAT MODEL 
 
After closely analyzing STRIDE, Trike, and ASF from an automotive 
sector applicability standpoint, the common elements from various methods 
were selected to establish the composite threat modeling method described in 
this section. This method is summarized in Figure 3. 
 

Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern Automobiles 63
Composite Threat Model Outline 
 
2.0.1 Identify critical applications/systems  
 
A. Application/system decomposition 
1. Create interconnection drawings 
2. Create high level data flow diagrams  
 
2.0.2 Determination and analysis of threats 
A. Threat identification 
B. Threat analysis 
1 Drawing review 
2. Use case development 
3. Vehicle threat matrix development and population 
Figure 3. Composite Threat Model Outline. 
 
2.0.1. Identify Critical Applications/Systems 
 
A critical application/system (e.g., brake, powertrain) for a vehicle is 
viewed as a vehicle function that, if compromised maliciously, could result in 
a serious safety concern. This step identifies priority application/systems for 
analysis, 
which 
requires 
a 
working 
knowledge 
of 
the 
specific 
component/system and how it relates to other components/systems. It is 
essential to assess the interconnected network impacts, considering all possible 
data paths and potential attack vectors that could provide for entry into a 
critical system/component potentially through a noncritical system/component. 
 
A. Application/System Decomposition 
Once a component/system has been identified as being critical (or that it is 
connected to a critical component/system), an interconnection and a data flow 
drawing of the component/system are created. 
 
1. Create Interconnection Drawing 
It is essential to create a complete interconnection drawing which 
contains: 
 

Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
64
 
All relevant on-board components and systems: Identify all 
components and systems that are physically connected to or 
communicate with the component/system being studied, with all 
connections. 
 
External interface connections: Identify external connections such as 
on-board diagnostics (OBD-II), Bluetooth, USB, etc. 
 
Data entry/exit points: Note any point whereby data can enter/exit the 
system/component. 
 
Data types: Identify the areas where there are separations of system 
and component data levels (i.e., critical versus non-critical) with 
special attention to those areas with data having differing levels of 
criticality handoffs (e.g., gateways). 
 
2. Create High Level Data Flow Drawing 
The purpose of the data flow drawing is to visually represent the data 
flows that support the functional relationships between the various 
systems/components, as well as the trust boundaries that exist between the 
various components. 
 
 
2.0.2. Determination and Analysis of Threats 
 
A. Threat Identification 
Threat identification is a continuous process that includes monitoring the 
system’s environment to determine if credible cyber threats exist. The 
automotive system developers and first tier suppliers are usually the best 
experts on their systems, and as such, it is essential for them to understand the 
landscape of cyber security threats and how they may impact safe operations. 
Cyber security threats are identified from multiple sources such as 
vulnerability databases, vendor and industry vulnerability notices, and security 
testing (by both vendors and OEMs), which often describe threats to a generic 
platform. It is important for the automotive system developers to analyze these 
threats and determine if they are applicable to their platforms and systems. 
Vulnerability data from intelligence agencies such as sector-specific 
Information Sharing and Analysis Centers, the U.S. Computer Emergency 
Readiness Team, the Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response 
Team, and MITRE’s Common Vulnerability Environment can also assist in 
this analysis. 

Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern Automobiles 65
In other disciplines, such as safety, historical data are typically used to 
estimate the probability that a given threat may occur. Current data for 
“automotive” man-made and intentional malicious threats (cyber threats) are 
scarce and not sufficient to estimate occurrence and recurrence probabilities of 
these attacks with confidence, making the determination of a particular threat 
for any specific system fairly subjective at this time. It may be valuable to 
monitor and draw from intelligence data on similar components deployed in 
related but non-automotive environments when possible (e.g., aircraft, transit 
systems). 
This process can play a key role in predicting component behavior and 
interactions within the system, which may integrate commercial-off-the-shelf 
(COTS) components and other propriety systems that may have been 
developed in isolation. The vast deployment of COTS components across 
multiple industries serves as a very large repository of COTS interactions and 
may point to focus areas to assess cyber-vulnerabilities. 
Techniques to identify threats should ideally include evidence of cyber 
activity across fleets, and related industries, through a trusted centralized 
repository or clearing house. Other industries have successfully established 
similar capabilities through the formation of sector-specific ISACs, e.g., the 
Public Transportation ISAC (PT-ISAC), the Surface Transportation ISAC 
(ST-ISAC), and the aviation/aircraft ISAC that is under development. 
 
B. Threat Analysis 
 
1. Drawing Review 
Once the interconnection and data flow drawings are completed, they are 
reviewed to provide context for development of the use cases. Examples of 
typical review questions are: 
 
 
What data paths are deemed critical to support the mission of the 
system? 
 
Are there any indirect data paths that an attacker could use to 
influence critical areas from non-critical areas? 
 
What are the gateways or components that handle differing levels of 
data criticality on the network? 
 
What are the physical and wireless entry points that connect the 
vehicle to external sources and networks? 
 
What are the confidentiality, integrity and availability data concerns? 
 

Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
66
2. Use Case Development 
After creating and analyzing the interconnection and data flow drawings 
referenced above, use cases and potential attack scenarios can be developed. A 
use case or attack scenario describes a potential attack at a high level, so the 
amount of detail included in the use case should be kept to a minimum. The 
use case does not describe the minutiae of the attack, as the threat model is 
concerned only with the fundamentals of the attack. Typically, use case 
development requires input from multiple sources familiar with the system. 
Scenarios deemed too improbable on their own may later provide substance 
for other more likely types of attacks. Each use case includes a short 
descriptive title. 
 
Table 3. Use Case Elements – Potential Entry Points 
 
Entry Point Type 
Entry Point 
Wired 
OBD-II Port 
Network harness connectors 
Diagnostic Ports 
USB Port 
On-board Vehicle Networks (CAN, FlexRay, 
Ethernet, MOST, etc.) 
CD/DVD player 
Vehicle Charging Port 
Wireless – Short Range 
Radio Frequency (tire pressure monitor, key fob, 
etc.) 
Near Field Communications 
Wi-Fi 
Bluetooth 
Dedicated short range communications 
Wireless – Long Range 
GPS receiver 
GSM/CDMA 
 
 
(a) Use Case Elements 
When developing use cases the following elements are included. 
 
 
Entry Points: How an attacker may gain access to the vehicle 
systems 
 
Access Methods: The means that an attacker may use to access the 
entry points 

Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern Automobiles 67
 
Types: The type of attack that may be launched 
 
Outcomes: The potential effects of the attack 
 
Potential examples of use case elements for automobiles are listed in 
Table 3 through 6. Table 3 lists examples of entry points, both wired and 
wireless. Table 4 provides examples of access methods. Table 5 provides an 
example of a type element in the use case. The types of attack in this example 
are borrowed from the STRIDE method. Table 6 lists examples of the 
outcomes element of the use case. 
 
Table 4. Use Case Elements – Potential Access Methods 
 
Access Method Type 
Access Method 
Outside Networks 
Network-Call Center 
Network-Service Center 
Network-Home network 
Network-Cellular 
Component 
Component-Counterfeit 
Component-Tampered with or modified 
(OEM/Aftermarket) 
Portable 
Personal Computer 
OEM supplied-Smart key fob 
RF repeaters/transceivers 
Removable Media- e.g., CD or DVD disc 
Smart phone 
Smart music player- e.g., portable music device 
Custom ECU 
 
Table 5. Use Case Elements – Types 
 
Types (Borrowed From STRIDE Method) 
Spoofing Identity: “Identity spoofing” is a key risk for applications that have 
many users but provide a single execution context at the application and 
database level. In particular, users should not be able to become any other user 
or assume the attributes of another user. 
Tampering with Data: Users can potentially change data delivered to them, 
return it, and thereby potentially manipulate client-side validation, GET and 
POST results, cookies, HTTP headers, and so forth. The application should not 
send data to the user, such as interest rates or periods, which are obtainable 
only from within the application itself.  
The application should also carefully check data received from the user and 

Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
68
validate that it is sane and applicable before storing or using it. 
Repudiation: Users may dispute transactions if there is insufficient auditing or 
recordkeeping of their activity. For example, if a user denies initiating an 
action, and the activities were not tracked through the application, there may 
be insufficient basis for a resolution. Therefore, consider if the application 
requires non-repudiation controls, such as web access logs, audit trails at each 
tier, or the same user context from top to bottom. Preferably, the application 
should run with the user’s privileges, not more, but this may not be possible 
with many off-the-shelf application frameworks. 
Information Disclosure: Users are rightfully wary of submitting private 
details to a system. If it is possible for an attacker to publicly reveal user data 
at large, whether anonymously or as an authorized user, there will be an 
immediate loss of confidence and a substantial period of reputation loss. 
Therefore, applications must include strong controls to prevent user ID 
tampering and abuse, particularly if they use a single context to run the entire 
application. Also, consider if the user’s web browser may leak information. 
Some web browsers may ignore the no caching directives in HTTP headers or 
handle them incorrectly. In a corresponding fashion, every secure application 
has a responsibility to minimize the amount of information stored by the web 
browser, just in case it leaks or leaves information behind, which can be used 
by an attacker to learn details about the application, the user, or to potentially 
become that user. Finally, in implementing persistent values, keep in mind that 
the use of hidden fields is insecure by nature. Such storage should not be relied 
on to secure sensitive information or to provide adequate personal privacy 
safeguards 
Denial of Service: Application designers should be aware that their 
applications may be subject to a denial of service attack. Therefore, the use of 
expensive resources such as large files, complex calculations, heavy-duty 
searches, or long queries should be reserved for authenticated and authorized 
users, and not available to anonymous users. For applications that do not have 
this luxury, every facet of the application should be engineered to perform as 
little work as possible, to use fast and few database queries, to avoid exposing 
large files or unique links per user, in order to prevent simple denial of service 
attacks. 
Elevation of Privilege: If an application provides distinct user and 
administrative roles, then it is vital to ensure that the user cannot elevate 
his/her role to a higher privilege one. In particular, simply not displaying 
privileged role links is insufficient. Instead, all actions should be gated through 
an authorization matrix, to ensure that only the permitted roles can access 
privileged functionality. 
 
 

Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern Automobiles 69
Table 6. Use Case Elements – Potential Outcomes 
 
Outcomes 
Cause erratic behavior within normal 
operational parameters 
Prevent normal data bus 
communications flow 
Cause behavior outside of normal 
operational parameters that a driver can 
mitigate 
Cause false or misleading 
information to be displayed to the 
driver 
Cause behavior outside of normal 
operational parameters that a driver cannot 
mitigate 
Cause driver distraction 
Data breach in private information, e.g., 
passwords, address books 
Theft of security data e.g., Digital 
Rights Management keys 
 
C. Vehicle Threat Matrix Development and Population 
Once use cases have been developed, both the data contained within the 
use cases and data that supports the use cases are parsed into the vehicle threat 
matrix. 
The vehicle threat matrix is used to consolidate threat data. It is 
constructed as a spreadsheet, allowing the matrix to be sorted by various 
categories as needed. In the matrix, categories of severity, sophistication level, 
and likelihood are indicated as high, medium, or low based on expert opinion. 
These categories allow for flexibility in their assignments while still 
maintaining the ability to sort the matrix data. 
 
(a)Threat Matrix Categories 
Table 7 contains the vehicle threat matrix categories and their 
descriptions. Category options for input are given where applicable. 
 
Table 7. Threat Matrix Categories 
 
Matrix Category 
Category Description 
Category Options 
ID Number 
Identification number for 
the attack 
 
Attacked Safety 
and Non- Safety 
Zone Groups 
/Attack Support 
Zone Groups 
Groups of various like 
categories of components 
and systems that are 
targeted by the attack or 
that are used to support the 
attack 
 Communications: 
 Internal communications 
paths (e.g., CAN, FlexRay, 
IDb-1394, MOST) 
 Vehicle Operations: 
 

Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
70
Table 7. (Continued) 
 
Matrix Category 
Category Description 
Category Options 
 
 
 Powertrain - Engine 
control, hybrid drive 
systems, transmission, 
misc. power train sensors 
(e.g., torque convertor 
lockup) 
 Chassis and Safety - Brake 
control, steering, 
environmental sensors, air 
bag sensors, tire pressure 
sensors, misc. chassis 
sensors (e.g., steering 
angle) 
 Body Electronics - 
Instruments, door modules 
(e.g., remote locks, light 
control, seat control) 
 Comfort Systems: 
 Climate control, air vent 
positions, remote start 
 Infotainment: 
 Audio, display/video, 
navigation, embedded 
telephonic communications 
 External interfaces: 
 GPS, diagnostic ports, USB, 
Bluetooth, key fob 
Attacked Zone 
Safety Related 
Whether or not the 
attacked zone contains 
safety related functions 
 Yes 
 No 
Component/ 
System 
The component or system 
that is under attack 
E.g., the electronic braking 
system as opposed to an 
electronic brake actuator 
Vulnerability2 
That Could Be 
Exploited 
Protocols/applications that 
could be used/corrupted in 
order to achieve the 
outcome of the attack 
E.g., lack of firewalls, easy 
diagnostic access 
Attack Vector 
Entry point of the potential 
attack 
E.g., OBD-II input, USB 
port, Bluetooth, GPS, audio 
system, etc. 
 
 

Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern Automobiles 71
Matrix Category 
Category Description 
Category Options 
Access Method 
The transport mechanism 
that could be used to 
launch the attack 
E.g., counterfeit component, 
portable device, call center 
network, RF repeater 
Attack Type 
Type of attack that could 
be used 
 Spoofing identity 
 Tampering with data 
 Repudiation 
 Information disclosure 
 Denial of service 
 Elevation of privilege 
Attack 
Name/Scenario 
A compressed narrative of 
the potential attack derived 
from the use cases 
The narrative contains: 
 Name of the attack (title) 
 Who the attacker may be 
 What the targeted 
component/system may be 
 How the attacker may gain 
access to the 
component/system 
 How the attack may be 
launched 
Resources 
Required 
Resources that may be 
needed to carry out the 
attack 
E.g., hardware, software, 
access to vehicle (physical or 
remote), skill level 
Casualty 
Severity 
Projected outcome severity 
due to the potential attack 
 High: High likelihood of 
severe injury or loss of life; 
loss of control of vehicle 
 Medium: Potential to cause 
injury; experienced operator 
may be able to maintain 
control of vehicle 
 Low: No injury; no loss of 
vehicle control during the 
attack; attack motive was for 
theft, nuisance, or publicity 
only 
Financial 
Severity 
The outcome severity in 
terms of direct or indirect 
financial loss to the owner, 
OEM, suppliers, or society 
 High: Could cause major 
financial loss to vehicle, 
business or product 
reputation 
 Medium: Potential to cause 
moderate financial loss to 
vehicle, business or product 
reputation 
 
 
 

Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
72
Table 7. (Continued) 
 
Matrix Category 
Category Description 
Category Options 
 
 
Low: Minimal loss to vehicle, 
business or product 
reputation; attack motive was 
for nuisance or publicity only 
Trip Phase 
The vehicle’s movement 
category at the instance of 
the potential attack 
One or more of the following 
may be used: 
 Parked- not moving, engine 
shut off 
 Idling- not moving, engine 
running 
 Stop-and-go- i.e., heavy 
traffic 
 City driving- typical city 
limits speed 
 Urban driving- typical urban 
space speeds 
 Highway driving- typical 
highway speeds 
 Any- Not speed-dependent 
Loss of Privacy 
Whether or not items such 
as onboard address books, 
vehicle location, or 
passwords may have been 
compromised and shared 
with un-trusted parties 
 Yes 
 No 
Outcome 
Ramifications of a 
successful potential attack, 
assuming no mitigations 
were bypassed 
 
Operator 
Override 
What an average operator 
may be able to do to 
override or avoid the 
ramifications of the 
potential attack 
E.g., cycling the ignition; 
disabling functions via a 
switch; applying brakes 
Sophistication 
Level 
The design complexity of 
the potential attack 
 High: Extremely complex 
code; may attack multiple 
components/systems; may 
use zero-day exploits; may 
have multiple triggers; hard 
to detect and remove; may be 
persistent (launching attack 
payload more than once),  
 

Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern Automobiles 73
Matrix Category 
Category Description 
Category Options 
 
 
and may erase itself after 
attack is executed 
 Medium: Moderately 
complex code; may contain 
remote trigger; may be 
persistent; may use zero-day 
exploits 
Low: Non-persistent; easy to 
detect; makes use of potential 
vulnerabilities 
Difficulty of 
Implementation 
How difficult is it to 
implement the potential 
attack 
 High: Extremely complex to 
implement; 
 may require prolonged and 
advanced 
 physical access to the vehicle; 
may need specialized tools 
and/or knowledge to launch. 
 Medium: Moderately 
complex to implement; may 
require some physical access 
to vehicle; may need some 
and/or specialized knowledge 
to launch 
 Low: Easy to implement; 
requires minimal/no physical 
access to vehicle; requires no 
specialized knowledge to 
launch 
Likelihood 
The likelihood of a 
potential 
attack to be carried out 
 High: Well-known attack; 
very easy to 
 perform; canned malware 
available for the attack 
 Medium: Some knowledge of 
system needed; access to 
entry point more difficult; 
some custom code needed 
 Low: Expert knowledge of 
component/system required; 
entry point difficult to 
access/unexpected; high level 
of custom coding involved 
 
(b) Populating the Threat Matrix 
Below is one example of a use case that has been derived from research 
materials and input received from automotive SMEs on cybersecurity. Other 

Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
74
use case examples can be found in Appendix A. It should be noted that these 
use case examples have not been reported in real world settings. Some have 
been studied in academic settings where experimenters had prolonged physical 
access to vehicles. 
The use case below will be used to provide an example of the threat 
matrix population. Table 8 demonstrates how the threat matrix could be 
populated in this particular use case. 
 
Use Case Example: Brake Disconnect 
A person with physical access to the vehicle attaches a custom device [6] 
to the OBD-II port. The device has the capability to run a program that can 
monitor vehicle parameters over the CAN bus and execute the CAN device 
control service that can send a data packet normally used when building and 
testing the vehicle, to the electronic brake control module. This could diminish 
or prevent the use of brakes when a programmed set of conditions takes place 
if there is linkage to the ECBM through the OBD-II data bus. 
 
Table 8. Threat Matrix Population Example 
 
Matrix Category 
Category Description 
Option Chosen 
ID Number 
Identification number 
for the attack 
1 
Attacked Safety and 
Non- Safety Zone 
Groups /Attack 
Support Zone 
Groups 
Groups of various like 
categories of 
components and 
systems that are 
targeted by the attack 
or that are used to 
support the attack 
The EBCM has been identified 
as the component that could be 
attacked. 
The attacker could use a device 
connected to the CAN bus, 
which falls under the external 
interface zone. The device 
connected to the CAN bus 
communicates with the EBCM, 
therefore the communications 
zone is also used. 
Attacked Zone 
Safety Related 
Whether or not the 
attacked zone contains 
safety related functions 
The attack could occur against 
the Vehicle Operations group 
which may contain safety 
related items. 
Component/System 
The component or 
system that is under 
attack 
The EBCM is the component 
that could be subject to an 
attack. 
 
 

Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern Automobiles 75
Matrix Category 
Category Description 
Option Chosen 
Vulnerability That 
Could Be Exploited 
Protocols/applications 
that could be 
used/corrupted in order 
to achieve the outcome 
of the attack 
In this category, subject matter 
knowledge combined with the 
interconnection and data flow 
drawings could highlight 
vulnerabilities that assist or 
allow the use case attack. 
Attack Vector 
Entry point of the 
potential attack 
The attack vector could be the 
OBD-II port. In a complex 
attack attempt, the attack vector 
should describe the highest 
point of entry for the potential 
attack. 
Access Method 
The transport 
mechanism that could 
be used to launch the 
attack 
A portable device 
(PC/microcomputer) may have 
been used to gain access to the 
platform’s network. 
Attack Type 
Type of attack that 
could be used 
Elevation of privileges 
Attack 
Name/Scenario 
A compressed 
narrative of the 
potential attack derived 
from the use cases 
The attack scenario is the use 
case developed earlier. (If it’s 
too lengthy it will be condensed 
down to the fundamentals of the 
attack). 
Resources Required 
Resources that may be 
needed to carry out the 
attack 
Items such as hardware, 
software, access time, and prior 
knowledge are some of the 
items that can be used. 
Casualty Severity 
Projected outcome 
severity due to the 
potential attack 
There may be a degradation or 
loss of brake functionality; there 
could have been a loss of control 
which could have resulted in 
severe injury or loss of life. 
Therefore a severity level of 
high would be assigned. 
Financial Severity 
The outcome severity 
in terms of direct or 
indirect financial loss 
to the owner, OEM, 
suppliers, or society 
There may be degradation or 
loss of brake functionality. 
Therefore a severity level of 
High would be assigned. 
Trip Phase 
The vehicle’s 
movement category at 
the instance of the 
potential attack 
“Highway speeds” would be 
indicated for the trip phase 
because the scenario may have 
triggered at high speed. 
 

Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
76
Table 8. (Continued) 
 
Matrix Category 
Category Description 
Option Chosen 
Loss of Privacy 
Whether or not items 
such as onboard 
address books, vehicle 
location, or passwords 
may have been 
compromised and 
shared with un-trusted 
parties 
“No” would be selected as there 
is no attempt during this attack 
to extract any data from either 
the passengers or vehicle 
platform. 
Outcome 
Ramifications of a 
successful potential 
attack, assuming no 
mitigations were 
bypassed 
The braking capability of the 
vehicle may have been degraded 
or lost temporarily or for 
extended periods of time. 
Operator Override 
What an average 
operator may be able 
to do to override or 
avoid the ramifications 
of the potential attack 
Potentially using emergency 
brakes; disengaging engine 
power; lowering of max gear 
setting 
Sophistication Level 
The design complexity 
of the potential attack 
Significant knowledge of 
proprietary systems, coding and 
tools used would have been 
required implying “medium” 
complexity designation. 
Difficulty of 
Implementation 
How difficult is it to 
implement the 
potential attack 
Brief direct access to the vehicle 
would have been needed in 
order to attach the 
microcomputer, which may or 
may not be detectable by the 
operator. A “low” designation is 
suggested. 
Likelihood 
The likelihood of a 
potential attack to be 
carried out 
Like other field designations 
above, there is subjectivity in 
assessing likelihood of threats. 
This case could be seen as 
analogous to someone devising 
a mechanical tampering method 
that could also disable the 
brakes. 
 
 

 
 
Figure 4. Threat Matrix Working Layout. 
 

Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
78
Due to the number of categories, the threat matrix could become difficult 
to read when included in a report; therefore, a format specifically designed for 
reports is used. Figure 4 shows the completed threat matrix for the example 
use case, with the working matrix layout. Figure 5 shows the same data, but in 
the matrix style for reports. Completed threat matrices for the other use cases 
(described in Appendix A) can be found in the report matrix format in 
Appendix B. 
 
Threat Model Matrix 
 
 
ID# 
1 
 
Attacked 
Zone Group 
Vehicle Operations 
(Chassis and Safety) 
 
 
 
Attacked 
Zone Safety 
Related 
Y 
Vulnerability 
That Could Be 
Exploited 
EBCM device 
control key 
and seed only 
16 bits; 
ability to 
access 
diagnostic 
areas 
 
Attack 
Support 
Zones 
Communications, 
External Interface 
 
Component/ 
System 
EBCM 
 
Attack Vector 
ODB-II Port 
 
Access 
Method 
Portable Device 
 
Attack Type 
Elevation of privileges 
 
Casualty 
Severity 
High 
 
Financial 
Severity 
High 
 
Trip Phase 
Highway speed 
 
Sophistication 
Level 
Medium 
Difficulty of 
Implementation 
Low 
 
Likelihood 
Medium 
 
 
 
Operator 
Override 
Depending on 
conditions at the time 
of the attack,  
operator may be able 
to use emergency 
brakes to bring vehicle 
to a controlled halt. 

Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern Automobiles 79
Attack 
Scenario 
Brake Disconnect: 
A person with physical access to the vehicle attaches a 
custom device to the OBD-II port. The device has the 
capability to run a program which can monitor vehicle 
parameters over the CAN bus and execute the CAN device 
control service that can send a data packet normally used 
when building and testing the vehicle, to the EBCM. This 
could diminish or prevent the use of brakes when a 
programmed set of conditions takes place if there is linkage 
to the ECBM through the OBD-II data bus. 
Resources 
Required 
Access to OBD-II port, ability to run CAN device service, 
knowledge of EBCM packet information 
Outcome 
Cause behavior outside of normal operating parameters. 
Brakes will not engage. Operator is unable to stop the car 
using service brakes. 
Figure 5. Threat Matrix Report Layout. 
 
APPENDIX A: USE CASE EXAMPLES 
 
The use cases below have been derived from research materials and input 
received from automotive SMEs on cybersecurity. It should be noted that these 
use case examples have not been reported in real world settings. Some have 
been studied in academic settings where experimenters had prolonged physical 
access to vehicles. 
 
Brake Disconnect [6] 
 
A person with physical access to the vehicle attaches a custom device to 
the OBD-II port. The device has the capability to run a program which can 
monitor vehicle parameters over the CAN bus and execute the CAN device 
control service that can send a data packet normally used when building and 
testing the vehicle, to the EBCM. This could diminish or prevent the use of 
brakes when a programmed set of conditions takes place if there is linkage to 
the ECBM through the OBD-II data bus. 
 
 
 

Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
80
Horn Activation 
 
A person with physical access to the vehicle installs a wireless interface to 
the USB port which can remotely send commands to the vehicle data bus such 
as to activate the vehicle’s horn [6, 7]. This could happen via short range 
proximity wireless or long range wireless pathways. 
 
Engine Halt Air Bag 
 
An owner installs an after-market radio purchased from a third party, 
which may come with an on-board malware that can access a vehicle data bus 
(assuming there is a pathway) that could potentially mimic the air bag 
deployed message from the inflatable restraint sensing and diagnostic module 
to the ECM. The ECM reads the forged packet and shuts down the engine at 
highway speeds. 
 
Portable Device Injection 
 
The owner downloads music from an untrusted source and creates a CD. 
The downloaded file could contain specific malware that when played sets the 
dominant state node for the infotainment unit for that vehicle and then uses the 
infotainment unit to launch a denial-of-service type of attack against the BCM. 
As the attack takes place, the instrument cluster may freeze in its current state, 
and when the vehicle is turned off, it may not allow the vehicle to be restarted 
without communication to the BCM being reestablished first. 
 
Dealership Download 
 
The LAN at the service department gets compromised. When an 
automobile is connected to the dealership’s network via the OBD-II port 
during the process of providing service, the attacker could install malware that 
could be exploited later on while using the service department’s computers as 
a pass through. 
 
Cellular Attack 
 
An attacker calls the car's embedded cell number [8] and launches 
malicious code that defeats the analog to digital modem's software security 
challenge via a buffer overflow attack.3 Once the software modem is 

Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern Automobiles 81
compromised, the attacker could gain access to the telematics unit. The 
malicious code then could cause the telematics unit to connect to an IP 
address. Once a connection to the IP address may be established, the attacker 
could use the telematics unit as an entry point to download and run further 
malicious code, which could execute subsequent attacks that may provide 
automotive systems false sensor data which could result in erroneous action. 
 
Key Fob Cloning 
 
An attacker exploits vulnerabilities in the theft alarm system to make a 
clone of a key fob [9], which provides full access to the car. 
 
Long Distance Keyless Entry Repeater Version 
 
When the vehicle is parked, a team of attackers use loop antennas and 
wireless repeaters to relay the polling request from the driver’s key fob [10] to 
the vehicle to get access. The same method could also be used to start the 
vehicle. 
 
Call Center Fleet Attack 
 
A hacker group gains control of servers at a telematics call center. The 
hackers then could issue engine disable commands to all cars under their 
control from the compromised call center. 
 
Car Rental or Lease 
 
A person with access to large number of vehicles that are typically 
operated by others, such as a rental car [6] employee, could potentially install 
malware via physical access to the vehicle. The malware could take form in 
any of the attack types described in this section. 
 
Malware Onboard 
 
An end-of-line programming station gets compromised with malware. The 
malware is downloaded into ECUs during the manufacturing process. The 
malware could be designed to execute under specific conditions and time 
periods. The malware could take form in any of the attack types described in 
this section. 

Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
82
APPENDIX B: COMPLETED THREAT MATRICES 
 
Brake Disconnect  
 
Threat Model Matrix  
 
 
ID#  
1  
 
Attacked Zone 
Group  
Vehicle Operations 
(Chassis and Safety)  
 
 
 
Attacked Zone 
Safety Related  
Y  
Vulnerability 
That Could Be 
Exploited  
EBCM Device 
control key and 
seed only 16 
bits; Ability to 
access 
diagnostic areas  
 
Attack Support 
Zones  
Communications, 
External Interface  
Component/ 
System  
Electronic Brake 
Control Module  
Attack Vector  
ODB-II Port 
Access Method  
Portable Device  
Attack Type  
Elevation of Privileges  
Casualty 
Severity  
High  
Financial 
Severity  
High  
Trip Phase  
Highway Speed 
Sophistication 
Level  
Medium  
Difficulty of 
Implementation  
Low  
 
Likelihood  
Medium  
 
 
 
Operator 
Override  
Depending on 
conditions at the time of 
the attack, operator may 
be able to use 
emergency brakes to 
bring vehicle to a 
controlled halt.  
Attack Scenario 
Brake Disconnect:  
A person with physical access to the vehicle attaches a custom 
device to the OBD-II port. The device has the capability to run a 
program which can monitor vehicle parameters over the CAN bus 
and execute the CAN device control service that can send a data 
packet normally used whenbuilding and testing the vehicle, to the 
electronic brake control module. This could diminish or prevent the 
use of brakes when a programmed set of conditions takes place if 
there is linkage to the ECBM through the OBD-II data bus. 
Resources 
Required  
Access to OBD-II port, ability to run CAN device service, 
knowledge of EBCM packet information  
Outcome  
Cause behavior outside of normal operating parameters. Brakes will 
not engage. Operator is unable to stop the car using service brakes.  
 

Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern Automobiles 83
Horn Activation  
 
Threat Model Matrix  
 
 
ID#  
2  
 
Attacked Zone 
Group 
Vehicle Operations 
(Body Electronics)  
 
 
 
Attacked Zone 
Safety Related  
N  
Vulnerability 
That Could Be 
Exploited  
Device 
control key 
not needed  
 
Attack Support 
Zones  
Communications, 
External Interface  
Component/ 
System  
Body Control Module  
Attack Vector  
USB Port  
Access Method  
RF transmitter  
Attack Type  
Spoofing  
Casualty 
Severity  
Low  
Financial 
Severity  
Low  
Trip Phase  
Any  
Sophistication 
Level  
Medium  
Difficulty of 
Implementation  
Medium  
 
Likelihood  
Medium  
 
 
 
Operator 
Override  
None  
Attack Scenario  
Horn Activation:  
A person with physical access to the vehicle installs a wireless 
interface to the USB port which can remotely send commands 
to the vehicle data bus such as to activate the vehicle’s horn. 
Thiscould happen via short range proximity wireless or long 
range wireless pathways.  
Resources 
Required  
Access to USB port, ability to run CAN device service, 
knowledge of BCM packet information  
Outcome  
Cause driver distraction. Cause erratic behavior within normal 
parameters. Horn blows on command.  
 
 
 
 
 

Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
84
Engine-Halt Airbag  
 
Threat Model Matrix  
ID#  
3  
 
Attacked Zone 
Group  
Vehicle Operations 
(Engine Control)  
 
 
 
Attacked Zone 
Safety Related  
Y  
Vulnerability That 
Could Be 
Exploited  
ECM Can be 
spoofed, ECM 
can be reached 
from non-
critical area  
 
Attack Support 
Zones  
Communications, 
Infotainment  
 
 
 
Component/ 
System  
Engine Control 
Module (ECM)  
 
 
 
Attack Vector  
Network Harness 
Connectors  
 
 
 
Access Method  
Component 
Tampered 
With/Modified 
 
 
 
Attack Type  
Spoofing  
 
 
 
Casualty 
Severity  
Medium  
 
 
 
Financial 
Severity  
Medium  
 
 
 
Trip Phase  
City, Urban, 
Highway  
 
 
 
Sophistication 
Level  
Medium  
Difficulty of 
Implementation  
Low  
 
Likelihood  
Low  
 
 
 
Operator 
Override  
None  
Attack Scenario  
Engine-Halt Airbag:  
An owner installs an after-market radio purchased from a 
third party, which may come with an on-board malware that 
can access a vehicle data bus (assuming there is a pathway) 
that could potentially mimic the airbag deployed message 
from the inflatable restraint sensing and diagnostic module to 
the ECM. The ECM reads the forged packet and shuts down 
the engine athighway speeds.  
Resources 
Required  
Knowledge of CAN and SDM protocols and packet 
composition, ability to design and load malware into radio  
Outcome  
Cause erratic behavior outside of normal parameters. Engine 
shuts off while at speed. Possible loss of power steering, and 
power assist for braking.  

Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern Automobiles 85
Portable Device Injection  
 
Threat Model Matrix  
 
 
ID#  
4  
 
Attacked Zone 
Group  
Vehicle Operations 
(BodyElectronics)  
 
 
 
Attacked Zone 
Safety Related  
N  
Vulnerability 
That Could Be 
Exploited  
CAN 
susceptible 
to DOS 
attacks, 
Node can 
be set to 
dominant 
state 
indefinitely  
 
Attack Support 
Zones  
Communications, 
External Interfaces, 
Infotainment  
Component/ System  
Body Control Module 
(instrument panel)  
Attack Vector  
CD/DVD Player  
Access Method  
Removable Media 
Attack Type  
Denial of Service 
Casualty Severity  
Low  
Financial Severity  
Medium  
Trip Phase  
Any  
Sophistication Level  
Medium  
Difficulty of 
Implementation  
Low  
 
Likelihood  
Medium  
 
 
 
Operator Override  
None  
Attack 
Scenario  
Portable Device Injection:  
The owner downloads music from an untrusted source and creates a 
CD. The downloaded file could contain specific malware that when 
played sets the dominant state node for the infotainment unit for that 
vehicle and then uses the infotainment unit to launch a denial-of-
service type of attack against the BCM. As the attack takes place, 
the instrument cluster may freeze in its current state, and when the 
vehicle is turned off, it may not allow the vehicle to be restarted 
without communication to the BCM being reestablished first.  
Resources 
Required  
Knowledge of CAN and BCM protocols and packet composition, 
ability to design malware program  
Outcome  
Cause erratic behavior outside of normal parameters. Prevents 
normal bus communications flow. Causes false or misleading 
information to be displayed. Instrument panel freezes. When car is 
turned off cannot be restarted unless communication to BCM is 
restored.  
 
Dealership Download  
 

Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
86
Threat Model Matrix  
 
 
ID#  
5  
 
Attacked Zone 
Group  
Vehicle Operations  
 
 
 
Attacked Zone 
Safety Related  
N/A  
Vulnerability 
That Could Be 
Exploited  
No intrusion 
detection 
system (IDS), 
improper or no 
firewall 
configurations, 
multiple 
network links to 
internet, weak 
password 
strength, etc.  
 
Attack Support 
Zones  
Communications, 
External Interfaces  
 
Component/ 
System  
CAN 
Network/ECUs 
 
Attack Vector  
Diagnostic Port  
 
Access Method  
NetworkService 
Center 
 
Attack Type  
Tampering With 
Data 
 
Casualty Severity  
Any (dependent on 
environment at 
time of theattack)  
 
Financial Severity  
High  
 
Trip Phase  
Any (dependent on 
environment at 
time of theattack)  
 
Sophistication 
Level  
Medium  
Difficulty of 
Implementation  
Medium  
 
Likelihood  
Medium  
 
 
 
Operator Override  
Unknown  
Attack Scenario 
Dealership Download:  
The LAN at the service department gets compromised. When an 
automobile is connected to the dealership’s network via the 
OBD-II port during the process of providing service, the 
attacker could install malware that could be exploited later on 
while using the service department’s computers as a pass 
through. 
Resources 
Required  
Ability to gain control of service department network, ability to 
create malware for CAN environment  
Outcome  
Multiple automobiles affected, service department’s reputation 
destroyed.  
 
 
Cellular Attack  
 

Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern Automobiles 87
Threat Model Matrix  
 
 
ID#  
6  
 
Attacked Zone 
Group  
Vehicle 
Operations  
 
 
 
Attacked Zone 
Safety Related  
N/A  
Vulnerability 
That Could Be 
Exploited  
Flaws in random 
implementation 
challenge, and 
authentication 
system, Possibility 
of playing 
modulated version 
of attack payload. 
Susceptible to 
buffer overflow  
 
Attack Support 
Zones  
Communications, 
Infotainment  
Component/ 
System  
Telematics  
Attack Vector  
GSM/CDMA  
Access Method  
Cellular Network  
Attack Type  
Tampering With 
Data 
Casualty 
Severity  
Any (dependent 
on the 
environment at 
time of theattack)  
Financial 
Severity  
Any (dependent 
on the 
environment at 
time of theattack)  
Trip Phase  
Any  
Sophistication 
Level  
High  
Difficulty of 
Implementation  
High  
 
Likelihood  
Low  
 
 
 
Operator 
Override  
None  
Attack 
Scenario 
Cellular Attack:  
An attacker calls the car's embedded cell number and launches 
malicious code that defeats the analog to digital modem's 
software security challenge via a buffer overflow attack. Once 
the software modem is compromised, the attacker could gain 
access to the telematics unit. The malicious code then could 
cause the telematics unit to connect to an IP address. Once a 
connection to the IP address may be established, the attacker 
could use the telematics unit as an entry point to download and 
run further malicious code, which could execute subsequent 
attacksthat may provide automotive systems false sensor data 
which could result in erroneous action. 
Resources 
Required  
Extensive knowledge of software modems, ability to reverse 
engineer modem protocol  
Outcome  
Car’s brakes are applied for no apparent reason  
Key Fob Cloning 
 

Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
88
Threat Model Matrix  
 
 
ID#  
7  
 
Attacked Zone 
Group  
Vehicle Operations 
(Body Electronics)  
 
 
 
Attacked Zone 
Safety Related  
N  
Vulnerability 
That Could Be 
Exploited  
Key fob 
flashing via 
OBD-II 
port  
 
Attack Support 
Zones  
Communications, 
External Interfaces  
 
Component/ 
System  
Key Fob  
 
Attack Vector  
OBD-II Port 
 
Access Method  
Custom ECU 
 
Attack Type  
Spoofing  
 
Casualty 
Severity  
Low  
 
Financial 
Severity  
High  
 
Trip Phase  
Parked  
Difficulty of 
Implementation  
Low  
 
Likelihood  
High  
 
 
 
Operator 
Override  
None  
Attack Scenario  
Key Fob Cloning:  
An attacker exploits vulnerabilities in the theft alarm 
system to make a clone of a key fob, which provides full 
access to the car.  
Resources 
Required  
Knowledge of anti-theft alarm system, OBD key 
programmer hardware and blank/used key fobsobtained 
via internet  
Outcome  
Automobile can be easily stolen.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Long Distance Keyless Entry Repeater Version  
 

Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern Automobiles 89
Threat Model Matrix  
 
 
ID#  
8  
 
Attacked Zone 
Group  
Vehicle Operations (Body 
Electronics)  
 
 
 
Attacked Zone 
Safety Related  
N  
Vulnerability 
That Could Be 
Exploited  
Key fob and 
car 
transmitting 
in open  
 
Attack Support 
Zones  
Communications, 
External Interfaces  
 
 
 
Component/ 
System  
Keyless Entry System 
 
 
 
Attack Vector  
Radio Frequency  
 
 
 
Access Method  
RF Repeater  
 
 
 
Attack Type  
Spoofing  
 
 
 
Casualty 
Severity  
Low  
 
 
 
Financial 
Severity  
High  
 
 
 
Trip Phase  
Parked  
 
 
 
Sophistication 
Level  
Low  
Difficulty of 
Implementation  
Low  
 
Likelihood  
Medium  
 
 
 
Operator 
Override  
Keep Key Fob in RF 
Shielded Area  
Attack 
Scenario  
Long-Distance Keyless Entry Repeater Version:  
When the vehicle is parked, a team of attackers use loop 
antennas and wireless repeaters to relay the polling request from 
the driver’s key fob to the vehicle to get access. The same 
methodcould also be used to start the vehicle.  
Resources 
Required  
Knowledge of specific automobile/owner target, accomplice, 
wireless repeater set-up, two smallloop antennas  
Outcome  
Automobile can be easily stolen.  
 
 
 
Call Center Fleet Attack 
 
Threat Model Matrix  

Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
90
 
 
ID#  
9  
 
Attacked 
Zone Group  
Vehicle Operations 
(Power Train)  
 
 
 
Attacked 
Zone Safety 
Related  
Y  
Vulnerability 
That Could Be 
Exploited  
Weak or non-
existent IDS, 
firewalls 
incorrectly 
configured, etc.  
 
Attack 
Support 
Zones  
Communications, 
External Interfaces  
 
Component/ 
System  
Telematics  
 
Attack Vector  GSM/CDMA  
 
Access 
Method  
NetworkCall Center 
 
Attack Type  
Spoofing  
 
Casualty 
Severity  
Medium  
 
Financial 
Severity  
High  
 
Trip Phase  
Any  
 
Sophistication 
Level  
Medium  
Difficulty of 
Implementation 
 
 
Likelihood  
Low  
 
 
 
Operator 
Override  
None  
Attack 
Scenario  
Call Center Fleet Attack:  
A hacker group gains control of servers at a telematics call 
center. The hackers then could issueengine disable 
commands to all cars under their control from the 
compromised call center.  
Resources 
Required  
Knowledge of firewalls, various network hacking 
techniques, and telematics command groups  
Outcome  
Cause erratic behavior outside of normal operational 
parameters. Automobiles not running will be able to be 
started. Automobiles on the road will initiate a controlled 
shutdown.  
Car Rental or Lease 
 
Threat Model Matrix  

Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern Automobiles 91
 
 
ID#  
10  
 
Attacked Zone 
Group  
Vehicle 
Operations 
(Power Train)  
 
 
 
Attacked Zone 
Safety Related  
Y  
Vulnerability 
That Could Be 
Exploited  
Ability to re-flash 
ECM without 
authentication  
 
Attack Support 
Zones  
Communications, 
External 
Interfaces  
 
 
 
Component/ 
System  
Engine Control 
Module  
 
 
 
Attack Vector  
OBD-II port 
 
 
 
Access Method  
PC  
 
 
 
Attack Type  
Elevation of 
privileges  
 
 
 
Casualty 
Severity  
Medium  
 
 
 
Financial 
Severity  
High  
 
 
 
Trip Phase  
Any  
 
 
 
Sophistication 
Level  
Medium  
Difficulty of 
Implementation  
Medium  
 
Likelihood  
Medium  
 
 
 
Operator 
Override  
None  
Attack Scenario  Car Rental or Lease:  
A person with access to large number of vehicles that are 
typically operated by others (such as arental car employee) 
could potentially install malware via physical access to the 
vehicle. The malware could take form in any of the attack types 
described in this section.  
Resources 
Required  
Knowledge of CAN and ECU flashing procedures, ability to 
design and load malware into re-flashed ECM, access to fleet 
cars  
Outcome  
Automobiles not running will not be able to be started. 
Automobiles on the road will shut down.Major loss of business 
for rental car facility.  
Malware Onboard 
 
Threat Model Matrix  

Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
92
 
 
ID#  
11  
 
Attacked Zone 
Group  
Vehicle Operations 
(Power Train)  
 
 
 
Attacked Zone 
Safety Related  
Y  
Vulnerability 
That Could Be 
Exploited  
Poor IT security 
at ECU 
manufacturer, 
ability to spoof 
transmission 
control module  
 
Attack Support 
Zones  
Communications  
 
 
 
Component/ 
System  
Transmission 
Control Module  
 
 
 
Attack Vector  
Network  
 
 
 
Access Method  
Component 
Tampered 
With/Modified  
 
 
 
Attack Type  
Tampering With 
Data 
 
 
 
Casualty Severity  
Low  
 
 
 
Financial Severity  
Medium  
 
 
 
Trip Phase  
Idling  
 
 
 
Sophistication 
Level  
Medium  
Difficulty of 
Implementation  
High  
 
Likelihood  
Low  
 
 
 
Operator Override  Manual Solenoid 
Release(some cars)  
Attack Scenario  
Malware Onboard:  
An end-of-line programming station gets compromised with 
malware. The malware is downloaded into ECUs during the 
manufacturing process. The malware could be designed to 
execute under specific conditions and time periods. The 
malware could take form in any of the attack types described in 
this section.  
Resources 
Required  
Knowledge of CAN and ECU manufacturing procedures, ability 
to design and load malware, access to PC linked to 
manufacturing process  
Outcome  
Automatic transmission will be locked in park. Possible OEM 
reputation damage.  
APPENDIX C: WORKS CITED 
 

Characterization of Potential Security Threats in Modern Automobiles 93
[1] 
Merritt, R. (2011, May 4)."IBM tells story behind Chevy Volt design. 
San Jose, CA: EE Times. Retrieved from www.eetimes.com/document. 
asp?doc id=1259444  
[2] 
Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act (MAP-21). P.L. 
112-141, 49 U.S.C. 30171. Sec. 30171. 
[3] 
Microsoft Developer Networks. (2005). The STRIDE threat model. 
Retrieved from http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ee823878(v= 
cs.20).aspx  
[4] 
Open Web Application Security Project . (2010, September 29). Threat 
risk modeling. Retrieved from www.owasp.org/index.php/Threat Risk 
Modeling  
[5] 
Microsoft Developer Network. (2005). Cheat sheet: Web application 
security 
frame. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/ff649461.aspx 
[6] 
Koscher, K., Czeskis, A., Roesner, F., Patel, S., Kohno, T., Checkoway, 
S., ... & Savage, S. (2010). Experimental security analysis of a modern 
automobile. In 31st IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, Oakland, 
CA, May 16-19, 2010. 
[7] 
Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft zur Förderung der angewandten Forschung e.V. 
(2008). E-safety vehicle intrusion protected applications. Munich, 
Germany: Author. Retrieved from http://evita-project.org/ 
[8] 
Checkoway, S., McCoy, D., Kantor, B., Anderson, D., Shacham, H., 
Savage, S., ... & Kohno, T. (2011). Comprehensive experimental 
analyses of automotive attack surfaces. In D. Wagner (Chair), SEC’11, 
Proceedings of the 20th USENIX Conference on Security, USENIX 
Association, August 8- 12, San Francisco, CA. . Available at 
www.usenix.org/events/sec11/tech/full papers/Checkoway.pdf 
[9] 
Torchinsky, J. (2012, July 6). Watch hackers steal a BMW in three 
minutes. (Web page). Retrieved from http://jalopnik.com/5923802/ 
watch-hackers-steal-a-bmw-in-three-minutes?tag=car-crime  
[10] Francillon, A., Danev, B., & Capkun, S. Relay attacks on passive 
keyless entry and start systems in modern cars. Paper presented at 
Network and Distributed System Security Symposium, February 6-9, 
2011, San Diego, CA. Available at www.internetsociety.org/sites/ 
default/files/franc.pdf 
 
 
End Notes 
 

Charlie McCarthy, Kevin Harnett and Art Carter 
94
1 While there may be several networks in the modern automobile, as identified in Table 1, the 
CAN bus has the most publicly available and current vulnerability information in the 
cybersecurity community. 
2 NIST 800-30 defines vulnerability as “A flaw or weakness in system security procedures, 
design, implementation, or internal controls that could be exercised (accidentally triggered 
or intentionally exploited) and result in a security breach or violation of the system’s 
security policy.” 
3 A buffer overflow attack is where a program, while writing data to a buffer, overruns the 
buffer's boundary and overwrites adjacent memory. Buffer overflows can be triggered by 
inputs that are designed to execute code, or alter the way the program operates. This may 
result in erratic program behavior, including a breach of system security. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEX 
 
 
A 
access, vii, 2, 5, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 
18, 25, 32, 37, 46, 48, 54, 56, 57, 66, 
67, 68, 70, 71, 73, 74, 75, 76, 78, 79, 
80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 87, 88, 89, 91, 92 
agencies, 12, 34, 38, 39, 40, 43, 47, 64 
attacker, 2, 13, 14, 15, 17, 34, 61, 65, 66, 
68, 71, 74, 80, 81, 86, 87, 88 
audit, 8, 45, 68 
authentication, 3, 23, 24, 30, 87, 91 
automakers, 2, 3, 6, 9, 11, 12, 18, 20, 21, 
22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 34, 36, 37, 
41, 42, 45, 48, 49, 50, 51 
automation, 11, 45, 53 
Automobiles, v, 4, 6, 7, 28, 32, 42, 43, 
46, 48, 51, 53, 55, 56, 67, 86, 88, 89, 
90, 91 
Automotive Open System Architecture 
(AUTOSAR), 4, 29, 44, 49, 52 
automotive sector, 32, 62 
avoidance, 11, 47, 49 
B 
bandwidth, 23, 24, 48, 49 
base, 50, 53, 54, 61 
Belgium, 7, 45 
benefits, 5, 12, 27, 30, 40, 56 
Bluetooth, 2, 5, 8, 13, 15, 56, 64, 66, 70 
built-in cellular-calling capabilities, 2 
C 
case examples, 74, 79 
categorization, 61 
category a, 72, 75 
certification, 37, 50 
CFR, 50 
challenges, vii, 1, 3, 4, 6, 25, 26, 27, 38, 
40, 42, 43 
Clean Air Act, 48 
collaboration, 3, 21, 25, 26, 36 
commercial, 54, 57, 65 
communication, 3, 9, 10, 13, 15, 20, 21, 
23, 24, 26, 30, 46, 47, 80, 85 
community, 11, 94 
competition, 26 
competitors, 28 
complexity, 8, 56, 72, 76 
compliance, 11, 37, 50 
composition, 84, 85 
computer, 16, 18, 20, 23, 32, 49, 55, 59 
conditioning, 55, 57 
confidentiality, 25, 65 
Congress, 7, 12, 45, 47, 50, 52 
connectivity, 10, 14, 16, 17, 23, 24, 26, 
46, 51, 53, 56 
consensus, 29 
construction, 50 

Index 
96
consumers, 9, 17, 26, 39, 49 
Continental, 44 
controller area network (CAN), 4, 9, 15, 
17, 22, 24, 26, 47, 49, 54, 58, 59, 66, 
69, 74, 79, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 91, 92, 
94 
conversations, 28 
cooperation, 28 
cost, 3, 26, 49, 56, 60 
cyberattacks, vii, 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 10, 13, 15, 
17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 24, 31, 36, 38, 39, 
40, 42, 43, 46, 48, 51, 57 
cybersecurity, vii, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 
10, 11, 12, 13, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 33, 34, 
35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 42, 43, 44, 45, 
47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 53, 54, 73, 79, 94 
cybersecurity vulnerabilities, vii, 1, 3, 4, 
5, 6, 13, 19, 21, 22, 24, 27, 34, 37, 40, 
41, 42, 43, 48, 51 
D 
decomposition, 63 
degradation, 75 
demonstrations, 8, 17, 18, 32, 35, 42, 43, 
45, 48 
denial, 11, 54, 68, 80, 85 
denial of service attack, 11, 68 
Department of Commerce, 6, 43 
Department of Defense, 6, 43, 47 
Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS), 4, 6, 34, 39, 43, 47 
Department of Transportation (DOT), v, 
vii, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 18, 28, 
30, 31, 32, 40, 42, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 
50, 51, 52, 53, 56, 60 
depth, 15, 51 
designers, 56, 68 
detectable, 76 
detection, 12, 22, 23, 24, 31, 34, 86 
detection system, 31, 34, 86 
disclosure, 21, 71 
domain separation, 3, 20, 21 
draft, 28, 40, 46 
drawing, 63, 64 
E 
ECM, 55, 80, 84, 91 
electronic control unit (ECU), 4, 9, 20, 
22, 23, 30, 55, 59, 67, 88, 91, 92 
electronic systems, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12, 20, 
36, 49, 56, 57 
emergency, 8, 76, 78, 82 
emissions, 2, 8, 13, 14, 59 
encryption, 3, 23, 25, 30, 31 
enforcement, 12, 38 
engineering, 28, 29, 39, 49, 53 
environment, 3, 10, 18, 38, 54, 64, 86, 
87 
Environmental Protection Agency, 48 
environments, 15, 38, 54, 57, 65 
equipment, 8, 33, 45, 50, 55, 56 
erratic behavior, 69, 83, 84, 85, 90 
Europe, 3, 7, 42 
evidence, 8, 45, 65 
expertise, 3, 26, 35, 50, 51 
exploitation, 34 
F 
FAA, 47, 50 
Federal Government, 7, 45, 47, 51, 52 
Federal Highway Administration 
(FHWA), 46, 51 
federal law, 6, 45 
Federal Register, 51 
Fiat Chrysler Automobiles( FCA), 4, 5, 
21, 33, 34, 35, 44, 48, 50 
financial, 9, 19, 71, 75 
firewalls, 22, 31, 70, 90 
fiscal year, 11, 33, 49 
Fixing America’s Surface Transportation 
Act (FAST Act), 4, 12, 45 
flexibility, 29, 69 
Ford, 44, 48 
foreign companies, 7 
formation, 7, 42, 65 

Index 
97
G 
GAO, 1, 2, 3, 7, 10, 14, 16, 20, 23, 24, 
32, 42, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 50, 51, 52 
General Motors (GM), 4, 15, 18, 35, 44, 
48 
Germany, 7, 44, 45, 93 
governments, 12 
GPS, 55, 66, 70 
guidance, 4, 34, 37, 40 
guidelines, 12, 54 
guiding principles, 29 
H 
hacking, 5, 15, 17, 18, 21, 32, 33, 34, 35, 
42, 43, 46, 48, 50, 90 
hands-free cell phone, 2 
heterogeneity, 28 
historical data, 65 
Homeland Security, 2, 4, 40, 41 
host, 24, 56 
House of Representatives, 41, 57 
hybrid, 61, 70 
I 
identification, 14, 63, 64 
identity, 48, 57, 71 
impacts of potential attacks, vii, 1, 6, 42 
individuals, 7, 43, 47, 51 
industry(ies), vii, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 13, 
17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 
29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37, 38, 39, 
40, 42, 43, 49, 50, 51, 52, 54, 60, 61, 
64, 65 
information processing, 46 
information sharing, 54 
Information Sharing and Analysis 
Center (ISAC), 3, 4, 7, 28, 32, 39, 42, 
46, 49, 50, 51, 55, 64, 65 
information technology (IT), 4, 9, 19, 
21, 22, 27, 42, 43, 92 
infrastructure, 19, 21, 46, 55, 56 
injury(ies), 8, 11, 14, 71, 75 
institutions, 31, 49 
integrity, 12, 23, 30, 47, 49, 65 
intelligence, 3, 28, 64, 65 
interest rates, 67 
interface, 17, 64, 74, 80, 83 
interference, 57 
internal controls, 38, 94 
International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO), 4, 29, 36, 49 
intrusions, 31 
in-vehicle networks, 2, 3, 20, 22, 23, 24, 
37, 49 
isolation, 9, 21, 65 
issues, 1, 4, 6, 19, 25, 28, 34, 35, 37, 39, 
40, 46, 47, 53 
L 
landscape, 61, 64 
laws, 6, 12, 36, 45 
laws and regulations, 6, 36, 45 
legislative proposals, 12 
light trucks, 46, 49 
M 
majority, 2, 3, 13, 21, 33 
malware, 73, 80, 81, 84, 85, 86, 91, 92 
management, 50, 58, 59 
manufacturing, 81, 92 
materials, 37, 73, 79 
matrix, 54, 60, 63, 68, 69, 74, 78 
matter, 2, 6, 25, 36, 37, 42, 44, 45, 55, 
60, 61, 75 
membership, 28, 35 
Mercedes-Benz, 44 
message encryption, 3, 30, 31 
messages, 9, 15, 17, 18, 22, 23, 30, 47 
methodology, 8, 34, 62 
mission, 11, 35, 38, 65 
models, 5, 9, 18, 46, 54, 60, 61 
modifications, 26 

Index 
98
Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st 
Century Act (MAP-21), 4, 6, 7, 12, 
35, 36, 45, 47, 55, 56, 93 
N 
National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration (NHTSA), 4, 5, 6, 7, 
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 19, 22, 30, 31, 32, 33, 
34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 42, 45, 46, 
47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 56 
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST), 4, 6, 23, 31, 32, 
43, 46, 47, 51, 52, 94 
National Strategy, 47 
navigation system, 8, 10, 14, 16, 24, 46 
negative consequences, 36 
NextGen, 47 
non-repudiation, 68 
nuisance, 71, 72 
O 
officials, 2, 3, 4, 6, 11, 12, 28, 30, 32, 
33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 45, 
47, 50 
on-board diagnostics port (OBD-II), 2, 
4, 13, 17, 25, 36, 48, 55, 64, 66, 70, 
74, 75, 79, 80, 82, 86, 88, 91 
operations, 12, 28, 50, 64 
oversight, 35, 37 
over-the-air (OTA), 4, 20, 21, 32, 34 
P 
passenger safety, vii, 1, 2, 6, 8, 10, 13, 
42, 43 
pathway(s), 80, 83, 84 
personal communication, 46 
platform, 59, 64, 75, 76 
playing, 27, 87 
policy, 31, 54, 94 
polling, 81, 89 
population, 7, 43, 63, 74 
prevention, 22, 23, 24, 31 
principles, 20, 29 
prior knowledge, 75 
private information, 69 
probability, 22, 65 
professionals, 26, 28 
profit, 26, 48 
profit margin, 26 
programming, 81, 92 
project, 48, 93 
protection, 10, 12, 23, 25, 49 
Q 
quality assurance, 56 
R 
radio, 14, 55, 56, 57, 80, 84 
recall, 4, 5, 34, 35, 48, 50 
recognition, 30 
recommendations, 2, 7, 43 
regions of the world, 6, 42 
regulations, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 35, 36, 38, 45, 
48, 50, 51 
reliability, 5, 9, 11, 30, 49 
remediation, 50 
repair, 13, 14, 37 
reputation, 68, 71, 72, 86, 92 
requirements, 6, 7, 11, 25, 28, 30, 35, 45, 
54 
research facilities, 7, 45 
research institutions, 31, 49 
researchers, 2, 5, 6, 9, 15, 17, 18, 21, 32, 
34, 35, 37, 39, 42, 44, 46, 48, 50 
resources, 11, 21, 33, 48, 51, 68 
response, 2, 4, 7, 20, 21, 35, 38, 39, 40, 
45, 48, 49, 59 
restrictions, 37 
risk, 2, 18, 19, 20, 26, 27, 29, 34, 38, 39, 
50, 54, 61, 62, 67, 93 
risk assessment, 19, 20 

Index 
99
S 
safety, vii, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 
12, 13, 15, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23, 30, 31, 
32, 34, 35, 36, 38, 39, 40, 42, 43, 45, 
46, 48, 49, 50, 53, 56, 57, 58, 63, 65, 
70, 74, 93 
safety-critical systems, vii, 2, 3, 5, 11, 
13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 20, 21, 31, 34, 38, 
40 
secure communication, 23 
security, 5, 7, 11, 12, 17, 20, 22, 23, 25, 
26, 28, 45, 48, 49, 54, 56, 57, 60, 64, 
69, 80, 87, 92, 93, 94 
Security Threats, v, 32, 46, 51, 53, 60, 
64 
semiconductor, 49 
semi-structured interviews, 6, 42 
sensing, 55, 80, 84 
sensitivity, 28 
sensor(s), 8, 14, 18, 70, 81, 87 
servers, 81, 90 
services, 9, 48 
signals, 19, 59 
Silicon Valley, 7, 27, 45 
society, 71, 75 
Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE), 
4, 28, 29, 34, 44, 47, 49 
software, 1, 5, 9, 10, 11, 15, 16, 20, 21, 
22, 23, 25, 26, 30, 32, 37, 49, 50, 71, 
75, 80, 87 
software code, 1, 5, 9, 15, 20, 25, 26 
specifications, 11, 30 
stability, 8, 21, 58 
stakeholders, vii, 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 13, 18, 19, 
21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 32, 33, 
34, 36, 37, 38, 40, 42, 45, 51, 52, 57, 
61, 62 
state(s), 22, 38, 80, 85 
storage, 14, 68 
strategic planning, 7, 45 
subjectivity, 76 
suppliers, 2, 3, 6, 11, 22, 25, 27, 28, 29, 
30, 42, 44, 45, 47, 49, 51, 57, 64, 71, 
75 
supply chain, 3, 11, 25, 26, 37 
T 
talent, 26 
target, 5, 13, 14, 15, 23, 48, 61, 89 
techniques, 23, 30, 31, 48, 90 
technology(ies), vii, 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 
10, 11, 12, 18, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 29, 
31, 34, 35, 38, 40, 42, 43, 45, 46, 48, 
49, 51 
telecommunications, 19, 46 
terminals, 59 
terrorists, 11 
testing, 2, 11, 13, 14, 19, 20, 23, 24, 27, 
30, 36, 56, 64, 74, 79, 82 
theft, 46, 71, 81, 88 
threats, 10, 20, 27, 31, 33, 36, 38, 39, 41, 
50, 54, 60, 61, 63, 64, 65, 76 
time frame, 37, 39 
time periods, 81, 92 
Toyota, 48 
transactions, 57, 68 
transmission, 58, 70, 92 
transparency, 3, 25, 26 
transport, 71, 75 
transportation, 57 
U 
United States, v, 1, 3, 55 
user data, 68 
V 
validation, 67 
vector, 75 
Vehicle Cybersecurity, v, 1, 19, 20, 22, 
25, 27, 28, 30, 31, 35, 38 
Vehicle Research and Test Center 
(VRTC), 4, 7, 11, 31, 32, 33, 38, 45 
vehicles, vii, 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 
12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 
23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 

Index 
100 
37, 40, 42, 43, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 
51, 53, 54, 56, 57, 74, 79, 81, 91 
ventilation, 55, 57 
Volkswagen, 44 
vulnerability, 3, 28, 32, 54, 64, 94 
W 
warning systems, 5 
Washington, 15, 32, 46, 47, 48, 50, 51, 
52 
weakness, 17, 22, 94 
web browser, 68 
Wi-Fi, 56, 66 
wireless attacks, 2 
wireless networks, 19 
wires, 58, 59 
working groups, 34 
 

