
 
AUTOCAD ELECTRICAL 2016
BLACK BOOK
 
 
 
 
By
 
Gaurav Verma
CAD/CAM/CAE Expert
 
 
Matt Weber
CAD/CAE Expert
(CADCAMCAE Works, Georgia)
 
Published by CADCAMCAE Works, USA. Copyright © 2015. All rights reserved. No part of this
publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in the database
or retrieval system without the prior permission of CADCADCAE Works. To get the permissions,
contact at cadcamcaeworks@gmail.com
 
 
 
ISBN # 978-1511878678
 
 
 
 
 
NOTICE TO THE READER
Publisher does not warrant or guarantee any of the products described in the text or perform any

independent analysis in connection with any of the product information contained in the text. Publisher
does not assume, and expressly disclaims, any obligation to obtain and include information other than
that provided to it by the manufacturer.
The reader is expressly warned to consider and adopt all safety precautions that might be indicated
by the activities herein and to avoid all potential hazards. By following the instructions contained
herein, the reader willingly assumes all risks in connection with such instructions.
The Publisher makes no representation or warranties of any kind, including but not limited to, the
warranties of fitness for a particular purpose or merchantability, nor are any such representations
implied with respect to the material set forth herein, and the publisher takes no responsibility with
respect to such material. The publisher shall not be liable for any special, consequential, or
exemplary damages resulting, in whole or part, from the reader’s use of, or reliance upon, this
material.
DEDICATION
 
To teachers, who make it possible to disseminate knowledge
to enlighten the young and curious minds
of our future generations
 
To students, who are the future of the world
 
 
 
 
 
 
THANKS

 
To my friends and colleagues
 
To my family for their love and support
 
 
Training and Consultant Services
At CADCAMCAE WORKS, we provides effective and affordable one to one online training on
various software packages in Computer Aided Design(CAD), Computer Aided Manufacturing(CAM),
Computer Aided Engineering (CAE), Computer programming languages(C/C++, Java, .NET,
Android, Javascript, HTML and so on). The training is delivered through remote access to your
system and voice chat via Internet at any time, any place, and at any pace to individuals, groups,
students of colleges/universities, and CAD/CAM/CAE training centers. The main features of this
program are:
Training as per your need
Highly experienced Engineers and Technician conduct the classes on the software applications used
in the industries. The methodology adopted to teach the software is totally practical based, so that the
learner can adapt to the design and development industries in almost no time. The efforts are to make
the training process cost effective and time saving while you have the comfort of your time and place,
thereby relieving you from the hassles of traveling to training centers or rearranging your time table.
Current Software Packages on which we provide basic and
advanced training are:
CAD/CAM/CAE: CATIA, Creo Parametric, Creo Direct, SolidWorks, Autodesk Inventor, Solid
Edge, UG NX, AutoCAD, AutoCAD LT, EdgeCAM, MasterCAM, SolidCAM, DelCAM, BOBCAM,
UG NX Manufacturing, UG Mold Wizard, UG Progressive Die, UG Die Design, SolidWorks Mold,
Creo Manufacturing, Creo Expert Machinist, NX Nastran, Hypermesh, SolidWorks Simulation,
Autodesk Simulation Mechanical, Creo Simulate, Gambit, ANSYS and many others.
Computer Programming Languages: C++, VB.NET, HTML, Android, Javascript and so on.
Game Designing: Unity.
Civil Engineering: AutoCAD MEP, Revit Structure, Revit Architecture, AutoCAD Map 3D and so
on.

We also provide consultant services for Design and development on the above mentioned software
packages
For more information you can mail us at:
cadcamcaeworks@gmail.com
Table of Contents
About Authors
Few Words from Author
Basics of
Electrical Drawings
Chapter 1
Need of Drawings
Electrical Drawings
Circuit Diagram
Wiring Diagram
Wiring Schedule
Block Diagram
Parts list
Symbols in Electrical Drawings
Conductors
Connectors and terminals
Inductors and transformers
Resistors
Capacitors
Fuses
Switch contacts
Switch types
Diodes and rectifiers
Earthing
Wire and Specifications
Types of Wires
Wire specifications

Labeling
Introduction to
AutoCAD Electrical and
Interface
Chapter 2
Introduction to AutoCAD Electrical
System requirements for AutoCAD Electrical 2016
Additional Requirements for Large Datasets, Point Clouds, and 3D
Modeling
Starting AutoCAD Electrical Electrical
Creating a new drawing document
Meaning of Default templates
Title Bar
Changing Color Scheme
Application Menu
New options
Creating Drawings
Creating Sheet Sets
Open Options
Opening Drawing File
Save
Applying Password on File
Save As
Export
Publish
Print
Drawing Tab Bar
Drawing Area
Command Window
Bottom Bar
Drafting Settings dialog box

Project
Management
Chapter 3
Workflow in AutoCAD Electrical
Initializing Project
Project Properties
Project Settings tab
Components tab
Wire Numbers tab
Cross-References tab
Styles tab
Drawing Format tab
Opening a Project File
New Drawing in a Project
Refresh
Project Task List
Project Wide Update or Retag
Drawing List Display Configuration
Plotting and Publishing
Plot Project
Publish to WEB
Publish to DWF/PDF/DWFx
Zip Project
Removing, Replacing, and Renaming Drawings in a Project
Locations View in Project Manager
Filter by Installation and Location
Search box
Details and Connections tabs
Inserting
Components
Chapter 4

Electrical Components
Inserting Component Using Icon Menu
Component Tag area
Catalog Data area
Description Area
Cross-Reference Area
Installation Code and Location Code
Pins area
Catalog Browser
User Defined List
Equipment List
Panel List
Pneumatic Components
Hydraulic Components
P&ID Components
Symbol Builder
Adding New Symbol in Icon Menu
Summary
Wires, Circuits,
and Ladders
Chapter 5
Introduction
Wires
Wire
22.5 Degree, 45 Degree, and 67.5 Degree
Interconnect Components
Gap
Multiple Bus
Creating of Multiple Buses with various radio button
Ladders
Insert Ladder

XY Grid Setup
X Zones Setup
Wire Numbering
Wire Numbers
3 Phase
PLC I/O
Wire Number Leaders and Labels
Wire Number Leader
Wire Color/Gauge Labels
In-Line Wire Labels
Markers
Cable Markers
Multiple Cable Markers
Insert Dot Tee Markers
Insert Angled Tee Markers
Circuit Builder
Starting a New drawing
Editing Title Block
Creating Wires
Assigning Numbers and Labels to Wires
Inserting 3 Phase Motor
Adding Ground symbol
Adding symbols for various components
Editing Wires,
Components, and
Circuits
Chapter 6
Introduction
Edit Tool
Internal Jumper
Fix/UnFix Tag

Copy Catalog Assignment
User Table Data
Delete Component
Copy Component
Edit Circuits drop-down
Copying Circuit
Moving Circuit
Saving Circuit to Icon Menu
Transforming Components drop-down
Scooting
Aligning Components
Moving Component
Reversing or Flipping Component
Re-tagging Components
Toggle NO/NC
Swap/Update Block
Swapping
Updating
Edit Attribute drop-down
Cross References Drop-down
Component Cross-Reference
Hide/Unhide Cross-Referencing
Update Stand-Alone Cross-Referencing
Circuit Clipboard panel
Editing Wires or Wire Numbers
Edit Wire Number
Fix
Swap
Find/Replace
Hide and Unhide
Trim Wire

Delete Wire Numbers
Move Wire Number
Add Rung
Revise Ladder
Renumber Ladder Reference
Wire Editing
Stretch Wire tool
Bend Wire tool
Show Wires
Check or Trace Wire tool
Wire Type Editing drop-down
Create/Edit Wire Type
Change/Convert Wire Type
Flip Wire Number
Toggle Wire Number In-Line
PLCs and
Components
Chapter 7
Introduction
Inserting PLCs (Parametric)
Insert PLC (Full Units)
Addressing Area
Used Area
Tag
Options
Line1/Line2
Manufacturer
Catalog
Assembly
Catalog Lookup
Description

I/O Point Description Area
List descriptions
Pins
Show/Edit Miscellaneous
Ratings
Connectors
Insert Connector
Insert Connector (From List)
Insert Splice
Terminals
Inserting Terminals from Catalog Browser
Associate Terminals on the Same Drawing
Practical and
Practice
Chapter 8
Introduction
Panel Layout
Chapter 9
Introduction
Icon Menu
Schematic List
Manual
Manufacturer Menu
Balloon
Wire Annotation
Panel Assembly
Editor
Table Generator
Insert Terminals
Editing Footprints
Edit

Copy Footprint
Delete Footprint
Resequence Item Numbers
Copy Codes drop-down
Copy Assembly
Page left blank intentionally for student notes
Reports
Chapter 10
Reports (Schematic)
Bill of Materials reports
Component report
Wire From/To report
Component Wire List report
Connector Plug report
PLC I/O Address and Description report
PLC I/O Component Connection report
PLC Modules Used So Far report
Terminal Numbers report
Terminal Plan report
Connector Summary report
Connector Details report
Cable Summary report
Cable From/To report
Wire Label report
Missing Catalog Data
Electrical Audit
Drawing Audit
Dynamic Editing of Reports in Drawing
Modifying Tables
Modifying Rows
Modifying Columns

Merge Cells
Match Cells
Table Cell Styles
Edit Borders
Text Alignment
Locking
Data Format
Block
Field
Formula
Manage Cell Content
Link Cell
Download from source
Project
Chapter 11
AutoCAD Electrical
with Inventor
Chapter 12
Introduction to Autodesk Inventor
Creating ElectroMechanical Link
Creating New Electromechanical link
Using Existing Electromechanical Link
Linking Inventor Model with AutoCAD Electrical Drawing
Electrical Harness in Autodesk Inventor for AutoCAD Electrical
Creating Electrical components in Autodesk Inventor
Placing Multiple pins on part
Harness Properties of Part
Creating Wiring in Harness Assembly
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preface
AutoCAD Electrical 2016 is an extension to AutoCAD package. Easy-to-use CAD-embedded
electrical schematic and panel designing enable all designers and engineers to design most complex
electrical schematics and panels. You can quickly and easily employ engineering techniques to
optimize performance while you design, to cut down on costly prototypes, eliminate rework and
delays, and save you time and development costs.
The AutoCAD Electrical 2016 Black Book, the second edition of AutoCAD Electrical Black books,
has lots of new features and examples as compared to previous edition. Following the same strategy
as for the previous edition, the book is written to help professionals as well as learners in performing
various tedious jobs in Electrical control designing. The book follows a step by step methodology.
The book covers use of right tool at right places. The book covers almost all the information required
by a learner to master the AutoCAD Electrical. The book starts with basics of Electrical Designing,
goes through all the Electrical controls related tools and ends up with practical examples of electrical
schematic and panel designing. Chapter on Reports makes you comfortable in creating and editing
electrical component reports. This edition also discusses the interoperability between Autodesk
Inventor and AutoCAD Electrical which is need of industry these days. Some of the salient features of
this book are :
In-Depth explanation of concepts
Every new topic of this book starts with the explanation of the basic concepts. In this way, the user

becomes capable of relating the things with real world.
Topics Covered
Every chapter starts with a list of topics being covered in that chapter. In this way, the user can easy
find the topic of his/her interest easily.
Instruction through illustration
The instructions to perform any action are provided by maximum number of illustrations so that the
user can perform the actions discussed in the book easily and effectively. There are about 1000
illustrations that make the learning process effective.
Tutorial point of view
The book explains the concepts through the tutorial to make the understanding of users firm and long
lasting. Each chapter of the book has tutorials that are real world projects.
Project
Free projects and exercises are provided to students for practicing.
For Faculty
If you are a faculty member, then you can ask for video tutorials on any of the topic, exercise, tutorial,
or concept.
Formatting Conventions Used in the Text
All the key terms like name of button, tool, drop-down etc. are kept bold.
Free Resources
Link to the resources used in this book are provided to the users via email. To get the resources, mail
us at cadcamcaeworks@gmail.com with your contact information. With your contact record with us,
you will be provided latest updates and informations regarding various technologies. The format to
write us e-mail for resources is as follows:
Subject of E-mail as Application for resources of ________book.
Also, given your information like
Name:
Course pursuing/Profession:
Contact Address:
E-mail ID:
For Any query or suggestion

If 
you 
have 
any 
query 
or 
suggestion 
please 
let 
us 
know 
by 
mailing 
us 
on
cadcamcaeworks@gmail.com. Your valuable constructive suggestions will be incorporated in our
books and your name will be addressed in special thanks area of our books.
 
About Authors
The author of this book, Gaurav Verma, has written many books on CAD/CAM/CAE books available
already in market. He has a long list of books on CAD/CAM/CAE packages available on Amazon
and other distribution sites. The author has hand on experience on almost all the CAD/CAM/CAE
packages. Besides that he is a good person in his real life, helping nature for everyone. If you have
any query/doubt in any CAD/CAM/CAE package, then you can contact the author by writing at
cadcamcaeworks@gmail.com
The technical editor of the book, Matt Weber, has written books on various CAD packages. He has
published on SolidWorks and SolidWorks Simulation with 2014 and 2015 version.
With the support of CreateSpace, we assure the best books and support to the education on latest
technologies.
Few Words from Author
I would like to thank all the educators and students for making the book successful in its aim. My
motive while writing the first edition of book was to make it as simple as possible for students. I
found some of the reviews on Amazon saying that its a basic book so there I got the satisfaction that it
is helpful to newbie. I got lots of e-mails and reviews from the users of book, and I have tried to
incorporate most of the suggestions in this edition.
I would like to thank all the professionals in industries who are using the book and I want to assure
them that we will keep on adding the updates of industry in the book in best possible ways.
Gaurav Verma
 

BASICS OF
ELECTRICAL DRAWINGS
 
CHAPTER 1
 
 
Topics Covered
 
 
 
 
The major topics covered in this chapter are:
 
• Need of Drawings
• Electrical Drawings
• Common Symbols in Electrical Drawings
• Wire and its Types
• Labeling
 
 
 
NEED OF DRAWINGS
In this book, we are going through the topics related to electrical wiring and our purpose it to create
good electrical wirings. So, it is important to know that why we need electrical drawings and what is
the role of AutoCAD Electrical in that.
 
When we work in an electrical industry, we need to have a lot of information handy like the wiring of
machines, position of switches, load of every machine and so on. It is almost impossible to remember
all these details of an industry because there might be thousands of wires and switches and there can
be hundreds of machine. To make this thing possible, we need electrical drawings that are written or
printed documentation of these informations. Figure-1 shows an electrical drawing.

Figure-1. Circuit diagram
 
ELECTRICAL DRAWINGS
Electrical drawings are the representation of electrical components and connected wiring to fulfill a
specific purpose. An electrical drawing can be of a house, industry or an electrical panel. Also, an
electrical drawing can be divided into following categories:
• Circuit diagram
• Wiring diagram
• Wiring schedule
• Block diagram
• Parts list
Circuit Diagram
A circuit diagram shows how the electrical components are connected together and uses:
• Symbols to represent the components;
• Lines to represent the functional conductors or wires which connect them together.
A circuit drawing is derived from a block or functional diagram (see Figure-2). It does not generally
bear any relationship to the physical shape, size or layout of the parts and although you could wire up
an assembly from the information given in it, they are usually intended to show the detail of how an

electrical circuit works.
Figure-2. Circuit diagram
 
Wiring Diagram
This is the drawing which shows all the wiring between the parts, such as:
• Control or signal functions;
• Power supplies and earth connections;
• Termination of unused leads, contacts;
• Interconnection via terminal posts, blocks, plugs, sockets, lead-throughs.
It will have details, such as the terminal identification numbers which enable us to wire the unit
together. Parts of the wiring diagram may simply be shown as blocks with no indication as to the
electrical components inside. These are usually sub-assemblies made separately, i.e. pre-assembled
circuits or modules. Figure-3 shows a wiring diagram.

Figure-3. Wiring diagram
 
Wiring Schedule
A wiring schedule defines the wire reference number, type (size and number of conductors), length
and the amount of insulation stripping required for soldering.
In complex equipment you may also find a table of interconnections which will give the starting and
finishing reference points of each connection as well as other important information such as wire
color, identification marking and so on. Refer to Figure-4.
Figure-4. Wiring Schedule
 
Block Diagram
The block diagram is a functional drawing which is used to show and describe the main operating
principles of the equipment and is usually drawn before the circuit diagram is started.

It will not give any real detail of the actual wiring connections or even the smaller components and so
is only of limited interest to us in the wiring of control panels and equipment. Figure-5 shows a block
diagram.
Figure-5. Block diagram
 
Parts list
Although not a drawing in itself, in fact it may be part of a drawing. The parts list gives vital
information:
• It relates component types to circuit drawing reference numbers.
• It is used to locate and cross refer actual component code numbers to ensure you have the correct
parts to commence a wiring job.
Figure-6. Parts list
 
You know various types of electrical drawings but these drawings contain various symbols. The
following section explains the common symbols that are used in an electrical drawing.
SYMBOLS IN ELECTRICAL DRAWINGS

Symbols used in electrical drawings can be divided into various categories that are explained next.
Conductors
There are 12 types of symbols for conductors; refer to Figure-7 and Figure-8. These symbols are
explained next.
1. General symbol, conductor or group of conductors.
2. Temporary connection or jumper.
3. Two conductors, single-line representation.
4. Two conductors, multi-line representation.
5. Single-line representation of n conductors.
6. Twisted conductors. (Twisted pair in this example.)
Figure-7. Symbols for conductors
 
7. General symbol denoting a cable.
8. Example: eight conductor (four pair) cable.
9. Crossing conductors – no connection.

Figure-8. Symbols for conductors
 
10. Junction of conductors (connected).
11. Double junction of conductors.
12. Alternatively used double junction.
 
Connectors and terminals
Refer to Figure-9.
13. General symbol, terminal or tag.
These symbols are also used for contacts with moveable links. The open circle is used to represent
easily separable contacts and a solid circle is used for those that are bolted.

Figure-9. Connectors symbols
 
14. Link with two easily separable contacts.
15. Link with two bolted contacts.
16. Hinged link, normally open.
17. Plug (male contact).
18. Socket (female contact).
19. Coaxial plug.
20. Coaxial socket.
Inductors and transformers
Refer to Figure-10.

21. General symbol, coil or winding.
22. Coil with a ferromagnetic core.
23. Transformer symbols.
Figure-10. Inductors symbols
 
Resistors
Refer to Figure-11.
24. General symbol.
25. Old symbol sometimes used.
26. Fixed resistor with a fixed tapping.
27. General symbol, variable resistance (potentiometer).
28. Alternative (old).
29. Variable resistor with preset adjustment.
30. Two terminal variable resistance (rheostat).
31. Resistor with positive temperature coefficient
(PTC thermistor).
32. Resistor with negative temperature coefficient
(NTC thermistor).

Figure-11. Resistors symbol
 
Capacitors
Refer to Figure-12.
33. General symbol, capacitor. (Connect either way round.)
34. Polarised capacitor. (Observe polarity when making connection.)
35. Polarized capacitor, electrolytic.
36. Variable capacitor.
37. Preset variable.

Figure-12. Capacitors symbols
 
Fuses
Refer to Figure-13.
38. General symbol, fuse.
39. Supply side may be indicated by thick line: observe orientation.
40. Alternative symbol (older).

Figure-13. Fuses symbols
 
Switch contacts
Refer to Figure-14.
41. Break contact (BSI).
42. Alternative break contact version 1 (older).
43. Alternative break contact version 2.
44. Make contact (BSI).
45. Alternative make contact version 1.
46. Alternative make contact version 2.
47. Changeover contacts (BSI).
48. Alternative showing make-before-break.
49. Alternative showing break-before-make.

Figure-14. Switch Contact symbols
 
Switch types
Refer to Figure-15.
50. Push button switch momentary.
51. Push button, push on/push off (latching).
52. Lever switch, two position (on/off).
53. Key-operated switch.
54. Limit (position) switch.

Figure-15. Switch symbols
 
Diodes and rectifiers
Refer to Figure-16.
55. Single diode. (Observe polarity.)
56. Single phase bridge rectifier.
57. Three-phase bridge rectifier arrangement.
58. Thyristor or silicon controlled rectifier (SCR) general symbol.
59. Thyristor – common usage.
60. Triac – a two-way thyristor.

Figure-16. Diode Symbols
 
Earthing
Refer to Figure-17.

Figure-17. Earthing
 
Along with the above discussed symbols, you might need some user defined symbols for
representation in your drawing.
After learning about various symbols the next important thing is to learn about wire and its
specifications.
WIRE AND SPECIFICATIONS
Electrical equipment uses a wide variety of wire and cable types and it is up to us to be able to
correctly identify and use the wires which have been specified. The wrong wire types will cause
operational problems and could render the unit unsafe. Such factors include:
• The insulation material;
• The size of the conductor;
• What it’s made of;
• Whether it’s solid or stranded and flexible.
Types of Wires
• Solid or single-stranded wire is not very flexible and is used where rigid connections are accept
able or preferred usually in high current applications in power switching contractors. It may be
uninsulated.
• Stranded wire is flexible and most interconnections between components are made with it.
• Braided wire, also called Screened wire, is an ordinary insulated conductor surrounded by a
conductive braiding. In this case the metal outer is not used to carry current but is normally
connected to earth to provide an electrical shield to screen the internal conductors from outside
electromagnetic interference.

Wire specifications
There are several ways to describe the wire type. The most used method is to specify the number of
strands in the conductor, the diameter of the strands, the cross sectional area of the conductor then the
insulation type.
Refer to Figure-18, Example 1:
• The 1 means that it is single conductor wire.
• The conductor is 0.6 mm in diameter and is insulated with PVC.
• The conductor has a cross-sectional area nominally of 0.28 mm .
Figure-18. Example 1
 
Standard Wire Gauge
Solid wire can also be specified using the Standard Wire Gauge or SWG system. The SWG number
is equivalent to a specific diameter of conductor; refer to Figure-19.
For example; 30 SWG is 0.25 mm diameter.
14 SWG is 2 mm in diameter.
The larger the number – the smaller the size of the conductor.
There is also an American Wire Gauge (AWG) which uses the same principle, but the numbers and
sizes do not correspond to those of SWG.

Figure-19. SWG table
 
We are at a position where we know about various schematic symbols and we know about wires.
Now, we will learn about labeling of contactors.
LABELING
Labeling is the marking on components for identifying incoming and outgoing supply; refer to Figure-
20. We also attach numbers to wires so that later on we can identify their circuits.
Figure-20. Contacts
 
Coils are marked alphanumerically, e.g. A1, A2.
Odd numbers – incoming supply terminal.

Even numbers – outgoing terminal.
Main contacts are marked with single numbers:
Odd numbers – incoming supply terminal.
Next even number – outgoing terminal.
In this way, we will find different type of markings for contacts that we would be including in our
drawings.

INTRODUCTION TO
AUTOCAD ELECTRICAL AND
INTERFACE
 
CHAPTER 2
 
 
Topics Covered
 
 
 
 
The major topics covered in this chapter are:
 
• Introduction
• System Requirement
• Starting AutoCAD Electrical/AutoCAD
• Starting Drawing
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION TO AUTOCAD ELECTRICAL
In today’s world, AutoCAD Electrical is a self defined name in the CAD industry. It is one of the
beginners in Electrical CAD software industry. If we move back into the history, then first version of
AutoCAD desktop applications came out around 1982 with the name AutoCAD Version 1.0. From
1982 to till today AutoCAD has undergone continuous enhancements and modifications. But, it is the
speciality of AutoCAD that it still retains its position as No. 1 in CAD industry. The AutoCAD
Electrical is built on that known platform called AutoCAD. The latest version AutoCAD Electrical
2016 is the most advanced model of AutoCAD Electrical available for us. The software has
expanded more into the user interface of AutoCAD Electrical and has become the most user friendly

one. The 2016 version of software has rich capabilities to operate with Autodesk Inventor for 3D
electrical CAD and electromechanical models. For every tool/command it has more that one ways to
invoke. This software also gives you the access to customize it as per your requirements.
Although the software is capable to perform 3D operations but in this book we will concentrate on
2D drawing creation. Now, we will learn to start AutoCAD Electrical and then we will discuss the
interface of AutoCAD Electrical. But before we discuss about starting AutoCAD Electrical, Please
check the system requirements to run AutoCAD Electrical 2016 properly. The system requirements
are given next.
System requirements for AutoCAD Electrical 2016
Operating System
Microsoft® Windows® 8/8.1 Enterprise
Microsoft Windows 8/8.1 Pro
Microsoft Windows 8/8.1
Microsoft Windows 7 Enterprise
Microsoft Windows 7 Ultimate
Microsoft Windows 7 Professional
Microsoft Windows 7 Home Premium
CPU Type
Minimum Intel® Pentium® 4 or AMD Athlon™ 64 processor
Memory
For 32-bit AutoCAD Electrical 2016:
2 GB (3 GB recommended)
For 64-bit AutoCAD Electrical 2016:
4 GB (8 GB recommended)
Display Resolution
1024x768 (1600x1050 or higher recommended) with True Color
Display Card
Windows display adapter capable of 1024x768 with True Color capabilities and DirectX® 9.
DirectX 11 compliant card recommended.

Disk Space
Installation 12.0 GB
Pointing Device
MS-Mouse compliant device
Media (DVD)
Download and installation from DVD
Browser
Windows Internet Explorer® 9.0 (or later)
.NET Framework
.NET Framework Version 4.5
Additional Requirements for Large Datasets, Point
Clouds, and 3D Modeling
Memory
8 GB RAM or greater
Disk Space
6 GB free hard disk available, not including installation requirements
Display Card
1600x1050 or greater True Color video display adapter;
128 MB VRAM or greater; Pixel Shader 3.0 or greater; Direct3D®-capable workstation class
graphics card.
Note: 64-bit Operating Systems are recommended if you are working with Large Datasets, Point
Clouds and 3D Modeling.
Make sure that you fulfill all the requirements for the software before running it. Since there are
various ways to perform the same thing so, we will use the best practice to perform an operation and
alternates will be given
STARTING AUTOCAD ELECTRICAL ELECTRICAL
• Click on the Start button in the taskbar and type AutoCAD Electrical in the search box. The list of

options related to AutoCAD Electrical will be displayed; refer to Figure-1.
Figure-1. Start menu
 
• Click on AutoCAD Electrical 2016 link button in the list. AutoCAD Electrical will initialize and
once the background processing is complete, the interface will be displayed as shown in Figure-2.

Figure-2. AutoCAD Electrical interface
 
The first screen of AutoCAD Electrical is divided into three columns. First column is for starting
drawings. The second column is for opening the recent documents. Using the third column which
connect, you can connect the other users of AutoCAD Electrical using your Autodesk account
information.
Now, our first task is to create a drawing document. In real world, we will find the drawings
generally in two unit systems: Metric (SI) and Imperial. We will now learn to create drawings in both
the unit systems.
CREATING A NEW DRAWING DOCUMENT
• Click on the down arrow below Start Drawing button in the First Column. List of drawing
templates will be displayed; refer to Figure-3.
Figure-3. List of templates
 
• Select the desired template from the list. The drawing environment will open according to the
selected template; refer to Figure-4.

Figure-4. AutoCAD Electrical with acadiso template
 
Meaning of Default templates
acad -Named Plot Styles.dwt :- Using this template, we can create drawings in imperial unit system
(feet and inches)that can be printed in black and white.
acad -Named Plot Styles3D.dwt :- Using this template, we can create 3D model in imperial unit
system (feet and inches) that can be printed in black and white.
acad.dwt :- Using this template, we can create drawings in imperial unit system (feet and inches)that
can be printed in color.
acad3D.dwt :- Using this template, we can create 3D model in imperial unit system (feet and inches)
that can be printed in color.
acadISO -Named Plot Styles.dwt :- Using this template, we can create drawings in metric unit system
(millimeters)that can be printed in black and white.
acadISO -Named Plot Styles3D.dwt :- Using this template, we can create 3D model in metric unit
system (millimeters) that can be printed in black and white.
acadiso.dwt :- Using this template, we can create drawings in metric unit system (millimeters)that can
be printed in color.
acadiso3D.dwt :- Using this template, we can create 3D model in metric unit system (millimeters)
that can be printed in color.

Tutorial-iArch.dwt :- Using this template, you can create architectural drawing that are compatible
with the tutorial in default library. Note that the unit for this template is imperial (Feet and Inches).
Tutorial-iMfg.dwt :- Using this template, you can create mechanical manufacturing drawing that are
compatible with the tutorial in default library. Note that the unit for this template is imperial (Feet and
Inches).
Tutorial-mArch.dwt :- Using this template, you can create architectural drawing that are compatible
with the tutorial in default library. Note that the unit for this template is metric (Millimeters.
Tutorial-mMfg.dwt :- Using this template, you can create mechanical manufacturing drawing that are
compatible with the tutorial in default library. Note that the unit for this template is metric
(Millimeters).
No Template - Imperial :- Using this template, you can create a new drawing using the imperial unit
system and without using any template.
No Template - Metric :- Using this template, you can create a new drawing using the metric unit
system and without using any template.
Electrical Templates
The template files that start with ACE are meant for electrical drawings. Also, you can use
ACAD_Electrical.dwt and ACAD_Electrical_IEC.dwt for creating AutoCAD Electrical drawings.
You will learn about these templates later in the book.
We know about the default templates. We have created a new document with a selected template.
Now, we will learn about interface. We divide the AutoCAD Electrical interface into following
sections:
• Title Bar
• Application Menu
• Ribbon
• Drawing Tab Bar
• Drawing Area
• Command Window
• Bottom Bar
Now, we will discuss each of the sections one by one.
TITLE BAR
Title bar is the top strip containing quick access tools, name of the document and connectivity
options; refer to Figure-5.

Figure-5. Title bar
• Application button is used to display Application menu, which we will discuss later.
• Quick Access Toolbar contains tools that are very common while working. The Quick Access
Toolbar contains tools for creating new file, saving current file, printing the file and so on. You can
add the desired tools in the Quick Access Toolbar which we will learn later.
• The center of the title bar shows the name of the drawing.
• Search Box is used to search the desired topic in the AutoCAD Electrical Help. To use this
option, type the keyword for which you want the information in the text box adjacent to search
button and press ENTER from the keyboard.
• Sign In button is used to sign into the Autodesk account. If you are not having an Autodesk account
then you can create one from Autodesk website. If you have an Autodesk account then you can save
and share your files through Autodesk cloud and you can render on cloud which are very fast
services. To sign into your Autodesk account, click on the Sign In button. As a result, a drop-down
will display; refer to Figure-6. Click on Sign In to Autodesk 360 button. As a result, the Autodesk
- Sign In dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-7. Enter your ID and password and click on
the Sign In button to login.
Figure-6. Sign In option
 
Figure-7. Autodesk sign in dialog box
 

 
• Exchange Apps is used to install or share apps for Autodesk products. Click on the Exchange
Apps button and exchange apps web page will open in the browser where you can buy or try
various apps as per your requirement.
• Help button is used to display the online help of AutoCAD Electrical on the Autodesk server. If you
click on the down arrow next to help button then a list of options is displayed; refer to Figure-8. If
you want to use offline help then click on the Download Offline Help option
Figure-8. Help menu
 
Figure-9. Offline help link
 
Click on the desired language link to download the help file in
respective language.
Now, we need to change the color scheme of AutoCAD Electrical because of printing compatibility

although you can retain the present color scheme. To change the color scheme, steps are given next.
Changing Color Scheme
• Click on the Application button 
. The Application Menu will be displayed; refer to Figure-10.
Figure-10. Application menu
 
• Click on the Options button at the bottom right of the Application Menu. The Options dialog box
will be displayed; refer to Figure-11.

Figure-11. Options dialog box
 
• Click on the Dark drop-down button in the Window Elements area. List of options will be
displayed.
• Select the Light option from the drop-down; refer to Figure-12.
Figure-12. Light option in Color scheme drop-down
 
• Click on the Colors button; refer to Figure-11. The Drawing Window Colors dialog box will be
displayed as shown in Figure-13.

Figure-13. Drawing Window Colors dialog box
 
Note that using the options in this dialog box, you can change the color of any element of interface.
• Select one of the backgrounds from Interface element list box, click on the drop-down for colors
and select the White option; refer to Figure-14.
Figure-14. Color drop-down
 
• Similarly, one by one select the other background options from the Interface element box and set
their colors to white.

Figure-15. Background options
 
• Select the Crosshairs option from the Interface element box and select the Black option from the
Color drop-down.
• Click on the Apply & Close button from the Drawing Window Colors dialog box and click on the
OK button from the Options dialog box. The drawing area and interface will be displayed in
colors that are suitable for printing of this book.
APPLICATION MENU
Application menu contains the tools that are related to the overall functioning of AutoCAD Electrical.
This functioning include (opening, saving, and creating of documents), (printing, publishing, and
exporting of documents), and (Drawing properties and configuration options for AutoCAD
Electrical). Now, one by one we will discuss each tool and option in the Application Menu.
New options
• Click on the Application button and hover the cursor over New option in the menu. The options for
new documents will be displayed; refer to Figure-16.

Figure-16. Options for new documents
 
• In this version of AutoCAD Electrical there are two options to create new documents; Drawing and
Sheet Set.
Using the Drawing option, you can create an individual drawing file, which contains model and
various views of the model in orthographic projection.
Using the Sheet Set option, you can create a group of inter-related drawing files in the form of
sheets.
Creating Drawings
• Click on the Drawing option from the New options. The Select Template dialog box will be
displayed; refer to Figure-17.

Figure-17. Select template dialog box
 
• Select the desired template from the dialog box. Note that the use of each template has already been
discussed.
• If you want to create a document with out using any of the above template but with the desired units
only then click on the down arrow next to Open button in the dialog box. A drop-down will be
displayed; refer to Figure-18.
Figure-18. Open drop down
 
• Click on the Open with no Template - Imperial button to work in Feet and Inches without loading
any template.
• Otherwise, click on the Open with no Template - Metric button to work in millimeters without
loading any template.
• Otherwise, click on the Open button from the drop-down to create a drawing using the selected
template. Note that if you directly select the Open button from the dialog box then also the
functioning will be similar.
• Note that from the Files of type drop-down in this dialog box the Drawing Template (*.dwt)
option is selected so you are able to select the templates. You can also use any previous drawing as
a template. To do so, click on the Drawing Template (*.dwt) option. The Files of type drop-down
will expand as shown in Figure-19.

Figure-19. Files of type drop down
 
• Select the Drawing (*.dwg) option from the list and you will be able to select any drawing in place
of template. Rest of the procedure is same.
Creating Sheet Sets
• Click on the Sheet Set option from the New options in the Application Menu. The Begin page of
Create Sheet Set dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-20.
Figure-20. Begins page Create Sheet Set dialog box
 
• If you want to use the example sheet set (template) then select the An example sheet set radio
button from this page. You can club more than one drawing files in the form of a sheet set by using
the Existing drawings radio button. We will select the An example sheet set radio button for the
time being.
• Click on the Next button from the dialog box. The Sheet Set Example page of Create Sheet Set
dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-21.

Figure-21. Sheet Set Example page of Create Sheet Set dialog box
 
• Select the desire sheet set template from the box and click on the Next button from the dialog box.
The Sheet Set Details page will be displayed as shown in Figure-22.
• Click in the Name of new sheet set edit box and specify the name of the sheet set as desired.
• Click on the Browse button 
 next to Store sheet set data file (.dst) here edit box. The Browse
for Sheet Set Folder dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-23.
Figure-22. Sheet Set Details page of Create Sheet Set dialog box
 

Figure-23. Browse for Sheet Set Folder dialog box
 
• Browse to the desired folder and click on the Open button to set the directory.
• You can set the properties by using the dialog box displayed on clicking on the Sheet Set Properties
button in this page.
• Click on the Next button from the page. The Confirm page will be displayed with the preview of
all the properties set; refer to Figure-24.
Figure-24. Confirm page of Create Sheet Set dialog box
 
• Click on the Finish button from the page. The Sheet Set Manager will be displayed with the
current sheet set; refer to Figure-25.

Figure-25. Sheet Set Manager
 
We will learn more about the sheet sets later in this book.
Open Options
These options are used to open files of different formats and from different locations. In this version
of AutoCAD Electrical, you can open drawing file from local drive or cloud (Autodesk 360), you can
open sheet sets from local drive, you can import DGN format files, and you can open sample files
from local drive as well as online. Note that the procedure to open all the type of files is similar, so
here we will discuss the procedure to open a drawing file from local drive.
Opening Drawing File
• Click on the Drawing option from the Open options in the Application Menu. The Select File
dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-26.
• Browse to the desired folder and select the file that you want to open in AutoCAD Electrical.
• Click on the Open button to open the file.

Figure-26. Select File dialog box
 
Note that there are three more methods to open a file; opening as read only, opening partially, and
opening as read only with partial content. The options to do so are displayed on clicking at the down
arrow next to Open button; refer to Figure-27. Partially opening a drawing file mean skipping some
of the layers that are not of our use. A layer is transparent sheet on which we draw something in
AutoCAD Electrical. In AutoCAD Electrical, each drawing is stacking of multiple layers one over
the other.
Figure-27. Open options
 
• If you want to open the file as read only and don’t want to make the changes in it then select the
Open Read-Only option from the drop-down.
• If you want to open a drawing file partially, then select the Partial Open option from the drop-
down. The Partial Open dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-28.

Figure-28. Partial Open dialog box
 
• Select the check boxes corresponding to the layers that you want to include while opening the
drawing.
• Click on the Open button from the dialog box. The file will open with only the selected layers.
You can similarly open a file partially and read only by using the Partial Open Read-Only option.
Save
This option is used to save the current file in the local drive for its later use. The steps to save the file
are given next.
• Click on the Save option from the Application Menu. The Save Drawing As dialog box will be
displayed as shown in Figure-29.

Figure-29. Save Drawing As dialog box
 
• Change the file name as desired and click in the Files of type drop-down to change the file format.
On clicking at the Files of type drop-down, the list of formats is displayed as shown in Figure-30.
Figure-30. AutoCAD Electrical file formats
 
• Browse to the desired location where you want to save the file. Note that the buttons in the left area
of the dialog box are used to access some common locations like Documents, Desktop, FTP, and so
on.
• Click on the Save button and the file will be saved with the specified settings.
Applying Password on File
Note that you can apply a password to the drawing file for security of your design. To apply the
password follow the steps given next.

• In the Save Drawing As dialog box, click on the down arrow next to Tool button; refer to Figure-
31. A list of options will be displayed.
Figure-31. Tools drop down
 
• Click on the Security Options button in the drop-down. The Security Options dialog box will be
displayed as shown in Figure-32.
Figure-32. Security Options dialog box
 
• Specify the password for security in the edit box corresponding to password.
• Select the Encrypt drawing properties check box to encrypt the properties of the drawing.
• Note that after specifying the password, the Advanced Options button becomes active. Click on this
button and select the encryption provider as per your requirement. If you are sending this file to
someone else then make sure that the person has the same encryption agent in this system.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Confirm Password dialog box will be displayed
as shown in Figure-33.

Figure-33. Confirm Password dialog box
 
• Type your password again and click on the OK button from the dialog box. Next, click on the Save
button from the dialog box.
Save As
This option is used to save the file with a different format. The steps to use this option are given next.
• Click on the arrow next to Save As in the Application Menu. The Save As options will be
displayed as shown in Figure-34.
Figure-34. Save As options

 
• If you want to save the file with a format different from the AutoCAD Electrical format then click on
the Other Formats button from the list of options. The Save Drawing As dialog box will be
displayed as discussed earlier. Note that some additional formats will be displayed in the Files of
type drop-down.
• Select the desired file format from the list and click on the Save button from the dialog box to save
the file. Note that later when we will work on 3D models and some more options will be available
in this drop-down.
Export
The options for this section are used to save the file in external formats. The options in this section
work in the same way as the Save options work. The steps to export a file in iges format are given
next. You can apply the same procedure to save files in other formats.
• Hold the cursor on the Export option in the Application Menu. The options related to exporting file
are displayed; refer to Figure-35.
Figure-35. Export options
 
• Click on the Other Formats button from the list. The Export Data dialog box will be displayed as
shown in Figure-36.

Figure-36. Export Data dialog box
 
• Specify the desired name in the File name edit box and click on the Files of type drop-down. The
list of formats will be displayed as shown in Figure-37.
Figure-37. Formats for export
 
• Select the IGES (*.iges) option from the list and click on the Save button from the dialog box to
save the file with the selected format.
Publish
The options for this section are used to package and transfer the file to external sources like 3D
printer, web services and e-mail transfer.

• To use the Send to 3D Print Service option, you must have a 3D model which can be sent for 3D
printing. If you have the model then click on this button and select the models that you want to print.
• Archive option is used to package the files for transfer. Note that to use this option, you need to
create a sheet set of drawing. If you have the sheet set then click on this button and you can package
the files in a zip format.
• eTransmit option is also used to package the files but it compresses the files to their fast electronic
transfer.
• Email option is used to directly e-mail the current file to your client.
Print
Printing is an important requirement of the CAD industry. All the designs are manufactured and
controlled on the basis of printed copy of the drawing. To get the print out follow the steps given next.
• Click on the Plot option from the Print options in the Application Manager. The Plot dialog box
will be displayed for Model option; refer to Figure-38. (Model is the workspace in AutoCAD
Electrical in which 3D view of model is displayed. Layout/Paperspace is the workspace where
model is displayed in its paper print form. It is advised to shift to Layout/Paperspace before
printing on the paper. ).
Figure-38. Plot dialog box

 
• Select the Printer/plotter from the Name drop-down in the Printer/plotter area of the dialog box;
refer to Figure-39.
Figure-39. Printer selection
 
• Select the paper size from the drop-down in the Paper size area of the dialog box.
• Select the Center the plot check box to print the drawing at the center of the paper.
• Select the Fit to paper check box to fit it in the current paper size.
• Click on More options 
 button or press ALT + > to expand the dialog box. The dialog box will
be displayed as shown in Figure-40.
Figure-40. Expanded Plot dialog box
 
• Select the Landscape radio button from the Drawing orientation area of the dialog box to print the
drawing in landscape orientation.
• Select the Plot upside-down check box from the Drawing Orientation area to reverse the printing
side of the paper.
• To increase or decrease the quality of printout, select the desired quality option from the Quality
drop-down in the Shaded viewport options area.

• Click on the OK button from the dialog box to print the drawing. You will learn more about the
printing later in this book.
DRAWING TAB BAR
The Drawing tab bar contains tabs for each drawing that is opened; refer to Figure-41.
Figure-41. Drawing Tab bar
 
There are various functions that can be performed by using the Drawing tab bar, which are discussed
next.
• Hold the cursor over the tile of any drawing file in the Drawing tab bar. An interactive box will be
displayed allowing you to switch between model and their paper spaces/layouts; refer to Figure-
42.
Figure-42. Interactive box for layout switching
 
• Click on the Layout1 or Layout2 to switch to paper space mode. You can switch back to Model
space mode by using the same procedure.
• You can create a new drawing file by clicking on the plus sign next to the drawing tile. On doing so,
the Start page of AutoCAD Electrical will be displayed.
• Using the options in this page, you can start a new drawing as discussed earlier.
DRAWING AREA
The blank area in below Drawing Tab bar is called Drawing Area. This area is used to create
sketches and models. Figure-43 shows the annotated drawing area. You will learn about more options
related to drawing area later in this book.

Figure-43. Drawing area
 
COMMAND WINDOW
This window is used to start new commands or specify the parameters for current running commands.
This window is available above the Bottom bar; refer to Figure-44.
Figure-44. Command Window
 
You can press CTRL+9 to display/hide the command window. The methods to use the command
window are given next.
• Click in the Type a Command box in the Command window. You are prompted to specify the
command.
• Type a few alphabets of your desired command, a list of commands relevant to your specified
alphabets will be displayed; refer to Figure-45.

Figure-45. Command list
 
• Hold the cursor on the name of a command, the description of the command will be displayed; refer
to Figure-46.
Figure-46. Tool description
 
• To know more about the highlighted command click on the Search in Help or Search on Internet
button next to the command name.
• You can scroll down in the box to browse the command not visible currently in the box. You can
also specify the values of various variables.
• Click on the + sign next to the variables tile in the box; refer to Figure-47. The list of variables
related to the specified alphabets will be displayed; refer to Figure-48.
Figure-47. Variables
 

Figure-48. List of variables
 
• To start any command or specify value of any variable click on it in the box. The respective options
will be displayed in the command window and you will be prompted to specify the desired values.
For example, type L at the command prompt in the Command Window and click on the Line tool at
the top in the command box. You will be prompted to specify the position of the starting point of the
line; refer to Figure-49. You will learn more later in this book. Press ESC to exit the tool.
Figure-49. Command prompt
 
Bottom Bar
The tools in the Bottom Bar are used to perform various functions like creating a new layout or
switching between existing ones, enabling orthogonal movement of cursor and so on; refer to Figure-
50. The options in the Bottom Bar are discussed next.
Figure-50. Bottom bar
 
Modelspace and Paperspace

In a layout, you can switch between paper space and model space by using the MODEL button in the
Bottom Bar. To display layout or switch back to Model environment, hover the cursor on the File
name tile in the Tile bar below Ribbon. An interactive box will be displayed showing buttons to
switch between Model and Layout environment; refer to Figure-51. Click on the desired button to
switch between model and layouts.
Figure-51. Options to switch model and layout
 
Grid Display
In AutoCAD Electrical, the grid lines are used as reference lines to draw objects. If the Grid Display
button is chosen, the grid display is on and the grid lines are displayed on the screen. The F7 function
key can be used to turn the grid display on or off.
Grid Snap
This option is used to enable snapping of cursor to the grid points as per the specified settings.
Snapping is the attraction of cursor to the key points of AutoCAD Electrical. There are two options
for specifying grid snap: Grid Snap button and corresponding drop-down. The steps to use Grid Snap
are given next.
• Click on the Grid Snap button to enable snapping of cursor to the key points on grid.
• Click on the down arrow next to Grid Snap button; a flyout will be displayed as shown in Figure-
52.
Figure-52. Snap flyout

 
• Select the Grid Snap option if you want to snap the cursor to the grid intersections. Select the Polar
Snap option from the flyout if you want to snap the cursor to the angular lines.
• Select the Snap Settings option from the flyout to specify the setting related to the selected type of
Snap. The Drafting Setting dialog box will be displayed with the Snap and Grid tab selected;
refer to Figure-53.
Figure-53. Drafting Settings dialog box
 
• After specifying the desired setting click on the OK button from the dialog box. The cursor will
automatically start snapping to the key points as specified by the settings. Various options in the
Drafting Setting dialog box are discussed next.
Drafting Settings dialog box
You can use the Drafting Settings dialog box to set the drawing modes such as grid, snap, Object
Snap, Polar, Object snap tracking, and Dynamic Input. All these modes help you draw accurately and
also increase the drawing speed. You can right-click on the Snap Mode, Grid Display, Ortho Mode,
Polar Tracking, Object Snap, 3D Object Snap, Object Snap Tracking, Dynamic Input, Quick
Properties, or Selection Cycling button in the Status Bar to display a shortcut menu. In this shortcut
menu, choose Settings to display the Drafting Settings dialog box, as shown in Figure-53. This dialog
box has seven tabs: Snap and Grid, Polar Tracking, Object Snap, 3D Object Snap, Dynamic
Input, Quick Properties, and Selection Cycling. On starting AutoCAD Electrical, these tabs have
default settings. You can change them according to your requirements. You will learn about them later
in the book.

Snap and Grid
Grid lines are the checked lines on the screen at predefined spacing, see Figure-54. In AutoCAD
Electrical, by default, the grids are displayed as checked lines. You can also display the grids as
dotted lines, refer to Figure 4-39. To do so, set the 2D model space check box in the Grid style area.
These dotted lines act as a graph that can be used as reference lines in a drawing. You can change the
distance between grid lines as per your requirement. If grid lines are displayed within the drawing
limits, it helps to define the working area. The grid also gives you an idea about the size of the
drawing objects. To display the grid up to the limits, clear the Display grid beyond Limits check
box. Now, the grids will be displayed only up to the limits set.
Figure-54. Grid
 
Figure-55. Dotted grid
 
Ortho Mode
If the Ortho Mode button is chosen, you can draw entities like lines at right angles only. You can use
the F8 function key to turn ortho on or off.
Polar Tracking
• Click on the Polar Tracking button 
 to restrict the cursor movements along the angle specified
for polar tracking.
• To set the polar tracking angle, click on the down arrow next to the Polar Tracking button. A list of

options will be displayed; refer to Figure-56.
Figure-56. Polar tracking angles
 
• Click on the desired angle option from the list. The cursor will start tracking as per the selected
angle option.
• To specify the settings related to Polar Tracking, click on the Tracking Settings button from the
list of options. The Drafting Settings dialog box will be displayed with the Polar Tracking tab
selected; refer to Figure-57.
Figure-57. Drafting Settings dialog box with Polar Tracking tab
 
• Click in the Increment angle drop-down and select the desired angle.
• You can specify more than one angle for tracking. For that, click on the Additional angles check box
and click on the New button. You will be asked to specify the additional angle.

• Enter the desired angle in the edit box. You can follow the same procedure to specify up to 10
additional angles.
• Click on the OK button to apply the specified settings.
Isometric Drafting
This button is used to enable isometric drafting. The procedure to use this option is given next.
• Click on the Isometric Drafting button 
 from the Bottom bar. The orientation of the cursor will
change as per the current isometric plane selected; refer to Figure-58.
Figure-58. Cursor orientation
 
• To select another isometric plane, click on the down arrow next to the Isometric Drafting button. A
list of isometric planes will be displayed; refer to Figure-59.
Figure-59. Isometric planes
 
• Select the desired isometric plane and the cursor will be oriented accordingly.
Annotation buttons
There is a group of four buttons that we call annotation buttons in AutoCAD Electrical; refer to
Figure-60.
Figure-60. Annotation buttons
 
These buttons are used to manage annotation and their display in the drawing area. You will learn
more about these options later in the book.
Workspace Switching
This flyout is used to switch between various workspaces available in AutoCAD Electrical. A
workspace is defined as a customized arrangement of Ribbon, toolbars, menus, and window palettes
in the AutoCAD Electrical environment. Click on the down arrow next to gear symbol in the Bottom

bar. A flyout is displayed; refer to Figure-61.
Figure-61. Workspace switching flyout
 
There are four default workspaces, ACADE & 2D Drafting & Annotation; ACADE & 3D
Modeling; 2D Drafting & Annotation; and 3D Modeling. ACADE & 2D Drafting & Annotation
workspace displays the tools and options related to 2D electrical drafting. ACADE & 3D Modeling
workspace displays the tools and options related to basic 3D electrical modeling. In this
environment, you can generate isometric drawings. The 2D Drafting & Annotation workspace
displays the tools to perform 2D drafting in general. The 3D Modeling workspace displays almost all
the tools required to perform advanced modeling.
Hardware Acceleration On
This button is used to set the performance of the software to an acceptable level.
Isolate Objects
This button is used to hide or isolate objects from the drawing area. On choosing this button, a flyout
will be displayed with two options. Choose the Isolate Objects option from this flyout and then
select the objects to hide or isolate. To end isolation or display a hidden object, click this button
again and choose the End Object Isolation option.
Clean Screen
The Clean Screen button is at the lower right corner of the screen. This button, when chosen,
displays an expanded view of the drawing area by hiding all the toolbars except the command
window, Status Bar, and menu bar. The expanded view of the drawing area can also be displayed by
choosing View > Clean Screen from the menu bar or by using the CTRL+0 keys. Choose the Clean
Screen button again to restore the previous display state.
Customization
This option is used to customize the Bottom bar. You can add or remove the buttons from the Bottom
bar as per the requirement. Click on the Customization button at the right corner in the Bottom bar.
A flyout will display as shown in Figure-62. The options that are displayed with tick mark are
available in the Bottom bar and other options are not. To display the other options or hide the current

displaying options click on them in the flyout.
Figure-62. Customization flyout
 
For example, click on the Units option from the flyout. It will be added in the Bottom bar; refer to
Figure-63. Now, you can change the unit style by clicking on this option in the Bottom bar any time
while working.
Figure-63. Unit option
 
System Variable Monitor 
 
This is one of the enhancement given in 2016 version of AutoCAD based software. Earlier, we used
to type system variables and then change their values but in 2016 version, there is an interactive way
to change the system variables. Click on the System Variable Monitor button from the Bottom bar,

the System Variable Monitor dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-64. Double click on
the value of variable to change it. Note that the warning sign is displayed under Status column for
variables whose value is not as preferred.
To add more variables in the list, click on the Edit List button from the dialog box and add the
variables you want to manage.
Figure-64. System Variable Monitor dialog box
 

PROJECT
MANAGEMENT
 
CHAPTER 3
 
 
Topics Covered
 
 
 
 
The major topics covered in this chapter are:
 
• Workflow in AutoCAD Electrical
• Starting a New Project
• Changing Properties of a project
• Adding drawings in the project
• Retagging and renumbering ladders in the drawings of project
• Plotting/publishing project files
 
 
 
WORKFLOW IN AUTOCAD ELECTRICAL
AutoCAD Electrical is a software that can manage a complete project of electrical circuits. But,
before we start to learn various tools in AutoCAD Electrical, it is necessary to understand the
workflow in AutoCAD Electrical. The workflow in AutoCAD Electrical in given in Figure-1.

Figure-1. Workflow
 
We have learned about starting AutoCAD Electrical and now, its time to understand the procedures to
manage projects in AutoCAD Electrical.
INITIALIZING PROJECT
As discussed earlier, Project is the categorized combination of various inter-related drawings. In
AutoCAD Electrical, there are two major categories of drawings- Schematic diagrams and Panel
drawings. Before we create these drawings, let’s create a Project file. The procedure to create a
project is given next.

• Start AutoCAD Electrical. If you are starting it for the first time then you will get the screen as
shown in Figure-2. The marked left area displays the Project Manager which is used to manage
projects.
Figure-2. AutoCAD Electrical initial screen
 
• Click on the Project Manager button in the Quick Access Toolbar; refer to Figure-3,if the Project
Manager is not displayed.
Figure-3. Project Manager button
• To be able to use all the tools in the Project Manager, open a drawing file or create a new one.
The deactivated tools in the Project Manager will become active; refer to Figure-4.
Figure-4. Project Manager
 
• Click on the New Project button 
 in the Project Manager. The Create New Project dialog box
will be displayed; refer to Figure-5.

Figure-5. Create New Project dialog box
 
• Specify the name of the Project in the Name edit box of the dialog box.
• Make sure that the Create Folder with Project Name check box to create folders with the name of
project file.
• Click on the Browse button next to Location edit box to change the location of the project files. The
Browse For Folder dialog box will be display; refer to Figure-6.
Figure-6. Browse For Folder dialog box
 
• Click on the nodes to move into sub-folder and select the desired location.
• Click on the OK button to create project files in the desired folder.
• If you want to copy settings from a desired project file then click on the Browse button next to Copy
Settings from Project File edit box. Select the desired file using options in the dialog box
displayed.
• Click on the Descriptions button to specify the description of the Project. The Project Description
dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-7.

Figure-7. Project Description dialog box
 
• Specify the descriptions in the lines one by one. If you want to include any of the description line in
your report then click on the in reports check box next that line.
• Click on the OK button to save the descriptions.
• Click on the OK button to create the Project. If you want to specify the properties of the project
while creating, then click on the OK - Properties button. The Project Properties dialog box will
be displayed; refer to Figure-8.

Figure-8. Project Properties dialog box
 
• Specify the desired settings and click on the OK button from the dialog box to apply settings. Note
that you will learn about project properties in the next section.
• As you click on the OK button, the project name is added in the Project list in the Project
Manager; refer to Figure-9.

Figure-9. Project name added in Project list
 
PROJECT PROPERTIES
Project Properties are the key players for any project whether it is for AutoCAD Electrical or any
other related software. Follow the procedure given next to change the properties of the project.
• Right-click on the name of the project in the Project Manager whose properties are need to be
changed. A shortcut menu will be displayed; refer to Figure-10.
• Click on the Properties button in shortcut menu. The Project Properties dialog box will be
displayed as shown in Figure-8.
Figure-10. Shortcut menu
 
Project Settings tab
The options in this area are used to specify settings for the current project file. Various options in this
tab are discussed next.
Library Icon Menu Paths area
• The first area in the dialog box is Library Icon Menu Paths. The options in this area are used to
specify the directories containing symbols and icons required in Electrical drawings.
• To add any new library, click on the Add button from the dialog box. A new link will be added

under the Schematic Libraries node. Specify the location of the directory that contains the
symbols.
• Similarly, you can add more files for Icons and panels.
Catalog Lookup File Preference area
• Options in the Catalog Lookup File Preference area are used to set the database of files that are to
be included in the library. If you add any new symbol or icon then make sure that you have entered
it in the database file used in this section.
• To set a user defined database, click on the Other File button in this area. The Catalog Lookup
File dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-11.
Figure-11. Catalog Lookup File dialog box
 
• By default system uses the default Lookup file available with the library. But if you need additional
file for look up then click on the Optional : Define a secondary catalog lookup file for this
project radio button and then click on the Browse button. The Secondary Catalog Lookup File
dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-12.
Figure-12. Secondary Catalog Lookup File dialog box
 
• Select the desired database file and click on the Open button. The location of file will be added in
the edit box.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box.

Options area
• Select the Real time error checking check box to allow the system to check for some basic errors
in the drawing.
• The Tag/Wire Number Sort Order drop-down is used to specify the order in which the Tags/wire
numbers will be arranged in the Project. There are many options in this drop-down to modify the
order; refer to Figure-13.
Figure-13. Sort Order drop-down
 
• Electrical Code Standard drop-down is used to set the standard for electrical codes.
Components tab
The options in the Components tab are used to manage properties of the components; refer to Figure-
14. Various options in the Components tab of the dialog box are discussed next.

Figure-14. Components tab Project Properties dialog box
 
Component TAG Format area
• The Tag Format edit box is used to set the format for tag assigned to various components. By
default, %F%N is specified in the Tag Format edit box. %F is used to assign Family number to
tag. %N is used to assign serial number to the tag. Similarly, %S is used to assign Sheet number
and %D is used to assign Drawing number in the tag.
• The Suffix Setup button is used to manage suffix for component tag. On clicking this button, the
Suffix List for Reference-Based Component Tags dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-
15. These suffix are automatically applied in case of duplicates in component tags.

Figure-15. Suffix List for Reference-Based Component Tags dialog box
 
• Select the Sequential radio button if you do not want to use the suffix. In this case, successive
numbers will be added in the duplicate component tags.
• If you are working with PLC as in the later chapter, then select the Search for PLC I/O address on
insert check to force system for checking the assigned PLC I/O addresses.
Component TAG Options area
• Select the Combined Installation/Location tag mode check box to use tag created by combining
installation/location code. Once you select this check box, the check boxes related to this option
will become active. You can use these activated check boxes to further refine the
Installation/Location tag mode. You will learn about Installation code and Location code later in
the book.
• Select the Upon insert: automatic fill installation/Location with drawing default or last used
check box to insert the default installation/location code with the component tag.
Component Options area
• Select the Description text upper case check box to make the description text uppercase in
drawing.
• Click on the Item Numbering button to setup the item numbering mode for the current project. On
clicking this button, the Item Numbering Setup dialog box is displayed; refer to Figure-16. If the
Accumulate Project Wide radio button is selected in the Item Numbering Mode area of the
dialog box then the item numbering continues from one drawing to another drawing in the project. If
you select the Reset with Each Drawing radio button then the numbering restarts from 1 in the
each drawing with its respective suffix/prefix.

Figure-16. Item Numbering Setup dialog box
 
• If you select the Per-Component Basis radio button from the Item Assignments area of the dialog
box then Item number is assigned to each component in the catalogue during insertion in the
drawing. If you select the Per -Part Number Basis radio button then the Item number is assigned
for each part number of the component in the catalogue. Note that a component can have more the
one part numbers in the catalogue.
Wire Numbers tab
The options in the Wire Numbers tab are used to set the numbering system for wires in the project;
refer to Figure-17. The options in this tab are discussed next.

Figure-17. Wire Numbers tab in Project Properties dialog box
 
Wire Number Format area
• The Format edit box in the Wire Number Format area is used to set the format for wire numbering
in project. You can add any suffix or prefix to %N for making wire numbering unique for your
project. The other options in this area work in the same way as they do for components in the
Components tab of the dialog box.
Wire Number Options area
• Select the Based on Wire Layer check box to make the wire numbering based on the wire layers.
On selecting this check box, the Layer Setup button becomes active. Click on this button to display
the Layer Setup dialog box; refer to Figure-18. In this dialog box, you can add, remove, or update
the wire layer for wire numbering.

Figure-18. Assign Wire Numbering Fornats by Wire Layer dialog box
 
• Select the Based on Terminal Symbol Location check box to make the wire numbering dependent
on the terminal symbols. For example, a wire network starts at line reference 100 and drops down
and over on line reference 103. If a schematic terminal symbol carries the WIRENO attribute
located on line reference 103, and this option is enabled, AutoCAD Electrical calculates a
reference-based wire number using 103 instead of 100. If multiple wire number terminals exist on
this network, the line reference value of the upper left-most terminal is used.
• Select the Hidden on Wire Network with Terminal Displaying Wire Number check box to make
the wire numbering hidden in the Wire network when the wire number is linked with terminal
location.
• Select the On per Wire Basis check box to make the wire numbering on per wire basis rather then
the wire network.
• The Exclude check box is used to exclude the wire numbering of the specified range from the wire
numbering of the network. On selecting this check box, the edit box next to it becomes active and
you can specify the range of the wire numbering like, 200-500 or 2;4;5;23.
New Wire Numbering Placement area
The options in this area are used to define the placement position for wire numbering with respect to
wire. The options are discussed next.
• Select the Above Wire radio button to place the wire numbering on the wire. This is the default
option for the wire numbering placement.
• Select the In-Line radio button to place the wire numbering in line with the wire. On selecting this
radio button the Gap Setup button becomes active. Click on this button to specify the gap between
the wire number and wire ends; refer to Figure-19. After specifying the values, click on the OK
button from the dialog box displayed to apply the gap.

Figure-19. In-Line Wire Label Gap Setup dialog box
 
• Click on the Below wire radio button to place the wire numbering below the wire. On selecting this
radio button, the options related to leaders will become active. Select the desired option from the
Leaders drop-down to specify the type of leader to be used while placing the wire number below
the wire; refer to Figure-20.
Figure-20. Leaders drop-down
 
• Click on the Centered radio button to make the wiring horizontally centered in the wire ends.
• Select the Offset radio button to specify the offset distance of the wire number from one of the end
point of the wire.
Wire Type area
There is only one option in this area, Rename User Columns button. This button is used to rename the
user columns. Note that the user columns are used to specify user defined parameters. Like, you can
make a user defined column with the name location of manufacturer.
Cross-References tab
Options in this tab are used to manage cross-referencing of the project files. These options are
discussed next.
Cross-Reference Format area
There are two edit boxes in this area: Same Drawing and Between Drawings edit boxes. Specify the
desired formate for both the edit boxes.
Cross-Reference Options area

• Select the Real time signal and contact cross-referencing between drawings check box to make
the real-time changes in the drawing. Means, if there is some change in an object being cross-
referenced then the same changes will be reflected in the corresponding drawing.
• Select the Peer to Peer check box to make cross-referencing between components of different
categories in the same drawing.
• The Suppress Installation/Location codes when matching the drawing default check box does
the same as the name suggests. Selecting this check box suppresses the installation codes and
locations codes while matching the drawing defaults.
Similarly, options in the Component Cross-reference Display area are used to modify the display of
component cross-references.
Styles tab
The options in the Styles tab are used to change various styles related to Wiring, Arrow, PLCs and so
on; refer to Figure-21. The options in this tab are discussed next.
Figure-21. Styles tab of Project Properties dialog box

 
• Select the desired radio button from the Arrow style area of the dialog box to change the arrow
style.
• Similarly, you can change the PLC style and Fan In/Out Marker style.
• Select the desired option from the Wire Cross drop-down to change the way wire crossing should
be displayed in drawing. Note that preview is also displayed on selecting an option from the drop-
down.
• Similarly, you can select the desired option from the Wire Tee  drop-down to change the Wire tee
formation in drawing.
Drawing Format tab
The options in the Drawing Format tab are used to manage some of the basic parameters of the
drawing like default shape and size of ladders, Feature scale, and so on. These options are discussed
next.
• Select the Horizontal or Vertical radio button from the Ladder Defaults area to change the ladder
to horizontal or vertical, respectively.
• Click in the Spacing edit box and change the distance between two consecutive wires in the ladder.
• Similarly, you can setup the other parameters in this tab.
OPENING A PROJECT FILE
The procedure to open a project file is similar to open a drawing file, which is given next.
• Click on the Open Project button 
 from the Project Manager. The Select Project File dialog
box will be displayed as shown in Figure-22.

Figure-22. Select Project File dialog box
 
• Browse to the location of the project file and double-click on the file. The project file will open and
display in the Project Manager.
NEW DRAWING IN A PROJECT
Creation of a new drawing is discussed earlier. At this stage, we will learn to create drawings in a
project ( Although earlier also, unknowingly we were creating drawing in a project). The procedure
to create a drawing file in a project is given next.
• Click on the New Drawing button 
 from the Project Manager. The Create New Drawing
dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-23.

Figure-23. Create New Drawing dialog box
 
• Click in the Name edit box in the dialog box and specify the name of the drawing file.
• Click on the Browse button to select a file as template. The Select template dialog box will be
displayed; refer to Figure-24.

Figure-24. Select Template dialog box
 
• Select the desired template for your drawing. You can conclude the template style of default
templates from their names in the list.
• After selecting the desired template, click on the Open button from the dialog box. Path of the
template will be added in the Template edit box.
• Click in the Description 1, Description 2, and Description 3 edit boxes one by one and specify the
description as required.
The options in the IEC - Style Designators area are used to specify the identifiers for the project.
• Click in the Project Code edit box and specify the identifier code for the project.
• Similarly, you can specify Installation Code and Location Code. Note that you can use the codes
of the earlier created drawings or projects by selecting the buttons corresponding to them.
• Also, you can specify the Sheet, Drawing, Section and Sub-Section numbers for the current
drawing.
• All the parameters starting from Project Code to Sub-Section number are used as meta-data for the
drawing and later help to identify the drawing.
• Click on the OK button. You are asked to set the default settings of the project or not. Click on Yes
or No as desired. The drawing will be created.
REFRESH
The Refresh button 
 is used to refresh the files in the Project. If you have performed any change in
any drawing of the project then click on this button from the Project Manager, the information in the

Project Manager will get updated.
PROJECT TASK LIST
The Project Task List button is used to display the tasks that are need to be performed in the current
project. Click on this button, the list of tasks will be displayed.
PROJECT WIDE UPDATE OR RETAG
The Project Wide Update/Retag button is used to update or retag component tags, wire numbers,
cross-references, and so on. The procedure to update or retag these parameters is given next.
• Click on the Project Wide Update/Retag button from the Project Manager. The Project-Wide
Update or Retag dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-25.
Figure-25. Project Wide Update or Retag
 
• Click on the Component Retag check box to specify tags of the non-fixed components while adding
drawings in the project.
• Select the Component Cross-Reference Update check box to update all the component cross-
references of the drawing while adding them in the project.
• Select the Wire Number and Signal Tag/Retag check box, the Setup button next to the selected
check box will become active.
• Click on the Setup button to change the settings for wire numbers and signal tags. The Wire
Tagging (Project-Wide) dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-26.

Figure-26. Wire Tagging dialog box
 
• Using the options in the dialog box you can update the tags of wires and signals. You will learn
more about these options later in the book.
• Select the Ladder References check box to renumber the ladders in the circuits. On selecting this
check box, the two radio buttons below it will become active.
• Select the Resequence radio button and click on the Setup button. The Renumber Ladders dialog
box will be displayed.
• Specify the starting number of the ladders in the edit box displayed at the top in the dialog box. This
numbering will be applicable to the first drawing in the project and similarly, you can specify the
starting number of ladder for second onwards drawings by selecting the desired radio button in the
dialog box.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box to renumber the ladders in the current project.
• Select the Bump - Up/Down by radio button and specify the value in the edit box next to the radio
button to increase the ladder numbers by specified value. Specify the negative value to decrease the
ladder numbers.
• Select the desired check box from the right area of the dialog box and specify the related values.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Select Drawings to Process dialog box will be
displayed refer to Figure-27.

Figure-27. Select Drawings to Process dialog box
• Select the drawings from the list by holding the CTRL key and then click on the Process button to
include the drawings for applying the settings we have specified earlier. The drawings will come
in the bottom list.
• You can include all the drawings by clicking on the Do All button from the dialog box.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box, the modified settings will be applied to the selected
drawings.
DRAWING LIST DISPLAY CONFIGURATION
This button is used to configure the details of the drawings that are to be displayed in the Project
Manager with the name of the drawings. The procedure to use this option is given next.
• Click on the Drawing List Display Configuration button. The Drawing List Display
Configuration dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-28.

Figure-28. Drawing List Display Configuration
 
• Select the details from the left list box that you want to display in Project Manager one by one.
• Press the Include button 
 from the dialog box. The details will be added in the right list
box.
• You can include all the details by clicking on the All>> button.
• To exclude any detail or all the details, click on the << or <<All button respectively.
• After selecting the desired details, click on the OK button from the dialog box. The details will be
displayed with the name of the drawing in the Project Manager.
PLOTTING AND PUBLISHING
After creating any drawing in the software, the next step is to take a hardcopy or distribution media by
which the drawing can be shared with other concerned people. There are four tools to plot or publish
drawings of a project: Plot Project, Publish to WEB, Publish to PDF/DWF/DWFx, and ZIP
Project; refer to Figure-29. These tools are one by one discussed next.
Figure-29. Tools to plot publish
 
Plot Project
The Plot Project tool is used to plot drawings of the project on the paper by using your
printing/plotting device. The steps to use this tool are given next.
• Click on the Plot Project tool from the Project Manager. The Select Drawings to Process dialog
box will be displayed; refer to Figure-27.
• Include the drawings that you want to plot by using the Process button after selecting them in the list.

• Click on the OK button from the Select Drawings to Process dialog box. The Batch Plotting
Options and Order dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-30.
Figure-30. Batch Plotting Options and Order dialog box
 
• Click on the Detailed Plot Configuration mode button to specify settings for the plot. The Detailed
Plot Configuration Option dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-31.

Figure-31. Detailed Plot Configuration Option dialog box
 
• Modify the desired settings of plotting like orientation of page, plot area, paper size and so on using
the options in this dialog box.
• To select the desired paper size, click on the Pick from generic list radio button in the Papersize
area. The dialog box with various paper sizes will be displayed; refer to Figure-32.
• Select the desired paper size and click on the OK button from the dialog box.
• Next, click on the On button from the Detailed Plot Configuration Option dialog box.

Figure-32. Paper sizes
 
• Click on the OK button from the Batch Plotting Options and Order dialog box. The drawings of
the project will be plotted by the assigned plotter.
Publish to WEB
This tool is used to publish drawings on the website. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Publish to WEB tool from the Plot/Publish drop-down in the Project Manager. The
Publish to WEB dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-33.
Figure-33. Publish to WEB dialog box
 
• The edit box in this dialog box will be used to specify the storage location of web files of the
drawing. Click on the Browse button 
 next to the edit box. The Browse For Folder dialog box
will be displayed; refer to Figure-34.

Figure-34. Browse For Folder dialog box
 
• Browse to the desired folder and click on the OK button from the dialog box to exit.
• Click in the Image drop-down and select the desired image format from DWF, JPEG, and PNG for
web view.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Select Drawings to Process dialog box will be
displayed as discussed earlier.
• Include the desired drawings and click on the OK button from the dialog box. The AutoCAD
Electrical Publish to Web dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-35.
Figure-35. AutoCAD Electrical Publish to Web dialog box
 
• Specify the meta data as desired in the displayed fields.
• Select the Allow drag/drop of the drawing files straight from your web page check box to enable
drag/drop of the drawing files.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. After the publishing is finished, the Finish page of the
Publish to Web dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-36.

Figure-36. Publish to WEB dialog box Finish page
 
• Click on the Preview button to preview the web page of the drawing.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box to exit.
Publish to DWF/PDF/DWFx
This tool is used to publish the drawings in Dwf or pdf forms. The procedure to use this tool is given
next.
• Click on the Publish to DWF/PDF/DWFx tool from the Plot/Publish drop-down in the Project
Manager. The Select Drawings to Process dialog box will be displayed as discussed earlier.
• Include the drawings that you want to publish in the DWF or PDF format. Click on the OK button
from the dialog box. The AutoCAD Electrical-Publish Setup dialog box will be displayed as
shown in Figure-37.
Figure-37. AutoCAD Electrical Publish Setup dialog box
 
• Select the check boxes for the options that you want to include in your DWFs and PDFs.
• Click in the Publish type drop-down to change the type of file for publishing.

• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Publish dialog box will be displayed; refer to
Figure-38.
Figure-38. Publish dialog box
 
• Set the desired options and then click on the Publish button from the dialog box. The Specify PDF
File dialog box will be displayed (in case of PDF format selected); refer to Figure-39.

Figure-39. Specify PDF File dialog box
 
• Browse to the desired location and then click on the Select button. If you have unsaved sheet list
then the Publish - Save Sheet List dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-40.
Figure-40. Publish Save Sheet List dialog box
 
• Click on the Yes button from the dialog box. The dialog box to specify location for saving the file
will be displayed. Browse to the desired location and save the file.
• The drawing file will be saved in the PDF format and will automatically open in the PDF reader of
your system.
Zip Project
This tool works in the same way as the other publishing tools discussed above. The procedure to use
this tool is given next.
• Click on the Zip Project tool from the Plot/Publish drop-down in the Project Manager. If you are
creating the zip file for the first time in this version of AutoCAD, then you will get the error
message as shown in Figure-41.

Figure-41. Error message
 
• Click on the Cancel button from this message box and exit AutoCAD Electrical.
• Open the folder C:\Users\{your user name}\Documents\AcadE2016\AeData using windows
browser.
• Open the wd.env file using any text editor(in our case, Notepad). The file will be displayed as
shown in Figure-42.
Figure-42. wd file in notepad
 
• Move down in the file at the location as shown in Figure-43.

Figure-43. Location to identified
 
• Check carefully the lines marked in the red box. You will notice that these lines link the zip file with
two programs WinZip32 and WinRAR.
• Remove the * mark from these line. Press CTRL+S to save the file.
• Restart the AutoCAD Electrical and reopen the project file and drawing you were working on.
• Click on the Zip Project tool from the Plot/Publish drop-down in the Project Manager. The
Select Drawings to Process dialog box will be displayed as discussed earlier.
• Rest of the procedure is same as discussed earlier.
REMOVING, REPLACING, AND RENAMING
DRAWINGS IN A PROJECT
Till this point you have learned to add drawings in the Project and you have learned to modify
properties of the drawings. Now, you will learn to remove, replace, or rename a drawing file in a
project. The steps to perform these actions are given next.
• Select the drawing from the Project Manager that you want to remove, replace, or rename. Right-
click on it, a shortcut menu will be displayed; refer to Figure-44.
Figure-44. Shortcut menu for drawing
 

• Select the Remove, Replace, or Rename option from the menu.
• Follow the instructions and do accordingly.
• If you have selected the Remove option then a confirmation will be asked and if you select Yes then
the file will be removed.
• If you have selected the Replace option then the dialog box will be displayed prompting you to
select the drawing for replacement.
• If you have selected the Rename option then you will be prompted to specify the new name of the
drawing.
LOCATIONS VIEW IN PROJECT MANAGER
The Location View tab is added in the Project Manager in AutoCAD Electrical 2016 version. The
Location View tab gives a fast report on various components by their location and installation codes.
To display options in the Location View tab, click on the tab in the Project Manager; refer to
Figure-45.
Figure-45. Location View tab in Project Manager
 
Click on the + sign before (??) in the Location View to check sub-categories of the category. The (??)
is displayed for Installation code. Since, we have not defined the installation code for current project

so (??) is displayed there. On expanding the installation code, we will get various components
arranged as per their location codes; refer to Figure-46.
Figure-46. Installation code and location code in Location View tab
 
Now, expanding the location codes will display components for those locations. The other options in
the Location View tab are discussed next.
Filter by Installation and Location 
 
Using this option, you can filter out the unwanted installations or locations. The procedure to use this
option is given next.
• Click on the Filter by Installation and Location button. A drop-box will be displayed; refer to
Figure-47.

Figure-47. Drop-box for filtering installations and locations
 
• Clear the check boxes for the locations and installations that you do not want to see in the Location
View tab and click on the OK button from the drop-box. The locations and installations for which
the check box is selected will be displayed in the Location View tab; refer to Figure-48.
Figure-48. Locations and installations after filtering
 
Search box
Oh!! This tool always works in same way. Nothing new, specify your parameters to search for
components on the basis of their locations or installation. Procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Type the location code, installation code, component keyword in the type box for searching and
click on the Go button next to the search box; refer to Figure-49.

Figure-49. Search box for Location view tab
 
• On clicking the Go button, only the objects with the specified keywords will be displayed.
Details and Connections tabs
The Details and Connections tabs are used to display the details and connections of the component
selected in the Component View tab of the Project Manager. To learn more about them, follow the
steps given next.
• Click on the Display Details and Connections button from the Project Manager; refer to Figure-
50. The Details and Connections tabs will be added in the Project Manager; refer to Figure-51.
Figure-50. Display Details and Connections button
 

Figure-51. Details and Connections tabs
 
• Select a component from the left pane of the Project Manager. The detail of the component will be
displayed in the Details tab of the Project Manager; refer to Figure-52.
Figure-52. Details of a component
 
• To check the connections of the component, click on the Connections tab. Various connections of
the component will be displayed in the Project Manager; refer to Figure-53.
Figure-53. Connections of the component
 
• If you want to check the component in the drawing then right-click on any field in the Connections
tab for desired component. A shortcut menu will be displayed; refer to Figure-54.

Figure-54. Shortcut menu for component
 
• Click on the Surf button from the shortcut menu. The Surf dialog box will be displayed; refer to
Figure-55.
Figure-55. Surf dialog box
 
• Click on the Go To button from the dialog box to check the component in the drawing.
Note that you can export the details of components in csv or xls format by using the Export button
above the table in the Project Manager. Using the exported file, you can share the information with
your peers.

INSERTING
COMPONENTS
 
CHAPTER 4
 
 
Topics Covered
 
 
 
 
The major topics covered in this chapter are:
 
• Inserting Components using Icon menu
• Inserting Components using Catalog Browser
• Inserting Components using User Defined list
• Inserting Components using Equipment list
• Inserting Components using Panel list
• Inserting Components using Terminal (Panel list)
• Pneumatic, Hydraulic, and P&ID components
 
 
 
ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS
Electrical Components in AutoCAD Electrical are schematic symbols of various components used in
electrical systems. There are various ways to insert the electrical components in AutoCAD
Electrical. Some of the methods to insert electrical components are given next.
 
INSERTING COMPONENT USING ICON MENU

The Icon Menu tool is used to insert schematic symbols of various electrical components by using the
Icon Menu. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Down arrow below Icon Menu button in the Schematic tab of the Ribbon. The list of
tools will be displayed; refer to Figure-1.
Figure-1. List of tools
 
• Click on the Icon Menu tool in this menu. The Insert Component window will be displayed; refer
to Figure-2.
Figure-2. Insert Component window
 
• Select the category of desired component from the Menu box at the left in the dialog box. Note that
the categories that have a + sign before their name are having sub-categories to browse in. Note
that you can specify the scale value for schematic symbols by using the Scale schematic edit box

available at the bottom of the dialog box.
• After selecting the category and subcategory, click on the desired symbol. The symbol will be
attached to the cursor and you will be prompted to specify the location for the symbol; refer to
Figure-3.
Figure-3. Component attached to cursor
 
• Click in the drawing area to place the component symbol at desired place. The Insert/Edit
Component dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-4.
Figure-4. Insert Edit Component dialog box

 
• This dialog box is divided into various areas like; Component Tag, Description, Catalog Data,
Cross-Reference and so on. The options in these areas specify various parameters of the
component being inserted. We will start with the Component Tag area and then one by one we
will use options in other areas.
Component Tag area
• The edit box in this area is used to specify the tag value for your current component. Click in the edit
box and specify the desired value.
• You can link your component with PLC by using the tag of PLC. To do so, click on the Use PLC
Address button. If your components are not directly connected to PLC via wires as in our case then
the Connected PLC Address Not Found dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-5.
Figure-5. Connected PLC Address Not Found
 
• Click on the Drawing button to display all the PLC connections available. The PLC I/O Point List
(this drawing) dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-6.
Figure-6. PLC IO Point List dialog box
 

• Select the desired plc pin from the dialog box and click on the OK button from the dialog box. The
component will be linked to the selected pin of plc.
Schematic tag
• Using the Schematic button in the Component Tag area. The SOL Tags in Use  dialog box will be
displayed as shown in Figure-7.
Figure-7. SOL Tags in Use dialog box
 
• Select the Show all components for all families check box. The list of all the tags in the drawing
will be displayed. Also the name of the dialog box will be modified as shown in All Tags in Use.
• Select the desired tag number and then select Copy Tag or Calculate Next button. If you select the
Copy Tag button then same tag will be assigned to the current component. If you select the
Calculate Next button then the next tag number will be assigned to the component. Note that in both
the cases system will ask your permission to overwrite the tag value. Do as per your requirement.
In the same way, you can use the Panel button and the External List button from the Component Tag
area.
Catalog Data area
The options in this area are used to link the inserted component to a catalog. A catalog is a collection
of various related components in a categorized form. To specify the details of the Catalog Data
follow the steps given next.
• Click in the Manufacturer edit box of the Catalog Data area and specify the name of the
manufacturer. Name of various companies like AB, ABB, Siemens, and so on that manufacture

electrical components are available in the AutoCAD Electrical Database. You can also start a new
manufacturer by specifying your desired name.
• Click in the Catalog edit box and specify the value of Catalog number. This number can include
alphabets as well as numeric. For example, 300F-1PB.
• Click in the Assembly edit box and specify the desired value for assembly code.
• Click in the Item edit box and specify the item number for the component. Note that each type of
component has a unique Item number.
• Click in the Count edit box and specify the number of components required in the current drawing.
The specified numbers will be automatically added in the Bill of Materials. The area after
specifying all the values will be displayed as shown in Figure-8.
Figure-8. Catalog Data area
 
• Instead of specifying all the parameters related to Catalog data, you can pick the desired
component’s details from the library of standard components in AutoCAD Electrical. To do so,
click on the Lookup button in this area. The Catalog Browser dialog box will be displayed as
shown in Figure-9.
Figure-9. Catalog Browser dialog box
 
• Select the desired option from the Category drop-down at the top in the dialog box. If you want to

check all the components in this category then click on the search button. The list of all the
components in that category will be displayed.
• You can customize user search by specifying the desired keywords in the Search edit box. After
specifying the keywords, click on the Search button. The list of components related to the specified
keyword will be displayed.
• Double click on the desired component in the list. The related data will be displayed in the Catalog
area.
• Similarly, you can use Drawing button or Project button to select the catalog data from earlier
created components in the drawing or project respectively.
Multiple Catalog Data
• You can use multiple catalog for a component to display alternates for the component. To do so,
click on the Multiple Catalog button from the Insert/Edit Component dialog box. The Multiple
Bill of Material Information dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-10.
Figure-10. Multiple Bill of Material Information dialog box
 
• Enter the details of Manufacturer, Catalog, and Assembly in the related edit boxes. Now, you
have specified first manufacturer of the desired component.
• Click on the Sequential Code drop-down and select 02 from the list displayed; refer to Figure-11.

Figure-11. Sequential Code drop down
 
• Specify the alternate data for Manufacturer, Catalog, and Assembly. Repeat the process until you
get the desired number of alternates for the selected type of components. You can specify 99
alternates at max.
• After specifying the data, click on the OK button from the dialog box.
Description Area
The options in this area are used to specify the description about the component. To specify the
description, follow the steps given next.
• Click in the Line 1 edit box in this area and specify the first line of description. Similarly, click in
the Line 2 edit box and specify the second line of description.
• If you want to use description of any component in current drawing or project then click on the
Drawing button or Project button respectively.
• The related dialog boxes will be displayed and you will be prompted to select the description of a
component from the list. Select the desired component description and click on the OK button from
the dialog box.
• You can also select the description from the default description list. To do so, click on the Defaults
button in this area. The Descriptions dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-12.

Figure-12. Descriptions dialog box
 
• Double click on any of the description in this dialog box. Note that the lines with all capital
characters are counted in the description. So, you need to double click only on those lines.
Cross-Reference Area
This is a very important area of the dialog box. Using the options in this area, you can link the pins of
your component with the other components the drawing/project. The procedure to use options in this
area is given next.
• When we insert a component in AutoCAD Electrical, then based on the already existing
components, the inserted component is automatically referenced to existing components. This
reference is of a certain reference format. To override this format, click on the Component
override check box. The Setup button next to it will get activated.
• Click on the Setup button. The Cross-Reference Component Override dialog box will be
displayed; refer to Figure-13.

Figure-13. Cross Reference Component Override dialog box
 
• Using the options in this dialog box, you can change the reference style. By default, for same
drawing %N is used as reference number and for Between drawings %S.%N is used. Glossary is
given next.
%S Sheet number of the drawing
%D Drawing number
%N Sequential or reference-based number applied to the component
%X Suffix character position for reference-based tagging (not present = end of tag)
%P IEC-style project code (default for drawing)
%I IEC-style “installation” code (default for drawing)
%L IEC-style “location” code (default for drawing)
• Specify the desired identifiers.
• You can also change the display format by using the radio buttons in the Component Cross-
Reference Display area of the dialog box.
• After specifying the desired format style, click on the OK button from the dialog box to exit.
• Each component need to be specified by NC or NO contact points. NC means Normally Closed and
NO means Normally Open. Using the Reference NO and Reference NC edit boxes, you can specify
the references for the contact types.
• A switch generally has two pins, but if you are working on PLC or other integrated circuit
components then you need to setup NC/NO for all the pins of components. To do so, click on the
NO/NC Setup button. The Maximum NO/NC counts and/or allowed Pin numbers dialog box
will be displayed; refer to Figure-14.

Figure-14. Maximum NO or NC counts dialog box
 
• Specify the numbers of contact types for different categories in this dialog box.
• In the Pin List edit box, you can define the connectivity of one pin with the other for NC, NO, COM,
or others. Check the description in Option area of the dialog box to know the method of linking
pins for switches.
Installation Code and Location Code
• The edit boxes in these areas are used to specify the installation code and location code for the
current component. The installation code is used to specify the line or circuit identifier in which
you want to add the component. For example, you can specify Line1 230VAC as installation code.
• Location code is used to specify the identifier for physical location of the component. For example,
you can specify Sub-Panel 20 Pin as location code for the component.
Pins area
The options in this area are used to number the pins of the component so that later they can be
connected with other components in the line. The procedure to use these options is given next.
• Click on the < button or the > button to decrease or increase the pin number.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box to exit. The component will be displayed with the
specified parameters in the drawing.

CATALOG BROWSER
The Catalog Browser is the standard library of various components used in electrical engineering.
You can insert any desired component using the options in the Catalog Browser. The procedure to
use the Catalog Browser is given next.
• Click on the down arrow below Icon Menu button in the Ribbon, the Component drop-down will
be displayed. Click on the Catalog Browser tool from the list; refer to Figure-15. The Catalog
Browser will be displayed; refer to Figure-16.
Figure-15. Catalog Browser button
 
Figure-16. Catalog Browser dialog box
 
• Click on the edit box for Category, a list of various component categories will be displayed; refer to
Figure-17.

Figure-17. Category drop-down
 
• Select the desire component type from the list.
• Click in the Search edit box and specify the requirements in keywords separated by space.
• Click on the Search button next to Search edit box, the list of components matching the keywords
will be displayed; refer to Figure-18.
Figure-18. Catalog Browser dialog box with desired components
 
• Click on the component that you want to include in your drawing, a small toolbar will be displayed;
refer to Figure-19.
Figure-19. Toolbar in Catalog Browser
 
• The 
 is used to specify a symbol for the current selected component. The 
 is used to display the
assembly details of the selected component. The 
 is used to display the details of the current
selected component in the web browser. Using this button, you will reach to the manufacturer’s

website. The 
 button is used to add the current component in the favorite components list.
• Click on the 
 button to assign a symbol. The Insert Component dialog box will be displayed;
refer to Figure-20.
Figure-20. Insert Component dialog box
 
• Click on the category for which your component resembles. In our case, Push Buttons. The list of
symbols will be displayed.
• Select the desired button from the list of symbols, in our case, Illuminated Push Button NO. The
Assign Symbol To Catalog Number dialog box will be displayed (if the catalog number is
unassigned); refer to Figure-21.
Figure-21. Assign Symbol To Catalog Number dialog box
 
• Click on the Map symbol to catalog number button from the dialog box to map the symbol for the
catalog. The symbol will get attached to the cursor.
• Click on the electrical line to which you want to connect the component or click in the drawing area
to place the component; refer to Figure-22. Note that after placing the component, the Insert/Edit
Component dialog box will be displayed as discussed earlier.

Figure-22. Component after placing on line
 
• Specify the desired parameters and click on the OK button from the dialog box.
• If you again go to Catalog Browser and click on the same component, then you will get symbols
mapped to the component; refer to Figure-23.
Figure-23. Symbols mapped to component
 
USER DEFINED LIST
The User Defined List tool is used to display the list of components that are collected by user under
a common list. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Select the User Defined List tool from the Component drop-down. The Schematic Component or
Circuit dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-24.
Figure-24. Schematic Component or Circuit dialog box
 
• Select any component/circuit from the list and click on the OK button from the dialog box. The
component/circuit will get attached to the cursor. Click to place the component/circuit.

• You can add the desired components/circuits in the list by using the Add button. Click on the Add
button. On doing so, the Add record dialog box will be displayed; refer to .
Figure-25. Add record dialog box
 
• Select the Schematic or Panel radio button to specify the type of component we are going to add in
the library.
• If it is a single block then select the Single block radio button otherwise select the Explode (Circuit
or panel assembly) radio button.
• Click on the Browse button to specify the location of block for component. The Select Schematic
component or circuit dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-26.
Figure-26. Select Schematic component or circuit dialog box
 
• Select the drawing file of the symbol that you want to assign for your component. Click on the Open
button from the dialog box. Note that you can make your own symbol by using the drawing tools and
after saving it at desired location, you can add it to the library.
• Click in the Description edit box and specify the description from the component.
• Click in the Catalog edit box and specify the catalog identifier for the component.
• Click in the Manufacturer edit box and specify the name of the manufacturer.

• Click in the Assembly Code edit box and specify the desired assembly code for the component.
• Click in the Text Values edit box to specify the text identifiers for the component.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box to place the newly added symbol.
EQUIPMENT LIST
The Equipment List tool is used to display or add the components in the drawing. The procedure to
use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Equipment List tool from the Component drop-down. The Select Equipment List
Spreadsheet File dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-27.
Figure-27. Select Equipment List Spreadsheet File dialog box
 
• Select the desired database file using the options in the dialog box. Click on the Open button from
the dialog box. The Table Edit dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-28.
Figure-28. Table Edit dialog box
 

• Select the desired data table from the list and click on the OK button from the dialog box. The
Settings dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-29.
Figure-29. Settings dialog box
 
• Click on the Default settings button to use the default settings of the program. You can use the
settings of an already existing .wde file by using the Read settings button. *.wde extension file is
used to specify Equipment list setup file.
• After specifying the settings file, the Spreadsheet/Table columns button will become active in the
View/Edit Settings area of the dialog box. Click on the Spreadsheet/Table columns button. The
Equipment List Spread Settings dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-30.
Figure-30. Equipment List Spreadsheet Settings dialog box
 
• Change the data category of the columns as per the requirement by using the drop-downs in this
dialog box. After modifying the category, click on the OK button from the dialog box. Click on the
OK button from the next dialog box. The Schematic equipment in dialog box will be displayed;

refer to Figure-31.
Figure-31. Schematic equipment in dialog box
 
• Browse through the list of equipment and click on the desired equipment from the list.
• Click on the Insert button from the dialog box. If there is no symbol assigned to the component then
the Insert dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-32.
Figure-32. Insert dialog box
 
• Click on the Icon Menu button and assign the desired symbol to the component. The symbol will get
attached to the cursor.
• Click in the drawing area or on the electrical line to place the component/equipment. The
component/equipment will be placed and the Insert/Edit Component dialog box will be displayed
as discussed earlier.
• Specify the desired parameters and click on the OK button from the dialog box to exit.
PANEL LIST
The Panel List tool is used to insert the parts from panels. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Panel List tool from the Component drop-down. The Panel Layout List dialog box
will be displayed as shown in Figure-33.

Figure-33. Panel Layout List dialog box
 
• You can extract the list of components from the current project or active drawing. Select the Project
radio button or Active drawing radio button to get the list of components.
• If you want to save the extracted list of components in an external file, select the save list to
external file check box.
• You can also use an external file for equipment list by using the Browse button.
• After specifying the desired parameters, click on the OK button from the dialog box. If you have
selected the Project radio button then the Select Drawings to Process dialog box will be
displayed as discussed earlier.
• Include the drawings from which you want to extract the list of components. Click on the OK button
from the dialog box. The list of components will display.
Note that the Panel List and Terminal (Panel List) tools work only if we have panels in our current
project or drawing. We will learn more about these tools later in the book.
There are three more categories of components that are available in AutoCAD Electrical; Pneumatic
Components, Hydraulic Components, and P&ID Components. The use of these components and their
procedure of insertion in drawing is given next.
PNEUMATIC COMPONENTS
Pneumatic components are those components that work because of pressure of the gases flowing
through them. In some electrical systems, you might need to deal with pneumatic components also. So,
AutoCAD Electrical provides a special database of these components. The procedure to insert the

Pneumatic components is given next.
• Click on the Down arrow next to Insert Component panel name; refer to Figure-34. The expanded
Insert Component panel will be displayed; refer to Figure-35.
Figure-34. Down arror to be clicked
 
Figure-35. Expanded Insert Components panel
 
• Click on the pin button (in red box in the above figure) to keep the panel expanded.
• Click on the Insert Pneumatic Components button 
. The Insert Component dialog box will be
displayed as shown in Figure-36.
Figure-36. Insert Component dialog box for pneumatic components
 
• Click on the desired category and select the component that you want to insert in the drawing. The
component will get attached to the cursor.

• Click in the drawing area to place the component. The Insert/Edit Component dialog box will be
displayed.
• Specify the parameters as discussed earlier and click on the OK button from the dialog box. The
component will be placed with the specified parameters.
HYDRAULIC COMPONENTS
The hydraulic components are those components that work due to the pressure of fluids flowing
through them. The procedure to insert the hydraulic components is given next.
• Click on the Insert Hydraulic Components tool from the expanded Insert Components panel. The
Insert Component dialog box with hydraulic components will be displayed.
• Rest of the procedure is same as for Pneumatic components discussed earlier.
P&ID COMPONENTS
The P&ID components are those components that are used in Piping and Instrumentation Diagrams.
The procedure to insert the P&ID components is given next.
• Click on the Insert P&ID Components tool from the expanded Insert Components panel. The
Insert Component dialog box with P&ID components will be displayed.
• Rest of the procedure is same as for Pneumatic components discussed earlier.
SYMBOL BUILDER
AutoCAD Electrical is a very flexible software which can fulfill the need of any designer in the field
of electrical control panel designing. One of such example is creating your own symbols for use in
drawing. It is not possible to add each and every symbol in the Content library of AutoCAD
Electrical, so we need to add few symbols based on our needs. The procedure to add new symbols in
library is given next.
• After starting a new document with ACAD Electrical IEC template, click on the Home tab of the
Ribbon. The basic tools of AutoCAD will be displayed; refer to Figure-37.
Figure-37. Home tab of Ribbon
 

• Using the tools in the Draw panel, create sketch for the desired symbol; refer to Figure-38.
Figure-38. Sketch for symbol
 
• Click on the Schematic tab in the Ribbon to display tools related to schematics.
• Click on the Symbol Builder tool from the Other Tools panel in the Ribbon; refer to Figure-39. The
Select Symbol/Objects dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-40.
Figure-39. Symbol Builder tool
 

Figure-40. Select Symbol or Objects dialog box
 
• Click on the Select objects button from the dialog box; refer to Figure-41. You will be asked to
select the objects.
Figure-41. Select Objects button
 
• Select all the objects from the drawing area; refer to Figure-42.

Figure-42. Objects being selected by window selection
 
• Press ENTER from keyboard, the objects will be displayed as selected.
• Similarly, click on the Pick point button 
 from the dialog box and specify the insertion point for
symbol.
• Select the desired option from the Symbol drop-down in the dialog box. There are nine options in
the 
drop-down, Horizontal Parent, Horizontal Child, Vertical Parent, Vertical Child,
Horizontal Terminal, Vertical Terminal , Panel Footprint, Panel Nameplate, and Panel
Terminal. The Horizontal and Vertical define the orientation of component. Parent means the
component can have more child components; refer to Figure-43. Also, the tag are automatically
assigned same for the child component as of parent component. To check this, insert a Relay coil in
the schematic drawing and specify the parameters in the Insert/Edit Component dialog box. After
that insert Relay NO Contact symbol and/or Relay NC Contact symbol; you will not be asked to
specify any parameter. Similarly, you can specify the symbol as panel footprint, terminal, or
nameplate.
Figure-43. Parent and child components
 

• Select the type for symbol from the Type drop-down in the dialog box.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Symbol Builder contextual tab will be selected
and the Symbol Builder environment will be displayed as shown in Figure-44.
Figure-44. Symbol Builder environment
 
• Specify the parameters like Tag, Manufacturer, Category, Assembly code etc. in the Required
rollout of the Symbol Builder Attribute Editor; refer to Figure-44.
• Similarly, specify other optional parameters as required.
• Click in the Direction/Style drop-down of Wire Connection rollout in the Symbol Builder
Attribute Editor; refer to Figure-45. Select the desired orientation for wire connection from the
list displayed. (We will select the Radial/None option from the list.)

Figure-45. Direction or Style drop-down
 
• Click on the Insert Wire Connection button from the Wire Connection rollout; refer to Figure-46.
You are asked to specify a point on the object for wire connection.
Figure-46. Insert Wire Connection button highlighted
 
• Click on the object to specify the point; refer to Figure-47.

Figure-47. Specifying wire connection point
 
• Similarly, click to specify the second wire terminal and if the component is 3 Phase then specify
third and fourth terminal.
• Press ENTER to exit the wire connection insertion mode. The defined terminals will be displayed
in the Pins rollout; refer to Figure-48.
Figure-48. Terminals created
 
• Specify the desired label for TERM01 and TERM02, like you can specify TERM01 as Live and
TERM02 as Neutral for connections in their corresponding boxes in the Pin rollout.
• Click on the Done button from the Symbol Builder contextual tab. The Close Block Editor: Save
Symbol dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-49.

Figure-49. Close Block Editor dialog box
 
• Click in the Symbol name edit box and specify the desired name for component. Like, we have
specified name as fan.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Close Block Editor dialog box will be displayed;
refer to Figure-50.
Figure-50. Close Block Editor dialog box
 
• Click on Yes button if you want to insert the newly created symbol in current drawing otherwise
select the No button.
We have created a new symbol but if we look into the Icon Menu, the symbol is not displayed
anywhere. The next step is to add the new symbol in Icon Menu.
ADDING NEW SYMBOL IN ICON MENU
• Click on the Icon Menu Wizard button from the Other Tools panel in the Schematic tab of the

Ribbon; refer to Figure-51. The Select Menu file dialog box will be displayed as shown in
Figure-52.
Figure-51. Icon Menu Wizard button
 
Figure-52. Select Menu file dialog box
 
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. Note that you can select desired menu file by using the
Browse button. By default, the default menu files are selected in the dialog box. On clicking OK
button, the Icon Menu Wizard will be displayed as shown in Figure-53.
Figure-53. Icon Menu Wizard dialog box
 

• Click on the Add button top-right corner of the dialog box. A list of tools will be displayed; refer to
Figure-54.
Figure-54. Add menu
 
• Click on the Component option from the menu. The Add Icon-Component dialog box will be
displayed; refer to Figure-55.
Figure-55. Add Icon-Component dialog box
 
• Specify the desired name for the symbol in the Name edit box.
• Click on the Browse button next to Block name edit box in the Block Name to Insert area of the
dialog box. The Select File dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-56.

Figure-56. Select File dialog box
 
• Select the drawing file of the symbol earlier created and click on the Open button from the dialog
box.
• Click on the Pick < button from the Icon Details area of the dialog box. You are asked to select the
object for creating image.
• Select the sketch of symbol from the drawing area. Note that you must have the symbol drawing
open in AutoCAD Electrical to select the sketch of symbol. Preview of symbol will be displayed in
the dialog box; refer to Figure-57.
Figure-57. Preview of Icon
 
• Click on the OK button from the Add Icon - Component dialog box. The Icon will be added in the
Icon Menu Wizard dialog box; refer to Figure-58.

Figure-58. Icon added
 
• You can drag the new icon in the desired folder as per your requirement. Click on the OK button
from the Icon Menu Wizard dialog box to save the icon in Icon Menu.
Now, you can use the new symbol in any of the electrical drawing as per your need.
SUMMARY
• AutoCAD Electrical provides us a complete database of electrical components.
• This electrical component database has data like manufacturer, assembly code, catalog etc. which
helps to identify the real-world match of component in the industry.
• When we generate the Bill of Material later, the catalog data is taken into account.
• To represent the components, we use schematic symbols which are available by Icon Menu tool.
These symbols are mapped to the Component database available in the Catalog Browser.
• You can add the components in database by using the Catalog Browser.

WIRES, CIRCUITS,
AND LADDERS
 
CHAPTER 5
 
 
Topics Covered
 
 
 
 
The major topics covered in this chapter are:
 
• Inserting Wires
• Applying wire numbers
• Inserting user defined circuits
• Inserting ladders
• Cable Markers
• Circuit Builders
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION
In the previous chapter, we learned to insert various electrical components. These components
individually placed do not perform any task. But if connect them in a desired manner then various
components perform various tasks. In this chapter, we will learn to add wires. Later, we will learn to
create circuits, multiple buses, and ladders.
 
WIRES

Wires are the life line of any circuit. Wires are used to carry current and make the appliances run.
The tools to create wires are available in the Wire drop-down in the Insert Wires/Wire Numbers
panel in the Schematic tab of the Ribbon; refer to Figure-1.
Figure-1. Wire drop-down
 
The tools in this drop-down are discussed next.
Wire
The Wire tool is used to add straight wires in the drawing to connect various components. The
procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Wire tool from the Wire drop-down. The command prompt will be displayed as shown
in Figure-2.
Figure-2. Command prompt for wire insertion
 
• Click in the wireType button in the command prompt or type T and press ENTER to change the
wire type. The Set Wire Type dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-3.

Figure-3. Set Wire Type dialog box
 
• Select the desired wire type from the list and click on the OK button from the dialog box. The
selected wire will be set for insertion.
• Click in the drawing area to specify the start point of the wire. You will be asked to specify the end
point of the wire and the command prompt will display as shown in Figure-4.
Figure-4. Command prompt after specifying start point
 
• If you are using the command prompt to specify the length of wire then you can use V=start Vertical
or H=start Horizontal button in the command prompt to force AutoCAD Electrical draw only
vertical or horizontal wires respectively.
• Click on the Tab=Collision off button to make the wires avoid collision with components. If you
click again on this button then the wires will be able to pass through the components (at least in
schematic drawings). Figure-5 shows two wirings one with collision OFF and one with collision
ON.

Figure-5. Collision ON or OFF
 
• Click to specify the end point of the wire. You can go on creating the wires until you end up at a
connector of a component. From there you need to start a new wire.
22.5 Degree, 45 Degree, and 67.5 Degree
These tools are used to create wires at their set angles. The procedure to use these tools is given next.
• Click on the 22.5 Degree or 45 Degree or 67.5 Degree tool from the Wire drop-down. You will
be prompted to specify the starting point of the wire.
• Click at the desired point to start wire. You are asked to specify the end point of the wire.
• Click to specify the end point of the wire.
Interconnect Components
The Interconnect Components tool is used to interconnect two components with each other. The
procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Interconnect Components tool from the Wire drop-down. You are asked to select the
first component.
• Select the first component. You will be prompted to select the second component.
• Select the second component. The wire will be created connecting both the components; refer to
Figure-6.
Note that the components to be connected using this tool should be aligned properly so that their
connection points are in same orientation.

Figure-6. Components interconnected
 
Gap
This tool is used to create gap in the wiring where the two wires intersect each other. The procedure
to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Gap tool from the Wire drop-down. You are asked to select the wire that you want to
be remained solid while applying this tool.
• Select the desired wire. You are asked to select the crossing wire.
• Select the intersecting wire. Gap in the wires will be created; refer to Figure-7.
Figure-7. Wires on using Gap tool
 
MULTIPLE BUS
The Multiple Bus tool is used to create multiple lines of wires. To create a multiple bus, follow the
steps given next.

• Click on the Multiple Bus tool from the Insert Wires/Wire Numbers drop-down. The Multiple
Wire Bus dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-8.
• Click in the Spacing edit boxes so specify the horizontal and vertical spacing between the wires.
• By default, the Another Bus (Multiple Wires) radio button is selected. As a result, you can create
the multiple wires from a point on another wire.
• Select the Empty Space, Go Horizontal radio button or the Empty Space, Go Vertical radio
button to create multiple wires in horizontal or vertical direction respectively.
Creating of Multiple Buses with various radio button
Figure-8. Multiple Wire Bus dialog box
 
Component (Multiple Wires)
• Select the Component (Multiple Wires) radio button from the Multiple Wire Bus dialog box.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. You are prompted to create a selection window to
select the connection ports of devices.
• Select the connection ports that you want to use for creating multiple wire bus; refer to Figure-9.
The selected ports will be highlighted as shown in Figure-10.
Figure-9. Window selection of ports
 

Figure-10. Connection ports highlighted
 
• Press ENTER at the command prompt. Wires will get attached to the cursor; refer to Figure-11.
Figure-11. Wires attached to the cursor
 
• Click to specify the length of the wires. The multiple wire bus will be created.
Another Bus (Multiple Wires)
The Another Bus (Multiple Wires) radio button is used to create a multiple wire bus by using an
already existing wire bus. The steps to use this option are given next.
• Select the Another Bus (Multiple Wires) radio button from the Multiple Wire Bus dialog box.
Specify the number of wires in the Number of Wires edit box. Note that the number of wires
should be equal to the wires in the already existing bus.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. You are asked to select a wire.
• Select the middle wire from the already existing wire bus. The ends of the current wire bus will get
attached to the cursor; refer to Figure-12.

Figure-12. Wire bus from another wire bus
 
• Click to specify the end point of the wire bus.
Empty Space, Go Horizontal
The Empty Space, Go Horizontal radio button is used to create a multiple wire bus in horizontal
direction starting from the specified start point. The steps to use this option are given next.
• Select the Empty Space, Go Horizontal radio button from the Multiple Wire Bus dialog box.
Specify the number of wires in the Number of Wires edit box.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. You are asked to specify the starting point for the bus.
• Click in the drawing area. You are asked to specify the end point of the bus.
• Click to specify the end point.
Empty Space, Go Vertical
The Empty Space, Go Vertical radio button is used to create a multiple wire bus in vertical
direction starting from the specified start point. The steps to use this option are given next.
• Select the Empty Space, Go Vertical radio button from the Multiple Wire Bus dialog box. Specify
the number of wires in the Number of Wires edit box.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. You are asked to specify the starting point for the bus.
• Click in the drawing area. You are asked to specify the end point of the bus.
• Click to specify the end point.
LADDERS
In Electrical systems, multiple circuits that are powered by a common power source can be combined
in the form of ladders. Ladders are arrangement of wire as shown in Figure-13.

Figure-13. Ladder
 
Using these Ladders, the Ladder Diagrams are created which are backbone to PLCs in today’s world.
The tools to create and control ladders are available in the Ladder drop-down; refer to Figure-14.
The procedures to use the tools in this drop-down are given next.
Figure-14. Ladder drop down
 
Insert Ladder
The Insert Ladder tool is used to insert the ladder of wires in the drawing. The procedure to use this
tool is given next.
• Click on the Insert Ladder tool in the Ladder drop-down. The Sheet 1: Insert Ladder dialog box
will be displayed as shown in Figure-15.

Figure-15. Sheet1 Insert Ladder dialog box
 
• Click in the edit box in Width area and specify the distance between two wire buses.
• Click in the edit box in Spacing area and specify the distance between two rungs.
• Click in the Length edit box and specify the total length of the ladder or click in the Rungs edit box
and specify the number of rungs in the ladder. Note that you can specify the value in any one of the
two edit boxes. Value in the other edit boxes will be calculated automatically.
• Select the desire number of phases for the ladder. If you select the 3 Phase radio button from the
Phase area then the ladder will be created with three phase wire lines and a value of distance
between phase lines will be required in the Spacing edit box.
• You can skip the creation of bus or rung in the ladder by selecting the respective radio button from
the Draw Rungs area of the dialog box.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box to create the ladder.
XY Grid Setup
This tool is used to setup a grid of wires based on the specified values. This grid can be later used to
connect various circuits. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the XY Grid Setup tool from the Ladder drop-down. The X-Y Grid Setup dialog box will
be displayed as shown in Figure-16.

Figure-16. X-Y Grid Setup dialog box
 
• Click on the Pick>> button from the dialog box to specify the origin of the grid. You are prompted
to pick a point in the drawing area.
• Click in the drawing area to specify the point.
• Specify the spacing between horizontal and vertical grid lines in the edit boxes available in the
Spacing area of the dialog box.
• Select the desired radio button from the X-Y format area of the dialog box.
• Select the Insert X-Y grid labels check box to display the labels of the grid.
• After selecting the check box specify the horizontal and vertical counts in the respective edit boxes
below the check box.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The grid will be created; refer to Figure-17. Note that
the grid created is for reference purpose. Using this grid, you can precisely place the components in
the drawing.

Figure-17. Grid created
 
X Zones Setup
The X Zones Setup tool is also used to create vertical references in the drawing for inserting
components. Note that you can use either the X-Y Grid Setup tool or X Zone Setup tool. Before
creating X zones, you need to enable this option. To enable this option, follow the steps given next.
• Right-click on the name of current drawing in the Project Manager. A shortcut menu will be
displayed as shown in Figure-18.
Figure-18. Shortcut menu
• Move the cursor to Properties option in the shortcut menu. A cascading menu will be displayed.

• Click on the Drawing Properties option from the menu. The Drawing Properties dialog box will
be displayed as shown in Figure-19.
Figure-19. Drawing Properties dialog box
 
• Click on the Drawing Format tab in the dialog box. The options in the dialog box will be displayed
as shown in Figure-20.

Figure-20. Drawing Properties dialog box with Drawing Format tab
 
• Select the X Zones radio button from the Format Referencing area of the dialog box.
• Note that you can also define the default direction of ladder creation by selecting the desired radio
button from the Ladder Defaults area of the dialog box.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box to apply the specified settings.
Now, we have enabled the X Zones Setup tool and we can use it in our drawing. The procedure to
use the X Zones Setup tool is given next.
• Click on the X Zones Setup tool from the Ladder drop-down in the Insert Wires/Wire Numbers
panel in the Ribbon. The X Zones Setup dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-21.

Figure-21. X Zones Setup dialog box
 
• Click on the Pick>> button from the Origin area of the dialog box. You are prompted to select a
point in the drawing area to specify the origin.
• Click on the desired point in the drawing area.
• Click in the Horizontal edit box in the Spacing area of the dialog box and specify the desired
distance value.
• Select the Insert zone labels check box to include the labels on the zone.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The X zone will be created; refer to Figure-22.
Figure-22. X zones
 
When we work on real world projects of electrical systems, then we generally require references to
insert our components. At the time, XY grids and X Zones are required to create references.
WIRE NUMBERING
Wire numbering is an important aspect of wires. Wire number helps to identify circuits related to that
wire, components connected to that wire, total length of the wire and other details. The tools to
specify wire numbers are available in the Wire Numbers drop-down in the Insert Wires/Wire
Numbers panel. There are three tools in this drop-down; Wire Numbers, 3 Phase, and PLC I/O.

Refer to Figure-23. These tools are discussed next.
Figure-23. Wire Numbers drop-down
 
Wire Numbers
This tool is used to specify the wire number for individual wires or project wide. The procedure to
use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Wire Numbers tool from the Wire Numbers drop-down. The Sheet1 - Wire Tagging
dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-24.
Figure-24. Sheet1 Wire Tagging dialog box
 
• Click in the Start edit box in the Wire tag mode area and specify the starting number for wire
tagging(numbering).
• Select the Tag new/un-numbered only radio button if you want to specify the wire number to un-
numbered wires only otherwise leave on the default.
• Click on the Setup button from the dialog box to specify the format of wire numbering. The Assign
Wire Numbering Formats by Wire Layers dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-25.

Figure-25. Assign Wire Numbering Formats by Wire Layers dialog box
 
• Click on the List button in this dialog box. The Select Wire Layer dialog box will be displayed;
refer to Figure-26.
Figure-26. Select Wire Layer dialog box
 
• Select the desired color layer for the wire.
• Click on the OK button from the Select Wire Layer dialog box.
• Click on the three Default buttons one by one to specify the default values in the related fields.
• Click on the Add button from the dialog box, the wire numbering format will be added.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box.
• Now, we are ready to use this layer format in our wire numbering. So, select the Use wire layer
format override check box.
• If you want to apply the wire numbering individually to each wire then click on the Pick Individual
Wires button from the dialog box. You are prompted to select the wires.
• Select the wires one by one and press ENTER. The numbering will be assigned to the wires; refer
to Figure-27.

Figure-27. Wire numbering
 
3 Phase
This tool is used to number three phase wiring. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the 3 Phase tool from the Wire Numbers drop-down in the Ribbon. The 3 Phase Wire
Numbering dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-28.
Figure-28. 3 Phase Wire Numbering dialog box
 
• Specify the desired values in the Prefix, Base, and Suffix edit boxes.
• Select the desired radio button from the Maximum area of the dialog box. If you have 3 wires in the
connection then select 3 radio button and if you have 4 then select the 4 radio button.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. You are asked to select first wire of the 3 phase line.
• Select the respective wire. You are asked to select the second wire.
• Select the second wire and similarly select the third wire.
• After selecting the third wire, the dialog box will be displayed again. Keep on selecting the
individual wire that you want to be numbers.

• After numbering, click on the Cancel button from the dialog box to exit.
PLC I/O
This tool is used to number the input and output ports of the PLC. The procedure to use this tool is
given next.
• Click on the PLC I/O tool from the Wire Numbers drop-down in the Ribbon. The PLC I/O Wire
Numbers dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-29.
Figure-29. PLC I O Wire Numbers dialog box
 
• Specify the desired tag format for the PLC I/O. The % codes have already been discussed.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. You are prompted to select the PLC.
• Select a PLC, you are asked to select the wires connected to the PLC.
• One by one select the wires that are connected to the PLC.
• The tags defined as per the PLC are extracted and applied to the wires; refer to Figure-30.
Figure-30. PLC I O Wire Numbers
 
WIRE NUMBER LEADERS AND LABELS
In the previous figure, the wire number leaders are assigned automatically. We can modify the wire
number leaders and we can assign the labels as per our need. The tools to do so are available in the

Wire Number Leader drop-down; refer to Figure-31.
Figure-31. Wire Number Leader drop down
 
The procedure to use the tools in this drop-down is discussed next.
Wire Number Leader
The Wire Number Leader tool is used to assign leader to a wire number. The procedure to use this
tool is given next.
• Click on the Wire Number Leader tool from the Wire Number Leader drop-down in the Ribbon.
You will be prompted to select a wire number; refer to Figure-32.
Figure-32. Command prompt for wire numbers
 
• Select the desired wire number from the drawing. You will be prompted to specify the point for
leader end point; refer to Figure-33.
Figure-33. After selecting wire number
 
• Click on the drawing area to specify the end point of the wire number leader. You will be prompted
to specify the next point of the leader.
• Click in the drawing area to specify the point or press ENTER. The wire number leader will be
assigned; refer to Figure-34.

Figure-34. Wire number leader assigned
 
• Similarly, you can assign leaders to other wire numbers.
Wire Color/Gauge Labels
This tool is used to attach the wire color and/or gauge labels to the wires so that we can easily
identify the wires in the circuit. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Wire Color/Gauge Labels tool from the Wire Number Leader drop-down in the
Ribbon. The Insert Wire Color/Gauge Labels dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-
35.
• Click on the Setup button to specify the settings. The Wire label color/gauge setup dialog box will
be displayed as shown in Figure-36.
Figure-35. Insert Wire Color or Gauge Labels dialog box
 

Figure-36. Wire label color or gauge setup dialog box
 
• Specify the desired settings in the dialog box and click on the OK button from the dialog box.
• Click on the Manual button from the dialog box to manually assign the color/gauge labels. Note that
you can assign the labels with leaders or without leaders by selecting the Manual button from the
respective area.
• Click on the Auto Placement button to automatically place the color/gauge labels.
• After selecting the desired button, click on the wire and follow the instructions given by system.
Press ENTER to create the labels. The labels will be attached to the wires; refer to Figure-37.
Figure-37. Wire labels

 
In-Line Wire Labels
The previous tool is used to insert labels aside the wires. The In-Line Wire Labels tool is used to
insert the in-line wire labels. The labels can include informations like color, gauge, and so on. The
procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the In-Line Wire Labels tool from the Wire Number Leader drop-down. The Insert
Component dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-38.
Figure-38. Insert Component dialog box
 
• Select the desired symbol from the dialog box. You will be prompted to specify the insertion point
for the symbol.
• Click on the wire to insert the label. The label will be inserted; refer to Figure-39.
Figure-39. In-Line label
 
MARKERS
The markers are used to mark the wires for categorizing them. The tools to apply marks are available
in the Cable Markers and Insert Dot Tee Markers drop-down. The procedure to use all these tools
are similar. These procedures are discussed next.

Cable Markers
This tool is used to insert cable markers. The procedure is given next.
• Click on the Cable Markers tool from the Cable Markers drop-down 
. The Insert
Component dialog box will be displayed with the cable markers; refer to Figure-40.
Figure-40. Insert Component dialog box with cable markers
 
• Click on the desire symbol and then click on the wire to place the symbol. The Insert/Edit Cable
Marker (Parent wire) dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-41.

Figure-41. Insert or Edit Cable Marker dialog box
 
• Specify the parameters as desired and click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Insert Some
Child Components dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-42.
Figure-42. Insert Some Child Components dialog box
 
• If you want to insert child components then click on the OK Insert Child button otherwise click on
the Close button from the dialog box.
• If you click on the OK Insert Child button then you need to click on the child wires and specify the
tags as desired.
Multiple Cable Markers
The Multiple Cable Markers tool is used to insert multiple cable markers in the drawing. The
procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Multiple Cable Markers tool from the Cable Markers drop-down. The Multiple

Cable Markers dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-43.
Figure-43. Multiple Cable Markers dialog box
 
• Select the desired radio button from the dialog box and click on the OK button from the dialog box.
The cable markers will be inserted automatically.
Insert Dot Tee Markers
The Insert Dot Tee Markers tool is used to insert dot tee mark on the wire. The procedure to use
this tool is given next.
• Click on the Insert Dot Tee Markers tool from the Insert Dot Tee Markers drop-down 
 in
the Ribbon. You will be prompted to click on the wire to create the dot tee mark.
• Click on the wire at desired point. The dot tee mark will be created; refer to Figure-44.
Figure-44. Dot tee mark
 
Insert Angled Tee Markers
The Insert Angled Tee Markers  tool is used to convert the tee mark into an angles tee mark. The
procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Insert Angled Tee Markers  tool from the Insert Dot Tee Markers drop-down. You
will be prompted to select the tee of wires.
• Click on the tee, it will be converted to angled tee mark; refer to Figure-45.

Figure-45. Angled tee
 
CIRCUIT BUILDER
The Circuit Builder tool is used to insert circuits in the drawing. The procedure to use this tool is
given next.
• Click on the Circuit Builder tool from the Circuit Builder drop-down in the Insert Components
panel in the Ribbon; refer to Figure-46. The Circuit Selection dialog box will be displayed as
shown in Figure-47.
Figure-46. Circuit Builder tool
 

Figure-47. Circuit Selection dialog box
 
• Select the desired circuit from the list.
• Click in the edit boxes of Scale area and specify the scale values for circuits and components.
• Specify the spacing between rungs in the Rung Spacing area.
• Select the desired radio button from the Special Annotation area of the dialog box.
• Click on the Insert button from the dialog box. You will be prompted to specify the insertion point
of the circuit.
• Click to specify the insertion point, the circuit will be placed; refer to Figure-48.

Figure-48. Circuit inserted
 
PRACTICAL
In this practical, we will create the circuit diagram of an electrical system; refer to Figure-49.

Figure-49. Practical
 
Starting a New drawing
• Start AutoCAD Electrical and Click on the down arrow below Start Drawing button. A list of
templates will be displayed; refer to Figure-50.

Figure-50. Templates of drawings
 
• Click on the ACE ANSI A(Landscape) Color.dwt  template from the list of templates. A new
drawing will open with the selected template; refer to Figure-51.
Figure-51. Drawing opened with the template
 
Editing Title Block
• Double-click on the title block at the bottom right corner. The Enhanced Attribute Editor dialog
box will be displayed; refer to Figure-52.

Figure-52. Enhanced Attribute Editor dialog box
 
• Select the desired tag from the list and specify the respective value.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box to exit.
Creating Wires
• Click on the Multiple Bus tool from the Insert Wires/Wire Numbers panel in the Ribbon. The
Multiple Wire Bus dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-53.
Figure-53. Multiple Wire Bus dialog box
 
• Specify the spacing as 0.5 in both the Spacing edit boxes.
• Select the Empty Space, Go Horizontal radio button from the dialog box.
• Click on the 3 button to specify the number of wires as 3.
• Click on the OK button. You are asked to specify the starting point of the wire bus.
• Click on the drawing area and create the wire bus as shown in Figure-54.

Figure-54. Wire bus to be created
 
• Similarly, create two more buses each having 3 wires with proper spacing; refer to Figure-55.
Figure-55. Other two wire buses
 
• Click on the Wire tool from Insert Wires/Wire Numbers panel and create a wire for earth; refer to
Figure-56.
Figure-56. Wire created for earth
 
Assigning Numbers and Labels to Wires
• Click on the In-Line Wire Labels tool from the Wire Number Leader drop-down; refer to Figure-

57. The Insert Component dialog box with wire labels will be displayed; refer to Figure-58.
Figure-57. Wire Number Leader drop down
 
Figure-58. Insert Component dialog box
 
• Select the Red symbol from the dialog box and click on the top wire to specify its color code.
• Similarly, set the middle and bottom wire as Black and Blue respectively; refer to Figure-59. Note
that by default, the tags on wires are displayed in yellow color. To change the color, double click
on the color name in the label. The Enhanced Attribute Editor dialog box will be displayed; refer
to Figure-60.
Figure-59. Wires after color coding
 

Figure-60. Enhanced Attribute Editor dialog box for color
 
• Click on the Properties tab and change the color of layer as per your requirement.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box.
• Click on the Wire Numbers tool from the Wire Numbers drop-down. The Sheet1 - Wire Tagging
dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-61.
Figure-61. Sheet1 Wire Tagging dialog box
 
• Click on the Drawing-wide button from the dialog box. The wire numbers will be assigned to the
wires; refer to Figure-62.

Figure-62. Wire numbers assigned to the wires
 
• You can change the color of wire numbers as we did for the wire labels.
Inserting 3 Phase Motor
• Click on the Catalog Browser button from the Components drop-down; refer to Figure-63. The
CATALOG BROWSER will be displayed.
• Click in the Category drop-down and select the MO (Motors) option from the list.
• Click in the Search edit box and specify 4-Pole in it.
• Click on the Search button. The list of motors in the catalog will be displayed as shown in Figure-
64.
Figure-63. Catalog Browser button
 
Figure-64. Catalog Browser with list of motors
 
• Select the Motor as highlighted in the red box in above figure. The panel of buttons will be
displayed; refer to Figure-65.

Figure-65. Panel of buttons
 
• Click on the 
 button. The Insert Component dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-66.
Figure-66. Insert Component dialog box by default
 
• Select the Motor Control category from the menu and select the icon highlighted by the cursor; refer
to Figure-67.

Figure-67. Motor symbol
 
• On doing so, the Assign Symbol To Catalog Number dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-
68.
Figure-68. Assign Symbol To Catalog Number dialog box
 
• Click on the Map symbol to catalog number button. The symbol will get attached to cursor.
• Click on the middle wire as shown in Figure-69. The motor will get attached to the three wires
automatically and the Insert / Edit Component dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-
70.

Figure-69. Motor to be placed
 
Figure-70. Insert or Edit Component dialog box
 
• Click in the edit box in Component Tag area and specify the tag as Motor.
• Click in the Line 1 edit box and specify description as 3 Phase.
• Click in the Rating edit box in Ratings area and specify the rating as 2 HP.

• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The motor will be placed; refer to Figure-71.
Figure-71. Motor placed
 
Adding Ground symbol
• Click on the Icon Menu button from the Icon Menu drop-down. The Insert Component dialog box
will be displayed.
• Select the Motor Control category from the Menu area and click on the Ground symbol from the
right area of the dialog box; refer to Figure-72. You are prompted to specify the location of the
ground symbol.
Figure-72. Ground symbol
 
• Click at the end of wire with 4 wire number; refer to Figure-73.

Figure-73. After placing ground symbol
 
Adding symbols for various components
• Click on the Catalog Browser button and insert the components as shown in Figure-74.
Figure-74. Circuit after connecting components
 
• Connect the 2 HP Motor to the ground wire using the Wire tool; refer to Figure-75.
Figure-75. Wire connected to motor
 
• After adding all the components, the drawing will be displayed as shown in Figure-76.

Figure-76. Practical-Model
 
PROBLEM
Create the circuit diagram as shown in Figure-77.

Figure-77. Problem-Model

EDITING WIRES,
COMPONENTS, AND
CIRCUITS
 
CHAPTER 6
 
 
Topics Covered
 
 
 
 
The major topics covered in this chapter are:
 
• Editing Components
• Internal Jumpers
• Editing Components like fixing tags, copying catalog assignments
• Editing Circuits
• Editing Wires and Wire Numbers
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION
Till this point, we have learned to insert components, insert wires, and insert circuits. Now, we are
ready to edit the components, wires and circuits for customizing. The tools to edit components are
available in three panels; Edit Components, Circuit Clipboard, and Edit Wires/Wire Numbers
panel; refer to Figure-1, Figure-2, and Figure-3.

Figure-1. Edit Components panel
Figure-2. Circuit Clipboard panel
 
Figure-3. Edit Wires or Wire Numbers panel
 
EDIT TOOL
The Edit tool is available in the Edit Components drop-down in the Edit Components panel; refer
to Figure-4. This tool is used to edit the details of any component inserted in the drawing area. The
procedure to use this tool is given next.
Figure-4. Edit components drop-down
 
• Click on the Edit tool from the Edit Components drop-down. You will be prompted to select the

components/cables/location boxes.
• Select the component. The Insert/Edit Component dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-5.
The options in this dialog box have already been discussed.
• Specify the desired settings in the dialog box and click on the OK button from the dialog box.
• If you want to use the component with the specified settings again then click on the OK-Repeat
button from the dialog box.
Figure-5. Insert or Edit Component dialog box
 
INTERNAL JUMPER
An Internal Jumper is used to interconnect terminals of the electrical components. Some components
in electrical system also have jumpers to change their functionality. For example, you might have seen
jumpers in transformers to change the output voltage between 110V and 230V. The Internal Jumper
tool in the Edit Components drop-down is used to edit the functions of internal jumpers. The
procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Internal Jumper tool from the Edit Components drop-down. You are asked to select a
component for editing jumpers.
• Select the component; refer to Figure-6. The Wire Jumpers dialog box will be displayed; refer to
Figure-7.

Figure-6. Component selected
 
Figure-7. Wire Jumpers dialog box
 
• Click on the Pick button from the dialog box. You are asked to select the jumper points on the
component; refer to Figure-8. Note that you can select the terminals directly from the dialog box but
in that case you will not be able to identify the wire connections to the jumpers.
• Press ENTER. The Wire Jumpers dialog box will be displayed with the jumpers selected; refer to
Figure-9. Note that the Add button is active now.

Figure-8. Jumper points selected
 
Figure-9. Wire Jumpers dialog box with terminals selected
 
• Click on the Add button from the dialog box. The jumper will be connected to the selected terminals
and will be listed in the Assigned Jumpers area of the dialog box; refer to Figure-10.

Figure-10. Wire Jumpers dialog box with assigned jumpers
 
• Click on the Show Jumpers button to display the jumper in the drawing area. The jumper will be
displayed connecting all the selected terminals; refer to Figure-11.
Figure-11. Jumper connecting the terminals
 
The example use above is just for illustration purpose, in real world we
will not be connecting motors like this. We can use PLCs for applying
jumpers but they have not been discussed till so we are using the
example of motors.
Fix/UnFix Tag
The Fix/UnFix Tag tool is used to fix or unfix the tags assigned to the components. Note that if you fix
a component tag then it will not get updated automatically when you re-tag the components in the
drawing. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Fix/UnFix Tag tool from the Edit Components drop-down. The Fix/UnFix

Component Tag dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-12.
Figure-12. Fix or UnFix Component Tag dialog box
 
• Select the desired radio button from the dialog box. For example, select the Force selected tags to
Fixed radio button; then later all the selected tags will get fixed.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. You are asked to select the tags that you want to change
for their tags fixed/unfixed status.
• Select the tags and press ENTER, the properties for selected tags will get modified as per the
selected radio button.
COPY CATALOG ASSIGNMENT
The Copy Catalog Assignment tool is used to copy the meta data from an existing component and
apply it to the other component. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Copy Catalog Assignment tool from the Edit Components drop-down. You are asked
to select the master component.
• Click on the tag of the component from which you want to copy the meta data; refer to Figure-13.
The Copy Catalog Assignment dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-14.
Figure-13. Component tag to be selected
 

Figure-14. Copy Catalog Assignment dialog box
 
• Edit the details if you want to and then click on the OK button from the dialog box. You are asked to
select the target component.
• Select the target component. Some of my friends might get the Update Related Components dialog
box; refer to Figure-15. Click on the Yes-Update button if you want to update all similar
components in the drawing or choose the Skip button to keep others as they are.
• Few of my friends might also get the Different symbol block names dialog box; refer to Figure-16.
This dialog box comes if you are assigning properties to an incompatible component. For example,
if you are coping properties of a motor to a switch then this dialog box will come. If it is need of
your drawing to assign such properties then click on the OK button and then Overwrite otherwise
cancel it and take your decision.
Figure-15. Update Related Components dialog box
 
Figure-16. Different symbol block names dialog box
 

USER TABLE DATA
The User Table Data tool allows you to enter any data that you want to include with the components
for their identity or purpose. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the User Table Data tool from the Edit Components drop-down. The Edit User Table
Data dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-17.
Figure-17. Edit User Table Data dialog box
 
• Click on the Add New button from the dialog box. The Add New USER data record dialog box
will be displayed; refer to Figure-18.
Figure-18. Add New USER data record dialog box
 
• Enter the desired data in the field and click on the OK button from the dialog box. The record will
be added for the component; refer to Figure-19.

Figure-19. Edit User Table Data dialog box with record
 
• Click on the Save Changes button from the dialog box. The user record will be added to the
component.
DELETE COMPONENT
 As the name suggests, the Delete Component tool is used to delete the component. The procedure
to do so is given next.
• Click on this tool from the Edit Component panel and click on the components that you want to
delete.
• After selecting the components, Press ENTER. The components will be deleted and the Search for/
Surf to Children dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-20.
Figure-20. Search for or Surf to Children dialog box
 
• Click on the OK button if you want to search for the child components and want to delete them
otherwise select the NO button from the dialog box.
COPY COMPONENT

 The Copy Component tool is used to create copies of an existing component. The procedure to
use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Copy Component tool from the Edit Components panel in the Ribbon. You are asked
to select the component that you want to copy.
• Select the component. You are asked to specify the insertion points of the copied component.
• Click at the desired place in the drawing to create copy and then specify the desired parameters in
the Insert/Edit Component dialog box.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box after specifying the parameters. The copy will be
created with the specified parameters.
EDIT CIRCUITS DROP-DOWN
The tools in the Edit Circuits drop-down are used to edit the circuits. There are three tools in this
drop-down; refer to Figure-21. The procedure to use these tools is discussed next.
Figure-21. Edit Circuit drop-down
 
Copying Circuit
• Click on the Copy Circuit tool from the Edit Circuits drop-down. You are asked to select a circuit.
• Select the circuit and its components and then press ENTER. You are asked to specify the insertion
point for the copied circuit.
• Click to specify the first point of insertion. You are asked to specify the second point of insertion;
refer to Figure-22.
Figure-22. Copying a circuit
 

• Click to specify the insertion point. The circuit will be placed.
• Note that if you have gaps in the circuit then the Gapped wire pointer problem dialog box will be
displayed; refer to Figure-23.
Figure-23. Gapped wire pointer problem dialog box
 
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box and modify the circuit as per your requirement.
Moving Circuit
• Click on the Move Circuit tool from the Edit Circuits drop-down. You are asked to select a circuit.
• Select the circuit and its components and then press ENTER. You are asked to specify the new base
point for the circuit.
• Click to specify the base point. You are asked to specify the insertion point for the circuit. Set the
insertion point and the circuit will be placed accordingly.
Saving Circuit to Icon Menu
• Click on the Save Circuit to Icon Menu tool from the Edit Circuits drop-down. The Save Circuit
to Icon Menu dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-24.
Figure-24. Save Circuit to Icon Menu dialog box
 
• Right-click on the desired slot from the dialog box. A shortcut menu will be displayed.

• Click on the Properties button from the shortcut menu. The Properties-Circuit dialog box will be
displayed; refer to Figure-25.
Figure-25. Properties Circuit dialog box
 
• Click on both the Active buttons one by one and click on the OK button from the dialog box. The
current drawing will be saved as user defined circuit; refer to Figure-26.
Figure-26. User defined circuit created
 
• Click on the OK button from the Save Circuit to Icon Menu dialog box.
TRANSFORMING COMPONENTS DROP-DOWN
The tools in this drop-down are used to transform the components. For example, you can change
position of a component on wire, you can align components, and so on. Various tools in this drop-
down are discussed next.
Scooting
Scooting is the movement of a component, tag, wire number etc. along the connected wire. The

procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Scoot tool from the Transform Component drop-down. You are asked to select
component, wire or wire number from the drawing area.
• Click on the desired entity. A box will be attached to the cursor representing the component; refer to
Figure-27.
Figure-27. Scooting component
 
• Click at the desire point to specify the new location of the entity; refer to Figure-28.
Figure-28. Entity after scooting
 
Aligning Components
• Click on the Align tool from the Transform Component drop-down. You are asked to select an
entity as the horizontal/vertical reference for the other components.
• Select the component. The reference line will be created from the center of the selected component;
refer to Figure-29. Also, you are asked to selected the to be aligned components.
Figure-29. Reference line for selected component

 
• Click on the entities that you want to align and press ENTER. The entities will be aligned; refer to
Figure-30.
Figure-30. Entities after alignment
 
Moving Component
You can move components in a circuit without creating gaps in the circuit. The procedure is given
next.
• Click on the Move Component tool from the Transform Components drop-down. You are asked
to select a component.
• Click on the component. The component will get attached to the cursor; refer to Figure-31.
Figure-31. Component attached to the cursor
 
• Click at the new position to place the component. The component will be placed and the circuit will
be modified to fill the gap; refer to Figure-32.

Figure-32. Circuit after moving component
 
Reversing or Flipping Component
• Click on the Reverse/Flip Component tool from the Transform Components drop-down. The
Reverse/Flip Component dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-33.
Figure-33. Reverse or Flip Component dialog box
 
• Select the desired radio button for whether you want to reverse the component or you want to flip
the component.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. You are asked to select the component that you want to
flip or reverse.
• Select the component, it will get flipped or reversed as per the selected option. Refer to Figure-34.

Figure-34. Reverse component
 
We will discuss about the other two tools in the Transform Components drop-down later in the
book when we will be discussing PLCs.
RE-TAGGING COMPONENTS
You can assign a new tag to the components by replacing the older one using the Retag Components
tool. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Retag Components tool from the Retag Components drop-down in the Edit
Components panel in the Ribbon; refer to Figure-35. The Retag Components dialog box will be
displayed; refer to Figure-36.
Figure-35. Retag Components drop-down
 

Figure-36. Retag Components dialog box
 
• Select the desired radio button from the dialog box and click on the OK button. The components
will be re-tagged according to the selected radio button.
TOGGLE NO/NC
You can toggle between Normally Open(NO) and Normally Closed(NC) variants of components by
using this tool. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Toggle NO/NC tool 
 from the Edit Components panel. You are asked to select the
component for toggling NC/NO.
• Select the component, its status will be changed; refer to Figure-37.
Figure-37. Component after toggling
 
SWAP/UPDATE BLOCK
This tool is used to swap or update the block of a component. The procedure to use this tool is given
next.
Swapping
• Click on the Swap/Update Block tool from the Edit Components panel. The Swap Block/Update
Block/Library Swap dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-38.
• Click on the desired radio button for Swap a Block area, the options related to swap will be
activated in the dialog box.
• Select the desired option for source of swapping by selecting Pick new block icon menu, Pick new
block “just like”, or Browser to new block from file selection dialog radio button.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. If you have selected the Browser to new block from
file selection dialog radio button, then the dialog box will be displayed prompting you to select the

blocks.
• Select the drawing of block. You are asked to select the component.
• Select the component and it will be swapped with the selected block.
Figure-38. Swap Block or Update Block or Library Swap dialog box
 
Updating
• Click on the desired radio button from the Option B: Update area of the dialog box. If you select the
Update a Block radio button then new block will be placed for selected component. If you select
the Library Swap radio button then all the blocks will be updated.
• After selecting the desired radio button, click on the OK button from the dialog box.
• If you selected the Update a Block radio button then you will be prompted to select an example of
block. Select the block of component(or component) from the drawing area and press ENTER. The
Update Block dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-39. Click on the Browse button and
select the desired component block. Click on the Project button if you want to update the block for
all project drawings or click on the Active Drawing button to update the block in current drawing
only.

Figure-39. Update Block dialog box
 
• If you have selected Library Swap radio button in the Swap Block/Update Block/Library Swap
dialog box then the Library Swap dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-40. Click on the
Browse button and select the directory of component blocks. Click on the Project button if you
want to update the block for all project drawings or click on the Active Drawing button to update
the block in current drawing only.

Figure-40. Library Swap dialog box
 
EDIT ATTRIBUTE DROP-DOWN
The options in the Edit Attribute drop-down are used to edit the attributes of the components; refer
to Figure-41. These tools are common to all the AutoCAD platform software. An attribute is used to
relate the blocks with the real word information. These tools perform the action as their names
suggest. You can also perform all these tasks by using the Properties Manager. To use the Properties
Manager, click on the component’s attribute and enter PROPERTIES at the Command Prompt. The
Properties Manager will be displayed with the relative options; refer to Figure-42. Click in the
desired field and change the attributes as required.
Figure-41. Edit Attribute drop-down
 

Figure-42. Properties Manager
 
CROSS REFERENCES DROP-DOWN
The tools in this drop-down are used to manage cross-references for the components; refer to Figure-
43. The tools in this drop-down are discussed next.
Figure-43. Cross References drop-down
 

Component Cross-Reference
This tool is used to update cross-reference text of a component. The procedure is given next.
• Click on the Component Cross-Reference tool from the Cross References drop-down. The
Component Cross-Reference dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-44.
Figure-44. Component Cross-Reference dialog box
 
• Select the desired radio button from the dialog box and click on the OK button. The
Error/Exception Report dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-45.
Figure-45. Error or Exception Report dialog box
 
• From the above result, we can find out that the three motors are duplicated and are not referenced to
any other component or circuit.
• Click on the Cross-reference button from the dialog box. The Cross-Reference Report dialog box
will be displayed; refer to Figure-46.

Figure-46. Cross Reference Report dialog box
 
• From the above result, we can find the components and their respective references in the
drawing/project.
• After checking the results, click on the Close button to exit.
Hide/Unhide Cross-Referencing
The Hide/Unhide Cross-Referencing tool is used to hide or unhide the cross reference of a
component in the drawing. Click on this tool from the Cross References drop-down and select the
component of which you want to change the hide/unhide status.
Update Stand-Alone Cross-Referencing
The Update Stand-Alone Cross-Referencing tool is used to update the cross-references in the
drawing or project. The procedure is given next.
• Click on Update Stand-Alone Cross-Referencing tool from the Cross References drop-down. The
Update Wire Signal and Stand-Alone Cross-Reference dialog box will be displayed; refer to
Figure-47.

Figure-47. Update Wire Signal and Stand-Alone Cross-Reference dialog box
 
• Click on the Drawing-wide or Project-wide button to update all the cross-references in the drawing
or project respectively. You can individually update the cross-references by selecting the Pick
button from the dialog box.
In this same way, you can use the other tools in the Cross References drop-down. Rest of the tools in
the Edit Components panel will be discussed in the chapter for PLCs.
Circuit Clipboard panel
The tools in this panel are used to manipulate circuits; refer to Figure-48. Click on the Cut or Copy
Clip tool to copy any circuit in the drawing and using the Paste tool, you can paste the copied or cut
circuits.
Figure-48. Circuit Clipboard panel
 
EDITING WIRES OR WIRE NUMBERS
The tools to edit wires/wire numbers are available in the Edit Wires/Wire Numbers panel in the
Ribbon; refer to Figure-49. The tools in this panel are discussed next.
Figure-49. Edit Wires or Wire Numbers panel
 

Edit Wire Number
The Edit Wire Number tool is used to manually change the wire number. The procedure to use this
tool is given next.
• Click on the down arrow below Edit Wire Number button in the Ribbon. The Edit Wire Number
drop-down will be displayed; refer to Figure-50.
Figure-50. Edit Wire Number drop-down
 
• Click on the Edit Wire Number button from the drop-down. You are asked to select a wire or wire
number.
• Select the wire or wire number that you want to change. The Modify/Fix/UnFix dialog box will be
displayed; refer to Figure-51.
Figure-51. Modify or Fix or UnFix dialog box
 
• Click in the Wire number edit box and specify the desired value. You can use the < or > buttons to
decrease or increase the wire number. Note that if the number is existing then you will be prompted
to enter a different wire number.
• Clear the Make it Fixed check box, if you want to unfix the wire number.
• Select the Hidden radio button if you want to hide the wire number.
• Click on the OK button to apply the specified parameters.

Fix
The Fix tool is used to make a wire number fixed. To do so, click on the Fix tool from the Edit Wire
Number drop-down. You are asked to select a wire number that you want to be fixed. Select the wire
number and it will get fixed. Also, the color of the wire number will change to CYAN color.
Swap
The Swap tool is used to swap the wire numbers. Click on this tool from the Edit Wire Number
drop-down and select two wire numbers one by one. The wire numbers will be swapped.
Find/Replace
The Find/Replace tool is available in the Edit Wire Number drop-down. This tool is used to find
and replace the wire numbers in the drawing. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Find/Replace tool from the drop-down. The Find/Replace Wire Numbers dialog box
will be displayed; refer to Figure-52.
Figure-52. Find or Replace Wire Numbers dialog box
 
• Click in the Find edit box and specify the wire number to be replaced.
• Click in the Replace edit box and specify the wire number with which it is to be replaced.
• Click on the Go button and then click on the OK button, the wire numbers will be replaced.
Hide and Unhide
The Hide tool is used to hide the wire numbers and Unhide tool is used to unhide the wire numbers.
Click on the Hide tool and select the wire number that you want to hide. To unhide the wire number,
click on the Unhide tool from the Edit Wire Number drop-down. You are asked to select a wire.

Select the wire, the hidden wire number for that wire will be displayed.
Trim Wire
The Trim Wire tool is used to trim a wire connected between wire connections. The procedure to use
this tool is given next.
• Click on the Trim Wire tool from the Edit Wires/Wire Numbers panel. You are asked to select the
wire that is to be trimmed.
• Select the wire that you want to be trimmed; refer to Figure-53.
Figure-53. Wire to be trimmed
 
• On selecting the wire, it will be trimmed between the connecting ends; refer to Figure-54. Also, the
wire numbering will be modified accordingly.
Figure-54. After trimming wire
 
Delete Wire Numbers
The Delete Wire Numbers tool is used to delete the wire numbers. Note that the remaining wire
numbers are not modified on using this tool. To delete the wire numbers, click on this tool and then
click on the wire numbers that you want to be deleted. The selected wire numbers will be deleted.

Move Wire Number
The Move Wire Number tool is used to move the wire numbers. To do so, click on Move Wire
Number tool from the Edit Wires/Wire Numbers panel; you will be prompted to select a new
location for the wire number. Click on the wire at the desired position. The wire number of that wire
will move to the location you clicked on the wire.
Add Rung
The Add Rung tool is used to add a rung in any circuit or ladder. A rung is a wire connecting two
parallel wiring lines. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Add Rung tool from the Ladder Editing drop-down; refer to Figure-55. You are asked
to click at the desired location to add rung.
• Click between the two parallel wires. A rung will be created connecting both the wires; refer to
Figure-56.
Figure-55. Ladder Editing drop-down
 
Figure-56. Rung connected
 
Revise Ladder

The Revise Ladder tool is available in the Ladder Editing drop-down. This tool is used to modify
the ladder numbering. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Revise Ladder tool from the Ladder Editing drop-down. The Modify Line
Reference Numbers dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-57.
Figure-57. Modify Line Raferece Number dialog box
 
• Specify the desired parameters for the ladder numbering in the current drawing and click on the OK
button from the dialog box. The ladder numbering will be modified accordingly.
• Note that to use this tool, you must have ladders in the drawing area.
Renumber Ladder Reference
The Renumber Ladder Reference tool is used to specify the reference point for the ladder
renumbering. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Renumber Ladder Reference tool from the Ladder Editing drop-down. The
Renumber Ladders dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-58.
Figure-58. Renumber Ladders dialog box
 
• Click in the edit box and specify the desired reference number. Next, click on the OK button from
the dialog box. The Select Drawings to Process dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-59.

Figure-59. Select Drawings to Process dialog box
 
• Select the drawing and click on the Process button on which you want to apply the numbering. To
select all click on the Do All button and then click on the OK button from the dialog box. The
ladders will be renumbered as per the specified value.
Wire Editing
The tools in the Wire Editing drop-down are used to modify wires; refer to Figure-60. The tools in
this drop-down are discussed next.
Figure-60. Wire Editing drop-down
 
Stretch Wire tool
The Stretch Wire tool is used to stretch the end point of a wire to connect it to the next intersecting
wire. The procedure to use this tool is given next.

• Click on the Stretch Wire tool from the Wire Editing drop-down. You are asked to select the end
point of the wire.
• Click on the wire near the end point. The wire will stretch till it intersect with the facing wire; refer
to Figure-61.
Figure-61. Stretching wire
 
Bend Wire tool
The Bend Wire tool is used to bend the wire at desired points. The procedure to use this tool is given
next.
• Click on the Bend Wire tool from the Wire Editing drop-down. You are asked to select the point
on first wire from which the bending will start.
• Click on the wire at desired point; refer to Figure-62.
Figure-62. First point of bending
 
• Click on the second wire to specify the end point of bend. The wire bend will be created refer to
Figure-63.

Figure-63. Wire bend after selecting second point
 
Show Wires
The Show Wire tool is used to display all the wire in the drawing. The procedure to use this tool is
given next.
• Click on the Show Wires tool from the Wire Editing drop-down. The Show Wires and Wire
Number Pointers dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-64.
Figure-64. Show Wires and Wire Number Pointers dialog box
 
• Select the desired check boxes to highlight the respective entities in the drawing.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Drawing Audit dialog box will be displayed; refer
to Figure-65.

Figure-65. Drawing Audit dialog box
 
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The wires will be highlighted; refer to Figure-66.
Figure-66. Highlighted wires
 
Check or Trace Wire tool
The Check/Trace Wire tool is used to highlight a wire in the drawing. The procedure to use this tool
is given next.
• Click on the Check/Trace Wire tool from the Wire Editing drop-down. You are asked to select a
wire segment.
• Click on the wire, its full length will be highlighted.
• Press the SPACEBAR to highlight the connected wire. Keep on pressing the SPACEBAR from
keyboard and the next connected wire will be highlighted; refer to Figure-67.

Figure-67. Wire highlighted
 
Wire Type Editing drop-down
The tools in the Wire Type Editing drop-down are used to edit the wire types; refer to Figure-68.
These tools and their operations are discussed next.
Figure-68. Wire Type Editing drop-down
 
Create/Edit Wire Type
The Create/Edit Wire Type tool is used to create or edit wire types. The procedure to use this tool
is given next.
• Click on the Create/Edit Wire Type tool from the Wire Type Editing drop-down. The
Create/Edit Wire Type dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-69.
• The fields in the table of this dialog box are used to specify parameters of common type of wires. If
you want to modify the wire type then click on the desired field and specify the desired values.
Note that Layer Name is automatically assigned on the basis of Wire Color and Size values.
• To add a new wire type, slide down the bottom of table and click in the Wire Color field; refer to
Figure-70.

Figure-69. Create or Edit Wire Type dialog box
Figure-70. Wire Color field
 
• Specify the desired color. For example, ORNG.
• Click in the Size field next to it and specify the desired size. For example, 4AWG.
• Click on the desired button in the Layer area and specify the related properties for the layers.
• After setting the desired parameters, click on the OK button from the dialog box. The wire type will
be created.
Change/Convert Wire Type
The Change/Convert Wire Type tool is used to change the wire type of wires in the drawing. The
procedure to use this tool is given next.

• Click on the Change/Convert Wire Type tool from the Wire Type Editing drop-down. The
Change/Convert Wire Type dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-71.
Figure-71. Change or Convert Wire Type dialog box
 
• Select the desired wire type from the list and click on the OK button from the dialog box. You are
asked to select a wire.
• Select the wire from the drawing area. All the similar wires will be converted to the wire type
selected in the dialog box.
Flip Wire Number
The Flip Wire Number tool is used to flip the wire number on the other side of the wire. The
procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Flip Wire Number tool 
 from the Edit Wires/Wire Numbers panel in the Ribbon.
You are asked to select a wire number.
• Select the wire number and it will be flipped to the other side of wire; refer to Figure-72.
Figure-72. Wire number flipped
 
Toggle Wire Number In-Line
The Toggle Wire Number In-Line  tools works in the same way as the Flip Wire Number tool
works. After using this tool, the wire number gets inserted in the middle of the wire; refer to Figure-

73.
Figure-73. Wire number after toggling
 
 
Till this point, we have discussed all the general tools used in editing components, circuits and wires.
In the next chapter, we will discuss PLC and its components.

PLCS AND
COMPONENTS
CHAPTER 7
 
 
Topics Covered
 
 
 
 
The major topics covered in this chapter are:
 
• Introduction
• Inserting Parametric PLCs
• Inserting PLCs (Full Unit)
• Inserting Connectors
• Inserting Terminals
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION
PLC is a solid state/ computerized industrial computer that performs discrete or sequential logic in a
factory environment. It was originally developed to replace mechanical relays, timers, counters.
PLCs are used successfully to execute complicated control operations in a plant. Its purpose is to
monitor crucial process parameters and adjust process operations accordingly. A sequence of
instructions is programmed by the user to the PLC memory and when the program is executed, the
controller operates a system to the correct operating specifications.
 
PLC consists of three main parts: CPU, memory and I/O units.
 
CPU is the brain of PLC. It reads the input values from inputs, runs the program existed in the

program memory and writes the output values to the output register. Memory is used to store different
types of information in the binary structure form. The memory range of S7-200 is composed of three
main parts as program, parameter, and retentive data fields. I/O units provide communication
between PLC control systems.
Application of PLCs in manufacturing process
In an industrial set up PLCs are used to automate manufacturing and assembly processes. By
‘Process’ we mean a step-by step procedure whereby a product is manufactured and assembled. It is
the responsibility of the product engineering department to plan for manufacture of new or modified
products. Other processes might involve the filling and capping of bottles, the printing of newspapers,
or the assembly of automobiles etc. in many such manufacturing situations, PLC plays an important
role in carrying out the various processes.
Examples of PLC Applications
Internal Combustion Engine Monitoring
A PLC acquires data recorded from sensors located at the internal combustion engine. Measurements
taken include water temperature, oil temperature, RPMs, torque, exhaust temperature, oil pressure,
manifold pressure, and timing.
Carburetor Production Testing
PLCs provide on-line analysis of automotive carburetors in a production assembly line. The systems
significantly reduce the test time, while providing greater yield and better quality carburetors.
Pressure, vacuum, and fuel and air flow are some of the variables tested.
Monitoring Automotive Production Machines
The system monitors total parts, rejected parts, parts produced, machine cycle time, and machine
efficiency. Statistical data is available to the operator anytime or after each shift.
Power Steering Valve Assembly and Testing
The PLC system controls a machine to ensure proper balance of the valves and to maximize left and
right turning ratios.
CHEMICAL AND PETROCHEMICAL
Ammonia and Ethylene Processing
Programmable controllers monitor and control large compressors used during ammonia and ethylene
manufacturing. The PLC monitors bearing temperatures, operation of clearance pockets, compressor
speed, power consumption, vibration, discharge temperatures, pressure, and suction flow.
Dyes

PLCs monitor and control the dye processing used in the textile industry. They match and blend colors
to predetermined values.
Chemical Batching
The PLC controls the batching ratio of two or more materials in a continuous process. The system
determines the rate of discharge of each material and keeps inventory records. Several batch recipes
can be logged and retreived automatically or on command from the operator.
Fan Control
PLCs control fans based on levels of toxic gases in a chemical production environment. This system
effectively removes gases when a preset level of contamination is reached. The PLC controls the fan
start/stop, cycling, and speeds, so that safety levels are maintained while energy consumption is
minimized.
Gas Transmission and Distribution
Programmable controllers monitor and regulate pressures and flows of gas transmission and
distribution systems. Data is gathered and measured in the field and transmitted to the PLC system.
Pipeline Pump Station Control
PLCs control mainline and booster pumps for crude oil distribution. They measure flow, suction,
discharge, and tank low/high limits. Possible communication with SCADA (Supervisory Control and
Data Acquisition) systems can provide total supervision of the pipeline.
Oil Fields
PLCs provide on-site gathering and processing of data pertinent to characteristics such as depth and
density of drilling rigs. The PLC controls and monitors the total rig operation and alerts the operator
of any possible malfunctions.
GLASS PROCESSING
Annealing Lehr Control
PLCs control used to remove the internal stress from glass products. The system controls the
operation by following the annealing temperature curve during the reheating, annealing, straining, and
rapid cooling processes through different heating and cooling zones. Improvements are made in the
ratio of good glass to scrap, reduction in labor cost, and energy utilization.
Glass Batching
PLCs control the batch weighing system according to stored glass formulas. The system also controls
the electromagnetic feeders for in feed to and outfeed from the weigh hoppers, manual shut-off gates,
and other equipment.

Cullet Weighing
PLCs direct the cullet system by controlling the vibratory cullet feeder, weight-belt scale, and shuttle
conveyor. All sequences of operation and inventory of quantities weighed are kept by the PLC for
future use.
Batch Transport
PLCs control the batch transport system, including reversible belt conveyors, transfer conveyors to
the cullet house, holding hoppers, shuttle conveyors, and magnetic separators. The controller takes
action after the discharge from the mixer and transfers the mixed batch to the furnace shuttle, where it
is discharged to the full length of the furnace feed hopper.
MANUFACTURING/MACHINING
Production Machines
The PLC controls and monitors automatic production machines at high efficiency rates. It also
monitors piece-count production and machine status. Corrective action can be taken immediately if
the PLC detects a failure.
Transfer Line Machines
PLCs monitor and control all transfer line machining station operations and the interlocking between
each station. The system receives inputs from the operator to check the operating conditions on the
line-mounted controls and reports any malfunctions. This arrangement provides greater machine
efficiency, higher quality products, and lower scrap levels.
Wire Machine
The controller monitors the time and ON/OFF cycles of a wiredrawing machine. The system provides
ramping control and synchronization of electric motor drives. All cycles are recorded and reported
on demand to obtain the machine’s efficiency as calculated by the PLC.
Tool Changing
The PLC controls a synchronous metal cutting machine with several tool groups. The system keeps
track of when each tool should be replaced, based on the number of parts it manufactures. It also
displays the count and replacements of all the tool groups.
Paint Spraying
PLCs control the painting sequences in auto manufacturing. The operator or a host computer enters
style and color information and tracks the part through the conveyor until it reaches the spray booth.
The controller decodes the part information and then controls the spray guns to paint the part. The
spray gun movement is optimized to conserve paint and increase part throughput.
MATERIALS HANDLING
Automatic Plating Line

The PLC controls a set pattern for the automated hoist, which can traverse left, right, up, and down
through the various plating solutions. The system knows where the hoist is at all times.
Storage and Retrieval Systems
A PLC is used to load parts and carry them in totes in the storage and retrieval system. The controller
tracks information like a lane numbers, the parts assigned to specific lanes, and the quantity of parts in
a particular lane. This PLC arrangement allows rapid changes in the status of parts loaded or
unloaded from the system. The controller also provides inventory printouts and informs the operator
of any malfunctions.
Conveyor Systems
The system controls all of the sequential operations, alarms, and safety logic necessary to load and
circulate parts on a main line conveyor. It also sorts products to their correct lanes and can schedule
lane sorting to optimize palletizer duty. Records detailing the ratio of good parts to rejects can be
obtained at the end of each shift.
Automated Warehousing
The PLC controls and optimizes the movement of stacking cranes and provides high turnaround of
materials requests in an automated, high-cube, vertical warehouse. The PLC also controls aisle
conveyors and case palletizers to significantly reduce manpower requirements. Inventory control
figures are maintained and can be provided on request.
METALS
Steel Making
The PLC controls and operates furnaces to produce metal in accordance with preset specifications.
The controller also calculates oxygen requirements, alloy additions, and power requirements.
Loading and Unloading of Alloys
Through accurate weighing and loading sequences, the system controls and monitors the quantity of
coal, iron ore, and limestone to be melted. It can also control the unloading sequence of the steel to a
torpedo car.
Continuous Casting
PLCs direct the molten steel transport ladle to the continuous- casting machine, where the steel is
poured into a water-cooled mold for solidification.
Cold Rolling
PLCs control the conversion of semifinished products into finished goods through cold-rolling mills.
The system controls motor speed to obtain correct tension and provide adequate gauging of the rolled
material.

Aluminum Making
Controllers monitor the refining process, in which impurities are removed from bauxite by heat and
chemicals. The system grinds and mixes the ore with chemicals and then pumps them into pressure
containers, where they are heated, filtered, and combined with more chemicals.
POWER
Plant Power System
The programmable controller regulates the proper distribution of available electricity, gas, or steam.
In addition, the PLC monitors powerhouse facilities, schedules distribution of energy, and generates
distribution reports. The PLC controls the loads during operation of the plant, as well as the
automatic load shedding or restoring during power outages.
Energy Management
Through the reading of inside and outside temperatures, the PLC controls heating and cooling units in
a manufacturing plant. The PLC system controls the loads, cycling them during predetermined cycles
and keeping track of how long each should be on or off during the cycle time. The system provides
scheduled reports on the amount of energy used by the heating and cooling units.
Coal Fluidization Processing
The controller monitors how much energy is generated from a given amount of coal and regulates the
coal crushing and mixing with crushed limestone. The PLC monitors and controls burning rates,
temperatures generated, sequencing of valves, and analog control of jet valves.
Compressor Efficiency Control
PLCs control several compressors at a typical compressor station. The system handles safety
interlocks, startup/shutdown sequences, and compressor cycling. The PLCs keep compressors running
at maximum efficiency using the nonlinear curves of the compressors.
PULP AND PAPER
Pulp Batch Blending
The PLC controls sequence operation, ingredient measurement, and recipe storage for the blending
process. The system allows operators to modify batch entries of each quantity, if necessary, and
provides hardcopy printouts for inventory control and for accounting of ingredients used.
Batch Preparation for Paper-Making Processing
Applications include control of the complete stock preparation system for paper manufacturing.
Recipes for each batch tank are selected and adjusted via operator entries. PLCs can control feedback
logic for chemical addition based on tank level measurement signals. At the completion of each shift,
the PLC system provides management reports on materials use.
Paper Mill Digester

PLCs control the process of making paper pulp from wood chips. The system calculates and controls
the amount of chips based on density and digester volume. Then, the percent of required cooking
liquors is calculated and these amounts are added to the sequence. The PLC ramps and holds the
cooking temperature until the cooking is completed.
Paper Mill Production
The controller regulates the average basis weight and moisture variable for paper grade. The system
manipulates the steam flow valves, adjusts the stock valves to regulate weight, and monitors and
controls total flow.
RUBBER AND PLASTIC
Tire-Curing Press Monitoring
The PLC performs individual press monitoring for time, pressure, and temperature during each press
cycle. The system alerts the operator of any press malfunctions. Information concerning machine
status is stored in tables for later use. Report generation printouts for each shift include a summary of
good cures and press downtime due to malfunctions.
Tire Manufacturing
Programmable controllers are used for tire press/cure systems to control the sequencing of events that
transforms a raw tire into a tire fit for the road. This control includes molding the tread pattern and
curing the rubber to obtain road-resistant characteristics. This PLC application substantially reduces
the space required and increases reliability of the system and the quality of the product.
Rubber Production
PLCs provide accurate scale control, mixer logic functions, and multiple formula operation of carbon
black, oil, and pigment used in the production of rubber. The system maximizes utilization of machine
tools during production schedules, tracks in-process inventories, and reduces time and personnel
required to supervise the production activity and the shift-end reports.
Plastic Injection Molding
A PLC system controls variables, such as temperature and pressure, which are used to optimize the
injection molding process. The system provides closed-loop injection, where several velocity levels
can be programmed to maintain consistent filling, reduce surface defects, and shorten cycle time.
I know that the above list of applications is quite long but it is important to know the applications of
PLC thoroughly before we start working on PLCs in AutoCAD Electrical.
Specifications of PLCs
In real-world, the PLCs are specified by the following parameters.
• Input Voltages

• Output Voltages
• Number of I/O terminals
Now, we are ready to work on the electrical drawings containing PLCs.
INSERTING PLCS (PARAMETRIC)
There are two tools in AutoCAD Electrical to insert PLCs; PLC (Parametric) and PLC (Full Units).
These tools are available in the Insert PLCs drop-down in the Insert Components panel; refer to
Figure-1. The PLC (Parametric) tool allows you to insert the PLCs based on your inputs whereas
the PLC (Full Units) allow you to insert the ready made PLC modules in the drawing. The procedure
to use the PLC (Parametric) tool is given next.
Figure-1. Insert PLCs drop-down
 
• Click on the Insert PLC (Parametric) tool from the Insert PLCs drop-down in the Insert
Components panel. The PLC Parametric Selection dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-
2.
• Click on the + signs to expand the categories and select the desired type for your PLC.
• Select the desired PLC from the table displayed at the bottom in the dialog box.
• Click on the desired radio button from the Graphic Style area displayed on the left in the dialog
box. Note that the preview of displayed style is also displayed in the thumbnail.

Figure-2. PLC Parametric Selection dialog box
 
• Click in the Scale edit box and specify the desired scale factor to make the PLC smaller or larger.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The PLC will get attached to the cursor; refer to
Figure-3.
Figure-3. PLC attached to the cursor
 
• Click in the drawing area to place the PLC. The Module Layout dialog box will be displayed; refer
to Figure-4.

Figure-4. Module Layout dialog box
 
• Specify the desired spacing between the consecutive input and output points in the PLC by using the
Spacing edit box in this dialog box.
• Select the Allow spacers/breaks radio button if you want to add spacers or break lines at the pre-
defined break points in the PLC.
• If you want to display all the terminals whether they are used or unused then select the Include
unused/extra connections check box.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The I/O Point dialog box will be displayed; refer to
Figure-5.
Figure-5. I/O Point dialog box
 
• Specify a number to the module by using the MODULE edit box of this dialog box and click on the
OK button from the dialog box. The PLC will be placed. Note that AutoCAD Electrical 2016
stores preferences of PLC insertion and next time when you will choose this tool, it will prompt
you whether to continue previous session or not.
INSERT PLC (FULL UNITS)
The Insert PLC (Full Units) tool is used to insert the full PLC units as per the requirement. Note that
in this case, you cannot control the number of connections, display style and so on for the selected
PLC. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Insert PLC (Full Units) tool from the Insert PLCs drop-down. The Insert
Component dialog box will be displayed with the PLC components; refer to Figure-6.

Figure-6. Insert Component dialog box
 
• Click on the desired category and select a plc of your requirement. The PLC will get attached to the
cursor; refer to Figure-7.
• Click in the drawing area to place the PLC. The Edit PLC Module dialog box will be displayed;
refer to Figure-8.
Figure-7. PLC full unit attached to the cursor
 

Figure-8. Edit PLC Module dialog box
 
• Specify the desired parameters in the dialog box and click on the OK button from the dialog box.
The options in this dialog box are discussed next (its very important to understand the options in
this dialog box).
Addressing Area
The options in this area are used to manage input or output addresses of the PLC.
First Address
Specifies the first I/O address for the PLC module. The addresses with I are meant for input like
I/9,I/8, and so on. The addresses with O are meant for output like O/3, O/4, and so on. Select the
desired address from the list to specify it as first I/O address.
Used Area
The buttons in this area are used to select I/O addresses used in earlier drawings or projects. The
procedure to use these options is given next.
• Select the Drawing button from the area. The PLC I/O Point List (this drawing)dialog box will be
displayed with the list of I/O points assigned already; refer to Figure-9.

Figure-9. PLC IO Point List dialog box
 
• Select the desired tag name from the list to use it for the PLC.
• In the similar way, you can use Project button.
Note that editing the first address, I/O point address, or catalog
information for a plc module that was imported using the Unity Pro
Export to Spreadsheet tool may result in problems when you export the
data back to Unity Pro. An alert displays to ask whether you want to
proceed with the changes.
Tag
The Tag edit box is used to specify a unique identifier assigned to the module. The tag value can be
manually typed in the edit box.
Options
The Options button is used to change the default format of tags for PLCs. On selecting this button, the
Option: Tag Format “Family” Override  dialog box is displayed; refer to Figure-10. Note that you
can insert a fixed text string for the %F part of the tag format. Retag Component can then use this
override format value to calculate a new tag for the PLC module. For example, a certain PLC module
must always have an “IO” family tag value instead of “PLC” so that retag, for example, assigns IO-

100 instead of PLC100. To achieve this tag override you would enter “IO-%N” for the tag override
format.
Figure-10. Option dialog box
 
Line1/Line2
These edit boxes are used to specify optional description text for the module. May be used to identify
the relative location of the module in the I/O assembly (example: Rack # and Slot #).
Manufacturer
The Manufacturer edit box is used to list the manufacturer number for the module. Enter a value or
select one by using the Catalog Lookup tool.
Catalog
Lists the catalog number for the module. Enter a value or select one from the Catalog Lookup.
Assembly
Lists the assembly code for the module. The Assembly code is used to link multiple part numbers
together.
Catalog Lookup
The Catalog Lookup tool is used to display the data in catalog related to the selected component.
Click on the Catalog Lookup tool and the Catalog Information dialog box will be displayed; refer
to Figure-11. The options of this dialog box have already been discussed.

Figure-11. Catalog Information dialog box
 
Description
Specify the optional line of description text in the Description edit box. May be used to identify the
module type (for example, “16 Discrete Inputs - 24VDC”)
I/O Point Description Area
Address
This edit box is used to specify the I/O address assignment.
Description 1-5
These edit boxes are used to specify the optional description text. Enter up to five lines of description
attribute text.
Next/Pick
The Next button is used to select the next I/O Point for specifying the description. Pick button is used
to select the desired I/O point directly from the drawing.
List descriptions
The options in this area are used to list the I/O point descriptions currently assigned to each I/O point
on the module or connected, wired devices in a pick list.
Pins
The edit boxes in this area are used to assign pin numbers to the pins that are physically located on
the module.

Show/Edit Miscellaneous
The Show/Edit Miscellaneous button is used to view or edit any attributes that are not predefined
AutoCAD Electrical attributes.
Ratings
This edit box is used to specify values for each ratings attribute. You can enter up to 12 ratings
attributes on a module. Select Defaults to display a list of default values.
Note: If Ratings is unavailable, the module you are editing does not carry rating attributes.
CONNECTORS
Connectors are the parts that are used to connect wirings from sources to equipment. The tools to add
or modify the connectors are available in the Insert Connectors drop-down in the Insert
Components panel; refer to Figure-12. Various tools in this drop-down are discussed next.
Figure-12. Insert Connector drop-down
 
Insert Connector
The Insert Connector tool is used to insert connectors in the drawing. The procedure to use this tool
is given next.
• Click on the Insert Connector tool from the Insert Connectors drop-down. The Insert Connector
dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-13.

Figure-13. Insert Connector dialog box
 
• Click in the Pin Spacing edit box and specify the space between two consecutive pins of the
connector.
• Click in the Pin Count edit box and specify the number of pins. Alternatively, click on the Pick<
button and draw a construction line of desired length. The number of pins will be automatically
assigned based on the length of line and space between two pins.
• Select the At Wire Crossing radio button if you want to set the pins of connector at the crossing of
wires with the connector.
• Click on the Details>> button to expand the dialog box.
• From the Type area, select the desired radio button to change the type of connector. After selecting
the radio button from this area, you can check the preview in the thumbnail in this dialog box.
• If you want the wire numbers to be changed after the insertion of the connectors, then select the
Wire Number Change check box.
• Select the desired options from the Display area to change the display style of the connector.
• The edit boxes in the Size area are used to change the size of connector.
• After specifying the desired parameters, click on the Insert button from the dialog box. The
connector will get attached to the cursor.
• Click in the drawing area to place the connector. If you click on the ladder’s wire then the pins of
connector will automatically adjust according to the ladder; refer to Figure-14.

Figure-14. Placing connectors on a ladder
 
Insert Connector (From List)
The Insert Connector (From List) tool is used to insert the connectors from an XML file created by
Inventor. In Inventor, you can create model of the connector and then you can export it into XML
format. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Insert Connector (From List) tool from the Insert Connectors drop-down. The
Autodesk Inventor Professional Import File Selection dialog box will be displayed; refer to
Figure-15.
Figure-15. Autodesk Inventor Professional Import File Selection dialog box
 
• Select the desired file and click on the Open button. List of connectors will be displayed.
• Select the desired connector and place it in the drawing.

Insert Splice
The Insert Splice tool is used to insert splice in the wiring of connection points of connectors. Click
on this tool to insert splice, the Insert Component dialog box will be displayed. The procedure to
use this dialog box have already been discussed.
TERMINALS
Terminals are used to connect wires to the devices. In real world, terminals are used to connect wires
so that they do not cause sparking at high load. You can use the Insert Component dialog box to
insert terminals in the drawing.
The tools to edit terminals are available in the expanded Edit Components panel. Various tools
related to terminals are discussed next.
Inserting Terminals from Catalog Browser
• Click on the Catalog Browser tool from the Insert Components panel in the Ribbon. The Catalog
Browser will be displayed.
• Select the TRMS category, or any category with terminals.
• Enter a search criteria and click on the Search button.
• Click on a field in the results pane.
Do one of the following:
• Click one of the symbols associated to the catalog value.
• Click Browse to locate the symbol on disk. The symbol selected is automatically associated to that
catalog value for future insertions.
You can double-click the row in the results pane to insert the default or
only symbol associated to the catalog value.
• Specify the insertion point in the drawing.
The symbol orientation matches the underlying wire. If there is no underlying wire, the selected
orientation is inserted. The wire breaks automatically if the symbol lands on it.
Associate Terminals on the Same Drawing
You can use the Associate Terminals tool to associate two or more terminal symbols together.
Associating schematic terminals combines the terminals into a single terminal block property
definition. The number of schematic terminals that can be combined is limited to the number of levels
defined for the block properties.

Associating a panel terminal provides a way to define a particular panel footprint to represent a
schematic block property definition. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click Schematic tab > Edit Components panel > Associate Terminals tool(
).
• Select a terminal symbol to use as the master. It is used as the basis for any terminal property
definition.
Note that your terminal symbol must have block properties defined. To
define block properties, right-click on the symbol and select Edit
Component. In the Insert/Edit Terminal Symbol dialog box, click Block
Properties.
• Select additional terminal symbols to add to the association of the master terminal.
• Press Enter to associate the terminals.
• The catalog data, block properties, Tag strip value, Installation code and Location code are copied
from the master terminal and added to the terminals in the association.
Note: If the number of selected terminals exceeds the total number of
levels defined in the block properties, an alert displays and the extra
terminals are not added to the association.
You can use the other tools related to terminals in the same way.

PRACTICAL AND
PRACTICE
 
CHAPTER 8
 
 
Topics Covered
 
 
 
 
The major topics covered in this chapter are:
 
• Introduction
• Practical 1
• Practical 2
• Practical 3
• Practice 1
• Practice 2
• Practice 3
• Practice 4
• Practice 5
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION
In this chapter, we will create various electrical circuits and at the end of chapter a complete
collection of electrical drawings is given for practice.

PRACTICAL 1
Create a schematic for 3 phase motor starter as shown in Figure-1.
Figure-1. Practical 1
 
Starting AutoCAD Electrical drawing
• Click on the AutoCAD Electrical icon from the desktop or start AutoCAD Electrical by using the
Start menu; refer to Figure-2.
Figure-2. Starting AutoCAD Electrical using Start menu

 
• AutoCAD Electrical will open.
• Click on the down arrow below Start Drawing button from the template area. The list of drawing
templates will be displayed; refer to Figure-3.

Figure-3. Drawing templates
 
• Select the ACAD ELECTRICAL IEC.dwt template from the list. A new drawing will be created
with the selected template.
• Click on the buttons displayed in Figure-4 to hide the grid and off the grid snap.
Figure-4. Grid display and snap
 
Inserting wires
• Click on the Multiple Bus tool from the Insert Wires/Wire Numbers panel in the Ribbon. The
Multiple Wire Bus dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-5.

Figure-5. Multiple Wire Bus dialog box
 
• Click in the Spacing edit box in Horizontal area of the dialog box and specify the spacing as 5 in
the edit box.
• Select the Empty Space, Go Horizontal radio button and specify the number of wires as 3 in the
Number of Wires edit box.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. You are asked to specify the start point of the wires.
• Click in the drawing area at desired position to start wiring. You are asked to specify the end point
of the wires.
• Click in the drawing area to specify the end point; refer to Figure-6.
Figure-6. Wire bus created
 
• Click in the Wire tool from the Wire drop-down in the Insert Wires/Wire Numbers panel in the
Ribbon. You are asked to specify the start point of the wire.
• Click on the top wire to specify the start point of the wire. You are asked to specify the next point of
the wire.
• Click to specify the next point. Similarly, create all the wires of the circuit; refer to Figure-7.
Figure-7. Complete wiring for current circuit

 
Inserting Components
• Click on the Icon Menu button from the Insert Components drop-down in the Insert Components
panel in the Ribbon. The Insert Component dialog box will be displayed.
• Click on the Motor Control category from the dialog box. The components related to motor control
will be displayed; refer to Figure-8.
Figure-8. Insert Component dialog box
 
• Click on the 3 Phase Motor component from the dialog box. The component will get attached to the
cursor.
• Click at the end point of the center line of the wire bus; refer to Figure-9. The motor will be placed
and the Insert/Edit Component dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-10.

Figure-9. motor placement
 
Figure-10. Insert or Edit Component dialog box
 
• Click on the Lookup tool from the Catalog Data area of the dialog box. The Catalog Browser will
be displayed.
• Select the CM111-FC1F518GSKCA field under the CATALOG column from the Catalog
Browser; refer to Figure-11. Note that this is a 3 Phase 1.5 HP motor with 1800 RPM speed.

Figure-11. Motor to be selected
 
• Click on the OK button from the Catalog Browser.
• The catalog data will be updated automatically in the Catalog Data area of the Insert/Edit
Component dialog box.
• Click on the Show All Ratings button from the Ratings area of the dialog box. The View/Edit
Rating Values dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-12.
• Click in the Rating 1 edit box and specify the value as 1.5HP and remove the Rating 4 edit box.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The value will be displayed in the Rating edit box.
Figure-12. View or Edit Rating Values dialog box
 
• Click in the Line 1 edit box in the Description area of the dialog box and specify the value as

MOTOR.
• Click in the Installation Code edit box and specify the value as ISC-01.
• Click in the Location Code edit box and specify the value as LC-0001.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. If the Assign Symbol To Catalog Number dialog box
is displayed (refer to Figure-13) then click on the Map symbol to catalog number button from it.
Figure-13. Assign Symbol To Catalog Number dialog box
 
• The motor after placement will be displayed as shown in Figure-14.
Figure-14. Motor after placement
 
Inserting 3 Phase Overload Circuit Breaker
• Click on the Icon Menu button from the Insert Components drop-down. The Insert Component
dialog box will be displayed.
• Click on the Motor Control category and select the 3 Phase Overloads icon from the dialog box;
refer to Figure-15. The icon will get attached to the cursor; refer to Figure-16.

Figure-15. 3 Phase Overloads component
 
Figure-16. Icon attached to the cursor
 
• Click on the top wire of the wire bus; refer to Figure-17. The Build Up or Down? dialog box will
be displayed; refer to Figure-18.
Figure-17. Placement of overload circuit breaker
 
Figure-18. Build Up or Down dialog box

 
• Click on the Down button from the dialog box. The Insert/Edit Component dialog box will be
displayed.
• Click on the Lookup button from the Catalog Data area. The Catalog Browser dialog box will be
displayed.
• Click on the 193-A1A1 field in the CATALOG column from the dialog box; refer to Figure-19.
Figure-19. Catalog Browser with Overloads components
 
• Click on the OK button from the Catalog Browser. The details will appear in the Catalog Data
area of the dialog box.
• Click in the Line 1 edit box in the Description area of the dialog box. Specify the value as
OVERLOAD BREAKER.
• For the Installation Code and Location Code, click on the Drawing button and select the earlier
specified code.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. If the Assign Symbol To Catalog Number dialog box
is displayed then click on the Map symbol to catalog number button. The breaker will be placed
in the circuit; refer to Figure-20.
Figure-20. Overload Breaker
 
Inserting the Starter Contact

• Click on the Icon Menu button and select the Motor Control category.
• Click on the 3 Phase Starter Contacts NO icon from the Insert Component dialog box. You are
asked to specify the location of the contacts.
• Click on the top wire of the bus as did before; refer to Figure-21. The Build Up or Down? dialog
box will be displayed.
• Click on the Down button from the dialog box. The contacts will be placed and the Insert/Edit
Child Component dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-22.
• Click in the Line 1 edit box in the Description area of the dialog box and specify the value as
CONTACTORS.
Figure-21. Contact symbol placement
 
Figure-22. Insert or Edit Child Component dialog box
 
• For Installation and Location codes, click on the Drawing buttons and select the earlier specified
values.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box.

Similarly, insert the other components with the required descriptions. The schematic drawing after
inserting all the components will be displayed as shown in Figure-23.
Figure-23. practical 1
 
PRACTICAL 2
In this practical, we will create a schematic drawing of circuit as shown in Figure-24. This circuit
mainly emphasize on connector.

Figure-24. Practica 2
 
Starting AutoCAD Electrical drawing
• Click on the AutoCAD Electrical icon from the desktop or start AutoCAD Electrical by using the
Start menu.
 
• AutoCAD Electrical will open.
• Click on the down arrow below Start Drawing button from the template area. The list of drawing
templates will be displayed; refer to Figure-25.

Figure-25. Drawing templates
 
• Select the ACAD ELECTRICAL IEC.dwt template from the list. A new drawing will be created
with the selected template.
• Click on the buttons displayed in Figure-26 to hide the grid and off the grid snap.
Figure-26. Grid display and snap
 
Inserting ladder
• Click on the Insert Ladder tool from the Insert Ladders drop-down in the Insert Wires/Wire
Numbers panel. The Insert Ladder dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-27.

Figure-27. Insert Ladder dialog box
 
• Specify the Width value and Spacing value as 50 and 10, respectively.
• Click in the Rungs edit box and specify the value as 4.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. You are asked to specify the insertion point for the
ladder.
• Click in the drawing area to place the ladder at the desired position. If your ladder is placed with
horizontal orientation as shown in Figure-28, then rotate the complete ladder by 90 degree using the
Rotate tool from the Modify panel in the Home tab of the Ribbon.
Figure-28. Ladder placed horizontally oriented
 
• After rotating the ladder, it will be displayed as shown in Figure-29.

Figure-29. Rotated ladder
 
Inserting the Connector
• Click on the Schematic tab if you still in the Home tab; refer to Figure-30.
Figure-30. Schematic tab
 
• Click on the Insert Connector tool from the Insert Connectors drop-down in the Insert
Components panel. The Insert Connector dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-31.
Figure-31. Insert Connector dialog box
 
• Click in the Pin Spacing edit box and specify the value as 10 (this is also the spacing between two

consecutive rungs in the ladder earlier created).
• Click in the Pin Count edit box and specify the value as 4 (this is also the number of rungs in the
ladder earlier created).
• Click in the Connector drop-down in the Display area of the dialog box and select the Vertical
option from the list displayed if not selected.
• Click on Insert button from the dialog box. The connector will get attached to the cursor.
• Click on the top rung of the ladder as shown in Figure-32 to place the connector.
Figure-32. Placing the connector
 
• Select the connector and right click on it. A shortcut menu will be displayed as shown in Figure-33.
Figure-33. Menu for connector
 
• Move the cursor on the Attributes option in the menu. A cascading menu will be displayed; refer to
Figure-34.

Figure-34. Cascading menu for attributes
 
• Click on the Attribute Size option from the cascading menu. The Change Attribute Size dialog
box will be displayed; refer to Figure-35.
Figure-35. Change Attribute Size dialog box
 
• Make sure the size is 2.5 and width is 1. Click on the Single button from the dialog box. You are
asked to select the annotation objects.
• Click on the connector numbers and tags displayed in very small font to increase their size. Refer to
Figure-36.
Figure-36. Numbers and tags in small font
 
• After increasing the size of annotations, the drawing will be displayed as shown in Figure-37.

Figure-37. After increasing size of annotations
 
• Move the overlapping annotations to their proper places.
Connecting Wires
• Click on the Wire tool from the Wires drop-down in the Insert Wires/Wire Numbers panel. You
are asked to specify the starting point of the wire.
• Click on the wire connected to connector number 3 in the left and connect it to the wire connected to
connector number 4; refer to Figure-38.
Figure-38. Wire connected
 
• Click on the Trim Wire tool from the Edit Wires/Wire Numbers panel in the Ribbon. You are
asked to select the wire to be trimmed.
• Click on the wire as shown in Figure-39. Press ENTER to exit the Trim Wire tool.

Figure-39. Wire to be trimmed
 
Inserting Components
• Click on the Icon Menu from the Insert Components drop-down in the Insert Components panel.
The Insert Component dialog box will be displayed.
• Click on the Relays/Contacts category from the dialog box. The components related to relays and
contacts will be displayed; refer to Figure-40.
Figure-40. Insert Component dialog box with Relay and Contacts
 
• Click on the Relay NO Contact component from the dialog box. The component will get attached to
the cursor.
• Place the component on the wire connected to Connector 3; refer to Figure-41. The Insert/Edit
Child Component dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-42.

Figure-41. Relay placed
 
Figure-42. Insert or Edit Child Component dialog box for relay
 
• Click in the Line 1 edit box and specify the value as Control Relay.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box.
• Similarly, place the other components in the circuit. The schematic after placing all the components
will be displayed as shown in Figure-43.

Figure-43. Schematic after placing the components
 
Assigning Wire Numbers
• Click on the Wire Numbers button from the Wire Numbers drop-down in the Insert Wires/Wire
Numbers panel. The Wire Tagging dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-44.
Figure-44. Wire Tagging dialog box
 
• Select the Format override check box. The edit box below it will become active.
• Click in the edit box and remove %S. from the edit box so that %N is left in the box; refer to Figure-
45.

Figure-45. Format override
 
• Click on the Drawing-Wide button from the dialog box to assign the wire numbers to all the wires
in the current drawing. The schematic after assigning the wire numbers will be displayed as shown
in Figure-46.
Figure-46. Practical 2
 
PRACTICAL 3
Create a PLC circuit as shown in Figure-47.

Figure-47. Practical 3
 
Starting AutoCAD Electrical drawing
• Click on the AutoCAD Electrical icon from the desktop or start AutoCAD Electrical by using the
Start menu.
• AutoCAD Electrical will open.
• Click on the down arrow below Start Drawing button from the template area. The list of drawing
templates will be displayed; refer to Figure-48.

Figure-48. Drawing templates
 
• Select the ACAD ELECTRICAL IEC.dwt template from the list. A new drawing will be created
with the selected template.
• Click on the buttons displayed in Figure-49 to hide the grid and off the grid snap.
Figure-49. Grid display and snap
 
Inserting PLC (Full Units)
• In this tutorial, we are going to use Allen Bradley’s AB 1761-L16AWA model PLC. We
recommend you to know the working of this PLC by browsing through the Allen Bradley’s website.
• Click on the Insert PLC (Full Units) tool from the Insert PLCs drop-down in the Insert
Components panel. The Insert Component dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-50.

Figure-50. Insert Component with PLC components
 
• Click on the AB 1761 Micrologix (1” Spacing) category from the dialog box. The list of PLCs will
be displayed; refer to Figure-51.
• Click on the L16-AWA 10in/6out AC-DC/115AC-DC  component from the list. You are asked to
specify the insertion point for the PLC.
• Click in the drawing area to place the PLC. The Edit PLC Module dialog box will be displayed;
refer to Figure-52.
Figure-51. Insert Component with PLCs listed
 

Figure-52. Edit PLC Module dialog box
 
• You can specify descriptions for each input/output address as desired.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The PLC will be placed with the specified
descriptions; refer to Figure-53.

Figure-53. PLC placed in drawing
 
Adding Multiple Wire Bus
• Click on the Multiple Bus tool from the Insert Wires/Wire Numbers panel in the Ribbon. The
Multiple Wire Bus dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-54.

Figure-54. Multiple Wire Bus dialog box with Component radio button selected
 
• Make sure that the Component (Multiple Wires) radio button is selected in the dialog box.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. You are asked to make a window selection to select the
ports of the component for connecting wires.
• Select the Input ports and AC COM as shown in Figure-55.
• Press ENTER from the keyboard and move the cursor. End point of the wire bus will get attached to
the cursor; refer to Figure-56.
• Click at the desired distance to create the wire bus.
Figure-55. Input ports selected
 

Figure-56. End point of wire bus attached to cursor
 
• Click on the Wire tool from the Wires drop-down in the Insert Wires/Wire Numbers panel. You
are asked to specify the start point of the wire.
• Connect all the end points of the wire bus by creating a wire; refer to Figure-57.
Figure-57. Wire connecting end points
 
Connecting Components
• Click on the Icon Menu button from the Insert Components drop-down in the Insert Components
panel. The Insert Component dialog box will be displayed.
• Click on the Selector Switches category in the dialog box. The components in the dialog box will
be displayed as shown in Figure-58. Note that you might need to change the scale of the component
to properly display it in the drawing by using the edit boxes highlighted in a box in Figure-58.
• Select the 3 Position NC component. The component will get attached to the cursor.
• Click on the top wire of wire bus connected to I/3 address of PLC. The Insert/Edit Component
dialog box will be displayed.

• Specify the desired parameters and click on the OK button from the dialog box.
Figure-58. Insert Component dialog box with Selector Switches
 
• Similarly, you can add the other components in the wire bus. After connecting all the components in
the wire bus, the schematic will be displayed as shown in Figure-59.
Figure-59. Wirebus after connecting components
 
Connecting Output Devices
• The right side of PLC is meant for output and power supply. Click on the Wire tool and build the
circuit as shown in Figure-60.

Figure-60. Circuit for output
 
• Using the Icon Menu tool, connect all the components to the circuit; refer to Figure-61.

Figure-61. Adding components to the output
 
• After connecting all the components, the complete circuit will be displayed as shown in Figure-62.

Figure-62. Practical 3
 
PRACTICE 1
Create the schematic drawing as shown in Figure-63.

Figure-63. Practice 1
 
PRACTICE 2
Create the schematic drawing as shown in Figure-64.

Figure-64. Practice 2
 
PRACTICE 3
Create the schematic drawing as shown in Figure-65.
Figure-65. Practice 3
 
PRACTICE 4
Create the schematic drawing as shown in Figure-66.

Figure-66. Practice 4
 
PRACTICE 5
Create the schematic drawing as shown in Figure-67.

Figure-67. Practice 5
 

PANEL LAYOUT
 
CHAPTER 9
 
 
Topics Covered
 
 
 
 
The major topics covered in this chapter are:
 
• Introduction
• Icon Menu for panels
• Schematic List
• Manual
• Manufacturers Menu
• Balloon
• Wire Annotation
• Panel Assembly
• Editor
• Table Generator
• Terminals
• Editing
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION
In the previous chapters, you have learnt to create schematic circuit diagrams. After creating those
circuit diagrams, the next step is to create panels. A panel is the box consisting of various electrical
switches and PLCs to control the working of equipment. Refer to Figure-1. Note that the panel shown
in the figure is back side panel of a machine. This panel is generally hidden from the operator. What
an operator see is different type of panel; refer to Figure-2. We call this panel as User Control panel.
In both the cases, the approach of designing is almost same but the interaction with the user is
different. The User Control Panel is meant for Users so it can have push buttons, screen, sensors, key
board and so on. On the other side, the back panel will be having relays, circuit breakers, sensors,
connectors, plcs, switches and so on.
Figure-1. Panel
 

Figure-2. User Control panel
 
If we start linking the schematic drawings with the panel drawings then the common platform is the
component tag and the location code. Suppose we have created a push button in the schematic with
tag -04PB2 then in the panel layout you should insert the same push button with the same tag. The
location of the Push button will be decided on the Location code. The components that are having
same location code should be placed at the same place in the panel.
In AutoCAD Electrical, there is a separate tab for the tools related to Panel Layout designing with the
name Panel; refer to Figure-3. The procedures of using various tools of the panel are discussed next.
Figure-3. Panel tab
 
ICON MENU
The Icon Menu tool works in a similar way as it does for Schematic drawings. The only difference is
representation of components in the panel layout. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Icon Menu tool from the Insert Component Footprints drop-down in the Insert
Components Footprints panel in the Panel tab of the Ribbon; refer to Figure-4. The Insert
Footprint dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-5.

Figure-4. Icon Menu tool
 
Figure-5. Insert Footprint dialog box
 
• Click on the desired category (Push Buttons in our case). The symbols related to the selected
category will be displayed; refer to Figure-6.

Figure-6. Insert Footprint dialog box with Push Buttons
 
• Click on the desired symbol from the dialog box (Push Button NC in our case). The Footprint
dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-7.
Figure-7. Footprint dialog box
 
• Click on the Catalog lookup button to check the catalog for current symbol. The Catalog Browser
dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-8.

Figure-8. Catalog Browser dialog box
 
• Select the desired component from the catalog and click on the OK button from the dialog box.
• If you have created a block for the component in your local drive then click on the Browse button
and select the desired component block from the dialog box; refer to Figure-9.
Figure-9. Pick dialog box
 
• After selecting the desired component, click on the Open button from the dialog box. The symbol
will get attached to the cursor.
• Click at the desired place in the drawing to place the symbol. You are asked to specify the rotation
angle for the symbol.
• Specify the desired angle or press ENTER to use the default angle (i.e. 0 degree). The Panel
Layout-Component Insert/Edit dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-10.

Figure-10. Panel Layout Component Insert or Edit dialog box
 
• This dialog box is similar to the Insert/Edit Component dialog box as discussed earlier. Specify
the tags for the component.
• Click on the Schematic List button below Tag edit box in the Component Tag area to display the
list of tags used in the drawing/project. The Schematic Tag List dialog box will be displayed;
refer to Figure-11.
• Select the tag related to the symbol being inserted and click on the OK button from the dialog box.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The symbol will be placed with the corresponding tag
attached. If you want to insert more instances of the component then click on the OK-Repeat button
from the dialog box.

Figure-11. Schematic Tag List dialog box
 
Before we start inserting components randomly, it is important to understand the basic frame of
panels. An electric panel generally has an encloser to close pack all the components of panel, a DIN
rail to support the MCBs( Mounted Circuit Breakers), Nameplates to identify components, and
electrical components. We will create a panel combining all of them later in this chapter (under
Practical).
SCHEMATIC LIST
The Schematic List tool is used to import the list of schematic components from the current project
drawings so that the panel representation of those components can be created. The procedure to use
this tool is given next.
• Click on the Schematic List tool from the Insert Component Footprints drop-down. The
Schematic Components List dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-12.

Figure-12. Schematic Components List dialog box
 
• Select the Active drawing if you want to extract the component list of only current drawing (as in
our case) or select the Project and include the relevant drawings.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Schematic Components (active drawing) dialog
box will be displayed(in case of selecting Active drawing radio button); refer to Figure-13.
Figure-13. Schematic Components dialog box
 
• Select any component from the list for which you want to insert symbol in the panel. Click on the
Insert button at the bottom of the dialog box. If the symbol for the component then it will get
attached to the cursor and you will asked to specify the insertion point for the symbol.
• Click in the drawing area to place the component. You will be asked to specify the rotation angle
value for the component.
• Specify the desired value in the Command box or press ENTER to set the default angle. The Panel
Layout-Component Insert/Edit dialog box will be displayed as discussed earlier. Note that the
tags are defined automatically this time. This is because the tags are automatically extracted as per
the schematic list.
• If you want to perform modifications then do that and click on the OK button from the dialog box.
The symbol will be created and the Schematic Components dialog box will appear again.
• Follow the same procedure and insert all the components required in the panel.
• After inserting all the components, click on the Close button from the dialog box to exit.
 
MANUAL
The Manual tool is used to insert the panel components as per our requirement directly using the
blocks. In this case, we need to be very careful regarding the tags otherwise it can create great
problems for assembly site. The procedure to use this tool is given next.

• Click on the Manual tool from the Insert Component Footprints drop-down. The Insert
Component Footprints -- Manual dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-14.
Figure-14. Insert Component Footprint Manual
 
• This dialog box is similar to the Choice B area of the Footprint dialog box discussed earlier. Click
on the Browse button to insert the block of component.
• If you have the component already in the drawing, then click on the Pick button and select the
component. (Note that you can select only non-AutoCAD Electrical blocks as symbol for using this
feature).
• On selecting the block, you are asked to specify the insertion point for the symbol.
• Click in the drawing area and specify the rotation of the symbol. The symbol will be placed and
Panel Layout - Component Insert/Edit dialog box will be displayed as discussed earlier.
• Specify the desired tags and click on the OK button from the dialog box.
MANUFACTURER MENU
The Manufacturer Menu tool is used to insert the components from the manufacturer’s menu.
AutoCAD Electrical contains a library of manufacturer’s components (Allen-Bradley and
ABECAD). The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Manufacturer Menu tool from the Insert Component Footprints drop-down. The
Vendor Menu Selection dialog box will be displayed (for the first time); refer to Figure-15.

Figure-15. Vendor Menu Selection dialog box
 
• Select the desired vendor from the list and click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Vendor
Panel Footprint dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-16.
Figure-16. Vendor Panel Footprint dialog box
 
• The dialog box works in similar way to Insert Component dialog box discussed earlier.
Similarly, you can use the User Defined List and Equipment List tools to insert the Panel
components.
BALLOON
The Balloon tool is used to assign balloons to the components for their identification in the table. The
procedure to use this tool is given next.

• Click on the Balloon tool from the Insert Component Footprints panel in the Ribbon. You are
asked to select the component for which you want to assign the balloon or specify settings for the
balloon.
• Enter S at the command prompt to specify parameters related to balloon. The Panel balloon setup
dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-17.
Figure-17. Panel balloon setup dialog box
 
• Select the desired balloon type and specify the parameters in the dialog box.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box to apply the specified parameters.
• Click on the component. You are asked to specify the leader start point or balloon insertion point.
• Click at the desired point near the component. A dashed line of leader will be displayed having end
point attached to the cursor.
• Click to specify the end point of the leader or press ENTER to place the balloon at the earlier
selected point; refer to Figure-18.
Figure-18. Component with assigned balloon

 
• If you have specified the end point of the leader then press ENTER to place the balloon.
WIRE ANNOTATION
The Wire Annotation tool is used to attach wire annotations to the selected panel components in the
drawing. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Wire Annotation tool from the Insert Component Footprints panel. The Schematic
Wire Number --> Panel Wiring Diagram dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-19.
• Select the desired radio button from the Panel connection annotation for area. If you select the
Active drawing(all) then the annotations will be assigned to components in the current drawing
based on all the active drawings.
Figure-19. Schematic Wire Number dialog box
 
• Select the desired radio button from the Location Codes to process area. The location codes will
be assigned to the components as per the selection of the radio button.
• After specifying the desired settings, click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Schematic --
> Layout Wire Connection Annotation dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-20.

Figure-20. Schematic dialog box
 
• Specify the annotation format in this dialog box and click on the OK button from the dialog box. The
annotations will be assigned to the components in the current drawing automatically; refer to
Figure-21.
Figure-21. Annotations automatically assigned
 
PANEL ASSEMBLY
The Panel Assembly tool is used to insert an already created assembly of panel in the current

drawing. This tool is very useful if you are going to use the same type of panel assemblies in various
drawings. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Panel Assembly tool from the Insert Component Footprints panel in the Ribbon. The
Insert Panel Assembly of Blocks dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-22.
Figure-22. Insert Panel Assembly of Blocks dialog box
 
• Make sure all the check boxes are selected and then click on the OK button from the dialog box. The
WBlocked Assembly to insert dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-23.
Figure-23. WBlocked Assembly to insert dialog box
 
• Select the drawing file of earlier created panel block and click on the Open button from the dialog
box. You are asked to specify the insertion point for the panel block.
• Click in the drawing area to specify the insertion point for the panel block. You are asked to specify
the rotation angle value for the block.
• Specify the desired angle value and press ENTER. The block will be placed.
Till this point, we have discussed about inserting the component footprints in the panel layout. Now,
we will learn to terminal footprints. The tools to manage the terminal footprints are available in the
Terminal Footprints panel in the Ribbon. The tools in this panel are discussed next.
EDITOR
The Editor tool is used to edit the details of terminals present in the current drawing. Note that the
terminal information is collected from all the drawings in the current project. So, it is important to
activate the project whose drawing is being used for editing terminal footprints. The procedure to use
the Editor tool is given next.

• Click on the Editor tool from the Terminal Footprints panel. The Terminal Strip Selection dialog
box will be displayed; refer to Figure-24.
Figure-24. Terminal Strip Selection dialog box
 
• Select the entry that you want to edit in this table and click on the Edit button. If the number of
terminals in the current drawing exceed the number of wires then the Defined Terminal Wiring
Constraints Exceeded dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-25.
Figure-25. Defined Terminal Wiring Constraints Exceeded dialog box
 
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Terminal Strip Editor dialog box will be
displayed; refer to Figure-26.
Figure-26. Terminal Strip Editor dialog box
 

• The selected terminal will be highlighted in yellow color. There are six areas in this dialog box
named; Properties, Terminal, Spare, Destinations, Jumpers, and Multi-Level. The tools in these
areas are used to edit the respective parameters of the terminals. Hold the cursor on each of the
button in these areas to check its function.
• After specifying the desired parameters click on the OK button from the dialog box. If you have
changed the graphical parameters then the Graphical Terminal Strip Insert/Update Required
dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-27.
Figure-27. Graphical Terminal Strip Insert or Update Required dialog box
 
• Click on the Insert button if you want to insert new graphical representation of the terminal strip.
The strip will get attached to the cursor; refer to Figure-28.
Figure-28. New terminal strip attached to cursor
 
• In place of selecting the Insert button, you can select the Update button to update the already
existing terminal strip.
• After updating or inserting the strip, the Terminal Strip Selection dialog box will be displayed
again.
• If you want to add a new terminal strip, then click on the New button from the dialog box. The
Terminal Strip Definition dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-29.

Figure-29. Terminal Strip Definition dialog box
 
• Click in the Number of Terminal Blocks edit box and specify the number of blocks of terminals.
The OK button will become active.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Terminal Strip Editor dialog box will be
displayed as discussed earlier. Specify each detail of the terminal as required and then click on the
OK button from the dialog box. The dialog box will be displayed asking you to insert the graphical
representation of the terminal.
• Click on the Insert button from the dialog box and place the terminal at the desired position in the
drawing.
• Click on the Done button from the Terminal Strip Selection dialog box to exit.
TABLE GENERATOR
The Table Generator tool is used to insert a table consisting of details related to the terminals in the
drawing. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Table Generator tool from the Terminal Footprints panel in the Ribbon. The
Terminal Strip Table Generator dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-30.

Figure-30. Terminal Strip Table Generator dialog box
 
• Select the desired terminal from the Terminal Strip Selection table in the dialog box. For multiple
selection, press and hold the CTRL key and then select; refer to Figure-31.
Figure-31. Terminal Selection
 
• Click on the Table Style  drop-down in the Table Settings area of the dialog box and select the
desired table style.
• Click in the Table Title edit box and specify the suitable title for the terminal table.
• Click on the Settings button in the dialog box. The Terminal Strip Table Settings  dialog box will
be displayed; refer to Figure-32.
• Click on the Browse button for the First Drawing Name edit box in the Drawing Information for
Table Output area of the dialog box. The First Drawing Name dialog box will be displayed; refer
to Figure-33.
• Select the desired drawing( The name of drawing in which table will be inserted is decided on the
basis of the selected drawing’s name). Click on the Save button from the dialog box.
• After specifying the rest of the parameters as required, click on the OK button from the dialog box.

Figure-32. Terminal Strip Table Settings dialog box
 
Figure-33. First Drawing Name dialog box
 
• Click on the OK button from the Terminal Strip Table Generator  dialog box. The Table(s)
Inserted dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-34.

Figure-34. Tables Inserted dialog box
 
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. Drawing will be added in the current project having
tables created recently; refer to Figure-35.
Figure-35. Table created
 
INSERT TERMINALS
There are two tools to insert terminals in the panel layout; Insert Terminals (Schematic List) and
Insert Terminals (Manual) which work similar to Schematic List and Manual tool respectively.
These tools are available in the Insert Component Footprints drop-down in the Insert Component
Footprints panel. Please follow the procedures given for these tools to insert terminals.
EDITING FOOTPRINTS
The tools to edit footprints are available in the Edit Footprints panel; refer to Figure-36. These tools
are discussed next.
Figure-36. Edit Footprints panel
 
 
Edit
The Edit tool is used to modify the footprints of components in the panel layout. The procedure to use
this tool is given next.
• Click on the Edit tool from the Edit Footprints panel. You are asked to select the component for

editing footprint.
• Select the desired component. The Panel Layout - Component Insert/Edit dialog box will be
displayed; refer to Figure-37.
Figure-37. Panel Layout Component dialog box
 
• Specify the desired tags and parameters in the dialog box and click on the OK button from the
dialog box to apply the specified settings.
Copy Footprint
The Copy Footprint tool is used to copy the footprint of a component so that you can assign it to other
components in the panel layout. The procedure is given next.
• Click on the Copy Footprint tool from the Edit Footprints panel. You are asked to select the
components just alike the component to which you want to assign footprints.
• Select the desired component. Its footprint will get attached to the cursor; refer to Figure-38.

Figure-38. Copied footprint
 
• Click at the desired location to place the footprint. The Panel Layout - Component Insert/Edit
dialog box will be displayed. The options in this dialog box have already been discussed.
• Follow the procedures discussed earlier.
Delete Footprint
The Delete Footprint tool is used to delete the footprints of panel components. The procedure is
given next.
• Click on the Delete Footprint tool from the Edit Footprints panel. You are asked to select the
components whose footprints are to be deleted.
• One by one click on the components that you want to be deleted and press ENTER. The footprints
will be deleted and the Search for / Surf to Children dialog box will be displayed; refer to
Figure-39.
Figure-39. Search for or Surf to Children dialog box
 
• Click on the OK button if you want to delete the children components also or click on the No button
to exit the tool.
• If you clicked on the OK button then the Surf dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-40.

Figure-40. Surf dialog box
 
• Select the item from the list and click on the Go To button. The component will be displayed in the
corresponding drawing and the Delete button will become active; refer to Figure-41.
Figure-41. Surf dialog box with component in drawing
 
• Click on the Delete button and delete the children components if you want to.
Resequence Item Numbers
T he Resequence Item Numbers tool is used to re-sequence all the items in the current
drawing/project. The procedure is given next.
• Click on the Resequence Item Numbers tool from the Edit Footprints panel. The Resequence
Item Numbers dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-42.

• Specify the desired starting number for the items in the Start edit box.
• Select the desired radio button and click on the OK button from the dialog box. (In our case, Active
drawing(all) radio button is selected).
• On doing so, the item numbers will be updated automatically.
Figure-42. Resequence Item Numbers dialog box
 
Copy Codes drop-down
There are four tools in this drop-down; Copy Installation Code, Copy Location Code, Copy Mount
Code, and Copy Group Code. These tools work in the same way. The procedure for Copy Location
Code tool is given next. You can assume the same for other tools in the drop-down.
• Click on the Copy Location Code tool from the Copy Codes drop-down. The Copy
Installation\Location\Mount\Group to Components dialog box will be displayed; refer to
Figure-43.

Figure-43. Copy Installation Location Mount Group to Components dialog box
 
• Click on the Pick Master button. You are asked to select the component whose location code is to
be copied.
• Select the desired component. The dialog box will be displayed again. Click on the OK button from
the dialog box. You are asked to select the target components.
• Select the target components to assign the copied location code and press ENTER. The location
code will be assigned.
Copy Assembly
The Copy Assembly tool is used to copy one or more components of a panel assembly. The
procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Copy Assembly tool from the drawing. You are asked to select components or
assembly.
• Select the desired components and press ENTER. You are asked to specify the base point for
copying.
• Click to specify the base point. The component will get attached to the cursor.
• Click in the drawing area to place the copied components/assembly.
PRACTICAL 1
Create the panel layout for schematic diagram created in Practical 1 of Chapter 8; refer to Figure-44.

Figure-44. Practical 1 schematic
 
Starting a drawing
• Select a project having schematic drawing for which you want to design the panel. Note that you
need to add the drawing of Practical 1 of previous chapter in any project.
• Right click on the project name in the Project Manager; refer to Figure-45.

Figure-45. Shortcut menu of Project
 
• Click on the New Drawing button. The Create New Drawing dialog box will be displayed; refer to
Figure-46.
• Click in the Name edit box and specify the name as Panel Layout.
• Click on the Drawing button and select the code for Installation as well as Location codes.

Figure-46. Create New Drawing dialog box
 
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Apply Project Defaults to Drawing Settings
dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-47.
Figure-47. Apply Project Defaults to Drawing Settings dialog box
 
• Click on Yes to apply the settings. The drawing will be created; refer to Figure-48.

Figure-48. Drawing created
 
Adding Enclosure of panel
• Click on the Icon Menu button from the Insert Component Footprints drop-down in the Insert
Component Footprints panel. For the first time, the Alert dialog box will be displayed; refer to
Figure-49.
Figure-49. Alert dialog box
 
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Insert Footprint dialog box will be displayed;
refer to Figure-50.

Figure-50. Insert Footprint dialog box
 
• Click on the Enclosures category in the dialog box. The Footprint dialog box will be displayed;
refer to Figure-51.
• Click on the Catalog lookup button to find out the manufacturer data or specify the desired
manufacturer data in edit boxes of the Choice A area.
• Click on the Browse button and select the drawing block for the enclosure.
• Click on the Open button from the dialog box, you are asked to specify the insertion point for the
footprint.
• Click in the drawing area to specify the insertion point. You are asked to specify the rotation angle
for the current footprint. Enter 0 at the command prompt. The enclosure will be placed; refer to
Figure-52 and the Panel Layout dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-53.

Figure-51. Footprint dialog box for enclosure
 
Figure-52. Enclosure placed
 

Figure-53. Panel Layout dialog box for enclosure
 
• Make sure that you have the values specified as in the above figure and then click on the OK button
from the dialog box.
Inserting other components of the panel
• Click on the Schematic List tool from the Insert Component Footprints drop-down in the Insert
Component Footprints panel. The Schematic Components List dialog box will be displayed;
refer to Figure-54.
Figure-54. Schematic Components List dialog box
 
• Make sure that the Project radio button is selected and then click on the OK button from the dialog
box. The Select Drawings to Process dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-55.

Figure-55. Select Drawings to Process dialog box
 
• Select the Practical 1 drawing from the list and click on the Process button. The drawing will be
included in the schematic list; refer to Figure-56.
Figure-56. Drawing included for processing
 
• Click on the OK button. The Schematic Components (active project) dialog box will be
displayed; refer to Figure-57.

Figure-57. Schematic Components active projects dialog box
 
• Select the component with description STOP and click on the Insert button. The icon will get
attached to the cursor; refer to Figure-58.
Figure-58. Stop button attached to cursor
 
• Click in the enclosure to place the button at the desired place. You are asked to specify the rotation
angle.
• Enter 0 at the command prompt. The component will be placed and the Panel Layout - Insert/Edit
Component dialog box will be displayed.
• Specify the required parameters and click on the OK button. The button will be placed and the
Schematic Components (active project) dialog box will be displayed again.
• Similarly insert the other components of the user panel and assign balloons as discussed in the
chapter. After adding all the components and the balloons the panel layout will be displayed as
shown in Figure-59.

Figure-59. Panel drawing for Practical 1
 
PRACTICE 1
Create a panel layout for users for the schematic created in Practical 2 of chapter 8; refer to Figure-
60. The panel layout is given in .

Figure-60. Practical 3
 

Figure-61. Panel layout for practical 3
 

REPORTS
 
CHAPTER 10
 
 
Topics Covered
 
 
 
 
The major topics covered in this chapter are:
 
• Introduction
• Reports
• Missing Data Catalog
• Electrical Audit
• Drawing Audit
• Dynamic Table editing
 
 
 
Introduction
After the huge discussion of technical aspects in previous chapters, this is the time to relax and see
the results of your work. Actually reports are the tabulated representation of components being used
in the schematic diagrams and panel layouts. The tools to create reports are available in the Reports
tab of the Ribbon; refer to Figure-1. Before we start using the tools one by one, it is important to note
that the reports created here are totally dependent on the schematic diagrams and panel layouts
created earlier. The tables generally have Names of components, Manufacturer details of components
and quantity of components. We can include other details also like location code, installation code
and so on in the table. The tools to create tables are discussed next.

Figure-1. Reports panel
 
REPORTS (SCHEMATIC)
The Reports tool in the Schematic panel is used to create reports of schematic components of the
project. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Reports tool from the Schematic panel in the Reports tab. The Schematic Reports
dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-2.
Figure-2. Schematic Reports dialog box
 
• We have a big list of report types in the Report Name selection box at the left; refer to Figure-3.
Select the desired report type from the selection box, the options in the dialog box will be modified
accordingly.

Figure-3. Report Name box
 
• The list of report types available in the dialog box is given next:
Bill of Materials reports
The Bill of Material reports report only components with assigned BOM information. These reports
provide the following BOM-related features:
• Extract BOM reports on demand, active drawing, or project-wide
• Extract BOM reports on a per-location basis
• Change BOM report format
• Output BOM reports to ASCII report file
• Export BOM data to a spreadsheet or database program
• Insert BOM as a table right on an AutoCAD drawing
• List parent or stand-alone components without catalog information
Procedure to create:
• Select the Bill of Materials option from the Report Name selection box. The options related to Bill
of Materials will be displayed in the dialog box.
• Select the Project radio button if you want to include the drawings from the current project or select
the Active Drawing radio button to create Bill of Materials based on the current active drawing.
• Click on the Category drop-down. The list of various options will be displayed; refer to Figure-4.
Figure-4. Category drop-down
 
• Select the desired option, the component related to the selected option will be included in the Bill
of Materials report.
• Select the check boxes in the Include options area of the dialog box to include the corresponding

components of the circuit in the report. You can select All the above check box to include all the
items displayed above this check box.
• Select the List terminal numbers check box to include the terminal numbers in the report.
• The four radio buttons in the Display option area of the dialog box are used to specify sorting of the
components in the table. The effect of these radio buttons is discussed next.
Normal Tallied Format
Identical component or component/assemblies are tallied and reported as single line items (example:
Red push-button operator 800EP-F4 with 800E-A3L latch and two 800E-3X10 N.O. contact blocks).
Normal Tallied Format (Group by Installation/Location)
Identical component or component/assemblies with the same installation/location codes are tallied
and reported as single line items.
Display in Tallied Purchase List Format
Each part becomes its own line item (example: no longer any sub-assembly items) and each is tallied
across all component types. For example, all 800E-3X10 N.O. contact blocks for all components are
reported as a single line item.
Display in By TAG Format
All instances of a given component-ID or terminal tag are processed together and then reported as a
single entry.
• Select the desired radio button.
• Click on the Format button and select the desired format for the report.
• Select All radio buttons from Installation Codes to extract and Location Codes to extract areas
to include installation codes and location codes in the report.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Report Generator dialog box will be displayed;
refer to Figure-5.

Figure-5. Report Generator dialog box
 
• Select the Add check box for desired data header from the Header area of the dialog box.
• Click on the Edit Mode button to edit the table data. The Edit Report dialog box will be displayed;
refer to Figure-6.
Figure-6. Edit Report dialog box
 
• Double-click on the desire row, the Edit Line dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-7.
Figure-7. Edit Line dialog box
 
• Specify the desired values in the edit boxes of this dialog box and click on the OK button to exit the
dialog box.

• You can add a new line by using the Add from Catalog button and use the catalog data.
• Click on the OK-Return to Report button to return the report creation.
• Now, we are ready to insert the report in the drawing. Click on the Put on Drawing button from the
Report Generator dialog box. The Table Generation Setup dialog box will be displayed; refer
to Figure-8.
• The options in this dialog box are used to modify the details of the table. Specify the desired
parameters and click on the OK button from the dialog box. A box of table boundary will get
attached to the cursor.
Figure-8. Table Generation Setup dialog box
 
• Click in at the desired place in the drawing to place the table. The table will be placed and the
Report Generator dialog box will be displayed again.
• Click on the Save to File button if you want to save the report in a separate file. The Save Report
to File dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-9.

Figure-9. Save Report to File dialog box
 
• Select the desired radio button to specify the format for the file. (Excel spreadsheet format(.xls) in
our case)
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Select file for report dialog box will be
displayed; refer to Figure-10.
Figure-10. Select file for report dialog box
 
• Browse to the desired location in the hard-drive and save the file. On selecting the Save button, the
Optional Script File dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-11.

Figure-11. Optional Script File dialog box
 
• Click on the Run Script button to generate the script file or click on the Close-No Script button to
exit. If you generate the script file then it help the other programs to link the table data to its
generation process.
• Click on the Close button from the Report Generator dialog box to exit. Figure-12 shows a table
inserted in the drawing.
Figure-12. Report of BOM
 
Above procedure is similarly applicable to other type reports discussed next.
Component report
This report performs a project-wide extract of all components found on your wiring diagram set. This
data includes component tags, location codes, location reference, description text, ratings, catalog
information, and block names.
Wire From/To report
If you marked components and/or terminals with location codes, you can make good use of this report.
This report first extracts component, terminal, location code, and wire connection information from
every drawing in the project set. Then it displays a location list dialog box where you can make your
report’s “from” and “to” location selections. All the location codes AutoCAD Electrical found on the
drawing set are listed on each side of this dialog box. Location “(??)” is also included in the list if
AutoCAD Electrical found any component or stand-alone terminal that did not have an assigned
location code.

Component Wire List report
This report extracts the component wire connection data and displays it in a dialog box. Each entry
shows a connection to a component, the wire number, component tag name, terminal pin number,
component location code (if present), and the layer that the connected wire is on.
Connector Plug report
This report extracts plug/jack connection reports and optionally generates pin charts. Since each wire
tied to each connector pin displays in the report, each pin has two entries. One entry is for the ‘in’
wire and the other is for the ‘out’ wire. To create a more useful report, select the PIN chart ‘on’ radio
button at the bottom of the Report Generator dialog box. Make sure the Remove duplicated pin
numbers toggle is checked and click OK. It reformats the report so each pin is listed only once.
PLC I/O Address and Description report
This report lists each PLC module and its beginning and ending I/O address numbers. It scans your
drawing set and returns all individual I/O connection points it finds. It includes up to five lines of
description text and the connected wire number for each I/O point.
PLC I/O Component Connection report
This report scans the selected drawings and returns information about any components connected to
PLC I/O points. Data for the report starts at each wire connection point and follows the connected
wire. The first terminal symbol, fuse symbol, or connector symbol that is hit reports in the column
marked with default “TERMTAG” label. The first schematic component reports in the column with
the “CMPTAG” label. If there are multiple instances, the one closest to the PLC I/O point is the one
that shows up in the report column.
PLC Modules Used So Far report
For this report, AutoCAD Electrical quickly scans the wiring diagram set. It returns in a few moments
and displays the I/O modules it finds. Each entry shows the beginning and ending address of the
module.
Terminal Numbers report
This project-wide, stand-alone report lists all instances of terminals. Each entry includes information
tied directly to the terminal such as terminal number, terminal strip number, and location code.
Terminal Plan report
This project-wide, stand-alone report does a wire network extraction. It takes longer to generate, but
the report includes wire number and wire layer name information.

Connector Summary report
This report lists a single line for each connector tag along with pins used, maximum pins allowed (if
the parent carries the PINLIST information), and a list of any repeated pin numbers used. You can run
this report across the project or for a single component.
Connector Details report
This report extracts the component wire connection data and displays it in a dialog box. Each entry
shows a connection to a component, the wire number, component tag name, terminal pin number,
component location code (if present), and the layer that the connected wire is on.
Cable Summary report
This project-wide cable conductor report gives a report listing all the cable marker tags (parent tags)
found.
Cable From/To report
This project-wide cable conductor report lists the “from / to” for each cable conductor. It also lists
the parent cable number of the conductor, conductor color code, and wire number (if present).
Wire Label report
This report lists wire markers/labels and can be used to create physical wire or cable labels.
MISSING CATALOG DATA
The Missing Catalog Data tool is used to display a diamond on the components in the schematic
diagram and panel layout that do not have catalog data attached. The procedure to use this tool is
given next.
• Click on the Missing Catalog Data tool from the Schematic panel. The Show Missing Catalog
Assignments dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-13.
Figure-13. Show Missing Catalog Assignments dialog box
 
• Click on the Show button to highlighted the components not having catalog data attached; refer to
Figure-14.

Figure-14. Component not having catalog data attached
 
• Click on the Report button from the Show Missing Catalog Assignments dialog box to generate the
report. The Schematic Reports dialog box will be displayed.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Select Drawings to Process dialog box will be
displayed.
• Select the Do All button to include all the drawings of the Project and click on the OK button from
the dialog box. The QSAVE dialog box will be displayed.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Report Generator dialog box will be displayed
with the missing entries; refer to Figure-15.
Figure-15. Report Generator dialog box with missing catalog data components
 
• Click on the Put on Drawing button or Save to File button as discussed earlier to extract the report.
You can also print the table by using the Print button from the dialog box.
ELECTRICAL AUDIT
The Electrical Audit tool is used to audit all the drawings in project and find out the faulty

components in the project. The procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the Electrical Audit tool from the Schematic panel in the Ribbon. The Electrical Audit
dialog box will be displayed.
• Click on the Details button. The expanded dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-16.
Figure-16. Electrical Audit dialog box
 
• Click on the Active Drawing radio button to display the problems in the current drawing. Click on
the tabs in the expanded dialog box which are marked with a cross, the errors will be displayed;
refer to Figure-17.

Figure-17. Errors in the drawing
 
• Select the error from the table and click on the Go To button from the dialog box. The component
having error will be highlighted in the drawing; refer to Figure-18.
Figure-18. Component of error highlighted
 
• Modify the component as per the requirement.
DRAWING AUDIT
The DWG Audit tool is used to audit the drawing for errors of wiring or wire numbers. The
procedure to use this tool is given next.
• Click on the DWG Audit tool from the Schematic panel of the Ribbon. The Drawing Audit dialog
box will be displayed; refer to Figure-19.

Figure-19. Drawing Audit dialog box
 
• Select the Active drawing or Project radio button as per your requirement. If selected the Project
radio button then you need to include the drawings of project as discussed earlier. (Active drawing
radio button is selected in our case)
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Drawing Audit dialog box with the options to
display in the drawing will be displayed; refer to Figure-20.
Figure-20. Drawing Audit dialog box with entities to display
 
• Select the desired check boxes and click on the OK button from the dialog box. The selected
components will be highlighted; refer to Figure-21.
Figure-21. Wires highlighted
 
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box to exit.
Similarly, you can use the other tools in the Reports tab to edit or create the reports.

DYNAMIC EDITING OF REPORTS IN DRAWING
You can edit any entry of the reports inserted in the drawing by using the dynamic editing facility of
the AutoCAD Electrical. The procedure is given next.
• Click in any cell of the table. The Table Cell tab will be displayed; refer to Figure-22.
Figure-22. Table Cell tab in Ribbon
 
• Type the new value for the selected cell if you want to change the value.
• Using the tools in the Table Cell tab you can change the format of the table.
The tools in the Table Cell tab are discussed next.
MODIFYING TABLES
Select any cell in the table; the Table Cell tab will be added to the Ribbon, as shown in Figure-23.
The options in the Table Cell tab are used to modify the table, insert block, add formulas, and
perform other operations.
Figure-23. The Table Cell tab added to the Ribbon
Modifying Rows
To insert a row above a cell, select a cell and choose the Insert Above tool from the Rows panel in
the Table Cell tab. To insert a row below a cell, select a cell and choose the Insert Below tool from
the Rows panel in the Table Cell tab. To delete the selected row, choose the Delete Row(s) tool
from the Rows panel in the Table Cell tab. You can also add more than one row by selecting more
than one row in the table.
Modifying Columns
This option is used to modify columns. To add a column to the left of a cell, select the cell and choose
the Insert Left tool from the Columns panel in the Table Cell tab. To add a column to the right of a
cell, select a cell and choose the Insert Right tool from the Columns panel in the Table Cell tab. To
delete the selected column, choose the Delete Column(s) tool from the Columns panel in the Table
Cell tab. You can also add more than one column by selecting more than one row in the table.

Merge Cells
This button is used to merge cells. Choose this button; the Merge Cells drop-down is displayed.
There are three options available in the drop-down. Select multiple cells using the SHIFT key and
then choose Merge All from the drop-down to merge all the selected cells. To merge all the cells in
the row of the selected cell, choose the Merge By Row button from the drop-down. Similarly, to
merge all cells in the column of the selected cell, select the Merge By Column tool from the drop-
down. You can also divide the merged cells by choosing the Unmerge Cells button from the Merge
panel.
Match Cells
This button is used to inherit the properties of one cell into the other. For example, if you have
specified Top Left Cell Alignment  in the source cell, then using the Match Cells button, you can
inherit this property to the destination cell. This option is useful if you have assigned a number of
properties to one cell, and you want to inherit these properties in some specified number of cells.
Choose Match Cell from the Cell Styles panel in the Table Cell tab; the cursor is changed to the
match properties cursor and you are prompted to choose the destination cell. Choose the cells to
which you want the properties to be inherited and then press ENTER.
Table Cell Styles
This drop-down list displays the preexisting cell styles or options to modify the existing ones. Select
the desired cell style to be assigned to the selected cell. The Cell Styles drop-down also has the
options to create a new cell style or manage the existing ones.
Edit Borders
Choose the Edit Borders button from the Table Cell tab; the Cell Border Properties dialog box will
be displayed, as shown in Figure-24.
Figure-24. The Cell Border Properties dialog box

 
Text Alignment
The down arrow with the Middle-Center button of the Cell Styles panel in the Ribbon is used to
align the text written in cells with respect to the cell boundary. Choose this button; the Text
Alignment drop-down will be displayed. Select the desired text alignment from this drop-down; the
text of the selected cell will get aligned accordingly.
Locking
This button is used to lock the cells so that they cannot be edited by accident. Select a cell and choose
Cell Locking from the Cell Format panel in the Table Cell tab; the Cell Locking drop-down list
will be displayed. Four options are available in the drop-down list. The Unlocked option is chosen
by default. Choose the Content Locked option to prevent the modification in the content of the text,
but you can modify the formatting of the text. Choose the Format Locked option to prevent the
modification in the formatting of the text, but in this case, you can modify the content of the text. Select
the Content and Format Locked option to prevent the modification of both formatting and content of
the text.
Data Format
The display of the text in the cell depends on the format type selected. Choose Cell Format to change

the format of the text in the cell. On doing so, the Data Format drop-down list is displayed. Choose
the required format from it. You can also select the  Custom Table Cell Format option and choose
the required format from the Data type list box in the Table Cell Format dialog box and then choose
the OK button.
Block
This tool is used to insert a block in the selected cell. Choose the Block tool from the Insert panel;
the Insert a Block in a Table Cell dialog box will be displayed, refer to Figure-25. Enter the name
of the block in the Name edit box or choose the Browse button to locate the destination file of the
block. If you have browsed the file path, it will be displayed in the Path area. The options available
in the Insert a Block in a Table Cell dialog box are discussed next.
Figure-25. The Insert a Block in a Table Cell dialog box
 
Properties Area
The options in this area are discussed next.
Scale. This edit box is used to specify the scale of the block. By default, this edit box is not available
because the AutoFit check box is selected below this drop-down list. Selecting the AutoFit check
box ensures that the block is scaled such that it fits in the selected cell.
Rotation angle. The Rotation angle edit box is used to specify the angle by which the block will be
rotated before being placed in the cell.
Overall cell alignment. This drop-down list is used to define the block alignment in the selected cell.
Field
You can also insert a field in the cell. The field contains the data that is associative to the property
that defines the field. For example, you can insert a field that has the name of the author of the current
drawing. If you have already defined the author of the current drawing in the Drawing Properties

dialog box, it will automatically be displayed in the field. If you modify the author name and update
the field, the changes will automatically be made in the text. When you choose the Field button from
the Insert panel, the Field dialog box will be displayed. You can select the field to be added from the
Field names list box and select the format of the field from the Format list box. Choose OK after
selecting the field and format. If the data in the selected field is already defined, it will be displayed
in the Text window. If not, the field will display dashes (----).
Formula
Choose Formula from the Insert panel; a drop-down list is displayed. This drop-down list contains
the formulas that can be applied to a given cell. The formula calculates the values for that cell using
the values of other cell. In a table, the columns are named with letters (like A, B, C, ...) and rows are
named with numbers (like 1, 2, 3, ...). The TABLEINDICATOR system variable controls the display
of column letters and row numbers. By default, the TABLEINDICATOR system variable is set to 1,
which means the row numbers and column letters will be displayed when Text Editor is invoked. Set
the system variable to zero to turn off the visibility of row numbers and column letters. The
nomenclature of cells is done using the column letters and row numbers. For example, the cell
corresponding to column A and row 2 is A2. For a better understanding, some of the cells have been
labeled accordingly in Figure-26.
Formulas are defined by the range of cells. The range of cells is specified by specifying the name of
first and the last cell of the range, separated by a colon (:). The range takes all the cells falling
between specified cells. For example, if you write A2 : C3, this means all the cells falling in 2nd and
3rd rows, Column A and B will be taken into account. To insert a formula, double click on the cell;
Text Editor is invoked. You can now write the syntax of the formula in the cell. The syntax for
different formulas are discussed later while explaining different formulas. Formulas can also be
inserted by using the Formula drop-down list. Different formulas available in the Formula drop-down
list are discussed next.
Figure-26. The Table showing nomenclature for Columns, Rows, and Cells
 
Sum
The Sum option gives output for a given cell as the sum of the numerical values entered in a specified
range of cells. Choose the Sum option from the Table Cell > Insert > Formula drop-down; you will
be prompted to select the first corner of the table cell range and then the second corner. The sum of
values of all the cells that fall between the selected range will be displayed as the output. As soon as
you specify the second corner, the Text Editor is displayed and also the formula is displayed in the

cell. In addition to the formula, you can also write multiline text in the cell. Choose Close Text
Editor from the Close panel to exit the editor. When you exit the text editor, the formula is replaced
by a hash (#). Now, if you enter numerical values in the cells included in the range, the hash (#) is
replaced according to the addition of those numerical values. The prompt sequence, when you select
the Sum option, is given next.
Select first corner of table cell range: Specify a point in the first cell of the cell range.
Select second corner of table cell range: Specify a point in the last cell of the cell range.
 
Note that the syntax for the Sum option is: =Sum{Number of the first cell of cell range (for example:
A2): Number of the last cell of the cell range (for example: C5)}
Average
This option is used to insert a formula that calculates the average of values of the cells falling in the
cell range. Prompt sequence is the same as for the Sum option.
 
Note that the syntax for the Average option is: =Average{Number of the first cell of the cell range
(for example: A2): Number of the last cell of the cell range (for example: C5)}
Count
This option is used to insert a formula that calculates the number of cells falling under the cell range.
The prompt sequence is the same as for the Sum option.
 
Note that the syntax for the Count option is: =Count{Number of the first cell of cell range (for
example: A2): Number of the last cell of cell range (for example: C5)}
Cell
This option equates the current cell with a selected cell. Whenever there is a change in the value of
the selected cell, the change is automatically updated in the other cell. To do so, choose the Cell
option from Table Cell > Insert > Formula drop-down; you will be prompted to select a table cell.
Select the cell with which you want to equate the current cell. The prompt sequence for the Cell
option is given next.
 
Select table cell: Select a cell to equate with the current cell.
 
 

Note that the syntax for the Cell option is: =Number of the cell.
Equation
Using this option, you can manually write equations. The syntax for writing the equations should be
the same as explained earlier.
Manage Cell Content
The Manage Cell Content button is used to control the sequence of the display of blocks in the cell,
if there are more than one block in a cell. Choose Manage Cell Contents from the Insert panel; the
Manage Cell Content dialog box will be displayed, see Figure-27. The options in the Manage Cell
Content dialog box are discussed next.
Figure-27. The Manage Cell Content dialog box
 
Cell content Area
This area lists all blocks entered in the cell according to the order of their insertion sequence.
Move Up
This button is used to move the selected block to one level up in the display order.
Move Down
This button is used to move the selected block to one level down in the display order.
Delete

This button is used to delete the selected block from the table cell.
Options Area
The options in this area are used to control the direction in which the inserted block is placed in the
cell. If you select the Flow radio button, the direction of placement of the blocks in the cell will
depend on the width of the cell. Select the Stacked horizontal radio button to place the inserted
blocks horizontally. Similarly, select the Stacked vertical radio button to place the inserted blocks
vertically. You can also specify the gap to be maintained between the two consecutive blocks by
entering the desired gap value in the Content spacing edit box.
Link Cell
To insert data from an excel into the selected table, choose Data > Link Cell from the Table Cell
tab; the Select a Data Link dialog box will be displayed. The options in this dialog box are used to
link the data in a cell to the external sources.
Download from source
If the contents of the attached excel spreadsheet are changed after linking it to a cell, you can update
these changes in the table by choosing this button. AutoCAD will inform you about the changes in the
content of the attached excel sheet by displaying an information bubble at the lower-right corner of the
screen.

PROJECT
 
CHAPTER 11
 
 
Topics Covered
 
 
 
 
The major topics covered in this chapter are:
 
• Schematic Drawing
• Panel Layout
• Report Generation
 
 
 
Project
Create schematic of the circuit as shown in Figure-1. Design the panel for the user and then generate
the report for the components.
 

Figure-1. Project-Model
 
Starting a New Project File
• Click on the AutoCAD Electrical icon from the desktop or Start AutoCAD Electrical by using the
Start menu.
• Click on the New Project button from the Project Manager; refer to Figure-2.
Figure-2. New Project button
 
• On doing so, the Create New Project dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-3.

Figure-3. Create New Project dialog box
 
• Specify the name of the file as Project in the Name field of the dialog box.
• Click on the OK-Properties button from the dialog box. The Project Properties dialog box will be
displayed.
• Click on the Drawing Properties tab from the dialog box. The options in the dialog box will be
displayed as shown in Figure-4.

Figure-4. Project Properties dialog box
 
• Select the Horizontal radio button from the Ladder Defaults area of the dialog box and click on the
OK button. A new project file will be added in the Project Manager with the name Project.
Adding Drawing in the Project
• Click on the New Drawing button from the Project Manager. The Create New Drawing dialog box
will be displayed; refer to Figure-5.

Figure-5. Create New Drawing dialog box
 
• Click in the Name field of the dialog box and specify Project 1 as the name.
• Click on the Browse button for the Template edit box and select the ACAD ELECTRICAL IEC
template from the dialog box displayed; refer to Figure-6.

Figure-6. Select Template dialog box
 
• Click on the Open button from the dialog box.
• Click on the OK button from the Create New Drawing dialog box. The Apply Project Defaults to
Drawing Settings dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-7.
Figure-7. Apply Project Defaults to Drawing Settings dialog box
 
• Click on the No button from the dialog box. New drawing will be added in the Project with the
name Project 1.
• Click on the Grid Snap and Grid Display button to turn off the grid snap and hide the grid from
drawing.
Creating Ladder
• Click on the Insert Ladder button from the Ladders drop-down in the Insert Wires/Wire
Numbers panel. The Insert Ladder dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-8.

Figure-8. Insert Ladder dialog box
 
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. You are asked to specify the start position of the first
rung.
• Click in the drawing area to specify the starting position. The end point of the ladder gets attached to
the cursor and you are prompted to specify the last rung.
• Click in the drawing area to specify the last rung so that the ladders are displayed as shown in
Figure-9.
Figure-9. Ladders created

 
Adding wire
• Click on the Wire tool from the Insert Wires/Wire Numbers panel in the Ribbon. You are asked to
specify the start point of the wire.
• Click on the top end of the ladder as shown in Figure-10.
Figure-10. End to be selected
 
• Drawing the wire as shown in Figure-11.
Figure-11. Wire drawn
 
Adding Components in the circuit
• Click on the Icon Menu button from the Insert Components panel in the Ribbon. The Insert
Component dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-12.

Figure-12. Insert Component dialog box
 
• Click on the Miscellaneous category from the dialog box. The components will be displayed as
shown in Figure-13.
Figure-13. Miscellaneous components
 
• Click in the Scale schematic edit box at the bottom of the dialog box and specify the value as 20;
refer to Figure-14.

Figure-14. Scale schematic edit box
 
• Click on the Power Source 1 Phase component from the dialog box. The component will get
attached to the cursor.
• Click in the middle of the wire to place the component; refer to Figure-15. The Insert/Edit
Component dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-16.
Figure-15. Placing power source
 

Figure-16. Insert or Edit Component dialog box
 
• Click in the Line 1 edit box of the Description area of the dialog box and specify Power Source in
it.
• Click on the Lookup button from the Catalog Data area of the dialog box. The Catalog Browser
will be displayed; refer to Figure-17.
Figure-17. Catalog Browser
 

• Click in the Search field and specify 230VAC.
• Click on the Search button next to Search field. The list of power sources will be displayed; refer
to Figure-18.
Figure-18. Power sources
 
• Select the 1609-P3000A field under the CATALOG column and click on the OK button from the
dialog box.
• Click on the Next button from the Catalog Data area of the dialog box to specify the item number.
• Specify the Installation Code and Location Code as X1 and L3 respectively.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The power source will be placed; refer to Figure-19.
Figure-19. Power source placed
 
Adding other components
• Click on the Icon Menu button once again and Select the Motor Control category. The components
for motor controls will be displayed; refer to Figure-20.

Figure-20. Components of Motor Control
 
• Click on the 1 Phase Motor component. It will get attached to the cursor.
• Click on the first rung of the ladder and place the component as shown in Figure-21.
Figure-21. Motor placed
 
• Click in the Line 1 edit box in the Description area of the dialog box displayed and specify the
name as Motor1.
• Click on the Lookup button from the Catalog Data area of the dialog box and select the 1329-
ZF00206NVH field in the CATALOG column; refer to Figure-22.

Figure-22. Motor in catalog browser
 
• Click on the OK button from the Catalog Browser dialog box.
• Click on the Next button from the Catalog Data area of the dialog box to specify the item number.
• Specify the same Installation and Location codes as done for previous component.
• Click on the OK-Repeat button from the dialog box and create motors for other rungs.
• Similarly add the other components in the schematic drawing; refer to Figure-23.
Figure-23. Project-Model
 
Adding Panel drawing in the Project
• Click on the New Drawing button from the Project Manager. The Create New Drawing dialog

box will be displayed as discussed earlier.
• Specify the name as Panel Drawing in the Name field of the dialog box.
• Specify the same Installation and Location codes, and click on the OK button from the dialog box.
• Click on No button from the dialog box displayed for applying defaults of project.
Adding panel components
• Click on the Panel tab from the Ribbon. The tools related to panel will be displayed.
• Click on the Icon Menu button from the Insert Component Footprints panel. The Alert dialog box
will be displayed.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Insert Footprint dialog box will be displayed;
refer to Figure-24.
Figure-24. Insert Footprint dialog box
 
• Click on the Enclosures category from the dialog box. The Footprint dialog box will be displayed
as shown in Figure-25.

Figure-25. Footprint dialog box
 
• Click on the Catalog lookup button from the dialog box.
• Make the Search field empty and click on the Search button from the Catalog Browser. The list of
enclosures will be displayed; refer to Figure-26.
Figure-26. List of enclosures
 
• Select the first enclosure from the list and click on the OK button from the Catalog Browser.
• Click on the Browse button from the Footprint dialog box. The Pick dialog box will be displayed;
refer to Figure-27.

Figure-27. Pick dialog box
 
• Select the desired file and click on the Open button from the dialog box. The selected enclosure
will get attached to the cursor.
• Click in the drawing area to place the enclosure. You are asked to specify the rotation angle for the
enclosure.
• Specify the rotation as 0 and press ENTER. The Panel Layout-Component Insert/Edit dialog box
will be displayed; refer to Figure-28.
• Click in the Line 1 of Description area and specify the value as Panel enclosure.
• Click on the Next button from the Item Number area to specify the item number.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box.
Figure-28. Panel Layout dialog box
 
Inserting buttons in the Panel layout

• Click on the Schematic List button from the Insert Component Footprints drop-down in the Insert
Component Footprints panel in the Ribbon. The Schematic Components List dialog box will be
displayed as shown in Figure-29.
Figure-29. Schematic Components List dialog box
 
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Select Drawings to Process dialog box will be
displayed; refer to Figure-30.
Figure-30. Select Drawings to Process dialog box
 
• Select the Project 1 drawing from the list and click on the Process button from the dialog box.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Schematic Components (active project) dialog
box will be displayed; refer to Figure-31.

Figure-31. Schematic Components dialog box
 
• Select the component from the list for which you want to insert the footprint and click on the Insert
button from the dialog box.
• If the footprint is mapped to component then the footprint will get attached to the cursor and you are
asked to place the footprint.
• Place the footprint in the panel enclosure. The Panel Layout dialog box will be displayed. Specify
the desired parameters and click on the OK button from the dialog box.
• If the footprint for the component is not mapped then the Footprint dialog box will be displayed and
you need to manually select the block for the component by using the Browse button as done
earlier.
• Similarly, place all the desired components in the panel enclosure. After adding all the components,
the panel is displayed as shown in Figure-32.

Figure-32. Panel after adding components
 
• Specify the desired annotation to the buttons to make it easy for interpretation.
Generating Reports
• Click on the Reports tab in the Ribbon. The tools related to reports will be displayed; refer to
Figure-33.
Figure-33. Reports tab
 
• Click on the Reports tool from the Schematic panel in the tab. The Schematic Reports dialog box
will be displayed; refer to Figure-34.
Figure-34. Schematic Reports dialog box
 
• Select the Bill of Material option from the Report Name selection box.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Select Drawings to Process dialog box will be
displayed.
• Click on the Do All button and click on the OK button from the dialog box. The QSAVE dialog box
will be displayed if the drawing is not saved.
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The Report Generator dialog box will be displayed;
refer to Figure-35.

Figure-35. Report Generator dialog box
 
• Click on the Put on Drawing button. The Table Generation Setup dialog box will be displayed;
refer to Figure-36.
Figure-36. Table Generation Setup dialog box
 
• Click on the OK button from the dialog box. The table will get attached to the cursor.
• Click at the desired location in the drawing area to place the table. Refer to Figure-37.

Figure-37. Report
 
• Click on the Close button from the dialog box to exit.
• Similarly, you can insert other reports as required.

AUTOCAD ELECTRICAL
WITH INVENTOR
 
CHAPTER 12
 
 
Topics Covered
 
 
 
 
The major topics covered in this chapter are:
 
• Electromechanical Link
• Electrical Part creation in Inventor
• Wire Harness in Autodesk Inventor
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION TO AUTODESK INVENTOR
Autodesk Inventor is a CAD product which provides tools to create 3D models. Once we have
created electrical drawings for the circuit, the next step is to create panel drawings. We have learnt
these things in earlier chapters. Note that the panel drawing is not enough to manufacture the panels.
We need a 3D model of the panel with all the components placed at their proper position. For
creating 3D models of panel, we need Autodesk Inventor. After creating the model, the next step is to
connect model with the electrical drawing for easy synchronization. The 2016 version of AutoCAD
Electrical and Autodesk Inventor gives us capability to make connections between Electrical drawing
and Inventor models by Electromechanical linking. Creating models in Autodesk Inventor is not in the
scope of this book. For that you can use the book on basics of Inventor. Here, we will start with
creating an Electromechanical link and then we will discuss other options related to linking.
 

CREATING ELECTROMECHANICAL LINK
Electromechanical link is an option to connect the electrical drawing with its 3D model. The 3D
model generally includes the wire harness same as creating in the electrical drawing. The procedure
to create an electromechanical link file in AutoCAD Electrical is given next.
• Open any project that you have created earlier. Now, open the panel drawing for which the 3D
model has been created in Autodesk Inventor; refer to Figure-1.
Figure-1. Panel drawing in AutoCAD Electrical
 
• Click on the Electromechanical tab from the Ribbon. The tool(s) related to electromechanical
linking will be displayed; refer to Figure-2.
Figure-2. Electromechanical tab in Ribbon
 
• Click on the Electromechanical Link Setup tool from the Ribbon. The Electromechanical Link
Setup dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-3.

Figure-3. Electromechanical Link Setup dialog box
 
• There are two ways for linking electrical drawing and inventor model. Either create a new link or
use the link earlier created with Autodesk Inventor. Both the ways are discussed next.
Creating New Electromechanical link
• Click on the Create button from the Electromechanical Link Setup dialog box. The Create
Electromechanical Link dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-4.
Figure-4. Create Electromechanical Link dialog box
 
• Specify the desired name for the link file in the Electromechanical Link File Name edit box.
• Click on the ellipse button (
) to browse for shared folder. The Browse For Folder dialog box
will be displayed; refer to Figure-5.

Figure-5. Browse For Folder dialog box
 
• Browse to the desired folder from the dialog box and click on the OK button from the dialog box to
make it shared folder.
• Click on the Create button from the dialog box. The link file will be created and the
Electromechanical Link Creation dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-6.
Figure-6. Electromechanical Link Creation dialog box
 
• Click on the Close button from the dialog box. The Electromechanical Link Setup dialog box will
be displayed; refer to Figure-7.

Figure-7. Electromechanical Link Setup dialog box with properties
 
• Select the desired option from the Link Conflict Resolution Preference area of the dialog box to
set the priority of AutoCAD Electrical or Autodesk Inventor in case of conflict during
synchronization. In simple word: If there is any conflict between files of AutoCAD Electrical and
Autodesk Inventor then priority will be given to the software for which the radio button is selected
in the Link Conflict Resolution Preference area.
• Click on the Close button from the dialog box to exit the dialog box.
Note that you can revise the properties of the link anytime by using the Electromechanical Link
Setup button from the Electromechanical tab in the Ribbon.

Using Existing Electromechanical Link
• After selecting the Electromechanical Link Setup button from the Ribbon, click on the Link button
from the Electromechanical Link Setup dialog box. The Select Electromechanical Link File
dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-8.
Figure-8. Select Electromechanical Link File dialog box
 
• Browse to the desired folder and select the already existing file for linking the electrical and
inventor project.
Note that the Electromechanical link file acts as a bridge between inventor and AutoCAD Electrical
so the same file should be linked to projects in both AutoCAD Electrical as well as Autodesk
Inventor.
LINKING INVENTOR MODEL WITH AUTOCAD
ELECTRICAL DRAWING
I hope that you have already created the Wire harness model of the drawing in Autodesk Inventor. The
steps after creating the model are given next.
• Open the assembly file of Electrical model in Autodesk Inventor; refer to Figure-9.

Figure-9. 3D Model of Electrical assembly
 
• Click on the Electromechanical tab from the Ribbon in Inventor. The tools related to
Electromechanical linking will be displayed; refer to Figure-10.
Figure-10. Electromechanical tab in Inventor
 
• Click on the Electromechanical Link Setup button from the Setup panel in the Electromechanical
tab. The Electromechanical Link Setup dialog box will be displayed as discussed earlier.
• Click on the Link to an electromechanical file button 
 from the dialog box. The Select
Electromechanical File dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-11.

Figure-11. Select Electromechanical Link File dialog box
 
• Select the desired link file and click on the Open button from the dialog box. If there are unsaved
changes in the assembly file then you will be asked to save the unsaved changes; refer to Figure-12.
Figure-12. Save dialog box
 
• Click on the Yes to All button and then on the OK button from the dialog box to save the changes.
The Electromechanical Link Setup dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-13.

Figure-13. Electromechanical Link Setup dialog box with inventor project selected
 
• Click on the Close button from the dialog box. The Location View pane will be displayed at the
right of the application window; refer to Figure-14.
Figure-14. Location View pane
 
• Expand the location codes in the Location View pane to display the components; refer to Figure-15.

Figure-15. Expanded locations in Location View pane
 
Note that in Figure-15, the components are displayed with different icons. These icons show the
nature and origin of component. There are four type of icons that are displayed in Location View
pane before the component name, which are:
Inventor Only 
 
Electrical Only 
 
Linked 
 
Linked with Differences 
 
• To link the electrical component to the Autodesk Inventor component, right-click on the desired
electrical only component. A shortcut menu will be displayed as shown in Figure-16.
Figure-16. Shortcut menu for linking file
 
• Click on the Assign to existing in Assembly option if you have the component already created in

the model space. You will be asked to select the component from the model space.
• Click on the component that you want to link with the selected electrical component. On selecting
the Inventor component, both the components will be replaced with a common component with
symbol of linking; refer to Figure-17.
Figure-17. Linked light with differences
 
• If we expand the link, we can find out the differences between the two objects like in Figure-18. In
this figure, the pins are not properly connected and hence cause the differences between the linking.
Figure-18. Differences in the link
 
• We can resolve such problems by connecting the component pins to the same components in both
AutoCAD Electrical and Autodesk Inventor.
Note that the functions of Location View pane has already been discussed in Chapter 3 of this book.
ELECTRICAL HARNESS IN AUTODESK
INVENTOR FOR AUTOCAD ELECTRICAL
This topic is not related to AutoCAD Electrical directly. In this topic, we will be discussing the
functions of Autodesk Inventor for Electrical harnessing. So, those who are not willing to work on
Autodesk Inventor for 3D electrical model of panel can skip this topic.
Creating Electrical components in Autodesk Inventor

After creating the Electrical drawing some of the client may demand you the 3D model of panel. For
creating 3D model of the panel, we will require the components of the panel. Most of the time, we
will not be able to get all the components in the library. In those cases, we will need a procedure to
create custom components which have electrical properties. The procedure to create such components
in Autodesk Inventor is given next.
• After starting Autodesk Inventor, click on the Part option from the New cascading menu in the
Application menu; refer to Figure-19. The modeling environment will be displayed.
Figure-19. Part option from Application menu
 
• Create a solid model by using the 3D modeling tools of Autodesk Inventor; refer to Figure-20.

Figure-20. Model of a glow bulb
 
• Right-click on any panel name in the Ribbon and select the Harness option from the shortcut menu
displayed; refer to Figure-21. The Harness panel will be displayed, see Figure-22.
Figure-21. Harness option
 

Figure-22. Harness panel
 
• Click on the Place Pin tool 
 from the Harness panel in the Ribbon. You are asked to specify
position of the pins.
• Click at the desired location on the face of model. The Place Pin dialog box will be displayed;
refer to Figure-23.
Figure-23. Placing pin
 
• Specify the pin number in the dialog box and click on the OK button. You will be asked to specify
position of the next pin. Continue the same procedure till you get the desired number of pins.
• After creating desired number of pins, right-click in the empty area of the modeling space and select
the Done option from the shortcut menu; refer to Figure-24. You can also press the ESC button
from keyboard in place of selecting Done option from the shortcut menu.

Figure-24. Completing pin creation
 
• Save the part and use it in assembly for harness.
Placing Multiple pins on part
Instead of placing pins individually, you can place a group of pins on the component to make it useful
for connectors. The procedure of placing multiple pins is given next.
• Click on the Place Pin Group tool 
 from the Harness panel in the Ribbon. The Place Pin
Group dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-25.
• Specify the desired number of pins in the Pins Per Row edit box in the dialog box. Similarly,
specify the number of rows, distance between two pins (pitch), starting number of pins and prefix.

Figure-25. Place Pin Group dialog box
 
• Select the desired option from the Sequential Row, Sequential Column, and Circumventing radio
buttons.
• Click at the desired location on the model to create the pin group. Note that you need to have a
reference point at the location where you want to place pin group. In Figure-26, we have already
created a sketch point on the surface of model, which we are going to select.
Figure-26. Specifying start location for pin group
 
• Click on the Select reference button next to Pin Pitch edit box in the dialog box to select reference
for column direction; refer to Figure-27. On doing so, you will be asked to select a reference entity.

Figure-27. Button selecting Pin Pitch reference
 
• Select a reference like in Figure-28. You can flip direction of pin pitch by using the Flip button next
to Select reference button.
Figure-28. Reference selected for pin pitch
 
• Similarly, select the row pitch; refer to Figure-29.
Figure-29. Directions of row pitch and pin pitch references
 
• Click on the OK button to create the pin group; refer to Figure-30.

Figure-30. Pin group created
 
Harness Properties of Part
To match schematic symbol of AutoCAD Electrical with Autodesk Inventor model, we need to
specify some properties of the harness part. The procedure to apply properties to harness part are
given next.
• Click on the Harness Properties tool 
 from the Harness panel in the Ribbon. The Part
Properties dialog box will be displayed as shown in Figure-31.
Figure-31. Part Properties dialog box

 
• Specify the reference description in the RefDes edit box in the dialog box. Note that this reference
data is matched with the description in AutoCAD Electrical catalog for cross-referencing.
• You can also specify whether the part is Male or Female. If the part is not to act as connector then
select the None radio button from the Gender area of the dialog box.
• Click on the Custom tab in the dialog box to define custom properties. Using the options in the
Custom tab, you can create various properties of part and set their values; refer to Figure-32.
Figure-32. Custom tab of Part Properties dialog box
 
• Specify the desired parameters; refer to Figure-33 and click on the Add button to add it in the table;
refer to Figure-34.
Figure-33. Specifying parameters for part
 

Figure-34. After adding parameter in table
 
• Similarly, add the desired parameters and click on the OK button from the dialog box.
Now, we have the components in the form of 3D models. The next step is to create harness assembly
using these components. Since this book is dedicated to AutoCAD Electrical only, so we will discuss
only little about the harness assembly.
Creating Wiring in Harness Assembly
The benefit of wiring in harness assembly is that you can create the bill of material for wiring. In this
way, you can get the idea of total length of various wires required in you project. The procedure to
create wiring is given next.
• Open the assembly file of the model that you want to use for harness; refer to Figure-35. Note that
pins are must on components for creating wiring. Without pins, you cannot create wiring.
Figure-35. Model used for harness
 
• Click on the Cable and Harness tool from the Begin panel in the Environments tab of the Ribbon;
refer to Figure-36. The Create Harness dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-37.

Figure-36. Cable and Harness button
 
Figure-37. Create Harness dialog box
 
• Specify the desired name and location for harness model. Click on the OK button from the dialog
box. The Cable and Harness contextual tab will be added in the Ribbon with options related to
cable and harness; refer to Figure-38.
Figure-38. Cable and Harness contextual tab
 
• Click on the Create Wire tool from the Create panel in the Cable and Harness contextual tab of
the Ribbon. The Create Wire dialog box will be displayed; refer to Figure-39. Also, you are
asked to select a pin from the component.
Figure-39. Create Wire dialog box
 
• Select the first pin to be connected by wire; refer to Figure-40.

Figure-40. First pin selected
 
• Specify the wire id in the Wire ID edit box of the dialog box.
• Select desired category from the Category drop-down and then select the wire type from the Name
drop-down.
• Now, select the other pin to specify end point of the wire.
• Click on the Apply button from the dialog box and keep on creating other wires.
• After creating all the desired wires, click on the Cancel button from the dialog box to exit.
Modifying Shape of wires
You will get the wires created as straight line but straight wires are not desired at every place; refer
to Figure-41. To change the shape of wires, follow the steps given next.
Figure-41. Straight wires created
 
• Select the wire to be modified. (Note that we will create points on the wire by which we can change
shape of wire.)
• Right-click on the wire. A shortcut menu will be displayed; refer to Figure-42.

Figure-42. Shortcut menu for wires
 
• Click on the Add Points option from the shortcut menu. You are asked to specify position of the
point on wire.
• Click at the desired location and press ESC; refer to Figure-43.
• Right-click at the new point created and select the 3D Move/Rotate option from the shortcut menu
displayed. A 3D dragger will be displayed on the point; refer to Figure-44.
Figure-43. Specifying position of point

 
Figure-44. 3D Dragger and Input boxes
 
• Move the dragger in desired direction and click on the OK button from the Input boxes to apply the
shape modification.
You can learn more about Autodesk Inventor from the book Autodesk Inventor 2016 Black Book from
the same author.

