Auto-Blog Domination System

Table Of Contents
Introduction..................................................................page 3
The Big Picture............................................................page 9
Automate The Auto-Blog Business.............................page 12
1. Planning Your Domination: Choosing The Right Niche To 
Attack........................................................................page 17
2. Setting Up Your Auto-Blogging Weapon...............page 28
3. Choosing Your Money Resources..........................page 54
4. The Ultimate Way To Promote Your 
Blogs..........................................................................page 60

5. The Exit-Strategy Selling To The Highest Bidder...page 65 
6. Conclusion.............................................................page 78

Introduction
Welcome to Auto-Blog Domination System. This is a comprehensive guide 
on how to really make the most money with auto-blogs. This is going to be 
different from other guides that claim to teach you how to create auto-blogs, or 
blogs that simply write themselves and make you money. The truth is, that 
despite the ‘Auto’ part in the name, work is involved in setting them up correctly. 
In this report, I'm going to show you the exact way to unlock all the 
potential.
What Is An Auto-Blog?
If you're wondering exactly what is an auto-blog, these are blogs that 
update by themselves. You can say that in a way, they can potentially write 
themselves without you having to touch them at all. This is done by activating 
certain plugins, which create content for your blog. This is done by grabbing the 
content from RSS feeds from article directories or Yahoo answers.  

These auto-blogs are a good solution if you do not want to spend time and 
effort updating a normal blog, and writing all the unique content for it. This is a 
hands-free affair, and will provide you a good stream of income if you use them 
in the way I've outlined in this report. I'll also explain in-depth about setting these 
blogs up and how they work in a later section.
In terms of setting up an auto-blog, I'm going to go over everything that's 
involved. This includes hosting, registering a domain, choosing a niche, installing 
the blog platform, and installing and using the right plug-ins. So nothing will be 
left out. I’m also going to be teaching you how to get these aspects done by 
others, so you don’t have to waste your time doing it yourself.
How This Will Be Different From Other Reports
What makes this report different fromothers is that I'm going to teach you 
how to make this process totally automated. This means that for every step that's 
required, I'm going to show you how you can have the step completed without 
having to do any of the groundwork yourself! 
 Rather than letting you win for the short-term, I’ll be giving you the bigger 
picture. In this report, I’m going to show you:

•
How to plan for a long-term business model.
•
How to eliminate the headaches involved with setting them up yourself, by 
outsourcing a team of workers to work for you.
•
The exit strategy everyone should have.
•
The right way to promote your site without blogfarms, or confusing links.
For the type of auto-blogs I recommend  setting up, they are going to be 
monetized with mostly CPA offers. You can also use Adsense or Amazon affiliate 
if that's your preference. But I find CPA offers the easiest type of monetization to 
work with when it comes to auto-blogs.  I will go over this in-depth in a later 
section of this report.
Because auto-blogs are pretty much hands free and automatic, they are a 
powerful way to keep building your passive income. If you use the techniques 
contained in this report including the value building areas, you will sure be on 
your way to making even up to $500 - $1,000 on certain days with this business 
model: 

I’m going to be honest and say that it will take some effort from you or 
others' behalf to reach this point. Initially you should have a lower goal and work 
your way up.
Later, I will even take things further by showing you how you can build 
your own empire by scaling this system. This way, you will have more and more 
auto-blogs working for you. Once again, the best part of this is that I will show 
you how this can be done with barely any work on your part. This will be mostly 
hands free as long as you're willing to pay a few very minimal costs.
Not only that, but I will show you exactly that to do with these auto-blogs to 
hit a home run and make big profits with them. Other guides do not mention this, 
but I truly believe this is the best way to make big money with these blogs. 

And once again, this will take only minimal work on your part. This process 
will be 95% hands free if you're willing to pay a few minimal costs.
Now that you have an idea of what this system is all about, let's move onto 
the process.

The Big Picture
As mentioned, the idea behind building your auto-blog empire is to make 
sure that it isn’t a short-term investment. With the labor and costs that you want 
to put into building your auto-blog, you want things to pay off much more than 
what you put in.
That’s why I highly recommend that you do the following to make your 
auto-blog business last for the long-term. If you enter this without a clear 
business model, then even though you’ll make money, there’s no telling how long 
this will last. Treat your auto-blogs like a business and you’ll be more secure for 
growth.
Here’s The Main Plan
Now here’s how you basically want your main business model to look like:
1. Determine Your Income Goal Versus Expected Profit/Blog.
2. Outsource To build the desired number of auto-blogs.
3. Profit from the site for 2-4 months at most.
4. Dump or flip the site at it’s peak.
5. Repeat the process for long-term.

These 5 steps may seem simple, but they makes a world of a difference to 
your business. Generally, a big majority of people get stuck on spending too 
much time building a site only to face the wrath of the engines at a later date. 
This is short-sighted and never the way to go.
Instead, rather than even doing the work yourself, once you’ve made 
some money you should directly funnel this back into growing a few workers to 
assist you in making these sites. Once they are done with the proper promotional 
steps taken, you’ll be making money once the site is up. Now the other area that 
people get lost in is that they expect their site to be around forever. In some 
cases (there are a lot of factors) this may be true. 
But, you are taking a risk with your site. You don’t want all of your hard 
work to go to waste. Depending on how conservative you are, you should aim to 
profit from your site for about 2-4 months. Even up to 6 months if you’re confident 
that your site will be around. Once this is done, you’ll want to immediately flip 
these site before or during it’s top traffic/income level. This way, it looks the most 
attractive to your buyer when you sell it off.
Yes, the best exit strategy isn’t to just wait for your site to die off. Instead, 
you want to flip them off to buyer for the aimed profit level. Overall, you’ll be 
building a much more safe exit strategy for yourself.

Determine If You Plan To Outsource And Budget
Now I highly recommend that you go and do the outsource route. This is 
what works for me, and I’ll be talking about this more on the next chapter. This is 
after all, a number’s game. To make sure you do the least amount of work 
necessary for the best profit, outsourcing your auto-blogs is the best way to go to 
build your empire in mass.
I do only recommend that you scale this process at your own pace, and 
already have a decent income from your sites though. Once you’ve done that, 
you’ll want to plan your budget accordingly, to the work that’s needed. Perhaps 
you want to only outsource the tedious tasks for now?
Either way, determine how much you’re making, and whether the 
outsourcing cost will be profitable to you in the long-run.

Automate The Auto-Blog Business
Auto-blogging itself is automated enough already since the blogs can write 
themselves. However, the setup and scale is where the real workload is. The 
trick to making this process insanely profitable is to leverage off of others to mass 
scale your empire. So if you want to build a real business off of auto-blogging, 
you need to sell the auto-blogs rather than hold them. This is why you want to 
consider automating your business, to help you expand your business and make 
things easier for you.
In each of the later chapters, I’ll be revealing the exact templates and 
steps that you can use get others to do for you cheaply. These will be under the 
“How To Automate This” section. This will only help your business grow further if 
you want to mass scale your business. Remember, depending on your income 
goals it’s really just a numbers game.
I suggest doing so only when you have a sufficient starting budget, or 
you're already making consistent income from your auto-blogging efforts. But the 
investment is well worth it, because it helps you save time and make more profit 
in the long run.
Here are a few of the best places to find quality freelancers you can hire:

Getafreelancer
This is a good site where you can find a lot of freelancers willing to do 
work at affordable prices. There's a number good web designers here that 
provide quality work  Just make sure the freelancer has good reviews and 
feedback on previous work that he/she has done.
Guru

This is place to go with if you want to hire the very best freelancers. The 
costs can be high compared to other places like Odesk and Getafreelancer. But 
you're verylikely to be satisfied with the quality of the work. They also have a 
good ranking system so you can know quickly how much skill a freelancer has.
Elance
This the best site to find top-notch freelancers. They do request high bids, 
but the quality of work is unmatched. I suggest using freelancers here if you need 
something major such as getting unique template for an auto-blog. 

Odesk
Like Getafreelancer, this is also a good place to find good freelancers at 
bargain prices. They also have a system where you can have freelancerswork on 
a hourly basis rather than per project. This is a good place to go to if you need 
someone who can provide you constant work for the long term. 
You can also find good freelancers for hire at Warriorforum and 
Digialtpoint:


1. Planning Your Domination: Choosing The Right Niche 
To Attack
The first step of setting up an auto-blog is to first choose a niche, or topic 
that your blog is going to be based on. This step is essential because you want to 
build a blog around a niche that's profitable, and will have keywords that are 
getting enough search volume. This is because you're going to setup your blog 
so that it targets the right keywords, and is going to get ranked highly for them.
So before you start building your blog, you want to make sure you choose 
a niche that is getting has enough interest in it. This means that for keywords 
related to that niche, they have to have enough volume of searches. Some 
keywords will have very high volumes but will be too competitive to get good 
rankings for. I will show you how to target the right keywords that has enough 
search volume, but will not be too hard to get top rankings.
Google Trends

One tool that I highly recommend for research using is Google Trends. 
Google Trends shows you the 50 most popular keywords that people are 
currently searching for on Google. These keywords should give you an idea of 
what topics are popular right now, and are likely to have users searching for 
information about the topic on Google and other search engine.
As you can see, the 5th most popular keyword is “obama peace prize for 
what”. Obama still seems like a popular topic even today. Now there are some 
people who may not agree that Obama deserves the Nobel Peace Prize, but I'm 
sure that are many who believe that he deserves it.
Yahoo Buzzlist
Another great niche research tool is Yahoo Buzzlist:

This shows you the top current headlines/articles on Yahoo news. As you 
can see, the top two articles relate to Obama. In fact, one article is on why 
Obama deserves the Nobel Peace Prize.
Google’s Wonder  Wheel Tool
This tool is fairly recent, and it’s one of my secret weapons to finding the 
best type of related topics for your blog. If you go to Google’s main site and click 
on the “Show Options” tab, then you’ll see something like this:

Simply just enter a search term like “Obama” and you’ll get a ton of related terms 
or topics to build your sites around. This is a fairly smart tool you can use if 
you’re in a pinch to find hot topics and even related keywords on. 
Google External Keyword Tool
          It seems Obama is still a good topic to base a blog on. Let's look into this 
topic and see which keywords our auto-blog can rank for. We're going to use the 
Google External Keyword Tool for this:

Simply just enter a search term like “Obama” and you’ll get a ton of related terms 
or topics to build your sites around. This is a fairly smart tool you can use if 
you’re in a pinch to find hot topics and even related keywords on. 
Google External Keyword Tool
          It seems Obama is still a good topic to base a blog on. Let's look into this 
topic and see which keywords our auto-blog can rank for. We're going to use the 
Google External Keyword Tool for this:

As you can see, there's only 29,900 results ranking for the phrase “obama 
plates”. Any keyword phrase with 65,000 results or less is not too hard to get top 
rankings for. 
Keyword Difficulty Check Tool
You can confirm SEO difficulty with the Keyword Difficulty Check Tool by 
SEO Log:

This tool is usually accurate in predicting the difficulty for ranking a 
keyword. All you have to do is type the keyword into the tool to see its difficulty. 
As you can see, the keyword “obama plates” has a difficulty of 45 out of 100. 
This means that it's not difficult at all to get top rankings for this keyword. Any 
keyword with difficulty of 70 out of 100 or lower is worth pursuing.
You want to keep doing this process until you find 6-8 more keywords that 
meet the criteria suggested in the above instructions. You want to keep a list of 
these keywords because they are what your content on your blog is going to be 
about. The content will get you ranked for those keywords. Here's an example list 
of other keywords I would pursue if I have an auto-blog on Obama:
 1. "obama volunteer"
   14,800 monthly search volume
   55,400 search results
   54 out of 100 difficulty
 2. "obama calendar"
  12,100 monthly search volume
 17,300 search results
  66 out of 100 difficulty

 3. "obama changes"
  14,800 monthly search volume
 47,400 search results
 66 out of 100 difficulty
 4. “obama doll”
  18,100 monthly search volume
 16,700 search results
  51 out of 100 difficulty
  
 5. “obama games”
 22,200 monthly search volume
  12,600 search results
   66 out of 100 difficulty
I will show you later on exactly how you can configure your blog and the 
plugins to get. These will help you achieve good rankings for your selected 
keywords.

*****How To Automate This Step******
As mentioned, at the end of each step, there will be a section on how to 
get this automated. This is the first of them. Keyword research is fairly easy to 
do, but you might want to consider outsourcing this step if you plan on setting up 
auto-blogs in bulk. I suggest picking the topics for your blogs yourself using 
Google Trends and Yahoo Buzzlist. Then you have the freelancer do the 
keyword research and look for related keywords. You want keyword statistics 
such as:
Monthly Search Volume
Number of SEO Competitors
SEO Difficulty Based On SEO Tool
Top 5 URLs in search engine for that keyword
Then you want the freelancer to highlight or bold any keyword that has 
high monthly search volume, but is not difficult to rank for. Then based on the 
research, you can decide which keyword to target.

The cost for a keyword research project should cost about $20-$50. 
Anything more than $50 is not worth it, unless you get this done in bulk for more 
than one niche (more than 20 blog’s worth of research). Yes prices can really be 
this low if you hire to from the right sources.
Here's an template you can use if you decide to automate this step:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hi,
I'm looking for someone who will do keyword research. I'm trying to find 
keywords to target and get top rankings for my blog. I'm looking for keywords 
with more than 5,000 monthly searches, but less than 65,000 search results 
when you type that keyword phrase into Google with quotes round it. 
I want someone to find me all related keywords along with the related statistics in 
an organized Excel sheet. These statistics include:
Monthly Search Volume
Number of SEO Competitors
SEO Difficulty Based On This SEO Tool 
(http://www.seologs.com/keyword-difficulty.html)
Top 5 URLs in search engine for that keyword

I want you to bold or highlight any keyword meeting my criteria. If you have any 
prior work experience in doing this type of work, please let me know.
If you have any questions, please let me know.
Regards,
(Your Name)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. Setting Up Your Auto-Blogging Weapon
Now that we're done with the niche research, let's move onto setting up 
the blog and configuring it. Again this can be outsourced if you wanted.
Hosting
The first step to having an auto-blog is to get web hosting if you don't have 
one already. Web hosting is essential if you plan on owning any sort of website. 
A web host basically host files for you on the web so that it is displayed when 
others go to a domain you own.
For web hosting, I recommend using Hostgator:

I suggest getting their “Baby” hosting package, which allows you to host 
unlimited domains for $7.95 per month. This is a great deal in my opinion.
Once you have web hosting already, you want to move onto registering a 
domain.
Domain Registration
When registering a domain for your auto-blog, you want to keep it as 
keyword rich as possible. Try to name it in a way that targets one of the keyword 
out of your list that gets the most monthly searches. For example, I would try to 
register:
www.obamagames.com
If that's taken, I would try to register the domain with dashes in between 
the words. For example:
www.obama-games.com

If both keywords are taken, I would try to do the same with the next 
keyword on my list until I find one that's not registered. I would personally stick 
to .com domains only because I believe those are the only domain types that are 
worth it. But if you have to, you can register a .net domain. All the other types of 
domains are not worth it.
The best paces to register a domain are:
 
www.godaddy.com
http://www.namecheap.com/
Most domain names are only around $10 to register, unless they are 
premium (I don't suggest paying the huge prices for these). After registering, you 
want to change the nameservers of your hosting account. You should've gotten 
your nameservers right after you set up your web hosting account. Most 
nameservers look like this:
ns101.hostgator.com
ns102.hostgator.com
Here's an example of which section of a Godaddy account you go to for 
changing namerservers.  

If both keywords are taken, I would try to do the same with the next 
keyword on my list until I find one that's not registered. I would personally stick 
to .com domains only because I believe those are the only domain types that are 
worth it. But if you have to, you can register a .net domain. All the other types of 
domains are not worth it.
The best paces to register a domain are:
 
www.godaddy.com
http://www.namecheap.com/
Most domain names are only around $10 to register, unless they are 
premium (I don't suggest paying the huge prices for these). After registering, you 
want to change the nameservers of your hosting account. You should've gotten 
your nameservers right after you set up your web hosting account. Most 
nameservers look like this:
ns101.hostgator.com
ns102.hostgator.com
Here's an example of which section of a Godaddy account you go to for 
changing namerservers.  

http://wordpress.org/download/
Wordpress has a detailed guide for manually installing Wordpress via FTP 
here:
http://codex.wordpress.org/Installing_WordPress
Configuring Wordpress
After Wordpress is installed, you're ready to login to the admin area and 
configure the theme and plugins. If you've installed Wordpress via Fantastico or 
manual installation, you would have created a administrator username and 
password. Use the username and password to login to the admin area. 
The admin are can be accessed by adding /wp-admin to the end of your 
domain. For example: www.obama-games.com/wp-admin.
The first thing you should do is change the default theme to a theme that's 
more attractive. You can change the theme in your admin area under 
“Appearance” and “Themes”:

To get more themes, you have to download the theme's files and upload 
them to your “themes” folder on your domain via ftp. When you login to the 
“Appearance” area, you should be able to see the theme and select it to make it 
the theme of your blog. 
Here are a few places to download more Wordpress themes for your blog:
 http://wordpressthemesbase.com/

          
 
 http://topwpthemes.com/
 
 
          
 
 http://www.themes2wp.com/
 
 

After changing the theme, the next thing you want to do is change the 
general setting by clicking on the “Settings” tab on the lower left of your admin 
area. You should then type in the title of your blog into Blog Title. It should be 
something related to your niche or topic. For example: “Obama Games”. Next, 
you want to add a little description of your blog in the “Tagline”. These two are 
the only settings I suggest changing, all the other settings can be left as default, 
which I highly suggest doing so.
After changing the “General” settings, you want to change the “Writing” 
settings. The only setting you want to change is the “Updates Services” option:
Right now, it only shows this URL:
http://rpc.pingomatic.com/
You want more URLs to ping to every time you have a new blog post. By 
doing this, you get more exposure by letting more people know whenever a new 
post is made on your blog.

Here's a complete list of URLs to add:
http://1470.net/api/ping
http://api.feedster.com/ping
http://api.moreover.com/ping
http://api.moreover.com/RPC2
http://api.my.yahoo.com/RPC2
http://api.my.yahoo.com/rss/ping
http://bblog.com/ping.php
http://bitacoras.net/ping
http://blog.goo.ne.jp/XMLRPC
http://blogdb.jp/xmlrpc

http://blogmatcher.com/u.php
http://blogsearch.google.com/ping/RPC2
http://bulkfeeds.net/rpc
http://coreblog.org/ping/
http://mod-pubsub.org/kn_apps/blogchatt
http://ping.amagle.com/
http://ping.bitacoras.com
http://ping.blo.gs/
http://ping.bloggers.jp/rpc/
http://ping.blogmura.jp/rpc/
http://ping.cocolog-nifty.com/xmlrpc
http://ping.exblog.jp/xmlrpc

http://ping.feedburner.com
http://ping.myblog.jp
http://ping.rootblog.com/rpc.php
http://ping.syndic8.com/xmlrpc.php
http://ping.weblogalot.com/rpc.php
http://ping.weblogs.se/
http://pingoat.com/goat/RPC2
http://rcs.datashed.net/RPC2/
http://rpc.blogbuzzmachine.com/RPC2
http://rpc.blogrolling.com/pinger/
http://rpc.icerocket.com:10080/
http://rpc.newsgator.com/

http://rpc.pingomatic.com
http://rpc.technorati.com/rpc/ping
http://rpc.weblogs.com/RPC2
http://topicexchange.com/RPC2
http://trackback.bakeinu.jp/bakeping.php
http://www.a2b.cc/setloc/bp.a2b
http://www.bitacoles.net/ping.php
http://www.blogdigger.com/RPC2
http://www.blogoole.com/ping/
http://www.blogoon.net/ping/
http://www.blogpeople.net/servlet/weblogUpdates
http://www.blogroots.com/tb_populi.blog?id=1

http://www.blogshares.com/rpc.php
http://www.blogsnow.com/ping
http://www.blogstreet.com/xrbin/xmlrpc.cgi
http://www.lasermemory.com/lsrpc/
http://www.mod-pubsub.org/kn_apps/blogchatter/ping.php
http://www.mod-pubsub.org/ping.php
http://www.newsisfree.com/RPCCloud
http://www.newsisfree.com/xmlrpctest.php
http://www.popdex.com/addsite.php
http://www.snipsnap.org/RPC2
http://www.weblogues.com/RPC/
http://xmlrpc.blogg.de

http://xping.pubsub.com/ping/
http://rpc.pingomatic.com/http://pingqueue.com/rpc/
https://phobos.apple.com/WebObjects/MZFinance.woa/wa/pingPodcast
http://rpc.britblog.com/
http://services.newsgator.com/ngws/xmlrpcping.aspx
http://www.holycowdude.com/rpc/ping/
http://1470.net/api/ping
http://www.a2b.cc/setloc/bp.a2b
http://api.feedster.com/ping
http://www.bitacoles.net/ping.php
http://ping.pubsub.com/ping/
http://xmlrpc.blogg.de/ 

Then you want to change the “Reading” settings:
For “Front Page Displays”, you want to leave it to display your latest posts. 
This is the best setting to use to help get high rankings for your blog. I would then 
set the blog pages to show at most 20 posts, since then it will show a good 
amount of content to search engines. 
Syndication feeds are what allows other blogs and sites to display your 
posts using RSS (Real Simple Syndication) feeds. Also others can subscribe to 
your blog and receive updated content from your blog using their own RSS 
reading programs. Personally I suggest leaving it to display 10 posts.
In the “For each article in a feed show” section, I would make it display 
summary. This is the best setting, because when other blogs and sites display 
your content in their RSS feed, you don't want them to display the full text of your 
content. If this happened, that's considered duplicate content and will make it 
more difficult for you to get higher search engine rankings. So that's why 
summary is the best setting for it.

The next settings you want to change is “Discussion” settings:
 
Under “Default Article Settings”, there's three options:
1. Attempt to notify any blogs linked to from the article (slows down 
posting.) 
- You want to leave this option on to notify other blogs whenever you link to them. 
This way, they know that you linked to them, and they will probably link back to 
you.
2. Allow link notifications from other blogs (pingbacks and trackbacks.) 
- You want to turn this off since it can be abused by people who want to spam 
your blog.
3. Allow people to post comments on the article 

- You want to turn this on because comments add to your content. You can 
always delete any comments that you don't like.
For all other settings on the page, I leave them as default. You do want 
your blog to notify you of new comments so you can approve of them. I 
personally do not care about avatars so I just choose not to display them.
For “Privacy” settings, always leave it as default so that search engines 
can find your blog. This is critical for ranking for your keywords.
The next set of settings that require changes are the Permalinks:
You want to select the “Month And Name” section. On the “Custom 
Structure” field, you want to have the following tag there:
/%postname%.html

Make sure it looks exactly like it is above. This will make your blog a lot 
more search engine friendly. Go “Save Changes” and you are done with setting 
and configuring your Wordpress blog. 
Plugins:
Plugins are small little programs that you can upload to your “plugins” 
folder inside the domain of your blog. To activate, you simply go to your Plugins 
screen, where you should see options to activate them or deactivate them.
Here are the plug-ins you need to activate for your auto-blog:
1. Aksimet- This plugin already comes with the Wordpress installation, so you 
don't have to find it and install it. When you activate this plug-in, you must 
configure it by applying for your API key, and putting it into the plugin.  This can 
be done at this screen:

Click on update options after putting in your API key and you are done.
2. All In One SEO Pack- This plugin will do all the SEO work for all your blog 
posts. For Home Title, type in the main keyword you want to rank for (usually the 
keyword with most monthly searches). For Home Description, add a description 
of your blog that includes some of the main keywords you want to rank for. Then 
onto Home Keywords, enter all the keywords you're trying to rank for.
3. StatTraq- Once activated, this plugin will give you all the traffic stats for your 
blog. It will tell you how much unique visitors you're getting, where they come 
from (search engines or links from other sites). Also it will tell you which 
keywords are visitors putting into search engines to get to your site. I would leave 
the settings the way they are, there's really nothing that should be changed.
4. Privacy Policy- Once activated, this will create a privacy policy page for you. 
This will make your blog look very complete in the eyes of Google, and give you 
a better chance of high rankings. Just click on “Create Page” and the privacy 
policy page will be created for you.
5. Google XML Sitemap- Once activated, this will create a sitemap for your blog, 
as well as submit the site to Google. It can also submit to Yahoo if you want to 
rank for those keywords on Yahoo too. All the settings are straightforward and 
are fine the way they are, so all you have to do is “Update Options”.

6. Caffienated Content- This plugin costs $77, but it is well worth the investment. 
This is the key plugin that will make your auto blog work.  Once you've bought 
this plugin, you can use it for any blog you plan on having. This plugin is so 
simple to work with yet so powerful, it's mind-boggling. Once activated, you go to 
the Caffienated Content screen:
You should see a message that says everything is checking out alright. 
Also in the same message, you should see a link to get to the management tab. 
Click on that link to get to this screen:

In the keywords section, you want to put all the keywords you gathered 
from your niche research. In the post source, I always choose “articles” as I think 
it's the best way to get content for your blog. For Post Category, I let it stay on 
“Computed”, which means that Caffienated Content will automatically make 
categories to put the content it generates.
I leave all the other settings as default since they don't really require any 
changes. For “Start Date” and “End Date”, you can specify a date range that your 
posts will be dated. Each post will have say that it's been posted in random dates 
within your date range.
Once all the settings are set, you click on “Go”. Then Caffienated Content 
will start posting unique content for your blog. It will take some time depending on 
how much content you want it to generate for your blog.  This plugin will also 
generate comments for you in each of the blog post.

*****How To Automate This Step******
If you don't like dealing with FTP or Cpanel or dealing with sites in general, 
then I suggest automating this step. You should register the domain and transfer 
the domain to your hosting. Then you give your FTP and Cpanel login to your 
freelancer so he/she could do the following:
1. Download and install Wordpress onto your domain.
2. Create MYSQL database and MYSQL if necessary.
3. Download and install the following plugins:
- All In One SEO Pack
- StatTraq
- Privacy Policy
- Google XML sitemap
-Caffienated Content
- Wordpress banner plugin
- Wordpress Adsense Manager
- Amazon Autoposter
4. Configure Wordpress settings and ping list as suggested in this chapter.
5. Choose, download and install an attractive theme.
6. Configure the right settings for all plugins.

This should cost about $50-$60 for this if you hire for a part-time virtual 
assistant from the right country (Phillipines). Depending on the person, this can 
sometimes yield you around 3-4 blogs. But this will be up to your negotiation. 
Make sure you pick someone who's trustworthy and reliable since you are 
providing private sensitive information. Always check background and past work 
experience before choosing somebody. 
Here's a template you can use to automate this step:
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hi,
I’m looking for a virtual assistant to help me install wordpress onto a domain, 
install plugins, and configure all the settings. You’ll need to have prior experience 
with wordpress, and be willing to do this at an affordable rate. However, this will 
be for long-term work if you can prove to you that you can provide good work.
If selected, I will provide all the necessary information to carry out these tasks.
Please do let me know if you have any prior related work experience. If you have 
any questions, please let me know.

This should cost about $50-$60 for this if you hire for a part-time virtual 
assistant from the right country (Phillipines). Depending on the person, this can 
sometimes yield you around 3-4 blogs. But this will be up to your negotiation. 
Make sure you pick someone who's trustworthy and reliable since you are 
providing private sensitive information. Always check background and past work 
experience before choosing somebody. 
Here's a template you can use to automate this step:
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hi,
I’m looking for a virtual assistant to help me install wordpress onto a domain, 
install plugins, and configure all the settings. You’ll need to have prior experience 
with wordpress, and be willing to do this at an affordable rate. However, this will 
be for long-term work if you can prove to you that you can provide good work.
If selected, I will provide all the necessary information to carry out these tasks.
Please do let me know if you have any prior related work experience. If you have 
any questions, please let me know.

Raising Value
This isn’t recommended if you want to save on budget. But it will raise 
your blog’s perceived value . You also might want to consider having a unique 
theme designed for your auto-blog. It makes your blog more unique and 
attractive at the same time. The costs for this can range in the $30-$40 for a top 
design so I don’t recommend that you do this yet. 
If you do though, here's a template to use if you decide to go this route:
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hi,
I'm looking for someone who can design an unique and attractive Wordpress 
template for me. My blog is going to be on (whatever topic you blog is on). I need 
a theme that relates to my blog, and captures the visitor's attention at the same 
time. 
The Wordpress theme must be 100% original. I will own all rights to the theme 
once it's finished. If you have experience designing Wordpress themes in the 
past, please let me know.

If you have any questions or need me to explain in-depth of what I'm looking for 
please let me know.
Regards,
Your Name
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The advantage is that you re-use the unique theme for other auto-blogs 
that you create. Thus, it raises the value for each of your blogs since it’s an 
exclusive design. Not too shabby.

3. Choosing Your Money Resources
Now it's time to monetize your auto-blog. I recommend three methods for 
monetizing your blogs: CPA networks, Adsense, and Amazon affiliate system.
CPA Networks
This is the most recommend way to monetize your blog. In case you don't 
know about CPA offers, it stands for Cost-Per-Action. For a lot of these offers, 
you are going to be paid for bringing leads rather than sales. In fact, there's CPA 
offers that will pay you whenever a user fills out only their most basic contact 
information such as:
1. Name
2. Address
3. Phone Number
4. E-mail
Payouts for CPA offers can range from $20-$40. There's also e-mail 
submits that pay $1-$2 every time a user submits just their e-mail. As you can 
see, CPA offers can be a profitable and easy way to monetize your blog.

To promote these offers, you first have to join a few CPA networks. You're 
going to have to fill out an application on their site to join, but in general, it's 
relatively easy to join these networks. For the website part of their application, 
just show them your blog.
Here a few networks that I recommend joining:
Neverblue:
I found Neverblue an easy network to join and work with. They got a big 
variety of offers there, including Obama offers that pay $1.15-$1.30 for every e-
mail submit:

Here are a few other good CPA networks to join:
http://www.rocketprofit.com

http://www.ads4dough.com
http://www.affiliate.com
http://www.copeac.com
http://www.revenueloop.com
http://www.xy7.com
How To Promote CPA Offers On Your Blog:
There's two main ways you can promote CPA offers. 
1. Banners
This is my most recommended way of promoting CPA offers to your blog.
Download and install this Wordpress banner plugin to display banners on 
your blog. Most CPA offers will already have banners for you to use. All you have 
to do is take the image files, upload them using your Wordpress banner plugin, 
and have them link to your affiliate link. This plugin will allow you to easily display 
banners however you want on any part of your blog.

2. Text Links
You can edit your Wordpress post that Caffienated Content generated. To 
do this, you manually hyperlink related keywords and have them link to your CPA 
offer.
Alternatively, you can have a short paragraph promoting the CPA offer 
and linking to them at either the beginning or the end of a post.
Adsense
You should be familiar with Adsense by now.  I recommend this if for 
some reason you have prefer not to join CPA networks. The basic concept is that 
you get paid every time a user on your site clicks on an Adsense ad. The payout 
can range from $0.05 - $ 1.50 per click depending on the ad.
This Wordpress Adsense Manager allows you to integrate Adsense easily 
to your blog. All you have to do is put in your Adsense plublisher ID (should be 
given to you in your Adsense account). Then you configure the settings on how 
you want your ads to displayed (background color, horizontal, vertical). Once 
that's done, the plugin will display Adsense Ads on all your posts. As you can 
see, it's a very easy and straightforward process.

Amazon
Amazon has an affiliate system where you are paid a certain percentage if 
customers coming from your blog buy certain items. This is another good way to 
monetize your blog. The payout really depends on price of the items offering a 
commission.
If you decide to go with Amazon's affiliate system, you want to use 
Amazon Autoposter. This plugin once activated will allow you to put in your 
Amazon affiliate idea, and display products from Amazon's stores into your blog 
posts. It fact, it generates whole posts for you, and also display reviews about the 
product right there on your blog.

4. The Ultimate Way To Promote Your Blogs
Optional Linking Strategy
This is one optional way to create your linking structure. The main concept 
is to build an auto-blog empire, one that works together by linking to each other. 
This builds up Page Rank of each blog, which leads to higher search engine 
rankings. Now I’m not going to make this too complicated, and this will be a fairly 
simple process if you choose to do it. Remember, I don’t suggst having confusing 
link structures at all, so this is a basic way you can use it to build search engine 
rankings. This is entirely optional and up to you.
The process in a nutshell is to have 4 domains, and 4 subdomains for 
each domain. Each subdomain will be its own blog too, and each one of them will 
focus on one keyword that you've gathered from your niche research. 
But there is a right way to do it and the wrong way to do it. Not everybody 
will be able to do this depending on how much of a budget you have, but if this is 
implemented, it can yield very powerful results for you that is well worth the 
investment. I'm about to show you exactly how to do it the right way.

1. Register your 4 domains.
In this step, you register your 4 main domains that you're going to use. It's 
best that you plan your domains so that the topics of each blog are somehow in 
same way related. For example, each of your main blogs can be on topics 
regarding politics.
2. Get 4 different hosting providers.
You have to get 4 different hosting providers so that your each of your 
domain is hosted by a different host, therefore making each domain get hosted 
under different IP. This is important because Google will detect if the sites linking 
to your site are under the same IP. Let’s just say that's not going to be good.
The 4 hosting providers I recommend are Hostgator, Bluehost, 2mHost, 
and Hostdone.
3. Get 4 sub-domains for each of your main domain you have.
Getting sub-domains can be done through Cpanel, usually under a 
domain that says “Domain Management” or “Manage Domains”. 

Once again, each sub-domain should be based and named after one on 
the keywords received from your niche research.
4. Setup auto-blogs on each domain and sub-domain.
Go through the setup process outlined in this guide for each domain and 
sub-domain. Remove any links (such as the blogroll) linking to other sites.
5. Build backlinks for each of your blog.
I find that the easiest way to do this is to submit each blog to web 
directories. This can be automated and done easily using Directory Submitter 
Pro. It is free and has a big database of directories you can submit to. Do this for 
each of your blog.
6. Link to each of the blog you own by using your keywords as anchor text. 
This is the step that will get you the most out of this process. This is what 
will increase PR and search engine rankings for your blogs.

This is a simple and straightforward process. You want to take one 
domain and each of its sub-domain, and link to the other domains and their sub-
domains. For example, on Domain 1 on the domain and each sub-domain, you 
want to link to Domain 2, Domain 3, and Domain 4 and in addition link to all their 
sub-domains. Then you do the same for the other three domains. This might take 
a bit of effort, but in my opinion it is well worth it.
I don't suggest trying to do all this at once. You want to try to do this one 
step at a time. You want to first get one main domain, and then all the sub-
domains. Then you get domain number 2 and all subdomains, then begin 
interlinking to each other. Then when you're ready, you can get domain 3 and 
subdomains, and do the same. I suggest doing this at your own pace. 

*****How To Automate This Step******
If you want to automate this, you basically want to have the freelancer 
install Wordpress, choose theme, install plugins, and configure settings for each 
domain you have. But once again, do this one at a time at your own pace. Have 
the freelancer install Wordpress for one domain at a time per project. I suggest 
doing this because doing it all at once will have huge costs. but if a freelancer 
has provided good work for installing Wordpress onto one domain, you should 
have him/her do it for the rest of your domains.

5. The Real Way To Cash In, Sell your Auto-Blogs For 
Highest Bidder
This is the most recommended way to get the most value for your auto-
blogs. I highly suggest flipping your auto-blogs, or selling at certain website 
marketplaces. Before you begin selling your blog, you want to hold onto your 
blog for a little more than a month for it to receive sufficient income and traffic. 
You also want to make sure your blog currently has top rankings for the 
keywords you were trying to target. This has several advantages as opposed to 
holding onto them:
You get instant cash rather than waiting for revenue to come in from 
your blogs.
- This means you get paid instantly rather than relying on payment from CPA 
networks or Adsense. Both pay mostly by the end of each month for your 
previous month's total earnings. Most sites sell for 5-8 times their monthly 
revenue. This means when you sell your auto-blog, you should get about the 
same amount of money that you would get for just holding onto the blog for 5 
months. And this is all in instant cash, you get the money from the moment you 
sell the site to a buyer.

You don't have to rely on search engine rankings, which can change 
in an instant.
-To make consistent money with your auto-blogs, you need to maintain and 
make sure you are at the top positions in the search engines. This is essential 
because if this doesn't happen, the traffic will stop coming to your blog. And as 
you know, Google can for any reason change their algorithms in an instant, 
causing your search rankings to drop dramatically. If you sell your auto-blogs 
rather than holding them, you don't have to bother with maintaining high rankings 
for months. You're not at the mercy of Google, and you have income coming in at 
a faster rate.
You're building a real business.
- There area a lot of site buyers out there interested in owning an automated blog 
that already ranks high for good keywords. Once you get to know them, you can 
sell them other blogs you have. This way, you build up a loyal list of customers 
interested in buying your automated blogs.
How To Sell your Blogs Like A Pro!

Here are the points you want to emphasize in your site description to sell 
your blog to the highest bidder:
1. Niche
You want to emphasize that you blog is in a good niche with a lot of 
demand. I suggest providing screenshots of keywords related to your niche, as 
well as how much monthly search volume they receive. Also, if you're monetizing 
your blog with Adsense, you will want to show them stats to give them an idea 
how much they can receive when a user clicks on an Adsense ad.
2. Traffic
If you followed my process, you should start receiving a good amount of 
traffic to your blog. You want to show this to potential site buyers by going into 
showing screenshots of your TrafficStats plug-in page.
3. Search Engine Rankings
You want to show them all the keywords you have top positions for in 
Goolge/Yahoo. Screenshots proving your top positions will also help.

4.  Domain
You want to emphasize that they get a domain that's short, easy to 
remember, and keyword rich. Use Swift Appraisal and see if your domain has 
any value. If your domain has a value of $50 or more, you should screenshot it 
and put it in your site description.
5. Design/Template
If your template is attractive, it brings up the value of the blog. Also, if you 
have a template that's completely unique, you want to mention that because that 
also brings up the value of your blog.
6. Wordpress And Plugins Already Installed
You want to mention that you have Wordpress already installed, and all 
the plug-ins for SEO, Privacy Policy, and automatic content generation. 
Emphasize that the blog is configured to receive a good amount of traffic, and 
that the content will be generated automatically so that no work has to be done 
by the site buyer. Emphasize that the blog is setup already and that it's plug-in 
and play.

7. Bonuses
Offer bonuses such as support, coaching, and free site transfer. Offer to 
transfer the site to their server if they prefer. Also provide support and coaching 
on how to make the most money out of their new auto-blog. 
Depending mostly on traffic and revenue, each auto-blog should sell for 
$100-$500. Now if you followed my process of interlinking blogs for higher ranks, 
you can sell the whole blog network for over $2,000, once again depending on 
overall traffic and revenue.
Best Marketplaces To Sell Your Auto-Blog
After creating a site description emphasizing the right points, it's now time 
to time to list you site for auction. Here are the best places to do so:
Flippa.com- This is branched off of Sitepoint.com. Sitepoint used to have a forum 
for selling sites. Now there's a whole entire separate site for those who want to 
buy and sell websites. This marketplace is mainly for selling high quality sites 
due to the fact that the listing fee is $20. But it is well worth it if you have good 
auto-blog receiving a large amount of traffic. 

There's a lot of good site buyers there willing to pay a good amount of high 
quality sites.
Ebay- Ebay has a section where you can auction off websites. In my opinion, it's 
not the best place to auction off your auto-blog. But if you can't find a buyer 
anywhere else, you're sure to find a buyer here. I only recommend using Ebay as 
the last resort.
Digital Point- This is the marketplace I recommend on using to sell most of your 
auto-blogs. There's a lot of site buyers there, and a lot of them are interested in 
owning an automated site with a lot of traffic coming in already. They're also 
willing to pay a good price for them too.
Have A List Of Auto-Blogs Buyers
I highly suggest you build a list of buyers so that you know who's 
interested in buying automated blog. A good way to do this is to have a separate 
site explaining that you're in the business of selling blogs, and have an opt-in 
form form on that site. 
This form is to let buyers know whenever you have a new auto-blog for 
sale. So every time you sell an auto-blog, you should point them to your site so 
that they're likely to opt-in to your list. 

Transferring Auto-Blog To Buyer
You can do transfer the blog for your buyer, or you can give a detailed 
guide/instructions for doing it themselves. First thing you want to do is change 
the namervers of the domain to match the nameservers of whatever host that 
your buyer uses. You have to ask the buyer for the right nameservers. Once this 
is done, you transfer ownership of the domain to the buyer.
1. Downloading The Files
Use FTP to go into your domain of the blog you're trying to sell. Download 
all files. Create a folder and name it 1_database.
2. Back Up The Database
Go into your Cpanel and go to the section that says “MYSQL” databases. 
Select the database that Wordpress is installed on for the site you're selling. 
Take note of the name of database and admin ID. Go To PHP My Admin. Select 
the database you want to back up, go to the export column, and select all. Then 
select SQL and click on “Save As File”, and save the files onto the 1_database 
folder.

3. Moving The Blog
Get your buyer's Cpanel login if you're moving the site for him/her. Go to 
MYSQL databases, and create a database with same username and password 
you used for your database. Give full privileges to that username.
4. Importing Databases
Go to buyer's PHP myadmin, locate the database you just created, and 
use the import function to upload the sql file download from earlier. Tell your 
buyer that if he/she wants to change the admin details for the database, he/she 
will need to edit the  wp-config.php file and upload it via FTP to the domain.

*****How To Automate This Step******
To automate this step you want to outsource the site description for selling 
your auto-blog. You want to give your freelancer the main idea of what your blog 
is on so that he/she can give you a template for the site description. Also tell 
him/her to emphasize these features in the description:
1. Unique Niche
2. Good Amount Of Traffic
3. Top Rankings for Keywords
4. Unique And Memorable Domain Name
5.  Attractive Theme
6. Wordpress and Plugins Installed Already
7. After Purchase Support
This shouldn't cost much at all and it shoud be around $40-$95. You do 
want to make sure you hire someone with copywriting experience, so be sure to 
check for past copywriting work your freelancer has done. Here's a template you 
can use to automate this step:
Hi,

I'm looking for someone to help me write a site description template I can use to 
auction off my blog. My blog is on (insert topic of your blog), and is an automatic 
blog with a plug-in that generates unique content.
Here are the main points I want emphasized in the site description:
1. Unique Niche
2. Good Amount Of Traffic
3. Top Rankings for Keywords
4. Unique And Memorable Domain Name
5.  Attractive Theme
6. Wordpress and Plugins Installed Already
7. After Purchase Support
If you have any prior copywriting experience, please let me know. Also please 
show me samples of your past copywriting work. The text must be formatted and 
written in language that is easy to read and understand, and please to the eye at 
the same time. It should also capture the reader's attention.
If you need me to provide more details about this to help you write the site 
description, please let me know.
Regards,

Your Name
You might also want to consider outsourcing transferring of site to buyer 
after an auto-blog is sold. This can be done relatively cheap $20-$65 per site 
transfer.  Just make sure your freelancer is familiar with transferring a site. Here's 
a template you can use to automate this process:
Hi,
I'm looking for someone to help me transfer ownership of a Wordpress site I own 
to another owner. This involves downloading all the necessary files from the 
domain, backing up the wordpress database and saving it as a sql file, then 
importing the database with the new owner's Cpanel. Then upload the files via 
FTP to the new owner's domain.
If selected, I'll provide all the necessary information to carry out this task.
This is a relatively simple job, so I'm looking for someone who's affordable, yet 
reliable enough to get the job done on time. If yo have experience with site 
transfers, please let me know.
Regards,
Your Name

Before you do this, you want to change nameservers of your domain to 
your buyer's nameserver.

6. Conclusion
By now, you should have a good idea of what it takes to make money from 
your auto-blogs. As you can see, they're relatively easy to setup. Yet if they're 
used correctly, they can can receive large amounts of traffic with very little effort. 
As long as you monetize these blogs, each auto-blog will only make your passive 
income grow bigger and bigger.
You should also know by now that the real value of auto-logs is to use 
them to build your own business. This can be done by automating the main steps 
through outsourcing, and then selling the blogs to potential site buyers. This 
allows you to make large amounts quick cash without getting your hands dirty.
You may have thought about owning a blog before but felt that it would be 
a pain to create the content for it. Hopefully, this report has shown you that it's 
entirely possible to have a blog that runs itself, and writes its own content. I do 
want to point out that blogs are popular right now due to its Web 2.0 
characteristics (or their social factor). More and more people are looking into 
owning their own blogs, therefore creating a bigger market for people looking to 
own a blog without them having to setup from scratch.

Luckily for you you are well-equipped for this situation, because you now 
know how to profit from this new demand. Now all there's left to do is take action, 
and start selling your auto-blogs to the highest bidder. 

