AVRAM DAVIDSON
 
Manatee Gal Ain’t You Coming Out Tonight
 
 
Here’s  another  story  by  Avram  Davidson,  whose  “The
Golem” appeared earlier in this anthology. Many a Grand
Master  pro-duces  weak  or  inferior  work  in  the  last  few
years of his life, but in this, as in so much else, Davidson
was far from  typical—in  fact,  toward  the end  of  his  long
career, Davidson produced some  of  his best  work ever,
in a series  of  stories—that  started  appearing  in  the  last
years  of  the  1970s  and  continued  through  to  the  early
1990s  (the  last  of  them  was  published  in  1993,  just
before  his death)—that  detail  the  strange  adventures  of
Jack Limekiller.
 
The  Limekiller  stories  are  set  against  the  lushly
evocative  background  of  “British  Hidalgo,”  Davidson’s
vividly  realized,  richly  imagined  version  of  one  of  those
tiny,  eccentric  Central  American  nations  that  exist  in
near-total
 isolation
 on
 the
 edge
 of
 the
 busy
twentieth-century  world  ...  a  place  somehow  at  once
flamboyant  and  languorous,
 where  strange
 things
can—and do— happen…
 
... as the brilliant story that follows,  one  of  the best
of  the Limekiller  tales,  and one  of  the  best  fantasies  of
the 1970s, will amply demonstrate!
 
* * * *
 
The Cupid Club was the only waterhole on the Port Cockatoo waterfront. To
be sure, there were two or three liquor booths back in the part where the
tiny town ebbed away into the bush. But they were closed for siesta,
certainly. And they sold nothing but watered rum and warm soft drinks and
loose cigarettes. Also, they were away from the breezes off the Bay which
kept away the flies. In British Hidalgo gnats were flies, mosquitoes were
flies, sand-flies—worst of all—were flies—flies were also flies: and if
any-one were inclined to question this nomenclature, there was the
unques-tionable fact that mosquito itself was merely Spanish for little fly.
 

It was not really cool in the Cupid Club (Alfonso Key, prop.,
LICENSED TO SELL WINE, SPIRITS, BEER, ALE, CYDER AND
PERRY). But it was certainly less hot than outside. Outside the sun burned
the Bay, turning it into molten sparkles. Limekiller’s boat stood at mooring,
by very slightly raising his head he could see her, and every so often he did
raise it. There wasn’t much aboard to tempt thieves, and there weren’t many
thieves in Port Cockatoo, anyway. On the other hand, what was aboard the 
Sacarissa he could not very well spare; and it only took one thief, after all.
So every now and then he did raise his head and make sure that no small
boat was out by his own. No skiff or dory.
 
Probably the only thief in town was taking his own siesta.
 
“Nutmeg P’int,” said Alfonso Key. “You been to Nutmeg P’int?”
 
“Been there.”
 
Every place needs another place to make light fun of. In King Town,
the old colonial capital, it was Port Cockatoo. Limekiller wondered what it
was they made fun of, down at Nutmeg Point.
 
“What brings it into your mind, Alfonso?” he asked, taking his eyes
from the boat. All clear. Briefly he met his own face in the mirror. Wasn’t
much of a face, in his own opinion. Someone had once called him “Young
Count Tolstoy.” Wasn’t much point in shaving, anyway.
 
Key shrugged. “Sometimes somebody goes down there, goes up the
river, along the old bush trails, buys carn. About now, you know, mon, carn
bring good price, up in King Town.”
 
Limekiller knew that. He often did think about that. He could quote the
prices Brad Welcome paid for corn: white corn, yellow corn, cracked and
ground. “I know,” he said. “In King Town they have a lot of money and only
a little corn. Along Nutmeg River they have a lot of corn and only a little
money. Someone who brings down money from the Town can buy corn
along the Nutmeg. Too bad I didn’t think of that before I left.”
 
Key allowed himself a small sigh. He knew that it wasn’t any lack of
drought, and that Limekiller had had no money before he left, or, likely, he
wouldn’t have left. “May-be they trust you down along the Nutmeg. They
trust old Bob Blaine. Year after year he go up the Nutmeg, he go up and
down the bush trail, he buy carn on credit, bring it bock up to King Town.”
 
Off in the shadow at the other end of the barroom someone began to

sing, softly.
 
W’ol’ Bob Blaine, he done gone. 
W’ol’ Bob Blaine, he done gone. 
Ahl, ahl me money gone—
Gone to Spahnish Hididgo ...
 
In King Town, Old Bob Blaine had sold corn, season after season.
Old Bob Blaine had bought salt, he had bought shotgun shells, canned milk,
white flour, cotton cloth from the Turkish merchants. Fishhooks, sweet
candy, rubber boots, kerosene, lamp chimney. Old Bob Blaine had
re-turned and paid for corn in kind—not, to be sure, immediately after
sell-ing the corn. Things did not move that swiftly even today, in British
Hidalgo, and certainly had not Back When. Old Bob Blaine returned with the
merchandise on his next buying trip. It was more convenient, he did not
have to make so many trips up and down the mangrove coast. By and by it
must almost have seemed that he was paying in advance, when he came,
buying corn down along the Nutmeg River, the boundary be-tween the
Colony of British Hidalgo and the country which the Colony still called
Spanish Hidalgo, though it had not been Spain’s for a century and a half.
 
“Yes mon,” Alfonso Key agreed. “Only, that one last time, he not
come bock. They say he buy one marine engine yard, down in Republican
wa-ters.”
 
“I heard,” Limekiller said, “that he bought a garage down there.”
 
The soft voice from the back of the bar said, “No, mon. Twas a
co-conut walk he bought. Yes, mon.”
 
Jack wondered why people, foreign people, usually, sometimes
complained that it was difficult to get information in British Hidalgo. In his
experience, information was the easiest thing in the world, there—all the
information you wanted. In fact, sometimes you could get more than you
wanted. Sometimes, of course, it was contradictory. Sometimes it was
out-right wrong. But that, of course, was another matter.
 
“Anybody else ever take up the trade down there?” Even if the
information, the answer, if there was an answer, even if it were negative,
what difference would it make?
 
“No,” said Key. “No-body. May-be you try, eh, Jock? May-be they trust
you.”

 
There was no reason why the small cultivators, slashing their small
cornfields by main force out of the almighty bush and then burning the slash
and then planting corn in the ashes, so to speak—maybe they would trust
him, even though there was no reason why they should trust him.
Still…Who knows…They might. They just might. Well…some of them just
might. For a moment a brief hope rose in his mind.
 
“Naaa ... I haven’t even got any crocus sacks.” There wasn’t much
point in any of it after all. Not if he’d have to tote the corn wrapped up in his
shirt. The jute sacks were fifty cents apiece in local currency; they were as
good as money, sometimes even better than money.
 
Key, who had been watching rather unsleepingly as these thoughts
were passing through Jack’s mind, slowly sank back in his chair. “Ah,” he
said, very softly. “You haven’t got any crocus sack.”
 
“Een de w’ol’ days,” the voice from the back said, “every good ‘oman,
she di know which bush yerb good fah wyes, fah kid-ney, which bush yerb
good fah heart, which bush yerb good fah fever. But ahl of dem good w’ol’
‘omen, new, dey dead, you see. Yes mon. Ahl poss aliway. No-body know
bush medicine nowadays. Only bush-doctor. And dey very few, sah, very
few.”
 
“What you say, Captain Cudgel, you not bush doctor you w’own self?
Nah true, Coptain?”
 
Slowly, almost reluctantly, the old man answered. “Well sah. Me know
few teeng. Fah true. Me know few teeng. Not like in w’ol’ days. In w’ol’ days,
me dive fah conch. Yes mon. Fetch up plan-ty conch. De sahlt wah-tah hort
me eyes, take bush-yerb fah cure dem. But nomah. No, mon. Me no dive
no mah. Ahl de time, me wyes hort, stay out of strahng sun now . . . Yes
mon . . .”
 
Limekiller yawned, politely, behind his hand. To make conversation,
he repeated something he had heard. “They say some of the old-time
peo-ple used to get herbs down at Cape Manatee.”
 
Alfonso Key flashed him a look. The old man said, a different note
suddenly in his voice, different from the melancholy one of a moment
be-fore, “Mon-ah-fe?. Mon-ah-fev is hahf-zttow, you know, sah. Fah true.
Yes sah, mon-ah-ta? is hahi-mon. Which reason de lah w’only allow you to
tehk one mon-ah-fei? a year.”

 
Covertly, Jack felt his beer. Sure enough, it was warm. Key said,
“Yes, but who even bother nowadays? The leather is so tough you can’t
even sole a boot with it. And you dasn’t bring the meat up to the Central
Mar-ket in King Town, you know.”
 
The last thing on Limekiller’s mind was to apply for a license to shoot
manatee, even if the limit were one a week. “How come?” he asked. “How
come you’re not?” King Town. King Town was the reason that he was down
in Port Cockatoo. There was no money to be made here, now. But there
was none to be lost here, either. His creditors were all in King Town, though
if they wanted to, they could reach him even down here. But it would hardly
be worth anyone’s while to fee a lawyer to come down and feed him during
the court session. Mainly, though, it was a matter of, Out of sight, somewhat
out of mind. And, anyway—who knows? The Micawber Principle was
weaker down here than up in the capital. But still and all: something might
turn up.
 
“Because, they say it is because Manatee have teats like a woman.”
 
“One time, you know, one time dere is a malm who mehk mellow wit
ah mon-ah-tee, yes, sah. And hahv pickney by mon-ah-tee.” It did seem that
the old man had begun to say something more, but someone else said, 
“Ha-ha-ha!” And the same someone else next said, in a sharp,
all-but-demanding voice, “Shoe shine? Shoe shine?”
 
“I don’t have those kind of shoes,” Limekiller told the boy.
 
“Suede brush? Suede brush?”
 
Still no business being forthcoming, the bootblack withdrew,
mutter-ing.
 
Softly, the owner of the Cupid Club murmured, “That is one bod
bobboon.”
 
Limekiller waited, then he said, “I’d like to hear more about that,
Cap-tain Cudgel. . .”
 
But the story of the man who “made mellow” with a manatee and
fathered a child upon her would have to wait, it seemed, upon another
occasion. Old Captain Cudgel had departed, via the back door. Jack
decided to do the same, via the front.

 
The sun, having vexed the Atlantic coast most of the morning and
afternoon, was now on its equal way towards the Pacific. The Bay of
Hi-dalgo stretched away on all sides, out to the faint white line which marked
the barrier reef, the great coral wall which had for so long safeguarded this
small, almost forgotten nation for the British Crown and the Protes-tant
Religion. To the south, faint and high and blue against the lighter blue of the
sky, however faint, darker: Pico Guapo, in the Republic of Hi-dalgo. Faint,
also, though recurrent, was Limekiller’s thought that he might, just might, try
his luck down there. His papers were in order. Port Cockatoo was a Port of
Entry and of Exit. The wind was free.
 
But from day to day, from one hot day to another hot day, he kept
putting the decision off.
 
He nodded politely to the District Commissioner and the District
Med-ical Officer and was nodded to, politely, in return. A way down the front
street strolled white-haired Mr. Stuart, who had come out here in The Year
Thirty-Nine, to help the war effort, and had been here ever since: too far for
nodding. Coming from the market shed where she had been buying the
latest eggs and ground-victuals was good Miss Gwen; if she saw him she
would insist on giving him his supper at her boardinghouse on credit: her
suppers (her breakfasts and lunches as well) were just fine. But he had
debts enough already. So, with a sigh, and a fond recollection of her fried
fish, her country-style chicken, and her candied breadfruit, he sidled down
the little lane, and he avoided Miss Gwen.
 
* * * *
 
One side of the lane was the one-story white-painted wooden building with
the sign DENDRY WASHBURN, LICENCED TO SELL DRUGS AND
POISONS, the other side of the lane was the one-story white-painted
wooden building where Captain Cumberbatch kept shop. The lane itself
was paved with the crushed decomposed coral called pipeshank—and,
indeed, the stuff did look like so much busted-up clay pipe stems. At the
end of the lane was a small wharf and a flight of steps, at the bottom of the
steps was his skiff.
 
He poled out to his boat, where he was greeted by his first mate,
Skippy, an off-white cat with no tail. Skippy was very neat, and always used
the ashes of the caboose: and if Jack didn’t remember to sweep them out
of the caboose as soon as they had cooled, and off to one side, why, that
was his own carelessness, and no fault of Skippy’s.
 

“All clear?” he asked the small tiger, as it rubbed against his leg. The
small tiger growled something which might have been “Portuguese man
o’war off the starboard bow at three bells,” or “Musket-men to the
futtock-shrouds,” or perhaps only, “Where in the Hell have, you been, all
day, you creep?”
 
“Tell you what, Skip,” as he tied the skiff, untied the Sacarissa, and,
taking up the boat’s pole, leaned against her in a yo-heave-ho manner; “let’s
us bugger off from this teeming tropical metropolis and go timely down the
coast…say, to off Crocodile Creek, lovely name, proof there really is no
Chamber of Commerce in these parts…then take the dawn tide and drop a
line or two for some grunts or jacks or who knows what…sawfish,
maybe…maybe…something to go with the rice and beans to-morrow ...
Corn what we catch but can’t eat,” he grunted, leaned, hastily released his
weight and grabbed the pole up from the sucking bottom, dropped it on
deck, and made swift shift to raise sail; slap/slap/…and then he took the
tiller.
 
“And thennn…Oh, shite and onions, I don’t know. Out to the
Welsh-man’s Cayes, maybe.”
 
“Harebrained idea if ever I heard one,” the first mate growled, trying to
take Jack by the left greattoe. “Why don’t you cut your hair and shave that
beard and get a job and get drunk, like any decent, civilized son of a bitch
would do?”
 
The white buildings and red roofs and tall palms wavering along the
front street, the small boats riding and reflecting, the green mass of the
bush behind: all contributed to give Port Cockatoo and environs the look
and feel of a South Sea Island. Or, looked at from the viewpoint of an-other
culture, the District Medical Officer (who was due for a retirement which he
would not spend in his natal country), said that Port Cockatoo was 
“gemütlich.” It was certainly a quiet and a gentle and undemanding sort of
place.
 
But, somehow, it did not seem the totally ideal place for a man not yet
thirty, with debts, with energy, with uncertainties, and with a thirty-foot boat.
 
A bright star slowly detached itself from the darkening land and swam
up and up and then stopped and swayed a bit. This was the immense
kerosene lamp which was nightly swung to the top of the great flagpole in
the Police yard; it could be seen, the local Baymen assured J. Limekiller, as
far out as Serpent Caye ... Serpent Caye, the impression was, lay hard

upon the very verge of the known and habitable earth, beyond which the
River Ocean probably poured its stream into The Abyss.
 
Taking the hint, Limekiller took his own kerosene lamp, by no means
immense, lit it, and set it firmly between two chocks of wood. Technically,
there should have been two lamps and of different colors. But the local
vessels seldom showed any lights at all. “He see me forst, he blow he
conch-shell; me see he forst, me blow my conch-shell.” And if neither saw
the other. “Well, we suppose to meet each othah…” And if they didn’t?
Well, there was Divine Profidence—hardly any lives were lost from such
misadventures: unless, of course, someone was drunk.
 
The dimlight lingered and lingered to the west, and then the stars
started to come out. It was time, Limekiller thought, to stop for the night.
 
He was eating his rice and beans and looking at the chart when he
heard a voice nearby saying, “Sheep a-high!”
 
Startled, but by no means alarmed, he called out, “Come aboard!”
 
What came aboard first was a basket, then a man. A man of no great
singularity of appearance, save that he was lacking one eye. “Me name,”
said the man, “is John Samuel, barn in dis very Colony, me friend, and
hence ah subject of de Queen, God bless hah.” Mr. Samuel was evidently a
White Creole, a member of a class never very large, and steadily dwin-dling
away: sometimes by way of absorption into the non-White major-ity,
sometimes by way of emigration, and sometimes just by way of Death the
Leveler. “I tehks de libahty of bringing you some of de forst fruits of de
sile,” said John S.
 
“Say, mighty thoughtful of you, Mr. Samuel, care for some rice and
beans?—My name’s Jack Limekiller.”
 
“—to weet, soursop, breadfruit, oh-ronge, coconut—what I care for,
Mr. Limekiller, is some rum. Rum is what I has come to beg of you. De
hond of mon, sah, has yet to perfect any medicine de superior of rum.”
 
Jack groped in the cubbyhold. “What about all those bush medicines
down at Cape Manatee? he asked, grunting. There was supposed to be a
small bottle, a chaparita, as they called it. Where—Oh. It must be ... No.
Then it must be….
 
Mr. Samuel rubbed the grey bristles on his strong jaw. “I does gront

you, sah, de vertue of de country yerba. But you must steep de yerba een
de rum, sah. Yes mon.”
 
Jack’s fingers finally found the bottle and his one glass and his one
cup and poured. Mr. Samuel said nothing until he had downed his, and then
gave a sigh of satisfaction. Jack, who had found a mawmee-apple in the
basket of fruit, nodded as he peeled it. The flesh was tawny, and reminded
him of wintergreen.
 
After a moment, he decided that he didn’t want to finish his rum, and,
with a questioning look, passed it over to his guest. It was pleasant there on
the open deck, the breeze faint but sufficient, and comparatively few flies of
any sort had cared to make the voyage from shore. The boat swayed
gently, there was no surf to speak of, the waves of the Atlantic having spent
themselves, miles out, upon the reef; and only a few loose items of gear
knocked softly as the vessel rose and fell upon the soft bosom of the inner
bay.
 
“Well sah,” said Mr. Samuel, with a slight smack of his lips, “I weesh
to acknowledge your generosity. I ahsked you to wahk weet me wan mile,
and you wahk weet me twain.” Something splashed in the water, and he
looked out, sharply.
 
“Shark?”
 
“No, mon. Too far een-shore.” His eyes gazed out where there was
nothing to be seen.
 
“Porpoise, maybe. Turtle. Or a stingray ...”
 
After a moment, Samuel said, “Suppose to be ah tortle.” He turned
back and gave Limekiller a long, steady look.
 
Moved by some sudden devil, Limekiller said, “I hope, Mr. Samuel,
that you are not about to tell me about some Indian caves or ruins, full of
gold, back in the bush, which you are willing to go shares on with me and all
I have to do is put up the money—because, you see, Mr. Samuel, I haven’t
got any money.” And added, “Besides, they tell me it’s illegal and that all
those things belong to the Queen.”
 
Solemnly, Samuel said, “God save de Queen.” Then his eyes
somehow seemed to become wider, and his mouth as well, and a sound
like hiss-ing steam escaped him, and he sat on the coaming and shook with
almost-silent laughter. Then he said, “I sees dot you hahs been

ahproached ahlready. No sah. No such teeng. My proposition eenclude
only two quality: Expedition. Discretion.” And he proceded to explain that
what he meant was that Jack should, at regular intervals, bring him supplies
in small quantities and that he would advance the money for this and pay a
small amount for the service. Delivery was to be made at night. And nothing
was to be said about it, back at Port Cockatoo, or anywhere else.
 
Evidently Jack Limekiller wasn’t the only one who had creditors.
 
“Anything else, Mr. Samuel?”
 
Samuel gave a deep sigh. “Ah, mon, I would like to sogjest dat you
breeng me out ah woman…but best no. Best not…not yet…Oh, Mon, I om
so lustful, ahlone out here, eef you tie ah rattlesnake down fah me I weel
freeg eet!”
 
“Well, Mr. Samuel, the fact is, I will not tie a rattlesnake down for you,
or up for you, for any purpose at all. However, I will keep my eyes open for
a board with a knothole in it.”
 
Samuel guffawed. Then he got up, his machete slap-flapping against
his side, and with a few more words, clambered down into his dory—no
plank-boat, in these waters, but a dugout—and began to paddle. Bayman,
bushman, the machete was almost an article of clothing, though there was
nothing to chop out here on the gentle waters of the bay. There was a
splash, out there in the darkness, and a cry—Samuel’s voice—
 
“Are you all right out there?” Limekiller called. 
 
“Yes mon…” faintly. “Fine…bloddy Oxville tortle…” 
 
Limekiller fell easily asleep. Presently he dreamed of seeing a large
Hawksbill turtle languidly pursuing John Samuel, who languidly evaded the
pursuit. Later, he awoke, knowing that he knew what had awakened him, but
for the moment unable to name it. The awakeners soon enough identified
themselves. Manatees. Sea cows. The most harmless creatures God ever
made. He drowsed off again, but again and again he lightly awoke and
always he could hear them sighing and sounding.
 
* * * *
 
Early up, he dropped his line, made a small fire in the sheet-iron caboose
set in its box of sand, and put on the pot of rice and beans to cook in
co-conut oil. The head and tail of the first fish went into a second pot, the

top of the double boiler, to make fish-tea, as the chowder was called; when
they were done, he gave them to Skippy. He fried the fillets with sliced
breadfruit, which had as near no taste of its own as made no matter, but
was a great extender of tastes. The second fish he cut and corned—that is,
he spread coarse salt on it: there was nothing else to do to preserve it in
this hot climate, without ice, and where the art of smoking fish was not
known. And more than those two he did not bother to take, he had no
license for commercial fishing, could not sell a catch in the market, and the
“sport” of taking fish he could neither eat nor sell, and would have to throw
back, was a pleasure which eluded his understanding.
 
It promised to be a hot day and it kept its promise, and he told
him-self, as he often did on hot, hot days, that it beat shoveling snow in
Toronto.
 
He observed a vacant mooring towards the south of town, recollected
that it always had been vacant, and so, for no better reason than that, he
tied up to it. Half of the remainder of his catch came ashore with him. This
was too far south for any plank houses or tin roofs. Port Cockatoo at both
ends straggled out into “trash houses,” as they were called—sides of wild
cane allowing the cooling breezes to pass, and largely keeping out the
brute sun; roofs of thatch, usually of the bay or cohune palm. The people
were poorer here than elsewhere in this town where no one at all by North
American standards was rich, but “trash” had no reference to that: 
Loppings, twigs, and leaves of trees, bruised sugar cane, com husks,
etc., his dictionary explained.
 
An old, old woman in the ankle-length skirts and the kerchief of her
generation stood in the doorway of her little house and looked, first at him,
then at his catch. And kept on looking at it. All the coastal people of Hidalgo
were fascinated by fish: rice and beans was the staple dish, but fish was
the roast beef, the steak, the chicken, of this small, small coun-try which
had never been rich and was now—with the growing depletion of its
mahogany and rosewood—even poorer than ever. Moved, not so much by
conscious consideration of this as by a sudden impulse, he held up his
hand and what it was holding. “Care for some corned fish, Grandy?”
 
Automatically, she reached out her tiny, dark hand, all twisted and
withered, and took it. Her lips moved. She looked from the fish to him and
from him to the fish; asked, doubtfully, “How much I have for you?”—
meaning, how much did she owe him.
 
“Your prayers,” he said, equally on impulse.
 

Her head flew up and she looked at him full in the face, then. “T’ank
you, Buckra,” she said. “And I weel do so. I weel pray for you.” And she
went back into her trash house.
 
Up the dusty, palm-lined path a ways, just before it branched into the
cemetery road and the front street, he encountered Mr.
Stuart—white-haired, learned, benevolent, deaf, and vague—and wearing
what was surely the very last sola topee in everyday use in the Western
Hemisphere (and perhaps, what with one thing and another, in the Eastern,
as well).
 
“Did you hear the baboons last night?” asked Mr. Stuart.
 
Jack knew that “baboons,” hereabouts, were howler monkeys. Even
their daytime noises, a hollow and repetitive Rrrr-Rrr-Rrr, sounded un-canny
enough; as for their nighttime wailings—
 
“I was anchored offshore, down the coast, last night,” he explained.
“All I heard were the manatees.”
 
Mr. Stuart looked at him with faint, grey eyes, smoothed his long
moustache. “Ah, those poor chaps,” he said. “They’ve slipped back down
me scale…much too far down, I expect, for any quick return. Tried to help
them, you know. Tried the Herodotus method. Carthaginians. Mute trade,
you know. Set out some bright red cloth, put trade-goods on, went away.
Returned. Things were knocked about, as though animals had been at
them. Some of the items were gone, though. But nothing left in return. Too
bad, oh yes, too bad…” His voice died away into a low moan, and he shook
his ancient head. In another moment, before Jack could say any-thing, or
even think of anything to say, Mr. Stuart had flashed him a smile of pure
friendliness, and was gone. A bunch of flowers was in one hand, and the
path he took was the cemetery road. He had gone to visit one of “the great
company of the dead, which increase around us as we grow older.”
 
From this mute offering, laid also upon the earth, nothing would be
expected in return. There are those whom we do not see and whom we do
not desire that they should ever show themselves at all.
 
* * * *
 
The shop of Captain Cumberbatch was open. The rules as to what stores
or offices were open and closed at which times were exactly the opposite
of the laws of the Medes and the Persians. The time to go shopping was

when one saw the shop open. Any shop. They opened, closed, opened,
closed…And as to why stores with a staff of only one closed so often, why,
they closed not only to allow the proprietor to siesta, they also closed to
allow him to eat. It was no part of the national culture for Ma to send Pa’s
“tea” for Pa to eat behind the counter: Pa came home. Period. And as for
establishments with a staff of more than one, why could the staff not have
taken turns? Answer: De baas, of whatsoever race, creed, or color, might
trust an employee with his life, but he would never trust his employee with
his cash or stock, never, never, never.
 
Captain Cumberbatch had for many years puffed up and down the
coast in his tiny packet-and-passenger boat, bringing cargo merchandise
for the shopkeepers of Port Caroline, Port Cockatoo, and—very, very
semi-occasionally—anywhere else as chartered. But some years ago he
had swal-lowed the anchor and set up business as shopkeeper in Port
Cockatoo. And one day an epiphany of sorts had occurred: Captain
Cumberbatch had asked himself why he should bring cargo for others to
sell and/or why he should pay others to bring cargo for he himself to sell.
Why should he not bring his own cargo and sell it himself?
 
The scheme was brilliant as it was unprecedented. And indeed it had
but one discernable flaw: Whilst Captain Cumberbatch was at sea, he could
not tend shop to sell what he had shipped. And while he was tend-ing his
shop he could not put to sea to replenish stock. And, tossing cease-lessly
from the one horn of this dilemma to the other, he often thought resentfully
of the difficulties of competing with such peoples as the Chi-nas, Turks,
and ‘Paniards, who—most unfairly—were able to trust the members of their
own families to mind the store.
 
Be all this as it may, the shop of Captain Cumberbatch was at this
very moment open, and the captain himself was leaning upon his counter
and smoking a pipe.
 
“Marneen, Jock. Hoew de day?”
 
“Bless God.”
 
“Forever and ever, ehhh-men.”
 
A certain amount of tinned corned beef and corned-beef hash, of
white sugar (it was nearer grey), of bread (it was dead white, as unsuitable
an item of diet as could be designed for the country and the country would
have rioted at the thought of being asked to eat dark), salt, lamp-oil, tea,
tinned milk, cheese, were packed and passed across the worn counter; a

certain amount of national currency made the same trip in reverse.
 
As for the prime purchaser of the items, Limekiller said nothing. That
was part of the Discretion.
 
Outside again, he scanned the somnolent street for any signs that
anyone might have—somehow—arrived in town who might want to charter a
boat for…well, for anything. Short of smuggling, there was scarcely a
purpose for which he would have not chartered the Sacarissa. It was not
that he had an invincible repugnance to the midnight trade, there might well
be places and times where he would have considered it. But Gov-ernment,
in British Hidalgo (here, as elsewhere in what was left of the Empire, the
definite article was conspicuously absent: “Government will do this,” they
said—or, often as not, “Government will not do this”) had not vexed him in
any way and he saw no reason to vex it. And, further-more, he had heard
many reports of the accommodations at the Queen’s Hotel, as the King
Town “gaol” was called: and they were uniformly un-favorable.
 
But the front street was looking the same as ever, and, exemplifying,
as ever, the observation of The Preacher, that there was no new thing
under the sun. So, with only the smallest of sighs, he had started for the
Cupid Club, when the clop…clop of hooves made him look up. Com-ing
along the street was the horse-drawn equivalent of a pickup truck. The back
was open, and contained a few well-filled crocus sacks and some sawn
timber; the front was roofed, but open at the sides; and for pas-sengers it
had a white-haired woman and a middle-aged man. It drew to a stop.
 
“Well, young man. And who are you?” the woman asked. Some
elements of the soft local accent overlaid her speech, but underneath was
something else, something equally soft, but different. Her “Man” was not 
man, it was mayun, and her “you” was more like yiauw.
 
He took off his hat. “Jack Limekiller is my name, ma’am.”
 
“Put it right back on, Mr. Limekiller. I do appreciate the gesture, but it
has already been gestured, now. Draft dodger, are you?”
 
That was a common guess. Any North American who didn’t fit into an
old and familiar category—tourist, sport fisherman, sport huntsman,
missionary, businessman—was assumed to be either a draft dodger or a
trafficker in “weed” ... or maybe both. “No, ma’am. I’ve served my time and,
anyway, I’m a Canadian, and we don’t have a draft.”
 

“Well,” she said, “doesn’t matter even if you are, I don’t cay-uh. Now,
sir, I am Amelia Lebedee. And this is my nephew, Tom McFee.” Tom
smiled a faint and abstract smile, shook hands. He was sun-dark and had a
slim moustache and he wore a felt hat which had perhaps been crisper than
it was now. Jack had not seen many men like Tom McFee in Canada, but
he had seen many men like Tom McFee in the United States. Tom McFee
sold crab in Baltimore. Tom McFee managed the smaller cotton gin in a
two-gin town in Alabama. Tom McFee was foreman at the shrimp-packing
plant in one of the Horida Parishes in Louisiana. And Tom McFee was
railroad freight agent in whatever dusty town in Texas it was that advertised
itself as “Blue Vetch Seed Capital of the World.”
 
“We are carrying you off to Shiloh for lunch,” said Amelia, and a
handsome old woman she was, and sat up straight at the reins. “So you just
climb up in. Tom will carry you back later, when he goes for some more of
this wood. Land! You’d think it was teak, they cut it so slow. Instead of
pine.”
 
Limekiller had no notion who or what or where Shiloh was, although it
clearly could not be very far, and he could think of no reason why he should
not go there. So in he climbed.
 
“Yes,” said Amelia Lebedee, “the war wiped us out completely. So
we came down here and we planted sugar, yes, we planted sugar and we
made sugar for, oh, most eighty years. But we didn’t move with the times,
and so that’s all over with now. We plant most anything but sugar nowadays.
And when we see a new and a civilized face, we plant them down at the
table.” By this time the wagon was out of town. The bush to either side of
the road looked like just bushtype bush to Jack. But to Mrs. Lebedee each
acre had an identity of its own. “That was the Cullens’ place,” she’d say.
And, “The Robinsons lived there. Beautiful horses, they had. Nobody has
horses anymore, just us. Yonder used to be the Simmonses. Part of the
house is still standing, but, land!—you can’t see it from the road any-more.
They’ve gone back. Most everybody has gone back, who hasn’t died off. ..”
For a while she said nothing. The road gradually grew nar-rower, and all
three of them began thoughtfully to slap at “flies.”
 
A bridge now appeared and they rattled across it, a dark-green
stream rushing below. There was a glimpse of an old grey house in the
archaic, universal-tropical style, and then the bush closed in again. “And 
they-uh” Miss Amelia gestured, backwards, “is Texas. Oh, what a fine place
that was, in its day! Nobody lives there, now. Old Captain Rutherford, the
original settler, he was with Hood. General Hood, I mean.”

 
It all flashed on Jack at once, and it all came clear, and he wondered
that it had not been clear from the beginning. They were now passing
through the site of the old Confederate colony. There had been such in
Venezuela, in Colombia, even in Brazil; for all he knew, there might still be.
But this one here in Hidalgo, it had not been wiped out in a year or two, like
the Mormon colonies in Mexico—there had been no Revolution here, no
gringo-hating Villistas—it had just ebbed away. Tiny little old B.H., “a
country,” as someone (who?) had said, “which you can put your arms
around,” had put its arms around the Rebel refugees ... its thin, green
arms…and it had let them clear the bush and build their houses…and it had
waited…and waited…and, as, one by one, the South-ern American families
had “died out” or “gone back,” why, as easy as easy, the bush had slipped
back. And, for the present, it seemed like it was going to stay back. It had,
after all, closed in after the Old Empire Mayans had so mysteriously left,
and that was a thousand years ago. What was a hundred years, to the
bush?
 
The house at Shiloh was small and neat and trim and freshly painted,
and one end of the veranda was undergoing repairs. There had been no
nonsense, down here, of reproducing any of the ten thousand imitations of
Mount Vernon. A neatly-mowed lawn surrounded the house; in a mo-ment,
as the wagon made its last circuit, Jack saw that the lawnmowers were a
small herd of cattle. A line of cedars accompanied the road, and Miss
Amelia pointed to a gap in the line. “That tree that was there,” she said,
calmly, “was the one that fell on my husband and on John Samuel. It had
been obviously weakened in the hurricane, you know, and they went over to
see how badly—that was a mistake. John Samuel lost his left eye and my
husband lost his life.”
 
Discretion…Would it be indiscreet to ask—? He asked.
 
“How long ago was this, Miss Amelia?” All respectable women down
here were “Miss,” followed by the first name, regardless of marital state.
 
“It was ten years ago, come September,” she said. “Let’s go in out of
the sun, now, and Tom will take care of the horse.”
 
In out of the sun was cool and neat and, though shady, the living
room-dining room was as bright as fresh paint and flowered wallpaper—the
only wallpaper he had seen in the colony—could make it. There were
flowers in vases, too, fresh flowers, not the widely-popular plastic ones.
Somehow the Bayfolk did not make much of flowers.
 

For lunch there was heart-of-palm, something not often had, for a
palm had to die to provide it, and palms were not idly cut down; there was
the vegetable pear, or chayote, here called cho-cho; venison chops, tomato
with okra; there was cashew wine, made from the fruit of which the
North-ern Lands know only the seed, which they ignorantly call “nut.” And,
even, there was coffee, not powdered ick, not
grown-in-Brazil-shipped-to-the-United-States-roasted-ground-canned-shipp
ed-to-Hidalgo-coffee, but actual local coffee. Here, where coffee grew with
no more care than weeds, hardly anyone except the Indians bothered to
grow it, and what they grew, they used.
 
“Yes,” Miss Amelia said, “it can be a very good life here. It is
necessary to work, of course, but the work is well-rewarded, oh, not in
terms of large sums of money, but in so many other ways. But it’s coming
to an end. There is just no way that working this good land can bring you all
the riches you see in the moving pictures. And that is what they all want, and
dream of, all the young people. And there is just no way they are going to
get it.”
 
Tom McFee made one of his rare comments, “I don’t dream of any
white Christmas,” he said. “I am staying here, where it is always green. I
told Malcolm Stuart that.”
 
Limekiller said, “I was just talking to him this morning, myself. But I
couldn’t understand what he was talking about…something about try-ing to
trade with the manatees…”
 
The Shiloh people, clearly, had no trouble understanding what Stuart
had been talking about; they did not even think it was particularly bizarre.
“Ah, those poor folks down at Mantee,” said Amelia Lebedee; “—now, mind
you, I mean Mantee, Cape Mantee, I am not referring to the people up on
Manatee River and the Lagoons, who are just as civilized as you and I: I
mean Cape Mantee, which is its correct name, you know—”
 
“Where the medicine herbs grew?”
 
“Why, yes, Mr. Limekiller. Where they grew. As I suppose they still
do. No one really knows, of course, what still grows down at Cape Man-tee,
though Nature, I suppose, would not change her ways. It was the
hurricanes, you see. The War Year hurricanes. Until then, you know,
Government had kept a road open, and once a month a police constable
would ride down and, well, at least, take a look around. Not that any of the
people there would ever bring any of their troubles to the police. They

were…well, how should I put it? Tom, how would you put it?”
 
Tom thought a long moment. “Simple. They were always simple.”
 
What he meant by “simple,” it developed, was simpleminded. His
aunt did not entirely agree with that. They gave that impression, the Mantee
people, she said, but that was only because their ways were so different.
“There is a story,” she said, slowly, and, it seemed to Jack Limekiller, rather
reluctantly, “that a British man-of-war took a Spanish slave ship. I don’t know
when this would have been, it was well before we came down and settled
here. Well before The War. Our own War, I mean. It was a small Spanish
slaver and there weren’t many captives in her. As I understand it, between
the time that Britain abolished slavery and the dreadful At-lantic slave trade
finally disappeared, if slavers were taken anywhere near Africa, the British
would bring the captives either to Saint Helena or Sierra Leone, and liberate
them there. But this one was taken fairly near the American coast. I
suppose she was heading for Cuba. So the British ship brought them here.
To British Hidalgo. And the people were released down at Cape Mantee,
and told they could settle there and no one would ‘vex’ them, as they say
here.”
 
Where the slaves had come from, originally, she did not know, but
she thought the tradition was that they had come from somewhere well
back in the African interior. Over the course of the many subsequent years,
some had trickled into the more settled parts of the old colony. “But some
of them just stayed down there,” she said. “Keeping up their own ways.”
 
“Too much intermarrying,” Tom offered.
 
“So the Bayfolk say. The Bayfolk were always, I think, rather afraid of
them. None of them would ever go there alone. And, after the hurricanes,
when the road went out, and the police just couldn’t get there, none of the
Bayfolk would go there at all. By sea, I mean. You must remember, Mr.
Limekiller, that in the 1940s this little colony was very much as it was in the
1840s. There were no airplanes. There wasn’t one single highway. When I
say there used to be a road to Mantee, you mustn’t think it was a road such
as we’ve got between Port Cockatoo and Shiloh.”
 
Limekiller, thinking of the dirt road between Port Cockatoo and Shiloh,
tried to think what the one between Port Cockatoo and the region be-hind
Cape Mantee must have been like. Evidently a trail, nothing more, down
which an occasional man on a mule might make his way, boiling the
potato-like fruit of the breadnut tree for his food and feeding his mule the

leaves: a trail that had to be “chopped,” had to be “cleaned” by
machete-work, at least twice a year, to keep the all-consuming bush from
closing over it the way the flesh closes over a cut. An occasional trader, an
occasional buyer or gatherer of chicle or herbs or hides, an occasional
missioner or medical officer, at infrequent intervals would pass along this
corridor in the eternal jungle.
 
And then came a hurricane, smashing flat everything in its path. And
the trail vanished. And the trail was never recut. British Hidalgo had
prob-ably never been high on any list of colonial priorities at the best of
times. During the War of 1939-1945, they may have forgotten all about it in
London. Many of Hidalgo’s able-bodied men were off on distant fronts. An
equal number had gone off to cut the remaining forests of the Isle of
Britain, to supply anyway a fraction of the wood which was then impos-sible
to import. Nothing could be spared for Mantee and its people; in King
Town, Mantee was deemed as distant as King Town was in Lon-don. The
p.c. never went there again. No missioner ever returned. Nei-ther had a
medical officer or nurse. Nor any trader. No one. Except for Malcolm
Stuart…
 
“He did try. Of course, he had his own concerns. During the War he
had his war work. Afterwards, he took up a block of land a few miles back
from here, and he had his hands full with that. And then, after, oh, I don’t
remember how many years of stories, stories—there is no televi-sion here,
you know, and few people have time for books—stories about the Mantee
people, well, he decided he had to go have a look, see for him-self, you
know.”
 
Were the Mantee people really eating raw meat and raw fish? He
would bring them matches. Had they actually reverted to the use of stone
for tools? He would bring them machetes, axes, knives. And ... as for the
rest of it…the rest of the rather awful and certainly very odd sto-ries ... he
would see for himself.
 
But he had seen nothing. There had been nothing to see. That is,
noth-ing which he could be sure he had seen. Perhaps he had thought that
he had seen some few things which he had not cared to mention to Jack,
but had spoken of to the Shiloh people.
 
They, however, were not about to speak of it to Jack.
 
“Adventure,” said Amelia Lebedee, dismissing the matter of Mantee
with a sigh. “Nobody wants the adventure of cutting bush to plant yams.
They want the adventure of nightclubs and large automobiles. They see it in

the moving pictures. And you, Mr. Limekiller, what is it that you
want?—coming, having come, from the land of nightclubs and large
au-tomobiles…”
 
The truth was simple. “I wanted the adventure of sailing a boat with
white sails through tropic seas,” he said. “I saw it in the moving pictures. I
never had a nightclub but I had a large automobile, and I sold it and came
down here and bought the boat. And, well, here I am.”
 
They had talked right through the siesta time. Tom McFee was ready,
now, to return for the few more planks which the sawmill might—or might
not—have managed to produce since the morning. It was time to stand up
now and to make thanks and say good-bye. “Yes,” said Amelia Lebedee,
pensively “Here we are. Here we all are. We are all here. And some of us
are more content being here than others.”
 
* * * *
 
Half past three at the Cupid Club. On Limekiller’s table, the usual sin-gle
bottle of beer. Also, the three chaparitas of rum which he had bought— but
they were in a paper bag, lest the sight of them, plus the fact that he could
invite no one to drink of them, give rise to talk that he was “mean.” Behind
the bar, Alfonso Key. In the dark, dark back, slowly sipping a lemonade (all
soft drinks were “lemonade”—coke was lemonade, straw-berry pop was
lemonade, ginger stout was lemonade…sometimes, though not often, for
reasons inexplicable, there was also lemon-flavored lemonade)—in the
dark rear part of the room, resting his perpetually sore eyes, was old
Captain Cudgel.
 
“Well, how you spend the night, Jock?” Alfonso ready for a tale of
amour, ready with a quip, a joke.
 
“Oh, just quietly. Except for the manatees.” Limekiller, saying this, had
a sudden feeling that he had said all this before, been all this before, was
caught on the moebius strip which life in picturesque Port Cockatoo had
already become, caught, caught, never would be released. Adventure!
Hah!
 
At this point, however, a slightly different note, a slightly different
comment from the old, old man.
 
“Een Eedalgo,” he said, dolefully, “de monatee hahv no leg, mon.
Bec-ahs Eedalgo ees a smahl coxm-trce, ahn every-teeng smahl.

Every-teeng weak. Now, een Ahfrica, mon, de monatee does hahv leg.”
 
Key said, incredulous, but still respectful, “What you tell we, Coptain
Cudgel? What?” His last word, pronounced in the local manner of using it
as a particular indication of skepticism, of criticism, of denial, seemed to
have at least three Ts at the end of it; he repeated “Whattt?”
 
“Yes, mon. Yes sah. Een Ahfrica, de monatee hahv leg, mon. Eet be
ah poerful beast, een Ahfrica, come up on de land, mon.”
 
“I tell you. Me di hear eet befoah. Een Ahfrica,” he repeated,
doggedly, “de monatee hahv leg, de monatee be ah poerful beast, come
up on de lond, mon, no lahf, mon—”
 
“Me no di lahf, sah—”
 
“—de w’ol’ people, dey tell me so, fah true.”
 
Alfonso Key gave his head a single shake, gave a single click of his
tongue, gave Jack a single look.
 
Far down the street, the bell of the Church of Saint Benedict the Moor
sounded. Whatever time it was marking had nothing to do with Green-wich
Meridian Time or any variation thereof.
 
The weak, feeble old voice resumed the thread of conversation. “Me
grahndy di tell me dot she grahndy di tell she. Motta hav foct, eet me
grahn-dy di give me me name, b’y. Cudgel. Ahfrica name. Fah true. Fah
True.”
 
A slight sound of surprise broke Limekiller’s silence. He said,
“Excuse me, Captain. Could it have been ‘Cudjoe’…maybe?”
 
For a while he thought that the question had either not been heard or
had, perhaps, been resented. Then the old man said, “Eet could be so.
Sah, eet might be so. Lahng, lahng time ah-go…Me Christian name, Pe-tah.
Me w’ol’grahndy she say. ‘Pickncy: you hahv ah Christian name, Pe-tah. But
me give you Ahfrica name, too. Cahdjo. No fah-get, pickney?’ Time poss,
time poss, de people dey ahl cab] me ‘Cudgel,’ you see, sah. So me
fah-get…Sah, hoew you know dees teeng, sah?”
 
Limekiller said that he thought he had read it in a book. The old
cap-tain repeated the word, lengthening it in his local speech. “Ah boook,

sah. To t’eenk ahv dot. Een ah boook. Me w’own name een ah boook.” By
and by he departed as silently as always.
 
* * * *
 
In the dusk a white cloth waved behind the thin line of white beach. He took
off his shirt and waved back. Then he transferred the groceries into the skiff
and, as soon as it was dark and he had lit and securely fixed his lamp, set
about rowing ashore. By and by a voice called out, “Mon, where de Hell you
gweyn? You keep on to de right, you gweyn wine up een Sponcesh
Hidalgo: Mah to de lef, mon: mah to lef!”And with such assistances, soon
enough the skiff softly scraped the beach.
 
Mr. John Samuel’s greeting was, “You bring de rum?” The rum put in
his hand, he took up one of the sacks, gestured Limekiller towards the
other. “Les go timely, noew,” he said. For a moment, in what was left of the
dimmest dimlight, Jack thought the man was going to walk straight into an
enormous tree: instead, he walked across the enormous roots and behind
the tree. Limekiller followed the faint white patch of shirt bobbing in front of
him. Sometimes the ground was firm, sometimes it went squilchy,
sometimes it was simply running water—shallow, fortunately— sometimes it
felt like gravel. The bush noises were still fairly soft. A rus-tle. He hoped it
was only a wish-willy lizard, or a bamboo-chicken—an iguana—and not a
yellow-jaw, that snake of which it was said…but this was no time to
remember scare stories about snakes.
 
Without warning—although what sort of warning there could have
been was a stupid question, anyway—there they were. Gertrude Stein,
returning to her old hometown after an absence of almost forty years, and
finding the old home itself demolished, had observed (with a lot more
ob-jectivity than she was usually credited with) that there was no there,
there. The there, here, was simply a clearing, with a very small fire, and a
ramada: four poles holding up a low thatched roof. John Samuel let his
sack drop. “Ahnd noew,” he said, portentously, “let us broach de rum.”
 
After the chaparita had been not only broached but drained, for the
second time that day Limekiller dined ashore. The cooking was done on a
raised fire-hearth of clay and sticks, and what was cooked was a bread-fruit,
simply strewn, when done, with sugar; and a gibnut. To say that the gibnut,
or paca, is a rodent, is perhaps—though accurate—unfair: it is larger than a
rabbit, and it eats well. After that Samuel made black tea and laced it with
more rum. After that he gave a vast belch and a vast sigh. “Can you play de
bonjoe?”he next asked.

 
“Well... I have been known to try…”
 
The lamp flared and smoked. Samuel adjusted it…somewhat…He
got up and took a bulky object down from a peg on one of the roof-poles. It
was a sheet of thick plastic, laced with rawhide thongs, which he laboriously
unknotted. Inside that was a deerskin. And inside that, an or-dinary banjo
case, which contained an ordinary, if rather old and worn, banjo.
 
“Mehk I hear ah sahng ... ah sahng ahv you country.”
 
What song should he make him hear? No particularly Canadian song
brought itself to mind. Ah well, he would dip down below the border just a
bit…His fingers strummed idly on the strings. The words grew, the tune
grew, he lifted up what some (if not very many) had considered a
not-bad-baritone, and began to sing and play.
 
Manatee gal, ain‘t you coming out tonight, 
Coming out tonight, coming out tonight? 
Oh, Manatee gal, ain‘t you coming out tonight, 
To dance by the light of the—
 
An enormous hand suddenly covered his own and pressed it down.
The tune subsided into a jumble of chords, and an echo, and a silence.
 
“Mon, mon, you not do me right. I no di say, ‘Mehk I hear a sahng ahv 
you country?’ Samuel, on his knees, breamed heavily. His breath was
heavy with rum and his voice was heavy with reproof... and with a
some-thing else for which Limekiller had no immediate name. But, friendly it
was not.
 
Puzzled more than apologetic, Jack said, “Well, it is a North American
song, anyway. It was an old Erie Canal song. It—Oh. I’ll be damned. Only
it’s supposed to go, ‘Buffalo gal, ain’t you coming out tonight,’ And I
dunno what made me change it, what difference does it make?”
 
“What different? What different it mehk? Ah, Christ me King! You lee’
buckra b’y, you not know w’ehnnah-teeng?”
 
It was all too much for Limekiller. The last thing he wanted was
any-thing resembling an argument, here in the deep, dark bush, with an
all-but-stranger. Samuel having lifted his heavy hand from the instrument,
Limekiller, moved by a sudden spirit, began.

 
Amazing grace, how sweet the sound, 
To save a wretch like me.
 
With a rough catch of his breath, Samuel muttered, “Yes. Yes. Dot
ees good. Go on, b’y. No stop.”
 
I once was halt, but now can walk: 
Was blind, but now I see…
 
He sang the beautiful old hymn to the end: and, by that time, if not
overpowered by Grace, John Samuel—having evidently broached the
sec-ond and the third chaparita—was certainly overpowered: and it did not
look as though the dinner guest was going to get any kind of guided tour
back to the shore and the skiff. He sighed and he looked around him. A bed
rack had roughly been fixed up, and its lashings were covered with a few
deer hides and an old Indian blanket. Samuel not responding to any
shakings or urgings, Limekiller, with a shrug and a “Well what the hell,”
covered him with the blanket as he lay upon the ground. Then, hav-ing
rolled up the sacks the supplies had come in and propped them under his
head, Limekiller disposed himself for slumber on the hides. Some lines
were running through his head and he paused a moment to consider what
they were. What they were, they were, From ghoulies and ghosties, long
Ieggedy feasties, and bugges that go boomp in the night, Good Lord,
deliver us. With an almost absolute certainty that this was not the
Authorized Version or Text, he heard himself give a grottle and a snore and
knew he was fallen asleep.
 
He awoke to slap heartily at some flies, and the sound perhaps awoke
the host, who was heard to mutter and mumble. Limekiller leaned over.
“What did you say?”
 
The lines said, Limekiller learned that he had heard them before.
 
“Eef you tie ah rottlesnake doewn fah me, I weel freeg eet.”
 
“I yield,” said Limekiller, “to any man so much hornier than myself.
Produce the snake, sir, and I will consider the rest of the matter.”
 
The red eye of the expiring fire winked at him. It was still winking at
him when he awoke from a horrid nightmare of screams and
thrashings-about, in the course of which he had evidently fallen or had
thrown him-self from the bed rack to the far side. Furthermore, he must

have knocked against one of the roof-poles in doing so, because a good
deal of the thatch had landed on top of him. He threw it off, and, getting up,
began to apol-ogize.
 
“Sorry if I woke you, Mr. Samuel. I don’t know what –” There was no
answer, and looking around in the faint light of the fire, he saw no one.
 
“Mr. Samuel? Mr. Samuel? John? oh, hey, Johhn!?...”
 
No answer. If the man had merely gone out to “ease himself,” as the
Bayfolk delicately put it, he would have surely been near enough to an-swer.
No one in the colony engaged in strolling in the bush at night for fun. “Son
of a bitch,” he muttered. He felt for and found his matches, struck one,
found the lamp, lit it, looked around.
 
There was still no sign of John Samuel, but what there were signs of
was some sort of horrid violence. Hastily he ran his hands over himself, but,
despite his fall, despite part of the roof having fallen on him, he found no
trace of blood.
 
All the blood which lay around, then, must have been—could only
have been—John Samuel’s blood.
 
All the screaming and the sounds of something—or some
things—heavily thrashing around, they had not been in any dream. They had
been the sounds of truth.
 
And as for what else he saw, as he walked, delicate as Agag, around
the perimeter of the clearing, he preferred not to speculate.
 
There was a shotgun and there were shells. He put the shells into the
chambers and he stood up, weapon in his hand, all the rest of the night.
 
* * * *
 
“Now, if it took you perhaps less than an hour to reach the shore, and if you
left immediately, how is it that you were so long in arriving at Port?” The
District Commissioner asked. He asked politely, but he did ask. He asked a
great many questions, for, in addition to his other duties, he was the
Examining Magistrate.
 
“Didn’t you observe the wind, D.C? Ask anyone who was out on the
water yesterday. I spent most of the day tacking—”
 

Corporal Huggin said, softly, from the wheel, “That would be correct,
Mr. Blossom.”
 
They were in the police boat, the George…once, Jack had said to
P.C. , Ed Huggin, “For George VI, I suppose?” and Ed, toiling over the
balky and antique engine, his clear tan skin smudged with grease, had
scowled, and said, “More for bloody George III, you ask me…” At earliest
day-light, yesterday, Limekiller, red-eyed and twitching, had briefly cast
around in the bush near the camp, decided that, ignorant of bush lore as he
was, having not even a compass, let alone a pair of boots or a snake-bite
kit, it would have been insane to attempt any explorations. He found his way
along the path, found his skiff tied up, and had rowed to his boat.
 
Unfavorable winds had destroyed his hope of getting back to Port
Cockatoo in minimum time: it had been night when he arrived.
 
The police had listened to his story, had summoned Mr. Florian
Blos-som, the District Commissioner; all had agreed that “No purpose
would be served by attempting anything until next morning.” They had taken
his story down, word by word, and by hand—if there was an official
stenographer anywhere in the country, Limekiller had yet to hear of it— and
by longhand, too; and in their own accustomed style and method, too, so
that he was officially recorded as having said things such as: Awak-ened
by loud sounds of distress, I arose arid hailed the man known to me as
John Samuel. Upon receiving no response, etcetera.
 
After Jack had signed the statement, and stood up, thinking to return
to his boat, the District Commissioner said, “I believe that they can
ac-commodate you with a bed in the Unmarried Police Constables’
Quar-ters, Mr. Limekiller. Just for the night.”
 
He looked at the official. A slight shiver ran up and down him. “Do you
mean that I am a prisoner?”
 
“Certainly not, Mr. Limekiller. No such thing.”
 
“You know, if I had wanted to, I could have been in Republican
wa-ters by now.”
 
Mr. Blossom’s politeness never flagged. “We realize it and we take it
into consideration, Mr. Limekiller. But if we are all of us here together it will
make an early start in the morning more efficacious.”
 

Anyway, Jack was able to shower, and Ed Huggins loaned him clean
clothes. Of course they had not gotten an early start in the morning. Only
fishermen and sandboatmen got early starts. Her Majesty’s Government
moved at its accustomed pace. In the police launch, besides Limekiller,
was P.C. Huggin, D.C. Blossom, a very small and very black and very wiry
man called Harlow the Hunter, Police Sergeant Ruiz, and white-haired Dr.
Rafael, the District Medical Officer.
 
“I wouldn’t have been able to come at all, you know,” he said to
Limekiller, “except my assistant has returned from his holidays a day
ear-lier. Oh, there is so much to see in this colony! Fascinating,
fascinating!”
 
D.C. Blossom smiled. “Doctor Rafael is a famous antiquarian, you
know, Mr. Limekiller. It was he who discovered the gravestone of my three
or four times great-grand-sir and-grandy.”
 
Sounds of surprise and interest—polite on Limekiller’s part,
gravestones perhaps not being what he would have most wished to think
of—genuine on the part of everyone else, ancestral stones not being
numerous in British Hidalgo.
 
“Yes, Yes,” Dr. Rafael agreed. “Two years ago I was on my holidays,
and I went out to St. Saviour’s Caye…well, to what is left of St. Saviour’s
Caye after the last few hurricanes. You can imagine what is left of the old
settlement. Oh, the Caye is dead, it is like a skeleton, bleached and bare!”
Limekiller felt he could slightly gladly have tipped the medico over the side
and watched the bubbles; but, unaware, on the man went, “—so, dif-ficult
though it was making my old map agree with the present outlines, still, I did
find the site of the old burial ground, and I cast about and I prodded with my
iron rod, and I felt stone underneath the sand, and I dug!”
 
More sounds of excited interest. Digging in the sand on the bit of
ravished sand and coral where the ancient settlement had been—but was
no more—was certainly of more interest than digging for yams on the fertile
soil of the mainland. And, even though they already knew that it was not a
chest of gold, still, they listened and they murmured oh and ah. “The letters
were still very clear, I had no difficulty reading them. Sacred to the memory
of Ferdinando Rousseau, a native of Guernsey, and of Marianna his
Wife, a native of Mandingo, in Africa. Plus a poem in three stanzas, of
which I have deposited a copy in the National Archives, and of course I
have a copy myself and a third copy I offered to old Mr. Ferdinand
Rousseau in King Town—”

 
Smiling, Mr. Blossom asked, “And what he tell you, then, Doctor?”
 
Dr. Rafael’s smile was a trifle rueful. “He said, ‘Let the dead bury their
dead’—” The others all laughed. Mr. Ferdinand Rousseau was evidently
known to all of them, “—and he declined to take it. Well, I was aware that
Mr. Blossom’s mother was a cousin of Mr. Rousseau’s mother—”
(“Double-cousin,” said Mr. Blossom.)
 
Said Mr. Blossom, “And the doctor has even been there, too, to that
country. I don’t mean Guernsey; in Africa, I mean; not true, Doctor?”
 
Up ahead, where the coast thrust itself out into the blue, blue Bay,
Jack thought he saw the three isolated palms which were his landmark. But
there was no hurry. He found himself unwilling to hurry anything at all.
 
Doctor Rafael, in whose voice only the slightest trace of alien accent
still lingered, said that after leaving Vienna, he had gone to London, in
London he had been offered and had accepted work in a British West
African colonial medical service. “I was just a bit surprised that the old
gravestone referred to Mandingo as a country, there is no such country on
the maps today, but there are such a people.”
 
“What they like, Doc-tah? What they like, thees people who dey mehk
some ahv Mr. Blossom ahn-ces-tah?”
 
There was another chuckle. This one had slight overtones.
 
The DMO’s round, pink face furrowed in concentration among
mem-ories a quarter of a century old. “Why,” he said, “they are like
elephants. They never forget.”
 
There was a burst of laughter. Mr. Blossom laughed loudest of them
all. Twenty-five years earlier he would have asked about Guernsey; today…
 
Harlow the Hunter, his question answered, gestured towards the
shore. A slight swell had come up, the blue was flecked, with bits of white.
“W’over dere, suppose to be wan ahv w’ol’ Bob Blaine cahmp, in de w’ol’
days.”
 
“Filthy fellow,” Dr. Rafael said, suddenly, concisely.
 
“Yes sah.” Harlow agreed. “He was ah lewd fellow, fah true, fah true.
What he use to say, he use to say, ‘Eef you tie ah rottle-snehk doewn fah

me, I weel freeg eet…’ “
 
Mr. Blossom leaned forward. “Something the matter, Mr. Limekiller?”
 
Mr. Limekiller did not at that moment feel like talking. Instead, he lifted
his hand and pointed towards the headland with the three isolated palms.
 
“Cape Man’tee, Mr. Limekiller? What about it?”
 
Jack cleared his throat. “I thought that was farther down the
coast…according to my chart…”
 
Ed Huggin snorted. “Chart! Washington chart copies London chart
and London chart I think must copy the original chart made by old Cap-tain
Cook. Chart!” He snorted again.
 
Mr. Florian Blossom asked, softly, “Do you recognize your landfall,
Mr. Limekiller? I suppose it would not be at the cape itself, which is pure
man-grove bog and does not fit the description which you gave us…”
 
Mr. Limekiller’s eyes hugged the coast. Suppose he couldn’t find the
goddamned place? Police and Government wouldn’t like that at all. Every
ounce of fuel had to be accounted for. Chasing the wild goose was not
approved. He might find an extension of his stay refused when next he went
applying for it. He might even find himself officially listed as a Pro-scribed
Person, trans.: haul ass, Jack, and don’t try coming back. And he realized
that he did not want that at all, at all. The whole coast looked the same to
him, all of a sudden. And then, all of a sudden, it didn’t…somehow. There
was something about that solid-seeming mass of bush—
 
“I think there may be a creek. Right there.”
 
Harlow nodded. “Yes mon. Is a creek. Right dere.”
 
And right there, at the mouth of the creek—in this instance, meaning
not a stream, but an inlet—Limekiller recognized the huge tree. And Har-low
the Hunter recognized something else. “Dot mark suppose to be where Mr.
Limekiller drah up the skiff.”
 
“Best we ahl put boots on,” said Sergeant Ruiz, who had said not a
word until now. They all put boots on. Harlow shouldered an axe. Ruiz and
Huggin took up machetes. Dr. Rafael had, besides his medical bag, a
bun-dle of what appeared to be plastic sheets and crocus sacks. “You

doesn’t mind to cahry ah shovel, Mr. Jock?” Jack decided that he could
think of a number of things he had rather carry: but he took the thing. And
Mr. Blossom carefully picked up an enormous camera, with tripod. The
Gov-ernments of His and/or Her Majesties had never been known for
throw-ing money around in these parts; the camera could hardly have dated
back to George III but was certainly earlier than the latter part of the reign of
George V.
 
“You must lead us, Mr. Limekiller.” The District Commissioner was not
grim. He was not smiling. He was grave.
 
Limekiller nodded. Climbed over the sprawling trunk of the tree.
Suddenly remembered that it had been night when he had first come this
way, that it had been from the other direction that he had made his way the
next morning, hesitated. And then Harlow the Hunter spoke up.
 
“Eef you pleases, Mistah Blossom. I believes I knows dees pahth
bet-tah.”
 
And, at any rate, he knew it well enough to lead them there in less
time, surely, than Jack Limekiller could have.
 
Blood was no longer fresh and red, but a hundred swarms of flies
suddenly rose to show where the blood had been. Doctor Rafael snipped
leaves, scooped up soil, deposited his take in containers.
 
And in regard to other evidence, whatever it was evidence of, for one
thing, Mr. Blossom handed the camera over to Police Corporal Huggin, who
set up his measuring tape, first along one deep depression and
pho-tographed it; then along another…another…another…
 
“Mountain-cow,” said the District Commissioner. He did not sound
utterly persuaded.
 
Harlow shook his head. “No, Mistah Florian. No sah. No, no.”
 
“Well, if not a tapir: what?”
 
Harlow shrugged.
 
Something heavy had been dragged through the bush. And it had
been dragged by something heavier…something much, much heavier ... It
was horridly hot in the bush, and every kind of “fly” seemed to be ready and
waiting for them: sand-fly, bottle fly, doctor-fly. They made un-avoidable

noise, but whenever they stopped, the silence closed in on them. No wild
parrot shrieked. No “baboons” rottled or growled. No warree grunted or
squealed. Just the waiting silence of the bush. Not friendly. Not hostile. Just
indifferent.
 
And when they came to the little river (afterwards, Jack could not even
find it on the maps) and scanned the opposite bank and saw nothing, the
District Commissioner said, “Well, Harlow. What you think?”
 
The wiry little man looked up and around. After a moment he nod-ded,
plunged into the bush. A faint sound, as of someone—or of
some-thing?—Then Ed Huggin pointed. Limekiller would never even have
no-ticed that particular tree was there; indeed, he was able to pick it out now
only because a small figure was slowly but surely climbing it. The tree was
tall, and it leaned at an angle—old enough to have experienced the brute
force of a hurricane, strong enough to have survived, though bent.
 
Harlow called something Jack did not understand, but he followed the
others, splashing down the shallows of the river. The river slowly became a
swamp. Harlow was suddenly next to them. “Eet not fah,” he muttered.
 
Nor was it.
 
What there was of it.
 
An eye in a monstrously swollen head winked at them. Then an insect
leisurely crawled out, flapped its horridly-damp wings in the hot and humid
air, and sluggishly flew off. There was no wink. There was no eye.
 
“Mr. Limekiller,” said District Commissioner Blossom, “I will now ask
you if you identify this body as that of the man known to you as John
Samuel.”
 
“It’s him. Yes sir.”
 
But was as though the commissioner had been holding his breath and
had now released it. “Well, well,” he said. “And he was supposed to have
gone to Jamaica and died there. I never heard he’d come back. Well, he is
dead now, for true.”
 
But little Doctor Rafael shook his snowy head. “He is certainly dead.
And he is certainly not John Samuel.”
 
“Why—” Limekiller swallowed bile, pointed. “Look. The eye is

miss-ing, John Samuel lost that eye when the tree fell—”
 
“Ah, yes, young man. John Samuel did. But not that eye.”
 
The bush was not so silent now. Every time the masses and masses
of flies were waved away, they rose, buzzing, into the heavy, squalid air.
Buzzing, hovered. Buzzing, returned.
 
“Then who in the Hell – ?”
 
Harlow wiped his face on his sleeve. “Well, sah. I cahn tell you. Lord
hahv mercy on heem. Eet ees Bob Blaine.”
 
There was a long outdrawn ahhh from the others. Then Ed Huggin
said, “But Bob Blaine had both his eyes.”
 
Harlow stopped, picked a stone from the river bed, with dripping hand
threw it into the bush…one would have said, at random. With an ugly croak,
a buzzard burst up and away. Then Harlow said something, as true—and as
dreadful—as it was unarguable. “He not hahv either of them, noew.”
 
* * * *
 
By what misadventure and in what place Bob Blaine had lost one eye whilst
alive and after decamping from his native land, no one knew and perhaps it
did not matter. He had trusted on “discretion” not to reveal his hideout,
there at the site of his old bush-camp. But he had not trusted to it one
hundred percent. Suppose that Limekiller were, deceitfully or accidentally,
to let drop the fact that a man was camping out there. A man with only one
eye. What was the man’s name? John Samuel. What? John Samuel…Ah.
Then John Samuel had not, after all, died in Jamaica, ac-cording to report.
Report had been known to be wrong before. John Samuel alive, then. No
big thing. Nobody then would have been moved to go down there to check
up.—Nobody, now, knew why Bob Blaine had returned. Perhaps he had
made things too hot for himself, down in “Re-publican waters”—where hot
water could be so very much hotter than back here. Perhaps some day a
report would drift back up, and it might be a true report or it might be false
or it might be a mixture of both.
 
As for the report, the official, Government one, on the circumstances
surrounding the death of Roberto Blaine, a.k.a. Bob Blaine ... as for
Limekiller’s statement and the statements of the District Commissioner and
the District Medical Officer and the autopsy and the photographs: why, that
had all been neatly transcribed and neatly (and literally) laced with red tape,

and forwarded up the coast to King Town. And as to what happened to it
there—
 
“What do you think they will do about it, Doctor?”
 
Rafael’s rooms were larger, perhaps, than a bachelor needed. But
they were the official quarters for the DMO, and so the DMO lived in them.
The wide floors gleamed with polish. The spotless walls showed, here a
shield, there a paddle, a harpoon with barbed head, the carapace of a huge
turtle, a few paintings. The symmetry and conventionality of it all was slightly
marred by the bookcases which were everywhere, against every wall,
adjacent to desk and chairs. And all were full, crammed, overflow-ing.
 
Doctor Rafael shrugged. “Perhaps the woodlice will eat the papers,”
he said. “Or the roaches, or the wee-wee ants. The mildew. The damp.
Hur-ricane…This is not a climate which helps preserve the history of men. I
work hard to keep my own books and papers from going that way. But I am
not Government, and Government lacks time and money and per-sonnel,
and…perhaps, also…Government has so many, many things pressing
upon it…Perhaps, too, Government lacks interest.”
 
“What were those tracks, Doctor Rafael?”
 
Doctor Rafael shrugged.
 
“You do know, don’t you?”
 
Doctor Rafael grimaced.
 
“Have you seen them, or anything like them, before?”
 
Doctor Rafael, very slowly, very slowly nodded.
 
“Well... for God’s sake ... can you even give me a, well a hint? l mean:
that was a rather rotten experience for me, you know. And—”
 
The sunlight, kept at bay outside, broke in through a crack in the
jalousies, sun making the scant white hair for an instant ablaze: like the brow
of Moses. Doctor Rafael got up and busied himself with a fresh lime and
the sweetened lime juice and the gin and ice. He was rapt in this task, like
an ancient apothecary mingling strange unguents and syrups. Then he gave
one of the gimlets to his guest and from one he took a long, long pull.
 
“You see. I have two years to go before my retirement. The pension,

well, it is not spectacular, but I have no complaint. I will be able to rest. Not
for an hour, or an evening... an evening! only on my holidays, once a year,
do I even have an evening all my own!—Well. You may imagine how I look
forward. And I am not going to risk premature and enforced retirement by
presenting Government with an impossible situation. One which wouldn’t be
its fault, anyway. By insisting on impossible things. By demonstrating—”
 
He finished his drink. He gave Jack a long, shrewd look.
 
“So I have nothing more to say…about that. If they want to believe, up
in King Town, that the abominable Bob Blaine was mauled by a croc-odile,
let them. If they prefer to make it a jaguar or even a tapir, why, that is fine
with Robert Rafael, M.D., DMO. It might be, probably, the first time in
history that anybody anywhere was killed by a tapir, but that is not my affair.
The matter is, so far as I am concerned, so far—in fact—as you and I are
concerned—over.
 
“Do you understand?”
 
Limekiller nodded. At once the older man’s manner changed. “I have
many, many books, as you can see. Maybe some of them would be of
in-terest to you. Pick any one you like. Pick one at random.” So saying, he
took a book from his desk and put it in Jack’s hands. It was just a
book-looking book. It was, in fact, volume II of the Everyman edition of
Plutarch’s Lives. There was a wide card, of the kind on which medical notes
or records are sometimes made, and so Jack Limekiller opened the book
at that place.
 
seasons, as the gods sent them, seemed natural to him. The
Greeks that inhabited Asia were very much pleased to see the great
lords and governors of Persia, with all the pride, cruelty, and
 
“Well, now, what the Hell,” he muttered. The card slipped, he
clutched. He glanced at it. He put down vol. II of the Lives and he sat back
and read the notes on the card.
 
It  is  in  the  nature  of  things  [they  began]  for  men,  in  a  new
country  and  faced  with  new  things,  to  name  them  after  old,
familiar  things.  Even  when  resemblance  unlikely.  Example:
Mountain-cow  for  tapir. (“Tapir”  from  Tupi  Indian  tapira,  big
beast.)  Example:  Mawmee-apple  not  apple  at  all.  Ex.:
Sea-cow
 for
 manatee.
 Early
 British
 settlers
 not
entomologists. Quest.: Whence word manatee? From Carib?

Perhaps.  After  the  British,  what  other  people  came  to  this
corner of the world? Ans.: Black people. Calabars, Ashantee,
Mantee,  Mandingo.  Re  last  two  names.  Related  peoples.
Named  after  totemic  animal. Also,  not  likely?  likely—named
unfamiliar animals after familiar (i.e., familiar in Africa) animals.
Mantee, Mandee-hippo. Refer legend.
 
Limekiller’s mouth fell open. “Oh, my God!” he groaned. In his ear
now, he heard the old, old, quavering voice of Captain Cudgel (once
Cudjoe): “Mon, een Ahfrica, dc mon-ah-tee hahv leg, I tell you. Een
Ahfrica eet be ah poerful beast, come up on de land, I tell you… dc w’ol’
people, dey tell me so, fah true…”
 
He heard the old voice, repeating the old words, no longer even
half-understood: but, in some measure, at least half-true.
 
Refer
 legend
 of
 were-animals,
 universal.
 Were-wolf,
were-tiger, were-shark, were-dolphin. Quest.: Were-manatee?
 
“Mon-ah-tee ces hahfah mon…hahv teats like a womahn…Dere
ees wahn mon, mehk mellow meet mon-ah-tee, hahv pickney by
mon-ah-tee . . .”
 
And he heard another voice saying, not only once, saying, “Mon, eef
you tie ah rattlesnake doewn fah me, I weel freeg eet…”
 
He thought of the wretched captives in the Spanish slave ship, set
free to fend for themselves in a bush by far wilder than the one left behind.
Few, to begin with, fewer as time went on; marrying and intermarrying, no
new blood, no new thoughts. And, finally, the one road in to them,
destroyed. Left alone. Left quite alone. Or…almost…
 
He shuddered.
 
How desperate for refuge must Blaine have been, to have sought to
hide himself anywhere near Cape Mantee—
 
And what miserable happenstance had brought he himself, Jack
Limekiller, to improvise on that old song that dreadful night?—And what had
he called up out of the darkness…out of the bush…out of the mindless
present which was the past and future and the timeless tropical forever?...
 
There was something pressing gently against his finger, something

on the other side of the card. He turned it over. A clipping from a magazine
had been roughly pasted there.
 
Valentry
 has
 pointed
 out
 that,
 despite
 a
 seeming
resemblance to such  aquatic  mammals  as seals  and walrus,
the manatee  is  actually  more  closely  related  anatomically  to
the elephant.
 
... out of the bush ... out of the darkness ... out of the mindless
pres-ent which was also the past and the timeless tropical forever…
 
“They are like elephants. They never forget.”
 
“Ukh,” he said, though clenched teeth. “My God. Uff. Jesus…”
 
The card was suddenly, swiftly, snatched from his hands. He looked
up still in a state of shock, to see Doctor Rafael tearing it into pieces.
 
“Doña ‘Sana!”
 
A moment. Then the housekeeper, old, all in white. “Doctor?”
 
“Burn this.”
 
A moment passed. Just the two of them again. Then Rafael, in a tone
which was nothing but kindly, said, “Jack, you are still young and you are still
healthy. My advice to you: Go away. Go to a cooler climate. One with cooler
ways and cooler memories.” The old woman called something from the
back of the house. The old man sighed. “It is the summons to supper,” he
said. “Not only must I eat in haste because I have my clinic in less than half
an hour, but suddenly-invited guests make Doña ‘Sana very nervous. Good
night, then, Jack.”
 
Jack had had two gin drinks. He felt that he needed two more. At least
two more. Or, if not gin, rum. Beer would not do. He wanted to pull the
blanket of booze over him, awfully, awfully quickly. He had this in his mind
as though it were a vow as he walked up the front street towards the Cupid
Club.
 
Someone hailed him, someone out of the gathering dusk.
 
‘Jock! Hey, mon, Jock! Hey, b’y! Where you gweyn so fahst? Bide,
b’y, bide a bit!”
 

The voice was familiar. It was that of Harry Hazeed, his principal
cred-itor in King Town. Ah, well. He had had his chance, Limekiller had. He
could have gone on down the coast, down into the Republican waters,
where the Queen’s writ runneth not. Now it was too late.
 
“Oh, hello, Harry,” he said, dully.
 
Hazeed took him by the hand. Took him by both hands. “Mon, show
me where is your boat? She serviceable? She is? Good: Mon, you don’t
hear de news: Welcome’s warehouse take fire and born up! Yes, mon. Ahl
de earn in King Town born up! No earn ah-tahl: No tortilla, no empinada, no
tamale, no carn-cake! Oh, mon, how de people going to punish! Soon as I
hear de news, I drah me money from de bonk, I buy ahl de crocus sock I
can find, I jump on de pocket-boat—and here I am, oh, mon, I pray fah you
... I pray I fine you!”
 
Limekiller shook his head. It had been one daze, one shock after
another. The only thing clear was that Harry Hazeed didn’t seem angry.
“You no understand?” Hazeed cried. “Mon! We going take your boat, we
going doewn to Nutmeg P’int, we going to buy carn, mon! We going to buy
ahl de carn dere is to buy! Nevah mine dat lee’ bit money you di owe me,
b’y! We going make plenty money, mon! And we going make de cultivators
plenty money, too! What you theenk of eet, Jock, me b’y? Eh? Hey? What
you theenk?”
 
Jack put his forefinger in his mouth, held it up. The wind was in the
right quarter. The wind would, if it held up, and, somehow, it felt like a wind
which would hold up, the wind would carry them straight and clear to
Nutmeg Point: the clear, clean wind in the clear and starry night.
 
Softly, he said—and, old Hazeed leaning closer to make the words
out, Limekiller said them again, louder, “I think it’s great. Just great. I think
it’s great.”
 
* * * *

