 
   
Being around the water offers allure and beauty, which is why waterfront homes are 
admired by many.  Your own backyard can be alive with the visual appeal and sounds of 
water in motion.  These soothing sounds and the beauty of colorful fish swimming among 
your plants, brings your landscaping alive. It's fun to create this attractive feature and it will 
become the centerpiece of your backyard. 
Before we get started I would like to answer some frequently asked questions about 
backyard ponds. 
• 
Will the winter cold kill my fish?  Most fish will naturally stop eating and hibernate 
at the bottom of the pond when the temperature of the water goes below 45 
degrees.  If you live in a climate where the pond will completely freeze over (even 
at the edges) you will need to create a hole in the ice for the fish to remain alive.   
• 
Will the winter cold kill my plants?  Yes, if it goes below freezing in your area. 
Bring plants inside for the winter months.  
• 
Do I need to filter the water?  That will depend on your climate and the design of 
your system. Ask a local dealer his recommendations for your geographical area 
concerning filtration. (look up in the Yellow Pages under ponds or water gardening)  
The action of water moving provides some natural filtration, so sometimes you can 
get away with only a fountain or waterfall. There are biological filters and cartridge 
filters available from pond supply outlets. We have provided links below to 3 sites 
that offer products, services and advice for building backyard water gardens.  
  
Water Gardening and Pond Supply : 
• 
B&Q 
• 
WICKES  
• 
FOCUS  
  
 
Step 1.  Educate yourself so you can make intelligent decisions.  Learn about water 
gardening in your part of the country.  Visit retail stores, shop out of a catalog click on the 
website links above. Determine the answer to such questions as, will I use a flexible liner or 
pre-formed shell...The location of my pond should take into account such things as 
availability of electricity...will I have a waterfall...etc.    
We will describe how to install a flexible vinyl liner pond in this article. Flexible liners give 
you complete variety in the shape of your pond, and are extremely durable. 
Step 2.   Locate the area in your yard for the pond. Determine how deep you want your 
pond to be. The depth of a back yard pond will usually be between 18-24", but you 
determine that after study and deciding the particulars about your pond. Mark the outline of 
the pond shape with string or garden hose on the lawn.  Remove sod and start diggin !  The 

outside wall of the pond will have a step in it to hold potted plants just under the water.  
Figure 2 below shows a profile view of the step in the side wall.  You create this step by 
leaving the original dirt in place as you dig. This will make the step as solid as possible.  
The depth of this step is approximately half of the depth of your pond.  This depth is also 
determined by the potted plants you plan on placing in the pond.  Figure 1 represents 
digging out the pond using a 2x4 board with level on top to make sure the outside edge is 
level all around the perimeter.  You need to raise low areas so the entire perimeter is the 
same height.  Check the depth as you dig to make sure the bottom is level as well. 
  
Figure 1  
 
  
  
Figure 2 
 
Figure 3  
 
  
Step 3.  Figure 3 shows how to measure your pond to get the right sized liner. The big 
square on Figure 3 represents the liner size needed for the pond in the drawing.  To 
determine the right liner size, take the width of the pond and add twice the depth of the 
pond, plus 24 more inches.  The length measurement will be done using the same formula. 

  
Step 4.  When hole is completed, drape liner 
over pond, centering it and placing stones 
around the edge.  Start filling with water.  As 
it fills, remove wrinkles and fold large 
creases into neat folds to be less noticeable. 
 
Step 5.  After pond is filled, trim excess liner to within 12 inches of edge of pond, and place 
your coping material around edge to give it a natural finished look.  We recommend large 
flat stones because they can overhang the pond edge slightly, and they look very natural. 
See Figure 2 above. 
Now your ready to add the finishing touches. This article covers the basics of how to install 
your own backyard pond. To finish the project you will need to investigate pumps, filters, 
plants and fish.  Check out the 3 website links above for the specifics needed to have a 
pond that is exactly right for your area.  
I know from personal experience that the catalog from Lilypons is complete and informative. 
Enjoy your new water gardening hobby. 
 
Waterfall built next to pond with dirt from pond excavation  
 

