arXiv:quant-ph/0407064 v1   8 Jul 2004
Basics of Quantum Computation
( Part 1 )
Elem´er E Rosinger
Department of Mathematics
and Applied Mathematics
University of Pretoria
Pretoria
0002 South Africa
eerosinger@hotmail.com

Dedicated to Meda

i
Table of Contents
Part 1
1 What is the point in Quantum Computation
1
1.1 Preview
1
1.2 A First View of the Advantages
5
1.3 Is Physics Nothing Else But Computation ?
12
2 First Quantum Computations
15
2.1 Quantum Bits, or Qubits
15
2.2 Single Qubit Gates
18
2.3 Composite Quantum Systems and Entanglement
21
2.4 Multiple Qubit Gates
28
2.5 Classical Computations on Quantum Computers
30
2.6 Keeping Quantum Gates Simple
33
3 Two Strange Phenomena
39
3.1 No-Cloning
39
3.2 Teleportation
44
4 Bell’s Inequalities
53
4.1 Boole Type Inequalities
56
4.2 The Bell Eﬀect
58
4.3 Bell’s Inequalities
61
4.4 Locality versus Nonlocality
64
5 The Deutsch-Jozsa Algorithm
67
5.1 A Simple Case of Quantum Parallelism
67
5.2 Massive Quantum Parallelism
69

ii
5.3 The Deutsch Algorithm
72
5.4 The Deutsch-Jozsa Algorithm
75
Bibliography
79
Part 2
6 Quantum Fourier Transform
7 The Grover Algorithm
8 The Shor Algorithm
9 Some Useful Properties
10 Conclusions
Appendix 1 Axioms of Quantum Mechanics
A1.1 State Space and Observables
A1.2 Six Axioms
A1.3 Types of Measurements
A1.4 Three Alternative Axioms
A1.4 Mathematical Failures of von Neumann’s First Model
Appendix 2 Mathematical Tools
A2.1 The Dirac ”bra-ket” Notation
A2.2 Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors
A2.3 Normal, Hermitian and Unitary Operators
A2.4 Spectral Representations
A2.5 Properties of Operators
A2.6 Tensor Products
A2.7 Abelian Groups, their Characters and Duals
A2.8 Finite Fourier Transforms and Complexity

Chapter 1
What is the point in
Quantum Computation
1.1. Preview
The literature on Quantum Computation has lately seen a number of
textbooks published. Typically, they tend to be rather encyclopedic,
and thus quite lengthy as well, as they try to cover not only quantum
computation proper, but also a variety of related subjects, such as
quantum decoherence, quantum error correction, quantum cryptogra-
phy, computational complexity, classical information theory, aspects
of physical implementation, and so on.
Some of such books are simply collections of chapters written by var-
ious authors dealing with speciﬁc aspects of the subject, and as such,
serving not necessarily in the best way the unity and coherence of the
presentation as a whole.
Such an involved approach, setting aside its merits, proves to have the
obvious defect of making one’s ﬁrst time access to the newly emerg-
ing realms of quantum computation so much more diﬃcult. And this
diﬃculty can be experienced even by a typical readership trained in
science, such as mathematicians, physicists, or engineers, who may
wish to learn about the basics of quantum computation, and do so in
a clear and rigorous enough manner, and not merely on the level of
science popularization.
Indeed, entering the subject of quantum computation does already
present the usual science trained readership with three quite inevitable
1

2
E E Rosinger
major diﬃculties : issues related to computational complexity, the
strangeness of algorithms for quantum computers, and above all, the
strange and highly counter intuitive world of quantum phenomena in
general.
The aim of this textbook is to bridge in regard of quantum compu-
tation what proves to be a considerable threshold even to the usual
science trained readership between the level of science popularization,
and on the other hand, the presently available more encyclopedic text-
books.
In this respect the present textbook is aimed to be a short, simple,
rigorous and direct introduction, addressing itself only to quantum
computation proper.
There has been a certain tradition in the science literature in writing
such introductions, albeit it may have been less familiar lately. One
of the examples which may come to one’s mind is given by the well
known Methuen monographs.
Quantum Computation presents the typical science trained reader
with a double novelty, and also a double strangeness. Namely, quantum
physics is highly counter intuitive, and consequently, so are strikingly
novel features of the algorithms and the corresponding programs on
quantum computers.
This textbook focuses as early as possible on the major new, typical,
and so far exclusive resources of quantum computers, given by such
quantum phenomena as :
superposition, entanglement, interference, parallelism, and reversible
computation.
A main issue, therefore, in quantum computation is that, as seen in
Fig. 1.2.1 below, the algorithms and programs on quantum comput-
ers only have a certain limited overlap with the usual algorithms and
programs on electronic digital computers. Indeed, on one hand, quite
a number of usual algorithmic operations on electronic digital com-
puters are not available on quantum computers. On the other hand,
quantum computers allow a number of algorithmic operations which
are incomparably more powerful than anything available on electronic

Basics of Quantum Computation
3
digital computers.
The prerequisites in this textbook are those familiar for a large number
of science trained readership. Namely, we assume some basic knowl-
edge about the way usual electronic digital computers process infor-
mation represented by classical binary bits. Also some familiarity is
assumed with Linear Algebra, and in particular, with real or com-
plex vector spaces, their isomorphisms, linear mappings between such
spaces, the representation of such mappings by matrices, the eigen-
vectors and eigenvalues of such mappings or matrices, as well as the
diagonalization of special classes of such mappings or matrices. Cer-
tain minimal knowledge on tensor products of vector spaces, as well
as on ﬁnite Fourier transforms and complexity of computation will be
required. However, all these subjects are reviewed for the convenience
of the reader in Appendix 2.
As in most of the literature on quantum physics and quantum com-
putation, we shall use the so called ”bra-ket” notation of Dirac which
proves to have important advantages. This notation is presented also
in Appendix 2.
So much for the mathematical type prerequisites.
When it comes to physics, this is of course the main point in quantum
computation, since whatever is new, and in fact, quite spectacularly
so in this respect, does come, and can only come, from those speciﬁc
properties of quantum systems which do not have any correspondent
in classical physics, including usual electronics.
Here however, the situation is quite diﬃcult as only a minority of
the science trained readership is familiar with quantum physics. And
then, the approach in this textbook is to give in Appendix 1, six well
known axioms of quantum physics which will be suﬃcient for the pre-
sentation and understanding of the issues in quantum computation
dealt with in this textbook. Fortunately, these six axioms can be pre-
sented in terms of Linear Algebra, and do not need additional detailed
or involved physical arguments in order to be used in the rest of this
textbook.
The two Appendices can be studied step by step, as the need arises
during the reading of the main part of the book. This is one reason

4
E E Rosinger
why the material in them was not placed as an introductory part at
the start of the textbook.
In this way, this textbook can be used starting with more advanced un-
dergraduate students. However, the readership is much wider, namely,
all those trained in science who have some familiarity with usual elec-
tronic digital computers, and may now wish to become familiar with
quantum computation as well, without having to use as a ﬁrst reading
the typical encyclopedic text available so far.
The content of this textbook is as follows. In the next section several
of the more important novelties and advantages of quantum compu-
tation are presented in short and in an informal manner. Chapter 2
introduces the very ﬁrst speciﬁc elements of quantum computation,
namely, the so called qubits, quantum gates, and the all important
phenomena of superposition and entanglement.
Immediately after,
in chapter 3, two speciﬁc, rather strange and unexpected quantum
computation phenomena, namely, the so called no-cloning and tele-
portation are presented.
Although these phenomena appear to be
quite diﬀerent, their early introduction has the advantage to make the
reader aware of some of the important speciﬁcs of quantum compu-
tation. In chapter 4, the celebrated Bell inequalities are introduced.
They play a fundamental role in Quantum Mechanics, and as such
cannot but have an important eﬀect in quantum computation as well.
These chapters 2 - 4 form together the entrance to the subsequent
presentation of speciﬁc algorithms typical for quantum computation,
algorithms which can be found in the following chapters 5 - 8. Such
algorithm are indeed very diﬀerent from those we have been accus-
tomed to when using usual electronic digital computers. Chapter 5
gives a gradual insight into some of the applications of quantum par-
allelism and interference, starting with a simple case, and ending with
the full version of the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm. Chapter 6 deals with
the essentials of the theoretical background of the Quantum Fourier
Transform, which is then used in the Grover and Shor algorithms in
chapters 7 and 8, respectively. The main part of textbook ends with
several additional facts and comments in chapters 9 and 10.
As far as the two Appendices which complete the textbook, their con-
tent was mentioned earlier.

Basics of Quantum Computation
5
1.2 A First View of the Advantages
Quantum computation has in certain impressive ways exploded upon
us during the last decade. This comes more than eight decades after
the establishment by Max Planck in 1900 of Quantum Mechanics, the
theory upon which quantum computation is based. A number of ini-
tial insights, principles and results relevant for quantum computation
were obtained in the 1980s in works by R Feynman, D Deutsch and a
few others, Brown, Deutsch [1-3], Feynman [1,2].
A crucial moment of vast potential practical implications, however,
occurred in 1994, when P Shor showed that quantum computers can
ﬁnd the prime factors of large integers incomparably faster than usual
electronic digital computers, thus they may revolutionize the ways in
which the coding of information is being done at present. This would
of course lead to a major challenge to the security of public-key crypto-
systems upon which much of governmental and private communication
is based.
What prevents at present such a security challenge is the fact that,
for the time being, there are not available large enough quantum com-
puters, that is, quantum mechanical devices which could eﬀectively
implement the massive advantages already developed by the theory of
quantum computation.
The Shor quantum algorithm for factorization in prime numbers, as
mentioned later, is no less than exponentially faster when compared
with any other such algorithm known so far on usual digital elec-
tronic computers. Another quite impressive breakthrough was Grover
quantum algorithm for search which is quadratically faster than any
possible such algorithm on a usual digital computer.
Such examples of highly practical interest have, no doubt, brought in
a sharp focus the issue of quantum computation, from the point of
view of both theoretical and eﬀective physical implementation.
These massive advantages of quantum computation come precisely
from the rather unusual, strange and surprising, that is, far from clas-

6
E E Rosinger
sical properties of quantum mechanical systems. In particular, quan-
tum mechanical systems can behave in ways which are inconceivable in
the case of electronic devices upon which the usual digital computers
are based. This fundamental diﬀerence between quantum mechanical
devices, and on the other hand, all the other classical ones, includ-
ing electronic devices, is at the root of the massive power of quantum
computing.
However, the comparative situation between classical and quantum
computation is not quite that simple and straightforward. Indeed, as
mentioned in detail in the sequel, when going from usual electronic
digital computers to quantum computers, one not only gains a num-
ber of massive advantages, but also loses several particularly useful
and familiar classical ones. In this way in such a transition from usual
to quantum computation, one enters under the realm of the saying :
”You win some, you lose some ...”,
as illustrated in Fig. 1.2.1 below. However, as it turns out, what one
loses is more than fully, and in fact, quite spectacularly compensated
by what one wins.

Basics of Quantum Computation
7
∗1
on bits
∗2
∗3
∗4
∗5
∗6
on qubits
operations by
electronic computers
operations by
quantum computers
Fig. 1.2.1
∗1 irreversible computation
∗2 superposition
∗3 entanglement
∗4 interference
∗5 parallelism
∗6 reversible computation
Let us start by noting that most of the operations performed by usual
electronic digital computers are irreversible. For instance, this holds
for one of such basic operations like the addition of two integer num-
bers. Indeed, when we add a and b, and obtain a + b, we cannot in
general recover from that sum the two initial terms a and b. On the
other hand, as we shall see, the typical operations in quantum comput-
ers are given by unitary linear operators, thus they are reversible. This
follows from the axioms of Quantum Mechanics, according to which
the dynamics of a quantum system is always described by some uni-
tary, thus invertible operator, unless some measurement is performed.
Of course, this does not mean that irreversible operations cannot at
all be performed by quantum computers. However, such operations
are related to measurement processes in which the quantum system
interacts with a macroscopic measurement device.

8
E E Rosinger
Fortunately, this restriction on irreversible operations in the case of
quantum computers can easily be compensated, as will become obvi-
ous later.
Here it is important to note that, as seen in Appendix 1, according
to the axioms of Quantum Mechanics a measurement performed on a
quantum mechanical system does not always collapse the state of that
system, does not always have a probabilistic outcome, and is not al-
ways an irreversible process. However, typically, such a measurement
does collapse the state, its outcome is probabilistic, and it leads to an
irreversible process.
As far as the new and unprecedented abilities quantum computers
have owing to such typically quantum phenomena like superposition,
entanglement, interference and parallelism, we shall see the extent to
which they revolutionize computation by allowing a massive power.
Needless to say, the known laws of nature do not stop at those of
electro-magnetism. And as it turns out, quantum processes oﬀer the
possibility for a far more powerful computation. However, the classical
laws of electro-magnetism, on the one hand, and the laws of quantum
processes, on the other hand, are vastly diﬀerent, with the latter being
also highly surprising and counter intuitive, as they no longer relate to
our every day experience. Consequently, when we go from usual elec-
tronic digital computers to quantum computers, we have to develop
completely new approaches in computation.
This is actually what Quantum Computation is all about.
Related to the massive power, or speed of quantum computers, let us
recall in somewhat more precise terms that from the point of view of
our usual electronic digital computers, problems get divided in two
sharply diﬀerent classes, namely, of polynomial, respectively, exponen-
tial complexity, when it comes to the number of computer operations
involved in their solution.
A problem of polynomial complexity requires a computation time
which in terms of the size, say n, of the respective problem does not
grow faster than a certain ﬁxed power nk of that size, where k is deter-
mined by the given problem, but not by its size n. In particular, when

Basics of Quantum Computation
9
k = 1, such problems are called of linear complexity. Such problems,
as well as more general ones of polynomial complexity for which k is
not too large, can easily be solved on electronic digital computers even
for considerable sizes for n.
Some typical examples are ﬁnding the smallest, or for that matter, the
largest, number in a list of n given numbers, or performing the mul-
tiplication of two n × n matrices. For both of these problems k ≤2.
Another example is the inversion of an n×n matrix which has nonzero
determinant, for which k ≤3.
On the other hand, a problem of exponential complexity requires a
computation time which grows like an exponent kn with the size n of
the respective problem. Here k depends on the particular problem,
but not on the size n of that problem. And obviously, this leads to a
tremendous growth even for k = 2, as the ancient story about the ori-
gin of the chess game and of the corresponding remuneration problem
of its inventor can attest.
Unfortunately, for a lot of important problems which one encounters in
practical situations we could so far ﬁnd only algorithms of exponential
complexity, and with k ≥2. Among such problems are the so called
travelling salesman’s problem, or the factorization in prime numbers
of larger integers, with the second problem playing, as mentioned, a
fundamental role in present day coding, Brown.
By the way, recently, M Agrawal, N Kayal and N Saxena of the In-
dian Institute of Technology in Kanpur, claimed to have a polynomial
algorithm for testing whether a number is prime or not, Agrawal, et.al.
What P Shor managed to show in 1994 is that the factorization prob-
lem becomes of a mere polynomial, and in fact, of less than cubic
complexity, when solved with a quantum computer. More precisely,
an n-bit number can be factorized in primes with no more than in
O(n2 log n log log n) steps, see Giorda, et.al., in Legget, et.al.
This is in sharp contradistinction with the algorithms known so far for
this problem and aimed for usual electronic digital computers. Indeed,
such known algorithms do not have any comparably low complexity,
not even even a polynomial one, since the best so far among them,
due to Pollard and Strassen, needs in general O(exp(C n1/3 log2/3 n))
steps, for a suitable constant C > 0.

10
E E Rosinger
And as the theory of quantum computation shows it in general, such
an earlier hard to imagine massive reduction in the complexity of
problems, when one goes from usual electronic digital computers to
quantum computers, can happen for rather large classes of problems.
Needless to say, quantum computers prove to have a number of other
important advantages as well, when compared with the usual elec-
tronic digital ones. And from the point of view of a fuller understand-
ing of such advantages we are still in early stages of development,
having so far found what may as well be but some of the ﬁrst surpris-
ingly powerful possibilities and results.
In this respect it should not be overlooked that Quantum Mechanics
itself, unlike the classical theories of physics upon which the usual
electronic digital computers are based, cannot be considered a closed
theory, as among others, it is still subject to fundamental controversies
in the interpretation of its theoretical body. Consequently, it can be
expected that Quantum Mechanics may further witness important new
developments which may as well impact upon quantum computation.
On the other hand, the recently emerged major interest in quantum
computation, as well as the developments related to its eﬀective phys-
ical implementation which is still in early stages, may bring in new
points of view regarding the theory of Quantum Mechanics. This two
way interaction can therefore be expected to further contribute to the
development of quantum computation.
One of the aims of this textbook is to make clear in suﬃciently general,
yet simple and direct terms such advantages of quantum computation
and quantum computers. However, this is not quite an immediate and
trivial task because of the following two reasons.
First, the dramatically increased computational powers of quantum
computers come from speciﬁc, unique and nonclassical, thus highly
unusual and counter intuitive aspects of quantum mechanical systems,
aspects upon which such powers are essentially and directly based. It
follows that one has to become familiar with some basics of Quan-
tum Mechanics in order to understand why, how and what quantum
computers can, or for that matter, cannot do. In Appendix 1 a short
introduction to Quantum Mechanics is presented, which suﬃces for

Basics of Quantum Computation
11
the purposes of this textbook. Further reference is provided for those
who may wish to go deeper in the related issues.
Second, and also as a consequence of the rather unusual ways of quan-
tum systems, there are a number of operations which quantum com-
puters cannot do, although usual electronic digital ones can.
This
however is fully compensated by what quantum computers can do,
and they do so far beyond the abilities of usual electronic digital com-
puters.
In particular, back in 1985, D Deutsch proved that quan-
tum computers are universal computers, in other words, just like the
usual electronic digital computers, they can perform every algorithm,
Brown.
The operations which quantum computers cannot do are again related
to some of the unusual feature of quantum systems. One of these fea-
tures is that the time evolution of a quantum system is reversible, as
long as no measurement is performed on the system. On the other
hand, a measurement of a quantum system will typically collapse the
state of that system, and do so in a probabilistic, rather than deter-
ministic manner, leading to an irreversible outcome.
The operations which quantum computers can do, and they can do
them far beyond the performance of electronic digital ones, come also
from the unusual features of quantum systems, such as entanglement,
superposition, parallelism, or interference.
Further, one has to note that in the usual electronic digital computers
the basic unit of information is the bit, which can take two distinct
values only. On the other hand, as we shall see in section 2.1, quantum
systems allow for a far richer basic unit of information which is called
quantum bit, or for brevity, qubit.
In view of the above, it is clear that, when we want to solve a problem
on a quantum computer, ﬁnding for it an appropriate algorithm is not
a trivial task, since we have to proceed in quite diﬀerent ways than
those which we use, and by now are so much familiar with, in the case
of an electronic digital computer. In this respect, for instance, the
algorithm of P Shor for prime number factorization gives a good ex-
ample of the extent to which algorithms for quantum computers may
have to be rethought completely, and from their very start.

12
E E Rosinger
Finally, in addition to the mentioned conceptual nontriviality in using
quantum computers, there is for the time being also the practical limi-
tation coming from the fact that the eﬀective physical implementation
of quantum computing has not yet gone far enough, although progress
in this regard is ongoing.
The challenge in building quantum computers, that is, actual phys-
ical systems which can perform quantum computations, is that one
may have to be able to control a certain suitable number, say, several
hundred or perhaps thousand, of individual quantum entities. This
is of course far less easy than the classical electro-magnetic control of
ﬂows of electrons through electric circuits in the microchips used in
electronic digital computers.
The situation in Fig. 1.2.1 need of course not necessarily mean that we
are now, or shall be in future, faced with an either-or choice, namely,
to use either usual electronic digital computers, or quantum comput-
ers. Indeed, it may prove to be possible and convenient to use both of
them, for instance, in a sort of hybrid setup, in which one can have ac-
cess to the comparative advantages of each of them. And for problems
which do not present exponential complexity, usual electronic digital
computers can perform quite well, not to mention that there are plenty
of well tested corresponding algorithms and programs. Also, the writ-
ing of new such algorithms may be more easy, due to the familiarity
we have acquired over more than half a century, as well as to the fact
that they need not be restricted mostly to invertible gates, as it hap-
pens in the case of quantum computers.
1.3 Is Physics Nothing Else But Computation ?
When it comes to eﬀective means for implementing computation, and
doing so outside of our human minds, we have so far been obliged to
make recourse to physical devices. In this regard, we can note three
successive waves. The ﬁrst was of course mechanical, and it has ranged
starting, for instance, from counting with small pieces of stone, from
where the very term Calculus happens to originate. It evolved to the
more organized collections of such pieces which make up an abacus,

Basics of Quantum Computation
13
then in the 17th century it reached the mechanical sophistication of
the machine constructed by the famous French mathematician Blaise
Pascal. Later, in the 19th century it even managed to overreach itself
in the immense and never completed Diﬀerence Engine of the English
amateur scientist Charles Babbage.
The next and second wave starting in the 1940s, and represented by
our present day usual electronic digital computers, has been incompa-
rably more advanced, and we are mostly still there, as the forthcoming
third wave, of quantum computers, is not yet at the stage where it
could compete in practice.
Needless to say, these three successive waves have had a far wider
impact upon human thinking and vision than in the realms of compu-
tation only. After all, we have, especially after Newton, gone through
a so called mechanical view of the universe, and lately, since the 1920s,
we tend to believe that everything is but a ... quantum cloud ...
As far as computation is concerned, its essential reliance in our times
on the latest of the most basic laws of physics has led to the question
of the possible identity between physics and computation. More pre-
cisely, the question emerged whether physics is, after all, nothing but
an information processing done by Nature. And then, as Quantum
Mechanics happens to be the latest and most subtle of our theories of
physics, the question arises whether or not the Universe as a whole is
but a quantum computer, Brown, Deutsch [1-3].
One of perhaps the ﬁrst such attempts to enquire into the possible
identity between physics and computation was the paper Simulating
Physics With Computers, by the American physicist Richard Feyn-
man, a famous Nobel Prize scientist.
That paper was delivered in
1981 at MIT, at the ﬁrst ever major conference on physics and com-
putation, Feynman [1,2].
The point, as stressed by Feynman in that talk, was not merely to ap-
proximate fundamental physical processes on a computer, but to see
whether one can perform on a computer the very same information
processing which goes on within the respective physical processes, as
they take place out there in Nature.

14
E E Rosinger
Speciﬁcally, Feynman asked whether our usual electronic digital com-
puters can possibly do the information processing which is involved in
quantum phenomena. And based on a number of arguments following
from the laws of Quantum Mechanics, Feynman concluded that the in-
formation processing which typically goes on in quantum phenomena
is so immense that our usual electronic digital computer are nowhere
near to be able to do the same.
In this way, the mentioned 1981 paper of R Feynman can be seen as
the ﬁrst major message on the dramatic relative limitation of usual
electronic digital computers, when compared to the potentialities of
quantum computers, and thus, of quantum computation.
Quantum computation is in this regard the development of the massive
potentialities of quantum computers, when compared with the capa-
bilites of the usual electronic digital ones, potentialities highlighted
among others by R Feynman.

Chapter 2
First Quantum
Computations
2.1 Quantum Bits, or Qubits
Information is based on diﬀerence, distinction, or discrimination. In its
classical form, its basic unit corresponding to its simplest possible form
is one bit. This corresponds to a discrimination between two states
only, say, 0 and 1. For instance, one bit of information corresponds to
knowing the state of an electronic device which, by assumption, can
only have one of two possible states. This means that we can write
(2.1.1)
one bit ∈{ 0, 1 }
and it is precisely such bits which are all that is processed by usual
electronic digital computers.
On the other hand, the qubit, which is the basic unit of information
processed by quantum computers, corresponds to the states | ψ >
of a quantum entity whose state space is a complex two dimensional
vector space, that is, | ψ >
∈C2. Thus a qubit is given by the
following inﬁnite amount of classical information
(2.1.2)
one qubit = | ψ >
= α | 0 >
+ β | 1 >
∈C2
where | 0 >, | 1 >
∈C2 denote an orthonormal basis in C2, and the
complex numbers α, β ∈C satisfy the relation
(2.1.3)
| α |2 + | β |2 = 1
15

16
E E Rosinger
However, since the states | ψ > and eiη| ψ >, for all η ∈[0, 2π], are
equivalent from quantum mechanical point of view, see Appendix 1, it
follows that α, β in (2.1.2) have together only two degrees of freedom,
thus for instance, we can take them as
(2.1.4)
α = cos θ,
β = eiη sin θ,
η, θ ∈[0, 2π]
In this way, by comparing the classical bit in (2.1.1) with the qubit in
(2.1.2) - (2.1.4), we can note from the start the considerably more rich,
and in fact doubly inﬁnite classical information content in one qubit,
relative to the minimal nontrivial ﬁnite information content in one bit.
Here, one of the strange quantum phenomena already shows up, namely,
a phenomenon which is the subject of the celebrated riddle of ”Schr¨o-
dinger’s cat”, Auletta.
Indeed, on the one hand, a quantum computer can eﬀectively handle
this doubly inﬁnite information which is in a qubit, this being done as
the result of such typical quantum phenomena like superposition, par-
allelism, interference, entanglement and so on. And such a handling
of one qubit is as much the most simple and easy basic operation in
a quantum computer, as is the handling of a classical bit in a usual
electronic digital computer.
Yet on the other hand, when it comes to retrieve as a classical in-
formation the information content in a qubit, we have to eﬀect what
is called a measurement on the respective quantum system. And this
will in general cause the collapse of the respective wave function which
gives the state | ψ > of the qubit in (2.1.2). Consequently, the clas-
sical information which we shall be able to obtain will in general only
be one single usual bit, for instance, either knowing that the respec-
tive quantum system is in the state | 0 >, or on the contrary, that it
is in the state | 1 >, with each of the two states appearing with the
respective probabilities
(2.1.5)
| α |2,
| β |2
What is most important to note here is that, in spite of the appear-
ance of the probabilities in (2.1.5), what we are dealing here with in

Basics of Quantum Computation
17
the case of the qubits in (2.1.2) - ( 2.1.5) is not at all a classical proba-
bilistic system. Indeed, a corresponding classical probabilistic system
would have two states A and B, and would manifest them with the
respective probabilities p and q. However, that classical system would
always, and most certainly, be in one, and only in one, of the states
A or B. Thus the probabilistic aspect would only come from the fact
that we do not know in which of these two states the classical system
happens to be, although that system is certainly always in one and
only one of its two states. A typical example of such a classical prob-
abilistic system is the tossing of a coin.
On the other hand, in the case of a qubit as in (2.1.2) - (2.1.5), the
respective quantum system is in general not in any particular one of
the states | 0 >
or | 1 >. Instead, the quantum system is typically,
and in a speciﬁc quantum manner, in both of the states | 0 > and
| 1 > at the same time, this being the meaning of superposition of the
respective two states in the case of a qubit.
The riddle of ”Schr¨odinger’s cat” was invented by E Schr¨odinger pre-
cisely in order to point out such strange, highly counter intuitive and
typically quantum phenomena.
Let us summarize the above two facts. A quantum computer can eas-
ily and simply handle qubits which can carry a doubly inﬁnite amount
of classical information. When we retrieve classically such an infor-
mation, we can only obtain one single bit, and in general, we can do
so only with a certain probability.
This is but one ﬁrst typical example of ”you win some, you lose some
...” illustrated in Fig. 1.2.1. However, as seen in the sequel, it is al-
ready the source of a tremendous power of quantum computers, when
compared with the usual electronic digital ones.
Needless to say, already these two facts make it clear that setting up al-
gorithms for quantum computers is highly nontrivial, when compared
with the customary ways of algorithms for usual electronic digital com-
puters.
However, the diﬀerence, as seen later, between quantum computers
and usual electronic digital ones is further accentuated when it comes

18
E E Rosinger
to handling an arbitrary ﬁnite number n ≥1 of qubits. Indeed, speci-
fying n classical bits amounts to giving one single integer 1 ≤m ≤2n.
On the other hand, owing to quantum superposition, specifying n
qubits can lead to specifying at the same time and simultaneously
no less than 2n integers, and in fact, much more, see (2.3.11), (2.3.12)
in section 2.3.
This alone, therefore, can already give an idea about the surprising
and signiﬁcant increase in capabilities of quantum computers.
Yet in order further to accentuate the fact that with quantum comput-
ers we are in a situation in which ”we win some, and we lose some”,
we also have to note the following. In a usual electronic digital com-
puter we can read oﬀthe above mentioned integer value m, and do
so without having in any way whatsoever aﬀected the n classical bits
which deﬁne it uniquely. On the other hand, in a quantum computer,
if we read oﬀthe contents of n qubits which are in superposition, we
are inevitably coming under the axioms about quantum measurement,
as already mentioned above, and will therefore typically, even if not
always, alter the respective multiple qubits by collapsing them, see
the end of section 2.3 for further details.
Fortunately, what ”we win” with quantum computers will more than
compensate for what ”we lose” ...
2.2 Single Qubit Gates
In analogy with usual electronic digital computer, we call a gate any
quantum system which can process one or more qubits. To be pre-
cise, such a quantum system will have as inputs and outputs states
given by one or more qubits, and it will process them according to the
axioms of Quantum Mechanics. Therefore, outside of measurements,
the states of quantum systems are processed by unitary, thus invertible
operators. It follows that quantum gates must have the same number
of input and output qubits.
We shall start with some of the simplest, yet useful quantum gates
which process one input qubit into one output qubit.
The general

Basics of Quantum Computation
19
form of such a quantum single qubit gate, say, A is
| ψ >
| χ >
A
Fig. 2.2.1
Here, as also always in the sequel, it is assumed that the information
ﬂows from left to right in quantum gates. Therefore, there is no need
for arrows to indicate the ﬂow of information. Clearly, this simpliﬁca-
tion in the graphic representation of quantum gates is made possible
by the fact that quantum gates process qubits according to unitary,
and thus invertible operators.
In the case of the graphic representation of logical gates processing
classical bits in electronic digital computers, it is not convenient, and
also often impossible, to make such an assumption on the ﬂow of in-
formation.
Back to the quantum gate in Fig.2.2.1, we note that | ψ >, | χ >
∈
C2 are qubits, while A : C2
−→
C2 is a unitary linear operator,
thus in particular, it is invertible. It is convenient to use a matrix
representation for the quantum gate A, namely
(2.2.1)
A =



a
b
c
d



in which case for qubits | ψ >
= α | 0 >
+ β | 1 >,
| χ >
=
γ | 0 >
+ δ | 1 >, for which A | ψ >
= | χ >, we shall have
(2.2.2)



a
b
c
d






α
β


=



γ
δ



The ﬁrst example of quantum gate we consider is the quantum NOT
gate, or in short, the q-NOT gate which is given by the unitary matrix

20
E E Rosinger
(2.2.3)
X =



0
1
1
0



It is easy to see that in view of (2.2.2), we obtain in this case
(2.2.4)
X (α | 0 >
+ β | 1 >) = β | 0 >
+ α | 1 >
in other words, the q-NOT gate simply switches between themselves
the states | 0 > and | 1 >.
Other useful quantum gates are given by the unitary matrices
(2.2.5)
Y
=



0
−i
i
0



and
(2.2.6)
Z =



1
0
0
−1



which act upon a given qubit according to
(2.2.7)
Y (α | 0 >
+ β | 1 >) =
−i(−β | 0 >
+ α | 1 >)
Z (α | 0 >
+ β | 1 >) = α | 0 >
−β | 1 >
The above X, Y and Z are called the Pauli matrices. Also, we shall
encounter the Hadamard gate deﬁned by the unitary matrix
(2.2.8)
H = (1/
√
2)



1
1
1
−1



Let us note that we have the following relations with respect to the
repeated application of the above quantum gates
(2.2.9)
X2 = Y 2 = Z2 = H2 = I
which means that each of the gates X, Y, Z and H are square roots
of the identity matrix, and corresponding quantum gate I.

Basics of Quantum Computation
21
In general, in view of the fact that an arbitrary quantum gate A in
(2.2.1) is only subjected to the condition to be unitary, it follows that
there are inﬁnitely many single qubit quantum gates.
Indeed, the
general form of a 2 × 2 unitary matrix, see Appendix 2, is given by
(2.2.10)
A = eia



cos b
−i sin b
−i sin b
cos b






cos c
−sin c
sin c
cos c






e−id
0
0
eid



where a, b, c and d are arbitrary real numbers.
This again is a considerable advantage over the situation with one
bit input and one bit output logical gates in usual electronic digi-
tal computers, where obviously, there are only four such gates F :
{ 0, 1 } −→{ 0, 1 }. And two of them are trivial, as they have the
constant value 0, respectively, 1. The third is the identity gate, while
the fourth is the NOT gate which sends 0 to 1, and 1 to 0.
A further advantage of the representation in (2.2.10) is that it allows
to approximate arbitrary one qubit quantum gates A by a ﬁxed and
ﬁnite number of such gates, corresponding to suitably chosen values
of the parameters a, b, c and d.
2.3 Composite Quantum Systems and Entanglement
Before considering multiple qubit gates in the next section, it is useful
to have a look at the unusual manner quantum systems become aggre-
gated into composite ones. This feature is again unique to Quantum
Mechanics and it leads to one of the most powerful capabilities of quan-
tum computers which is based on what is called entanglement, Auletta.
This term was initially suggested in the 1930s by E Schr¨odinger in his
comments to the celebrated 1935 paper of Einstein-Podolski-Rosen, or
in short, EPR.
In fact, the phenomenon of entanglement goes very deep into the na-
ture of quantum processes, and it raises a whole host of fundamental
issues, among them that of nonlocality. The mentioned EPR paper
was the ﬁrst to bring entanglement and its dramatic eﬀects into fo-
cus, and it elicited a reaction which since then has seen more than

22
E E Rosinger
one million related published papers, Auletta. Of a major interest in
this regard has been what is called ”Bell’s inequalities”, published in
1964, see Bell, Cushing & McMullin, Maudlin. We shall consider in
chapter 4 certain aspects of this issue which are relevant to quantum
computation.
Since we are dealing here with quantum computation, we can restrict
ourselves to quantum systems which have as states a ﬁnite number
n ≥1 of qubits, say
| ψ1 > = α1 | 0 > + β1 | 1 >, . . . , | ψn > = αn | 0 > + βn | 1 > ∈C2
Thus the state spaces of such quantum systems are Cm, for various
ﬁnite and integer values of m ≥1.
Here however, we have to be careful about how we ﬁnd out the state
space of n qubits, that is, what is the value of m for the corresponding
Cm in which the n qubits range. Indeed, one of the surprising and
signiﬁcant advantages of quantum computers already comes here to
the fore, as mentioned at the end of section 2.1.
Given two quantum systems S and T, with the respective state spaces
Cn and Cm, let us consider them together, as forming a composite
quantum system denoted by S ⊗T, even if they may on occasion be
functioning independently.
What is uniquely speciﬁc to Quantum Mechanics is that the state
space of this composite quantum system S ⊗T will be given by the
tensor product
(2.3.1)
Cn ⊗Cm
This is much unlike in Classical Mechanics, where the state space of a
composite system is given by the Cartesian product of their respective
state spaces.
The eﬀect of the tensor product in (2.3.1) is that the dimension of
the state space of the composite quantum system S ⊗T is the product
of the dimensions of their respective state spaces, since we have the
isomorphism of vector spaces

Basics of Quantum Computation
23
(2.3.2)
Cn ⊗Cm ≃Cnm
Here again for comparison, and in order to point out the diﬀerence,
we can recall that in Classical Mechanics the dimension of the state
space of the composite of two system is the sum of the dimensions
of their respective state spaces, since as mentioned, the state space
of this composite is given by the Cartesian product of the two state
spaces involved. In particular, for instance, if S and T were classi-
cal systems, then their classical composite would have the state space
Cn × Cm = Cn+m. And clearly nm > n + m, starting with quite
small values of n, m, with the diﬀerence between nm and n + m
increasing fast.
Returning to qubits, and with a view to multiple qubit gates, let us
note the following consequence of (2.3.1), (2.3.2).
Suppose we are
given n quantum systems, each having its state described by the re-
spective qubits | ψ1 >, . . . , | ψn >
∈C2. Then the composite
quantum system will have its states described by multiple qubits
(2.3.3)
| ψ >
= (| ψ1 >, . . . , | ψn >) ∈C2 ⊗. . . ⊗C2 ≃C2n
with the tensor product having n factors, thus the dimension of the
state space of the n multiple qubits | ψ > will be 2n.
On the other hand, in case we would have n classical mechanical
systems, each with the state space C2, their composite would be
C2 × . . . × C2 ≃C2n, which is obviously much smaller, as soon as
n ≥3.
In this way, the dimension of the state space of multiple qubits grows
exponentially, as the power 2n, in the number n of qubits involved,
while such a growth in dimension cannot be attained in such a simple
manner in Classical Mechanics.
For instance, if we consider n classical bits b1, . . . , bn ∈{ 0, 1 }
then according to the Cartesian product rule which operates in the
classical context, we have b = (b1, . . . , bn) ∈{ 0, 1 }n for the corre-
sponding classical multiple bit. Therefore there are 2n such distinct
multiple classical bits. However, this does not compare in any way
with the inﬁnite amount of multiple qubits | ψ >
in (2.3.3) which
can range over the whole of the 2n complex dimensional vector space

24
E E Rosinger
C2 ⊗. . . ⊗C2 ≃C2n, except for the vector zero. And all these
multiple qubits are distinct from quantum mechanical point of view,
unless they are obtained from one another by a transformation of the
form c | ψ >, with c ∈C, c ̸= 0.
To conclude for the moment, the state space { 0, 1 }n of n classical
bits is but a ﬁnite set which altogether has only 2n distinct elements.
On the other hand, the state space C2 ⊗. . . ⊗C2
≃
C2n of n
quantum qubits is a complex vector space, and as such, it has 2n as
its complex dimension. Thus the state space C2n has inﬁnitely many
states which, according to the equivalence given by the above trans-
formation | ψ >
7−→c | ψ >, with c ∈C, c ̸= 0, are all distinct
from quantum mechanical point of view. A more precise expression of
this inﬁnity is given at the end of this section.
With respect to (2.3.1) - (2.3.3) it is most important to note that
it is precisely the presence of tensor products in the state space of
composite quantum systems, and the resulting multiplication of di-
mensions, which allow quantum computers to accomplish the rather
incredible feat in allowing algorithms which may abolish the diﬀerence
between polynomial and exponential complexity, a diﬀerence which al-
though highly inconvenient, it is nevertheless unavoidable when using
electronic digital computers. The algorithm of P Shor, for instance,
shows in the case of prime factorization that one can turn a problem
which, on usual electronic digital computers has so far only algorithms
with a very high complexity, into a problem of a signiﬁcantly lower
complexity, when solved on a quantum computer.
Finally, let us note that the reason why the state space of the com-
posite of two quantum systems is given by a tensor, rather than a
Cartesian product is an immediate consequence of the linearity prop-
erty of the states of quantum systems, thus of their property to be
able to have their states in superposition. Let us illustrate all that
in the simple case when we compose two quantum systems S and T,
each having its states given by a respective single qubit. Of course,
in this particular case the respective tensor product of the two state
spaces has the same complex dimension 4 as their Cartesian product
has. Nevertheless, we analyze more closely this simple case in order

Basics of Quantum Computation
25
to avoid complications of a merely technical nature. Needless to say,
in view of (2.3.2), as soon as at least one of the two state spaces has
complex dimension larger than 2, their respective tensor product will
have a complex dimension larger than that of their Cartesian product.
We start by noting that the quantum system S can, among others,
be in one of the single qubit states | 0 > or | 1 >. Similarly for the
quantum system T. It follows that among the states of the composite
quantum system S ⊗T are the double qubits
(2.3.4)
(| 0 >, | 0 >),
(| 0 >, | 1 >),
(| 1 >, | 0 >),
(| 1 >, | 1 >)
And then the linearity property of the states, which holds for any
quantum system, will immediately imply that S ⊗T must in addition
also have as states all the possible superpositions given by the linear
combinations
(2.3.5)
α (| 0 >, | 0 >) + β (| 0 >, | 1 >) + γ (| 1 >, | 0 >) +
+ δ (| 1 >, | 1 >)
with α, β, γ, δ ∈C, for which
(2.3.6)
| α |2 + | β |2 + | γ |2 + | δ |2 = 1
Since in Quantum Mechanics any nonzero state | ψ > is equivalent
with any other state c | ψ >, with c ∈C, c ̸= 0, we can consider
(2.3.5) alone, without the normalizing condition (2.3.6). In this way,
it follows that the state space of the two qubit composite quantum
system S ⊗T is indeed C2 ⊗C2, as speciﬁed in general in (2.3.1).
In order to clarify the phenomenon of entanglement, let us now return
to the general case in (2.3.1) of the composite S ⊗T of two quantum
systems S and T. We can assume that the state space Cn of S has an
orthonormal basis | 1 >, . . . , | n >, while the state space Cm of T
has an orthonormal basis | 1 >, . . . , | m >. Then every state | ψ >
of S and | χ >
of T can be written respectively as
(2.3.7)
| ψ >
= α1 | 1 >
+ . . . + αn | n >
| χ >
= β1 | 1 >
+ . . . + βm | m >

26
E E Rosinger
with α1, . . . , αn, β1, . . . , βm ∈C.
On the other hand, every state | φ >
of the composite quantum
system S ⊗T can be written as
(2.3.8)
| φ >
= γ1 | 1 > ⊗| 1 > + . . . + γnm | n > ⊗| m >
with γ1, . . . , γnm ∈C.
Here we used the customary notation according to which a double
qubit (| i >, | j >) is also written as | i > ⊗| j >, or | i > | j >, and
even simply as | i, j >, or | ij >, when this does not create confusion.
And now an essential feature of tensor products comes into play.
Namely, by far most of the states | φ >
of the composite quantum
system S ⊗T are not of the simple and particular form
(2.3.9)
| φ >
= | ψ >
⊗| χ >
where | ψ > and | χ > are states of the component systems S and T,
respectively. For instance, in the case of double qubits, it can be seen
easily that in C2 ⊗C2 we have
(2.3.10)
| 0, 1 >
+ | 1, 0 >
̸=
̸= (α | 0 >
+ β | 1 >) ⊗(γ | 0 >
+ δ | 1 >)
for any values of α, β, γ, δ ∈C.
The states | φ > of a composite quantum system S ⊗T for which
(2.3.9) does not hold are called entangled. And as noted, such en-
tangled states constitute by far the majority, or in other words, the
typical states in a composite quantum system.
One such example of entangled state in a composite quantum system
is the double qubit | 0, 1 >
+ | 1, 0 >
in C2 ⊗C2, see (2.3.10).
Returning to the n qubit systems in (2.3.3) with their states | ψ >
∈
C2n, let us note that we have their representations
(2.3.11)
| ψ >
= Σx1, . . . , xn αx1, . . . , xn | x1, . . . , xn >
∈C2n

Basics of Quantum Computation
27
where the sum is taken over all x1, . . . , xn ∈{ 0, 1 }, while
αx1, . . . , xn ∈C are subject to the condition
(2.3.12)
Σx1, . . . , xn |αx1, . . . , xn|2 = 1
And in order to obtain in (2.3.11) diﬀerent quantum states | ψ >, that
is, diﬀerent n qubits, the respective sets of αx1, . . . , xn in two qubits
given by (2.3.11) have to diﬀer more than merely by a factor c ∈C,
with |c| = 1.
Clearly, the multiple inﬁnity of such n qubits | ψ > goes far beyond
the ﬁnite number of 2n classical bits of a classical n bit system. In-
deed, n classical bits can only have 2n diﬀerent states. On the other
hand, n qubits can range, within condition (2.3.12), over a 2n com-
plex dimensional complex vector space, and they will all give diﬀerent
states, as long as they diﬀer by more than a factor c ∈C, with |c| = 1.
Here again, let us note that a quantum system which handles n entan-
gled qubits does in eﬀect process such a multiple inﬁnity information
as contained in (2.3.11) under the above mentioned conditions. And
the respective quantum system, based on the laws of Quantum Me-
chanics, processes such an inﬁnite information just as simply as the
usual electronic digital computers do with the classical information,
based on the Classical Mechanics.
The problem arises, as with ”Schr¨odinger’s cat”, when we want to
retrieve in a classical manner that inﬁnite amount of information con-
tained in a quantum system. In such a case, as seen in section 2.1, we
have to make a quantum measurement, with all the consequent ran-
domness and loss of information which in such a situation will happen
typically.
As far as quantum measurement is concerned in the context of multi-
ple qubits in (2.3.11), (2.3.12), we can note the following. According
to the axioms of Quantum Mechanics, when such an n qubit | ψ > is
measured, we shall typically obtain one and only one set of n classical
bits (x1, . . . , xn) ∈{ 0, 1 }n, and do so with the respective proba-
bility |αx1, . . . , xn|2.
Furthermore, as an eﬀect of measurement, the superposition of the
large number of states in (2.3.11) will collapse onto the corresponding
state | x1, . . . , xn >. Thus the ability of the quantum computer

28
E E Rosinger
to handle simultaneously all the states in the superposition in (2.3.11)
will end.
Finally, due to the large number of terms in (2.3.12), it is often that
such a probability |αx1, . . . , xn|2 is small.
Practical Remark
In view of the above, when setting up algorithms for quantum com-
puters, it is useful to avoid an early loss of superposition. This there-
fore means avoiding an early measurement. As far as enhancing the
probability of the results of measurements, this can be obtained by a
judicious choice of quantum gates, that is, of unitary operators acting
on multiple qubits.
All this, however, need not mean that measurements have to be left
up to the very end of such quantum algorithms. Indeed, as seen for
instance in the case of the algorithm for quantum teleportation in Fig.
3.2.1 in chapter 3, it can happen that an appropriate measurement,
leading as it always does to a classical information, can be useful not
only at the end of a quantum algorithm.
2.4 Multiple Qubit Gates
Although there are an inﬁnity of single qubit gates, there are obvious
advantages in considering as well multiple qubit gates. Here however
we have to recall that in the case of quantum gates one has to have
the same number of qubits both at input and output. This is contrary
to what happens with logical gates processing classical bits, used in
electronic digital computers, where for instance, the gates AND and
OR each have two bits as input, and only one bit as output.
A ﬁrst quantum gate with two qubit input and two qubit output which
we consider is the controlled-NOT, or simply CNOT gate

Basics of Quantum Computation
29
| ψ >
| ψ >
| χ >
| ψ >
⊕| χ >
}
m
Fig. 2.4.1
which operates according to
(2.4.1)
| 0 0 >
7−→| 0 0 >,
| 0 1 >
7−→| 0 1 >
| 1 0 >
7−→| 1 1 >,
| 1 1 >
7−→| 1 0 >
thus when | ψ >
= | 0 >, then | ψ >
⊕| χ >
= | χ >, while
for | ψ >
= | 1 >, we obtain | ψ >
⊕| χ >
= X | χ >, see
(2.2.4). The matrix representation of the operation of the CNOT gate
is therefore
(2.4.2)





1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0










α
β
γ
δ




=





α
β
δ
γ





assuming that | ψ > = α | 0 > + β | 1 >, | χ > = γ | 0 > + δ | 1 >.
It is easy to check that the above matrix is indeed unitary.
Remark
The special importance of the CNOT gate comes from the fact that
any multiple qubit gate can be obtained as a composition of CNOT
gates and single qubit gates, see section 2.6.
This result about quantum gates corresponds to the classical result ac-
cording to which every logical gate operating on bits can be obtained
from the composition of NAND gates.
Here we recall that a NAND gate operates on two classical bits a, b
according to
a NAND b = NOT (a AND b).

30
E E Rosinger
2.5 Classical Computations on Quantum Computers
As we mentioned, D Deutsch showed in 1985 that quantum compu-
tation, just like the usual electronic digital one, is universal. Here we
shall address in short some of the related issues. Namely, as we have
seen, quantum gates operate on qubits in a reversible manner, while
classical logical gates operate on bits, and do so most often in an ir-
reversible way.
Therefore the question arises how can quantum gates process informa-
tion in equivalent ways with classical logical gates ? In other words,
how can one turn irreversible operations into reversible ones ?
At a ﬁrst thought, and on a rather metaphysical level, one could expect
that quantum computers can indeed perform classical computations.
After all, it is a fundamental thesis of modern Physics that quantum
phenomena underlie the macroscopic ones, thus including the classical
logical gates of usual electronic digital computers. However, since here
we are not dealing with metaphysics, we shall instead give a precise
indication about the way classical computations can be performed on
quantum computers.
As it happens, the idea of a reversible computation appeared as a
consequence of studying the problem of the minimum energy needed
in computation on usual electronic digital computers, Brown. One of
the ﬁrst steps in clarifying this minimum energy was taken in 1949 by
John von Neumann.
In 1961, Rolf Landauer made a crucial discovery by showing that the
only processes in a computation which are irreversible are those which
erase information. This was to lead to the idea of reversible compu-
tation even before the emergence of quantum conputation. Results
in this respect were obtained by Yves Lecerf in 1963, and in their
complete form by Charles Bennett in 1973. Not much later, Ed Fred-
kin and Tom Toﬀoli showed independently the way to build reversible
computers.
It is however important to note that, by avoiding to erase information

Basics of Quantum Computation
31
one creates, and also must carry along a signiﬁcant, if not even grow-
ing amount of redundancy, this being one of the prices one has to pay
for reversible computation.
Needles to say that at the time, such studies concerned not the quan-
tum, but only the classical forms of computation, that is, by electronic
digital computers.
Further details regarding reversible computation can be found in Brown,
Deutsch [1-3], Hirvensalo, Alber et.al.
The relevant result with respect to the questions formulated above is
that the information processing by any classical logical gate can be
reproduced with the use of Toﬀoli gates which are reversible.
The Toﬀoli gate has three bits as input, and also three bits as output,
namely, for classical bits a, b, c ∈{ 0, 1 }, we have
a
a
b
b
}
}
c
c ⊕ab
m
Fig. 2.5.1
where in the term c ⊕ab, the operation ⊕is addition modulo 2, while
ab is the usual multiplication. In this way, written as an input-output
table, the Toﬀoli gate has the form

32
E E Rosinger
(2.5.1)
(0, 0, 0) 7−→(0, 0, 0)
(0, 0, 1) 7−→(0, 0, 1)
(0, 1, 0) 7−→(0, 1, 0)
(0, 1, 1) 7−→(0, 1, 1)
(1, 0, 0) 7−→(1, 0, 0)
(1, 0, 1) 7−→(1, 0, 1)
(1, 1, 0) 7−→(1, 1, 1)
(1, 1, 1) 7−→(1, 1, 0)
It is easy to see that applying twice the Toﬀoli gate gives the identity.
Thus the Toﬀoli gate is invertible, being its own inverse. Consequently,
the operation of the Toﬀoli gate is indeed reversible.
It is important to note that the redundancy in the output of the Toﬀoli
gate which reproduces identically the bits a and b is the way to avoid
erasing information, which according to Landauer, is a necessary con-
dition for allowing for reversibility.
In order to prove that every classical logical gate can be obtained from
Toﬀoli gates it suﬃces to show that the NAND gate can be constructed
in that way. Indeed, we have
a
a
b
b
}
}
1
1 ⊕ab = a NAND b
m
Fig. 2.5.2
The classical Toﬀoli gate in Fig. 2.5.1 or (2.5.1) has a quantum gate
version as well. Indeed, each triplet of classical bits (a, b, c) ∈{ 0, 1 }3
can be uniquely associated with the quantum triplet | a, b, c >
∈

Basics of Quantum Computation
33
C2⊗C2⊗C2 ≃C8. And then (2.5.1) deﬁnes a unique 8×8 unitary ma-
trix together with the corresponding unitary operator T : C8 −→C8
which gives the quantum Toﬀoli gate.
And the operations of this
quantum Toﬀoli gate clearly contain as a particular case those of the
classical Toﬀoli gate.
Finally, let us note that quantum computation can also simulate non-
deterministic classical computation. For that purpose, as is known,
it is suﬃcient to simulate the randomness of a fair coin toss. This
however can be done trivially, by sending the quantum state | 0 >
through a Hadamard gate H, see (2.2.8). Indeed, we shall have then
H | 0 >
= (1/
q
(2))( | 0 >
+ | 1 > ), thus by measuring this
resulting state we shall obtain | 0 >
or | 1 >, each with probability
1/2.
2.6 Keeping Quantum Gates Simple
Let us recapitulate.
On usual electronic digital computers the smallest amount of informa-
tion, as seen in (2.1.1), is one classical bit which can be represented
as an element of the two element set { 0, 1 }. It follows that in such
a computer any classical logical gate operating on one classical bit is
given by one of the four functions f : { 0, 1 } −→{ 0, 1 }.
On the other hand, in quantum computers, the smallest amount of
information is a qubit, see (2.1.2) - (2.1.4)
(2.6.1)
| ψ >
= cos θ | 0 > + eiη sin θ | 1 >
∈C2,
η, θ ∈[0, 2π]
of which there are therefore a double inﬁnity.
Now the quantum gates which operate on such single qubits are given
by unitary operators, see (2.2.1)
(2.6.2)
A : C2 −→C2
of which there are a quadruple inﬁnity, as follows form (2.2.10).
Let us recall that, therefore, each of such one qubit quantum gates
A, which in the case of quantum computers are the simplest possible

34
E E Rosinger
gates, already processes at each step a double inﬁnity of information,
as given in (2.6.1). Such a performance is of course impossible on
usual electronic digital computers, where there cannot be any logical
gates which could in one single step process an inﬁnite amount of in-
formation.
On the other hand, when extracting classical information from a quan-
tum computer, and in particular, when we do so from any given qubit
(2.6.1), we can only obtain one classical bit, namely, one of the states
| 0 > or | 1 >. This follows from the axioms of Quantum Mechanics
relating to measurement.
Now, as seen already in section 2.4, and in more detail later, quantum
algorithms may need quantum gates which operate on multiple qubits
as well.
And as follows from (2.3.3), and the axioms of Quantum
Mechanics, a quantum gate which operates on n qubits is given by an
arbitrary unitary operator
(2.6.3)
U : C2n −→C2n
Related to this, let us recall the uniquely convenient feature of quan-
tum computers seen in (2.3.11). According to that, if we take n single
qubits, each of them having only two states | 0 > and | 1 >, and
construct from them one n-qubit composite system, then this sys-
tem will have no less than 2n diﬀerent and linearly independent states
| x1, . . . , xn >, with x1, . . . , xn ∈{ 0, 1 }, which form the basis of
the correpsonding 2n dimensional complex vector space C2n. And an
n-qubit quantum gate U in (2.6.3) can in general operate simultane-
ously on all of these 2n diﬀerent and linearly independent states.
Remark
In this way, quantum gates on multiple qubits present two major ad-
vantages over usual logical gates. First, they can operate on an inﬁnite
amount of information, and second, the number of quantum states on
which they can operate simultaneously grows exponentially, namely,
like 2n, with the length n of the number of qubits they operate.
Again, however, and due to the same axioms of Quantum Mechanics,

Basics of Quantum Computation
35
when we measure the eﬀect of such a quantum gate U, we shall only
obtain n classical bits, namely, one speciﬁc single state | x1, . . . , xn >.
Obviously, the inﬁnite multiplicity of all such possible quantum gates
in (2.6.3) is fast growing with n. Thus the practical problem arises
whether such n-qubit gates can be modelled, or at least approximated,
by a small number of quantum gates, each operating only on a small
number of qubits.
2
Fortunately, we have a number of strong results in this respect and
we shall recall several of them here. Further details can be found in
Alber et.al., Pittenger, and the literature cited there.
The general intuitive idea underlying such results is that unitary op-
erators are in certain sense generalized rotations. And as such, they
should be reproducible in suitable ways by a composition of the sim-
plest rotations, which therefore are only supposed to involve two di-
mensions.
A result already mentioned section 2.4, is the following. Arbitrary
n-qubit quantum gates U in (2.6.3) can be constructed form CNOT
gates operating on two qubits, see Fig. 2.4.1, and the simplest quan-
tum gates A in (2.6.2) which operate on a single qubit.
The precise details are as follows. Let us take any n ≥1 ﬁxed.
Given any quantum gate A in (2.6.2) which operates on a single qubit,
let us deﬁne for every 1 ≤i ≤n the corresponding extension to an
n-qubit quantum gate
(2.6.4)
Ai : C2n −→C2n
which operates according to
(2.6.5)
Ai(| ψ1 >, . . . , | ψn >) =
= (| ψ1 >, . . . , | ψi−1, A| ψi >, | ψi+1, . . . , | ψn >)
where | ψ1 >, . . . , | ψn >
∈C2. In other words, Ai leaves all the
qubits the same, except for | ψi >, on which it operates according to

36
E E Rosinger
the one qubit gate A.
Now, given 1 ≤i, j ≤n, i ̸= j, we extend the CNOT gate in (2.4.1),
(2.4.2) to the following n-qubit gate
(2.6.6)
CNOTi,j : C2n −→C2n
which when applied to an arbitrary n-qubit (| ψ1 >, . . . , | ψn >),
leaves all the qubits the same, except for | ψi > and | ψj >, upon
which acts according to Fig 2.4.1.
It is easy to check that both Ai and CNOTi,j deﬁned above are unitary
operators.
Then every n-qubit quantum gate U in (2.6.3) can be written as the
following decomposition
(2.6.7)
U = U1 . . . Um
for suitable m ≥1 and with U1, . . . , Um being either of the form
(2.6.4) or (2.6.6).
In case we do not ask for equality, as in (2.6.7), and we are only look-
ing for an approximation of n-qubit quantum gates U in (2.6.3), we
have the following result which, on the other hand, is stronger, since
it allows the use of one single 2-qubit quantum gate.
Namely, given a 2-qubit quantum gate B : C4 −→C4, we extend it
to an n-qubit quantum gate
(2.6.8)
Bi,j : C2n −→C2n
in a similar way as was done above for CNOT.
Then, there exist universal 2-qubit quantum gates B such that for
every n-qubit quantum gate U and every ǫ > 0, one can ﬁnd 1 ≤
i1, . . . , im, j1, . . . , jm ≤n, with i1 ̸= j1, . . . , im ̸= jm, and with
(2.6.9)
|| U −Bi1,j1 . . . Bim,jm || ≤ǫ
It is further known that a generic set of 2-qubit quantum gates B :
C4 −→C4 have the above universal approximation property. In other

Basics of Quantum Computation
37
words, this property is valid for an open and dense subset of such
quantum gates B : C4 −→C4. However, when one is given a speciﬁc
2-qubit quantum gate, it is not easy to check whether indeed it is uni-
versal in the above sense.
Let us conclude with a related result, and its proof, which can oﬀer
certain additional speciﬁcs, Deutsch [1]. Given
(2.6.10)
U : CD −→CD
any unitary operator, where D ≥1. Then there exists an orthonormal
basis in CD and unitary operators U1, . . . , Um : CD −→CD, with
m = 2D2 −D, such that
(2.6.11)
U = U1 . . . Um
where each of the Ui act on at most a two dimensional subspace CD
in the given basis.
Before presenting the proof of this property, let us note its consequence
in the particular case of n-qubit quantum gates U in (2.6.3), when we
have D = 2n and thus m = 22n+1 −2n. Namely, every such quantum
gate U operating on n qubits can be decomposed as in (2.6.11), where
the Ui are one qubit or two qubit quantum gates.
In order to show the general property (2.6.11), let | ψ1 >, . . . , | ψD > ∈
CD be the eigenvectors of the unitary operator U, while λ1, . . . , λD ∈
C denote the corresponding eigenvalues.
Given a certain ﬁxed basis in CD, then | ψ1 > has in this basis the
coordinates (c1, . . . , cD). We consider now the D ×D block diagonal
matrix
A1,2 =






¯c1/c1,2
¯c2/c1,2
−c2/c1,2
c1/c1,2



I3, . . . ,D



where c1,2 = (|c1|2 + |c2|2)1/2, while I3, . . . ,D is the (D −2) × (D −2)
identity matrix.
Obviously A1,2 is unitary, and it operates on CD only on the two
dimensional subspace corresponding to the ﬁrst two coordinates in

38
E E Rosinger
the given basis, and maps | ψ1 > into a vector with coordinates
(c1,2, 0, c3, . . . , cD). Applying further the similar matrices A1,3, . . . , A1,D,
one obtains a vector with coordinates (1, 0, . . . , 0).
Now we multiply the vector with coordinates (1, 0, . . . , 0) with the
eigenvalue λ1 = eiθ1, which clearly is a unitary operator on CD acting
only on the one dimensional subspace corresponding to the ﬁrst coor-
dinate in the given basis.
Further, in the order reverse to the one above, we apply the operators
A1,D, . . . , A1,2, and thus obtain λ1 | ψ1 >.
Obviously, we used for that purpose 2D −1 unitary operators which
acted on subspaces of dimension at most two.
Since the eigenvectors are orthogonal, the above procedure can be ap-
plied step by step to the other D −1 eigenvectors, without disturbing
the results obtained in previous steps. This then completes the proof
of (2.6.11).
As mentioned, in quantum computers the decomposition (2.6.11) is of
interest when D = 2n and thus m = 22n+1−2n, where n is the number
of qubits on which the quantum gate U in (2.6.3) operates. This how-
ever gives in (2.6.11) a decomposition of U which is not necessarily
linear or even polynomial in the number n of qubits on which they
operate. In this way, further improvements of such decompositions
are useful. In this regard there are known a number of results, and
certain details can be found in Pittenger [pp. 24,25], Alber et.al. [pp.
98-109], as well as the literature cited there.
It should be noted that the above results can have a two fold practical
importance. Indeed, they allow the use of very simple quantum gates
when building up more complex quantum algorithms. Also, they may
allow a convenient architecture when building eﬀective physically re-
alized quantum computers.

Chapter 3
Two Strange Phenomena
We present next two novel and typical quantum computation phe-
nomena. It is useful to encounter them early in the study of quantum
computation, since they can give an instructive insight into how much
diﬀerent quantum computers are from the usual electronic digital ones.
The ﬁrst we start with, called no-cloning, is an unexpected limitation
in view of what we have been accustomed to with usual electronic
digital computers. The second one, called teleportation, is at least as
surprising, however, it can present great advantages. In this way, once
again, we are in the situation described by ”you win some, you lose
some ...” ...
Teleportation is also of interest since it makes essential use of quantum
entanglement through double qubits in C2⊗C2 ≃C4 which are called
EPR or Bell pairs. As far as no-cloning is concerned, it proves to be an
impossibility which results from very simple basic quantum principles.
3.1 No-Cloning
Scientists are on occasion giving names to new phenomena in ways
which are not thoroughly enough considered, and thus may lend them-
selves to misinterpretation.
One such case is with the term no-cloning used in quantum computa-
tion.
What is in fact going on here is that, quite surprisingly, quantum
computers do not allow the copying of arbitrary qubits. Thus a more
proper term would be the somewhat longer one of no arbitrary copy-
ing.
39

40
E E Rosinger
Yet in spite of that, plenty of copying can be done by quantum com-
puters, as will be seen in the sequel.
In order better to understand the issue, let us start by considering
copying classical bits. For that purpose we can use the classical ver-
sion of the quantum CNOT gate in Fig. 2.4.1, operating this time on
bits a, b ∈{ 0, 1 }, namely
a
a
b
a ⊕b
}
m
Fig. 3.1.1
Now, if we ﬁx b = 0, then for an arbitrary input bit a ∈{ 0, 1 }, we
shall obtain as output two copies of a.
Strangely enough, a similar copying of arbitrary quantum bits cannot
be performed by quantum systems, as was discovered in 1982 by W K
Wooters and W H Zurek, see Hirvensalo.
Of course, as seen in (2.1.2) - (2.1.4), each qubit contains a double
inﬁnity of classical information, much unlike the situation with one
single bit. In this way, the ability to copy arbitrary qubits is consid-
erably more demanding than copying arbitrary classical bits.
Let us now turn to this issue in some more detail. First we present
a simple and somewhat intuitive argument. We assume that we have
a quantum system S which allows one qubit at input and has one
qubit at output. The output facility we shall use as a ”blank sheet”
on which we want to copy an arbitrary input qubit | ψ >
∈C2. We
can assume that the initial state of the ”blank sheet” at the output is
given by a ﬁxed qubit | χ0 >
∈C2. Thus we start with the setup

Basics of Quantum Computation
41
| ψ >
| χ0 >
S
Fig. 3.1.2
and would like to end up with the setup
| ψ >
| ψ >
S
Fig. 3.1.3
However, as quantum processes evolve through unitary operators when
not subjected to measurement, it means that we are looking for such
a unitary operator U : C2 ⊗C2
−→
C2 ⊗C2, and one which
would act according to
(3.1.1)
U( | ψ >
⊗| χ0 > ) = | ψ >
⊗| ψ >,
| ψ >
∈C2
Before going further, let us immediately remark here that a unitary
operator U, which therefore is linear, is not likely to satisfy (3.1.1), in
view of the fact that it is a nonlinear, in particular, quadratic relation
in | ψ >
∈C2.
And now, let us return to a more precise argument. Since | ψ >
∈C2
is assumed to be arbitrary in (3.1.1), we can write that relation for
any | ψ1 >, | ψ2 >
∈C2. Thus we obtain
(3.1.2)
U( | ψ1 >
⊗| χ0 > ) = | ψ1 >
⊗| ψ1 >
U( | ψ2 >
⊗| χ0 > ) = | ψ2 >
⊗| ψ2 >
Now if we take the inner product of these two relations and recall that
U was supposed to be unitary, we obtain

42
E E Rosinger
(3.1.3)
< ψ1 | ψ2 >
= ( < ψ1 | ψ2 > )2
which implies that either < ψ1 | ψ2 >= 0, or < ψ1 | ψ2 >= 1. This
means that the two arbitrary quantum states | ψ1 >, | ψ2 >
∈C2
are always either orthogonal, or identical from quantum point of view,
which is clearly absurd.
The general and rigorous argument is as follows. We consider a quan-
tum system whose state space is Cn, for a certain integer n ≥1.
Further, we ﬁx in this state space an arbitrary orthonormal basis
| ψ1 >, . . . , | ψn >
∈Cn.
Finally, we assume that the state
| ψ1 >
will function as the ”blank sheet” on which we want to copy
arbitrary states | ψ >
∈Cn.
Then the desired copying machine of arbitrary states in Cn will be
given by a unitary operator U : Cn ⊗Cn −→Cn ⊗Cn, for which
we have
(3.1.4)
U( | ψ >
⊗| ψ1 > ) = | ψ >
⊗| ψ >,
| ψ >
∈Cn
And now we can prove that for n ≥2, there does not exist such a
copying machine U.
Indeed, if we assume that n ≥2, then we do have at least the two
orthonormal states | ψ1 >, | ψ2 >
∈Cn. Thus (3.1.4) gives
(3.1.5)
U( | ψ1 >
⊗| ψ1 > ) = | ψ1 >
⊗| ψ1 >
U( | ψ2 >
⊗| ψ1 > ) = | ψ2 >
⊗| ψ2 >
U( ( | ψ1 >
+ | ψ2 > ) ⊗| ψ1 > ) =
= ( | ψ1 >
+ | ψ2 > ) ⊗( | ψ1 >
+ | ψ2 > )
Now the last relation in (3.1.5) and the linearity of U give together
with the ﬁrst two relations
(3.1.6)
U( ( | ψ1 >
+ | ψ2 > ) ⊗| ψ1 > ) =
= U( | ψ1 >
⊗| ψ1 > ) + U( | ψ2 >
⊗| ψ1 > ) =
= | ψ1 >
⊗| ψ1 >
+ | ψ2 >
⊗| ψ2 >
Thus (3.1.6) with the last relation in (3.1.5) imply
( | ψ1 >
+ | ψ2 > ) ⊗( | ψ1 >
+ | ψ2 > ) =
= | ψ1 >
⊗| ψ1 >
+ | ψ2 >
⊗| ψ2 >

Basics of Quantum Computation
43
or in other words
| ψ1 >
⊗| ψ2 >
+ | ψ2 >
⊗| ψ1 >
= 0
which is obviously false.
Let us point out two facts with respect to the above no-cloning result.
First, in the more general second proof, we did not use the fact that U
is unitary, and only made use of its linearity, when we obtained (3.1.6).
In the ﬁrst proof, on the other hand, the fact that U is unitary was
essential in order to obtain (3.1.3).
Second, it is important to understand properly the meaning of the
above limitation implied by no-cloning. Indeed, while it clearly does
not allow the copying of arbitrary qubits, it does nevertheless allow
the copying of a large range of qubits.
For instance, in terms of the second proof, let I = { 1, . . . , n } be
the set of indices of the respective orthonormal basis
| ψ1 >, . . . , | ψn >
∈Cn
Further, let us consider the partially deﬁned function
c : I × I −→I × I
given by c (i, 1) = (i, i), with 1 ≤i ≤n. Then clearly, c is injective
on the domain on which it is deﬁned. Therefore, c can be extended to
the whole of I × I, so as still to remain injective, and in fact, become
bijective. And obviously, there are many such extensions when n ≥2.
Now we can deﬁne a mapping U by
U( | ψi >
⊗| ψj > ) = | ψk >
⊗| ψl >
where 1 ≤i, j ≤n and c (i, j) = (k, l).
Since c is bijective on
I × I, this mapping U will be a permutation of the respective basis
in Cn ⊗Cn, therefore it extends in a unique manner to a linear and
unitary mapping
U : Cn ⊗Cn −→Cn ⊗Cn

44
E E Rosinger
And now it follows that
U( | ψi >
⊗| ψ1 > ) = | ψi >
⊗| ψi >,
1 ≤i ≤n
thus indeed U is a copying machine with the ”blank sheet” | ψ1 >,
and it can copy onto this ”blank sheet” all the qubits in the given
orthonormal basis | ψ1 >, . . . , | ψn >
of Cn. And in any such basis,
with the exception of the ﬁxed ”blank sheet” | ψ1 >, all the other
qubits | ψ2 >, . . . , | ψn >
are arbitrary, within the constraint that
together they have to form an orthonormal basis.
3.2 Teleportation
The term teleportation used in the context of quantum computation
is also somewhat misleading.
Indeed, as we shall see, there is no
physical transportation of any kind taking place.
What happens
instead is that the speciﬁc quantum state of a given input qubit
| ψ >
=
α | 0 >
+ β | 1 >
∈C2 is reproduced identically
as an output.
This is however not copying either, since the input qubit will typically
get destroyed in the process. More precisely, the input qubit | ψ > will
be subjected to measurements which, in general, will therefore make
it collapse into the states | 0 >
or | 1 >. In this way the nearest we
may come to any sort of teleportation is that of the doubly inﬁnite
classical information content in a quantum qubit, but in no way of
any part of the eﬀective quantum physical system which may have
supported that qubit at the input.
Quantum teleportation is not only a strange phenomenon, but it also
has a variety of important applications in quantum computing, and
more generally, in the fast emerging theory of information processing
through quantum systems.
One possible more convenient manner to present quantum teleporta-
tion is the familiar one which uses the personages Alice and Bob who
are supposed to be involved in this process.
The essential novel starting point in teleportation is that sometime in
the past, Alice and Bob were together, generated an entangled EPR

Basics of Quantum Computation
45
pair, and then went apart, no matter how far, and for how long in
time, from one another, each taking with them one of the qubits from
the entangled pair.
But let us ﬁrst clarify the above by giving the following deﬁnition. An
EPR pair is a double qubit in C2 ⊗C2 ≃C4 which has one of the
following four forms
(3.2.1)
| ω 00 >
= (1/
√
2) ( | 0 >
⊗| 0 >
+ | 1 >
⊗| 1 > )
| ω 01 >
= (1/
√
2) ( | 0 >
⊗| 1 >
+ | 1 >
⊗| 0 > )
| ω 10 >
= (1/
√
2) ( | 0 >
⊗| 0 >
−| 1 >
⊗| 1 > )
| ω 11 >
= (1/
√
2) ( | 0 >
⊗| 1 >
−| 1 >
⊗| 0 > )
Here the factor 1/
√
2 is present in order to have the respective states
| ω ij >
normalized in C2 ⊗C2 ≃C4. In a simpliﬁed notation, which
we shall use in the sequel, these four quantum states will be written
as
| ω 00 >
= (1/
√
2) ( | 00 >
+ | 11 > )
| ω 01 >
= (1/
√
2) ( | 01 >
+ | 10 > )
| ω 10 >
= (1/
√
2) ( | 00 >
−| 11 > )
| ω 11 >
= (1/
√
2) ( | 01 >
−| 10 > )
There are three essential points to note with these EPR pairs.
First, they are entangled, since none of them is of the form | ψ > ⊗| χ >,
with | ψ >, | χ >
∈C2.
Second, they belong to the composite quantum system C2 ⊗C2, thus
Alice can take with her the single qubit which belongs to the ﬁrst
factor C2 in this tensor product, while Bob can do the same with the
single qubit which belongs to the second factor.
Third, the entanglement means that, no matter how far, and for how
long in time, Alice and Bob would go apart, there will always be a

46
E E Rosinger
certain nonclassical and typically quantum connection between their
respective quantum qubits, provided that, of course, none of the qubits
is subjected to destruction. And according to Quantum Mechanics,
this quantum connection is not supposed to change or diminish with
distance, or in time.
Needless to say, the above properties correspond not only to a thought
experiment, but they can be eﬀectively implemented on suitable phys-
ically existent quantum systems.
For clarity, let us further note here that, in the case of the EPR pair
| ω 00 >, for instance, when Alice and Bob take their respective sin-
gle qubits from it, and then go apart, this does not at all refer to the
terms | 00 >, or | 11 >. Indeed, each of these two terms belongs to the
composite quantum system C2 ⊗C2, and thus to none of its separate
two factors.Therefore they cannot be taken away either by Alice or by
Bob. Needless to say, the same goes for the other three EPR pairs as
well.
The single qubits which Alice and Bob take with them respectively
cannot be described in other way than it is already done in the cor-
responding entangled states in (3.2.1), this being precisely one of the
points about the typically quantum, and nonclassical aspects of en-
tanglement.
Of course, there are also more complicated, for instance, three or four
term entangled quantum states in the composite system C2⊗C2. Such
examples are given, among many others, by the quantum states
| 00 > + | 01 > + | 11 >,
| 00 > + | 01 > −| 10 > + | 11 >
However, the EPR pairs in (3.2.1), which have only two terms each,
are some of the simplest possible entangled quantum states, and as
such, they can present certain advantages.
Needless to say, Alice and Bob could still take away their respective
single qubits, regardless of the number of terms in an entangled quan-
tum state from the composite system C2 ⊗C2.

Basics of Quantum Computation
47
Let us now continue with the task Alice and Bob are facing when
they are involved in quantum teleportation. Alice is given a qubit
| ψ >
=
α | 0 >
+ β | 1 >
∈C2. And she is not supposed
to know it, since she is not supposed to subject it to a measurement,
which would typically risk to collapse it.. Yet by only using a classi-
cal information channel with Bob, she has to let Bob obtain the full
information about that qubit | ψ >.
At ﬁrst sight, this seems to be an impossible task. Indeed, the qubit
| ψ >
contains a doubly inﬁnite amount of classical information,
not to mention that Alice does not even have access to it. So that,
even if Alice would fully know the classical information contained in
| ψ > , she would not be in a position to convey it to Bob in ﬁnite
time through the classical information channel.
Fortunately, the task is nevertheless possible, due to the fact that
Alice and Bob have kept intact their respective single qubits from that
entangled EPR pair which they had produced sometime in the past,
when they were together. And the task of the so called teleportation
can be accomplished by the following device which is partly quantum
and partly classical
| ψ >
H
M1
| ω 00 >
| ωA >
M2
z
j
| ωB >
X2
Z1
| ψ >
Fig. 3.2.1
Here | ψ > in the upper left corner is the input qubit at Alice which
she wants to teleport to Bob, that is, to get to the lower right output
position. The other two inputs | ωA > and | ωB > are the entangled

48
E E Rosinger
qubits in the EPR pair | ω 00 >, with the ﬁrst of these qubits being
at Alice, while the second one at Bob.
Further, H is the Hadamard gate in (2.2.8), X2 and Z1 are certain
adaptation to be speciﬁed of the Pauli gates X and Z, respectively,
see (2.2.4), (2.2.6). The double lines are classical information chan-
nels, while M1, M2 are measuring devices speciﬁed later.
In order to follow the performance of the mixed quantum-classical
device in Fig. 3.2.1, it is useful to break it up in four successive input-
output devices. The ﬁrst of them is the following three qubit input,
three qubit output quantum gate
| ψ0 >
| ψ >
| ω 00 >
z
j
| ψ1 >
in which we have the input
| ψ0 >
= | ψ > | ω 00 >
=
= (1/
√
2) ( α | 0 > ( | 00 > + | 11 > ) + β | 1 > ( | 00 > + | 11 > ) )
In this three qubit input, the ﬁrst two qubits, counted from the left,
belong to Alice, while the ﬁrst qubit counted from the right belongs
to Bob. In other words, Alice has the qubit | ψ >, as well as the left
qubit from | ω 00 >, while Bob has the right qubit from | ω 00 >. Let
us now compute the three qubit output | ψ1 >. Clearly, Alice sends
her two qubits through a CNOT gate, therefore

Basics of Quantum Computation
49
| ψ1 >
=
= (1/
√
2) ( α | 0 > ( | 00 > + | 11 > ) + β | 1 > ( | 10 > + | 01 > ) )
The second component of the device in Fig. 3.2.1 is again a three
qubit input and three qubit output quantum gate, namely
| ψ1 >
H
| ψ2 >
It follows that
| ψ2 >
=
= (1/2) ( α ( | 0 > + | 1 > ) ( | 00 > + | 11 > ) +
+ β ( | 0 >
−| 1 > ) ( | 10 >
+ | 01 > ) )
By using the associativity of the tensor product, we further obtain
| ψ2 >
=
= (1/2) ( | 00 > ( α | 0 > + β | 1 > ) + | 01 > ( α | 1 > + β | 0 > ) +
+ (1/2) ( | 10 > ( α | 0 > −β | 1 > ) + | 11 > ( α | 1 > −β | 0 > ) +
The expression in the right hand side is quite useful. Its ﬁrst term

50
E E Rosinger
| 00 > ( α | 0 >
+ β | 1 > )
has the two qubits of Alice in the state | 00 > and the single cubit of
Bob in the state α | 0 > + β | 1 >
which is in fact | ψ >. Therefore,
if Alice performs a measurement on her two qubits at obtains | 00 >,
then Bob will have obtained the desired | ψ >. Proceeding in a similar
fashion, we obtain the following table in which the left column lists
the four possible double bits of classical information which Alice can
obtain by measuring her two qubits, while the right column contains
the corresponding states of the single qubit which Bob will obtain
following the measurement
(3.2.2)
| 00 >
−→
α | 0 >
+ β | 1 >
| 01 >
−→
α | 1 >
+ β | 0 >
| 10 >
−→
α | 0 >
−β | 1 >
| 11 >
−→
α | 1 >
−β | 0 >
This leads to the third component of the device in Fig. 3.2.1 which
this time is a mixed classical-quantum device with three qubits as in-
put, while its output are two classical bits and one qubit
| ψ2 >
M1
a1
a2
| ψ3 >
M2
a1, a2, | ψ3 >
Now the measurements M1 and M2 made by Alice will give her the
bits a1 and a2, respectively. This is precisely the classical information
which she has to communicate to Bob.
And then based on table (3.2.2), Bob is at last in the position to re-
ceive the original qubit | ψ >
=
α | 0 >
+ β | 1 >. For that

Basics of Quantum Computation
51
purpose he can use the following mixed classical-quantum device with
input two bits and a qubit, and output one qubit, a device which is
the fourth component of the device in Fig. 3.2.1
a1
a2
| ψ3 >
X2
Z1
| ψ >
Here what happens is as follows. If a1 a2 = 0 0 then Bob already has
| ψ > as the output. If a1 a2 = 1 0 then the gate Z has to be acti-
vated in order to obtain the same output. Further, in case a1 a2 = 0 1
then the gate X should be activated for obtaining again the desired
output. Finally, when a1 a2 = 1 1, then both gates X and Z have to
be activated in this order, so that the output will be | ψ >.
Having analyzed in some detail the device in Fig. 3.2.1 used for quan-
tum teleportation, one more observation can be useful. Namely, the
left-to-right direction, according to which by convention the ﬂow of
information is supposed to happen in such diagrams, need not at the
same time represent as well the eﬀective spatial disposition of inputs,
outputs or other entities related to the respective process. This can
be seen quite clearly even in the case of the diagram in Fig. 3.2.1.
Namely, the respective spatial disposition has, of course, part of this
diagram located at Alice, while the other part may be ways far away, at
Bob. And this spatial separation is indicated by the following starred
line which divides this diagram in two, with the upper part being at
Alice, and the lower part at Bob

52
E E Rosinger
| ψ >
H
M1
| ω 00 >
| ωA >
∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗
M2
z
j
| ωB >
X2
Z1
| ψ >
Fig. 3.2.2
Clearly, Alice can only input the qubit | ψ >
which is in the upper
left corner, as well as her qubit | ωA >
from the entangled EPR pair
| ω 00 >. On the other hand, Bob can only input his qubit | ωB >
from the same pair. And although in the diagram the inputs are all
on the left, it is nevertheless obvious that they are far from being at
the same place, at least not in the case of Alice and Bob in the above
situation.
Finally, we should note that during teleportation as performed above,
both the original qubit | ψ >
and the entangled EPR pair | ω 00 >
will in general become destroyed. Indeed, as mentioned, the original
qubit | ψ >
is subjected to measurement, and this happens when
it goes from the stage | ψ2 >
to the stage | ψ3 >, thus it suﬀers a
collapse. The same happens with the qubit | ωA >
of Alice, which is
her part of the EPR pair.
In this way, teleportation has a price, and a nontrivial quantum one
at that :
One qubit teleported costs in general one entangled EPR pair !

Chapter 4
Bell’s Inequalities
We have seen some of the importance of the typically quantum phe-
nomenon of entanglement when we used entangled EPR pairs in quan-
tum teleportation. This issue of entanglement has been, and still is
of special focus in Quantum Mechanics, not least due to its intimate
connection to such fundamental disputes as locality versus nonlocality.
And as mentioned, the related literature is indeed vast.
Nearly three decades after the EPR paper had appeared in 1935, John
Bell published in 1964 what amounted to a surprising conﬂict between
predictions of a classical world view based on the principle of locality,
and on the other hand, of Quantum Mechanics. The classical world
view based on locality led J Bell to certain inequalities which, how-
ever, proved to be contradicted by Quantum Mechanics, namely, by
certain properties of suitably chosen entangled EPR pairs.
And this contradiction could be observed in eﬀective quantum me-
chanical experiments, such as conducted for instance in 1982 by A
Aspect et.al., see Maudlin.
Here it should be mentioned again that, as often, the related termi-
nology which entered the common use tends to misplace the focus.
Indeed, the main point in J Bell’s contribution is not about inequali-
ties, but about the fact that they lead to the mentioned contradiction.
Furthermore, there are by now a number of other similar arguments
which all lead to such contradictions with Quantum Mechanics.
53

54
E E Rosinger
Needless to say, it is well known that ever since its very inception in
the 1920s, Quantum Mechanics has been witnessing an ongoing foun-
dational controversy related to its interpretation, some of the earlier
major stages of this controversy being those between N Bohr and A
Einstein. However, as not seldom in such human situations, a cer-
tain saturation, stationarity and loss of interest may set in after some
longer period of time has failed to clarify enough the issues involved.
The surprising result of J Bell happened to appear after most of the
founding fathers of Quantum Mechanics had left the scene, and proved
to inaugurate a fresh line of controversies, see Bell, Cushing & Mc-
Mullin, Maudlin.
Here, an attempt is presented to recall in short the essential aspects
of J Bell’s result. Clearly, at least to the extent that this result is
essentially connected to the typically quantum phenomenon of entan-
glement, it may be expected to be relevant for a better understanding,
and thus further development of quantum computation.
Also, a relatively less well know aspect of Bell type inequalities is pre-
sented here, namely that, these inequalities are among a larger class
of purely probabilistic inequalities, a class whose study was started by
George Boole, with the ﬁrst results published in his book The Laws
of Thought, back in 1854. This purely mathematical study was later
further extended in the work of a number of mathematicians and prob-
abilists, see details Pitowsky, for instance.
Needless to say, this fact does in no way detract from the importance
and merit of J Bell’s result. Indeed, unlike J Bell, it is obvious that
G Boole and his mentioned followers, including those in more recent
times, did not consider the quantum mechanical implications of such
inequalities. In this way, the importance and merit of J Bell’s result is
to single out for the ﬁrst time certain rather simple inequalities which
are supposed to be universally valid, provided that a classical setup
and locality are assumed, and then show that the respective inequali-
ties do to a quite signiﬁcant extent conﬂict with Quantum Mechanics,
involving in this process such important issues as entanglement and
locality versus nonlocality.

Basics of Quantum Computation
55
There is a special interest in pointing out the fact that the Bell type
inequalities can be established by a purely mathematical argument,
as was done, for instance, by the followers of G Boole. Indeed, both
in the work of J Bell, as well as in the subsequent one of many of
the physicists who dealt with this issue, the true nature of such in-
equalities is often quite obscured by a complicated mix of physical and
mathematical argument. Such an approach, however, is unnecessary,
and can of course create confusions about the genuine meaning, scope
and implications of J Bell’s result.
The fact however is that regardless of the considerable generality of
the framework underlying such inequalities, and thus of the corre-
sponding minimal conditions required on locality, one can nevertheless
obtain the respective inequalities through purely mathematical argu-
ment, and without any physical considerations involved, yet they turn
out even to be testable empirically. And in a surprising manner, they
fail tests which are of a quantum mechanical nature. And this failure
is both on theoretical and empirical level. In other words, the Bell in-
equalities contradict theoretical consequences of Quantum Mechanics,
and on top of that, they are also proven wrong in quantum mechanical
experiments such as those conducted by Aspect et.al.
The impact of Bell’s inequalities is only increased by the fact that
they require such minimal conditions, yet they deliver a clear cut and
unavoidable conﬂict with Quantum Mechanics.
Let us also note the following. J Bell, when obtained his inequalities,
he was concerned with the issue of the possibility, or otherwise, of the
so called deterministic, hidden variable theories for Quantum Mechan-
ics. This issue arose from the basic controversy in the interpretation of
Quantum Mechanics, and aimed to eliminate the probabilistic aspects
involved typically in the outcome of measurements. One way in this
regard was to consider Quantum Mechanics incomplete, and then add
to it the so called hidden variables, thus making the theory determin-
istic by being able a priori to specify precisely the measurement results.
By the way, the very title of the EPR paper was raising the question
whether Quantum Mechanics was indeed complete, and suggested the

56
E E Rosinger
experiment with entangled quantum states in order to justify that
questioning.
Regarding the term hidden variables, once again we are faced with a
less than proper terminology. Indeed, as it is clear from the context
in which this term has always been used, one is rather talking about
missing variables, or perhaps variables which have been missed, over-
looked or disregarded, when the theory of Quantum Mechanics was
set up. Details in this regard can be found in Holland, where an ac-
count of the de Broglie-Bohm causal approach to Quantum Mechanics
is presented.
In view of this historical background, the eﬀect of Bell’s inequalities
is often wrongly interpreted as proving that a deterministic hidden
variable theory which is subjected to the principle of locality is not
possible.
However, it is important to note that such a view of Bell’s inequalities
is not correct. Indeed, by giving up determinism, or the hidden vari-
ables, one still remains with Bell’s inequalities, since these inequalities
only assume a classical framework in which the locality principle holds.
4.1 Boole Type Inequalities
In his mentioned book G Boole was concerned among others with con-
ditions on all possible experience or experimentation, this being the
factual background to logic and the laws of thought. Needless to say,
G Boole assumed automatically a classical and non-quantum context
which was further subjected to the principle of locality.
Here we shall limit ourselves to a short presentation of some of the
relevant aspects. Let therefore A1, . . . , An be arbitrary n ≥2 events,
and for 1 ≤i1 < i2 < . . . < ik ≤n, let pi1,i2, . . . ,ik be the probability
of the simultaneous event Ai1
T Ai2
T . . . T Aik.
One of the questions G Boole asked was as follows. Suppose that the
only information we have are the probabilities p1, p2, . . . , pn of the

Basics of Quantum Computation
57
respective individual events A1, . . . , An. What are under these con-
ditions on information the best possible estimates for the probabilities
of A1
S A2
S . . . S An and A1
T A2
T . . . T An ?
G Boole gave the following answers which indeed are correct
(4.1.1)
max { p1, p2, . . . , pn } ≤P(A1
S A2
S . . . S An) ≤
min { 1, p1 + p2 + . . . + pn }
(4.1.2)
max { 0, p1 + p2 + . . . + pn −n + 1 } ≤
≤P(A1
T A2
T . . .
T An) ≤
min { p1, p2, . . . , pn }
And these are the best possible inequalities in general, since for suit-
able particular cases equality can hold in each of the four places.
A rather general related result is the so called inclusion-exclusion prin-
ciple of Henri Poincar´e
(4.1.3)
P(A1
S A2
S . . . S An) = Σ1≤i≤n pi −Σ1≤i<j≤n pij +
+ Σ1≤i<j<k≤n pijk +
. . . + (−1)n+1 p12 . . .n
This however requires the knowledge of the probabilities of all the si-
multaneous events Ai1
T Ai2
T . . .
T Aik, with 1 ≤i1 < i2 < . . . <
ik ≤n.
A question with less demanding data, yet with more of them than
required in (4.1.1) and (4.1.2), is the following. Suppose we know the
probabilities pi of the events Ai, with 1 ≤i ≤n, as well as the proba-
bilities pij of the simultaneous events Ai
T Aj, with 1 ≤i < j ≤n.
What is then the best possible estimate for the probability of
A1
S A2
S . . .
S An ?
Unfortunately, this question is computationally intractable, Pitowsky.
However, C E Bonferroni gave some answers in 1936, one of which is
that
(4.1.4)
Σ1≤i≤n pi −Σ1≤i<j≤n pij ≤P(A1
S A2
S . . . S An)

58
E E Rosinger
and here it is interesting to note that (4.1.4) generates easily 2n −1
other independent inequalities by the following procedure. We take
any 1 ≤i1 < i2 < . . . < ik ≤n, and replace in (4.1.4) the events
Ail, for 1 ≤l ≤k, with their complementaries.
Now the important fact to note is that Bell’s inequalities result from
(4.1.4) in this way, in the case of n = 3.
It follows therefore that Bell’s inequalities are of a purely mathemat-
ical nature, and as such, only depend on classical probability theory.
By the way, Boole’s inequalities and its further developments have
been presented in well known monographs of mathematics and proba-
bility theory, some of them as recently as in 1970, and related research
has continued in mathematics and in probability theory till the present
day, Pitowsky. As so often however, due to extreme specialization and
the corresponding narrowing of interest, such results seem not to be
familiar among quantum physicists. In this regard it may be worth
mentioning that Pitowski himself is a philosopher of science.
4.2 The Bell Eﬀect
There are by now known a variety of ways which describe the phe-
nomenon brought to light for the ﬁrst time by Bell’s inequalities. In
order to avoid complicating the issues involved, we shall present here
one of the most simple such ways, Maudlin.
This phenomenon, which one can call the Bell eﬀect is a contradiction
resulting between Quantum Mechanics, and on the other hand, what
can be done in a classical setup which satisﬁes the principle of local-
ity. The Bell inequalities are only one of the ways, and historically
the ﬁrst, which led to such a contradiction. They will be presented
in section 4.3. What is given here is a simple and direct argument
leading to the mentioned kind of contradiction.
Certain entangled quantum particles can exhibit the following be-
haviour.
After they become spatially separated, they each can be
subjected to three diﬀerent experiments, say, A, B and C, and each of

Basics of Quantum Computation
59
them can produce one and only one of two results, which for conve-
nience we shall denote by R and S, respectively.
What is so uniquely speciﬁc to these entangled quantum particles is
the behaviour described in the next three conditions which such par-
ticles do satisfy.
Condition 1. When both particles are subjected to the same experi-
ment, they give the same result.
Condition 2. When one of the particles is subjected to A and the
other to B, or one is subjected to B and the other to C, they will in a
large number of experiments give the same result with a frequency of
3/4.
Condition 3. When one of the particles is subjected to A and the
other to C, then in a large number of experiments they will give the
same result with a frequency 1/4.
Now, the surprising fact is that no experiment in a classical setup in
which the principle of locality holds can come anywhere near to such
a behaviour.
And strangely enough, that includes as well the case when two con-
scious participants, and not merely two physical entities would be
involved. In such a case, when conscious participant are present, we
shall see the experiments A, B and C as questions put to the two par-
ticipants, while the results R and C will be seen as their respective
answers.
Such are indeed the wonders of entanglement and of certain EPR pairs
that some of their performances, like for instance those which satisfy
conditions 1, 2 and 3 above, cannot be reproduced in a classical context
which obeys the locality principle, even if attempted by two conscious
participants.
Indeed, a simple analysis shows that the best two such participants
can do is to decide to give the same answers, when asked the same
questions. This means that any possible strategy of the two partici-
pants has to be joint or identical, and as such, it is given by a function

60
E E Rosinger
f : { A, B, C } 7−→{ R, S }.
Clearly, there are 8 such joint strategies, namely
(4.2.1)
A
B
C
−−−−−−−−−−
1
R
R
R
2
R
R
S
3
R
S
R
4
R
S
S
5
S
R
R
6
S
R
S
7
S
S
R
8
S
S
S
Now it is obvious that by choosing only these 8 join strategies, condi-
tion 1 above will be satisﬁed.
From the point of view of satisfying conditions 2 and 3 above, the
strategy pairs ( 1, 8 ), ( 4, 5 ), ( 3, 6 ) and ( 2, 7 ) are equivalent.
Therefore, we only remain with four distinct strategies to consider,
namely
(4.2.2)
A
B
C
−−−−−−−−−−
1
R
R
R
2
R
R
S
3
R
S
R
4
R
S
S
At this point the two participants can further improve on their attempt
to satisfy conditions 2 and 3 above by randomizing their joint strate-
gies. For that purpose, they can choose four real numbers α, β, γ, δ ∈
R, such that
(4.2.3)
α, β, γ, δ ≥0
α + β + γ + δ = 1

Basics of Quantum Computation
61
and use their joint strategies 1, 2, 3 and 4 with the respective frequen-
cies α, β, γ, δ. A simple computation will show that conditions 2 and
3 above will further impose on α, β, γ, δ the relations
(4.2.4)
γ + δ = 1/4
β + γ = 1/4
β + δ = 3/4
However, (4.2.3) and (4.2.4) yield
(4.2.5)
γ =
−1/8
thus a contradiction.
Here it is important to note that the locality principle was assumed in
(4.2.1) - (4.2.5). In other words, each of the two participants could be
asked questions, without the question asked from one of them having
any eﬀect on the answer of the other. Indeed, the two participants
could be asked diﬀerent questions, and each of them would only reply
according to the question asked, and according to their joint strategy,
which they happened to use at the moment.
The fact that the setup in (4.2.1) - (4.2.5) is classical, that is, it is not
speciﬁcally quantum mechanical, is obvious.
4.3 Bell’s Inequalities
For convenience we shall consider two entangled quantum particles
which are in a situation even simpler than in section 4.2, Cushing &
McMullin. Namely, each of the particles can only be subjected to two
diﬀerent experiments, and as before, each such experiment can only
give one of two results.
In view of the speciﬁc quantum mechanical setup considered, the ex-
periments to which the two particles are subjected can be identiﬁed
with certain angles in [0, 2π] which deﬁne the directions along which
quantum spins are measured. As far as the results obtained, they can
be identiﬁed with quantum spins, and as such will be denoted by +

62
E E Rosinger
and −, respectively. Finally, when the same experiment is performed
on both particles, it is assumed that due to their entanglement and
momentum conservation, the results are always diﬀerent, that is, one
result is +, while the other is −.
Locality, as before, will mean that, when far removed in space from
one another, each particle can be subjected to any experiment inde-
pendently, and the result does not depend on what happens with the
other particle.
Having done a large number of experiments on such two particles, let
us denote by
(4.3.1)
p1,2 (αi, βj | x, y)
the probability that experiment αi ∈[0, 2π], with i ∈{ 1, 2 }, on
particle 1 yields the result x ∈{ +, −}, and at the same time exper-
iment βj ∈[0, 2π], with j ∈{ 1, 2 }, on particle 2 yields the result
y ∈{ +, −}.
Similarly we denote by
(4.3.2)
p1 (αi | x),
p2 (βj | y)
the respective probabilities that experiment αi ∈[0, 2π], with i ∈
{ 1, 2 }, on particle 1 yields the result x ∈{ +, −}, and that exper-
iment βj ∈[0, 2π], with j ∈{ 1, 2 }, on particle 2 yields the result
y ∈{ +, −},.
Now based alone on the assumption of locality, one obtains Bell’s
inequality
(4.3.3)
−1 ≤p1,2 (α1, β1 | +, +) + p1,2 (α1, β2 | +, +) +
+ p1,2 (α2, β2 | +, +) −p1,2 (α2, β1 | +, +) −
−p1 (α1 | +) −p2 (β2 | +) ≤0
Obviously, by changing the indices of the angles and the spin values,
one can obtain further variations of this inequality.

Basics of Quantum Computation
63
What suitable quantum mechanical experiments can give are very
good approximations of the relations
(4.3.4)
p1,2 (α, β | +, +) = p1,2 (α, β | −, −) = (1/2) sin2(α −β)/2
p1,2 (α, β | +, −) = p1,2 (A, B | −, +) = (1/2) cos2(α −β)/2
p1 (α | +) = p2 (β | −) = 1/2
where α, β ∈[0, π].
Now let us return to the Bell inequality in (4.3.3) and take following
angles for the experiments
(4.3.5)
α1 = π/3,
α2 = π,
β1 = 0,
β2 = 2π/3
in which case we obtain the contradiction
(4.3.6)
−1/8 ≥0
As shown in Pitowsky, the Bell inequality in (4.3.3), as well as its
mentioned variants follow from the Bonferroni inequalities in (4.1.3).
Let us conclude the issue of Bell’s inequalities, and more importantly,
of the Bell Eﬀect, by noting that the resulting contradictions show
the existence of relevant physics beyond any classical framework which
obeys the principle of locality.
And the quantum mechanical experiments which, together with Bell’s
inequalities, deliver the above contradictions are therefore part of such
a physics, even if Quantum Mechanics as a theory is still quite far from
having at last settled its foundational controversies.
As far as entangled quantum particles, or in general, systems are con-
cerned, they are some of the simplest quantum phenomena to lead to
the Bell Eﬀect, and thus beyond the classical and local framework.
This is therefore one of the reasons why they can oﬀer possibilities
in quantum computation which cannot be reached anywhere near by
usual electronic digital computers, which obviously belong to realms
of physics that are classical and subjected to the locality principle.

64
E E Rosinger
4.4 Locality versus Nonlocality
The original EPR paper, then the de Broglie-Bohm causal interpreta-
tion, as well as Bell’s inequalities have focused a considerable attention
on the issue of locality versus nonlocality. And in view of what appear
to be obvious reasons, there is a rather unanimous and strong dislike
of nonlocality among physicists. A typical instance of such a position
is illustrated by the next citation from a letter of A Einstein to Max
Born, see Maudlin, or Born :
... If one asks what, irrespective of quantum mechanics, is
characteristic of the world of ideas of physics, one is ﬁrst of
all struck by the following : the concepts of physics relate
to a real outside world, that is, ideas are established relat-
ing to things such as bodies, ﬁelds, etc., which claim ”real
existence” that is independent of the perceiving subject -
ideas which, on the other hand, have bee brought into as
secure a relationship as possible with the sense-data. It is
further characteristic of these physical objects that they
are thought of as arranged in a space-time continuum. An
essential aspect of this arrangement of things in physics
is that they lay claim, at a certain time, to an existence
independent of one another, provided these objects ”are
situated in diﬀerent parts of space”.
Unless one makes
this kind of assumptions about the independence of the
existence (the ”being-thus”) of objects which are far apart
from one another in space - which stems in the ﬁrst place
from everyday thinking - physical thinking in the familiar
sense would not be possible. It is also hard to see any way
of formulating and testing the laws of physics unless one
makes a clear distinction of this kind. This principle has
been carried to extremes in the ﬁeld theory by localizing
the elementary objects on which it is based and which ex-
ist independently of each other, as well as the elementary
laws which have been postulated for it, in the inﬁnitely
small (four dimensional) elements of space.
The following idea characterizes the relative independence
of objects far apart in space (A and B) : external inﬂuence

Basics of Quantum Computation
65
on A has no direct inﬂuence on B; this is known as the
”principle of contiguity”, which is used consistently in the
ﬁeld theory. If this axiom were to be completely abolished,
the idea of laws which can be checked empirically in the
accepted sense, would become impossible...
However, as often happens in the case of strongly felt dislikes, the
reactions involved may prove to be exaggerated. And in the case of
nonlocality this seems to happen.
Indeed, certain milder, fast diminishing forms of nonlocality have been
around in physics, and some of them, like the gravitational eﬀect of
a mass, were introduced by no lesser contributors than Isaac New-
ton. Of course, the gravitational eﬀect of a given mass, although it
decreases fast, namely, with the square of the distance, it is neverthe-
less not supposed to vanish completely anywhere. A similar thing is
supposed to happen with the electric charge, according to Culomb’s
law.
On the other hand, certain nonlocality eﬀects in the case of entangled
quantum particles are not supposed to diminish at all with the dis-
tance separating the particles.
What seems to happen, however, is that there is a signiﬁcant reluc-
tance to admit even one single, and no matter how narrow and well
circumscribed instance of a nondiminishing nonlocality. Such a reluc-
tance appears to be based on the perception that the acceptance of
even one single such nondiminishing nonlocality would instantly bring
with it the collapse of nearly all of the theoretical body of physics.
In other words, it is considered that physical theory, as it stands, is
critically unstable with respect to the incorporation of even one single
nondiminishing nonlocality.
Clearly, if indeed such may be the case, then that should rather be
thoroughly investigated, instead of being merely left to perceptions as
part of an attitude which, even if by default, treats it as a taboo.
After all, a somewhat similar phenomenon was still going on less than
four centuries ago, when the idea of Galileo that our planet Earth is
moving was felt to be an instant and mortal threat to the whole ediﬁce

66
E E Rosinger
of established theology.

Chapter 5
The Deutsch-Jozsa
Algorithm
The Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm is a good example of a quantum algo-
rithm which by using quantum parallelism can solve a speciﬁc problem
faster than any algorithm on a usual electronic digital computer can
do. To put it simply, quantum parallelism allows certain kind of simul-
taneous computations, thus saving computation time. Such a feature
is not available on usual electronic digital computers, unless one sets
up a special hardware with multiple circuits so that they function in
parallel and simultaneously. In the case of a quantum computer, how-
ever, certain parallel computations are always readily available.
Another feature of quantum algorithms used in this chapter is quan-
tum interference, which is not at all available on usual electronic digital
computers.
We shall present the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm as a fourth step in solv-
ing certain problems, each of which leads to an algorithm that is more
involved than the previous one.
5.1 A simple case of quantum parallelism
Suppose we are given a function f : { 0, 1 } −→{ 0, 1 } which thus
takes classical bits into classical bits. Although the function f has
a domain of deﬁnition which only has two elements, nevertheless, its
67

68
E E Rosinger
computation can happen to be given by a complicated formula, thus it
may require a large amount of computer time. Therefore, it is conve-
nient to avoid computing separately each of its two classical bit values
f(0) and f(1), which is the only procedure available on a usual elec-
tronic digital computer.
Here we shall show how by using quantum parallelism we can, through
one single classical value computation, obtain a quantum state which
contains both of the classical bit values f(0) and f(1).
Let us start by assuming that the computation on a usual electronic
digital computer of any one of the classical bit values of the function
f is made by a ”black box”
x
f
f(x)
Fig. 5.1.1
Then as shown in Nielsen & Chuang, it is possible to construct a
comparably eﬃcient quantum gate with two qubit input and two qubit
output
| x >
| y >
Uf
| x >
| y ⊕f(x) >
Fig. 5.1.2
where x, y ∈{ 0, 1 }, while as before, ⊕is the addition modulo 2.
Now let us use this as a quantum ”black box” and construct with it
the following quantum device
| ψ >
H
Uf
| χ >
Fig. 5.1.3

Basics of Quantum Computation
69
where H is the Hadamard gate in (2.2.8).
If we now input | ψ >
= | 0, 0 > then as output we obtain
(5.1.1)
| χ >
= (1/
√
2) ( | 0, f(0) >
+ | 1, f(1) > )
Here we can observe quantum parallelism in computational action. In-
deed, the output state in (5.1.1) contains both function values f(0) and
f(1), although in Fig. 5.1.3 the device Uf in Fig. 5.1.2, and which
computes the values of f, was activated only once.
Next we show how quantum parallelism can be used in far more pow-
erful ways as well.
5.2 Massive quantum parallelism
For an arbitrary integer n ≥1, we shall deﬁne the n-fold Walsh-
Hadamard quantum gate H⊗n with n qubits input and n qubits output
as given by the n-fold parallel device
H
H
H
Fig. 5.2.1
Clearly, H⊗n is a unitary operator on the n-fold tensor product, see
???

70
E E Rosinger
(5.2.1)
C2 ⊗. . . ⊗C2 ≃C2n
And it is easy to see that if all the n input qubits are | 0 >, that is,
we input in Fig. 5.2.1
(5.2.2)
| 0 . . . 0 >
∈C2 ⊗. . . ⊗C2 ≃C2n
then the n qubit output will be
(5.2.3)
(1/
√
2
n) Σx1, . . . ,xn | x1, . . . , xn >
where the sum is taken over all possible x1, . . . , xn ∈{ 0, 1 }, hence
it has 2n terms.
In this way, by using only n parallel Hadamard gates, the n-fold Walsh-
Hadamard gate H⊗n in Fig. 5.2.1 produces from the n qubit input
in (5.2.2) a superposition of no less than 2n quantum states, given in
(5.2.3).
Let us now use this massive quantum parallelism which obviously has
no correspondent in usual electronic digital computers.
Given a function f : { 0, 1 }n −→{ 0, 1 } which transforms n classical
bits x1, . . . , xn into one classical bit f(x1, . . . , xn), we can use the
above parallelism in order to evaluate this function in the following
way. Similar to the quantum gate in Fig. 5.1.2 which corresponds to
the case when n = 1, we can construct a quantum gate
| x1 >
| xn >
| y >
Uf
| x1 >
| xn >
| y ⊕f(x1, . . . , xn) >
Fig. 5.2.2

Basics of Quantum Computation
71
Further, similar with the way in the particular case of n = 1, where
we went from the device in Fig. 5.1.2 to that in Fig. 5.1.3, now we
shall use the device in Fig. 5.2.2 together with the massive parallel
device in Fig. 5.2.1 in order to construct the corresponding general
version of the device in Fig. 5.1.3, namely
| ψ >


n
H⊗n


n
Uf


n
| χ >
Fig. 5.2.3
where the sign


n
represents n qubits.
Now if we input in Fig. 5.2.3 the n + 1 qubits | 0 . . . 00 > then we
shall obtain the n + 1 qubit output
(5.2.4)
(1/
√
2
n) Σx1, . . . ,xn | x1, . . . , xn > | f(x1, . . . , xn) >
which is a superposition containing all the 2n diﬀerent possible values
of the function f.
Here it is important to note the following.
This massive quantum
parallelism obtained in (5.2.4) allows us to obtain simultaneously as a
superposition all the 2n values of the function f, each of these values
being a classical bit. However, having them as a superposed quan-
tum state given by (5.2.4), need not also mean that we can recover
all of them at once as separate classical bits. Indeed, according to
the axioms of Quantum Mechanics, if we make any measurement of
the quantum state (5.2.4), and thus we obtain as value a real num-
ber, then by such a measurement we collapse the superposed state in
(5.2.4) into one, and only one, of the 2n states which are the terms of
the respective sum, and we do so with the same probability 1/
√
2
n.
Therefore, in order to be able to make use of the obvious immense
advantages of massive quantum parallelism, we also have to be able to

72
E E Rosinger
ﬁnd ways to extract the real numbers which are there simultaneously
in superpositions, such as for instance in (5.2.4).
In the next two sections we show how that can be done in the case of
two speciﬁc problems.
5.3 The Deutsch algorithm
The algorithm presented here is a modiﬁed version of the original 1985
one given by D Deutsch, see Brown, Deutsch [1-3]. Its interest is in the
fact that it uses both quantum parallelism and quantum interference
in order to solve the respective problem, and do so with a signiﬁcantly
better performance than a usual electronic digital computer would do.
The problem is as follows. We are given, as in section 5.1, a function
f : { 0, 1 } −→{ 0, 1 } which takes classical bits into classical bits.
And we want to compute a global property of this function, given by
the quantity
(5.3.1)
f(0) ⊕f(1)
thus depending on both of its values, where as before ⊕denotes addi-
tion modulo 2. In other words, we want to compute the parity of the
function f.
This can be achieved with the help of the following quantum two qubit
input, two qubit output device
| ψ >
H
Uf
H
H
| χ >
Fig. 5.3.1
in which we input this time the two qubits | ψ >
= | 0, 1 >. Here for

Basics of Quantum Computation
73
clarity, and as in Fig. 3.2.1, let us again decompose the above device.
This time we can do so in three quantum devices, each with two qubit
input and two qubit output. The ﬁrst of them is
| ψ0 >
H
H
| ψ1 >
Fig. 5.3.2
in which we input | ψ0 >
=
| ψ >
=
| 0, 1 >. Then the two
Hadamard gates will give
| ψ1 >
= (1/2) (| 0 >
+ | 1 >) (| 0 >
−| 1 >)
We now input | ψ1 > in the following second quantum device which
again has a two qubit input and a two qubit output
| ψ >
Uf
| χ >
Fig. 5.3.3
First, let us note that in view of Fig. 5.1.2, if we input above
| ψ >
= | x > (| 0 >
−| 1 >)/
√
2
where x ∈{ 0, 1 }, then we obtain the two qubit output

74
E E Rosinger
| χ >
= (−1)f(x) | x > (| 0 >
−| 1 >)/
√
2
therefore, if we input | ψ1 >, then we obtain
| ψ2 > =





± (| 0 >
+ | 1 >) (| 0 >
−| 1 >)/2
if
f(0) = f(1)
± (| 0 >
−| 1 >) (| 0 >
−| 1 >)/2
if
f(0) ̸= f(1)
Now we ﬁnally input | ψ2 > into the simple quantum device
| ψ2 >
H
| ψ3 >
Fig. 5.3.4
we obtain the two qubit output
| ψ3 >
=





± | 0 > (| 0 >
−| 1 >)/
√
2
if
f(0) = f(1)
± | 1 > (| 0 >
−| 1 >)/
√
2
if
f(0) ̸= f(1)
while in terms of Fig. 5.3.1, we have | χ >
= | ψ3 >. Now we can
note that
f(0) ⊕f(1) =





0
if
f(0) = f(1)
1
if
f(0) ̸= f(1)
therefore, the two qubit output in Fig. 5.3.1 is
| χ >
=
± | f(0) ⊕f(1) > (| 0 >
−| 1 >)/
√
2

Basics of Quantum Computation
75
In this way, by measuring the ﬁrst qubit in | χ >, we can indeed de-
termine the value of f(0) ⊕f(1), as required in (5.3.1).
Let us note the following with respect to the Deutsch algorithm in
Fig. 5.3.1. As far as the eﬀect in it of quantum parallelism, this is
the same with what happened in section 5.1 in the algorithm in Fig.
5.1.3, and led to (5.1.1).
On the other hand, in Fig. 5.3.1 there is an additional eﬀect which
plays a role, namely, quantum interference. Indeed, the two Hadamard
gates in Fig. 5.3.2, which make up the ﬁrst component in Fig. 5.3.1,
give a two qubit quantum state which in Fig. 5.3.3 leads to the two
qubit output | ψ2 >. And in giving this output, the respective input
two qubits have interfered with one another in such a way that we
have now a global information on the function f. And this global in-
formation has been obtained by one single activation of the component
device in Fig. 5.3.3 which computes the values of the function f.
Clearly, such an eﬀect cannot be obtained on a usual electronic digital
computer.
Needless to say, in the case of a massive parallelism, as for instance,
in section 5.2, the possibilities for a convenient use of quantum inter-
ference increase signiﬁcantly.
5.4 The Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm
The problem solved is as follows. Alice and Bob are again faraway
from one another. Let n ≥1 be a certain given and ﬁxed number.
Bob chooses any function f : { 0, 1, . . . , 2n −1 } −→{ 0, 1 }
which only has to satisfy the condition that, either it is constant, or it
is balanced, that is, it is equal to 0 for half of the values in its domain,
and it is thus equal to 1 for the other half.
Alice has to ﬁnd out whether Bob chose a function which is constant,
or on the contrary, one that is balanced. And she has to do so with
as little information exchange with Bob, as possible.
The only information exchange allowed between them is that Alice
sends any x ∈{ 0, 1, . . . , 2n −1 } to Bob, and Bob sends back to

76
E E Rosinger
Alice the corresponding value f(x) of the function which he has chosen.
Clearly, the worse case for Alice is that she selects 2n−1 values x ∈
{ 0, 1, . . . , 2n −1 }, and obtains from Bob the respective answers
f(x), and all these answers have the same value. In this case Alice
will have to make one more such enquiry. Thus it may happen that
Alice will need 2n + 1 such enquiries.
We can note that, each time, Alice sends Bob an information equiva-
lent with n classical bits, while each time, Bob sends Alice one classical
bit.
Furthermore, beyond the possible fun of the story with Alice and Bob,
the above problem can correspond to a real practical one. Indeed, let
us again assume that computing a value f(x) may be very time con-
suming, due to the complicated procedure which gives the function
f. Thus, there is in such a case an important practical interest in
computing as few values of f as possible, and certainly not 2n +1 such
values, which as seen, corresponds to the worst case.
We shall show now that the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm can always solve
this problem with only one single evaluation of the value of the func-
tion f.
This single function evaluation is of course performed through the
quantum device in Fig. 5.1.2, which as mentioned, has a comparable
performance with the classical black box in Fig. 5.1.1 for the compu-
tation of values of f on a usual electronic digital computer.
The whole algorithm is as follows

Basics of Quantum Computation
77
| ψ >


n
H⊗n
H


n
Uf


n
H⊗n


n
| χ >
| ψ0 >
↑
| ψ1 >
↑
| ψ2 >
↑
| ψ3 >
↑
Fig. 5.4.1
where we have indicated the way it is composed of three successive
parts, namely, ﬁrst | ψ >
= | ψ0 > goes into | ψ1 >, then it proceeds
into | ψ1 >, and at last it results in | ψ3 >
= | χ >.
Here the respective vertical arrows ↑are supposed to cut through the
whole diagram in Fig. 5.4.1, thus leading to three corresponding quan-
tum gates, each with n + 1 input and output qubits.
The n + 1 input qubits we use in the algorithm in Fig. 5.4.1 are given
by
| ψ >
= | ψ0 >
= | 0 >⊗n | 1 >
where for any quantum state | φ > and n ≥1, we denote by | φ >⊗n
the n-fold tensor product | φ >
⊗. . . ⊗| φ >.
Now a direct computation, initiated by Alice, will give
| ψ1 >
= Σx1, . . . ,xn | x1, . . . , xn > (| 0 >
−| 1 >)/
√
2
n + 1
where the sum is taken over all x1, . . . , xn ∈{ 0, 1 }. The next step,
when | ψ1 > goes into | ψ2 >, is eﬀected by Bob, who computes his
function f upon the n + 1 input qubits | ψ1 >, and obtains
| ψ2 >
= Σx (−1)f(x) | x > (| 0 >
−| 1 >)/
√
2
n + 1

78
E E Rosinger
where for brevity we denoted x = (x1, . . . , xn).
The interesting thing to note with respect to n + 1 qubit state | ψ2 >
is that it contains an information which involves all the values of the
function f, although it only used only once the quantum gate Uf which
computes that function. Further, the way | ψ2 > contains all the val-
ues of f is through its amplitude || | ψ2 > ||.
Now let us see how a part of this global information on f can be
extracted by Alice, a part which is enough for her to solve the problem.
In Fig. 5.4.1, this corresponds to going from | ψ2 > to | ψ3 >, and
this is done simply by having the Walsh-Hadamard gate H⊗n act on
the ﬁrst n qubits in | ψ2 >.

Bibliography
Books on Quantum Mechanics :
Al-Khalili J : Quantum, A Guide for the Perplexed. Weidenfeld
& Nicolson, London, 2003
Auletta G : Foundations and Interpretations of Quantum Me-
chanics, In the Light of a Critical Historical Analysis of the Prob-
lems and of a Synthesis of the Results. World Scientiﬁc, 2000
Bell J S : Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics.
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1993
Bohm D : Quantum Theory. Prentice-Hall, New York, 1951
Born M : The Born-Einstein Letters. Walker, New York, 1971
Chester M : Primer of Quantum Mechanics. Dover, New York,
1987
Cushing J T, McMullin E (Eds.) : Philosophical Consequences
of Quantum Theory, Reﬂections on Bell’s Theorem. Univ. Notre
Dame Press, 1989
Dirac P A M : The Principles of Quantum Mechanics. Oxford,
1930
d’Espagnat B : Conceptual Foundations of Quantum Mechan-
79

80
E E Rosinger
ics. Benjamin, 1976
de Muynck W M : Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, an Em-
piricist Approach. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 2002
Einstein A, Podolsky B, Rosen N : Can quantum mechanical de-
scription of physical reality be considered complete ? Physical
Review, 47 (1935), 777-780
Gillespie D T : A Quantum Mechanics Primer, An Elementary
Introduction to the Formal Theory of Non-relativistic Quantum
Mechanics. International Textbook Company Ltd., London, 1973
Hannabuss K : An Introduction to Quantum Theory. Clarendon
Press, Oxford, 1997
Holland P R : The Quantum Theory of Motion, an Account of the
de Broglie-Bohm Causal Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics.
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1993
Isham C J : Lectures on Quantum Theory, Mathematical and
Structural Foundations. Imperial College press, 1995
Khinchin A Y : Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Statis-
tics. Dover, New York, 1998
Levin F S : An Introduction to Quantum Theory. Cambridge
Univ. Press, 2002
Messiah A : Quantum Mechanics. North-Holland, Amsterdam,
1961
Maudlin T : Quantum Non-Locality and Relativity, Metaphisi-
cal Intimations of Modern Physics. Blackwell, Oxford, 2002
Nielsen M A, Chuang I L : Quantum Computation and Quan-
tum Information. Cambridge Univ. Press, 2000

Basics of Quantum Computation
81
Peres A : Quantum Theory, Concepts and Methods. Kluwer, 1998
Pitowsky I : From George Boole to John Bell - the origins of
Bell’s inequalities. In Kafatos M (Ed.) Bell’s Theorem, Quantum
Theory and Conceptions of the Universe. Kluwer Acad. Publ.,
Dordrecht, 1989, pp. 37-49
Rae A I M : Quantum Mechanics. Institute of Physics, 1980
Robinett R W : Quantum Mechanics, Classical Results, Mod-
ern Systems, and Visualized Examples. Oxford Univ. Press, 1997
Ruskai M B : Confusion about Bohm. The Mathematical Intelli-
gencer, vol. 23, no. 4, fall 2001, 23-27
SchiﬀL : Quantum Mechanics. McGrawHill, New York, 1955
Sudbery A : Quantum Mechanics and the Particles of Nature,
An Outline for Mathematicians. Cambridge Univ. Press, 1986
Books on Quantum Computing :
Alber G, Beth T, et. al. : Quantum Information, An Introduction
to Basic Theoretical Concepts and Experiments. Springer, 2001
Brown J : The Quest for the Quantum Computer. Simon & Schus-
ter, New York, 2000
Deutsch D [1] : Quantum theory, the Church-Turing principle
and the universal quantum computer. Proc. Roy. Soc. London,
A, 400 (1985), 97-117
Deutsch D [2] : Quantum computational networks. Proc. Roy.
Soc. London, A 425 (1989), 73-90

82
E E Rosinger
Deutsch D [3] : The Fabric of Reality. Penguin, New York, 1997
Feynman R P [1] : Simulating physics with computers. Inter-
nat. J. Theor. Phys., vol. 21, no. 6-7, 1982, 467-488
Feynman R P [2] : Quantum mechanical computers. Optics News,
11, Feb. 1985, 11-20
Hirvensalo M : Quantum Computing. Springer, 2001
Leggett A, Ruggiero B, Silvestrini P (Eds.) : Quantum Com-
puting and Quantum Bits in Macroscopic Systems. Kluwer, New
York, 2004
Kitaev A Yu, Shen A H, Vyalyi M N : Classical and Quantum
Computation. AMS, 2002
Lo Hoi-Kwong, Popescu S, Spiller T (Eds.) : Introduction to
Quantum Computation and Information. World Scientiﬁc, Sin-
gapore, 2000
Nielsen M A, Chuang I L : Quantum Computation and Quan-
tum Information. Cambridge Univ. Press, 2000
Pittenger A O : An Introduction to Quantum Computing Al-
gorithms. Birkh¨auser, 2001
Brylinski R K, Chen G [Eds.] : Mathematics of Quantum Com-
putation. Chapman & Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, 2002
General Books :
Kreyszig E : Introductory Functional Analysis with Applications.
Wiley, New York, 1978

Basics of Quantum Computation
83
Papers :
Agrawal M, Kayal N, Saxena N : Primes is in P. Report, De-
partment of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institue
of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 208016 India
email addresses :
manindra@cse.iitk.ac.in, kayaln@iitk.ac.in,
nitinsa@cse.iitk.ac.in
Gudder S : Quantum Computation. The American Mathemat-
ical Monthly, March 2003, 181-201

