Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Basic Guide to
System Safety
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Basic Guide to
System Safety
Third Edition
Jeffrey W. Vincoli
Manager of Environmental, Safety,
and Health Compliance Assurance and Support Services
Bechtel Global Corporation
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Copyright © 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax
(978) 750-4470, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should
be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ
07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permission.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable
for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor
author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to
special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317)
572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may
not be available in electronic formats. For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at
www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Vincoli, Jeffrey W., author.
Basic guide to system safety / Jeffrey W. Vincoli. – Third edition.
p. ; cm.
Includes index.
ISBN 978-1-118-46020-7 (hardback)
I. Title.
[DNLM:
1. Occupational Health.
2. Safety.
3. Safety Management. WA 485]
T55
658.3′82–dc23
2013051270
Printed in the United States of America.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
To my loving wife, Rosemary
Of all my accomplishments in this life, my greatest achievement was
convincing you to be my wife. After more than 30 years together, I do not know
how people go through life alone. I am blessed in many ways, but none more than
having you as my wife. Thank you for always being there with your patience,
your charm, your perspective, and your love. You are and will always be the most
cherished thing about my life.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Contents
PREFACE
xiii
PART I
THE SYSTEM SAFETY PROGRAM
1
1
System Safety: An Overview
3
Background / 3
The Difference Between Industrial Safety and System Safety / 7
System Safety and the Assessment of Risk / 8
2
System Safety Concepts
15
Fundamentals / 15
The System Safety Process / 16
System Safety Criteria / 18
Hazard Severity / 18
Hazard Probability / 18
The Hazard Risk Matrix / 19
System Safety Precedence / 20
vii
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
viii
CONTENTS
Cost and Risk Acceptance / 24
Quantitative Risk Assessment / 25
Principles of Risk Management / 27
Management Commitment / 27
3
System Safety Program Requirements
29
The Safety Charter / 29
Selling Safety to Management / 30
The System Safety Effort / 31
Closed-Loop Hazard Tracking System / 32
Accident Risk Assessment / 33
Mishap/Accident/Incident Reporting / 33
Facility Inspection Reports / 36
System Safety Analyses / 36
Life Cycle Phases and the System Safety Process / 36
Concept Phase / 37
Design Phase / 37
Production Phase / 37
Operations Phase / 39
Disposal Phase / 39
4
The Industrial Safety Connection
41
The Occupational Safety and Health Act / 41
The Human Factors Element / 43
Accident Prevention Through System Design / 44
The Process of Task Analysis / 47
The Job Safety Analysis and System Safety / 48
Guidelines for Preparing a Job Safety Analysis / 50
Signatures and Approvals / 56
Changes in Hazard/Scope / 56
System Safety: an Integral Part of the Overall Organization / 57
5
Probability Theory and Statistical Analysis
61
Introduction / 61
Probability / 62
Statistics / 64
Summary / 67
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
CONTENTS
ix
PART II
SYSTEM SAFETY ANALYSIS: TECHNIQUES
AND METHODS
69
6
Preliminary Hazard Analysis
71
Introduction / 71
The PHA Development Process / 72
The PHA Report / 78
PHA Example / 78
System Description / 79
System Operation / 80
Preliminary Assessment / 81
Evaluation of System Risk / 81
Summary / 90
7
Subsystem and System Hazard Analyses
91
Introduction / 91
The Subsystem Hazard Analysis Report / 92
SSHA Example / 93
System Description / 93
Evaluation of Subsystem Hazard Risk / 95
Summary / 98
8
Operating and Support Hazard Analysis
99
Introduction / 99
Ergonomics / 99
When to Perform the O&SHA / 101
O&SHA Example / 103
Scope and Purpose of the Example O&SHA / 103
Risk Assessment / 104
Risk Assessment 1: 1B / 106
Risk Assessment 2: 1A / 107
Risk Assessment 3: 2B / 107
Summary / 109
9
Energy Trace and Barrier Analysis
111
Introduction / 111
The Energy–Barrier Concept / 111
Uses of the ETBA / 112
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
x
CONTENTS
Performing the ETBA / 112
The ETBA Worksheet / 113
ETBA Example / 114
System Description / 114
The ETBA / 114
Summary / 118
10
Failure Mode and Effect Analysis
119
Introduction / 119
Types of FMEAs / 119
Performing an FMEA / 120
The FMEA Report / 121
FMEA Example / 124
System Component/Subassembly Description / 124
System Operation / 128
Failure Mode(s) and Effect(s) / 128
Evaluation of Potential Subsystem or Component Failures / 129
Summary / 132
11
Fault or Functional Hazard Analysis
135
Introduction / 135
The FHA Process / 136
FHA Example / 137
System Description / 137
The FHA Process / 139
The FHA / 141
Summary / 143
12
Fault Tree Analysis
145
Introduction / 145
Qualitative and Quantitative Reasoning / 146
Constructing a Fault Tree / 146
Fault Tree Symbols / 147
FTA Examples / 150
Probability Values and the Fault Tree / 153
Summary / 156
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
CONTENTS
xi
13
Management Oversight and Risk Tree
157
Introduction / 157
The MORT Analytical Chart / 158
MORT Use / 159
The MORT Event Tree / 160
Symbols / 160
MORT Analysis Example / 161
MORT Color Coding / 163
Procedure for MORT Analysis / 165
Summary / 165
14
HAZOP and What-If Analyses
167
Introduction / 167
Background / 168
Definitions / 168
Objectives / 169
Team Members / 169
Reference Data Requirements / 169
The Concept of “Nodes” / 170
Conducting the What-If Analysis / 171
What-If Analysis Steps / 171
The What-If Analysis Worksheet / 173
Conducting The HAZOP Study / 175
The HAZOP Worksheet / 175
The Analysis Report / 176
Summary / 177
15
Special Use Analysis Techniques
179
Introduction / 179
Sneak Circuit Analysis / 180
Types and Causes of Sneaks / 180
SCA Input Requirements / 181
Advantages and Disadvantages of the SCA / 181
Software Hazard Analysis / 183
Types of SWHA Techniques / 183
Summary / 185
Epilogue
187
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
xii
CONTENTS
Appendix A
Sources of Additional Information/Training
189
Appendix B
Acronyms and Abbreviations
195
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
199
BIBLIOGRAPHY
223
INDEX
225
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Preface
The third edition of the Basic Guide to System Safety contains all of the content
of the previous editions, updated (where applicable) to reflect current industry prac-
tice. The first edition of the Basic Guide to System Safety was the first volume issued
in a series of Basic Guide books that focused on the topics of interest to the practicing
occupational safety and/or health professional. Other books in the Series include
the Basic Guide to Environmental Compliance, Basic Guide to Accident Investiga-
tion and Loss Control, and Basic Guide to Industrial Hygiene. Each book has been
designed to provide the reader with a fundamental understanding of the subject and
attempt to foster a desire for additional information and training.
In addition to updated content of the previous editions, the revised third edition of
the Basic Guide to System Safety introduces some system safety concepts not previ-
ously discussed to further expand upon the basic knowledge that is the cornerstone of
the Basic Guide Series. In this regard, the third edition contains a discussion on the
concept of Design for Safe Construction where the methods and techniques associ-
ated with the system safety discipline can be effectively utilized to identify, analyze,
eliminate, or control system hazards during the design phase of a construction project.
As with all analytical methods and techniques presented in this text, it is suggested
that the concept of design for construction safety has definite application to general
industry operations.
Also, information on the use of the various methods and techniques associated with
the use of system safety has been expanded in the third edition to include guidance on
the evaluation and verification of compliance efforts following the implementation
of system safety analysis. This additional information will attempt to close-the-loop
on the effective use of system safety analysis in the industrial safety environment.
xiii
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
xiv
PREFACE
It should be noted from the onset that it is not and never has been the intention
of the Basic Guide to System Safety to provide any level of expertise beyond that of
novice. Those practitioners and users who desire complete knowledge of the subject
will not be satisfied with the information contained on these pages. It is not practical or
feasible to expect a “basic guidebook” to contain all possible technical information on
any subject, especially one as complex as system safety. However, those that require
or perhaps only desire a basic understanding of a field similar but distinctly separate
from their current area of specialization will find the third edition of Basic Guide to
System Safety a valuable reference source and introductory primer. It is also assumed
that those currently involved in the practice of system safety engineering and analysis
might find this material somewhat enjoyable and, at the very least, refreshing. Also,
professionals not directly involved in the system safety effort but who must work in
association with those that are, will also find this text useful.
Finally, although the books in the Basic Guide Series were always originally
intended for the practicing safety professional, the Series has been proven to be quite
useful as textbooks for introductory courses in numerous colleges and universities.
In this regard, the third edition will provide some additional fodder for enhancing
existing primer courses on the subject.
It has long been known by practicing safety and health professionals that organiza-
tions with excellent safety performance records have a well-rounded corporate policy
or at least a firmly established administrative posture that consistently emphasizes
the importance and value of working safely. The leadership of such organizations has
provided their strong (and intelligent) commitment in support of the safety effort.
Therefore, this text concentrates especially upon the concepts that all executives
should understand concerning the role that safety programs play in the successful
operation of a business. No less of a commitment is necessary to properly imple-
ment system safety into an already established occupational/industrial safety and
health program.
It is also recognized that, in order to achieve operationally safe system perfor-
mance, system safety programs must be conducted with defined purpose, proficiency,
skill, and a sense of well-rounded responsibility to the needs of the organization that
the system safety program is intended to serve. In such a supportive environment, the
system safety effort can and will become a vital contributor to the overall success of
the enterprise.
This text places considerable emphasis on the integration of system safety princi-
ples and practices into the total framework of the organization. Anything less would
constitute unsound business management. In the 20 years since the publication of the
first edition of Basic Guide to System Safety, this very concept has been tested and
proven viable numerous times by the author and other safety and health practitioners.
There are examples of the successful integration of system safety methodologies into
the practice of safety and health assurance in general industry, construction, rail,
maritime, and aviation. It works, as long as there is understanding and commitment.
In short, the third edition of Basic Guide to System Safety follows tradition of
the previous two editions. Safety and health professionals, as well as managers,
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
PREFACE
xv
engineers, technicians, designers, and college professors and their students should
obtain some benefit from the information contained in this book.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
In the preparation of the third edition of Basic Guide to System Safety, I would like
to thank and acknowledge those individuals and organizations that assisted in the
initial, as well as revised, versions of this text.
First, I do not want to forget the valuable advice and assistance of those colleagues
and associates who helped in the development and review of the first edition. Specif-
ically, Steven S. Phillips, Frank Beckage, Douglas J. Tomlin, George S. Brunner, and
Susie Adkins.
Second, I wish to recognize and acknowledge the training firm of Technical
Analysis, Inc. (TAI) in Houston, Texas for permitting me to use some of their materials
in the first and subsequent editions of this text, and for developing and providing
exceptional training seminars on the subject of System Safety Engineering. Their
contributions to the advancement of the System Safety discipline are commendable
and appreciated.
Third, I would like to thank all those who participated in bringing this third edition
of Basic Guide to System Safety to fruition including all the reference sources used
herein, and the reviewers who helped identify specific areas for improvement over
the previous editions. Thanks also to Fred Manuele for his leadership as Chair of the
ANSI Z590.3-2011 Committee.
Fourth, a special thanks to Bob Esposito and Michael Leventhal of John Wiley &
Sons for their support in making this third edition a reality.
Finally, I want to thank my wife, Rosemary, for her patience, understanding,
and encouragement during my work to complete this process, and for her dedicated
support of all that I do, always.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Part I
The System Safety Program
In the practice of occupational safety and health in industry today, the primary
concern of any responsible organization is the identification and elimination of
hazards that threaten the life and/or health of employees, as well as those which
could cause damage to facilities, property, equipment, products, and/or the environ-
ment. When such risk of hazard cannot be totally eliminated, as is often the case, it
becomes a fundamental function of the safety professional to provide recommenda-
tions to control those hazards in an effort to reduce the associated risk to the lowest
acceptable levels.
It is the intention of this Basic Guide to System Safety to demonstrate the
effectiveness of the system safety process in identifying and eliminating hazards,
recommending risk reduction techniques, and methods for controlling residual
hazard risk.
Part I will introduce the reader to the system safety process, how it evolved,
how it can be managed, and how it relates to the current practice of the industrial
safety and health professional. In fact, upon completion of Part I, the reader shall
have developed a clear understanding of this relationship and, quite possibly, have
developed an interest in the further pursuit of the system safety profession. As noted
in the Preface, the information provided here is introductory in scope, intended to
merely acquaint the reader with the system safety approach to hazard analysis and
hazard risk reduction.
As a separate discipline, system safety had its origins in the aviation and aerospace
industries. Systems safety has proven its worth in the dramatic improvements in
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
1
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2
THE SYSTEM SAFETY PROGRAM
aviation safety over the past 60 years. It is not by chance that flying is demonstrably the
safest mode of travel and this accomplishment has led to an undeniable understanding
that all modern systems require a more logical, focused approach to identifying and
controlling hazards. System safety is no longer a discipline reserved for the aerospace
designer and nuclear engineer; it is the most effective method of improving the safety
of any modern operation. As it has developed and matured, system safety has moved
away from being the exclusive domain of design engineers and has become less
mathematical or abstract and is now more practical and realistic. Modern concepts of
system safety can be used by any organization or person who wants a logical, visible,
and traceable method of identifying and controlling safety hazards and this is the
objective of the Basic Guide to System Safety.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
1
System Safety: An Overview
BACKGROUND
The idea or concept of system safety can be traced to the missile production industry
of the late 1940s. It was further defined as a separate discipline by the late 1950s
(Roland and Moriarty 1983) and early 1960s, used primarily by the missile, aviation,
and aerospace communities. Prior to the 1940s, system designers and engineers relied
predominantly on a trial-and-error method of achieving safe design. This approach
was somewhat successful in an era when system complexity was relatively simple
compared with those of subsequent development. For example, in the early days of
the aviation industry, this process was often referred to as the “fly-fix-fly” approach to
design problems (Roland and Moriarty 1983; Stephenson 1991) or, more accurately,
“safety-by-accident.” Simply stated, an aircraft was designed based upon existing or
known technology. It was then flown until problems developed or, in the worst case,
it crashed (Figure 1.1). If design errors were determined as the cause (as opposed to
human, or “pilot” error), then the design problems would be fixed and the aircraft
would fly again. Obviously, this method of after-the-fact design safety worked well
when aircraft flew low and slow and were constructed of wood, wire, and cloth.
However, as systems grew more complex and aircraft capabilities such as airspeed and
maneuverability increased, so did the likelihood of devastating results from a failure of
the system or one of its many subtle interfaces. This is clearly demonstrated in the early
days of the aerospace era (the 1950s and 1960s). As the industry began to develop jet
powered aircraft and space and missile systems, it quickly became clear that engineers
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
3
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4
SYSTEM SAFETY: AN OVERVIEW
Figure 1.1
The “fly-fix-fly” approach, or more accurately “safety-by-accident,” focused on fixing design
issues after an accident event rather than focusing on accident prevention through design.
could no longer wait for problems to develop; they had to anticipate them and “fix”
them before they occurred. To put it another way: the “fly-fix-fly” philosophy was no
longer feasible. Elements such as these became the catalyst for the development of
systems engineering, out of which eventually grew the concept of system safety. The
need to anticipate and fix problems before they occurred led to a new approach—
a consideration of the design as a “system.” This means that all aspects of the
design of operation (e.g., machine, operator, and environment) must be considered in
identifying potential hazards and establishing appropriate controls. Another important
part of this “systems” approach to safety is the realization that resources for safety
are limited and there must be some logical, reasoned way to apply resources to the
most serious potential problems. Systems safety provides this capability. Figure 1.2
shows a simplification of the basic elements of the systems engineering process. It
is noted that safety comprises only one part of this integrated engineering design
approach (Larson and Hann 1990). Taken one step further, Figure 1.3 demonstrates
how the systems approach associated with the initial element of the systems safety
engineering process—the design aspect—can support the identification of hazards
in the earliest phases of a project life cycle. Only after the accurate identification of
hazards can proper elimination or control measures be determined.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
BACKGROUND
5
PROJECT REQUIREMENTS
ARE ESTABLISHED BASED
UPON GIVEN PARAMETERS
AND ESTABLISHED OBJECTIVES
IDENTIFY DESIGN
REQUIREMENTS TO
ENSURE ENGINEERING
CAN UNDERSTAND OBJECTIVES
IMPLEMENT DESIGN
REQUIREMENTS TO
ENSURE OPTIMUM SAFETY IN
PERFORMANCE
DESIGN PROJECT TO
THE LOW-LEVEL PARAMETERS
THAT HAVE BEEN IDENTIFIED
Schedule
Objectives
Purpose
Cost
Quality
Functions
Maintainability
Human factors
Availability
Performance
Reliability
Safety
Quantify design specifications
Lowest-level design criteria
Ensure consensus before proceeding
Show that all system requirements met
Qualify all results
Document and record accomplishment
Maintain schedule
Progress toward top-level parameters
Figure 1.2
The system safety engineering process (Source: Larson and Hann 1990).
IDENTIFY HAZARDS
IN SYSTEM DESIGN
EVALUATE HAZARDS FOR
IMPACT ON SYSTEM
DEVELOP CORRECTIVE ACTIONS
TO MITIGATE HAZARDS
VALIDATE CORRECTIVE ACTIONS
BY TEST AND EVALUATION
IDENTIFY & CONTROL HAZARDS
IN OPERATING & SUPPORTING
THE SYSTEM
ESTABLISH CONTROLS FOR
EFFECTIVE AND SAFE
DISPOSAL OF THE SYSTEM
Figure 1.3
The systems approach to the consideration of safety from the design phase through product
disposal or project termination.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6
SYSTEM SAFETY: AN OVERVIEW
The dawn of the manned spaceflight program in the mid-1950s also contributed to
the growing necessity for safer system design. Hence, the growing missile and space
systems programs became a driving force in the development of system safety engi-
neering. Those systems under development in the 1950s and early 1960s required a
new approach to controlling hazards such as those associated with weapon and space
systems (e.g., explosive components and pyrotechnics, unstable propellant systems,
and extremely sensitive electronics). The Minuteman Intercontinental Ballistic Mis-
sile (ICBM) was one of the first systems to have had a formal, disciplined, and
defined system safety program (Roland and Moriarty 1983). In July of 1969, the US
Department of Defense (DOD) formalized system safety requirements by publishing
MIL-STD-882 entitled “System Safety Program Requirements.” This Standard has
since undergone a number of revisions.
The US National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) soon recognized
the need for system safety and has since made extensive system safety programs
an integral part of space program activities. The early years of our nation’s space
launch programs are full of catastrophic and quite dramatic examples of failures.
During those developing years, it was a known and quite often stated fact that “our
missiles and rockets just don’t work, they blow up.” The many successes since those
days can be credited in large part to the successful implementation and utilization
of a comprehensive system safety program. However, it should be noted that the
Challenger disaster in January 1986 and the loss of the orbiter Columbia upon reentry
in February of 2003 stand as historic reminders to us all that, no matter how exact and
comprehensive a design or operating safety program is considered to be, the proper
management of that system is still one of the most important elements of success.
This fundamental principle is true in any industry or discipline.
Eventually, the programs pioneered by the military and NASA were adopted by
industry in such areas as nuclear power, refining, mass transportation, chemicals,
healthcare, and computer programming.
Today, the system safety process is still used extensively by the various military
organizations within the DOD, as well as by many other federal agencies in the United
States such as NASA, the Federal Aviation Administration, and the Department of
Energy. In most cases, it is a required element of primary concern in the federal
agency contract acquisition process.
Although it would not be possible to fully discuss the basic elements of system
safety without comment and reference to its military/federal connections, the primary
focus of this text shall be placed upon the advantages of utilizing system safety
concepts and techniques as they apply to the general safety arena. In fact, the industrial
workplace can be viewed as a natural extension of the past growth experience of the
system safety discipline. Many of the safety rules, regulations, statutes, and basic
safety operating criteria practiced daily in industry today are, for the most part, the
direct result of a real or perceived need for such control doctrine. The requirement
for safety controls (written or physical) developed either because a failure occurred
or someone with enough foresight anticipated a possible failure and implemented
controls to avoid such an occurrence. Even though the former example is usually the
case, the latter is also responsible for the development of countless safe operating
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN INDUSTRIAL SAFETY AND SYSTEM SAFETY
7
requirements practiced in industry today. Both, however, are also the basis upon
which system safety engineers operate.
The first method, creating safety rules after a failure or accident, is likened to the
“fly-fix-fly” approach discussed earlier. The second method, anticipating a potential
failure and attempting to avoid it with control procedures, regulations, and so on, is
exactly what the system safety practitioner does when analyzing system design or an
operating condition or method. However, when possible or practical, the system safety
concept goes a step further and actually attempts to engineer the risk of hazard(s)
out of the process. With the introduction of the system safety discipline, the fly-fix-fly
approach to safe and reliable systems was transformed into the “identify, analyze,
and eliminate” (Abendroth and Grass 1987) method of system safety assurance.
We have established the basic connection between the system safety discipline and
its relationship to the general industry occupational safety practice. This conceptual
relationship will be examined in more detail throughout this text.
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN INDUSTRIAL SAFETY
AND SYSTEM SAFETY
Industrial safety, or occupational safety, has historically focused primarily on control-
ling injuries to employees on the job. The industrial safety engineer usually is dealing
with a fixed manufacturing design and hazards that have existed for a long time, many
of which are accepted as necessary for operations. Traditionally, more emphasis is
often placed on training employees to work within this environment rather than on
removing the hazards.
To perform their charter, industrial safety engineers collect data during the opera-
tional life of the system and eliminate or control unacceptable hazards where possible
or practical. When accidents occur, they are investigated and action is taken to reduce
the likelihood of a recurrence—either by changing the plant or by changing employee
work rules and training. The hazards associated with high-energy or dangerous pro-
cesses are usually controlled either by
r Disturbance control algorithms implemented by operators or an automated con-
trol system or
r Transferring the plant to a safe state using a separate protection system.
Safety reviews and compliance audits are conducted by industrial safety organiza-
tions within a company or, less frequently, by safety committees to ensure that unsafe
conditions in the workplace are corrected and that employees are following the work
rules specified in manuals, directives, and operating instructions. Lessons learned
from accidents are incorporated into design standards, and much of the emphasis in
the design of new plants and work rules is on implementing these standards. Often,
the standards are enforced by the government through occupational safety and health
legislation.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
8
SYSTEM SAFETY: AN OVERVIEW
In contrast, system safety has been traditionally concerned primarily with new
systems. The concept of “loss” is treated much more broadly as relevant losses may
include
r Injury to nonemployees;
r Damage to equipment, property, or the environment;
r Loss of mission.
As has been previously established, instead of making changes as a result of
operational experience with the system, system safety attempts to identify potential
hazards before the system is designed, to define and incorporate safety design criteria,
and to build safety into the design before the system becomes operational. Although
standards are used in system safety, they usually are “process standards” rather than
“product standards” as reliance on design or product standards is often inadequate for
new types of systems, and more emphasis is placed on upfront analysis and design-
ing for safety. There have been attempts to incorporate system safety techniques and
approaches into traditional industrial safety programs, especially when new plants and
processes are being built. Although system safety techniques are considered “overkill”
for many industrial safety problems, larger organizations and increasingly dangerous
processes have raised concern about injuries to people outside the workplace (e.g.,
pollution) and have therefore made system safety approaches more relevant. Further-
more, with the increase in size and cost of plant equipment, changes and retrofits to
increase safety are costly and may require discontinuing operations for a period of
time. Similarly, it is interesting to note that system safety is increasingly considering
issues that have been traditionally thought to be strictly industrial safety concerns.
In summary, industrial safety activities are designed to protect workers in an indus-
trial environment with extensive standards imposed by federal codes or regulations
to provide for a safe workplace. However, with few exceptions, these codes seldom
apply to protection of the product being manufactured. With the increasingly more
frequent use of robotics in the workplace environment and with long-lived engineer-
ing programs like space launch vehicles that have substantial continuing complex
engineering design activities, the traditional concerns of industrial safety and system
safety have become more intertwined (Leveson 2005).
In 2011, these circumstances have led to the development of a new American
National Standards Institute/American Society of Safety Engineers (ANSI/ASSE)
Standard titled Prevention Through Design: Guidelines for Addressing Occupational
Hazards and Risks in Design and Redesign Processes (ANSI/ASSE Z590.3-2011).
This Standard and its relationship to the objectives of this Basic Guide to System
Safety will be discussed further in Chapter 4.
SYSTEM SAFETY AND THE ASSESSMENT OF RISK
The idea, concept, or process of system safety has been defined in many ways, by a
wide variety of scientific and technical professionals. However, since its inception,
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SYSTEM SAFETY AND THE ASSESSMENT OF RISK
9
system safety has had the specific, driving purpose to eliminate system faults or failure
risk and subsequent recognized accident and/or hazard potential through design and
implementation of engineering controls. Basically, system safety can be defined as:
a sub-discipline of systems engineering that applies scientific, engineering and manage-
ment principles to ensure adequate safety, the timely identification of hazard risk, and
initiation of actions to prevent or control those hazards throughout the life cycle and
within the constraints of operational effectiveness, time, and cost (Stephenson 1991).
In the simplest of terms, system safety uses systems theory and systems engineer-
ing approaches to prevent foreseeable accident events and to minimize the result of
unforeseen events. Losses in general (not just human death or injury) are consid-
ered and can include destruction of property, loss of mission, and/or environmental
harm (Leveson 2005). The term safety, as used here, is somewhat relative. Although
“safety” has often been traditionally defined in many sources as …. freedom from
those conditions that can cause death, injury, occupational illness, or damage to
or loss of equipment or property (MIL-STD-882), it is generally recognized in the
profession that this definition is somewhat unrealistic (Leveson 1986). This defini-
tion would indicate that any system containing some degree of risk is considered
unsafe. Obviously, this is not practical logic since almost any system that produces
some level of personal, social, technological, scientific, or industrial benefit contains
an indispensable element of risk (Browning 1980). For example, safety razors or
safety matches are not entirely safe, only safer than their alternatives. They present
an acceptable level of risk while preserving the benefits of the less-safe devices that
they have replaced (Leveson 1986). A more vivid example of risk reduction and
acceptance involves the sport of skydiving: Most sane skydivers would never jump
out of an airplane without a parachute. The parachute provides a control measure
intended to eliminate some level of risk. However, even with the parachute strapped
in place, the jumper is still accepting the risk of parachute failure. System safety
is concerned with the aspect of reducing the risk(s) associated with a hazard to its
lowest acceptable level. In reality, no aircraft could fly, no automobile could move,
and no ship could be put out to sea if all hazards and all risk had to be completely
eliminated first (Hammer 1972). Similarly, no drill press could be operated, forklift
driven, petroleum refined, dinner cooked, microwave used, water boiled, and so on,
without some element of operating risk.
This problem is further complicated by the fact that attempts to eliminate risk result
instead in the often unfortunate displacement of risk (Malasky 1982). For example,
some approved (by the US Food and Drug Administration) preservatives currently
utilized in the food processing industry to prevent bacteria growth and spoilage
are, themselves, a suspected cause of cancer (e.g., sodium nitrates). Likewise, there
is a risk trade-off between the known benefits of improved medical diagnosis and
treatment which result from the use of radiation (e.g., X-rays, radiation therapy),
against the known risks of human exposure to radiation. Hence, safety is really more
of a relative issue in that nothing is completely safe under all circumstances or all
conditions. There is always some example in which a relatively safe material or
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
10
SYSTEM SAFETY: AN OVERVIEW
piece of equipment can become hazardous. The very act of drinking water, if done to
excess, can cause severe renal problems in most cases (Gloss and Wardel 1984).
Unfortunately, the question “How safe is safe enough?” has no simple answer.
For example, it is not uncommon to hear the term “99.9% risk-free” used to signify
high assurance or low-risk assessments, especially in the advertising industry. In fact,
it would be safe to say that this terminology is somewhat overused in our society.
However, consider the following statistical facts (Larson and Hann 1990).
In the United States today, 99.9% safe would mean:
r one hour of unsafe drinking water per month;
r 20,000 children per year suffering from seizures or convulsions due to faulty
whooping cough vaccinations;
r 16,000 pieces of mail lost per hour;
r 500 incorrect surgical operations each week;
r 50 newborns dropped by doctors each day.
Clearly, a 99.9% assurance level is not really “safe enough” in today’s society. If
the percentage were increase by a factor of ten to “99.99%,” the following information
indicates that this level of risk is still unacceptable in certain instances. A 99.99%
risk-free assurance level would mean:
r 2000 incorrect drug prescriptions per year;
r 370,000 checks deducted from the wrong account per week;
r 3200 times per year, your heart would fail to beat;
r 5 children sustaining permanent brain damage per year because of faulty whoop-
ing cough vaccinations.
Obviously, the need to ensure optimum safety in a given system, industry, or
process is absolutely essential. In fact, with certain critical functions of a system,
there is no room for error or failure, as is evidenced in some of the above listed
examples. Thus, safety becomes a function of the situation in which it is measured
(Leveson 1986).
Therefore, the question still remains as to the proper definition of safety. One
possible improvement of the previously presented MIL-STD-882 definition might be
that safety …. is a measure of the degree of freedom from risk in any environment
(Leveson 1986). Hence, safety in a given system or process is not measured so much
as is the level of risk associated with the operation of that system or process. This
fundamental concept of acceptable risk is the very foundation upon which system
safety has developed and is practiced today.
In the world of occupational safety, the ever-present requirement to achieve 100%
compliance with written codes, rules, regulations, or established operating procedures
is a challenge in and of itself. However, in the practice of system safety, it must be
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SYSTEM SAFETY AND THE ASSESSMENT OF RISK
11
clearly understood that “design by code” is no substitute for intelligent engineering
and that codes only establish a minimum requirement which, in many systems or
situations, must be exceeded to ensure adequate elimination or control of identified
hazard(s). Therefore, 100% “compliance” usually means a system has met only the
minimum safety requirements. Looking at the subject of regulatory compliance a
different way, let us consider what it really means to be 100% compliant with the
minimum requirements established by applicable codes and regulations. In the United
States, for example, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
claims that occupational injuries and fatalities have decreased between 60% and
65% during the 40-year period of it existence between 1971 and 2011. While such
a statistic is certainly laudable for obvious reasons, it also tells us that between 30%
and 35% of workers in the United States are still suffering occupational injuries or
fatalities. Clearly, compliance with the minimum requirements established by OSHA
is not enough. Employers must do more. They must go beyond compliance, where
required, to ensure optimum safety and health in the workplace.
The efforts associated with system safety attempt to exceed these minimum com-
pliance standards and provide the highest level of safety (i.e., the lowest level of
acceptable risk) achievable for a given system. In addition, it is important to mention
at this point that system safety has often been used to demonstrate that some compli-
ance requirements can be too excessive while providing insufficient risk reduction to
justify the costs incurred. Costs, such as operating restrictions, system performance,
operational schedules, downtime, and, of course, actual dollars, are all elements of
a successful operation which must be considered when determining the validity of
implementing any new compliance controls. Proper utilization of system safety engi-
neering has proven to be an excellent tool for evaluating the value of such controls
with regard to actual savings and reduction of risk. For example, in general, the OSHA
requires that machine guarding be employed to protect operators of machines from
hazards created by the machining point of operation and/or other hazards associated
with machine operation [OSHA 29 CFR §1910.212(a)(1)]. Safety practitioners and
machine operators both are well aware that a machine can be effectively guarded to
the point where it is no longer usable and, in actuality, borders on the ridiculous.
Safety professionals will recall the famed “OSHA Cowboy” which was first drawn
by J. N. Devin in 1972 and has circulated throughout the industry ever since. As
shown in Figure 1.4, the OSHA Cowboy was a satirical view of OSHA compliance
extremes. Essentially, the cartoon drawing demonstrated that the risks to the cowboy
on horseback can be guarded and controlled to the point where even simple movement
would be impossible.
As stated previously, system safety developed or evolved as a direct result of a
need to ensure, to the greatest extent possible, reliability in the safe operation of a
system or set of systems (especially when a given system is known to be hazardous
in nature). While no system can be considered completely or 100% reliable, system
safety is an attempt to get as close as practical to this goal. Over the years, numerous
techniques and methods used to formally accomplish the system safety task have
also evolved and have further expanded our capabilities to examine systems, identify
hazards, eliminate or control them, and reduce risk to an acceptable level in the
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
12
SYSTEM SAFETY: AN OVERVIEW
Figure 1.4
The “OSHA Cowboy” as first depicted by J.N. Devin in 1972.
operation of that system. These analytical methods and/or techniques are known
by many names such as, but certainly not limited to the following common system
safety tools:
r Preliminary Hazard Analysis (PHA)
r System Hazard Analysis (SHA)
r Subsystem Hazard Analysis (SSHA)
r Operating & Support Hazard Analysis (O&SHA)
r Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (FMEA)
r Fault Tree Analysis (FTA)
r Fault (or Functional) Hazard Analysis (FHA)
r Management Oversight and Risk Tree (MORT)
r Energy Trace and Barrier Analysis (ETBA)
r Sneak Circuit Analysis (SCA)
r Software Hazard Analysis (SWHA)
r Common Cause Failure Analysis (CCFA)
r Cause and Effect Analysis (CEA)
r Event Tree Analysis (ETA)
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SYSTEM SAFETY AND THE ASSESSMENT OF RISK
13
r Hazard and Operability Studies
r Random Number Simulation Analysis (RNSA)
r Health Hazard Analysis (HHA)
The chapters in Part II of this text will provide a simplified explanation of the most
common used of these techniques. The intention is to present a basic foundation
of understanding with regard to the fundamental analytic methods associated with
the system safety engineering discipline. It is important to note once again that it is
not the purpose of this limited volume to provide a single-source technical reference
on the complete scope of the system safety discipline. This approach, although
feasible, is not practical or advisable when attempting to discuss only the basics
of system safety development and its potential use in general industry. There are
numerous scientific and engineering reference volumes available on this subject and
further research is recommended for those that desire more complete and detailed
instruction on the use of system safety techniques. In addition, many universities,
training institutions, professional and trade organizations, and independent private
consultants offer continuing educational courses on the subject of system safety
engineering/analysis.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2
System Safety Concepts
FUNDAMENTALS
Since its initial development a half-century ago, the system safety discipline has expe-
rienced a dramatic evolution of change and growth. Some analysts have compared
this rapid development to the humorous analogy of a man that walked into a doctor’s
office with a frog growing from his forehead. When the doctor asked: “How did it
happen?” The frog replied: “It started as a pimple on my rear end!” (Olson, undated).
Although, as defined in Chapter 1, system safety has emerged as a subdiscipline
within systems engineering, it has quickly become an essential element of the safety
planning process in many industries including nuclear, aerospace/aviation, refining,
healthcare, and so on. In order to properly understand system safety as utilized in
this text, a fundamental understanding of some basic safety concepts, principles, and
terms must first be examined. The following definitions, from the Glossary of Terms,
are therefore provided here for discussion purposes:
System: A combination of people, procedures, facility, and/or equipment all func-
tioning within a given or specified working environment to accomplish a spe-
cific task or set of tasks (Stephenson 1991).
Safety: A measure of the degree of freedom from risk or conditions that can cause
death, physical harm, or equipment/property damage (Leveson 1986). Note:
assumption of risk is an essential ingredient of system safety philosophy.
System Safety Precedence: An ordered listing of preferred methods of eliminating
or controlling hazards (MIL-STD-882).
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
15
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
16
SYSTEM SAFETY CONCEPTS
Hazard: A condition or situation which exists within the working environment
capable of causing harm, injury, and/or damage.
Hazard Severity: A categorical description of hazard level based upon real or
perceived potential for causing harm, injury, and/or damage.
Hazard Probability: The likelihood that a condition or set of conditions will exist
in a given situation or operating environment.
Mishap: An occurrence which results in injury, damage, or both.
Near-miss: An occurrence which could have resulted in injury, damage, or both,
but did not.
Risk: The likelihood or possibility of hazard consequences in terms of severity
and probability (Stephenson 1991).
THE SYSTEM SAFETY PROCESS
The process of system safety revolves around a desire to ensure that jobs or tasks
are performed in the safest manner possible, free from unacceptable risk of harm or
damage. The primary concern of system safety is the management of hazards: their
identification, evaluation, elimination, and control through analysis, design, and man-
agement procedures (Leveson 2005). This forward-looking process occurs within a
working environment where people, operating procedures, equipment/hardware, and
facilities are all integral factors which may or may not affect the safe and successful
completion of the job or task. Each of these elements themselves might also impose
some degree of risk or hazard to people or equipment during the performance of a
task. People, for example, can be hazardous to themselves or others in an industrial or
technological working environment. Inattention, lack of proper or adequate training,
horseplay, fatigue, stress as well as substance abuse, personal problems (marriage,
financial, etc.) are all “human” factors that interfere with optimum or desirable human
work performance. Likewise, certain equipment or tools can present hazards, even
if operating as intended (pressure systems, nuclear reactors, powder-actuated hand
tools, etc.). Also, inadequately written or faulty operating instructions and procedures
can cause hazards to operational or task flow. Therefore, the system safety process
must take each of these factors into consideration to properly address the variety of
potential hazards that might be associated with a specific task or job. Figure 2.1 is a
graphic representation of the system safety process which incorporates the concept
of people, procedures, facility, and/or equipment that must operate within a specific
work environment to accomplish a task or set of tasks (Stephenson 1991; Roland
and Moriarty 1983). For example, consider a forklift operator involved in relocating
several drums of a highly volatile, flammable solvent from one location of a plant
to another. What potential or degree of risk exists for a failure or accident in a sim-
ple operation such as this? In answering this question, one should think about the
operator, his/her training, and level of experience. The forklift and other associated
equipment (drum handling attachment, securing devices, etc.) must also be evaluated
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
THE SYSTEM SAFETY PROCESS
17
WORKING ENVIRONMENT
EQUIPMENT
EQUIPMENT
PLANT
PLANT
HARDWARE
HARDWARE
FACILITIES
FACILITIES
JOB/TASKS
HARDWARE
HARDWARE
FACILITIES
FACILITIES
HUMAN
HUMAN
RESOURCES
RESOURCES
PROCEDURES
PROCEDURES
PERSONNEL
PERSONNEL
DOCUMENTS
DOCUMENTS
WORKING ENVIRONMENT
Figure 2.1
The elements of the system safety process (Source: Stephenson 1991).
as potential sources of operational failure. The facility in which the drums are located
should be designed to store such commodities. Fire suppression equipment must
be evaluated for adequacy. Normal operating procedures as well as emergency/spill
control requirements should be examined for proper considerations/controls. This
analysis of hazard or risk potential can become quite detailed. However, for the pur-
pose of this illustration, the point of risk analysis of system or process operations
should be obvious. As one can see by this simple example, there is a great deal of
hazard potential associated with the above described task. It is the function of system
safety to pursue such an evaluation to the greatest extent possible, with respect to the
complexity of the task, system, operation, or procedure.
The system safety discipline will require the timely identification and subsequent
evaluation of the hazards associated with this operation, before losses occur. The
hazards must then be either eliminated or controlled to an acceptable level of risk
in order to accomplish the goal of relocating the hazardous chemicals. In short, the
system safety process will identify any corrective actions which must be implemented
before the task is permitted to proceed. The fly-fix-fly approach discussed earlier
has also been described as an “after-the-fact” attempt to improve operational safety
performance. In contrast, the system safety concept requires “before-the-fact” control
of system hazards.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
18
SYSTEM SAFETY CONCEPTS
SYSTEM SAFETY CRITERIA
Hazard Severity
MIL-STD-882 establishes system safety criteria guidelines to assist in the determi-
nation of hazard severity. The hazard severity categories listed in Table 2.1 provide
a qualitative indication of the relative severity of the possible consequences of the
hazardous condition(s). Although this system was initially established for use with
DOD system safety efforts, it is generally applicable to a wide variety of industries
that currently employ the system safety discipline. The utilization of the hazard sever-
ity categorization technique is extremely useful in attempting to qualify the relative
importance of system safety engineering as it applies to a given system condition or
failure. For example, the criticality of addressing a Category I, catastrophic hazard,
is much more important than a negligible, Category IV hazard.
Hazard Probability
The hazard probability levels listed in Table 2.2 (MIL-STD-882) represent a quali-
tative judgment on the relative likelihood of occurrence of a mishap caused by the
uncorrected or uncontrolled hazard. Here again, based upon a high probability that a
situation will occur, a judgment can be made as to the importance of addressing one
specific concern over another.
Therefore, when using the severity and probability techniques simultaneously,
hazards can be examined, qualified, addressed, and resolved based upon the hazardous
severity of a potential outcome and the likelihood that such an outcome will occur.
For example, while an aircraft collision in midair would unarguably be classified as a
Category I mishap (catastrophic), the hazard probability would fall into the Level D
(remote) classification based upon statistical history of midair collision occurrence.
The system safety effort in this case would require specific, but relatively minimal
TABLE 2.1
Hazard Severity Categories
Description
Category
Mishap identification
Catastrophic
I
Death or system loss
Critical
II
Severe injury, occupational illness, or system damage
Marginal
III
Minor injury, occupational illness, or system damage
Negligible
IV
Less than minor injury, occupational illness, or system damage
Source: MIL-STD-882.
TABLE 2.2
Hazard Probability Levels
Description
Level
Mishap identification
Frequent
A
Likely to occur frequently
Probable
B
Will occur several times during the life of an item
Occasional
C
Likely to occur sometime during the life of an item
Remote
D
Unlikely, but may possibly occur in the life of an item
Improbable
E
So unlikely, it can be assumed that the hazard will not occur
Source: MIL-STD-882.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SYSTEM SAFETY CRITERIA
19
controls to prevent such an occurrence. Conversely, a minor collision between two
automobiles in a congested parking lot might be classified as a Category IV mishap
(negligible) with a hazard probability of Level A (frequent) or Level B (probable).
The effort here would focus on implementing low-cost, effective controls because
of the high probability of occurrence. Signs indicating right-of-way, wide parking
spaces, low speed limits, the placement of speed bumps, and so on, are some examples
of such controls. Hence, it is fairly obvious that if evaluation of a potential for mishap
reveals a Category I occurrence (catastrophic) with a Level A probability (frequent),
the system safety effort would undoubtedly require elimination of the hazard through
design or, at the very least, provide for implementation of redundant hazard controls
prior to system or project activation.
Very simply stated: An extreme or severe hazard risk may be tolerable if it can
be demonstrated that its occurrence is highly improbable; whereas a probable hazard
may be tolerable if it can be demonstrated that the result of occurrence would be
extremely mild. This intuitive reasoning leads to the assumption that the probability
of a hazard risk is inversely proportional to its severity.
System safety hazard analysis, as discussed in this text, is concerned primarily with
the identification and control of hazard probability and severity of a given project,
system, or program. In fact, analysis and evaluation of system hazards are the very
basis of the system safety effort. Proper analysis performed during the total life of
a project will provide the essential foundation upon which the entire safety program
should be based. Chapter 4 will demonstrate that adequate identification and control
of hazards in the early stages of a product’s life cycle will dictate the nature and
extent of such standard industrial tasks as personnel training, preventative mainte-
nance, procedure development, purchasing requirements, engineering approaches,
and product design criteria. It must also be emphasized that, in general terms, system
safety must examine all levels of operating hazard associated with a given system
including the results of any potential failures. However, since some risk of hazard or
accident exists even when certain systems or tasks operate as intended and designed
(pressure systems, foundry operations, oil refinement, etc.), the total hazard level
must be evaluated, and not just that associated with system or subsystem failures.
Having established this concept of total hazard evaluation, the reader should now
understand that the system safety effort would not be complete if all elements of
operational integrity are not evaluated.
The Hazard Risk Matrix
Table 2.3 shows the Hazard Risk Matrix which incorporates the elements of the
Hazard Severity table and the Hazard Probability table to provide an effective tool for
approximating acceptable and unacceptable levels or degrees of risk. By establish-
ing an alphanumeric weighting system for risk occurrence in each severity category
and level of probability, one can further classify and assess risk by degree of accep-
tance. Obviously, from a systems standpoint, use of such a matrix facilitates the risk
assessment process. It should be noted that Table 2.3 provides only an example of
a Hazard Risk Matrix for illustrative purposes and for demonstrating the approach
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
20
SYSTEM SAFETY CONCEPTS
TABLE 2.3
Example of a Hazard Risk Assessment Matrix—Values Can Be Assigned Based
Upon Organization Preferences
to risk assessment as used in this text. The Matrix can be adjusted and modified
to meet the objectives of any given enterprise or operational parameters. Table 2.3
provides four categories of severity and five categories of probability and, therefore,
it is often referred to as a “4 × 5 Risk Matrix.” However, some organizations will
sometimes add a fifth severity value such as “insignificant” or “slight” or “no loss.”
In such cases, it would be referred to as a “5 × 5 Risk Matrix.” The point is, the
exact parameters and/or categories assigned are not written in stone and as long as
the categories used are well-defined and understood by the users, the Matrix is an
extremely useful tool in the evaluation of risk. Table 2.3 also shows an example of
how a shaded code can be used to further highlight the categories of risk; in this
example, a dark gray, medium gray, light gray, and white shade scheme has been
applied. Again, organizations should customize their Matrix to meet the objectives
of their specific risk assessment approach.
System Safety Precedence
The order of precedence for satisfying system safety requirements and resolving
identified hazards is not unlike that which applies to general industrial safety consid-
erations. There are five basic steps, as follows (MIL-STD-882):
1. Design for minimum risk
2. Incorporate safety devices
Risk Assessment 
Matrix
HAZARD SEVERITY CATEGORIES 
FREQUENCY OF 
OCCURRENCE
(PROBABILITY)
I
Catastrophic
II
Critical
III
Marginal
IV
Negligible
(A) Frequent
1A
2A
3A
4A
(B) Probable
1B
2B
3B
4B
(C) Occasional
1C
2C
3C
4C
(D) Remote
1D
2D
3D
4D
(E) Improbable
1E
2E
3E
4E
HAZARD RISK INDEX
Risk Classification
Risk Criteria
1A, 1B, 1C, 2A, 2B, 3A
Unacceptable, changes must be made
1D, 2C, 2D, 3B, 3C
Undesirable, make changes if possible
1E, 2E, 3D, 4A, 4B
Acceptable with management review
3E, 4C, 4D, 4E
Acceptable without review
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SYSTEM SAFETY CRITERIA
21
3. Provide warning devices
4. Develop procedures and training
5. Acceptance of residual/remaining risk
1. Design for Minimum Risk: The system safety order of precedence dictates
that, from the first stages of product or system design, it should be designed for
the elimination of hazards, if possible. Unfortunately, in the real world, this is
not always practical or feasible. If an identified hazard cannot be eliminated,
then the risk associated with it should be reduced to an acceptable level of
hazard probability through design selection.
To clearly understand the relative importance of this element in the system
safety order of precedence, consider the following example.
An entrepreneur wishes to establish a small manufacturing facility that will
be involved in the production of school desks. Part of the finishing process
will require several coats of lacquer to be applied to each desk surface. An
enamel-based paint will also be used on the under-structure of each desk.
The facility will have only one small open-faced paint booth. Ventilation
will be provided and the operator will be supplied with respiratory protection in
the form of disposable respirators. However, during the design phase, a system
safety evaluation of the painting process required the identification of hazards
associated with all aspects of this task, including materials/chemicals planned
to be used. The analysis of the operation reveals that the designated lacquer to
be used contains an isocyanate derivative, which is extremely hazardous and
will require an expensive supplied-air respiratory protection system. Because a
system safety analysis of this operation was performed during the system design
phase of this project, the management of this enterprise can choose to design
the hazard out of the system by selecting a less hazardous but equally accept-
able paint product. If the owner wished to eliminate the potential exposure all
together, an automated paint application system could be evaluated with regard
to risk-reduction benefits versus cost. The obvious point here is to demonstrate
that utilization of the system safety order of precedence allows management
more choices in the management of risk associated with their operations.
2. Incorporate Safety Devices: If identified hazards cannot be effectively elimi-
nated or their associated risk adequately reduced to acceptable levels through
system design, that risk should be reduced through the use of engineering
controls and safety devices. These may include fixed, automatic, or other pro-
tective safety design and hazard limitation/control features or devices. Also,
when applicable, provisions should be made for periodic functional checks and
maintenance of any safety devices.
In the above example, the management of this manufacturing plant has deter-
mined that many other comparable paints/lacquers available on the market also
contain isocyanates or other equally hazardous commodities. The installation
of automated technologies will be too cost prohibitive to operate a competitive
enterprise. Therefore, the system safety order of precedence dictates that suit-
able safety devices should be installed to control the hazard risk posed by the
toxic lacquer. This would mean that the management team must decide whether
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
22
SYSTEM SAFETY CONCEPTS
to install a permanent supplied-air system or provide a portable, self-contained
breathing apparatus to be worn by the operator only when using the hazardous
paints. Physical barriers can be installed to preclude entry into the area by
other plant personnel during the painting operation. Again, proper considera-
tion of the system safety analysis process provides management a choice of
hazard-control/risk-reduction techniques.
3. Provide Warning Devices: When neither design nor safety devices/
engineering controls can effectively eliminate identified hazards or adequately
reduce the associated risk, devices should be employed to detect the condition
and produce an adequate warning signal to alert personnel of the hazard. Warn-
ing signals and their application should be designed to minimize the probabil-
ity of personnel reacting incorrectly to the signals and should be standardized
within similar types of systems to avoid further confusion.
Continuing with the above example, it has been determined that the design
of the paint booth could not be changed adequately enough to eliminate or
control the risk potential imposed by the hazardous chemical to an acceptable
level. Also, requiring a paint booth operator to wear a new type of breath-
ing apparatus carries some additional risk of noncompliance by the operator,
especially when the system is new and unfamiliar. There are other company
personnel in the facility not assigned to the paint operation but who are required
to work in the same general vicinity within the facility. They too could pos-
sibly be exposed to some levels of toxic isocyanate vapors. In this instance,
the order of precedence dictates that warning devices be installed as a further
or added precaution for hazard/risk control. Such devices include, but are not
limited to, warning signs posted in the operating area to remind of the hazards
and/or the required use of personal protective equipment, a warning light or
beacon which will be activated whenever the painting operation is in progress
to preclude the possibility of other company personnel entering the area, or a
public address announcement made throughout the facility to let people know
when the hazardous operation starts and stops.
4. Develop Procedures and Training: Where it is impractical to eliminate haz-
ards through design selection or adequately reduce the associated risk with
safety warning devices, administrative controls, such as procedures and train-
ing, should be used to advise personnel how to safely operate the hazardous
system. For example, procedures may include the use of personal protective
equipment as a means of protecting personnel from a hazardous condition.
Also, certain hazardous tasks and activities may be deemed critical and might
require personnel to be certified as proficient. It should be noted that, without
special consideration, no warning, caution, or other form of written advisory
should be used as the only method of risk reduction for Category I or Category
II hazards.
Once again, our example, to ensure the paint booth operator is aware of the
changes made to the system ( new form of respiratory protection, additional
warning signs, concern for other employees during paint spraying applications,
familiarity with the exact hazardous nature of the toxic paint, etc.), specific
operating instructions and training procedures must be developed. By ensuring
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SYSTEM SAFETY CRITERIA
23
adherence to an approved, written operating procedure through proper training,
the potential for operator error can be further reduced to acceptable levels. The
possibility of exposure to other personnel not associated with this task is also
reduced through awareness training and procedural controls.
Through proper and detailed consideration of the system safety order of
precedence, the potential risk of the paint operation will be reduced to its
lowest perceivable level and the risk acceptance, the next and last step, will be
much easier to justify.
5. Risk Acceptance: Realistically, even when operating in compliance with the
minimum standards established by applicable safety and health regulations,
there may still be some level of residual risk which must inevitably be accepted.
How much risk is accepted or not accepted is a management decision. The out-
come of that decision will be affected by numerous inputs and considerations,
not the least of which is cost.
The process for reducing risk created by a hazard is illustrated in Figure 2.2.
It reflects an obvious interaction of both engineering and management consid-
erations to bring about an optimal resolution of risk. The final acceptance or
rejection of residual risk becomes a decision of the managing activity.
INCORPORATE 
SAFETY
DEVICES
PROVIDE
WARNING
DEVICES
SUCCESS?
DESIGN
FOR MINIMUM 
RISK
NO
SUCCESS?
NO
RISK
ACCEPTANCE
SUCCESS?
NO
TERMINATE 
SYSTEM OR 
PROCESS
SUCCESS?
NO
PROVIDE RISK 
ASSESSMENT PACKAGE 
FOR MANAGEMENT REVIEW
CONCLUDE HAZARD 
ANALYSIS
YES
YES
YES
YES
Figure 2.2
Hazard reduction order of precedence process flow.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
24
SYSTEM SAFETY CONCEPTS
COST AND RISK ACCEPTANCE
Of primary concern to management is, and will always be, the issue of cost. As an
example, Figure 2.3 is a graphical illustration model of an expected loss index based
upon cost of system loss versus the probability of that loss (Olson, undated). An
arbitrary limit is set on acceptable mishap cost with an index of five (in actuality, any
index could be used, it would just alter the slope of the line accordingly). It should
be emphasized that the example in Figure 2.3 is only concerned with system loss.
Personnel loss is not an issue in this example. If it were, the importance of system loss
as it relates to cost would, of course, be overruled by the importance of the preservation
of human life. In this hypothetical illustration, a system designed such that the
probability that a mishap can occur with one chance in a thousand (10−3) would be
acceptable if the loss were $5000 or less. Similarly, if a loss of five million dollars were
projected, a probability of occurrence of once chance in one million (10−6) would be
acceptable risk. Using this concept as a baseline, quantitative and qualitative design
limits can be adequately defined. However, as risk/cost trade-offs are being considered
through the design phase of a project, it sometimes becomes evident that certain safety
parameters force higher program risk. From the management perspective, a relaxation
of one or more design parameters may appear, on the surface, to be advantageous
when considering the broader issue of cost and performance optimization. A facility or
operation’s manager will frequently make such decisions against the recommendation
of the System Safety Staff. The System Safety Manager must recognize the right of
the upper echelon to exercise management prerogatives when costs are involved.
However, the prudent facility manager will also realize that a decision to alter design
$5000
$5 million
10–3
10–6
Probability of loss
Cost of accident
Figure 2.3
Expected loss index.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
COST AND RISK ACCEPTANCE
25
parameters rather than fix a safety concern must be documented properly. When
a management decision is made to accept a level of risk, the decision should be
coordinated with all affected organizational elements and then documented so that
in future years, everyone will know and understand the elements of the decision
and why it was made. When personnel loss must be considered, this documentation
becomes especially critical. It will be extremely difficult to justify or even explain that
the cause of some future loss of human life or limb was due to a previous decision
to accept the risk based purely upon monetary cost savings. Such actions are the
foundation of successful personal injury and wrongful death litigation.
Another aspect of cost as it relates to risk acceptance is the subsequent costs asso-
ciated with either controlling or eliminating the risk. Some hazards are considered
unacceptable, even if they pose relatively low risk, because they are somewhat easier
to control/fix. For example, even though the risk of being struck by lightning, which
has been calculated in the area of one in 14 million, can be considered relatively low,
people seldom remain outdoors during a lighting storm. The risk here, although neg-
ligible, is worth eliminating based upon the cost of ignoring the possibility altogether
(death or serious physical injury). The cost to control or eliminate this risk potential
may also be minor in most cases (i.e., one could simply remain indoors). However,
if a major construction operation is to remain on a tight schedule, costs of reducing
personnel exposure to lighting strikes are viewed from a different perspective. In
fact, many construction site managers often find themselves weighing the low risk
potential of a possible lightning strike against the serious impact potential of a slipped
schedule and/or cost overruns.
Conversely, there are other hazards that are considered acceptable, even though
they may pose high-risk potential, but they are relatively difficult to fix. An example
here would be space shuttle launch operations. From a purely system operation point
of view, the level of risk associated with launching/landing a space shuttle is several
orders of magnitude greater than operating an airline flight, and the risks involved
in an airline flight are several orders of magnitude greater than the risk of piloting
a small single-engine aircraft. Hence, cost is not only a major consideration of risk
acceptance, but it also plays an important role in the evaluation process associated
with risk identification and control (Olson, undated).
Because of the relative ease in obtaining data, some analysts may be tempted to
assess risk in terms of the average cost of past accidents. However, this method often
results in a gross underestimation of system risk. Accident patterns are random events
and the average cost is usually larger than the most frequently occurring cost. This is
because the very large or catastrophic accident may (and frequently does) constitute a
significant portion of the total risk, even though no such accident may have occurred
in recent history (DOE SSDC-11 1982).
Quantitative Risk Assessment
In any discussion of risk management and risk assessment, the question of quantified
acceptability parameters must be considered. Richard E. Olson (undated) provides
the following discussion pertaining to quantitative risk assessment.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
26
SYSTEM SAFETY CONCEPTS
In any high-risk system, there is a strong temptation to rely totally on statistical
probabilities because numbers seem an easy way to measure the safety and likelihood
of failure/loss. However, the limitations and basic principles of such an approach,
as well as past engineering experience, should be well understood before attempting
any such measurement. Quantitative acceptability parameters must be well defined,
predictable, demonstrable, and, most important, useful. They must be useful in the
sense that they can be easily converted into design criteria. Many factors considered
fundamental to system safety are not, in actuality, quantifiable. Design deficiencies
are not easily examined from a statistical standpoint. Additionally, it is entirely
possible for system safety analysts and managers to become so enamored with the
statistics that simpler and more meaningful methods to address a concern might
be overlooked. Caution here cannot be overemphasized. Arbitrarily assigning a
quantitative measure for a system creates a strong potential for the model to mask
a very serious risk. Having established this understanding, it should be reiterated
at this point that Figure 2.3 is only an example of how such models can be used to
determine loss expectations based upon cost of system loss versus the probability of
that loss. It is general in nature and care should be taken when attempting to apply
this exact model to more specific systems.
In the design of many high-risk systems such as nuclear power facilities or weapon
systems, there is often a strong tendency to rely solely upon statistical analysis for haz-
ard evaluations. Management finds such an approach somewhat easier to accept since
it provides a convenient (if not entirely realistic) medium to express safety in terms
to which they can relate. However, the unwary can be easily trapped in their failure
to establish reasonable limits on the acceptability of a probability of risk occurrence.
For example, Richard Olson: One such “high-risk” program considered a calcu-
lated probability of risk occurrence of 10−42 to be an unacceptable level. To illustrate
the impracticality of this decision, this level of risk will be considered in terms that
all can relate to—money. If it can be assumed that a single dollar bill is three thou-
sandths of an inch thick, the probability of selecting that same bill from a stack of
dollar bills three inches high (or 1000 dollars), is 1 × 10−3 (or 1 chance in 1000).
One million dollar bills create a stack 250 feet tall. The chance of selecting that same
single dollar bill from this stack is now 1 × 10−6 (or one chance in a million). When
the chance goes to one in a billion, or 1 × 10−9, the stack of dollar bills is now over
47 miles high. One chance in a trillion (1 × 10−12) creates a stack 47,000 miles high!
If probability in this example is spoken in terms of 1 × 10−42, the stack of dollar
bills probably would not fit within the confines of the galaxy. The probability of
an undesired event expressing 1 × 10−42 approaches one occurrence in many times
the life of the universe. The point is that realistic, reachable safety goals must be
established so that management can make intelligent, rational decisions based upon
understandable data. In this particular instance, the safety analysis dwelled upon the
probability of the impossible and allowed a single human error, with the probability
of occurrence in the range of 1 × 10−3, to cause a near disaster, mainly because it
was not a quantifiable element. It is doubtful whether the decision makers were fully
aware of the mishap risks they were accepting. Instead, they were overwhelmed by a
large, impressive-looking number (Olson, undated).
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
MANAGEMENT COMMITMENT
27
Principles of Risk Management
According to Olson, there are 12 generally accepted principles of risk management. A
related discussion of these principles can also be found in the Department of Energy’s
Risk Management Guide (SSDC-11 1982).
a. All human activity involving a technical device or process entails some element
of risk.
b. Every discovered hazard does not require panic; there are ways of controlling
them.
c. Problems should be kept in the proper perspective.
d. Risk should be weighed and judgments made according to knowledge, experi-
ence, and company need.
e. Other company disciplines or organizational elements should be encouraged to
adopt the same philosophy.
f. System operations represent some degree of risk; good analyses will identify
the need to reduce the odds of occurrence.
g. System safety analysis and risk assessment do not eliminate reliance on sound
engineering judgment.
h. It is more important to establish clear objectives and parameters for risk assess-
ment than to find a standardized “cookbook” approach to problem solving.
i. There is no “best solution” to a safety problem or concern. There are a variety
of directions in which to proceed, each of which may produce some degree of
risk reduction.
j. Advising a designer on methods of achieving a specified safety goal is much
more effective than indicating a suggested design will not work.
k. Total safety is a condition which seldom can be achieved in a totally practical
manner.
l. There are no “safety problems” in system planning or design. There are only
engineering or management problems which, if left unresolved, can cause
mishaps.
MANAGEMENT COMMITMENT
System safety success cannot be achieved without firm management commitment,
regardless of the nature of the business or industry. There must be a mutual confidence
between company managing directors and system safety managers. Upper-level man-
agers must have confidence that safety decisions are made with professional compe-
tence. System safety managers must know that their actions will receive full manage-
ment support. Personnel must have well-defined assignments for the system safety
tasks, and the authority and management flexibility to perform their assignments.
Additionally, there must exist a control and coordination which will establish, in
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
28
SYSTEM SAFETY CONCEPTS
advance, what is considered an acceptable level or risk; who has resolution authority;
what organizational elements should be involved; what output is required/expected;
and what will be done with that output (Olson, undated).
Perhaps of primary importance in the management equation is that decision makers
must be fully aware of the risk(s) they are taking in making their decisions. The system
safety effort is designed to facilitate this requirement. Decision makers must then plan
and manage their risk. For effective risk management, Olson suggests that responsible
managers should:
a. Demand that competent, responsible, qualified engineers are assigned within
the organization, as well as in any contractor organizations, to manage the
System Safety Program;
b. Ensure system safety managers are properly placed within the organizational
structure so that they have the authority and organization flexibility to perform
effectively;
c. Ensure that acceptable and unacceptable risks are defined specifically and
documented, as a company operating policy, so that decision makers are made
aware of the risks being assumed when the system operates;
d. Require an assessment of mishap risk be presented as part of any program
evaluation/review and as a part of all decision-making milestones.
Without the above assurances in place, as a minimum commitment from organi-
zational management, the system safety effort will not succeed. It can be said that
the very reason system safety is utilized is to facilitate the decision-making process
regarding risk or potential risk of failure. Therefore, management must not only pro-
vide the necessary resources and company-wide commitment needed to accomplish
the system safety objectives, it must also stand ready to accept the results of the
system safety process and ensure that appropriate, responsible decisions are made
based upon all available information.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
3
System Safety Program
Requirements
THE SAFETY CHARTER
In any organization concerned about the safety of personnel, systems, products, or
services, there is one fundamental principle that must be clearly established and
understood for the safety effort to succeed: The Safety Charter. This necessary Char-
ter has been presented in a variety of ways over the years by numerous experts and
professional consultants. However, the fundamental philosophy behind the Safety
Charter has remained constant and is presented and discussed here. In a typical Line
and Staff organization, the task of safety is most always a Staff function. This means
that, while professional safety personnel are responsible for providing recommenda-
tions and advise to assist Line managers in their efforts to comply with applicable
rules and regulations, it is still the Line managers and supervisors that have the author-
ity and responsibility to implement the recommendations of Staff organizations such
as safety. Having established this principle concept, the task of safety should be
approached with the following basic understanding of the Safety Charter:
It is essential that the Safety Function be implemented as a Line responsibility. The
Safety Organizational element within the company is a Staff function which provides
advice and assistance to the Line in their efforts to comply with all established safety
requirements in daily operations of the organization. Safety, as a task, must clearly be
the function of the Line, or Safety will not succeed.
This Safety Charter allows for safety to be a productive and functioning element of
an organization’s daily operations. It demonstrates that effective safety management,
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
29
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
30
SYSTEM SAFETY PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS
including the system safety effort, requires not only full commitment from all levels
of management, but also full management participation. Only after establishing the
Safety Charter as a basic ground rule for operations can an effective system safety
program be implemented.
The Safety Charter is based upon a fundamental concept which stipulates that Line
management (especially first-line supervisors, but includes management from the top
of the organization on down) are absolutely responsible for all operations which
occur within their assigned area(s). There are very few Line managers/supervisors
that would argue this position or have it any other way. It is therefore logical to add that
this responsibility must include the safety of those operations. This is an extremely
important concept which must be understood and accepted through all levels of the
organization. Hence, the system safety effort requires managing directors, project
engineers, design engineers, and so on, to ensure safety objectives are fulfilled as a
givensystem, product, or project is conceived, designed, developed, andimplemented.
System safety cannot succeed if it is approached without such assurances.
SELLING SAFETY TO MANAGEMENT
It should also be noted here that in practice, the Safety Charter, as fundamental as
it may be, is often a difficult concept for some organizational elements to accept.
More often than not, the occupational safety function of an organization must also
engage in exotic marketing strategies within their own company to literally sell
the safety program to upper management. Unfortunately, this may also be the case
when system safety programs are proposed for implementation. With system safety,
however, there is a slight advantage. If approached properly, implementation of a
system safety program can be shown as a cost savings strategy in the long term. The
very concept behind system safety is to identify hazards within a system or process
prior to a mishap, incident, or system failure and provide recommended solutions,
corrections, or controls to preclude any such problems. Since incidents, mishaps,
accidents, and/or system failure all equate to lost revenues and subsequent reduction
in profits; there should be relatively little difficulty in gaining management acceptance
of a properly proposed system safety effort.
In contrast, occupational safety and health programs can be more difficult to
implement, especially when upper management has not established such programs
as a required operating objective. For example, Wellness Programs, Safety Incentive
Programs, Accident Prevention Strategies, Off-the-Job Safety Promotions are all
basic to the occupational safety and health effort. While these programs have proven
to be quite effective in gaining employee acceptance and boosting morale, it is often
difficult to prove to company comptrollers, as well as a skeptical management, that
the absence of such programs would have made any real difference in the overall
safety performance of the operation. After all, how does one demonstrate how many
accidents or lost-time injuries the company would have experienced without any of
the often costly safety program elements discussed above? This question, of course,
cannot be answered with any degree of certainty and is therefore only posed in an
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
THE SYSTEM SAFETY EFFORT
31
attempt to demonstrate the value of a system safety program. The point is system
safety can be sold to upper management if properly proposed. In fact, it is suggested
here that gaining management acceptance for system safety might possibly be less
difficult than obtaining approvals for some of the most basic elements of a well-
rounded occupational safety and heath program.
THE SYSTEM SAFETY EFFORT
As previously discussed, an important aspect of a successful system safety program is
to ensure maximum reduction of the risk associated with a given system, product, or
process produced within a given enterprise. However, an equally important element
of consideration is to require exactly the same assurances from subcontracting orga-
nizations that provide any systems, products, or processes to a contracting company.
As discussed in the previous chapter, system safety has its roots in the military and
other government agencies responsible for its development over the past six decades.
Therefore, to further understand this “federal connection” and how system safety
actually becomes a required element of government contract acquisitions, the fol-
lowing discussion will focus on the system safety process as it relates to government
contracts. Once understanding of this process has been firmly established, the reader
should be able to adapt usable elements of this contracting process when attempting
to implement a system safety requirement for subcontracting organizations as well
as their own company.
Historically, the requirement for a system safety program has usually been the
result of some sort of government acquisition. As presented in Figure 3.1, a gov-
ernment agency that desires a new system, product, program, or service usually
establishes system safety requirements and standards at the onset of the acquisition
process (i.e., the pre-bid phase). Requirements for a system safety program will be
outlined in a Request for Proposal (RFP). In the RFP, the government establishes
specific performance criteria which are commonly referred to as a Statement of
Work (SOW). The potential contractors then “bid” their effort in accordance with
the requirements established in the specified SOWs. Most always, the contract will
require the bidders to implement a System Safety Program and provide a System
Safety Program Plan (SSPP) which defines the methods by which the contractor
intends to perform the system safety effort.
Routinely, the government will require the SSPP to contain, at the very least, the
items specified in MIL-STD-882. The SSPP will typically include explanations of
the contractor’s intended system safety program effort. The SSPP will usually pro-
vide detailed information about the system safety personnel and their qualifications,
which must meet the minimum requirements of the RFP specifications. Information
pertaining to intended Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and other types of
operating instructions are also described. The SSPP should provide data regarding
required products and services which will be developed during the contract period.
The contract will also require specific products to be delivered to the customer
at specified time periods or intervals. These items are usually found on the Contract
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
32
SYSTEM SAFETY PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS
Selected contractor
implements SSPP as
defined in contract and
provides CDRLs, as
required
STEP 1
STEP 2
STEP 3
STEP 4
PROCESS INITIATED
CONTRACTOR RESPONDS
CONTRACT AWARD
CONTRACT IMPLEMENTED
Government agency
issues RFP for
program, project,
service, or product
Contractor provides
bid to government
agency which includes
system safety program
requirements
Government agency
receives/reviews bids
and selects contractor
to perform work
Figure 3.1
Typical system safety program process flow.
Deliverable Requirements List and are referred to as “CDRL” (pronounced SEE-
DRULL) Items. Quite typically, the customer will require certain System Safety
CDRL Items throughout the life of the contract. In fact, the SSPP itself is usually one
of the first CDRL requirements. In some instances, depending upon the nature of the
proposed contract, the SSPP might be submitted along with the contractor’s response
to the RFP. This will give the customer an opportunity to review the contractor’s
intended system safety program from the onset. In addition to the SSPP, system
safety CDRLs may include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following items:
r Closed-loop hazard tracking system/plan
r Accident risk assessment
r Mishap/accident/incident reporting
r Facility inspection reports
r System safety analyses
Closed-Loop Hazard Tracking System
The government agency/customer will require that the contractor implement a system
for identifying, tracking, and closing hazards associated with contractual operations.
These previously unforeseen or unknown hazardous conditions may develop as the
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
THE SYSTEM SAFETY EFFORT
33
result of the operation of a specific facility, equipment, hardware, or a combination of
these. As indicated in Chapter 2 (Figure 2.1), all of the elements in the working envi-
ronment, including people, must be considered when attempting to identify hazards
to a task, job, or process. Once a hazardous condition has been identified, it should
be documented on some sort of Hazard Report. Figure 3.2 is a sample Hazard Report
form which can be used to document as well as track the corrective action/closure
status of such hazards. Completing the Hazard Report initiates the tracking process.
The Closed-Loop Hazard Tracking System requires the contractor to provide docu-
mented evidence to the customer indicating that each of the identified hazards has
been effectively closed or controlled to an acceptable level of risk so as not to be a
threat to normal operations. The customer is able to provide a response indicating
approval or disapproval of the closure or control actions which “closes the loop” and
ensures complete accountability for the safety of the system. Figure 3.3 shows how
an identified hazard is incorporated into the Closed-Loop system, tracked, controlled
or closed, and reported back to the customer for approval.
Accident Risk Assessment
In addition to the hazardous conditions which develop during daily operations and are
incorporated in the Closed-Loop Hazard Tracking System, the customer may require
the contractor to perform a formal periodic risk assessment of all facilities in which
operations will occur. This is done usually annually, but it can be more frequent if
the customer so desires or if operational activities dictate. The risk assessment will
also take into consideration the hazards associated with the permanent equipment
and hardware assigned for use in the facility. The Accident Risk Assessment then
becomes a detailed safety analysis of a facility, its systems, and functions. It provides
the customer a single source of reference for information regarding a specific area
of operations. Depending upon the depth of the assessment, it can also be a valuable
tool when changes or modifications to a facility are required. A good risk assessment
will provide enough detailed information about the current operating configuration
of a facility or system and will, therefore, facilitate customer review and approval of
any proposed modifications. Of course, after any significant modification or change
to an existing system, the Accident Risk Assessment should be updated accordingly
and submitted again.
In short, the Accident Risk Assessment provides a comprehensive, detailed evalu-
ation of the overall accident risk associated with the operation and maintenance of a
specific facility, its systems, equipment, and hardware. It incorporates the results of
integrated hazard analyses, recommended design changes, hazard reports, and proce-
dural or administrative tools which will eliminate or reduce the risk of these hazards,
operational flow charts, safety-critical procedure lists, and other such information
pertinent to the overall assessment of accident risk.
Mishap/Accident/Incident Reporting
The necessity to report mishaps, accidents, and/or incidents to the contracting agency
should, at face value, be obvious. In fact, the occurrence of such unfortunate activities
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
34
SYSTEM SAFETY PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS
HAZARD REPORT FORM
SYSTEM OR ACTIVITY
REV
NUMBER
CLOSURE STATUS
CLOSED
OPEN
DATE
HAZARD DESCRIPTION
ACTION TAKEN
VERIFICATION
APPROVAL SIGNATURES
PROJECT MANAGER
SYSTEM SAFETY MANAGER
CUSTOMER REPRESENTATIVE
Figure 3.2
Sample hazard report form.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
THE SYSTEM SAFETY EFFORT
35
Hazardous Conditions Identified,
Hazard Report Form Submitted
to Customer for Review
Close the Hazard Report
Maintain File Record
Return to Safe Operations
Implement Corrective Closure
or Control Actions and
Document Status on Hazard
Report Form
Close Hazardous Conditions,
Report and Document Results,
Submit Completed Hazard
Report Form  to Customer for
Final Approval
Customer
Agrees with
Closure?
SAFE
OPERATIONS
NO
YES
Figure 3.3
Typical closed-loop hazard tracking system flow.
may provide new or modified interpretations of previous risk assessments. However,
not so obvious is the method by which a contractor determines which occurrences
are considered “reportable” and which are not. For this reason, and because the
contracting agency usually wishes to avoid inundation of paperwork for every incident
(major and minor), the contract will typically specify conditions or limits which, if
met or exceeded, will require the submittal of a formal report. For example, the
US Air Force will follow reporting criteria as established in Air Force Regulation
127-4, “Investigating and Reporting US Air Force Mishaps.” Among other things,
this document basically requires the contractor to report, “… without delay, any
accident/incident to Government property in excess of $1,000.00, hospitalization of
one or more employees and any fatality …” This information is provided here as
an example of the military criteria used in mishap reporting. In the private sector,
organizations are free to establish their own internal mishap reporting criteria. With
such preestablished guidelines identified, the contractor is better able to determine
which accidents, incidents, mishaps, and so on, require reporting to the contracting
agency. Also, the customer may require submittal of detailed lessons-learned and
corrective action intentions along with the Accident Report. Since one of the primary
objectives of the system safety effort is to eliminate or reduce accident risk potential
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
36
SYSTEM SAFETY PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS
through design and/or control actions, it is absolutely essential for the system safety
function to play an integral part in the accident reporting and lessons learned process.
If the subject accident, incident, mishap, and so on, was the result of previously
unknown or unforeseen hazardous conditions, then a system safety reevaluation is
necessary to preclude the possibility of future, similar events and to ensure optimum
control of system operations.
Facility Inspection Reports
Periodic, scheduled facility safety inspections are essential in any operational area,
especially where hazardous tasks are performed on a regular basis. Compliance with
safety inspection requirements should not be difficult to accomplish since similar
requirements should already exist in an established occupational safety program.
The facility inspection encompasses all facets of daily operations and considers the
human–machine interface a primary candidate area for potential mishaps. Frequent
facility inspections are an excellent method of maintaining current awareness of facil-
ity conditions and how those conditions affect, or might affect, the safe operation
of that facility. A system should be in place to ensure implementation of corrective
actions and to track repetitive items. Results of inspections should be properly docu-
mented and accountability for discrepant items appropriately determined and assigned
for the inspection process to be effective. If properly performed, the facility safety
inspection is an excellent tool in the overall success of the system safety function.
System Safety Analyses
The contract may require a wide range or types of system safety analyses to be
performed for a variety of reasons during the life of the contract. For example, any
time new equipment or hardware is introduced into the work environment, a series
of system safety analyses should be performed. Likewise, when existing equipment
is modified to the extent that critical functions of the equipment may be affected,
a series of analyses should be conducted prior to the first operational use of the
modified equipment. In addition, prudent system safety protocol will dictate that
certain analyses be conducted under certain circumstances. For example, an accident
investigation may utilize fault tree analysis, or the system safety technique known as
MORT (Management Oversight and Risk Tree) to determine the exact cause(s) that
lead to an accident/incident/mishap.
LIFE CYCLE PHASES AND THE SYSTEM SAFETY PROCESS
Any proposed or existing project or product has what is called a life cycle. Within the
project life cycle are sub-elements known as phases. Each distinct phase will, in turn,
indicate certain tasks that are typically performed in the life of that project. These
tasks are required to establish, implement, and maintain a successful system safety
process. Generally, the tasks fall within three broad categories:
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
LIFE CYCLE PHASES AND THE SYSTEM SAFETY PROCESS
37
1. Planning Tasks: Tasks needed to initiate a new program such as the develop-
ment of policy, operating requirements, expected results of the effort, schedules,
and so on, are part of the planning task. These tasks are typically the respon-
sibility of upper management and are usually performed by the system safety
staff or, if established, a system safety planning group. Review and subsequent
approval by company management is also required as part of the planning task.
2. Primary System Safety Tasks: The tasks of identifying, initiating, and con-
trolling hazards are part of the primary system safety task. These efforts are
performed by a variety of contributors including management, safety, engi-
neering (the design element) and, in most cases, the end user of the product.
3. Support Tasks: Such tasks needed to maintain the program include, but are not
limited to, training, documentation, and database generation and are normally
assigned to the safety staff.
Figure 3.4 shows the typical life cycle of a generic project with the various phases
within the life cycle identified, as well as the system safety program elements, as
follows:
Concept Phase
During the concept phase of the life cycle, overall project goals and objectives are
identified and developed. Project descriptions, design requirements, and expected
end results are also formulated. In effect, the concept phase establishes a project road
map to provide direction and purpose to the proposed project. A loosely translated
Chinese proverb provides a very good justification for the elements of the concept
phase: “… if you don’t know where you are going, any road will take you there!” A
properly executed concept phase will not only identify the project destination, but it
will also keep it on the desired track through completion.
Design Phase
The general plans developed during the concept phase are made more specific during
the design phase. Plans, drawings, design specifications and parameters, and so on,
are clearly developed during the design process. Once project design(s) are reviewed
and approved by all participating organizational elements, the project can then move
into the next phase with confidence that the end result will be as expected with very
few, if any, real surprises along the way.
Production Phase
All the conceptual planning and approved design criteria are finally transformed into
the desired product during the production phase. Since actual production is taking
place along with greater expenditures of time and money necessary to produce a
physical product, the production phase is justifiably considered by many system
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
A NEED FOR THE
PROJECT OR PRODUCT
IS GENERATED OR
PERCEIVED
DESIGN
PRODUCTION
OPERATIONS
RECORD AND
DOCUMENT PERFORMANCE,
GENERATE LESSONS
LEARNED
Energy Trace and Barrier Analysis
Preliminary Hazard List
PHASE 1
Subsystem Hazard Analysis
Preliminary Hazard Analysis
PHASE 2
System Hazard Analysis
Operating Hazard Analysis
Failure Modes and Effects Analysis
Fault Tree Analysis
Subsystem Hazard Analysis
Operating Hazard Analysis
PHASE 3
System Hazard Analysis
Change Analysis
Fault Tree Analysis
Accident/Incident Analysis
Job Safety Analysis
PHASE 4
Mgmt Oversight and Risk Tree
Change Analysis
Operating Hazard Analysis
Failure Modes and Effects Analysis
Job Safety Analysis
PHASE 5
Change Analysis
Operating Hazard Analysis
What-If Review
What-If Review
HAZOP Study
What-If Review
HAZOP Study
HAZOP Study
What-If Review
What-If Review
DISPOSAL
CONCEPT
THE FIVE LIFE-CYCLE PHASES
Concept:  Goals and objectives established
1.
Design: General plans developed
2.
Production:  Actual production transforms plans into reality
3.
Operations:  End product is placed into service
4.
Disposal:  No longer obtaining benefit from product
5.
Figure 3.4
Project life cycle phases and the system safety process.
38
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
LIFE CYCLE PHASES AND THE SYSTEM SAFETY PROCESS
39
safety professionals as one of the more critical phases of a project life cycle. For this
reason, a great deal of effort is required by all responsible/participating organizational
elements to ensure project success.
Operations Phase
The end product is put into operation during this phase. Whether the end product is
a facility, a piece of operating equipment, a tool, or a service, the entire effort of the
system safety process will be realized during and throughout the operations phase.
If the end user is an internal organization, the system safety professional has an
opportunity to closely observe product operation and to make subsequent evaluation
of the risks associated with that operation. However, if the end user is an external
agency, there is seldom an opportunity to conduct operational evaluations of risk.
Either way, the proof is in the pudding and the system safety efforts prior to the
operational phase should therefore be as complete as possible.
Disposal Phase
The beneficial use of the end product has reached a point of diminishing return and
is destroyed, discarded, or the operation is discontinued. Depending upon the nature
of the product, this phase may require disposal planning, phase-out deconfiguration,
actual tear-down or disassembly, and so on. Such actions are especially necessary
when dealing with hazardous products or systems such as hazardous waste treatment
equipment/facilities, underground storage tank removals, and nuclear power plant
modifications.
Part II of this text will detail a number of the various common system safety
analytical methods and techniques that are practiced in the system safety discipline.
Each of these methods or techniques are usually conducted at specific points during
the project/product life cycle, as indicated in Figure 3.4. At this point, it is important
to understand that a specific system or program may require the use of any or all of
the system safety analyses techniques available to today’s system safety professional.
Each method has its own distinct purpose and function, and, as tools, each can be
quite useful.
It should be clearly understood that, although system safety programs are usually
the required result of the government acquisition process, the discipline of system
safety and its concepts, tools, techniques, and so on, can and should be utilized
in nongovernment programs and/or contracts. A variety of system safety reference
documents, procedures, operational guides, and handbooks have been developed as
a result of six decades of work by government system safety engineers and profes-
sionals. There is every reason to borrow and transfer this knowledge into the private
sector, and industry is encouraged to do so. The benefits from an implemented com-
prehensive system safety program far outweigh the potential costs associated with
unsafe operations/tasks, equipment, facilities, and hardware. As long as people are
required to perform in a work environment filled with any or all of these elements,
the importance of a system safety program is even more evident.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4
The Industrial Safety
Connection
THE OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ACT
Safety and health professionals who work in industrial settings concentrate primarily
on ensuring compliance with, at the very least, the minimum safety and health
standards promulgated under the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, as
enforced by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). These
rules form the basis of almost all occupational safety and health programs currently
in place throughout both the public and private sectors.
Safety and health regulations for general industry can be found in the US Code of
Federal Regulations (CFR) at 29 CFR 1910 and, for the construction industry, at 29
CFR 1926. These codes address literally thousands of situations, working conditions,
hazard control requirements, and worker safety and health protection standards, all
intended to make the work environment safer. Although numerous areas are addressed
and a minimum level of worker protection is ensured by implementation of these many
standards, it is important to note that the major driving factor for worker safety is
contained not in the CFR but in Section 5 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act
itself. This factor, better known as the General Duty Clause, Section 5(a)(1), simply
states that:
Each employer shall furnish to each of his employees employment and a place of
employment which are free from recognized hazards that are causing or are likely to
cause death or serious physical harm to his employees, and shall comply with occupa-
tional safety and health standards promulgated under this Act.
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
41
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
42
THE INDUSTRIAL SAFETY CONNECTION
It is clear that the intention of the Occupational Safety and Health Act is to
ensure a safe and healthy workplace. In fact, the General Duty Clause has been the
precursor for many of the regulations that have followed since 1970 and continues to
ensure worker safety in the absence of a specific standard for a specific occupational
situation. Less clear, but equally important to worker safety, is that the methods and
techniques associated with the system safety effort are an excellent means of assuring
that the intent of the General Duty Clause is met at the earliest possible time in the
project or program development process.
Historically, the occupational safety and health profession has relied primarily
on achieving “safety” through compliance with established standards and mandated
operating criteria. However, as noted earlier, most standards and regulations reflect
minimum requirements for safe operations and do not place any additional respon-
sibilities upon employers to be safer than what is required by these standards. It is
well known within the occupational safety arena that, in order to ensure continued
safety in a given situation, it is often necessary to exceed the minimum requirements
established by law.
Another primary goal of the industrial safety effort is the reduction or elimination
of occupational accident potential. Here again, implementation of the system safety
process can provide a defined means of accomplishing this objective. Even though
a majority of industrial accidents/incidents have historically been attributed to the
unsafe acts or the unsafe conduct of workers, the importance of unsafe physical con-
ditions and equipment can and should not be minimized in any discussion concerning
accident risk potential. Injuries and/or property damage caused by mechanical haz-
ards generally have a high potential severity, since they often result in a permanent
partial or permanent total disability (loss of motion or use of a body member, ampu-
tations, loss of sight, damage to hearing, etc.) and/or extensive damage or loss to
essential equipment or facilities. Furthermore, many of the so-called unsafe acts that
cause such injuries or damage may not result in an accident if the potential for risk
is properly assessed well in advance and safer physical conditions are implemented
to control the hazards associated with the level of ascertained risk. The concept of
system safety analysis provides an excellent opportunity for the industrial safety
practitioner to achieve the desired goal of an accident-free work environment.
The very concept of system safety, as established in previous chapters of this text,
is to
a. Systematically evaluate and analyze a given project, process, product, facility,
service, and so on, to identify the risk of hazard associated with that system
and
b. Recommend/implement risk elimination or control techniques so that manage-
ment can make intelligent and informed decisions to reduce the risk of hazard
to the lowest possible levels of acceptance.
It has been suggested here that this basic system safety concept is in direct cor-
relation with the stated intentions of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, as
established by the General Duty Clause. In many cases, then, system safety cannot
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
THE HUMAN FACTORS ELEMENT
43
only be the means by which the much desired compliance with OSHA requirements
can be achieved, but actual improvements to an industrial safety process can also be
established.
It is strongly suggested that the system safety function and the industrial safety
process be closely integrated to ensure a complete and sound hazard control, worker
protection, and risk management program. The overall importance of frequent and
positive interaction between those responsible for occupational safety and system
safety cannot be overstated. The employee and the working environment do play a
significant role in management’s determination of acceptable levels of risk. There-
fore, accurate evaluation of applicable occupational and environmental standards and
regulations, as well as an analysis of specific worker tasks are absolutely essential in
determining appropriate levels of protection. Since the goals and objectives of both
the industrial safety and system safety disciplines tend to serve each other’s best
interests, it would not be prudent management practice to ignore the integration of
the system safety program with the industrial safety effort.
THE HUMAN FACTORS ELEMENT
Perhaps one of the strongest argument for the integration of system safety with
industrial safety programs is the human factors element. The social concerns for
workplace safety that began in the early part of the last century, which eventually
led to and then became the essence of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of
1970, are still the driving force behind the OSHA regulatory process. In fact, the
industrial safety movement has evolved from a primary concern for the preservation
of human life and limb. Therefore, to fully comprehend the relationship between
system safety and industrial safety, one must also understand how system safety
can be successfully utilized in the analysis of the human factors element of task
performance. In the design of equipment, for example, human factors or ergonomics
is a subject of great consideration. One reason for such emphasis has been the desire
to design systems with extremely high levels of reliability. The desire to achieve “total
reliability” in system design is not only dependent upon the equipment, but also on
the way that equipment is operated by the human element. Therefore, the design of
the system must be in such a way so as to ensure that the human operator can interface
with the equipment in an effective manner with minimum opportunity of error. If this
basic concept of human–system interface is not properly considered in the design
phase, then all the safety incentives and motivational programs money can buy will
not encourage an individual to operate poorly designed equipment at a designated
level of effectiveness. Also, if personnel are trained to operate inadequately designed
equipment under normal operating conditions, then they will typically revert to very
ineffective operations under emergency or other stress-induced conditions.
Another significant aspect of the human factors equation which should not be
overlooked centers around the issue of product liability, especially in the commercial
world of sales and service. The concept of strict liability has been the basis for
numerous legal judgments during the past few decades. This philosophy implies that
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
44
THE INDUSTRIAL SAFETY CONNECTION
the liability for the use and, more importantly, the misuse of products can be extended
to the designer, manufacturer, and the seller of those products. This higher degree of
responsibility for the use and misuse of a product requires the product or equipment
designer to have a greater knowledge of the human factors element.
In short, it is essential that the design of a product or system consider the people–
equipment interface during the very early stages of the design process if the final
product is to have a high degree of reliability.
ACCIDENT PREVENTION THROUGH SYSTEM DESIGN
In the study of ergonomics, the concept of typical human behavior based upon
documented evaluations of human performance, has provided strong evidence that
certain aspects of expected behavior can potentially lead to unsafe acts. These data
suggest that the design engineer can effectively reduce or eliminate serious risk
concerns through proper design considerations based upon expected, or “norms” in
human behavior. It is important to understand that there is no real evidence to suggest
that a “normal” or “average” human being exists since so many variables are involved
in the evaluation of human performance in any given task. However, for the purpose
of simplification and example, the reader is provided some examples of common
behavioral traits that can be expected from a large percentage of the population under
most circumstances. Examples of this human behavior–design consideration process
are provided in Table 4.1. One can see that simple analysis of the human/system
interface in the design phase will effectively identify serious hazard risk potential
resulting from this expected human behavior. Once such risk potential is identified,
controls can be designed into the system. These studies in human behavior strongly
suggest that optimum design safety must allow for the equipment or machine to
perform in the most effective manner possible while design consideration is also
given to allow the human operator to perform in the safest manner possible. Any
trade-offs between this optimum design situation must consider the consequences of
failure if the system does not function as intended. Effective system design, then,
depends on the designer’s evaluation of those areas where humans can do the best job
and, conversely, those areas where safer task performance is achieved if the machine
accomplishes the action. These concepts are the basis of industrial safety accident
prevention programs. It is suggested that system safety can augment these accident
prevention efforts, if used properly. Chapter 8 will further discuss the ergonomic
element as it relates to the operational analysis of the people–task interface.
Assuring safety of a system, process, or operation and the prevention of failures
(or accidents) through design has always been a cornerstone objective in the practice
of system safety. However, the concept of preventing accidents and incidents through
system design has only become an issue of focus and concern in mainstream engi-
neering relatively recently. In the United States, for example, the National Institute
for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) led a national initiative referred to as
Prevention through Design (PtD) to promote this concept and highlight its importance
in all business decisions.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
ACCIDENT PREVENTION THROUGH SYSTEM DESIGN
45
TABLE 4.1
Samples of Behavior Patterns That Must Be Considered During System Design
Human behavior considerations in system design
Behavior description
Design consideration
People do not USUALLY consider the effects of
surface friction on their ability to grasp and
hold and article.
Design surface texture to provide friction
characteristics commensurate with functional
requirements of task or device.
MOST people cannot estimate distances,
clearances, or velocities very well (they tend to
overestimate short and underestimate large
distances).
Design so that users do not need to make
estimates of critical distances, clearances, or
speeds. Provide indicators of these
measurements when necessary.
MOST people do not watch where they place
their hands and feet, especially in familiar
surroundings.
If hand/foot placement is critical to the process,
design so that careless, inadvertent placement
of hands or feet will not result in injury.
Provide guards, restraints, warning labels, etc.
People OFTEN utilize the first thing available as
an aid in getting where they want to go or to
manipulate or “fix” something.
Either design the product so that the “first thing
handy” simply cannot be functionally useful, or
so that it will serve a specific, intended
function.
People SELDOM anticipate the possibility of
contact with sharp corners or edges.
Except to meet functional requirements, eliminate
sharp edges on surfaces or units where
inadvertent human contact is even remotely
possible.
People RARELY consider the possibility of fire
or explosion from overheated objects.
Unless it is an unavoidable functional
requirement, eliminate configurations that will
permit such potential (even with product
misuse).
MANY people do not take the time to read labels
or instructions, or to observe safety precautions.
Make labels brief, bold, simple, and clear. Repeat
or place same labels on various parts of a
product. Make use of color coding, fail-safe
innovations, and other attention-demanding
devices.
MOST people perform in a perfunctory manner,
utilizing previous habit patterns. Under stress
or in an emergency, they almost always revert
to these habit patterns.
Do not alter or change an established design (if it
is satisfactory) just for the sake of change. Base
all “design innovations” on changes in
functional or operational requirements.
Source: DOE.
According to NIOSH, the concept of PtD can be defined as: Addressing occu-
pational safety and health needs in the design process to prevent or minimize the
work-related hazards and risks associated with the construction, manufacture, use,
maintenance, and disposal of facilities, materials, and equipment. A growing number
of business leaders have recognized PtD as a cost-effective means to enhance occupa-
tional safety and health. Many US companies openly support PtD concepts and have
developed management practices to implement them. Other countries are actively
promoting PtD concepts as well. In 1994, the United Kingdom began requiring
construction companies, project owners, and architects to address safety and health
during the design phase of projects, and companies there have responded with positive
changes in management practices to comply with the regulations. Australia developed
the Australian National OHS (Occupational Health and Safety) Strategy 2002–2012
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
46
THE INDUSTRIAL SAFETY CONNECTION
Figure 4.1
The U.S. NIOSH Prevention through Design (National Initiative) concept, modified to show
system safety integration into the process.
that set “eliminating hazards at the design stage” as one of the five national priorities.
As a result, the Australian Safety and Compensation Council (ASCC) developed
the Safe Design National Strategy and Action Plans for Australia encompassing a
wide range of design areas including buildings and structures, work environments,
materials, and plant (machinery and equipment).
The approach used to develop and implement the PtD National Initiative is framed
by industry sector within four functional areas: Research, Education, Practice, and
Policy. As shown in Figure 4.1, this process encourages stakeholder input through a
sector-based approach. The ultimate goal of the PtD initiative is to prevent or reduce
occupational injuries, illnesses, and fatalities through the inclusion of prevention
considerations into all designs that impact workers. During this process, intermediate
goals are identified to provide a path toward achieving the ultimate goal. In the
United States, NIOSH serves as a catalyst to establish this initiative but, in the end,
the partners and stakeholders must actively participate in addressing these goals to
make PtD “business as usual” in the twenty-first century.
A major goal for the NIOSH PtD Plan as a National Initiative was the develop-
ment and publication of a new National Standard to provide guidance on including
PtD concepts within an occupational safety and health management system that can
be applied in any occupational setting. In 2011, the American Society of Safety
Engineers (ASSE) announced the release of the American National Standards Insti-
tute (ANSI)/ASSE Z590.3 Standard, “Prevention through Design: Guidelines for
Addressing Occupational Risks in Design and Redesign Processes.” The Z590.3
standard focuses specifically on the avoidance, elimination, reduction, and control of
occupational safety and health hazards and risks in the design and redesign process.
Through the application of the concepts presented in the standard, decisions about
occupational hazards and risks can be incorporated into the process of design and
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
THE PROCESS OF TASK ANALYSIS
47
redesign of work areas, tools, equipment, machinery, substances, and work processes.
Design and redesign also include construction, manufacture, use, maintenance, and
disposal or reuse of equipment used on the job. One of the key elements of this stan-
dard is that it provides guidance for “life-cycle” assessments and a design model that
balances environmental and occupational safety and health goals over the life span of a
facility, process, or product. The Z590.3 focuses on the four key stages of occupational
risk management: the preoperational, operational, postincident, and postoperational
stages are all addressed. The standard also provides tools for determining and achiev-
ing acceptable levels of risk for hazards that cannot be eliminated during design.
Z590.3 complements, but does not replace, performance objectives existing in
other specific standards and procedures. The goals of applying PtD concepts in an
occupational setting are to
r Achieve acceptable risk level;
r Prevent or reduce occupationally related injuries, illnesses, and fatalities;
r Reduce the cost of retrofitting necessary to mitigate hazards and risks that were
not sufficiently addressed in the design or redesign processes.
According to NIOSH, implementation of the standard can save lives and prevent
injury. For example, as skylights become synonymous with green construction and
energy conservation, an increase in skylight installation can be expected. If skylights
are designed and installed with proper guarding, deaths and injuries to workers who
inadvertently fall through skylights during construction and maintenance activities
could be prevented. Another example involves bailing machines used to break down
cardboard for recycling in various industries. If the bailers were designed and installed
with proper guarding, workers would not be able to enter the machines for trouble
shooting thus preventing deaths and injuries.
The American Industrial Hygiene Association (AIHA) is also actively engaged in
including PtD concepts into the revisions to (ANSI)/AIHA Z10 “Occupational Health
and Safety Management Systems” standard. Including PtD into Z10 can be considered
a natural progression since the “systems” approach to occupational health and safety
enables management and worker collaboration on corrective actions, enables the
anticipation of occupational hazards so that risks to workers from those hazards can
be assessed and controlled during design, and enables the inclusion of occupational
safety and health into an organization’s planning process.
Further research and investigation into the contents and requirements of both the
Z359.3 standard and the Z10 standard is highly recommended as a next step in the
study of the PtD approach to accident prevention and its relationship to the system
safety process.
THE PROCESS OF TASK ANALYSIS
Industrial or occupational safety and health professionals have been involved for
some time now in the analysis of tasks which must be performed in the workplace
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
48
THE INDUSTRIAL SAFETY CONNECTION
and the human interface which must occur in order to accomplish such tasks. In
actuality, the modern methods of task analysis and job analysis were initially devel-
oped as a result of the somewhat historic time and motion studies conducted in the
early part of the twentieth century. These techniques were later enhanced further
during the US Department of Labor’s efforts in occupational analysis conducted in
1930. These methods represent an analytical process which moves from the detail of
individual physical job movements to the generalized description of the occupation
itself. Later, during World War II, the need for an even more complete analysis of
human performance was first perceived. This need lead to the development of the
formal task analysis process which is nothing more than a thorough examination of
the individual elements and sub-elements that comprise a given task (DOE SSDC-31
1985). It is a systematic review of a collection of actions or human behaviors nec-
essary and sufficient to complete that task. To fully consider the human element and
its effect on the operation of a given system, it is necessary to analyze the specific
operational task requirements of the particular system in question. The process of
task analysis provides the means by which this transition from the more general
human factors studies to the more specific human factors considerations which have
been customized to a particular system for the sole purpose of designing an effective
human–task or human–machine interface, as the case may be.
Task analysis differs from Job Safety Analysis in that the latter is a more simplified,
global, higher function description of a job and its corresponding tasks assigned to
one person and related to general safety.
Task analysis outputs may serve a variety of system inputs. For example, task
analysis may be used to obtain detailed information on a given work position, thereby
providing data for selection, training, staffing level, procedure development and
retrofit, communications, equipment review, feedback, supervisory control, and risk
screening.
THE JOB SAFETY ANALYSIS AND SYSTEM SAFETY
The Job Safety Analysis or JSA (also referred to as the Job Hazard Analysis or JHA),
which is a more simplified form of task analysis, has been a long-standing tool for
task and function analysis. JSA has been available and utilized in general industry
for many years by the industrial safety community. However, many practitioners do
not understand or are simply unfamiliar with the connection between the JSA and the
system safety tasks of hazard identification and analysis. It has even been suggested
by some in the profession that the JSA itself is a type of oversimplified system safety
analysis and, if performed earlier in the job development phase, could be used as the
basis of a Preliminary Hazard Analysis for a specific task or set of tasks. However,
because JSA is often (and improperly) used only to analyze a function after it has
been implemented, much of the data is not factored into the system safety process.
The primary purpose of the JSA is to uncover inherent or potential hazards which
may be encountered in the work environment. This basic definition is not unlike that
which has been previously discussed regarding the various system safety analyses.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
THE JOB SAFETY ANALYSIS AND SYSTEM SAFETY
49
The primary difference between the two is subtle but important and is found in the
end-use purpose of the JSA. Once the job or task is completed, the JSA is usually
used as an effective tool for training and orientating the new employee into the work
environment. The JSA presents a verbal picture of a specific job, broken down into a
step-by-step description of the tasks required to perform that job. Therefore, since the
JSA attempts to identify hazards inherent to an existing job, its primary purpose then
is not pretask hazard elimination or risk reduction (as is the case in system safety
analysis), but hazard control through awareness and training. Also of importance
when attempting to differentiate the JSA from the system safety process is to point
out that the JSA is typically performed by the person or group of persons most
knowledgeable of the specific job or task, usually the supervisor, lead technician,
and/or department head. This, of course is not the case with a system safety analysis.
While it is true that a supervisor or department head may have valuable input in
the system safety effort, seldom are they the only contributors to the system safety
evaluation process.
To further illustrate the important difference between the JSA and the system
safety process, consider the primary elements of the basic Job Safety Analysis,
which typically include the following five steps (as a minimum):
1. Select a job;
2. Break the job down into steps;
3. Identify the hazards to determine the necessary controls of the hazards;
4. Apply the controls to the hazards;
5. Evaluate the controls for effectiveness.
The JSA, then, is a specialized approach of task analysis that takes an existing
job and analyzes its tasks to specifically identify hazards encountered in the work
environment. At the very least, the JSA does have a place within the system safety
process as a tool to evaluate the hazards/risks of an existing task or function during
the operation phase of the project life cycle. Here we see another connection between
the principle elements of the industrial safety process and one of the basic objectives
of the system safety effort: The JSA tries to eliminate or control the risk of hazard
exposure in a given task during the life of the project.
As a minimum, the expected benefits of a properly performed JSA can be sum-
marized as follows with respect to the principle concept of system safety:
r Provides individual training in the safe, efficient operation of equipment/
hardware;
r Establishes positive safety contacts with employee work force;
r Provides new personnel with “on-the-job” safety awareness training;
r Prepares for planned safety observations during the performance of the task
and;
r Provides prejob safety instructions for irregular or nonroutine tasks.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
50
THE INDUSTRIAL SAFETY CONNECTION
Figure 4.2 shows a typical Job Safety Analysis form which can be utilized by any
organization wishing to capitalize on this basic method of hazard identification and
analysis. It should be noted again that it is most ideal if the task supervisor completes
each JSA for those operations under his/her direction. This makes sense since it is
the supervisor who is most likely to have detailed knowledge of the steps associated
with each task (including the hazards). Also, by including those personnel in the JSA
process who will actually perform the work, even more valuable insight will be gained
and a more complete understanding of job hazard control will inevitably be realized.
GUIDELINES FOR PREPARING A JOB SAFETY ANALYSIS
The JSA and the analysis of job/task risk is (or should be) a critical element in
the assurance of worker safety and health. However, its potential for success can
be severely hindered when the JSA is not utilized or performed properly. As stated
earlier in this chapter, it is usually the task supervisor and the work team that will
complete the JSA. At the very least, this means that consistency in JSA approach
and completion can be as varied as the tasks being analyzed. Ideally, the safety
professional should also participate in JSA development to facilitate the process
and ensure the proper and complete analysis of the given task. But, in reality, most
industrial safety and health practitioners may not always be involved or even present
when a JSA exercise takes place.
In an effort to provide some basic guidelines for conducting a JSA, the following
information is provided. It might be suggested that the JSA is the closest link the
industrial safety world has to the principles and concepts of system safety analysis.
Establishing these guidelines at this juncture will hopefully demonstrate the parallel
objectives of industrial safety assurance and system safety analysis.
Figure 4.1 shows a JSA form that can be used in performing the safety analysis.
Figure 4.3 provides an example of a completed JSA form for reference purposes only.
The JSA form is divided into three columns. Instructions for completing each column
are provided on the first page, over the respective column. It is extremely important
to follow these instructions closely to ensure a properly completed and usable JSA.
This cannot be overemphasized. Specifically:
Column 1 (Sequence of Job Steps): The job shall be broken down into specific
steps describing, in sequence, what is to be done. The descriptions must be clear,
simple, and concise (usually no more than one or two brief sentences). Important
things to remember when filling information in Column 1:
r Describe only actual job steps that contain a hazard(s), create a hazard(s), or
expose personnel to a hazard(s), or hazardous condition(s). Avoid placing infor-
mation in Column 1 (or anywhere else on the JSA) that does not specifically
address an actual job step or task. Non “step-specific” or general safety informa-
tion can be found and documented elsewhere (the contractor’s Health & Safety
Plan, Company Directives, Tailgate Briefings, etc.) and does not belong in
the JSA.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Job Safety Analysis
Job Description:
JSA No.:
Job Location:
Contractor Name:
Page  ____   of  ____
Prepared By: (Originator’s Name)
Date:
Signature – Team Members
SEQUENCE OF BASIC JOB STEPS
POTENTIAL ACCIDENTS OR HAZARDS
RECOMMENDED SAFE JOB PROCEDURE
Break the job down into basic steps that tell what is
done first, what is done next, and so on. 
Record the job steps in their normal job order of
occurrence. 
Describe what is done, not the details of how it is
done.  Usually three or four words are sufficient to
describe each job step.  
Make the job steps neither too fine nor too broad.
They should sound natural.  Sometimes the job
step may be a major safety precaution; e.g., “Check
for gas before entry.”    
Number each step.
Ask yourself for each step, what accidents could occur to the people during the job
step. 
Ask: Can they be struck by or contacted by anything?  Can they be caught in, on, or
between anything?  Can they fall?  Can their strain or over exert themselves?  Can
they be exposed to gas, fumes, radiation, etc.?  
For each potential accident, ask yourself what exactly should that person do or not do
to avoid the accident. 
Describe specific precautions in concrete detail.  Give each recommended precaution
the same number as was given each job step to which it applies.  List the procedure
number for those job steps included in the procedure.  
Avoid generalities like “be alert,” “be careful,” and “take caution.”
Use simple do and don’t statements.  If necessary, explain how, as well as what to do.
Also, question the basic job method.  Is there an entirely different way to do the job
that is better and safe?  If a repair or service job, can anything be dome to increase the
life of the job?  
Figure 4.2
Typical Job Safety Analysis (JSA) form.
51
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Job Safety Analysis
Page   1  of  3
Job Description:
Prepare Plant Site for Energy Project (SAMPLE)
JSA No.:
SAMPLE
Job Location:
Anywhere, USA (SAMPLE)
Contractor Name:
ABC Contractor, Inc (SAMPLE)
Prepared By: (Originator)
SAMPLE
Date:
SAMPLE
Signature – Team Members
SAMPLE
SAMPLE
SAMPLE
SAMPLE
SEQUENCE OF BASIC JOB STEPS
POTENTIAL ACCIDENTS OR HAZARDS
RECOMMENDED SAFE JOB PROCEDURE
Break the job down into basic steps that tell 
what is done first, what is done next, and so 
on.
Record the job steps in their normal job order 
of occurrence.
Describe what is done, not the details of how 
it is done.  Usually three or four words are 
sufficient to describe each job step.
Make the job steps neither too fine nor too 
broad.  They should sound natural.  
Sometimes the job step may be a major 
safetyprecaution; e.g., “Check for gas before 
entry.”
Number each step.
Ask yourself for each step, what accidents could occur to the people during 
the job step.
Ask: Can they be struck by or contacted by anything?  Can they be caught 
in, on, or between anything?  Can they fall?  Can their strain or over exert 
themselves?  Can they be exposed to gas, fumes, radiation, etc.?
For each potential accident, ask yourself what exactly should that person do 
or not do to avoid the accident.
Describe specific precautions in concrete detail.  Give each recommended 
precaution the same number as was given each job step to which it applies.  
List the procedure number for those job steps included in the procedure.
Avoid generalities like “be alert,” “be careful,” and “take caution.”
Use simple do and don’t statements.  If necessary, explain how, as well as 
what to do.
Also, question the basic job method.  Is there an entirely different way to do 
the job that is better and safe?  If a repair or service job, can anything be 
dome to increase the life of the job?
1.
Installation and maintenance of 
corrosion control measures (including, 
swales, silt fencing, and seeding). 
1a.
Slip/Trip/Fall due to various uneven surfaces and ground areas (dips, 
pits, ditches) and debris in the area. 
1b.
Struck by heavy equipment (dozer, back hoe) during swale 
construction. 
1c.
Eye contact/injury with foreign objects/debris due to dusty/windy 
conditions. 
1d.
Contact with snakes, insects, animals, rodents (including rodent 
waste/feces), and other wastes.
1a1.
Personnel shall observe and note obstacles that are in their path of 
travel, taking care to avoid areas of uneven footing and/or debris that 
could cause them to trip or fall.
1a2.
Housekeeping at site shall occur at end of each shift to remove 
unnecessary debris and avoid accumulation of clutter and/or supplies
1b1.
All personnel entering area shall wear high visibility vests at all times.
1b2.
Equipment operators shall maintain a maximum speed of 5 mph 
while in work areas.
1c1.
All personnel must wear approved PPE, including safety glasses with 
side shields.
1d1. All personnel shall be briefed on the presence of biological hazards 
and shall avoid contact with animals and insects during work 
activities.
(Continued on next page)
Figure 4.3
Example of a partially completed JSA form.
52
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Job Safety Analysis 
Page 2 of  2 
SEQUENCE OF BASIC JOB STEPS
POTENTIAL ACCIDENTS OR HAZARDS
RECOMMENDED SAFE JOB PROCEDURE
2.
Demolition of existing structures and
fencing 
3.
Clearing, grubbing, stripping, and
disposal of vegetation, including tree
removal  
4.
Installation of access roads, parking,
and lay down areas 
2a.
Cuts/scraps/abrasions while working with or handling demolished
fencing materials. 
2b.
For access to elevated areas:  If ladder is used, possible fall due to
unstable ladder footing and/or overreaching by user during cleaning
operations causing user to loose balance or ladder to fail   
2c.
For access to elevated areas:  If elevating boom lift is used,
possible fall due to travel over uneven floor surfaces or debris   
2d.
Sprains/strains while manual lifting of heavy loads.
3a.
Cuts/scraps/abrasions while working with sharp tools used during
clearing/grubbing operations. 
3b.
Crushed toes while lifting/removing trees and shrubs.
4a.
Struck by heavy equipment (blades, pavers, etc.) during pavement
operations
2a1.
All personnel working with demolished fencing materials shall wear 
work gloves of substantial material (leather)and long -sleeved shirts.
2b1.
Whenever an employee is using a ladder, a second employee will
serve as spotter, supporting the base of the ladder and ensuring
proper ladder footing at all times. 
2c1.
All travel will occur with boom or scissors lift in lowest possible
position. 
2c2.
Only personnel that have been trained and certified to operate
elevating and rotating man-lifts will be permitted to use the
equipment. 
2c3.
All removable debris shall be cleared of the equipment path of travel
prior to movement
2d1.
All personnel shall practice safe lifting techniques, seeking assistance
for loads that are too heavy to lift alone. 
3a1.
All personnel involved in clearing/grubbing operations shall wear
work gloves of substantial material (leather), long-sleeved. 
3b1.
Personnel shall be required to practice safe lifting techniques and
wear appropriate work shoes (steel toed safety shoes preferred). 
4a1.
All personnel shall be required to wear high-visibility vests while in
operational areas. 
4a2.
Heavy equipment operations will not occur unless a spotter or
signalman is available to direct tracffi and keep area clear. 
4a3.
All heavy equipment shall be equipped with functional back-up
alarms which will be tested prior to each work shift. 
Figure 4.3
(Continued)
53
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
54
THE INDUSTRIAL SAFETY CONNECTION
r Number each step in sequential order (i.e., 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.). This will allow easy
reference to a particular step, especially in a multipage JSA. It will also facilitate
association of hazard descriptions (in Column 2) and mitigation measures (in
Column 3) to the steps described in Column 1.
r IMPORTANT: While there may be 50 steps to a given job, only two of those steps
may actually be hazardous. Therefore, the only steps that are to be described
in Column 1 will be the two hazardous steps. In other words, do NOT place
a job step in Column 1 unless there is at least one hazard associated with the
performance of that step. Adherence to this requirement is sometimes difficult,
but it is essential to ensuring a properly completed JSA. Remember, a JSA is
NOT an “operating instruction.”
r The JSA only addresses hazards to people (i.e., the person performing the step
and/or those around him/her). This cannot be overemphasized. The JSA does
NOT consider hazards to property or the environment, unless those hazards also
threaten personnel. If the latter is the case, then only the threat to personnel shall
be addressed on the JSA.
r If a job step cannot be described in one or two brief sentences, then reevaluate
the step that is being considered. It is possible that it can be further broken down
to be more descriptive of the task. Keep the descriptions simple and clear.
Column 2 (Potential Accidents or Hazards): For each specific step described in
Column 1 (Sequence of Job Steps), provide a description of the hazard(s) and/or
hazardous condition(s) associated with the performance of that step in Column 2.
Important things to remember when completing the information in Column 2:
r In many cases, there will be more than one specific hazard associated with a
given job step. For this reason, each hazard will be numbered alphanumerically
to associate the hazards with the proper job step. For example, if job step number
2 contains three specific hazards, then the hazard descriptions in Column 2 of
the JSA form shall be numbered “2a”, “2b,” and “2c.” In this way, it will be quite
obvious that job step number 2 contains three individual hazards of concern to
the worker.
r If a job step is placed in Column 1, then there MUST be at least one hazard
associated with that step described in Column 2 (otherwise, the step should
never be listed in Column 1). That hazard MUST be clearly described (see
next bullet). Do NOT refer readers to other sections of the JSA for a hazard
description. Do NOT refer readers to other documents (e.g., another JSA, a
regulation) for a description of a hazard that is supposed to be specific to a given
job step. Just describe the hazard, plain and simple.
r When describing the hazard(s), be specific. What is it about a particular step
that presents a hazard to personnel (i.e., what is the hazard)? It may be helpful
to ask questions, focusing on the following key American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) hazard categories:
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
GUIDELINES FOR PREPARING A JOB SAFETY ANALYSIS
55
– Can a person be struck by something (e.g., moving equipment, vehicles, flying
debris)?
– Can a person strike against something (e.g., sharp edges, fixed equipment)?
– Can a person fall to the same level (e.g., slip/trip)?
– Can a person fall to a different level (e.g., working at heights)?
– Can a person be caught in, on, or between something (e.g., pinching or
crushing hazards)?
– Can a person overexert themselves (e.g., sprain/strain/lifting)?
– Can a person come into contact with something hazardous (e.g., electric-
ity, heat, cold, radiation, caustics, dusts/fumes/vapors/mists/gases/smoke,
noise/vibration, toxic or noxious substances, biohazards)
– Can a person be placed into hazardous locations (e.g., confined spaces, poorly
illuminated areas, work in tight spaces)?
r Remember to only describe the hazard(s) in Column 2. Avoid describing control
measures here. It is often difficult to do, but save the control measures (the
mitigation) for Column 3 of the JSA form. Also, avoid further describing the
job step in Column 2. All descriptions of the job step belong in Column 1 of the
JSA form.
Column 3 (Recommended Safe Job Procedures): For each specific hazard
described in Column 2 (Potential Accidents or Hazards), provide specific mitigation
measures that will effectively ensure either the elimination of the hazard (preferred
approach) or maximum exposure control. Important things to remember when filling
information in Column 3:
r In many cases, there may be more than one recommended control measure for
a particular hazard. For this reason, each control measure will be numbered
alphanumerically to associate the control with the proper hazard (and job step).
For example, if a hazard associated with job step number 2 has been labeled
“2a” and there are two possible or required control measures for hazard 2a, then
the control measures in Column 3 of the JSA form shall be numbered “2a1”
and “2a2” respectively. In this way, it will be quite obvious that hazard number
2a for job step number 2 contains two individual control measures that must be
implemented (2a1 and 2a2).
r Be specific to the hazard when describing control requirements. Always list the
requirements for each hazard associated with each job step. Avoid referring
readers back to previous steps when identifying control measures, even if such
measures have been previously described for some other step. This can become
confusing and, in some cases, lead to misinterpretation (i.e., the reader refers
to the wrong control requirements). It is preferable to be repetitious rather than
confusing when describing hazard control measures.
r Never use vague or nondescript terminology such as “be safe” or “be careful”
or “take caution.” These are not control measures and do not provide the reader
with any usable information.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
56
THE INDUSTRIAL SAFETY CONNECTION
r Use simple “do” and “do not” statements whenever possible. If necessary,
describe how and what to do, as well as what not to do (as the case may be).
r Avoid referencing Company Directives, Regulations, and/or Training Courses
as the sole means of hazard control. This is practically useless to the reader.
Rather, describe the required control measure(s) for the hazard(s). It is highly
improbable that the reader will search out a Directive or Regulation and attempt
to locate/identify the proper portion of the Directive that applies to the specific
hazard. Remember, the JSA is intended to provide a worker with the information
he/she needs to perform the work safely. Help them in every way possible. Make
the JSA easy to understand and to use.
r If a hazard is described in Column 2, then there MUST be at least one con-
trol/mitigation measure associated with that hazard described in Column 3
(otherwise, the hazard should never be listed in Column 2 and the work step
never listed in Column 1). That control/mitigation measure MUST be clearly
described. Do NOT refer readers to other sections of the JSA for a control mea-
sure description. Do NOT refer readers to other documents (regulations, other
JSA, etc.) for a description of a hazard control measure that is supposed to be
specific to a given job step hazard. Just describe the control measure, plain and
simple.
Signatures and Approvals
Upon completion of the JSA, the JSA team members sign the document in the
spaces provided (first page of the JSA form) to indicate their concurrence with the
information presented therein.
Prior to implementing the JSA, it is recommended that the appropriate company
safety representative review the completed JSA form. If circumstances warrant, a
safety representative may have also been a member of the JSA team, in which case
their signatures as a team member also indicates their approval of the completed JSA
form.
Attachments to the JSA form:
Attachments to the JSA can include any permits or documents necessary to control
the hazards specified within the JSA (e.g., Confined Space Entry Permits, Excavation
and Trenching Permits).
Changes in Hazard/Scope
As described in this chapter, JSAs are normally developed for a specific activity. In the
event of an unforeseen change in scope, change in hazard level, or the identification of
a new hazard, the work should be suspended and the JSA be revised accordingly. The
revised JSA must adequately address the hazards associated with the change(s). All
appropriate signatures (i.e., representatives from those organizations or departments
that signed the original JSA) should be obtained on the revised JSA prior to restart
of the subject work.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SYSTEM SAFETY: AN INTEGRAL PART OF THE OVERALL ORGANIZATION
57
SYSTEM SAFETY: AN INTEGRAL PART OF THE OVERALL
ORGANIZATION
The role of the occupational or industrial safety and health organization in the sys-
tem safety process has been established as an essential element since both can be
interpreted as “self-serving” to a great extent. That is to say, the industrial safety
program could be drastically improved by incorporating the process of system safety
whenever possible and, conversely, a well-rounded system safety effort would not be
complete without adequate consideration of the industrial safety program.
Once again, the primary objective of a system safety program within any organi-
zation is to ensure the maximum level of safety (i.e., the lowest level of acceptable
risk) while operating within the boundaries of effectiveness, time, cost, and feasi-
bility. A properly implemented system safety effort in any industrial organization
will effectively apply appropriate scientific and/or engineering techniques and prin-
ciples to first identify and then eliminate (if possible) or control any risk of exposure
to system hazards. Therefore, it is also essential to understand that other internal
departments of an industrial organization should be included in the system safety
process. Without appropriate participation between organizational departments, the
system safety effort might not succeed or, at the very least, might fall short of iden-
tifying all possible system risks. In a manufacturing facility, for example, possible
interdepartmental system safety interfaces might include the following organizational
elements/personnel:
r Facility Engineers: As indicated by the previous example of an intended paint
booth operation at a desk manufacturing facility, the importance of system
safety participation and coordination with facility engineers cannot be overem-
phasized. The most logical opportunity for the evaluation and elimination or
control of potential hazards is when a design for a new or improved facility
is in the preparation stages of development. The participation of the system
safety specialist in the planning of new or modified facilities should also help
to ensure a more thorough consideration of safeguards that can be built into the
new development. As an example, in the layout of a new office facility, it is
not unusual that only cursory consideration is given to the location and quantity
of electrical receptacles for the operation of essential office equipment. Then,
when the equipment is actually installed, the typical result is an unsafe amount
of electrical extension cords strung precariously around desks, across floors and
along aisle ways. It is often difficult (and expensive) to correct such an oversight
after completion of initial construction. With proper consideration and evalu-
ation of the risk potential associated with the work environment (i.e., people,
equipment, facilities, and procedures) through the system safety process, such
unfortunate and potentially unsafe circumstances could be avoided.
r Equipment Design Engineering: The system safety organization should pro-
vide safety criteria, design parameters, and other necessary requirements to the
design engineers. System safety should also play a role in the review of system
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
58
THE INDUSTRIAL SAFETY CONNECTION
and component specifications, interface and control drawings, schematic dia-
grams, and so on, and provide input as required during the conceptual phase
to verify incorporation of appropriate safety controls. The design engineer
should also have a significant input in the performance of the preliminary
hazard analysis. With proper consideration of the human factors element in the
design of a new product, potential incidents involving human error might be
avoided through proper design. For example, utilization of known human perfor-
mance/reliability data during the design process will assist in the identification
and control of human error hazard causes.
r Reliability, Maintainability, and Quality Control: Inclusion of these organi-
zations in the system safety process, from concept through disposal, will aid in
the identification of safety critical components for reliability analysis. A Failure
Modes and Effects Analysis, as well as other common reliability models, can
be used to identify critical and noncritical failure points. The Quality Assurance
element can be extremely useful in the overall system safety process. Qual-
ity engineers should participate in the inspection of safety critical components,
serve on certification boards, audit any corrective action requirements, and iden-
tify any safety impacts associated with implementation of such requirements.
r Engineering Management: Since engineering management must review and
approve any engineering changes, including those driven by system safety
requirements, they too play a key role in the system safety process. Also,
since they are a management function, they are typically cost-sensitive and their
support is, therefore, critical to the success of the system safety program.
r Manufacturing/Facilities Operations and Maintenance: These organizations
can be very helpful in identifying hazardous materials, equipment, processes,
and/or operations associated with a new or proposed product. System safety
personnel should consult with occupational safety and facility engineers to
determine facility safety requirements and safe operating criteria. Perhaps of
greatest utility is the ability of operations and maintenance personnel to assess
operating procedures and proposed work flow to identify, in advance, the poten-
tial for failure/mishap and propose methods to eliminate hazardous conflicts or
situations. Maintenance personnel can assess new tool requirements, preventa-
tive maintenance provisions, any necessary new test equipment to accommodate
the proposed system, and so on, and provide useful information to the system
safety organization to assist in the development of the overall system safety
evaluation.
r Personnel Training Department: Another essential participant in the system
safety process is the training department. They will develop training require-
ments and lesson plans for the new system based upon data supplied by the
design engineer, the system safety staff, and other organizations that may have
been involved. Because the information provided by the trainer is usually the
worker’s first exposure to a new or different system, there is a unique opportunity
for the trainer to ensure that one of the primary messages received by the trainee
concerns the safe use (and operating hazards/restrictions) of the new product or
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SYSTEM SAFETY: AN INTEGRAL PART OF THE OVERALL ORGANIZATION
59
system. The training staff can also play an active role in the development of any
operating procedures which will eventually be used to establish safe and proper
system utilization criteria.
r Environmental Engineering: If the intended, or unintended, use of the pro-
posed system might possibly have an adverse effect on the surrounding envi-
ronment, the environmental engineering and compliance function within the
organization should be consulted during the system safety effort. The accurate
assessment of potential environmental exposures is essential in the success of
any proposed project. Possible waste management, air pollution, ground water
contamination, community awareness of potential hazards, employee training
for hazard awareness, and necessary emergency response activities/planning are
all necessary considerations which must be assessed during the evaluation of
overall system hazard and risk reduction.
It cannot be overemphasized that the principle elements of a sound industrial
safety program, with its primary purpose of OSHA compliance, work hazard reduc-
tion, assurance of employee/job safety and health, and the evaluation of jobs or tasks
(through the JSA or other comparable method), can, in most cases, be achieved
through application of the system safety process. The connection between the two
programs while not entirely obvious is quite understandable, as described above.
Perhaps the most important thing to remember here is that the industrial or occupa-
tional safety and health professional can utilize the time-proven techniques of hazard
reduction and system safety analysis to accomplish the desired goal of both programs:
Maximum safety in the performance of a task or function with minimum risk of
hazard exposure and minimum cost.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5
Probability Theory and
Statistical Analysis
INTRODUCTION
In the practice of modern system safety analysis, the system safety engineer attempts
to provide a sufficient level of information to organizational management so that
informed decisions may be made regarding hazard risk acceptance or rejection. In
the safety and health arena, the provision of such choices often requires ample
substantiation in order to justify decisions to accept a hazard risk. The system safety
practitioner can utilize a wide variety of techniques and methods to determine risk
levels and, through preestablished acceptance criteria, make recommendations to
management. These analytical tools serve to qualify the risk in relation to some
existing level and/or standard of operation. Some of the more common of these tools
are discussed in detail in Part II of this text. When actual failure rate data are known or
can be determined or deduced, the system safety effort can take the analysis process
further and actually quantify the risk of hazard in terms of these known or expected
failure rates.
While probability theory examines the likelihood of a specific failure event given
a single opportunity for occurrence, statistics focuses on the number of times a failure
event will occur given many opportunities.
Through the use of basic probability theory and statistical analysis, the system
safety function can actually assign expected values to certain hazards and/or failures
to determine the likelihood of their occurrence. The availability of such quantifiable
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
61
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
62
PROBABILITY THEORY AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
information further enhances the management decision-making process and justifies
the existence of the system safety effort within the organization.
This chapter will present the fundamental principles of probability theory and
briefly examine the use of statistical analysis in the practice of system safety. The
information discussed here should provide the reader with a very basic understanding
of these concepts which, by some accounts, is essential to the overall understanding
of the system safety discipline. It should be noted that it is not within the scope of
this Basic Guide to System Safety to provide all there is to know regarding probability
theory and statistical analysis. However, a certain level of understanding is essential
and will therefore be discussed here.
PROBABILITY
The theory of probability, as it applies to system safety, is based upon the chance
or unplanned occurrence of random failure events. In general, probability studies
are primarily concerned with predicting the occurrence of uncertainties in task or
operational performance. The probable or likely occurrence of these events is rep-
resented numerically as a value between zero and one. An event that has absolutely
no chance of occurrence (i.e., 0% of occurrence) is assigned a probability level of
zero. Conversely, those events that have a 100% chance of occurrence are assigned a
level of one. Since nothing can have less than a 0% or greater than 100% chance of
occurrence, probabilities cannot be represented in numbers less than zero or greater
than one. There are an infinite number of possibilities for event occurrence that exist
between the end points of zero and one. A probability of 0.5 would indicate that a
given event has an equal chance of occurring or not occurring. Such probabilities are
often used daily in weather forecasting. It is not unusual to hear that there is a 50%
chance of rain, or a 30% chance of snow. These probabilities have been deduced from
available data that enables a forecaster to predict the outcome of the day’s weather
activity. When the forecast does not materialize as advertised, it is usually the result
of additional, unpredictable variables that interrupted the forecasted weather pattern.
Another example to understand probability theory: Nine clean, usable machine
bolts and one defective machine bolt are all placed in an opaque parts bag. The
defective bolt is the same size, weight, and color as the nine clean bolts. Only the
thread pattern on the bolt is defective and this cannot be determined with the naked
eye. What is the chance the machinist will choose the defective bolt in a random
selection exercise? Since the position of each bolt in the bag and the selection process
are completely uncontrolled factors, each of the 10 bolts has an equal chance of being
chosen. The probability of selecting the defective bolt on the first draw is simply stated
as a 1 in 10 chance, or 0.1 in terms of probability. If this exercise were performed
numerous times, the uncertainty of this probability level becomes clear. For example,
if the machinist were to continue to choose bolts 100 more times, and returning the
selected bolts to the parts bag between draws, the previously assigned probability
level of 0.1 indicates that, out of 100 draws, the defective bolt will be pulled 10 times
(100 × 0.1). However, in actual practice, it is conceivably possible (although highly
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
PROBABILITY
63
improbable) that the inferior part could be pulled each of the 100 attempts or not at
all. Therefore, the likelihood or probability of choosing a defective bolt occurring
between 0 and 100 times can be predicted based only upon the known information
that exists (e.g., 10 bolts, 1 defective, 9 clean, 0.1 probability of a defective pick on
one draw).
Chance events such as random part failures, accidents, injuries, and so on, usually
occur as a result of actions from which more than one outcome is possible. Hence,
it follows that the more complex the action, the greater the probability of chance or
unplanned results. Chance events can also refer to those unplanned or unpredictable
events which result from a combination of or an interaction between conditions and/or
activities. Since accidents are basically unplanned or unpredictable events, they can
generally be analyzed using probability theory and statistics.
Mathematically, probability can be defined as the number of times an event will
produce a given result divided by the total number of events in the sample. This
probability value can be deduced or inferred. In practice, probabilities can be relatively
exact if they have been deduced from known conditions. The toss of a coin or the
choosing of a playing card from a deck of 52 cards has very definite and exact
probable outcomes. Based upon known information, an inferred prediction can be
made on how many times the coin will land on heads or tails. Statistics has often
been referred to as the “mathematics of inference” since many probabilities for
complex systems must be determined through statistical evaluation of known or
inferred data. This logic of inference can be extended to the industrial environment
when attempting to forecast failure rates. If certain performance data for a given part
or component can be obtained or determined, probable failure rates can be calculated
and assigned. For example, many machine manufacturers and vendors provide data
on expected failure rates for critical parts such as gauges, valves, regulators, crane
components, lifting slings, certain automotive parts, and so on. Such information
is also used in the determination of safe operating factors. In the system safety
process, this information is used to determine the likelihood of system, subsystem, or
component failure and, therefore, greatly facilitates the decision-making process. Use
of statistical inference will provide estimates of probability, determine the likelihood
of occurrence based upon past experience, and predict with some level of accuracy
how many times the event will occur in the future based upon deduced probability.
For example, in the industrial safety world, one of the most common techniques
for determining accident potential is to examine historical performance (i.e., past
history). If a factory experienced an average of 20 lost-time injuries for every 1000
employees, the average injury probability is 0.02. If this probability is multiplied
by the entire employee population of 7500, for example, then the expected number
of injuries that will occur in the next year can be estimated at 150. Caution is
warranted in applying these expected rates to individuals or to those employees that
work in high-risk areas. An individual may have a higher or lower accident potential
depending on job duties, training, experience, and so on. Likewise, an office secretary
will have presumably lower risk potential than a forklift operator or welder. Of course
such variables will effect the expectation. However, from a plant-wide perspective,
if the sample population from which the expected probability has been estimated is
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
64
PROBABILITY THEORY AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
similar in general to the entire population to which this rate is being applied, then the
expected probability rate is as close to a prediction as is possible based upon known
data. From this point, the safety engineer can begin to focus on those higher risk
areas and attempt to formulate recommendations for controlling the risk of hazard or
reducing it to acceptable levels.
The simple probability theory discussed thus far has not considered the effect
of other factors which usually influence the outcome of an unexpected event. For
example, failure of a single component in a complex system does not necessarily
mean that a failure of the total system will occur. Likewise, an automobile accident
does not always mean that an injury or fatality will occur. There are usually other
influencing variables that will affect the outcome. If the occupants of the vehicle
were wearing seat belts, the chance of an accident resulting in injury is significantly
reduced. If an airbag supplemental restraint system were installed in the vehicle, the
probability of injury is lessened even further. If the vehicles involved in the accident
were traveling at low rather than high rates of speed, there may be an even greater
reduction in the potential risk of injury. These factors create what is referred to as
conditional probability. Conditional probability reflects the chance of an expected
outcome when considering the fact that the likelihood of that outcome has been
influenced by certain conditions acting upon the initiating event.
If the probability of a failure can be calculated as something less than one (i.e.,
less than 100%), then it follows that the probability of success is equal to one minus
the probability of failure. In a previous example, the probability of experiencing a
lost-time injury was calculated at 0.02. The probability of having no lost time injuries
is equal to 1−0.02, or 0.98 (a 98% chance that no lost-time injuries will occur). This
ability to provide management with projected failure AND success rates for a given
operation, task, system, and so on, demonstrates the advantage of using probability
theory in system or project analysis.
Chapter 11 of this text will discuss the use of Fault Tree Analysis in deter-
mining system reliability, failure potential, and even accident cause factors through
examination of specific or general fault paths. Additional information on the appli-
cation and use of probability values in Fault Tree Analysis will also be provided in
Chapter 11.
STATISTICS
Statistics evaluate any variation in the probable number of events and attempts to
define these variations. For example, if a coin is tossed, there is a 50% chance the
coin will either be heads or tails (probability of 0.5). If the coin is tossed 10 times,
the probable number of tails (or heads) is five. This information indicates that, if
many coin tossing exercises were to occur in groups of 10, then five tails would occur
most often in those groups. The frequency of four or six tails would be less, three
or seven tails even less frequent, and so on. Each of these values can be plotted in
terms of frequency of occurrence. In situations where the probability of all possible
outcomes of an event is known, such as with a coin toss, it is referred to as preassigned
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
STATISTICS
65
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
10
20
40
55
35
17
5
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Data from previous projects
Percent in compliance with established
design safety requirements
Total number of samples:   182
55  +  40  +  20  +  10 = 0.687
Probability (P) of 70% or less = 
182
40  +  55  +  35 =  0.714
Probability (P) between 60% and 80% = 
182
55  +  35  +  17  +  5 = 0.615
Probability (P) of 70% or more = 
182
Figure 5.1
Histogram of distribution values.
probability. However, in the real world, not all occurrences are as predictable as coin
tossing or the rolling of dice. For instance, although the probability of a desired
successful event such as meeting design safety parameters may be known, many
possible outcomes exist. The consideration of all possibilities when they are not
known is referred to as empirical probability and involves statistical evaluation of
possible data values. The manner in which the different values appear over the entire
range of possible values is referred to as the distribution of values. Figure 5.1 is a
histogram that demonstrates the distribution of values pertaining to the desire to meet
design safety parameters based upon historical performance to date. In this example,
it is easy to see how known values can be plotted, their distribution determined,
and the probability of future successful performance established. Figure 5.2 takes
the values from the histogram and converts the data to percent of occurrence and
smoothes the points to form a distribution curve. In practice, there are many types of
distribution curves, the more common of which is known as the normal distribution
and is expressed as Figure 5.3. Note the similarities between Figure 5.3 and that of
the smoothed data curve in Figure 5.2. In the industrial safety arena, these values can
also be numbers of accidents, costs, injury severity rates, injury frequency rates, and
so on. The most common or most frequent value that appears during evaluation or
observation is known as the mode. If an arithmetic average is calculated by simply
adding all the value points and dividing by the total number of points, the mean is
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
66
PROBABILITY THEORY AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
40%
70%
100%
Percent occurrence
Percent in compliance with established
design safety requirements
AREA OF
PROBABILITY = 1.0
Figure 5.2
Curve of empirical distribution.
derived (Figure 5.3). The median is that value point where half of the total values
under consideration lie above and the other half fall below. Variance is a measure
of variation in the observed values and the standard deviation is the square of the
variance.
Statistical values can also be used to determine expected periods of optimum
performance in the life cycle of products, systems, hardware, or equipment. For
example, if the life cycle of humans were plotted on a curve, the period of their
lives that may be considered “most useful” in terms of productivity and success,
MEAN
BELL CURVE
Figure 5.3
Curve of normal distribution (“bell curve”).
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SUMMARY
67
INFANT
MORTALITY
RANGE
Age progression
Number of deaths
USEFUL LIFE
RANGE
OLD AGE
RANGE
DEATH
Figure 5.4
Human life cycle curve.
BREAK-IN
PERIOD
(Failure rates
decreasing)
Time progression
Failure rate
USEFUL LIFE
(Failure rates
constant)
WEAR OUT
(Failure rates
increasing)
Figure 5.5
Reliability curve (“bathtub curve”).
could be represented as shown in Figure 5.4. This plotted curve is often referred to
as the bathtub curve because of its obvious shape. A similar curve can be used to
determine the most productive period of a product’s life cycle based upon the five
known phases of that life cycle, as discussed in Chapter 3. The resultant curve, known
as a product’s reliability curve, would look like that which appears as Figure 5.5.
During the break-in period, failures in the system may occur more frequently, but
decreasingly less frequent as the curve begins to level toward the useful life period.
Then, as the system reaches the end of its useful life and approaches wear-out, more
frequent failure experience is likely until disposal.
SUMMARY
A detailed understanding of all statistical terms and the formulas that are associated
with their use is not an essential prerequisite to the practice of basic system safety
analysis. A familiarization with their meaning is more than adequate for this purpose.
The primary difference between statistics and probability is that probability attempts
to predict the occurrence of future events, whereas statistics is used to develop models
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
68
PROBABILITY THEORY AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
based upon past performance. Using such statistical models facilitates the probabil-
ity process of predicting future events. Mathematically, probability is expressed as
a value between 0.0 and 1.0 with an infinite number of possibilities in between.
Once a probable event has either occurred or not occurred, it becomes a statistic
and the basis for future models. These models are needed because most events in
the real world are considered empirically probable (i.e., many possible outcomes).
The relatively few events where all probable results can be preassigned because of
limited possible outcomes (tossing a coin, drawing a playing card, rolling a die, etc.)
seldom require extensive statistical modeling to ensure proper calculation of those
probable outcomes.
Hence, statistical evaluation of failures that occur during a product’s life cycle
help to develop a failure curve which, because of its shape, is referred to as a bathtub
curve. When considering the usefulness of a product, the curve becomes a reliability
curve for that product.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Part II
System Safety Analysis:
Techniques and Methods
Part II of this Basic Guide to System Safety will present and briefly discuss some
of the more common system safety analytical tools used in the performance of the
system safety function. Through example analyses of hypothetical mechanical and/or
electrical systems, the reader should become familiar with each type of system safety
analysis method or technique discussed. However, it must be understood that it is not
within the limited scope of this volume to provide a detailed explanation of each of
these methods and/or techniques. The intention is to merely introduce the reader to
the various tools associated with the system safety process. The value of each concept
in the analysis of hazard risk will be dependent upon the individual requirements of
a given organization or company.
It is hoped that the introductory information provided here will familiarize the
reader with the primary tools of system safety analysis and provide an opportunity
to experiment with these basic concepts, as they may be applied to their own safety
function or responsibility.
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
69
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6
Preliminary Hazard
Analysis
INTRODUCTION
The Preliminary Hazard Analysis (PHA) is an analysis of the generic hazard groups
present in a system, their evaluation, and recommendations for control (TAI 1989).
The PHA is usually the first attempt in the system safety process to identify and
categorize hazards or potential hazards associated with the operation of a proposed
system, process, or procedure. In many instances, however, the PHA may be preceded
with the preparation of a Preliminary Hazard List (PHL). The identification of hazards
on a PHL can occur through the use of a variety of methods such as but not limited to
r Checklists,
r Hazard matrices,
r The lessons learned process,
r Equipment descriptions,
r Accident/incident report data,
r Past operational history of similar tasks, and/or
r Review of other historical records.
After examining all available information, a PHL can then be prepared. Though not
entirely necessary in the overall system safety program, a well-developed PHL can be
expanded and further developed into the basis of a PHA. The methods used to develop
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
71
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
72
PRELIMINARY HAZARD ANALYSIS
the PHA are similar, but more specific, than those used during the development of the
more generalized PHL. Since the primary objective of the PHL is to document and
provide an initial assessment of hazards identified very early in the process, the PHL
should be performed and completed in the concept phase of the product or project
life cycle (Stephenson 1991; Roland and Moriarty 1983). As stated, the PHL can
then be used as the foundation upon which to base the PHA, and it will also assist in
ascertaining the extent of the system safety effort which must follow. Also determined
as part of the PHL is a preliminary Risk Assessment Code (RAC). The RAC assigns or
determines a risk level for a given hazard and is used to assess the scope of the system
safety effort required, as well as identify the need for alternate design approaches
early enough in the concept phase to be considered feasible. As stated above, the PHL
can be developed from information obtained through a variety of input sources such as
checklists (see Figures 6.1 and 6.2 for examples of checklists), informal meetings and
conferences, and/or other previously performed analytical methods and techniques
such as the Energy Trace and Barrier Analysis (ETBA) (Stephenson 1991). Chapter 8
will discuss the ETBA in more detail. Figure 6.3 shows a typical PHL worksheet
and provides some instruction on the types of information usually recorded in the
separate columns of the PHL.
The PHA Development Process
The PHA (Figure 6.4) is perhaps the most critical analysis which will be performed
because it is usually the first in-depth attempt to isolate the hazards of a new or, in
some cases, modified system. The PHA will also provide rationale for hazard control
and indicate the need for further, more detailed analyses, such as the Subsystem
Hazard Analysis (SSHA) and the System Hazard Analysis (SHA). The PHA is usually
developed using the system safety techniques known as Failure Modes and Effects
Analysis (FMEA) (Chapter 9) and/or the ETBA. Data required to complete the PHA
include, but is not necessarily limited to, any available data having to do with the
following:
r Mission or scope/intent of product
r Environment in which the product will operate
r Systems concepts used to develop the product
r Equipment/hardware to be used with product
r Operational criteria for product end use
PHA development can be somewhat simplified through the use of a Preliminary
Hazard Matrix (Figure 6.5) identifying a Generic Hazard Group. An example of such
a group is listed in Table 6.1. For clarification, the Generic Hazard Group elements
from Table 6.1 are defined as follows:
Collision: Item breaking loose and impacting other items. It hits something, or
something hits it. Typically caused by structural failure, procedural error, or
inadequate handling of equipment (i.e., human behavior).
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
INTRODUCTION
73
GENERIC HAZARD EVALUATION CHECKLIST
SYSTEM/PROGRAM:
PERFORMED BY:
DATE:
COMMENTS
NO
YES
HAZARDOUS ELEMENT SOURCES
ACCELERATION
CHEMICAL (DISSOCIATION,
REPLACEMENT, SUBSTITUTION)
ELECTRICAL ELEMENTS
AND OPERATIONS
ENVIRONMENT
LEAKAGE
MOISTURE
OXIDATION
OFF-GASSING OF MATERIAL
PROPERTIES
PRESSURE HIGH, LOW,
RAPID CHANGE
STRESS
STRUCTURAL FAILURE
Figure 6.1
Sample generic hazard evaluation checklist.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
74
PRELIMINARY HAZARD ANALYSIS
GENERIC ENERGY SOURCE EVALUATION CHECKLIST
SYSTEM/PROGRAM:
PERFORMED BY:
DATE:
ENERGY SOURCE (Kinetic/Potential)
YES
NO
COMMENTS
ACTUATING DEVICES
CATAPULTED OBJECTS
CHARGED ELECTRICAL
CAPACITORS
CHEMICAL REACTION
CRYOGENIC MATERIAL
EXPLOSIVE CHARGES
ELECTRICAL GENERATORS
ELECTROMAGNETIC, IONIZING
NONIONIZING RADIATION
ELECTROSTATICE CHARGE
OR DISCHARGE
FALLING OBJECTS
FUEL/PROPELLANTS
GAS GENERATORS
HEATING DEVICES
PRESSURE CONTAINERS
INITIATORS/IGNITORS
NUCLEAR
PLACEMENT OF SYSTEMS,
COMPONENTS
PRESSURE
PUMPS, BLOWERS, FANS
ROTATING/MOVING MACHINERY
SPRING – LOADED DEVICES
STORAGE BATTERIES
SUSPENSION SYSTEMS
Figure 6.2
Sample energy source evaluation checklist.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
PRELIMINARY HAZARD LIST
PROGRAM:
DATE:
ENGINEER:
PAGE:
ITEM
HAZARDOUS
CONDITION
COMMENTS
RAC
EFFECTS
CAUSE
Assigned
Number
Sequence
List the nature of the
condition
(refer to Generic
Hazard Group,
If necessary).  
Describe what is
CAUSING the stated
condition to exist  
If allowed to go uncorrected,
what will be the effect or
effects of the hazardous
condition?  
Hazard
Level
assigned
Provide supporting comments
and/or descriptions of rationale
used to form conclusions
Figure 6.3
Sample preliminary hazard list (PHL) worksheet.
PRELIMINARY HAZARD ANALYSIS
PROGRAM:
DATE:
ENGINEER:
PAGE:
ITEM
HAZARDOUS
CONDITION
RECOMMENDATIONS
RAC
EFFECTS
CAUSE
ASSESSMENTS
Assigned
Number
Sequence
List the nature of
the Condition
(refer to Generic
Hazard Group,
Group, if
necessary).  
Describe what is
CAUSING the stated
condition to exist  
If allowed to go
uncorrected, what will be
the effect or effects of the
hazardous condition?  
Hazard
Level
assigned
Recommended actions to
eliminate or control the
hazard
NOTE: Use the Hazard
Reduction Precedence
Sequence
Probability or
Possibility of
occurrence:
• Likelihood
• Exposure
• Magnitude
Figure 6.4
Sample preliminary hazard analysis (PHA) worksheet (Note: Worksheet will provide for
hazards identification, evaluation, and resolution).
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
76
PRELIMINARY HAZARD ANALYSIS
PRELIMINARY HAZARD MATRIX
DATE:
SYSTEM/PROGRAM EVALUATED:
PERFORMED BY:
GROUP
HAZARD
POTENTIAL FAILURE AREAS
HAZARD GROUP
Procedural
Mechanical
Leakage/
Spill
Pressure
Electrical
Structural
SLIPS, TRIPS, FALLS
FALL FROM HEIGHT
DECOMPOSITION
ELECTRICITY
FIRE / EXPLOSION
ASPHYXIATION
PATHOGENS
MENTAL DISORDERS
TEMPERATURE VARIATIONS
RADIATION / LASERS / UV LIGHT   
MOVING EQUIPMENT / 
PINCH POINTS
Figure 6.5
Sample preliminary hazard matrix (Note: Examples have been used under “Potential Areas
For Failure”).
Contamination: The release of toxic, flammable, corrosive, condensable, or par-
ticulate matter into a system. Typically caused by leakage, spillage, loose
objects, abrasion, growth, or component failure.
Corrosion: Structural degradation of metallic or nonmetallic equipment. Can be
caused by leakage of reactive material, material incompatibility, or environ-
mental conditions.
TABLE 6.1
Sample Generic Hazard Groups
Generic hazard groups
Slips, trips, falls
Fall from height
Decomposition
Electricity
Fire/explosion
Asphyxiation
Pathogens
Mental disorders
Temperature variations
Radiation/lasers/UV light
Moving equipment
Pinch points
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
INTRODUCTION
77
Electrical Shock: Personnel injury or fatality due to electric current passing
through any portion of the body. Typically caused by contact with energized
electrical circuit, procedural error, component failures, static discharge, human
factors, or environmental conditions. Can also degrade equipment operation.
Fire: Rapid oxidation of combustibles. Caused when fuel and oxidizer are exposed
to an ignition source. Hypergolic fuels also ignite without an external source
of ignition. Typically caused when fuels are raised above their ignition temper-
atures in the presence of an oxidizer or heat source.
Explosion: A violent release of energy due to overpressurization. Can be caused by
fire, chemical reaction, excessive temperature, component failure, or procedural
error.
Loss of Habitable Atmosphere: Removal or displacement of oxygen to below
19.5% by volume. Can be caused by a wide variety of conditions and situations.
Pathological: Injury to persons caused by disease, bacteria, microorganisms, and
so on.
Psychological: Injury to persons due to mental conflicts such as sudden noises,
perceived danger, preoccupation, or distraction, and so on.
Temperature Extremes: Injury to persons or damage to equipment due to depar-
ture of temperature from normal range. Extreme heat or cold can be due to
the introduction of fire or cryogenics, respectively. May also be caused by
component failure or procedural error. Results can be burns and/or structural
damage.
Radiation: Exposure of persons or sensitive equipment to ionizing radiation,
nonionizing radiation, ultraviolet or infrared light, lasers, electromagnetic or
radio frequency emanations. Results can be burns to persons, structural damage
to equipment, initiating of ordnance devices, and so on.
Figure 6.3 is a PHA worksheet. Upon comparison to Figure 6.4, the difference
between the PHL and PHA worksheet is the level of detail in the PHA. While the PHL
typically identifies the hazardous event, casual factors, system effects, and the RAC,
the PHA goes further by providing recommended actions and referencing standards
which are in violation, if applicable.
Fundamentally, there are basic questions which must be asked when developing
the PHA. Although some may seem obvious or somewhat simplistic, they should
still be considered. If such questions are not asked, the system safety professional
runs the risk of conducting an incomplete analysis. All too often, the most obvious or
visible may tend to conceal some associated level of risk of exposure to a hazard(s).
Basic questions which should be resolved include
r What is the process/system under analysis?
r Does it involve people?
r What must the system always do?
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
78
PRELIMINARY HAZARD ANALYSIS
r What must the system never do?
r Are there any codes/standards to address this?
r Has the system been used before?
r What does the system produce?
r What elements are taken into the system?
r What elements are discharged from the system?
r What could cause a release of a hazard?
r What is the assessment of this release?
r What/where are the energy sources/barriers?
r Is timing critical to safe operations?
r What are the inherent generic hazards in the system?
r How could control be improved?
r Will management accept these controls?
Tools such as the Hazard Element Evaluation Checklist, Figure 6.1, and the Energy
Source Evaluation Checklist, Figure 6.2 (TAI 1989), can be used to facilitate the
development of the PHL, Figure 6.3. The PHL, together with the PHA matrix can
then be utilized to prepare the PHA worksheet.
The PHA matrix, Figure 6.5, and the PHA worksheet, Figure 6.4, both serve to
formalize the question/answer process associated with PHA development.
The PHA Report
Once all the data have been evaluated and the PHA worksheet is completed, a for-
mal report should be written documenting the results of the analysis. The narrative
report typically includes a summary of all significant findings associated with oper-
ational risk. Recommendations for hazard elimination/control are also included in
the report as well as suggestions for follow-on analyses. Although not entirely nec-
essary, depending on the nature of the operation, process, or system, it is also useful
to include a brief description of the project itself, its purpose and/or function as it
relates to overall operations. The PHA/PHL worksheets are usually provided in the
report as backup data to verify the report contents. Finally, the PHA report should
also include a brief discussion of the methods used to develop the analysis (ETBA,
FMEA, checklists, matrices, etc.), so that the reader can validate the report data, if
required (Stephenson 1991).
PHA EXAMPLE
In an effort to demonstrate the utility of the preliminary hazard list and the preliminary
hazard analysis in the initial evaluation of system risk, an example of a simple vapor
degreaser in a manufacturing facility will be examined. This illustration will utilize
the PHL in the development of the PHA in the method discussed earlier in this
chapter. However, it must be noted from the onset that this example is intended to aid
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
PHA EXAMPLE
79
in the understanding and use of the basic PHL and PHA concepts. It is therefore only
an example and cannot, in the interest of space and feasibility, be considered an all-
encompassing preliminary hazard analysis of a vapor degreasing system. Therefore,
this analysis will only highlight some of the many possible hazard risks associated
with this proposed project.
System Description
Figures 6.6 and 6.7 show the basic concept and layout of the proposed vapor degreas-
ing system. It will be comprised of a single, open-top solvent degreasing tank, con-
tained in a concrete pit. The proposed tank measurements are 6 feet long, 4 feet wide,
and 4 feet deep. The pit measurements are only slightly larger than the tank. The
tank is to be constructed of steel with welded seams. Inside the tank, approximately
20 inches from the top, a 1-inch wide cooling coil is built into the wall of the steel
tank structure. This coil, which contains a super-cold refrigerant, travels around the
entire inner circumference of the degreasing tank. The refrigerant source is a 2-gallon
reservoir tank located adjacent to the tank-pit area. A small electric motor is used to
circulate the coolant through the coil. A compressor is also built into this system to
ensure the refrigerant remains at a designated temperature. In order to generate the
desired degreasing vapors, the solvent in the tank is heated to approximately 118–
120◦F, at which point it becomes a gas. As the heated gas moves toward the cold air
near the cooling coil, it instantly vaporizes into a cloud which remains permanently
Overhead
bridge crane
Electrical service
panel
Parts holder
Operator’s
console
Compressor
Cooling coil
inside tank
Shop floor
surface level
Refrigerant
storage tank
4’
Solvent liquid
level in tank
Vapor-cloud
area
6’
Figure 6.6
Proposed vapor degreasing operation work area: planar view.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
80
PRELIMINARY HAZARD ANALYSIS
6’
Electrical service
panel
Over head
bridge crane
1.5 ton
Compressor
Cooling coil
inside tank
Designated
drying area
Solvent liquid
level in tank
Parts sorting
work table
Operator’s
console
Refrigerant
storage
tank
Parts holder
Figure 6.7
Proposed vapor degreasing operation work area: dimensional view.
suspended inside the tank, as long as the tank heat is applied or the coil remains cool.
This vapor-cloud blanket, which will generally encompass a 10- to 15-inch thick
space inside the tank, is where the degreasing will take place.
1,1,2 trichloro-1,2,2 trifluoroethane (Freon R 113) has been selected as the solvent
to be used as the degreasing agent because of its relatively high toxicity threshold
(1000 ppm), its nonflammable, noncombustible characteristics, as well as its excel-
lent degreasing capabilities. The vapor degreasing tank is designed to hold up to
120 gallons of liquid. However, the operating procedures for this system specify a
maximum of 100 gallons of liquid at any given time.
System Operation
The vapor degreaser is to be used to clean finely machined metal parts prior to painting.
The parts will be placed in a specially designed holding rack and lowered into the
vapor tank utilizing a small crane, which has been installed over the degreasing work
station. As the parts reach the vapor cloud inside the tank, the operator is required
to stop the crane and monitor a timer. The parts should remain in the vapor cloud
for not more than 10 minutes, otherwise metal-pitting might occur and the relatively
expensive parts would be ruined. After the parts are cleaned, they are removed and
placed in a designated drying area where they are air-dried for 15 minutes, inspected,
and removed for painting.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
PHA EXAMPLE
81
Preliminary Assessment
Since we have begun this analysis during the concept phase of the project life cycle,
it would be prudent to develop a preliminary hazard list of basic safety concerns
associated with the project concept. Then, as the project moves into the design phase,
a PHA can be performed based upon the information contained on the PHL.
In considering the limited amount of information provided above regarding the
proposed project, several questions can now be asked to determine the level of possible
hazard risk associated with system operation. Utilizing the Generic Hazard Evalu-
ation Checklist (Figure 6.1) and the Generic Source Evaluation Checklist (Figure
6.2), the analyst can begin to identify and address the fundamental inputs required to
develop the PHL worksheet (Figure 6.3). Once each checklist is complete, the infor-
mation can literally be transferred to the PHA worksheet for further analysis and
development. Figure 6.8 is a completed Hazard Evaluation Checklist for the vapor
degreasing system. Note the utility of the checklist and its ability to assist the analyst
in isolating hazard concerns, as well as eliminating those areas which are not appli-
cable. Already, in these early stages of analysis, the system safety effort is beginning
to focus on essential hazard concerns that will eventually be fully addressed, eval-
uated, controlled, and/or eliminated. Figure 6.9 uses the Energy Source Evaluation
Checklist for the proposed degreasing project. The PHL can now be completed in
greater detail using the data provided here.
Evaluation of System Risk
The information provided above on this proposed system reveals many serious or
potentially serious hazard risk levels. When asking the basic questions associated
with the identification of system risk, the analyst can begin to categorize the severity
of a potential mishap and evaluate the probability of a possible occurrence (refer
Tables 2.1 and 2.2). The following is an itemized listing of a few of the initial safety
concerns which should be resolved prior to proceeding into the design phase of this
project’s life cycle. The identification of these potential hazard risks is the result of
proper utilization of the basic system safety tools discussed thus far.
r Crane Operations
Hazard Risk Item 1: Personnel under suspended loads
The proposed design will require that the crane/load combination be moved
directly over the operator’s console. OSHA requires that crane operators
avoid transporting loads over personnel [OSHA 29 CFR §1910.179(n)
(3)(vi)].
Risk Assessment 1: 2A (refer Tables 2.1–2.3)
Because the severity of such an occurrence is categorized as “critical” (i.e.,
severe injury, occupational illness, or system damage) and, due to the pro-
posed system design, the probability of a mishap of this nature is categorized
as "frequent" (i.e., likely to occur frequently), the risk assessment matrix
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
82
PRELIMINARY HAZARD ANALYSIS
GENERIC HAZARD EVALUATION CHECKLIST
SYSTEM/PROGRAM:
Vapor Degreaser  
SYSTEM/PROGRAM:
PERFORMED BY:
DATE:
COMMENTS
NO
YES
HAZARDOUS ELEMENT SOURCES
05/2013
J. Doe
ACCELERATION
CHEMICAL (DISSOCIATION,
REPLACEMENT, SUBSTITUTION)
Crane movement into/out of tank; possible
movement over operator
Use of Freon 113 violates provisions of the
Clean Air Act of 1990 (CFC Phase-out)
ELECTRICAL ELEMENTS
AND OPERATIONS
ENVIRONMENT
Heating elements/controls in tank to heat
Freon 113
Closed room, no ventilation provisions; Pit 
is open-top with no barriers installed
LEAKAGE
MOISTURE
No provisions for tank leakage into pit 
(Containment? Emergency Response? etc.)
Condensation on outside surface of steel 
tank around cooling coil
OXIDATION
OFF-GASSING OF MATERIAL
PROPERTIES
Possible rust/corrosion problems due to 
moisture build-up on steel tank (see above)
Heated Freon will off-gas.  Hydrofluoric 
acid gas is one hazardous by-product
PRESSURE HIGH, LOW,
RAPID CHANGE
STRESS
N/A
stress of liquid mass 
Tank weld points –
STRUCTURAL FAILURE
and temperature extremes   
Crane failure; tank failure
Figure 6.8
Vapor degreaser: generic hazard evaluation checklist.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
PHA EXAMPLE
83
GENERIC ENERGY SOURCE EVALUATION CHECKLIST
SYSTEM/PROGRAM:
Vapor Degreaser
J.Doe
05/2013
PERFORMED BY:
DATE:
COMMENTS
NO
YES
ENERGY SOURCE (Kinetic/Potential)
ACTUATING DEVICES
CATAPULTED OBJECTS
Crane system
N/A
CHARGED ELECTRICAL
CAPACITORS
CHEMICAL REACTION
CRYOGENIC MATERIAL
Heating mechanism; operator’s control
panel; crane system
Potential Freon reaction with steel tank
Refrigerant in cooling coil
EXPLOSIVE CHARGES
ELECTRICAL GENERATORS
ELECTROMAGNETIC, IONIZING
NONIONIZING RADIATION
ELECTROSTATICE CHARGE
OR DISCHARGE
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
FALLING OBJECTS
FUEL/PROPELLANTS
GAS GENERATORS
HEATING DEVICES
N/A
N/A
Crane securing, proper rigging; structural
integrity of crane
Heating element in tank
PRESSURE 
INITIATORS/IGNITORS
NUCLEAR
PLACEMENT OF SYSTEMS,
COMPONENTS
N/A
N/A
N/A
Tank open pit, no barriers or controls; 
Crane movement over operator’s head
PRESSURE CONTAINERS 
PUMPS, BLOWERS, FANS
ROTATING/MOVING MACHINERY
SPRING – LOADED DEVICES
N/A
N/A
N/A
Crane system
STORAGE BATTERIES
SUSPENSION SYSTEMS
N/A
N/A
Figure 6.9
Vapor degreaser: generic energy source evaluation checklist.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
84
PRELIMINARY HAZARD ANALYSIS
assigns this risk a classification of 2A which, according to Table 2.3, is an
unacceptable level of risk.
Recommendation 1: To ensure maximum possible reduction of the hazard risk
associated with personnel working under suspended loads, the design should
consider either relocation of the operator console, or, installation of a positive
stop in the crane trolley to prevent any movement beyond a predetermined
point.
Hazard Risk Item 2: Liquid Solvent Contacting Parts
The crane operator is required to lower the parts holding rack into the vapor
degreasing tank to a level which places the parts directly in the center of the
vapor cloud blanket. This effort requires visual contact between the operator
and the inside of the vapor tank. From the control console, it may not always
be possible for the operator to have total visual contact at all times with the
parts rack, especially when it enters the tank. If the parts are lowered too far,
they could end up submerged in the liquid solvent and possibly be ruined.
Also, if there is a failure of the crane wire rope or the sling supporting the
parts rack, the parts might fall into the liquid and retrieval would be extremely
difficult.
Risk Assessment 2: 2B (refer Tables 2.1–2.3)
Liquid contact with parts is assessed as a “critical” occurrence, since the poten-
tial damage to the parts would most likely render them unusable. The likeli-
hood of such a mishap is considered highly "probable," based on the proposed
system design. The Risk Assessment Matrix (Table 2.3) indicates that a risk
classification of 2B is unacceptable. Therefore, the system safety precedence
tells us that such risk should be approached with the intention of elimination,
or possible reduction to an acceptable level.
Recommendation 2: To prevent the potential for operator error, the design should
provide another automatic stop for the crane so that the parts cannot possibly
be lowered any further into the tank than the required level. Also, as an added
precaution or as a possible alternative to the automatic crane stop, a raised
mesh floor could be installed in the tank just above the liquid level so that
contact with the solvent liquid would not be possible in any case.
Hazard Risk Item 3: Parts Remain Too Long in Vapor
The procedure for this operation indicates that if the machined parts remain
in the vapor cloud for more than a 10-minute period, possible pitting will
occur and the expensive parts will be ruined. To prevent this occurrence, the
operator will be required to monitor a timer and remove the parts rack when
the 10 minutes has elapsed. It is estimated that the degreasing operation
will occur approximately 25 times during an 8-hour shift. Based upon this
frequency and the monotony associated with any clock-watching activity, the
probability of an operator error is considered extremely high.
Risk Assessment 3: 2C (refer Tables 2.1–2.3)
Because the probability of the above described mishap has been assessed as
“occasional” (i.e., likely to occur sometime in the life of an item) and the
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
PHA EXAMPLE
85
severity of the mishap outcome can be categorized as “critical,” the risk
classification from Table 2.3 indicates that such a mishap is assessed as
2C. This level of risk, although not totally unacceptable, by definition, is
still undesirable and must therefore be reduced or eliminated through design
controls.
Recommendation 3: One way to eliminate the risk of this occurrence is to
automate the system so that, once the operator lowers the crane into the tank
and the crane stops at the predetermined level, the crane will automatically
begin to rise out of the vapor cloud after the 10-minute degreasing operation.
However, while such a system would eliminate the risk, it would, of course,
be very expensive to install and maintain. There are also inherent hazards
that exist whenever any equipment starts automatically. As an alternative,
installation of a simple automatic timing device in the operator’s console
that will sound an alarm after the 10-minute period has elapsed will alert the
operator to remove the parts from the tank. This alternative recommendation
would not totally eliminate the risk, but it will reduce, or control it to a much
lower and therefore acceptable level.
r Tank Design/Structural Considerations
Hazard Risk 4: Welded Seams on Tank
The welded seams on the vapor degreasing tank offer a potential hazard risk.
Failure of any weld point below the liquid level would obviously result in
loss of some or all of the liquid solvent into the surrounding concrete pit
area. Considering the stress of liquid mass inside the tank, as well as the
temperature extremes associated with solvent heating and off-gas cooling,
the possibility of weld failure occurring sometime during the life cycle of
this system must be carefully evaluated.
Risk Assessment 4: 3D (refer Tables 2.1–2.3)
Although weld seam failure can occur, its likelihood can be described as
“remote” (i.e., unlikely, but may possibly occur in the life of an item). If
the seams were to fail, the severity of the outcome is assessed as “marginal”
(i.e., minor injury, occupational illness, or system damage). Hence, the Risk
Assessment Matrix classifies this incident as acceptable, with a review by
engineering and management personnel.
Recommendation 4: Although such a risk may be considered acceptable, the
system safety analyst is still obligated to recommend possible risk reduction
techniques to provide management with additional criteria by which to accept
the level of risk. In this case, one possible recommendation would be to install
a unibody tank (i.e., all one piece, custom designed, with no welded seams).
This would totally eliminate the risk of tank failure due to faulty welded
seams. However, because such a system would most likely be extremely
expensive, management is not likely to consider a unibody tank design.
A more economic alternative would be to X-ray each welded seam prior
to tank installation. The X-ray will show any faulty or improperly welded
seams which could then be corrected. Although the risk of weld seam failure
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
86
PRELIMINARY HAZARD ANALYSIS
will not be entirely eliminated through the use of X-ray analysis, the risk
of failure would be greatly reduced to the point of highly improbable and,
therefore, acceptable.
Hazard Risk 5: Tank Layout and Design
This particular design provides no means of accessing the exterior wall of the
tank for inspection, once it is installed in the pit. Close design tolerances
between the exterior tank wall and the concrete pit will not permit mainte-
nance or inspection of such possible failure components as the solvent-fill
connection point, the heating element and associated circuitry, the refrigerant
connection to the cooling coil, and general tank structural integrity. Also, in
the unlikely event of tank leakage, or the possible release of Freon liquid
from the solvent-fill connection point, the solvent would accumulate inside
the pit area. Depending upon the amount of the release, there might not be
sufficient containment space in the pit. Removal of spilled solvent would
also be difficult because of the close design tolerances.
Risk Assessment 5: 4D (refer Tables 2.1–2.3)
The probability of tank leakage might be assessed as “remote,” especially if
X-ray analysis of welded seams is performed prior to installation. Even if it
were to leak, the resulting severity would be considered negligible (i.e., less
than minor injury, occupational illness, or system damage) since the liquid
would be contained in the concrete pit area. Therefore, the Risk Assess-
ment Matrix recommends such a risk be classified as acceptable, without
review.
Recommendation 5: Even though the risk may be classified as acceptable with-
out review, the system safety effort cannot take for granted any level of risk
without providing management with possible alternative design recommen-
dations for their consideration and review. As stated above, there is a slight
possibility that the pit might not be able to contain all the liquid in the event
of a major leak or spill. Also, the inspection and maintenance of tank system
components is not entirely possible based upon the proposed design. The
concrete pit could be designed with much larger dimensions than that of the
tank. This design change would permit authorized access into the pit area
for inspection and maintenance of the tank structure and any of its compo-
nents or connections. Also, if a pit redesign is considered, the new layout
should allow for total liquid containment. This could be accomplished by
constructing a sump area in the pit and installing a raised, corrugated floor.
The tank would sit on the suspended steel floor instead of the pit bottom
itself. If a leak were to occur, it would all be contained below the base of
the tank. A sump pump could be installed in the pit that would automatically
activate and remove any liquid from the sump area. If an automatic pump
proves too cost prohibitive, a manual pump could be lowered into the con-
tainment area to transfer the liquid out of the sump and into drums for
disposition and removal as a hazardous waste. Of course all these recom-
mended design changes will obviously increase the cost of the entire project
and must therefore be carefully considered. The point of the system safety
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
PHA EXAMPLE
87
effort is to provide management with risk reduction choices so that accurate
informed decisions can be made.
r Electrical: Design and Layout Considerations
Hazard Risk 6: Location of Service Panel
The electrical service panel in the vapor degreasing work area is located on
the other side of the tank pit, away from the operator’s console and behind
a compressor and the refrigerant storage tank. Aside from violating OSHA
criteria regarding accessibility of electrical service panels [OSHA 29 CFR
§1910.303(h)(3)], the proposed design does not afford quick access to circuit
breakers in the event of an emergency. If a problem occurs with the crane,
the compressor, or the solvent heating system, and the operator is unable
to quickly de-energize the electrical power source, then the possible risk of
hazard might be quite severe, depending upon the nature and extent of any
such problems.
Risk Assessment 6: 2C (refer Tables 2.1–2.3)
Obviously, such “critical” mishaps as those described above might possibly
occur during the life cycle of this system (occasional). The Risk Assessment
Matrix indicates that such risk is undesirable and must, if at all possible, be
controlled/reduced to acceptable levels or eliminated totally.
Recommendation 6: A redesign of the layout is required to ensure appropriate
access to the electrical service panel. If possible, it should be located adjacent
to the operator console area so the operator can easily access the electrical
circuits in the event of an emergency. If total relocation of the service panel
from one side of the room to another is not possible or feasible due to building
limitations, room design, and so on, then the operator’s console should be
provided with a “dead-man” switch that will de-energize all electrical power
to the vapor degreasing system, including the crane. This relatively simple
solution will provide the operator more control over the risk associated with
critical electrical systems and subsystems.
Other possible areas of consideration for hazard risk include, but are certainly
not limited to the following:
r Pit/Tank Area: Wide-open, no barricades, personnel could fall into tank. Recom-
mend barriers such as stanchions with rope or chain, or guard rails as required
by OSHA at 29 CFR §1910.23(a)(5).
r Parts Holder Synthetic Web Sling: Use of synthetic web slings in areas where
fumes or vapors are present is a violation of OSHA 29 CFR §1910.184(i)(6).
Constant exposure to solvent vapors could result in premature failure of synthetic
web sling. Recommend use of wire rope sling instead.
r Room Ventilation: A remote potential does exists for oxygen displacement in
the room if the cooling coil inside the tank should fail. Such a failure would
allow Freon gas to accumulate in the work area and deplete the level of oxygen
below the life sustaining level of 19.5% by volume. Recommend installation
of an exhaust ventilation system as required by applicable regulations and/or
manufacturer recommendations or requirements.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
88
PRELIMINARY HAZARD ANALYSIS
r CFC Phase-Out Requirements: The solvent selected for use in the degreasing
tank operation is listed as a designated chlorofluorocarbon, the use of which was
subjected to the phased-out requirements stipulated under the Clean Air Act of
1990. Since this system is still in the design phase, it is not too late to consider
an alternate degreasing solvent that is not a threat to the earth’s ozone layer.
(NOTE: While it is true that the use of Freon 113 is not a particular hazard to
personnel or the equipment used in this degreasing process, its use still poses
an alleged threat to the earth’s environment and, therefore, its identification as
a potential “hazard” is warranted).
The list of potential hazard risk will continue to grow, the more extensive the
analysis becomes. There are many other possible design hazards associated with
this system which must be considered and evaluated during the concept phase of
the project life cycle. However, for the purpose of this example, the above listed
items have been provided and discussed to demonstrate the level of analysis which
is typically conducted when developing a PHL. Figure 6.10 is an example of how
some of these identified hazards might be recorded on the PHL worksheet. Please
note that in this example only five of the many possible hazards have been recorded.
As the preliminary hazard list is finalized, much of the information pertaining to
identified hazards that have not been corrected or controlled can be transferred to the
PHA worksheet as the project enters the design (as shown on Figure 6.11). Finally,
PRELIMINARY HAZARD LIST
PROGRAM:
DATE:
Vapor Degreaser
05-06-2013
ENGINEER:
PAGE:
ITEM
HAZARDOUS
CONDITION
COMMENTS
RAC
EFFECTS
CAUSE
Jane Doe
1  of  1
Structural failure of
crane equipment  
COLLISION  
1
Injury to personnel;
Damage to tank or
equipment
RE:  ANSI B30
requirements for cranes 
2A  
Crane lowers parts too
far into tank,
submerging parts in
liquid Freon  
COLLISION  
2
No provision to prevent the
improper use  or
operation of  cranes 
2B  
Possible loss of usable
parts
Tank leakage or
structural
failure  
STRUCTURAL  
3
Injury to personnel; loss
or damage to parts or
equipment
Weld points are not
inspected before initial use 
3D  
TEMPERATURE
EXTREMES
4
Solvent is heated to
120°F; Cold liquid
refrigerant also
present
Possible personnel
injury upon contact with
either
Contact not probable due to
isolation of chemicals 
4D  
Cooling-coil system
failure during tank
operations  
LOSS OF HABITABLE
ATMOSPHERE
5
Possible personnel
injury or death due to
displacement of oxygen
in room
RE:  ANSI codes for
ventilation requirements 
2D  
Short in heating
system  
ELECTRICAL SHOCK  
6
Possible personnel
injury or death
RE:  NEC and OSHA
requiirements for
electrical safety 
2A  
Figure 6.10
Vapor degreaser: preliminary hazard list worksheet.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
PRELIMINARY HAZARD ANALYSIS
PROGRAM:
DATE:
Vapor Degreaser
05-05-2013
ENGINEER:
PAGE:
ITEM
HAZARDOUS
CONDITION
RECOMMENDATIONS
RAC
EFFECTS
CAUSE
ASSESSMENTS
Jane Doe
1  of  1
Injury to personnel;
Crane Failure  
COLLISION  
1
damage to tank or
equipment
Personnel possibly 
2A  
working under 
suspended loads 
Install positive stop 
1.
mechanism in crane 
path to avoid 
exposure
Operator’s
2.
Relocate
Console away from 
crane movement path
Parts damaged due to
Crane Failure  
COLLISION  
2
Unacceptable risk 
2B  
Install positive stop
1.
contact with liquid
solvent
due to high 
probability of liquid 
contact 
mechanism in crane 
path to prevent 
possibility of liquid 
contact
Install suspended 
2.
floor inside tank,
above liquid level
Solvent leak into outer
Tank Weld Failure  
STRUCTURAL  
3
Remote possibility 
3D  
Install uni-body tank 
1.
pit area; system
damage
due to stress and
temperature 
extremes
2.
X-ray welded seams 
prior to installation
Figure 6.11
Vapor degreaser: preliminary hazard analysis worksheet.
89
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
90
PRELIMINARY HAZARD ANALYSIS
the PHA Report can be generated based upon the evaluation and analysis of system
hazard risk, as described earlier in this chapter.
SUMMARY
In system safety analysis, the initial process begins with the development of the
preliminary hazard list during the project or system concept phase. Although it is not
always compiled in all cases, an available PHL can become the working foundation
for the development of the preliminary hazard analysis during the design phase of
the project life cycle.
Use of a variety of system safety concepts and tools, such as the order of precedence
for hazard reduction, the hazard severity and probability tables, and the hazard risk
matrix, will assist the analyst in determining the appropriate risk assessment code
to assign to a particular hazard risk. The RAC will prioritize for management the
specific level of risk associated with a specific, identified hazard concern.
The information recorded on the PHA worksheet together with the PHA report,
will greatly facilitate the performance of other beneficial system analyses (such as
the Subsystem Hazard Analysis, the Failure Mode and Effect Analysis, and the
Operating and Support Hazard Analysis) which may be accomplished during the
remaining phases of the product life cycle.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
7
Subsystem and System
Hazard Analyses
INTRODUCTION
A Subsystem Hazard Analysis (SSHA) or a System Hazard Analysis (SHA) may be
required depending upon the complexity of a given program or project. Both the
SSHA and the SHA are often referred to as one-in-the-same by many system safety
professionals (Stephenson 1991). However, as explained here, the two methods are
slightly different and, if used properly, they provide for a more complete evaluation
of a given system.
The SSHA can provide specific details about the hazards associated with many
subsystems, or only one subsystem. The SHA provides an analysis of the system as
a whole, with all subsystems working together. The SSHA should be performed as
early in the design phase as possible. Some experts recommend the initial SSHA be
conducted as early as 35% of design completion. However, realistically, exact timing
of the SSHA will usually be dependent upon the availability of the required subsystem
data such as project description documentation, complete and accurate drawings and
schematics, and applicable regulatory codes and/or safety design standards. The PHL
(if available) and the preliminary hazard analysis (PHA) should also be used in
preparing the SSHA. Any relative lessons learned will also be effective in developing
the SSHA. As a minimum, the SSHA should address at least the following elements
of the hazard identification process:
r Hazard-initiating component(s)
r Component hazardous modes
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
91
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
92
SUBSYSTEM AND SYSTEM HAZARD ANALYSES
SYSTEM/SUBSYSTEM HAZARD ANALYSIS
PROGRAM:
ENGINEER:
DATE:
PAGE:
ITEM
HAZARDOUS
CONDITION
CAUSE
EFFECTS
RAC
STANDARDS
RECOMMENDED
CONTROLS
SYSTEM/SUBSYSTEM:
CONTROLLED
RAC
Figure 7.1
Sample subsystem/system hazard analysis (SSHA) worksheet.
r System operational mode(s) for each component
r Hazard effects of each operational mode
Once all the available data have been examined, the system safety engineer can
then begin to develop the SSHA using the SSHA worksheet, as shown in Figure 7.1.
It should be noted again that the SSHA is intended to provide an analysis of the
hazards associated with an individual subsystem or group of systems. Therefore, it
should also be emphasized that the SSHA, by itself, will not provide a complete
picture of the entire system or any hazards not related to the specific subsystems
examined. Although this principle is somewhat basic, it must be clearly understood
prior to initiating any SSHA. There is a danger of overlooking other hazards of the
total system if the SSHA is taken alone without adequate consideration of the entire
project. To prevent the potential for this occurrence, the SHA should be developed
using data obtained during the performance of the SSHA. To conduct an SSHA, it
is recommended that the system safety engineer utilize the Failure Mode and Effect
Analysis (FMEA) and/or the Fault Tree Analysis (FTA) techniques, as described in
Chapter 10 and Chapter 12, respectively, in this text.
The Subsystem Hazard Analysis Report
The SSHA report is completed after the SSHA is fully developed. If more than one
SSHA is performed (i.e., at the 35%, 50%, and/or 65% design phase), a detailed
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SSHA EXAMPLE
93
report should be prepared after each SSHA to adequately document any findings
and recommendations (Stephenson 1991). The SSHA report will typically contain a
full description of the subsystem(s) which were the subject of the analysis and their
relationship/function with regard to total system operation. A summary of all findings
resulting from the analysis are also provided in the narrative of the report, as are any
recommendations to improve hazard control and risk reduction. The report should
also provide an evaluation of existing or planned hazard controls as well as identify
areas where further controls are recommended or required. The SSHA will further
clarify the control of any risk associated with a hazard by assigning a “controlled
RAC” to the hazard, after recommended controls have been put into place. The use of
the controlled RAC facilitates the accurate tracking of a specific hazardous condition
as it relates to a specific subsystem. As with the PHA report, the SSHA report
should discuss the techniques and methodology utilized during the performance of
the SSHA and provide copies of the SSHA worksheets used to develop and finalize
the report. Finally, any criteria for risk acceptance should also be detailed in the report
to establish the baseline from which the SSHA had been developed. Such criteria
may have been developed by a variety of means such as customer preference or past
performance experience.
SSHA EXAMPLE
To understand the utility of the SSHA, an example of a hydraulic elevator will be
evaluated. A typical hydraulic elevator system consists of many subsystems such
as car buffers and bumpers, plunger mechanism, counterweight system, car door
system, car safeties, counterweight safeties, and cylinders. For simplicity, this SSHA
will consider only the hydraulic plunger subsystem. This SSHA is being performed
on an existing elevator (i.e., during the operational phase).
The elevator is one of two that serve an extremely busy three-story office building.
The SSHA is necessary as a result of two individual reports from passengers claiming
a “slipping sensation” in the car while waiting for the doors to open at their designated
floor landing. When the doors finally opened, the normally level car was uneven by
as much as 4 inches. An incident investigation has been ordered by the building
operator to determine possible causes of the alleged slippage. As part of the problem
assessment process, the SSHA will evaluate the plunger system to determine potential
hazards, identify the possible cause and effect of those hazards, and to establish a
risk assessment code which will categorize the level of acceptable risk associated
with any identified hazard. These findings will be recorded on the SSHA worksheet.
Once all hazard conditions are understood, the SSHA will provide recommended
control actions. The analyst will also show, on the SSHA worksheet, a modified
risk assessment code that reflects the level of acceptable risk each hazard would be
reduced to, once recommended control actions are in place.
System Description
Figure 7.2 is a diagram of the major hydraulic elevator components, showing the
plunger location in relation to the other associated subsystems. As a subsystem, the
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
94
SUBSYSTEM AND SYSTEM HAZARD ANALYSES
Counterweight
Plunger
Passenger car
Car
counterweight
rope
Overhead sheave
Governor
Governor rope
Plunger joint
Governor
tension sheave
Shaft floor
Cylinder pit
Cylinder
Jack and jack
head
Figure 7.2
Hydraulic elevator system.
plunger mechanism consists of two primary components that will be evaluated in this
SSHA: the plunger joints and the hydraulic cylinder.
The plunger joint is a connection in the plunger extension mechanism that permits
the telescoping action during operation which causes the desired lifting or lowering
movement of the elevator car. There are a total of two plunger joints in this system.
Figure 7.3 shows the components of the plunger joint.
The hydraulic cylinder contains the hydraulic oil necessary to enable the lifting
action of the elevator. The total vertical travel distance of this particular elevator
is 26 feet (7.92 meters) and the cylinder volume is 3 gallons per foot (11.4 liters
per meter). A total of 77 gallons (291.5 liters) of oil is encased by the cylinder
when the elevator is in the uppermost position in the shaft. When fully lowered, the
volume of oil in the cylinder is decreased to 42 gallons (159 liters). There is another
15 gallons (58.6 liters) of oil reserve over and above that required to raise the car to its
maximum extension. There is an additional 4 gallons (15.6 liters) of oil contained on
the lines connecting the power unit to the cylinder. Hence, the total oil contained in
this system during full extension is equal to 96 gallons (383.4 liters). The hydraulic
oil was filled at the time of installation, and the same oil is expected to serve the
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SSHA EXAMPLE
95
Figure 7.3
Plunger joint.
system throughout the entire operational phase of the product life cycle (estimated at
approximately 40 years). The lifting jack, located inside the cylinder, operates under
hydraulic pressure to move the plunger up or down.
Evaluation of Subsystem Hazard Risk
The information provided above on the elevator plunger subsystem reveals some
component areas that will require further examination. The intent of this particular
SSHA is to identify possible hazardous conditions caused by a failure of one or
more components in the plunger subsystem that could possibly result in the reported
slippage of the elevator car in the shaft. Once these hazards are identified and the
cause and effect determined, the SSHA can recommend control actions to reduce the
risk to a lower, more acceptable level. In analyzing the elevator to the subsystem level,
it would be prudent to review any previous analyses that may have been performed
on this system during the design or production phases. In particular, the PHA will
offer excellent, fundamental risk assessment information. Of more utility in this
case would be the data recorded on any failure mode and effect analyses performed
on the elevator system. Depending on the nature and scope of the FMEA, it may
provide precise information pertaining to the plunger subsystem in which case the
subsequent SSHA process will be greatly facilitated. For the purpose of this example,
we will assume that the previous FMEA on the elevator system did not examine the
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
96
SUBSYSTEM AND SYSTEM HAZARD ANALYSES
plunger components in particular and, therefore, no prior hazard analysis information
is available for evaluation.
The SSHA has identified two possible conditions that could cause the passenger
car to slip in the shaft once it has come to a stop at a designated floor landing.
r Plunger Joint
Hazard Condition Item 1: Loss of Hydraulic Pressure
A loss in oil pressure due to a small system leak occurring around the plunger
joint due to o-ring failure could result in a possible slipping of the elevator car
until replacement oil is obtained from the reservoir or until the suspect joint
was once again contained (submerged) within the plunger mechanism (i.e.,
as in retraction during car lowering). If the condition is allowed to continue,
it is possible that the leak could become more serious with the resultant
effect of pressure loss during operation and subsequent uncontrollable and
undesirable lowering of the passenger car.
Risk Assessment Code, Item 1: 3D
The required design safety factors and hydraulic pressure bleed-off rates will
not permit a catastrophic result in the event of pressure loss. At most, in the
event of a continuous oil pressure loss, the elevator would descend slowly to
the ground floor level at a rate consistent with that of the loss. Therefore, a
severity level of marginal has been assigned and a probability of occurrence
level of remote has been determined.
Recommendation 1: Even though an RAC of 3D is considered acceptable with
review, hazard risk reduction is still warranted, especially in consideration
of the two reported incidents. In order to ensure maximum possible reduc-
tion of the hazard risk associated with a failure of the plunger joint com-
ponents, it is recommended that routine preventative maintenance inspec-
tions include replacement of the plunger joint o-ring component. This action
would further reduce the probability of occurrence to the improbable level.
Once recommended control actions are in place, a controlled RAC of 3E
(marginal/improbable) can be assigned.
r Hydraulic Cylinder
Hazard Condition Item 2: Loss of Hydraulic Pressure
A small leak in the hydraulic cylinder system would result in a loss of pressure in
the cylinder and a subsequent inability to maintain constant cylinder volume.
Any damage to the cylinder jack head would cause a leak of hydraulic oil
from the cylinder system. Such damage is possible due to an abrupt contact
with the plunger mechanism and/or a failure in the neoprene seal between
the jack head and the plunger. The system safety analyst has learned from the
PHA report that there is no provision for oil recovery in the event of damage
to the jack head.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SSHA EXAMPLE
97
Risk Assessment Code, Item 2: 2B
Loss of oil due to jack head damage is probable since no provision currently
exists for oil recovery. This condition has been assessed as critical due to the
potential result of such a hazard (i.e., total and sudden pressure loss in the
cylinder system; possible rapid, although not uncontrolled, descent of the
passenger car).
Recommendation 1: Installation of an oil recovery ring on the jack head, as
required by ANSI A17.1, Rule 1302.3h (Safety Code for Elevators & Escala-
tors) would significantly reduce the hazard risk associated with this condition.
Frequent inspection of the neoprene seal for damage and routine engineering
evaluation of clearance tolerance between the plunger and jack head will
also ensure system integrity and reduce risk. A controlled RAC of 2E (criti-
cal/improbable) could be assigned to this condition once the recommended
controls are implemented.
Figure 7.4 is the SSHA worksheet, completed to show the analysis of the two
conditions discussed in this example. Additional evaluation can occur regarding the
elevator system, with concentration on other possible hazardous conditions associated
with other elevator subsystems and components.
SYSTEM/SUBSYSTEM HAZARD ANALYSIS
PROGRAM:
ENGINEER:
DATE:
PAGE:
ITEM
HAZARDOUS
CONDITION
CAUSE
EFFECTS
RAC
STANDARDS
RECOMMENDED
CONTROLS
SYSTEM/SUBSYSTEM:
CONTROLLED
RAC
Maintenance
John Doe
ELEVATOR PLUNGER
11-16-2005
1  of 1
LOSS OF
PRESSURE
1
Oil leakage from
plunger joint(s)  
Elevator
passenger car
may “slip” in
shaft; alarm to
passengers   
3D
Routine and
scheduled
inspections;
frequent O-ring
replacement
3E
ANSIA17.1
Rule1302.1
LOSS OF
PRESSURE
2
Oil leakage from
cylinder or
damage to jack
head 
Sudden and
abrupt but not
uncontrolled
slippage of 
elevator
passenger car in
shaft, alarming
passengers    
2B
Provide oil 
recovery ring for 
jack head; ensure 
proper
maintenance and
inspection of
cylinder plunger
system     
2E
ANSIA17.1
Rule1302.1
Figure 7.4
Elevator plunger subsystem/system hazard analysis worksheet.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
98
SUBSYSTEM AND SYSTEM HAZARD ANALYSES
SUMMARY
The SSHA evaluates hazardous conditions, on the subsystem level, which may effect
the safe operation of the entire system. In the performance of the SSHA, it is prudent
to examine previous analyses that may have been performed such as the PHA and the
FMEA. Ideally, the SSHA is conducted during the design phase and/or the production
phase, as shown in Chapter 3, Figure 3.4. However, as discussed in the above example,
an SSHA can also be done during the operation phase, as required, to assist in the
identification of hazardous conditions and the analysis of specific subsystems and/or
components. In the event of an actual accident/incident investigation, the completed
SSHA can be used to assist in the development of an FTA by providing data on
possible contributing fault factors located at the subsystem or component level.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
8
Operating and Support
Hazard Analysis
INTRODUCTION
The purpose of the Operating and Support Hazard Analysis (O&SHA), sometimes
called the Operating Hazard Analysis (OHA), is to
1. Identify all hazards in the operation of a system that are inherently dangerous
to personnel, or in which a human error could be hazardous to equipment or
people, and
2. Provide recommended risk-reduction alternatives during all phases of tasks or
operations that are controlled by written procedures (TAI 1989; Stephenson
1991).
Simply stated, the O&SHA encompasses an analytical review of the controlling
documents to ensure hazard elimination or control and concentrates heavily on the
performance of people (human factors and human behaviors) and their relationship
to the hazards within the task. The focus is primarily upon the maintenance and
operation of the system, rather than the system components themselves.
ERGONOMICS
The O&SHA examines those operating functions which may be inherently dangerous
to personnel, or in which personnel error could be hazardous to equipment or people.
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
99
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
100
OPERATING AND SUPPORT HAZARD ANALYSIS
TABLE 8.1
Typical Human Errors Commonly Made by the Three Groups Having Impact
on a System
Operator
▶Omit required actions
▶Performance of nonrequired actions
▶Failure to recognize needed action
▶Improper (early, late, wrong) response
▶Poor communications
▶Maintenance error
Designer
▶Lack of hazard awareness
▶Designing requirement for repetitious tasks
▶Requiring quick operator response for hazard recognition/resolution
▶Requiring operator to perform rapid, complex computations
▶Design sensor requirements outside human range
▶Requiring continuous operator attention
▶Requiring operator to work in poor environment
▶Requiring simultaneous physical activity and communication
▶Designing or providing improper tools
▶Providing inadequate or faulty written procedures
Manager
▶Providing improper or inadequate training
▶Creating unrealistic production schedules
▶Assigning inexperienced personnel to complex tasks
▶Providing inadequate oversight or guidance during work operations
In fact, ergonomics (the scientific study of the interrelationship between people, their
occupations, and their work environment) is a major element of the O&SHA.
Humans are involved in almost every facet of most system development and
operations. The human interface, therefore, presents the most critical area of system
safety analysis (DOE SSDC-2 1976). It is a widely known and often too readily
accepted fact that human error is a major causal factor (either primary or contributory)
in many mishaps. Table 8.1 lists common errors which often result from a breakdown
of the human component (DOE SSDC-2 1976). The information presented in the table
obviously indicates that the designer has a heavy responsibility for reducing the
probability that a human error will cause additional problems with the operation
of the system. The designer must consider all possible outcomes of a given human
error and attempt to design the system such that the end result will be a fail-safe
situation (i.e., the system fails in a safe, nonenergy transferring mode). Because
certain elements of human behavior are somewhat predictable, the analyst should
take such elements into consideration when evaluating a human interface system. For
example, people will usually follow procedures that involve
1. Minimal mental and/or physical effort;
2. Reduction in time to complete a given task;
3. Elimination of discomfort;
4. Elimination of monotony or fatigue.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
WHEN TO PERFORM THE O&SHA
101
TABLE 8.2
Characteristics of Common Human Errors
Physical
▶Anthropometric data/limitations
▶Controls and barriers: types, direction, blind operations, etc.
▶Equipment and hardware design inadequate
Work space requirements
▶Position of operator relative to activities performed
▶Task requirements—adequate space to perform
▶Limitations to ingress into and egress out of work area
▶Adequate isolation from other tasks
▶Loads are too heavy
Environmental
▶Illumination adequate to perform task
▶Atmospheric conditions
▶Noise levels in area
▶Motion—vibrations of (or in) working environment
▶Poor or inadequate ventilation
▶Temperature extremes
Limitations
▶Prolonged concentration
▶Personal stress (physical or mental)
▶Inadequate rest
▶Illness
▶Boredom
Human error has been defined as an action that is inconsistent with or contrary
to established behavioral patterns considered to be normal, or that differs from pre-
scribed procedures that may or may not result in an adverse or unwanted event (TAI
1989). The common causes of human error can be divided into the following four
categories and evaluated in an O&SHA (TAI 1989):
1. Physical
2. Work space requirements
3. Environmental
4. Limitations to human performance
Each of these categories are further broken down in Table 8.2 for clarification.
Of course these causal breakdowns are not all-inclusive and more can certainly be
added to each category. The point is, once these causes are examined and determined
applicable to a specific task or operation, the analyst can then recommend design
principles and control methods to prevent occurrence or reduce the possibility of
human errors.
WHEN TO PERFORM THE O&SHA
Because of the human factor element and the necessity to reduce risk of injury to
personnel, the O&SHA should be performed as early in the product life cycle as
possible, or, at the very least, prior to the first operational use of the system. This is
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
102
OPERATING AND SUPPORT HAZARD ANALYSIS
not always entirely feasible because the design of the product or system must usually
be practically complete before maintenance and operating procedures are developed.
At any rate, the O&SHA should be complete at the end of the production phase, prior
to first use (Stephenson 1991).
Exact timing of the O&SHA will obviously be contingent upon the desired end
use of the product or system. For example, in many instances, the final or end product
will simply be an updated or modified version of one that already exists. In fact,
Update O&SHAs are typically performed routinely during a product’s entire useful
life cycle. Therefore, numerous procedures, operating instructions, and maintenance
documents should already exist. Also, if it is truly a case of modification/update, then
the end use of the product will most likely already be defined and the O&SHA can
then be performed fairly early in the process.
In order to properly and accurately perform an O&SHA, the analyst should have
access to detailed project descriptions and all appropriate design information. Operat-
ing sequence diagrams, functional diagrams, equipment panel layouts (if applicable),
and other available drawings should be examined. Review of applicable regulatory
codes and performance standards is also essential. The Preliminary Hazards List (if
there is one), the PHA, and any subsequent SHAs are all excellent sources of docu-
mented information pertaining to the subject system which may prove as invaluable
time-savers when performing an O&SHA. As previously mentioned, one primary
objective of the O&SHA is to analyze maintenance procedures and operational docu-
ments for hazard control/elimination. These documents should therefore obviously be
available for review. Finally, equipment operational performance data, facility pecu-
liarities and other specifics, and information about the personnel (skills training, num-
ber of personnel involved, the size of the organization, etc.) that will operate/maintain
the system must also be reviewed. Once the hazards associated with or generated by
each of these performance and operational characteristics have been identified and
evaluated, an O&SHA worksheet can be completed, as shown in Figure 8.1.
The final O&SHA report should include a description of the system or product,
including any operating and maintenance organization/personnel and procedures. The
main body of the report should provide a narrative concentrating on the key findings
of the analysis with any recommended hazard control solutions. Usually, a calendar
schedule showing anticipated dates of subsequent, future O&SHAs is included in the
report along with the completed O&SHA worksheets (Stephenson 1991).
The properly executed O&SHA will address the total system interface and pro-
vide control measures for personnel interface hazards. It identifies all personnel and
equipment within a determined hazard range of operations and evaluates caution
and warning requirements. Special skills or additional training requirements are also
typically identified in a completed O&SHA.
It cannot be overemphasized that the O&SHA is an extremely valuable analytical
tool which concentrates on the human interface with the system, both from an oper-
ations and maintenance standpoint. Therefore, because of the critical requirement of
ensuring that operations and maintenance personnel are protected from any hazards in
their tasks, the importance of a properly performed O&SHA is of paramount concern
in the system safety analysis process.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O&SHA EXAMPLE
103
OPERATING AND SUPPORT HAZARD ANALYSIS
SYSTEM:
Operational Mode:
Performed By:
ITEM
PROCEDURE
TASK
HAZARDOUS
CONDITION
CAUSE
EFFECT
STATUS/
RECOMMENDATION
HAZARD
LEVEL
ASSESSMENT
Page:
Date:
Figure 8.1
Sample operating and support hazard analysis (O&SHA) worksheet.
O&SHA EXAMPLE
To demonstrate the simple practicality of the Operating and Support Hazard Analysis,
this example will evaluate the operator control console configuration for the vapor
degreasing operation discussed in Chapter 6 (Preliminary Hazard Analysis). The
reader will recall from Figures 6.6 and 6.7 that this operation required an operator to
maintain a controlling position at a rigid console while manipulating panel controls
to operate a crane, the vapor degreasing tank instrumentation, monitor operational
timing, coolant flow and, at the same time, maintain visual contact with expensive
parts during the performance of the degreasing task. All of these human-dependent
tasks place a certain stress load on human performance and, indeed, some of the
possible risk associated with operator error were initially identified on the PHL and
PHA worksheets for this operation (Figures 6.10 and 6.11, respectively).
Scope and Purpose of the Example O&SHA
Using initial data identified during the development of the PHA, this O&SHA will
only concentrate on the design and layout of the operator’s control console. The
analysis will focus on the actual placement of the console itself, as well as the
location of the controlling dials, levers, indicator gauges, and switches on the main
panel. If the possibility for hazard risk reduction exists due to simple panel/console
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
104
OPERATING AND SUPPORT HAZARD ANALYSIS
redesign, the O&SHA will make the appropriate recommendations. This exercise
is not intended to serve as a complete O&SHA for the vapor degreaser system.
The purpose here is to provide a sufficient amount of information to illustrate the
performance parameters of an O&SHA.
Risk Assessment
Figure 8.2 is a close-up view of the control console and main operator’s panel as per
current design specifications. The initial placement of the console itself, as well as the
layout of the various dials, switches, gauges, and levers on the panel, as seen here, has
been established based upon availability of panel space with minimal consideration
of operator interface requirements.
Initially, the following risk potential exists if the current design were utilized:
r Monitor Indicator Gauges
Hazard Condition 1: Gauge Similarity and Placement
Cause: There are three indicator gauges which must be monitored by the operator
of this console panel. Current design has each gauge nearly identical in their
appearance, although their respective functions are entirely different. The
three gauges, placed side-by-side, provide indication and operational status
for solvent temperature, solvent liquid level in the tank, and coolant system
pressure.
Effect: Because of their location on the panel and their likeness to each other,
there is a risk of operator misinterpretation or misreading of the respective
gauges during task performance. This error could result in the following
hazards:
1. Solvent temperature inaccuracies (too high or too low). If the solvent
temperature is too low, improper or inadequate liquid-to-gas conversion
will result. This condition would have an adverse impact on the efficiency
of the degreasing operation. If the temperature is too high, the solvent
off-gassing rate would accelerate and either create an excessive amount
of vapor in the tank (waste of solvent) or cause solvent vapors to escape
the tank creating a hazard to personnel.
2. Solvent liquid level in the degreasing tank could be inadequate (too high
or too low). If the liquid level were too low, there is a potential that
insufficient levels of vapor will be generated to accomplish the required
amount of degreasing. If the solvent liquid level were too high, there is
the possibility that the liquid would contact the metal parts and render
them useless.
3. Insufficient coolant pressure could result in a lack of coolant flow through
the system, which in turn would effect the vaporizing action in the tank.
Vapors could escape into the room and threaten personnel health by
displacing the oxygen level in the room. If the pressure were too high,
there is a slight risk of line rupture, although this is highly improbable
due to excessive system design safety factors.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O&SHA EXAMPLE
105
CRANE SPEED
FAST
SLOW
F
0
60
120
GAL
0
60
120
PSI
0
60
120
SOLVENT TEMP
SOLVENT LEVEL
COOLANT PRESS
EMERG STOP
ON
OFF
COOLANT
ON
OFF
SOLVENT
CRANE MAIN
TIMER ON
CRANE STOP
CRANE START
CRANE RIGHT
CRANE LEFT
TIMER OFF
4
0
8
1
0
1
1
6
1
0
0
3
5
4
RESET
PARTS COUNT
Figure 8.2
Close-up of existing crane operator’s control console.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
106
OPERATING AND SUPPORT HAZARD ANALYSIS
Risk Assessment 1: 1B
A hazard level of 1B has been assigned since, based upon the current panel design,
it is quite probable that such an operator error could occur and the effects (threat to
human health, equipment/parts damage, etc.) are considered catastrophic.
Recommendation 1: Relocate and redesign gauges, as indicated in Figure 8.3.
Position all indicator devices for the solvent system on one side of the panel, and all
coolant controls on the opposite side.
r Activation of Critical Systems
Hazard Condition 2: Switch Location and Design
Cause: The control switches for coolant flow and solvent flow are located side-
by-side and are identical in appearance. As with the gauge assessment above,
the result of this design scheme would be an increased potential for operator
error in system activation.
PSI
0
60
120
SOLVENT TEMP
SOLVENT LEVEL
COOLANT PRESS
EMERGENCY 
ALL STOP
ON
OFF
SOLVENT FLOW
L
RESET
PARTS COUNT
AUTO TIMER
INDICATOR LIGHT
ON
OFF
COOLANT FLOW
FLOW INDICATOR
CRANE SPEED
S
F
R
CRANE DIRECTION
CRANE START
CRANE STOP
CRANE MAIN POWER
4
0
8
1
0
1
1
6
1
0
0
3
5
4
Figure 8.3
Close-up of modified crane operator’s control console after the O&SHA analysis.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
O&SHA EXAMPLE
107
Effect: Inadvertent activation or deactivation of either system, at the wrong time
during the operational flow, would adverse hazardous effects as follows:
1. Deactivation of the coolant flow instead of solvent flow would result in
a steady loss of coolant in the system. This would allow Freon vapor to
escape the tank and threaten human health.
2. Deactivation of the solvent flow instead of coolant flow would allow an
excess amount of solvent liquid into the tank and subsequent equipment
or parts damage is likely.
Risk Assessment 2: 1A
Due to the close proximity of one switch to the other, coupled with their identical
construction and markings and the criticality in proper system operation, the potential
for occurrence of human error in this instance is regarded as frequent. Due to the
nature of the potential results (injury/death, property damage, and/or loss), this hazard
risk has been categorized as catastrophic.
Recommendation 2: Relocate critical system control switches, as indicated in
Figure 8.3. Position each switch on panel in close proximity to the system they are
required to control (i.e., solvent and coolant).
r Crane Operator Controls
Hazard Condition 3: Control Placement and Layout
Cause: The crane control dials, buttons, and levers are literally scattered about
the operator panel in the current design configuration. There appears to be no
thought in the layout of these critical controls. The operator is subsequently
required to maintain crane control while manipulating a variety of randomly
placed control devices. For example, the speed control lever in the current
design (Figure 8.2) is not even located on the main panel. Also, “crane left”
and “crane right” controls are identical and placed opposite to and right next
to each other (i.e., “control left” is on the right and “control right” is on the
left).
Effect: An inexperienced operator will have great difficulty remaining cognizant
of all critical crane control functions. An experienced operator would also
have some problem operating this panel if the current design layout is used,
especially under stressful or emergency conditions. The resultant effect could
be a loss of parts into the tank, inadvertent activation of similar-looking
control dials and knobs, and subsequent misdirection of the crane load.
Risk Assessment 3: 2B
Based upon the current design layout, there is a high potential for frequent crane
control errors. Since the resultant effect of this hazard would cause damage
or loss of parts, as well as processing schedule delays, the hazard category of
critical has been assigned.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
108
OPERATING AND SUPPORT HAZARD ANALYSIS
OPERATING AND SUPPORT HAZARD ANALYSIS
SYSTEM:
Operational Mode:
Performed By:
ITEM
PROCEDURE
TASK
HAZARDOUS
CONDITION
CAUSE
EFFECT
STATUS/
RECOMMENDATION
HAZARD
LEVEL
ASSESSMENT
Page:
Date:
Vapor Degreaser –Parts Prep.
Normal Configuration
John Doe
29 April 2013
1  of 1
MAIN
CONSOLE
OPERATION
1
Gauge similarity
and Placement
1. Solven
    Temp. Errort 
2. Solvent
    Liquid Level
    Error  
3. Coolant
    Pressure
    Error 
1B
Relocate and
Redesign Controls
1. Injury;
    Solvent Loss
2. Injury; Loss of
    Parts 
3. Injury; Line
    Rupture
Operator Error
Probable; Results
Catastrophic 
Operator Error
Frequent; Results
Catastrophic 
MAIN
CONSOLE
OPERATION
2
Switch Location
and Redesign
1. Coolant
    System
    Activation
    Error  
2. Solvent
    System.
    Activation
    Error  
1A
Relocate and
Redesign Controls
1. Injury; Parts
    Damage
2. Parts Damage
    or Loss
CRANE
OPERATOR
CONTROLS
3
Control
Placement and
Layout 
1. Operator
    Error During
    Crane
    Operations  
2B
Relocate and
Redesign Controls
1. Misdirection of
    Crane 
Operator Error
Frequent; Results
Critical 
Figure 8.4
Crane operator’s control console O&SHA worksheet.
Recommendation 3: Redesign and relocate crane control devices to one central
location on the panel. Eliminate the use of similar dials or buttons as much
as design will permit. Figure 8.3 shows a suggested new layout. In addition,
different color switches can be used for critical functions such as “crane stop”
(suggest a red switch) and “crane start” (suggest a green switch).
Each of the above listed concerns have been recorded on the O&SHA worksheet as
shown in Figure 8.4. From here, the analyst can prepare the O&SHA report which will
detail each of these findings in much the same manner as provided in this example.
Of course there is potential for additional operator error as a result of this design.
These include, but are not limited to
Condition: Less than obvious location of the Emergency Power Shut-Off control.
Recommendation: Relocate and isolate the control to center of the panel.
Condition: Current procedure requires operator to manually activate a timer once
the parts are in the tank and deactivate it when the parts are retrieved.
Recommendation: Install automatic timer that will activate a flashing light indi-
cator to alert the operator when the timing sequence has expired.
Condition: Operator cannot see parts basket over the top of the control panel
because of the location of the parts counter mechanism on top of the console
cabinet.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SUMMARY
109
Recommendation: Relocate parts counter mechanism into the face of the console
cabinet (Figure 8.3). Since this is only a passive indication device, its location
on the panel itself is not critical.
Condition: Current labeling of control devices and indicators is difficult to read.
Recommendation: Use larger, more legible labels for control panel devices.
SUMMARY
The Operating and Support Hazard Analysis, or O&SHA, as discussed here is an
integral part of the system safety analysis process. It is especially useful when eval-
uating operations or tasks that rely heavily on human performance. The O&SHA
indicates that system design must consider the ergonomic or human-task interface
element to ensure the identification and elimination or control of some types of haz-
ard risk. The O&SHA is normally developed during the design phase of the project
life cycle, using inputs from a variety of sources including the preliminary hazard
analysis. However, the O&SHA can also be performed during the operations phase,
especially after a system modification has occurred. If the subject system is partic-
ularly maintenance-dependent, the O&SHA can also identify potential hazard risk
resulting from the human–machine interface that must occur during system servicing.
Where human task performance is concerned the importance of hazard risk reduc-
tion cannot be overemphasized. The O&SHA is an excellent tool to ensure the proper
and adequate identification of such risk and to provide recommendations for risk
reduction/control.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
9
Energy Trace and
Barrier Analysis
INTRODUCTION
The Energy–Barrier Concept
The Energy Trace and Barrier Analysis (ETBA) developed as a component of the
Management Oversight and Risk Tree (MORT) program as a means of providing
adequate analysis of accident cause. As discussed in greater detail later in Chapter 13,
the MORT program suggests that accidents are usually multifactorial in nature. In the
MORT program, an incident is defined as an unwanted flow of energy resulting from
inadequate barriers or having a failure without consequence. An accident is further
defined as an unwanted flow of energy or an environmental condition that results in
adverse consequences. Hence, an accident can occur because of a lack of adequate
barriers and/or controls upon an unwanted energy transfer associated with the incident
(DOE SSDC-4 1983; Stephenson 1991). The accident is usually preceded by initiating
sequences of planning or operational errors that eventually result in a failure to
adequately adjust to changes in human factors and/or environmental factors. Failure
to adequately adjust to these unplanned changes leads directly to unsafe conditions
and unsafe acts that arise out of the risk associated with the subject activity. These
unsafe conditions and unsafe acts, in turn, provoke the flow of unwanted energy.
When proper barriers are not in place or are not adequate to control this energy
flow, the resulting unwanted consequences (or accident) will undoubtedly occur. The
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
111
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
112
ENERGY TRACE AND BARRIER ANALYSIS
ETBA has been designed as an investigative tool with which to focus specifically
upon four primary areas of concern.
1. Energy source(s) within a given system;
2. The adequacy of any barriers or controls within the energy path;
3. The human factors interface; and
4. The eventual target(s) of unwanted/uncontrolled energy flow (Note: Targets
may be people or objects).
Uses of the ETBA
The ETBA is an analytical technique which can be of great assistance in the prepara-
tion of the preliminary hazard list (PHL). It can also be quite useful in the development
of a Preliminary Hazard Analysis (PHA), Subsystem Hazard Analysis (SSHA), or the
more general System Hazard Analysis (SHA). The ETBA can also be used, depend-
ing on the specific system under consideration, in the development of the Operating
and Support Hazard Analysis (O&SHA), and, of course, during the MORT process
from which the ETBA evolved.
In order to utilize the ETBA in the performance of the above listed system safety
analyses, certain essential data are required for evaluation. For example, if the ETBA
is to be performed on a specific manufacturing facility, then the analysis should
begin with an examination of completed facility drawings. If the ETBA is concerned
with a specific project, or a newly designed piece of manufacturing equipment, the
project plans and schematics must be evaluated. It should be noted that the level of
detail required is dependent upon the analysis itself. Development of a PHL will not
require extensive detail and evaluation. Whereas an ETBA in support of an SSHA
will meticulously analyze the project to the component level and detailed drawings
will, therefore, be required.
Performing the ETBA
The ETBA begins with the identification of the types of energy that will be associ-
ated with the project, program, or equipment. Types of energy which can result in
unwanted transfers include mechanical (rotating gear assemblies), electrical (ener-
gized systems or subsystems), potential (spring-loaded devices), kinetic (swinging
armatures or a moving crane hook), natural (wind, temperature, solar radiation),
radiation (ionizing, nonionizing, radiofrequency, electromagnetic), even biological
(pathogens and viruses have energy), and so on. The next step in the ETBA process
is to locate the exact source of the energy as it initially enters into the system or
process. From here, the analyst will literally trace or plot the energy flow throughout
the entire system. Next, wherever it may be possible for the flow of energy to contact
a target element (i.e., people or objects), adequate barriers or controls must be in
place. The ETBA will then identify all locations within the system where barriers
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
INTRODUCTION
113
are required, evaluate the adequacy of existing barriers, determine the risk associated
with each unwanted flow of energy and assign a Risk Assessment Code (RAC) to that
condition, and recommend barriers where none currently exist. Once completed, the
ETBA will facilitate any subsequent evaluation of risk levels that may remain in
the system after recommended barriers are installed (i.e., residual risk).
The ETBA Worksheet
Once the various types of energy affecting the system have been identified, the ETBA
worksheet should be completed. Figure 9.1 shows a sample ETBA worksheet. The
information recorded on the completed ETBA worksheet can then be used to perform
subsequent analyses (PHL, PHA, etc.) along with their related reports. In some cases,
depending upon the level of detail desired, the ETBA itself may provide an adequate
amount of information to be included in the final PHA. In fact, since hazardous events
can usually be associated with some type of energy transfer and, since accident causal
factors typically involve the absence of controls or the failure of existing barriers and,
ENERGY TRACE AND BARRIER ANALYSIS
PROGRAM:
ENGINEER:
DATE:
DRAWING
NUMBER
ENERGY
AMOUNT
& TYPE
BARRIERS
(CONTROLS)
POTENTIAL
TARGETS
RECOMMENDED
ACTIONS
RAC
NO.
ANALYSIS OF
BARRIER
EFFECTIVENESS
PAGE:
CONTROLLED
RAC
APPLICABLE
STANDARDS
Figure 9.1
Sample energy trace and barrier analysis (ETBA) worksheet.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
114
ENERGY TRACE AND BARRIER ANALYSIS
since the resulting effect(s) of a failure on system operations are often determined
in relation to the target of the unwanted energy flow, the information on the ETBA
worksheet can actually be transferred quite easily to the PHA worksheet discussed in
Chapter 6.
ETBA EXAMPLE
As stated earlier, the ETBA has great utility in determining the specific breakdowns
in energy barriers during an accident/incident investigation. The ETBA is also quite
useful in the analysis of new or existing systems to examine the adequacy of energy
barriers currently in place.
The following example will evaluate an existing oxygen supply system installed
at a fictitious hospital (Memorial General Hospital).
System Description
The oxygen system at Memorial General provides a high purity oxygen supply for
use by individual critical care patients in their rooms, as well as during surgical
procedures. The system consists of the following major components, as indicated in
Figure 9.2:
– 3000 psi gaseous oxygen supply tank, located in a fenced-in protected area,
outdoors, behind the hospital.
– Isolation valves, located throughout the system as needed.
– Main Distribution Service Panel, located in the hospital equipment room; it
functions to regulate the source supply pressure from 3000 psi to 250 psi.
Regulators, relief valves, and pressure indicating gauges are part of the Panel.
– Seam-welded conduit tubing, one inch in diameter, is used throughout the
system to transfer oxygen supply from the Main Distribution Service Panel to
the various demand locations.
– Several In-Room Service Panels are part of this system. Each patient room and
other needed locations are equipped with an In-Room Service Panel. The Panel
consists of an isolation valve, regulator hand valve (to reduce supply pressure
from 250 psi to a usable pressure of 20–30 psi), a pressure indicator gauge, a
pressure relief valve, a spring-loaded check valve, and a capped interface port
(for maintenance operations only).
The ETBA
The ETBA begins with an identification of the types of energy involved in this case.
For the purpose of this example, only the two primary sources shall be examined here.
Obviously, the very first concern is the presence of an extremely high pressure in a
confined system. The gas in this example (oxygen) is highly combustible and, thus,
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
P
Isolation valve
Legend
Pressure relief valve
Check valve, spring-loaded
Pressure gauge
Capped interface
Pressure regulating hand valve
Flow direction
Gaseous oxygen
3000 PSI
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
In-Room Service Panel
In-Room Service Panel
In-Room Service Panel
In-Room Service Panel
To
patient
To
patient
To
patient
To
patient
Interior/exterior
wall interface
Main Distribution
Panel
Figure 9.2
Schematic diagram of Memorial Hospital oxygen system.
115
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
116
ENERGY TRACE AND BARRIER ANALYSIS
ENERGY TRACE AND BARRIER ANALYSIS
PROGRAM:
ENGINEER:
DATE:
DRAWING
NUMBER
ENERGY
AMOUNT
& TYPE
BARRIERS
(CONTROLS)
POTENTIAL
TARGETS
RECOMMENDED
ACTIONS
RAC
NO.
ANALYSIS OF
BARRIER
EFFECTIVENESS
PAGE:
CONTROLLED
RAC
APPLICABLE
STANDARDS
Oxygen Supply System
Jane Doe
07-15-2013
1  of  1
High 
Pressure 
Gas  
MGHS
CMV-051834
Isolation
valves
Barriers 
adequate 
to prevent 
exposure
Barriers 
adequate 
to prevent 
exposure
Barriers 
adequate 
to prevent 
exposure
Barriers 
adequate 
to prevent 
exposure
Personnel
1C
1E
Fenced-off
oxygen tank
storage area
Personnel;
Property
1B
1E
Shatter-proof
gauges and
safety-related
components
Personnel;
Property
1D
3E
Distance from
personnel and
insulation
inside service
panels
Barriers 
adequate
to prevent 
exposure
to high 
noise 
levels
Personnel;
Property
2D
3E
Oxygen-rich
atmosphere  
MGHS
CMV-111604
Field-welded
tubing
assemblies;
scheduled
inspections
Ensure proper
procedures are
established and
followed
Increase
security around
hospital grounds
Ensure system
design is per
code
Dye-penetrant
inspection should
be performed
initially and every
five years
Personnel;
Property
1C
2E
ASME
OSHA 
29 CFR
1910.134
ASME
ASME
Figure 9.3
Completed energy trace and barrier analysis worksheet for oxygen system.
presents a second energy source of concern. Figure 9.3 reflects a partially completed
ETBA worksheet for the following example analysis:
r High Pressure Gas
Analysis of barriers/controls and potential targets:
1. Condition: 1) The 3000 psi source oxygen supply is transferred into the
hospital equipment room via a 2-inch supply line.
Potential Targets: 1) Personnel contact with high pressure gas during
maintenance and/or loading operations.
Risk Assessment: 1) The result of this potential risk of hazard is con-
sidered catastrophic with an occasional opportunity for occurrence
(RAC 1C).
Barriers/Controls: 1) There is currently an isolation valve in this line (on
the exterior side) which enables complete energy system shut-off prior
to energy flow into the facility.
Controlled Risk Assessment: 1) Barriers are considered adequate with a
Controlled RAC of 1E assigned.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
ETBA EXAMPLE
117
2. Condition: 2) Oxygen source is a tank located outdoors.
Potential Targets: 2) Unauthorized entry into or tampering with tank
supply area could threaten life and/or equipment.
Risk Assessment: 2) Results of such risk exposure would be catastrophic
(possible loss of life) and the frequency probable (RAC 1B).
Barriers/Controls: 2) The entire exterior oxygen storage area is fenced-off
and locked shut to prevent unauthorized entry.
Controlled Risk Assessment: 2) Barriers considered adequate. Addition of
security surveillance around the hospital grounds area would further
reduce the probability of risk exposure. A Controlled RAC of 1E is
assigned.
3. Condition: 3) Once in the equipment room, the oxygen supply enters the
Main Distribution Panel. The Panel contains regulators, relief valves, and
gauges to reduce the inlet pressure from 3000 psi to 250 psi.
Potential Targets: 3) Gauge or valve component failure could endanger
operator and/or damage surrounding equipment.
Risk Assessment: 3) There is a remote possibility that such failures will
occur with a potential hazard risk determined to be catastrophic, since
serious injury or death could result from such exposure (RAC 1D).
Barriers/Controls: 3) All gauges have been equipped with shatter-proof
glass to prevent hazardous release of energy due to gauge failure. All
valves have been rated and proof tested, in accordance with American
Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) requirements, for use in this
system.
Controlled Risk Assessment: 3) Design per applicable ASME codes have
reduced the likelihood of such a risk to improbable and, if component
failure were to occur, the shatter-proof gauges and rated valves would
decrease the hazard category to marginal. A Controlled RAC of 3E is
therefore assigned.
4. Condition: 4) In the event of pressure relief valve activation, potential dan-
gerous noise levels may result in close proximity to personnel.
Potential Targets: 4) Operating personnel and/or patients may be subjected
to damaging noise levels due to release of high pressure gas.
Risk Assessment: 4) The potential for unplanned or inadvertent system
relief is considered remote, based upon system design factors, and
the risk of hazard exposure has been determined critical since human
health may be effected (RAC 2D).
Barriers/Controls: 4) All relief valves are either isolated from personnel
by distance or are contained inside an insulated service panel.
Controlled Risk Assessment: 4) Barriers adequate, isolation by distance
acceptable and insulated control panels further reduce risk of exposure
to hazardous noise levels. A Controlled RAC of 3E is assigned because,
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
118
ENERGY TRACE AND BARRIER ANALYSIS
even if a relief did occur, the distance and isolation would create a
marginal, rather than critical risk.
r Oxygen Rich Atmosphere
Analysis of barriers/controls and potential targets:
1. Condition: 5) Pure oxygen is piped throughout a hospital facility, between
walls and ceiling/floor interfaces, and into various patient rooms and other
needed areas.
Potential Targets: 5) Hospital staff personnel and/or patients’ possi-
ble exposure to oxygen-rich conditions creating a potential for fire/
explosion and personnel injury/death as well as equipment damage/loss
in the event of a system leak or failure.
Risk Assessment: 5) The frequency of such an exposure, without controls,
is considered occasional and the results, catastrophic (RAC 1C).
Barriers/Controls: 5) All tubing and/or equipment connections have been
field welded to ensure an adequate seal. System is visually inspected
on an annual basis and hydrostatically leak tested every 5 years.
Controlled Risk Assessment: 5) Barriers/controls considered adequate. The
addition of a dye-penetrant analysis of all field joints would further reduce the
possibility of hazard risk exposure. Enforced “No Smoking” policies around
oxygen panels by the hospital staff and the patients will also decrease the risk
potential. A Controlled RAC of 2E is assigned.
There are, of course, many other possible energy sources which would, under
actual analysis, be evaluated for barrier adequacy. These may include electrical
equipment located in close proximity of the oxygen system and relative location of
heat- or spark-producing devices to the oxygen system.
SUMMARY
The ETBA is an effective system safety technique that can be used to evaluate the
adequacy of existing or planned energy flow barriers with regard to hazard risk
exposures. Typically, a well-developed ETBA is helpful in the development of a PHA
for the entire system or project. The ETBA is most useful in tracing the flow of
energy through a system to determine the cause factors that may have contributed to
an accident or loss. However, there is also utility in the evaluation of existing controls
to determine their value in preventing an unwanted flow of energy.
The ETBA is one of the fundamental tools of system safety analysis and, when
used, cannot only document the adequacy of hazard barriers and controls, but it can
also identify those energy flow areas within a system that may have been overlooked
as potential risk hazards during the concept or design phase of the project.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
10
Failure Mode and
Effect Analysis
INTRODUCTION
The Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (FMEA) is one of the more familiar of the
system safety analysis techniques in use. It has remarkable utility in its capacity to
determine the reliability of a given system. The FMEA will specifically evaluate a
system or subsystem to identify possible failures of each individual component in
that system and, of greater importance to the overall system safety effort, it attempts
to forecast the effects of any such failure(s). Because of the FMEAs ability to examine
systems at the component level, potential single-point failures can be more readily
identified and evaluated (Stephenson 1991). Also, although the FMEA should be
performed as early in the product life cycle design phase as possible (refer Figure 3.4)
based upon availability of accurate data, the system safety analyst can also use this
tool, as necessary, throughout the life of the product or system to identify additional
failure elements as the system matures.
Types of FMEAs
There are basically two types of Failure Mode and Effect Analyses. They are distin-
guished more by the target of the analysis than the actual analysis itself. In fact, the
steps required in the performance of each are very similar, only the items being ana-
lyzed differ. Perhaps the fundamental difference between the two is in their approach.
The first type, often referred to as the functional FMEA, utilizes the deductive rea-
soning approach (i.e., it begins by assuming a failure and focuses on the modes which
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
119
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
120
FAILURE MODE AND EFFECT ANALYSIS
could cause that failure to occur). The second type, the hardware or detailed FMEA,
uses the inductive approach by recognizing common failure modes and examining the
effects of those failures on the entire system, its subsystems, or just one subsystem,
depending upon the established scope of the FMEA (Stephenson 1991).
The functional FMEA targets any subsystems that may exist within an entire
system. The functional FMEA will evaluate each subsystem and attempt to identify
the effect of any failures in these subsystems. The analyst not only looks for the
possible effects of subsystem failures on the system as a whole, but also examines the
effect of such failures on other subsystems within the system. Although functional
FMEAs are not as common as the hardware FMEA, their basic utility should not
be dismissed. When a complex system (such as a nuclear reactor, an airliner, an
overhead bridge crane, or a robotic milling machine) consists of numerous secondary
subsystems, each with their own set of supporting subsystems, the functional FMEA
should be performed to ensure proper system safety evaluation at every level.
The second and more common hardware FMEA examines actual system assem-
blies, subassemblies, individual components, and other related system hardware. This
analysis should also be performed at the earliest possible phase in the product or sys-
tem life cycle. Just as subsystems can fail with potentially disastrous effects, so can
the individual hardware and components that make up those subsystems. As with
the functional FMEA, the hardware FMEA evaluates the reliability of the system
design. It attempts to identify single-point failures, as well as all other potential fail-
ures, within a system that could possibly result in failure of that system. Because the
FMEA can accurately identify critical failure items within a system, it can also be
useful in the development of the preliminary hazard analysis and the operating and
support hazard analysis (Stephenson 1991). It should be noted that FMEA use in the
development of the O&SHA might be somewhat limited, depending on the system,
because the FMEA does not typically consider the ergonomic element. Other possi-
ble disadvantages of the FMEA include its purposeful omission of multiple failure
analysis within a system, as well as its failure to evaluate any operational interface.
Also, in order to properly quantify the results, an FMEA requires consideration and
evaluation of any known component failure rates and/or other similar data. These
data often prove difficult to locate, obtain, and verify (Stephenson 1991).
Performing an FMEA
To properly execute a Failure Mode and Effect Analysis, certain detailed data must
be made available to the analyst. These data typically include, but certainly are not
limited to, the following fundamental information for each system, subsystem, and
their components (TAI 1989):
r Design drawings
r System schematics
r Functional diagrams
r Previous analytical data (if available)
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
INTRODUCTION
121
r System descriptions
r Lessons learned data
r Manufacturer’s component data/specifications
r Preliminary hazard list (if available)
r Preliminary hazard analysis
r Other system analyses previously performed
After the required information has been collected, the specific nature of the FMEA
must be established. A firmly defined scope of the FMEA will assist the analyst in
determining direction and ensure the FMEA remains in focus with these established
objectives.
Once the scope of the analysis has been established, the FMEA can begin by
examining the effects of specific failures in the system or subsystem. As these failures
are identified, they are recorded on the Failure Mode & Effect Analysis Worksheet
(Figure 10.1) for evaluation. The completed FMEA will then be very useful in the
performance of other system safety analyses such as an SHA or the SSHA.
The FMEA Report
Upon completion of the FMEA worksheets, the analysis data are transferred into
report format which should include, as a minimum, the following information:
Introductory Information: The analyst should provide basic information in this
section of the report which describes the purpose and scope of the FMEA
along with any limitations imposed on the analysis as a result (i.e., items not
specifically within the scope of the analysis). The scope will also identify the
type of FMEA (i.e., functional or hardware). Also included in the introduction
section is an explanation of the methodology used to perform the analysis
such as, but not limited to drawing reviews, examination of previous analyses
(if applicable), evaluation of lessons learned, use of Preliminary Hazard List
and/or Preliminary Hazard Analysis, and so on. Finally, any preestablished
“ground rules” that may have been agreed upon should be provided here. Such
ground rules typically limit or further narrow the scope of the FMEA, or just
a portion of it, and should therefore be explained in the introductory pages of
the report.
Definitions Section: Typically, an FMEA report will contain phrases or words that
are not generally associated with the everyday practice of the industrial safety
professional. It is therefore important to provide definitions and explanations
of terms and phrases that will be utilized in the FMEA.
System Description: The FMEA report should contain a significant amount of
descriptive information pertaining to the system or subsystem(s) being evalu-
ated. The detail of this description is obviously dependent upon the available
information. However, if the project or system is well into the design phase,
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
122
FAILURE MODE AND EFFECT ANALYSIS
FAILURE MODE AND EFFECT ANALYSIS
PROGRAM:
ENGINEER:
DATE:
PART OR
DRAWING
PART 
NAME
PART
FUNCTION
FAILURE MODE 
AND CAUSE
PAGE:
EFFECT ON 
JOB OR 
PERSONNEL
CRITICALITY
LEVEL
SYSTEM:
COMPONENT:
FACILITY:
FAILURE EFFECT
ON SYSTEM OR
COMPONENT
Figure 10.1
Sample failure mode and effect analysis (FMEA) worksheet.
detailed information should be obtainable. This section of the FMEA report will
explain the intended function or functions of the subject system under analysis.
System components and required interfaces between components should be
discussed in specific detail and to a level equal to that which will be required
to understand the results of the FMEA. Caution should be exercised to remain
within the established scope of the FMEA. The analyst need not provide too
much or excessive descriptive information, particularly when it is not necessary
to meet the objectives of the FMEA. This is especially true when the FMEA
is only concerned with the evaluation of just one subsystem or even one com-
ponent within a larger more complex system. If the FMEA is to be performed
on an existing system, the description section should also include a detailed
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
INTRODUCTION
123
history of its use and performance to date, along with any noted safety-related
concerns which may have been reported or documented in the past.
Criticality Assessment: This section of the FMEA report will detail the level of
system, subsystem, or component criticality (refer Chapter 2, Table 2.3). This
criticality assessment is usually based on some predetermined criteria that have
been agreed upon by management. When evaluating a system during an FMEA,
criticality is an expression of concern over the possible effects of a failure in that
system. If such failures could result in adverse effects on personnel (e.g., death,
serious injury, illness) or equally undesirable effects on equipment, components
or the system itself (e.g., system loss, equipment damage), then the level of
criticality will reflect this assessment.
Any and all critical single failure points (CSFPs) that were identified during the
FMEA should also be provided in this section. The specific failure mode and its
effect(s) should be listed and discussed here. The discussion should detail any accep-
tance or rejection rational to justify the recommended actions, which are provided
later in the report.
Documentation List: To complete an FMEA properly, the analyst is usually
required to review and/or reference many separate documents related to either
the specific system being analyzed or the system safety task in general. Docu-
ment numbers should be listed as well as any drawings or system specifications
and schematics. Regulatory standards, if applicable, should also be referenced.
Operating procedures, lessons learned documentation, vendor documentation,
manufacturer’s information documents/drawings, and so on, are all potential
candidates for review and, if used in the development of the FMEA, should be
listed in this section.
Data Section: All supporting data used to develop the FMEA, as well as that
which can assist in the presentation of the final analysis, should be included in
the final FMEA report. These data can include photographs of the system, sub-
system, or individual component(s) being analyzed; layout drawings; electrical
schematics; and, of course, the FMEA worksheets.
Critical Items List: The purpose of the FMEA is to identify and evaluate failure
modes and the possible system effects of those failures. Since the potential for
undesirable effects must be eliminated or controlled, the FMEA also provides
recommended actions which must be taken to accomplish this goal. As part of
this analysis process, the FMEA identifies any and all items within the system
which, if a failure were to occur, would have a critical effect on the operation
of that system. Therefore, to facilitate evaluation and analysis of these system
effects, a critical items list is developed. The list provides detailed descriptive
information on each item. It will explain its overall function within the system,
as well as the function of any components that may make up that item. The
failure mode determined as “critical” is then listed along with the potential
effect(s) of such a failure. If an item on the critical items list is to be accepted
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
124
FAILURE MODE AND EFFECT ANALYSIS
as is, then acceptance rational must be provided. Such rational may include an
explanation of any existing or planned design limitations that will prevent the
failure during actual system operations, or the provision of excessive factors of
safety that will render such failure(s) extremely improbable. Another area for
evaluating acceptance is the history, or lack thereof, and any known failures of
systems similar in nature and operation. Finally, the most important element
of the entire report, the FMEA provides recommendations for management
acceptance or rejection of the risk associated with any failure of any item on
the critical items list.
FMEA EXAMPLE
To further understand the use of the FMEA, the following example of an overhead
bridge crane will be evaluated. It is again noted that this analysis, as with other
sample examples of analyses discussed in this text, is only provided in an effort
to demonstrate the utility of a specific system safety analysis tool. It is therefore
superficial in presentation and will only examine a select few of the many possible
failure modes associated with the described overhead bridge crane system.
This example will develop a hardware FMEA for a proposed system that is well
into the design phase of the product life cycle. For informational purposes, it is given
that a Preliminary Hazard Analysis (PHA) was previously performed during the early
stages of the design phase of this system. The information from the PHA will be used
to assist in the development of the hardware FMEA. It should also be noted that the
nature of an FMEA requires evaluation of subsystems, subassemblies, and/or compo-
nents. For this reason, more detailed and specific descriptive information is provided
here than that which has been supplied for previous examples discussed in this text.
System Component/Subassembly Description
Subsystem: Hoist Assembly
The overhead bridge crane in this example consists of
two hoists: a main hoist of 10 ton capacity and an auxiliary hoist of 1.5 ton capacity.
The crane has powered trolley and bridge drives with control from plug-in type floor
consoles. This crane will operate within a manufacturing facility that produces speed
boats and small fishing craft. The crane is manufactured and will be installed by XYZ
Cranes, Inc. Figure 10.2 shows a simplified layout of the crane system.
The 10 ton (main) hoist assembly contains two main hoist motor brakes, a 30 horse
power main hoist AC motor, the main hoist magnetorque load brake, main hoist gear
reduction assembly, and the wire rope drum assembly. The 1.5 ton (auxiliary) hoist
assembly contains the same components as the 10 ton. However, the auxiliary hoist
motor is rated at 18 horse power and a single auxiliary hoist brake is provided.
Component: Electric Hoist Motors and Controls
Both hoists have enclosed, non-
ventilated, 220/440 volt, 3-phase, 60 hertz, 1200 rpm motors. The control used
on hoist motions is referred to as the “static stepless magnetorque control” on the
manufacturer’s drawings. With this control, drive motor torque is controlled by means
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
FMEA EXAMPLE
125
Magnetorque
electric load brake
Trolley
Trolley motor
10-ton
main hoist
1.5-ton
auxiliary hoist
Runway
Motor shaft
extension
Wire rope drum
1.5-ton
Wire rope drum
10-ton
Hoist motor
10-ton
Hoist motor
1.5-ton
Bridge motor
Bridge
Figure 10.2
The combination 10-ton/1.5-ton overhead bridge crane system.
of fixed resistors and saturable reactors in the motor secondary circuit. To obtain very
low speeds with overhauling or light loads, an electric load brake (magnetorque)
is coupled to the motor shaft. The operator selects the direction and speed of the
motion by moving the induction master handle from the “off” position toward the
hoist (up) or lower (down) direction. There are two magnetic amplifiers, one responds
only when the motor speed is above that called for by the induction master (operator
controlled), the other when the motor speed is below that called for by the induction
master. Normally, in the neutral or “off” position, the magnetorque load brake is
fully activated. During crane movement, whenever the motion is slowed or stopped
by moving the induction master handle toward “off,” the magnetorque load brake
provides braking torque which slows down the drive before the motor brake sets. This
reduces wear of the motor brake shoes and wheels. After the motion has stopped, the
“off” position bias circuit reduces the magnetorque load brake activation to minimize
heating of the brake mechanisms.
Component: Magnetorque Electric Load Brake
The primary function of the mag-
netorque load brake is to incorporate an electrical brake to preload the motor and
provide speed control without the use of a mechanical load brake system. The brake
transmits torque by means of electromagnetic fields, there being no mechanical con-
nection between stationary and rotating components. The stationary component is a
doughnut-shaped coil, rigidly mounted and centered about the motor shaft extension.
The rotor, or rotating component, is mounted on the motor shaft extension and rotates
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
126
FAILURE MODE AND EFFECT ANALYSIS
at motor speed. The breaking torque is accomplished through magnetic lines of force
between the stationary field member and the rotor.
An aluminum fan, bolted to the rotor, draws air through the unit to remove heat
from the rotor. In case of electric motor brake failure, the load will overhaul the
hoisting unit. Then, the magnetorque brake will exert a braking torque to slowly
lower the overhauling load to the floor, thus preventing a free falling load. With 90%
of rated capacity load, the lowering speed will be limited to approximately 40% of
maximum rated hook speed. The 10 ton hoist’s rated hook speed is 0 to 7 feet per
minute. The 1.5 ton hoist hook speed is rated at 0 to 20 feet per minute.
Component: Motor Brake Assembly
The motor brakes are spring closed, electri-
cally released magnetic boxes. These brakes are function devices, utilizing brake
shoes operating on the motor shaft extension. The magnetorque load brake slows
motion to a very low speed before the motor brake sets and continues to apply
braking torque until the motion stops, thus eliminating excessive wear and heating.
Component: Hoist Gear Reduction Assembly and Wire Rope Drum
The 10 ton
main hoist gear case provides a 167 to 1 gear ratio through four gear reductions.
The motor pinion shaft transfers power from the hoist motor to the main pinion shaft
through a series of two intermediate gear and pinion assemblies. The main pinion shaft
transfers power to the drum gear through the drum gear pinion resulting in the wire
rope drum hoisting motion. The 1.5 ton auxiliary hoist gear reduction assembly func-
tions in the same manner as the 10 ton assembly, however, the main pinion shaft drives
the wire rope drum directly, resulting in one less reduction and a gear ratio of 125 to
1. Both drum assemblies are protected by gear driven upper and lower limit switches.
Subsystem: Motor-Driven Power Wheel
The motor-driven power wheel is mounted
on the bridge assembly and functions as a “care taker” of the electric cable. It provides
automatic operation as it rolls up, or releases, the cable as required by crane travel. It
is powered by a drip proof, brake-equipped AC motor protected by a limit switch.
Subsystem: Trolley Drive Assembly
The trolley drive assembly moves the hoist
assembly laterally across the 14 feet span between the runway rails. This is accom-
plished by applying torque through the trolley drive gear case to the trolley wheels.
The assembly consists of a five horse power, 220/440 volt, three-phase, 60 Hertz
enclosed motor, driving through the trolley drive gear reducer assembly. The motor
is reversible and therefore able to drive the trolley in either direction. An electrically
released, spring set motor brake provides frictional torque to brake and hold the
trolley. Contact limit switches are provided for trolley travel in either direction.
Subsystem: Bridge Drive Assembly
The bridge drive assembly moves the main
hoist (10 ton hoist) assembly along the runway rails. This is accomplished by applying
torque to two of the bridge wheels. As with the trolley drive assembly, this assembly
consists of a five horse power, 220/440 volt, three-phase, 60 Hertz motor with a motor
brake, driving through a gear reducer assembly. This motor is also reversible and able
to drive the bridge in either direction. The brake is spring set and electrically released.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
FMEA EXAMPLE
127
When the motor is de-energized, the brake becomes set by allowing the brake spring
to engage the brake and hold the bridge assembly. Contact limit switches are provided
for bridge travel in either direction.
Subsystem: Control Station
Hoist control is accomplished from a plug-in type floor
console which contains the following components:
r Main and auxiliary hoist controls
r Bridge and trolley controls
r Stop-start push button controls
r Selector (key) switch (master cut-off control)
r Run-inch push button controls
r Warning bell push buttons
Subsystem: 1.5 Ton Crane Micro-Drive System
During micro-drive operations
(slow speed), an electric clutch is used to engage the micro motor and associated gear
train. This allows smooth, minute movements of the hoist during critical operations.
Passive Components
Since an FMEA is concerned primarily with the identification
of critical single-point failure items, concentration is usually specific to those subsys-
tems and/or components that carry the greatest potential for failure. These items are
generally those which move, are energized, cause other components to move or be
energized, or, in some way would transfer its energy (kinetic or potential) in a given
failure mode in such a way as to have undesirable consequences (i.e., effects). For this
reason, the analyst may find it helpful or even necessary to list any and all passive com-
ponents of a system, especially one as seemingly complex as an overhead bridge crane.
For the purpose of this example, the following components of the 10/1.5 ton
overhead bridge crane are considered passive and will not be analyzed in the FMEA:
r Hooks
r Wire ropes∗
r Load block
r Sheaves
r Suspension frame assembly
r Wire rope drums
r Drum gear
r Trolley and bridge shafts, couplings, and wheels (between the gear reducer
assembly and the structural assembly)
r Structural components (rails, grinders, etc.)
∗Note: Although it is possible that a failure of a wire rope might impart or release
some energy, depending upon the configuration at the time of the failure, it is highly
unlikely due to required manufacturing design safety factors and will therefore be
considered a passive component in this example.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
128
FAILURE MODE AND EFFECT ANALYSIS
Travel span
14 feet
Travel length
20 feet
Runway
Bridge
Figure 10.3
Runway and bridge travel distances for the combination 10-ton/1.5-ton overhead bridge
crane.
System Operation
The overhead bridge crane system described above is used to transport precast fiber-
glass speed boats and light fishing craft from their final assembly location, inside
a manufacturing facility, onto a transport vehicle which is usually a flat-bed truck
that has been backed into the facility. The operator must control the crane movement
with the precision required to lift, transport, and lower the boats into place on the
transporter. The hoist trolley design configuration will allow a travel span of 14 feet
laterally, which provides ample operating flexibility when positioning the hook over
the load, as well as when lowering the load into position on the truck. The longitu-
dinal runway travel length of 20 feet also provides the operator with discretionary
maneuverability during crane operations (Figure 10.3). The main hoist is used for
movement of the boats themselves while the smaller, auxiliary hoist is primarily
used to handle individual boat components being installed in the boat (e.g., seats,
windshields, dash control panels).
Failure Mode(s) and Effect(s)
At face value, based upon the information provided, the complexity of the above
described system appears to offer numerous opportunities for critical single-point
failures. Therefore, the analyst should begin the FMEA process by first attempting
to identify any and all nonpassive components and/or subassemblies that, depending
on the type or mode of failure, could possibly have an undesirable effect. Table 10.1
lists each identified subsystem and related components in the overhead bridge crane
system used in this example. Once such a list has been developed, the analyst will
find it much easier to evaluate each subsystem or component, its possible failure
mode(s) and the resultant effect(s) or any failure. Also, it is typical that subsequent
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
FMEA EXAMPLE
129
TABLE 10.1
Overhead Bridge Crane Subassembly Components
Subassembly
Components
Hoist assemblies
Hoist motor brakes
30 Horsepower hoist motor (main)
18 Horsepower hoist motor (auxiliary)
Magnetorque load brake
Hoist gear reduction assembly
Electric hoist motors
Fixed resistors
Saturable reactors
Motor secondary circuits
Induction master
Magnetic amplifiers
Motor shaft extension
Magnetorque electric load brake
Electric brake
Rotor
Aluminum fan
Field assembly
Spring mechanism
Magnetic brakes
Friction devices
Brake shoes
Hoist gear reduction assembly
Main pinion shaft
Intermediate gear and pinion assemblies
FMEAs may be performed during the operational phase of the crane life cycle
(refer Chapter 3, Figure 3.4). These subsequent FMEAs may only analyze a single
subassembly or even a single component of specific concern within that subassembly.
This is especially true when a modification to the crane takes place and the system
safety effort is interested in analyzing the effects resulting from a failure of only that
changed component, and not the entire system. Therefore, having developed a list
similar to that provided as Table 10.1 during the design phase, the performance of any
subsequent FMEAs on single components or subsystems will be greatly facilitated.
Evaluation of Potential Subsystem or Component Failures
Of the many possible failures that could occur within this system, the following
examples are provided and discussed to demonstrate the typical approach used in
developing an FMEA. Based on these examples, the reader should be able to grasp
the fundamental FMEA concepts and, with some practice, utilize this tool to evaluate
virtually any simple or complex system used in their respective organizations.
The completed FMEA worksheet (Figure 10.4) is provided to demonstrate its use
in evaluating the following examples of identified failure modes.
r Main and Auxiliary Hoist
Failure Mode 1: Hoist Inoperative
The possible causes of an inoperative hoist include a loss in the power supply,
defective circuitry, and/or defective bearings. (Note: In the examination of
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
130
FAILURE MODE AND EFFECT ANALYSIS
FAILURE MODE AND EFFECT ANALYSIS
PROGRAM:
ENGINEER:
DATE:
PART OR
DRAWING
PART 
NAME
PART
FUNCTION
FAILURE MODE 
AND CAUSE
PAGE:
EFFECT ON 
JOB OR 
PERSONNEL
CRITICALITY
LEVEL
SYSTEM:
COMPONENT:
FACILITY:
FAILURE EFFECT
ON SYSTEM OR
COMPONENT
Boat Manufacturing
Jane Doe
Overhead Bridge Crane
Trolley & Bridge
Main Manufacturing
29 September 2012
1  of  1
3
3
3
Main and
Auxiliary
Hoist 
Motors
Main and
Auxiliary
Hoist 
Motors
Main and
Auxiliary
Hoist 
Motors
Main Hoist
Gear
Reduction
Assembly
XYZ Crane
Drawing
04291954-B
XYZ Crane
Drawing
04291954-B
XYZ Crane
Drawing
04291954-B
XYZ Crane
Schematic
No. CV34
Provides motive
power for raising 
and lowering
suspended load
from hoist
Provides
frictional torque
for stopping and
holding load 
when hoist motor
is de-energized.
Provides
frictional torque
for stopping
and holding
load when hoist
motor is 
de-energized.
Transfers motor
and braking 
torque and 
provides for 
mechanical
advantage
through gear
reduction from
the motor to
the hoist drum
Load cannot be 
raised or lowered.
Brake will hold 
load stationary.
Load cannot be 
raised or lowered.
Brake will hold 
load stationary.
Load holding 
torque of motor
brake will be lost.
Redundant motor 
brake with electric 
load brake and 
motor control 
will hold load.
Torque necessary 
for lifting or holding 
load would be lost.
Load would drop.
INOPERATIVE:
Loss of power; 
Defective circuitry; 
Defective bearings
FAILS TO 
ENGAGE:
Broken springs;
Worn linings
FAILS TO 
DISENGAGE:
Loss of electric 
power.
DISENGAGES:
Structural failure 
of gears, pinions 
or keys.
No effect,
except delay
in operations
during repair
No effect,
except delay
in operations
during repair
No effect,
except delay
in operations
during repair
Possible
loss of life
or serious injury;
damage to
equipment
and/or facility
1
Figure 10.4
The partially completed failure mode and effect analysis worksheet for the crane system.
listed failure modes, it is important to consider the cause(s) of any such
failures. Once all potential causes have been identified, recommended cor-
rective actions will be much easier to develop.)
Failure Effect 1: Load cannot be raised or lowered. Work stoppage may occur.
No potential effect on other components or subsystems identified.
Assessment, Failure Effect 1: Noncritical potential. Crane load brake design will
prohibit loss of load from a suddenly de-energized system. No identifiable
adverse effect on personnel resulting from this condition.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
FMEA EXAMPLE
131
r Main Hoist Motor Brake Assembly (two in system)
Failure Mode 2: Fails to Engage
The hoist motor brake assembly provides frictional torque for stopping the crane
as well as holding a load when hoist motor has been de-energized. Possible
causes of such a failure include a broken spring component or worn/damaged
linings in the assembly.
Failure Effect 2: Simultaneous disengagement of both motor brake assemblies
would result in the loss of holding torque of the motor brake which would, in
turn, result in the loss of the load. Possible personnel injury/death and severe
equipment/property damage or loss.
Assessment, Failure Effect 2: Since simultaneous disengagement of both braking
assemblies is highly improbable, the effect of this failure is assessed as
noncritical due the redundancy in this system. However, if this failure were
to occur with no redundant electric load brake and motor control to hold the
load, then the load would be lost and this failure would therefore have to be
assessed as critical.
Failure Mode 3: Fails to Disengage
The main hoist motor brake assembly could fail to disengage if there is a loss
of power during hoisting operations.
Failure Effect 3: The effect of such a failure during hoisting operations is the
same as that discussed above in Failure Effect 1. The operator would not be
able to move the load and, hence, operational delays would occur.
Assessment, Failure Effect 3: This failure effect is also assessed as noncritical
since there will be no direct risk of hazard to personnel or equipment.
r Main Hoist Gear Reduction Assembly
Failure Mode 4: Disengagement∗
The disengagement of the main hoist gear reduction assembly is possible if
there is a structural failure of the gears, pinions, or keys.
Failure Effect 4: The sudden disengagement of the main hoist gear reduction
assembly would result in the loss of the torque used for lifting and/or holding
the load. The result would be a loss of the load (suspended boat could drop).
Possible personnel injury/death and severe equipment/property damage
or loss.
Assessment, Failure Effect 4: Because there is no redundancy in this system to
prevent the loss of the load, this risk is assessed as critical. Possible loss of
life or the infliction of severe injury, as well as equipment or property loss
could result from a dropped load.
∗Note: It is noted that the very same potential failure mode exists with the auxiliary
hoist as well.
In the above described failure mode and effects, one failure mode has been assessed
as critical. The analyst should now provide either acceptance or rejection rational so
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
132
FAILURE MODE AND EFFECT ANALYSIS
that management can evaluate all aspects of this failure mode and effect before
making a decision. Remember, one of the primary underlying purposes of the system
safety effort is to provide management with choices in their evaluation of system risk.
In this example, the following acceptance rational is suggested:
a. An operational check of the hoist will be performed before each use to verify
proper operation of all gears. Such preoperational function tests will exceed the
minimum acceptable testing required by OSHA at 29 CFR §1910.179(k)(1)(i).
b. Preventative maintenance inspections will be conducted weekly to ensure
proper gear, pinion, and key operations. This periodic inspection interval
will exceed the minimum monthly inspection defined by OSHA at 29 CFR
§1910.179(j)(3).
c. Probability of failure is considered remote based upon the following design
considerations:
r Shaft and gear design will be in accordance with standards established by
the American Gear Manufacturers Association.
r The minimum design safety factor for this gearing will be 5:1.
r All gears will turn in a continuous oil bath which will dissipate friction heat
and lubricate the gear bearing surfaces.
r Hook over-travel will be controlled by an upper limit switch.
r Disengagement would require structural failure. The most probable result of
structural failure would be binding and/or noisy operations which will alert
the operator and those in the general vicinity of a problem with the crane.
d. A load test of the hoist at 125% of rated load will be performed annually. This
annual test will exceed the minimum requirements for only an initial load test
as specified by OSHA at 29 CFR §1910.179(k)(2).
e. There is no significant documented failure history of this type. In fact, standard
industry reliability handbooks establish a generic failure rate for gears at 1.67
failures per million hours of operation.
Finally, based upon the results of the FMEA, including the presentation of the
risk acceptance rational, the system safety analyst in this example is in the position
of providing an accurate, well considered and properly evaluated recommendation to
management to accept the risk associated with the failure mode of “disengagement.”
SUMMARY
The failure mode and effect analysis is an excellent tool for evaluating the potential
effects of failures within a designated system at the subsystem, subassembly, or
component level. In fact, because of its ability to examine failure modes and their
effects on either the individual component level (specific) or the subsystem/system
level (general), the FMEA offers some level of flexibility in system safety analysis.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SUMMARY
133
The functional FMEA is used to evaluate failures in one or many subsystems that
function within a larger system, while the hardware FMEA examines failures in the
assemblies, subassemblies, and components within those subsystems. The FMEA,
therefore, has great versatility in the system safety process. The analysis can either be
specialized, without regard for other subsystems which are not within the scope of the
analysis, or it can be generalized to encompass total subsystem or system effects of
a given failure condition. However, because the FMEA does not consider the human
factors element or multiple failure analyses within a system, other types of system
safety analysis tools and techniques should also be utilized.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
11
Fault or Functional
Hazard Analysis
INTRODUCTION
The Fault Hazard Analysis (FHA), also referred to as the Functional Hazard Analysis,
method follows an inductive reasoning approach to problem solving in that the
analysis concentrates primarily on the specific and moves toward the general (TAI
1989). The FHA is an expansion of the FMEA (Stephenson 1991). As demonstrated
in the previous chapter, the FMEA is concerned with the critical examination and
documentation of the possible ways in which a system component, circuit, or piece
of hardware may fail and that failure’s effect upon the performance of that element.
The FHA takes this evaluation a step further by determining the effect of such failures
upon the system, the subsystem, or personnel. In fact, when an FMEA has already
been completed for a given system and information on the adverse safety effect of
component or human failures is desired for that system, the safety engineer can often
utilize the data from the FMEA as an input to the FHA.
Although it can be performed later in the product development cycle than the
PHA, the maximum benefit from an FHA is obtained if it is properly performed in
the early stages of system development. The minimum requirements of an FHA are
as follows:
r Must consider all functions;
r Must consider all functional failure modes;
r Must consider all operational phases;
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
135
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
136
FAULT OR FUNCTIONAL HAZARD ANALYSIS
r Must consider all operational interfaces;
r Must derive the failure condition and classify its severity;
r Must be systematic and thorough.
The FHA may derive hazard control criteria or even performance criteria where
none previously existed. It may also establish the exact applicability of mandated
criteria (standards and regulations). However, because of its ability to determine
actual applicability of specific criteria as well as verify that maximum allowable
probabilities are correct, the FHA is often useful in the analysis of a fully operational
system as well. Like the SHA and SSHA, the FHA will examine small components
or events to determine potential impacts on safety and reliability of the system or
subsystem. The FHA requires a detailed evaluation of the system or subsystem and
examines
r component hazard modes;
r causes of those hazards;
r resulting effects on the system or subsystem.
More simply stated, the properly performed FHA will attempt to answer at least
the following two questions with respect to system or subsystem components (Larson
and Hann 1990):
1. How can a component (or set of components) fail?
2. What will be the effect of this failure on the system or subsystem?
A fully developed FHA can also be used to define inputs to vendor design require-
ments, identify depth and scope of other analyses, define system architecture, and
identify installation requirements and constraints.
The FHA Process
The FHA process usually begins with the establishment of a list of system or subsys-
tem functions. Hazards are then postulated based upon the failure and/or likelihood
of failure of each function. Then, the overall probable effect of the hazard upon the
system and those operating it (i.e., people) is derived. Once identified, this overall
probable effect is known as the failure condition. The severity of the failure condi-
tion is assessed and a hazard severity classification is assigned to it. This severity
class will determine the maximum allowable probability for each failure condition. In
extremely critical systems or operations, such as an elevator braking device/system or
material handling operations, for example, very low maximum allowable probabilities
identified in an FHA will mandate the prohibition of single-point failures.
Another benefit of performing the FHA in the early stages of design is the iden-
tification of Fault Tree Analysis “top events” (the failure conditions). Once the top
events are defined, an inductive fault tree can be developed for each failure condition
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
FHA EXAMPLE
137
or event associated with the system. Chapter 12 will discuss the Fault Tree Analysis
technique.
It should also be noted that each component of any given system may have more
than one possible failure mode. Each mode may or may not become an additional
hazard to normal operating conditions. Therefore, the resultant effects (e.g., damage,
malfunction) on the system or subsystem are usually expressed in terms of probability
and severity.
In this simplified explanation of the FHA, it should be evident that much of the
data obtained during the PHA and, if performed, the SHA and/or SSHA can also be
used to assist in the development of the FHA. The primary difference lies in the detail
of the FHA method and the fact that it examines all component failure modes and
assesses the impact of such failures. The potential impact to normal, safe operations
may be negligible to none or devastating to catastrophic. The FHA, then, investigates
the hazards of all system or subsystem faults.
The FHA which has been conducted during the early stages of product or sys-
tem development should be re-performed whenever significant information about the
system is further developed. If the subject system is an operational system, it is rec-
ommended that the FHA be performed on a periodic bases (e.g., quarterly, annually),
depending on the potential hazards of possible failures. A new FHA should also be
conducted following any major engineering design changes or modifications to a
given system.
Figure 11.1 shows an example of a Fault Hazard Analysis Worksheet which can
be modified to a specific system or subsystem. An explanation of each column on the
worksheet is also provided.
FHA EXAMPLE
An automobile brake system will be examined using the fault hazard analysis method
to determine potential faults in the systems current design. Once again, this is only
an example to demonstrate the utility of the FHA and it should not be construed as
an all-encompassing analysis of an automobile brake system. In this example, two
designs shall be presented. The first (Figure 11.2) shows the system as it is currently
designed (Larson and Hann 1990). The FHA worksheet, presented as Figure 11.3,
resulted in the redesign of the system, as shown in Figure 11.4 (Larson and
Hann 1990).
System Description
The system in this example is a simple automobile brake system that allows both
front and rear braking action when the driver applies pressure on the brake pedal.
Figure 11.2 shows the current design. The single-cell master cylinder serves both the
front and rear brake systems. As pressure is applied, the piston in the master cylinder
compresses the brake fluid in the cylinder. This compression force is transmitted
through the brake lines to each brake shoe (two front, two rear) causing activation of
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SYSTEM FUNCTIONAL/FAULT HAZARD ANALYSIS (FHA)
PROGRAM:
ENGINEER:
DATE:
SYSTEM
COMPONENT
NOMENCLATURE
PAGE:
ENVIRONMENTAL
FACTORS
SUBSYTEM/SYSTEM:
A simple
description of
the component
or its official
nomenclature;
include a part
number if
available.
HAZARD
MODE
DESCRIPTION
SYSTEM
OPERATING
MODE/PHASE
EFFECT OF
HAZARD ON
OTHER SYSTEM
FAILURE CONDITION
(EFFECT ON
OVERALL SYSTEM)
OTHER FACTORS
INFLUENCING
HAZARD EFFECTS
HAZARD
CONTROL
APPROACH
A description
of the type of
component
failure that
will result in
a hazard.
The operating
phase or mode
of the entire
system being
considered in
the hazard
evaluation.
Address the
hazard directly;
provide a
description of
the result of the
component
failure.
Describe the larger
result of the hazard,
which may reduce
subsystem
effectiveness or
result in subsystem
failure and/or total
system failure.
If applicable, a
description of the
operating
environment and
its influence on 
the severity or
probability of the
hazard.
HAZARD
SEVERITY
CLASS
Address
both the
probability
and the
severity.
(Refer to
Figure 2.1
and Figure
2.2).
If applicable,
describe any other
factors which may
have an influence
(direct or indirect)
on the probability
orseverity of the
hazard.
Provide a
brief
description
of the
proposed
controls to
resolve the
hazard.
Figure 11.1
Sample system functional/fault hazard analysis (FHA) worksheet.
138
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
FHA EXAMPLE
139
FOOT
PEDAL 
FIREWALL
MASTER
CYLINDER
REAR
LEFT
REAR
RIGHT
FRONT
LEFT
FRONT
RIGHT
Figure 11.2
Simple automobile brake/master cylinder system design (Source: Larson and Hann, 1990).
the shoe and the resultant slowing of the wheel hub. This design offers unacceptable
levels of risk, as will be shown during the following FHA.
The FHA Process
As stated earlier in this chapter, the FHA process begins with a listing of the sys-
tem functions. In this example, the following functions can be expected from an
automobile brake system (Larson and Hann 1990):
1. Put brakes on to stop car
A. Linearly proportional to input force and travel (negligible timing delay);
B. Withstand maximum pedal force without breaking;
C. Capable of absorbing maximum brake energy;
D. Not too much travel on pedal;
E. Capable of maximum braking under maximum traction conditions;
F. Left/right, front/rear brake force balanced;
G. Work properly under all angular velocities;
2. Release brakes when pedal force is released
3. Capable of all the above in all environmental conditions
4. Self tightening.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SYSTEM FUNCTIONAL/FAULT HAZARD ANALYSIS (FHA)
PROGRAM:
ENGINEER:
DATE:
SYSTEM
COMPONENT
NOMENCLATURE
PAGE:
ENVIRONMENTAL
FACTORS
SUBSYTEM/SYSTEM:
HAZARD
MODE
DESCRIPTION
SYSTEM
OPERATING
MODE/PHASE
EFFECT OF
HAZARD ON
OTHER SYSTEM
FAILURE CONDITION
(EFFECT ON
OVERALL SYSTEM)
OTHER FACTORS
INFLUENCING
HAZARD EFFECTS
HAZARD
CONTROL
APPROACH
HAZARD
SEVERITY
CLASS
System Design
Automobile Braking System
John Doe
09-14-2013
1  of  1
N/A
N/A
1A
N/A
System
redesign to
eliminate
possible
fault hazard.
Master
Cylinder
Proportional
Braking Force
Loss of
proportional
braking force,
causing all 
4 wheels to
turn freely.
1.
Vehicle
accelerating.
2.
Vehicle
accelerating.
3.
Vehicle
moving with
engine off.
Vehicle has no
brakes.
Collision is likely,
resulting in death
or injury.
Figure 11.3
The completed system FHA for the automobile brake system (Source: Larson and Hann, 1990).
140
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
FHA EXAMPLE
141
DUAL
RESERVOIR
REAR
LEFT
REAR
RIGHT
FRONT
LEFT
FRONT
RIGHT
FOOT
PEDAL 
FIREWALL
TANDEM
MASTER
CYLINDER
Figure 11.4
Automobile brake/master cylinder system redesign following FHA (Source: Larson and
Hann, 1990).
There are many other expected functions of an automobile brake system that could
be considered. However, for the purpose of this FHA, the above listed examples
demonstrate the beginning of the FHA process for a given system.
During the next step in this process, the analyst will evaluate the current design
to determine whether any faults exist that would prevent any or all of the expected
functions from occurring under any operational condition. In this example, only Item
1A (proportional braking) shall be analyzed, and the results recorded on the FHA
worksheet (Figure 11.3).
The FHA
Initially, the desired safety design criteria should be established. Generally, if the
expected result of brake pedal compression is proportional braking, this is the basis
of the design criteria for this item. A loss of all brakes is the event that is least
desirable and, therefore, must be considered in the evaluation process.
Proportional Braking
Hazard Risk, Item 1: Loss of All Brakes
As shown on Figure 11.3, column 2, the
hazard mode is described as loss of proportional braking force causing all four wheels
to turn freely. This hazard must be considered during vehicle acceleration, vehicle
deceleration, and when the car is moving with the engine off (column 3). For this
particular hazard, this hazard poses no discernible effects on other systems. However,
the larger result of such a hazard (i.e., the failure condition) is listed as vehicle has
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
142
FAULT OR FUNCTIONAL HAZARD ANALYSIS
no brakes to stop; collision is likely, resulting in injury or death in column 5 of
Figure 11.3. There are no specific environmental factors listed here since total brake
loss under any condition is an extremely dangerous situation. However, it is conceiv-
able that a fault occurrence of this nature during adverse weather conditions (snow,
rain, etc.) would greatly increase the loss potential and, thus, increase the level of risk.
Risk Assessment, Item 1: 1A
A hazard severity class is assigned a catastrophic,
since the loss of human life is a potential result of this hazard risk. Because the
current system design requires a single-cell master cylinder to serve both front and
rear braking systems and a failure in the cylinder will permit a loss of all braking
power, the probability for occurrence is listed as frequent.
Control Approach, Item 1
Redesign the system and incorporate a tandem cylinder
which will serve front and rear brakes without compromising the safety of either
if a fault should occur in the cylinder head. Figure 11.5 is a close-up view of the
redesigned cylinder shown in Figure 11.4 which depicts the entire system, after the
FHA inputs.
This example demonstrates the first evaluation of those functions which are
expected to occur for an automobile braking system. The same analytical steps
should be repeated for each item on the expected functions list until all fault hazards
have been evaluated and controlled or eliminated. The FHA process ends when the
last item on the list has been properly considered and/or resolved.
AFT RESERVOIR
FWD RESERVOIR
SEALING LID
PISTON
INPUT
SOCKET
FORWARD
CHAMBER
CYLINDER
BODY
OUTLET
TO FORWARD
BRAKES
OUTLET
TO REAR
BRAKES
AFT
CHAMBER
Figure 11.5
Close-up view of the redesigned master cylinder, showing dual hydraulic chambers (Source:
Larson and Hann, 1990).
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SUMMARY
143
SUMMARY
It should be understood that the performance of an FHA is not always a requirement.
Other analytical methods such as, but not limited to, the FMEA and the ETBA, if
performed, should have already evaluated most, if not all, the same hazards which
would be identified in the FHA. However, the FHA is a powerful tool in hazard
identification and control and the benefit of its performance should not be overlooked.
The FHA is an excellent system safety engineering method which can be used to
ensure system operational integrity.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
12
Fault Tree Analysis
INTRODUCTION
The Fault Tree Analysis (FTA) is considered one of the more useful analytical tools in
the system safety process, especially when evaluating extremely complex or detailed
systems. Because it utilizes the deductive method of logic (i.e., moves from the general
to the specific), many system safety analysts find the FTA very useful in examining the
possible conditions which may have lead to or influenced an undesirable or desirable
event. As most occupational safety practitioners who have ever participated in an
accident investigation know, undesirable events seldom occur as a result of just one
initiating factor. For this reason, in the system safety process of fault tree analysis, the
undesirable event is referred to as the top event. This is the general or known outcome
of a possible series of events, the nature of which may or may not be known until
investigated. As the analyst begins to identify the specific events which contributed
to the top event, a fault tree can be constructed. By placing each contributing factor
in its respective location on the tree, the investigator can accurately identify where
any breakdowns in a system occurred, what relationship exists between events, and
what interface occurred (or did not occur, as the case may be).
Although the FTA, by its very name, implies that it is primarily a tool for analyzing
faults in a system or process, it is important to note that the FTA can also be used
to evaluate the actions necessary to result in desired events, such as no accidents.
By building a tree depicting all the events which must occur in order to realize that
top event, the analyst can use the FTA as a method to construct the foundation of an
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
145
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
146
FAULT TREE ANALYSIS
industrial safety accident prevention program. In this text, both uses of the FTA (i.e.,
evaluation of positive and negative top events) will be discussed through relatively
simple and basic examples.
In the practice of system safety, the FTA is a very organized, meticulous, and
versatile type of analysis. It is organized because it evaluates each event in consider-
ation of that event’s specific purpose, function, or place within a system or process.
The FTA is meticulous because it attempts to describe the relationship of any and all
events that may have acted upon a system to result in the top event. This method is
also quite versatile in its ability to allow for the evaluation of hypothetical events,
which the analyst may introduce into the tree to determine potential effects on the
top event. Because of the flexibility offered by the FTA, it is most often used during
the design phase of the product life cycle. The FTA can forecast potential failures
in current design and identify areas where improvement is needed. It also has utility
during the operational phase to determine the nature of real or potential desired or
undesired events resulting from system operation. As is the case with most of the
tools and techniques in the system safety process, the FTA will provide management
with more alternatives when evaluating operational safety against operational cost.
Qualitative and Quantitative Reasoning
After all the causal events are listed on a fault tree, the FTA allows the analyst to
evaluate each event separately or in combination with other events on the tree. This
provides the user with a powerful tool capable of determining, through deduction,
which event or set or events led to the top event. When more than one contributing
event is identified, as is usually the case, their respective location on the fault tree
is referred to as a cut set. Identification and qualification of one or multiple cut
sets within a fault tree facilitates the evaluation process. Essentially, the cut set
isolates specific events in the system and allows for a qualitative examination of the
relationship between the set, as a whole, and its effect on the top event.
When the likelihood of an event is known and a probability value has been assigned,
then analysis of these events on a fault tree will also yield quantitative results. As cut
sets are identified, the probability of occurrence as a result of cut set interactions can
be quantified and the associated risk can be more readily evaluated.
Constructing a Fault Tree
In order to properly construct a fault tree, the analyst must first possess extensive
knowledge of the system or process under consideration. If such knowledge is lacking,
then the process must include in-depth participation from the design community, as
well as from other applicable organizational elements within the company (e.g.,
quality and reliability, operations engineering, facility operations). The analyst must
obtain a clear understanding of the thought process behind the design of the system,
as well as any operational criteria that effect system output.
An understanding of the operational working environment, as discussed in Chap-
ter 2 (Figure 2.1), is also essential. Possible causal event factors may exist within the
working environment and must therefore be considered in the FTA process.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
INTRODUCTION
147
TOP EVENT
CONTRIBUTING
EVENT
CONTRIBUTING
EVENT
CONTRIBUTING
EVENT
CONTRIBUTING
EVENT
CONTRIBUTING
EVENT
UNDEVELOPED
EVENT
UNDEVELOPED
EVENT
BASIC
EVENT
BASIC
EVENT
Figure 12.1
The fault tree concept.
The creation of a fault tree begins with the identification of the top event. This
event can be as broad and general as Total System Failure or as narrow and specific
as Component X Malfunction. This top event will be placed at the top of the tree and
all subsequent events that lead to the main event will be placed as branches on the
tree. Figure 12.1 illustrates the beginning of a simple fault tree, with the location of
the top event, the placement of contributing events, and undeveloped events, down
to the basic (or root) events. As the user moves from the top event downward, each
level of the tree will materialize. In order to proceed from one level to the next, the
analyst must continually ask the fundamental question: What could cause this event
to occur? As causal events are identified, they are placed in position on the fault tree
(Figure 12.1).
Fault Tree Symbols
Numerous symbols are used in the construction of a basic fault tree. These symbols,
sometimes referred to as fundamental logic symbols, provide the analyst with a
pictorial representation of the event and how it interacts with other events on the tree.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
148
FAULT TREE ANALYSIS
Figure 12.2 shows the basic symbols used during the FTA process. Once the reader
has a general understanding of these symbols and their use, as described below, fault
tree construction will be greatly facilitated.
The Rectangle
Used to identify the top or primary event, as well as secondary or
contributing events (sometimes called main events). The rectangle shape as used on
the fault tree indicates an event, or system state, which must be further analyzed on
lower levels within the tree. This is the reason that the primary undesirable event is
represented by a rectangle. Everything that appears under it is an attempt to further
analyze its occurrence.
The Circle
Used to depict a basic event in the FTA process. It can be a primary fault
event (i.e., the first in the process to have occurred) and, therefore will require no fur-
ther development. Use of the circle symbol offers the analyst some flexibility. A causal
chain could conceivably become quite extensive. Many times, the analyst will obtain
sufficient casual information from analysis of higher level events in the chain. There-
fore, in order not to waste valuable time and resources analyzing a single event to its
lowest possible level, the analyst can label a particular event as basic, using the circle
symbol indicating that no further development is required. For this reason, the symbols
of the fault tree places the circle at the base of the tree (i.e., a “basic” event). The basic
event is also often referred to as a “root” event or “root” cause, for obvious reasons.
The House
The house is used to identify a normal event which occurs during
system operation. It is an event that either occurs or does not occur, such as turning
a switch on or off. It should be noted that, if either the on state or the off state are
possible during normal system operation, then the possible effect of both on the top
event should be considered.
The Diamond
An event in the fault tree that is considered undeveloped is repre-
sented by a diamond. Use of this symbol identifies an event that the analyst has chosen
not to develop further either because of the complexity of the event or because insuf-
ficient data are available to further analyze the event. Typically, it may also indicate
an area of concern where further development should be considered at some point in
the future.
The Oval
A conditional event or a conditional input into the logic tree that further
defines the state of the system which must exist in order for the fault sequence to
occur. It may place a restriction on event occurrence based on the occurrence of other
events on the causal chain.
Logic Gates
A fault tree is basically a logic tree that shows the association between
events on the tree. In general, there are two forms of logic gates which appear on a
fault tree: The AND gate and the OR gate (Figure 12.2).
Use of the AND gate means that all contributing events connected to the main or
primary events, through the gate, must occur in order for the main or top event to
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
INTRODUCTION
149
NAME
SYMBOL
DESCRIPTION
TOP EVENT; SECONDARY OR
CONTRIBUTING EVENTS; A SYSTEM
STATE REQUIRING MORE
INVESTIGATION ON LOWER LEVELS  
RECTANGLE
CIRCLE
BASIC FAULT EVENT; NO FURTHER
DEVELOPMENT REQUIRED 
HOUSE
NOT A FAULT EVENT; AN EVENT THAT
IS EXPECTED TO OCCUR UNDER
NORMAL OPERATION  
DIAMOND
UNDEVELOPED EVENT; ONE THAT,
EITHER BY CHOICE OR NECESSITY,
WILL NOT BE DEVELOPED FURTHER  
OVAL
AN EVENT THAT PLACES QUALIFIED
CONDITIONS ON THE FAULT
SEQUENCE  
AND GATE
DESCRIBES AN OPERATION WHERE
ALL INPUT EVENTS MUST OCCUR
FOR THE OPERATION TO OCCUR  
DESCRIBES AN OPERATION WHERE
ONE OR MORE OF THE INPUT EVENTS
CAN OCCUR IN ORDER FOR THE
OUTPUT TO OCCUR  
OR GATE
TRANSFER
USED TO SHOW LOGIC FLOW
BETWEEN TWO PARTS OF THE FAULT
TREE;TRANSFERS EVERYTHING
UNDER THE EVENT IT IS ATTACHED
TO; REFERENCE IS MADE BY AN
ALPHANUMERIC CODE    
GATE
A1
Figure 12.2
Standard Fault Tree Analysis (FTA) symbology.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
150
FAULT TREE ANALYSIS
ANALYSIS A
No conditions on
the occurrence of
either event  
LIGHT BULB 
TO ACTIVATE
OR
FILAMENT
FAILURE
SOCKET
FAILURE
FAULTY
WIRING
DAMAGE TO
BULB
FAILURE
FAILURE
BULB
ANALYSIS B
Exclusive condition,
if the wall switch
fails, filament failure
will be irrelevant   
FAILS
TO ACTIVATE
OR
EXCLUSIVE
FILAMENT
FILAMENT
FAILURE
FAILURE
WALL SWITCH
FAILS
LIGHT BULB
Figure 12.3
The use of exclusive OR gates when proper conditions exist.
occur. For example, when an AND gate is used, if only one or two of three listed
events occur, then the main event will not occur.
The OR gate tells the analyst that if either event connected to a main event
through an OR gate occurs, then the main event will also occur. This is an inclusive
OR meaning that occurrence of any or all of the listed events will have the same
result. There is an exception to this logic which must be understood. Sometimes,
occurrence of one event connected to an OR gate, might exclude the possibility
of other events occurring. For example, in order for a simple electric light bulb to
function as intended, it has to be turned on. Events which could lead to failure of
the light bulb to activate include filament failure, socket failure, damage to the bulb,
faulty wiring, and so on. All of these events would be connected to the main event
through an OR gate as shown in Figure 12.3, Analysis A. However, if the scope of
the analysis is to consider only one of these possible failures, along with a failure
of the light switching mechanism in the fault tree, the gate is now conditional and
must be represented by an exclusive OR gate. The oval symbol, attached to the gate
indicates the condition of the OR gate in this example (Figure 12.3, Analysis B). If
more complex systems are evaluated, the exclusive condition placed upon this gate
would require further explanation.
FTA Examples
As stated earlier, two types of fault trees will be constructed to demonstrate the use
of this system safety analytical technique. The first, which will be referred to as a
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
INTRODUCTION
151
NO ACCIDENTS
Safety Incentive
Safety Awareness
Employee Safety
Employee Safety
Off-the-Job
Safety Programs
Programs
Programs
Committees
Training
A1
Funding
Commitments
Fair, Written
Policy
Union and
Non-Union
Commitment
All Work
Area Levels
Represented
Establish
Program
Objectives
Evaluate
Current
Performance
Externally
Provided
Internally
Provided
Management
Training
Needs
Management
Training
Needs
Commitment
Established
Commitment
Established
Figure 12.4
Sample fault tree analysis (FTA) showing structure, event and symbol placement, and cut-set
identification.
positive fault tree analysis, will identify the events necessary to achieve a top desired
event of no accidents. The second, or negative fault tree, will be constructed to show
those events or conditions which will lead to a top undesired event of a fire in a
manufacturing facility.
In the first example, the system safety engineer has been asked to assist in the
industrial safety accident prevention program. By helping to identify those fault areas
in the program where, if proper consideration is not provided, certain events could
jeopardize the successful achievement of the primary objective (i.e., no accidents).
To construct this fault tree, the top event of “no accidents” is placed in the
rectangle at the top of the tree. Refer to Figure 12.4 during this portion of the FTA
example. The next step is to identify those areas or events that are necessary to
achieve this top event. Basic industrial safety accident prevention program elements
such as employee safety training, safety incentive programs, safety awareness
programs, employee safety committees, and off-the-job safety programs are some
of the many possible contributors to an accident-free work place. In Figure 12.4, the
analyst has placed these sample events in rectangles under the top event. Because
the analyst has determined that success in each of these areas is necessary in order
to achieve the top event, an AND gate is used to connect them to the top event on the
fault tree.
Working to the next level under each of these events, the analyst will identify
each required supporting event. Where only one of many possible events are
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
152
FAULT TREE ANALYSIS
required in order to accomplish the main event, an OR gate is used in place of
an AND gate (Figure 12.4). In some cases, events will not be developed further
due to inadequate information, or a determination by the analyst that no further
development is necessary. In this case, a triangle shape is used to characterize the
event. At the bottom of this simple tree, some basic events have been identified and
placed in a circle. The completed fault tree analysis for the top event of no accidents
is somewhat self-explanatory. The FTA provides a road map that will lead to an
accident-free work place. Cut sets leading to the top event can also be identified, as
shown on Figure 12.4 by the dotted line. Of course further development of this tree
will yield many more possible contributing and supporting events. However, for the
purpose of demonstrating the construction of a positive FTA, this example should
suffice.
In the second example, the negative fault tree with a top undesired event of fire has
been developed as Figure 12.5. Here, the analyst shows the top event which, through
the connection of an AND gate, cannot occur unless all of the three supporting
conditions (ignition source, oxygen, and fuel) are present at the same time. This tree
shows that each of these contributing events has additional supporting events under
them which, if controlled, will not permit the main event to occur and, thus, the top
event will not occur either. As in the previous example, this FTA also provides the
user with a road map for controlling the outcome of the top event.
FIRE
Sufficient
Oxygen
Flammable
Materials
Combustible
Materials
Constant
Supply
Sufficient
Level
Flame
Electric
or Static
Spark
Heat or
Thermal
Combustible
Combustible
Combustible
Spark
Flammable
Solids
Flammable
Gases
Flammable
Liquids
Gases
Liquids
Solids
Fuel Source
Ignition Source
Figure 12.5
Demonstrating the use of AND gates and OR gates in the building of a simple fault tree.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
INTRODUCTION
153
Probability Values and the Fault Tree
As discussed in Chapter 5, known or deduced failure rates can assist in developing
recommended control actions. In any given cut set, if a failure rate or a combination
of failure rates are known to be quite low, then their potential effect on the top event
can be numerically evaluated against the costs of controlling these risks.
A set of events attached to the main event through an OR gate are sometimes
referred to as mutually exclusive events since the occurrence of the main event is
not dependent upon the occurrence of all sub-events and, occurrence of each of the
sub-events is not dependent upon the occurrence of each other. This means that, when
events in a set are mutually exclusive, the probability of one or another of the events
occurring is equal to the sum of the probabilities of the events occurring individually.
This old but fundamental concept is known as the addition rule for probabilities
(Spurr and Bonini 1973) and can be expressed as follows:
P(A or B) = P(A) + P(B)
where P = probability; A = first possible event; B = second possible event.
On the fault tree, when probability rates are known, the analyst simply adds the
probability values for the events under an OR gate and arrives at the expected proba-
bility for the occurrence of the main or top event. However, it is noted that in many
systems, events are not mutually exclusive in that more than one can occur at the
same time and result in the same outcome. In fact, the OR gate simply indicates that
more than one or only one event must occur to effect the main event. When there is
some probability that more than one event can occur at the same time to effect an
outcome, it is known as joint probability. Figure 12.6 shows the overlapping effect
which creates the joint probability theory. The event labeled AB in this diagram indi-
cates that these events would actually be counted twice should the above formula be
TOTAL PROBABILITY
EVENT A
EVENT B
EVENT AB
TOTAL PROBABILITY
Figure 12.6
The concept of joint probability of events. (Source: Spurr and Bonini 1973).
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
154
FAULT TREE ANALYSIS
TABLE 12.1
Injury Rates for a Sample of the Male and Female Population
Safe behavior of 1000 men and women (percent of total)
Men
Women
Total
Injury
17
3
20
Non-injury
53
27
80
Total
70
30
100
used by accidentally labeling the event as mutually exclusive. In order to compensate
for this potential, the formula can be modified slightly to allow for those events which
are not mutually exclusive, as follows:
P(A or B) = P(A) + P(B) −P(A, B)
As an example: In evaluating the safe behavior of 1000 men and women, Table 12.1
shows the percent of the total that have either had occupational injuries or did
not have occupational injuries. The contributing events (men having injuries and
women having injuries) are not mutually exclusive since either or both may have
suffered occupational injuries and, subsequently, effected the primary or top event
(safe behavior). Figure 12.7 shows the fault tree for this extremely simple example.
By applying the modified formula for non-mutually exclusive events, the probability
of an injury event (I) involving a man (M) can be calculated as follows:
P(M or I) = P(M) + P(I) −P(M, I)
= 0.70 + 0.20 −0.17
= 0.73
These data indicate that there is a 73% probability that an injury event will involve a
male employee.
WORK FORCE
INJURIES
MEN HAVING
WOMEN HAVING
INJURIES
INJURIES
Figure 12.7
The top events of a fault tree analyzing safe work behavior.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
INTRODUCTION
155
A.
CATASTROPHIC
PRESSURE
SYSTEM FAILURE
P = .01  x  .05  x  .001
= 5  x  10-7
“AND” GATE
all sub-events must occur
GAUGE OR
REGULATOR
OPERATOR
ERROR
SYSTEM OVER-
PRESSURIZATION
REGULATOR
FAILURE
ERROR
PRESSURIZATION
B.
SIMPLE
.01
1
0
0.
5
0.
P = .01  +  .05  +  .001
= 6  x  10-2
PRESSURE
SYSTEM FAILURE
“OR” GATE
only one  sub-event must occur
GAUGE OR
OPERATOR
SYSTEM OVER
REGULATOR
FAILURE
OPERATOR
ERROR
SYSTEM OVER-
PRESSURIZATION
.01
1
0
0.
5
0.
Figure 12.8
Probability values in fault tree analysis.
When a main or top event is the result of contributing events connected through
an AND gate, the total probability of occurrence is, relatively speaking, somewhat
less than if those events passed through an OR gate. Under an AND gate, each
listed event must occur in order to realize the top event. Whereas, under an OR
gate, only one of many possible events must occur for the top or main event to
materialize. Therefore, to calculate the probable occurrence of an event supported
by an AND gate, the underlying event probabilities are multiplied. For example, if
a catastrophic failure of a pressure system (top event) is supported through an AND
gate by three contributing events entitled operator error, gauge/regulator failure,
and system over-pressurization, the simple fault tree could be drawn as shown in
Figure 12.8A. Through manufacturer supplied data, gauge/regulator failure rates have
been determined to be 0.01 based on 1000 hours of operation (10 failures in every
thousand hours). Past accident/incident experience has determined the probability for
operator error to be 0.05 (50 errors in 1000 hours of performance). Similar historical
experience has shown that the probability of a system over-pressurization is remote at
0.001 (1 in a 1000 hours of operation). By placing these values under the appropriate
labels on the tree, the analyst can already begin to evaluate the likelihood of realizing
the top event (Figure 12.8A). Mathematically, the probability of experiencing a
catastrophic failure of the pressure system is expressed as follows:
P(A) = P(B) × P(C) × P(D)
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
156
FAULT TREE ANALYSIS
where: P(A) = probability of catastrophic system failure; P(B) = probability of gauge/
regulator failure; P(C) = probability of operator error; P(D) = probability of system
over-pressurization.
Therefore,
P(A) = 0.01 × 0.05 × 0.001
= 5 × 10−7(0.0000005)
Obviously, if all three sub-events must occur in order for pressure system failure
to be classified as catastrophic, it appears that the probability of such a failure is
extremely remote. However, if the analysis determined that an occurrence of any or
all of the three events would result in simple system failure and that these events were
mutually exclusive, then these events would be connected to the top event through an
OR gate (as shown in Figure 12.8B) and the applicable probability values would be
added, as follows:
P(A) = 0.01 + 0.05 + 0.001
= 6 × 10−2(0.061)
Hence, when occurrence of the top event is not dependent upon the occurrence of
all sub-events, the probability of the top event is not so remote. In this example, the
likelihood of simple system failure (as opposed to catastrophic system failure) has
increased several orders of magnitude and would therefore require a more informed
decision regarding hazard risk acceptance.
SUMMARY
The FTA is a technique which can be used to identify those events which can or
must occur in order to realize a desired or undesired outcome. The technique uses a
deductive approach to event analysis as it moves from the general to the specific. The
FTA has great utility in its ability to distinguish between those events which must
occur (represented by an AND gate) and those that simply can occur (represented by
an OR gate) in order for the top event to occur. The information charted on a fault
tree provides a qualitative analysis by demonstrating how specific events will effect
an outcome. If probability data are known for these events, then the FTA can also
provide quantitative information to further evaluate the likelihood of achieving the
top event.
Once developed, the fault areas which are responsible for yielding an undesired
(or desired) event can be evaluated on the micro rather than the macro level and this
is one of the primary utilities of the fault tree analysis technique.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
13
Management Oversight
and Risk Tree
INTRODUCTION
The Management Oversight and Risk Tree (MORT) was originally conceived and
developed in 1970 by W. G. (Bill) Johnson at the request of the Energy Research and
Development Administration (today’s Department of Energy, and the now defunct
Atomic Energy Commission), Division of Safety, Standards, and Compliance. Prior
to that time, there was no coordinated and formalized system safety program within
the organization. The original proposal for the establishment of such a program made
the following arguments (DOE SSDC-4 1983):
… . Emerging concepts of system analysis, accident causation, human factors, error
reduction, and measurement of safety performance strongly suggest the practicality of
developing a higher order of control over hazards (than currently exists).
… . The formulation of an ideal system appears to be a valuable precondition for knowing
what information to seek after an accident and what aspects of performance to measure.
Johnson, who had recently retired as General Manager of the National Safety
Council, advanced the idea that the application of controls and resources by the
management of occupational safety and health programs could be categorized into
five basic levels.
1. Less than minimal compliance with regulations and codes.
2. Minimal compliance with regulations and codes.
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
157
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
158
MANAGEMENT OVERSIGHT AND RISK TREE
3. Application of manuals and standards.
4. Advanced safety programs exemplified by those currently found in leading
companies.
5. An as-yet-nonexistent, higher level safety program synthesized by combining
the “system safety” concepts pioneered by the military and aerospace industry
with the best occupational safety practices and factoring in the newer concepts
of behavioral, organizational, and analytical sciences.
Johnson was convinced that a sufficient amount of data already existed to suggest
that progression from one level of safety program performance to the next higher
(better) level might result in an order of magnitude reduction in the annual rate of
disastrous accidents experienced by a specific enterprise. His extremely analytical
approach to this study yielded the first generation MORT text in 1971. At that time,
four key innovative features now basic to the MORT program were introduced.
1. An analytical “logic tree” or diagram, from which MORT derives its name.
2. Schematic representation of a dynamic, universal system safety model by using
fault tree analysis methodology.
3. Methodology for analyzing a specific safety program, through a process of
evaluating the adequacy of the implementation of individual safety program
elements.
4. A collection of philosophical statements and general advice relative to the
application of the MORT system safety concepts and listed criteria by which
to make an assessment of the effectiveness of their application.
The MORT Analytical Chart
Throughout the early-to-mid 1970s, the “new” MORT concept was subjected to
extensive studies and further development through practical application at test loca-
tions. The MORT program (or programmatic MORT) as it exists today, is viewed
as a specialized management subsystem that focuses upon programmatic control of
industrial safety hazards. The actual logic diagram (or analytical MORT), displays a
structured set of over 1500 basic events, nearly 100 generic problem areas, and an
unknown number of judging criteria, all interrelated as safety program elements and
concepts comprising the ideal safety program model. Figure 13.1 shows the way in
which the MORT concept (programmatic MORT) is schematically represented by a
logic diagram (analytical MORT). The MORT chart has been increasingly used and
accepted as a method for analyzing a specific accident or, alternatively, evaluating an
existing safety program for accident/incident potential.
As a safety management program, MORT has been designed to prevent safety-
related oversights, errors, and/or omissions by providing relatively simple decision
points in an accident analysis or a safety program evaluation. The end results of
programmatic MORT implementation are the identification, assessment, and referral
of residual risks to the proper management levels for appropriate action. MORT will
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
INTRODUCTION
159
98 GENERIC
PROBLEM EVENTS
1500
POSSIBLE
BASIC EVENT
CAUSES
CRITERIA OR
JUDGMENT RATIONALE
STEPS
REQUIRED
TO FULFILL A
FUNCTION
FUNCTIONS
NECESSARY FOR
THE PROCESS
THE
COMPLETED MORT
PROCESS
Is a STEP well done, or
Less Than Adequate (LTA)
based on Judgment Rationale?
Figure 13.1
The management oversight and risk tree (MORT) process.
also serve to optimize the allocation of resources available to the safety program and
to individual hazard control efforts.
MORT Use
Primarily, MORT has been designed for use as an investigative tool with which to
focus upon the many factors contributing to an incident/accident. It accomplishes this
by means of a meticulous trace of unwanted energy sources, along with consideration
of the adequacy of the barriers provided. Hence, one can understand how the energy
trace and barrier analysis (ETBA), as discussed in Chapter 9, grew from MORT as
a completely separate analytical technique. MORT, however, goes much further than
the ETBA. As the analysis proceeds, the MORT chart will identify any detected
changes in the system (planned or unplanned). When change is detected, MORT
recommends the performance of a detailed change analysis (DOE SSDC-4 1983).
When system changes are considered, their potential consequences must be eval-
uated in terms of risk acceptance. Here again, the appropriate management level
must determine what is considered acceptable risk. Good business management will
identify the need for proper control methods such as barriers to reduce levels of risk.
MORT, then, is designed to investigate accidents and incidents and to evaluate safety
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
160
MANAGEMENT OVERSIGHT AND RISK TREE
programs for potential accident/incident situations. Two of the many basic MORT
concepts are the analysis of change and the evaluation of the adequacy of energy
barriers relative to persons or objects (i.e., targets, as discussed in Chapter 9) in the
energy path.
THE MORT EVENT TREE
It is not possible within the limited scope of this text to provide fully detailed
and comprehensive instruction on the use of the MORT event tree in either safety
program evaluation or accident/incident investigation and analysis. Indeed, experts
in this technique, such as Bill Johnson, have written numerous textbooks on just
this system safety concept alone (see Appendix A). The event tree working model
is detailed on a single chart 30′′ × 24′′ (without instructions). Reproduction of the
entire event tree would require several pages alone which is not practical. Because of
the complexity and overwhelming nature of the full MORT event tree, a mini-MORT
chart has been developed to facilitate the analysis of relatively minor incidents, as
well as to serve as a tool for instructor users in the MORT technique. The mini-
MORT reduces the number of events to be analyzed and evaluated from 1500 to
approximately 150 by eliminating the bottom tier of the chart and removing all
transfers from the chart. Since the use of transfer gates to associate information from
one chart to another is avoided in the mini-MORT, the overall chart tends to appear
less complex and intimidating. Additionally, the seldom-used event symbols like
the scroll and the stretched circle are replaced with the more common circles and
rectangles (Stephenson 1991). However, with the mini-MORT, reproduction of the
entire event tree would not be possible in a single-page text format. Other excellent
alternatives to MORT and mini-MORT, such as Stephenson’s PET chart (Project
Evaluation Tree) also exist, but will not be discussed here.
In general, the remainder of this chapter will focus on the explanation of the various
MORT event tree symbols and their use/meaning. Since the tree is an analytical model,
the information presented in the previous chapter (Fault Tree Analysis) will be helpful
and should be reviewed.
Symbols
The primary symbols used for most analytical trees have been used in the MORT
event tree as well. These include
r the rectangle (primary or top event and secondary, contributory or main events),
r the diamond (undeveloped event),
r the circle (basic event),
r the AND gate,
r the OR gate,
r the oval (conditional or constraint symbol), and
r the triangle (transfer gate or symbol).
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
THE MORT EVENT TREE
161
RECTANGLE
ELONGATED
CIRCLE
CIRCLE
“AND”
GATE
“OR”
GATE
SCROLL
DIAMOND
TRANSFER
SYMBOL
Figure 13.2
MORT Symbology (Source: DOE).
In addition to these, the MORT chart also uses a rounded rectangle, or elongated
circle, to represent a satisfactory event (an event that may have contributed to an
accident or incident but whose existence is essential for normal system operation).
Also, instead of the house symbol common to fault tree analysis to represent those
events that are considered normal and expected in a typical system, MORT uses a
scroll symbol. Figure 13.2 shows the MORT symbols as described here.
MORT Analysis Example
In accident investigation, MORT analysis begins as soon as the accident/incident
occurs. MORT moves from the known (accident event) to the unknown (causal
factors) through an extremely complex, exacting, and quite meticulous process of
elimination. The top event (e.g., injuries, damage, performance loss) is identified
and assigned the appropriate position in the rectangle at the top of the event tree.
Contributing events, or blocks of many possible contributing events, are placed under
the top event in typical fault tree fashion. Figure 13.3 (DOE SSDC-4 1983) shows
the top events of the MORT chart.
Construction and layout at this level depicts the main tree “branches” as Specific
and Management (S/M) Oversights and Omissions on the left side of the tree, and
Assumed Risks (R), on the right. MORT dictates that risk factors are defined as only
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
162
MANAGEMENT OVERSIGHT AND RISK TREE
Injuries, Damage, Other
Costs, Performance Lost
or Degraded
Program/Public Impact
T
Future
Undesired
Events?
TOP EVENT
Ask the question:
What and how large 
were the losses?
Oversight
and
Omissions
Assumed
Risks
S/M
R
NEXT LEVEL
BRANCH EVENTS
R1
R2
R3
R4
Rn
Specific
Control
Factors LTA
S
Ask the
question:
What
happened?
Management
System
Factors LTA
M
Ask the question:  Why?
Accident
SA1
Amelioration
LTA
SA2
Implementation
LTA
MA2
Risk
Assessment
System LTA
MA3
Policy
LTA
MA1
Figure 13.3
The top branches of the MORT analytical event tree (Source: DOE).
those risks that have been analyzed and accepted by the proper level of manage-
ment. Nonanalyzed or unknown risks cannot be considered Assumed Risks. Because
Assumed Risks have been accepted by management, MORT requires risk events in the
Management Oversight and Omissions branch to be transferred to the Assumed Risks
branch (since it may have been a management oversight to assume a given risk event).
The two next-level branches under Oversights and Omissions are labeled Specific
Control Factors (S) on the left side or the branch and Management System Factors
(M) on the right. On the MORT chart, Management factors are deliberately shown
separate from the process that produced the specific adverse event for two reasons
(DOE SSDC-4 1983) as follows:
1. Depiction of the existing management systems will suggest related background
aspects of the specific accident that should be closely examined and
2. The specific event may, in turn, suggest certain aspects of the management
system which may truly be less than adequate (LTA).
In order for MORT to be truly comprehensive, all related and seemingly unrelated
events in the management system must be examined for possible contribution to the
top event.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
THE MORT EVENT TREE
163
The MORT investigative process can be best understood through a detailed exam-
ination of each element on the MORT event tree diagram. The individual branches
and the events assigned to them are somewhat self-explanatory in that each element
of the branch asks a relatively simple question. Starting at the top of the diagram with
the actual loss event (or the potential for a loss if MORT is being used to evaluate an
existing safety program) and moving, in turn, through each of the three main branches,
the analysis begins to identify, isolate, eliminate, and/or evaluate all possible con-
tributory factors that may have influenced the top event. Detailed consideration of
the Specific Control Factors branch is accomplished by reasoning backward in time,
through several sequences of contributing factors. The analysis in this branch ends
when the question posed by the basic event (circle) statement can be answered with
a definitive “yes” or “no.” Obviously, some factors (branches) will be more relevant
than others. However, MORT deliberately has many planned redundancies through-
out the diagram. A higher degree of hazard protection is attained when a hazard may
be identified and connected at two or more places. It is better to ask the right question
twice than to fail to ask it at all (DOE SSDC-4 1983).
MORT Color Coding
MORT investigation utilizes a color-coding system, as follows, to help identify those
areas on the event tree where additional investigation or analysis is warranted.
Red: Event or factor Less than Adequate (LTA). Any event, factor, or block of
events or factors, that, after thorough examination, has been determined to have
LTA controls or barriers to prevent a transfer of hazardous energy is colored red
on the MORT chart. Caution in the use of this color is warranted since any sys-
tem elements labeled LTA must be well documented and a recommended course
of action provided in the final accident investigation report to management.
Green: Event or factor Adequate. When investigative evaluation reveals that the
barriers, controls, procedures, training, and/or any other factor effecting an
event is considered to have been adequate (i.e., not likely to have contributed
to the primary event in the block), the color green is used. Since green will
also indicate that no further analysis will occur in this event block, the analyst
should also cautiously use this color code.
Black: Event or factor Not Applicable. Depending upon the nature of the top
event, there may be some areas of the comprehensive MORT event tree that
simply do not apply to the particular investigation. In this case, the event and/or
an entire event block is colored black or simply crossed-out. Although it may
be obvious in many instances when a set of events is not applicable, the analyst
must truly verify (not assume) that specific events are not contributory to the
investigation. Inadvertent elimination of a possible contributing factor could
jeopardize the overall analysis process.
Blue: Event or factor examined. Insufficient data available to fully evaluate the
event or event block. Additional detailed analysis and investigation of these
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
164
MANAGEMENT OVERSIGHT AND RISK TREE
Figure 13.4
Sequence of work through a MORT Analysis Chart (Source: DOE).
Consider a MORT
Element in Context
to Situation
Delete Element
from Consideration
YES
NO
Enough
Data to
Assess
Element?
YES
NO
Is MORT
Element
Relevant?
Code Element
BLUE
Make Entry on List
of Further Inquiries
Does this
Element
Reveal a
Problem?
YES
NO
Code Element
GREEN
End Analysis of Element
Code Element
RED
Move to
Next MORT Element
NOTE ELEMENT
1.  State problem
2.  Identify evidence
3.  Provide basis for
  judgment (e.g.,
  company policy,
  regulations)
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SUMMARY
165
areas may produce an adequate amount of data to determine the true value of
these factors or events. Once this has occurred, these events will be re-coded
with one of the other indicator colors. Ideally, the MORT process will exhaus-
tively examine all blue areas to remove any question as to their value. However,
in many cases, it is simply not possible to eliminate all blue events from a truly
comprehensive investigation (sometimes, data are just not available).
The MORT User’s Manual first published more than 30 years ago states that it is
best to assume that all the boxes in the MORT diagram are colored blue, meaning that
much more information is required before a judgment can be made (DOE SSDC-4,
Revision 3 1992). This is where the questioning begins in the MORT process. Events
can then be colored the appropriate indicator (red, green, or black) depending upon
the answers obtained. The investigation is complete only when the entire chart has
been evaluated through this question–answer process.
PROCEDURE FOR MORT ANALYSIS
Simply stated, the objective of a MORT analysis is to understand how specific
“targets” were exposed to harm, damage, or unwanted change and to explain this in
terms of risk management. To begin the analysis, an event is chosen from a previously
performed ETBA (see Chapter 9) and is placed at the top of the MORT diagram. Then,
the analyst considers each MORT element (e.g., oversight and omissions, assumed
risks, specific control factors, management system factors) relative to the situation
under analysis. By following the logic flow shown in Figure 13.4 in the analysis of
that event, and for each subsequent event, the process will eventually lead to the root
or basic causes of the chain of failures that resulted in the loss or damage.
SUMMARY
The MORT analytic diagram works best if it is used as a working paper. Pertinent
facts about an accident or problem may be noted in margins at appropriate places.
Informality is a key factor in the practice of MORT analysis. The diagram itself will
ensure proper discipline in the performance of the analysis. MORT is a screening
guide and a working tool, not the finished report. Writing the accident investigation
report is a separate process. MORT is structured to facilitate analysis of a given
accident event or the potential for its occurrence.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
14
HAZOP and What-If
Analyses
INTRODUCTION
The Hazard and Operability (HAZOP) study and the What-If analysis are analytical
techniques that have their roots in the petrochemical industry. The HAZOP and the
What-If analysis have become two of the most common qualitative methods used
to conduct process hazard analyses in the petrochemical industry. In fact, up to
80% or more of a given company’s process hazard analysis may consist of HAZOP
studies and What-If analysis. The remaining 20% is comprised of checklists, fault tree
analyses, failure mode and effects analyses, event trees, and so on. (Nolan 1994). Just
as the foundation of system safety engineering had its roots in the emerging missile
and aerospace industries during the 1940s and 1950s, this text has demonstrated that
the methods and techniques associated with system safety have direct application in
the practice of industrial safety compliance. Likewise, the principal concepts of the
HAZOP study and the What-If analysis processes have definite application in general
industry as well. An experienced review team can use these techniques to evaluate
possible deviations from design, construction, modification, and operating intent to
define and prevent potential unwanted consequences or cause desired outcomes to
materialize. This chapter will present a brief introduction to the use of the HAZOP
study and the What-If analysis in an effort to show how they are used in tandem to
produce a comprehensive and highly detailed assessment of operational risk.
These analytical methodologies were first developed for the petrochemical indus-
try with the intent to reduce the probability and/or consequences of a major incident
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
167
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
168
HAZOP AND WHAT-IF ANALYSES
that would have serious or even devastating impacts to the employees, the public,
property (both company-owned as well as off-site), and/or the environment. Exten-
sion of these concepts into a more broad application in industry in general could
have far-reaching benefits and present certain advantages to an organization’s overall
accident/incident prevention programs.
BACKGROUND
The HAZOP study was first developed in the United Kingdom for use in its chemical
industry during the 1960s. Imperial Chemical Industries, Ltd (ICI) is credited for
developing this standardized approach to the analysis of process hazards associated
with basic operating conditions of their facility. Then, using the HAZOP and What-If
methodologies, changes to individual operating protocols were introduced (on paper)
one at a time to allow the review team to evaluate the subsequent (albeit hypothetical)
consequences. Over time, this analysis method evolved into a standard practice, first
at ICI and then into the chemical industry in general. While it should be stated that
HAZOP was not uniformly or consistently applied, the concepts still form the basis
of the HAZOP approach that is in general use today. By inputting these hypothetical
changes to the operating system, the potential consequences can be better understood
and, if necessary, actions can be taken to preempt any possibility of realizing such
consequences under real-world operating conditions.
Definitions
For the purpose of this text, the following definitions are provided for the HAZOP
study and the What-If analysis:
HAZOP: A formal, systematic, logical, and structured investigative study for
examining potential deviations of operations from design conditions that could
create process-operating problems and hazards.
What-If Analysis: An informal but somewhat structured investigative method for
introducing and evaluating hypothetical events, or series of events, associated
with the operation of a given facility or process.
The successful use of both the HAZOP study and the What-If analysis is dependent
upon the expertise and experience of the individuals that comprise the review teams.
Essentially, both are really nothing more than exercises in communication. While each
method can be conducted as separate analyses, the What-If analysis is almost always a
primary component of a complete HAZOP study. Information is presented, discussed,
analyzed, and recorded. Specific safety aspects and requirements are identified so
that appropriate design considerations can be determined. The objective is accident
prediction and the end result is accident prevention.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
REFERENCE DATA REQUIREMENTS
169
Objectives
There are basically four primary objectives of any HAZOP study or What-If analysis
(Nolan 1994).
1. To identify the causes of all deviations of changes from the intended design
function;
2. To determine all major hazards and operability problems associated with any
identified deviations;
3. To decide whether action is required to control the hazard or operability
problems;
4. To ensure that the actions decided upon are implemented and documented.
TEAM MEMBERS
Conducting a proper HAZOP study and any supporting What-If analysis is and should
always be a team effort. The review team should consist of individuals that work in or
are affected by the process under review. These can include supervisors, maintenance
personnel, and line employees, as well as safety representatives and even consultants
(when necessary) to ensure a well-rounded, experienced-based review team. In the
end, the team should consist of at least the following “types” of members:
1. A team leader
2. A recorder (or scribe) to document all team activities, decisions, and reports
3. The “experts” (those who are experienced with the process, equipment, proce-
dures, facility, etc., under review)
The ideal size of a review team should not exceed five or six members. This is
because too many participants will make the review process particularly difficult to
follow and document. The more members, the more the number of conversations,
and the greater the potential for distraction and confusion.
REFERENCE DATA REQUIREMENTS
When performing either a HAZOP study or What-If analysis, it is essential that all
necessary reference data be available for review and evaluation. Any and every type
of data that pertains to the system or project under analysis should be examined
to ensure that the review team is fully cognizant of all design criteria, functional
intent, and operational requirements of the system. Once these elements are clearly
established and understood, the consequences of any potential deviations (intended
or otherwise) can be more fully explored and evaluated.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
170
HAZOP AND WHAT-IF ANALYSES
TABLE 14.1
Typical Sources of Reference Data to be Reviewed When Conducting a What-If
Analysis and/or HAZOP Study
Examples—sources of reference data
r History of losses from the existing or similar facilities
r Ergonomic or human factor elements (color coding, accessibility, practical use, languages and
instructions, etc.)
r Personnel staffing and headcount levels ( distribution of personnel, levels of supervision, etc.)
r Evacuation routes and emergency response/action plans
r Design codes and applicable standards (ANSI, NFPA, OSHA, ASME, ASTM, ISO, HSE, etc.)
r Utilities specifications and reliability history/data (power, water, gas, etc.)
r Ambient environmental data (expected operating temperatures, prevailing weather conditions, seismic
considerations, etc.)
r Special studies or calculations where available and applicable (vapor dispersions, blast overpressure,
etc.)
r As-built drawings showing interface to exiting systems
r Instrumentation criteria and approach (local/remote control, hardwired/data highway, failure modes,
analog/digital, emergency alarms, etc.)
r Facility and equipment electrical diagrams
r Data sheets for instruments and controls (i.e., vendor or manufacturer specifications)
r Full description of system design specifications and calculations
r Operating procedures including startup and commissioning as well as shutdown and disposal (if
applicable)
r System maintenance history, including regular maintenance schedules and any known or previous
emergency maintenance requirements
r If applicable, chemical and physical properties of all commodities involved in the system (material
safety data sheets, UN specifications, etc.)
r Fire and explosion protection systems drawings and arrangements (fire and gas detection/alarm,
protection—passive/aggressive, etc.)
r System design philosophy and requirements (e.g., process description)
Table 14.1 (Nolan 1994) provides an example listing of some of the more common
reference sources typically identified for use in HAZOP and What-If analyses. The
challenge is to identify and obtain all potential source data to ensure a comprehensive
review.
THE CONCEPT OF “NODES”
In HAZOP studies and What-If analyses, the review team must first identify the
areas or components of the system that will each be analyzed during the review
process. In the chemical industry, these individual components are typically referred
to as “nodes.” There are three basic criteria for identifying the nodes to be reviewed
(Nolan 1994).
1. Divide the facility into process systems and subsystems
2. Follow the process flow of the system under study
3. Isolate subsystems into major components which achieve a single objective
(i.e., increase pressure, remove water, separate gases).
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
CONDUCTING THE WHAT-IF ANALYSIS
171
Using these criteria, individual nodes associated with the vapor degreaser system
discussed in Chapter 6 (refer Figure 6.6) can be identified:
1. Compressor
2. Refrigerant storage tank
3. Cooling coil
4. Solvent storage tank
5. Overhead bridge crane
6. Electrical service
Once the individual nodes have been identified, the HAZOP study and What-If
analysis can be initiated. As stated earlier, the information developed through the
What-If analysis can then be used as input data for the more complete and detailed
HAZOP study of the vapor degreasing system.
CONDUCTING THE WHAT-IF ANALYSIS
While both the HAZOP study and What-If analysis are generally organized and con-
ducted in a similar fashion, the HAZOP study is more comprehensive and structured,
while the What-If approach is generally broader and less formal. For these reasons,
each method will be presented and discussed separately.
In the petrochemical industry, the What-If analysis has been found to be most
useful in analyzing facilities and processes that are relatively simple in structure,
operations, and overall complexity. Extending these “lessons learned” from years of
application in the chemical industry to general use, it is suggested that the occupational
safety practitioner interested in the utility of the What-If analysis attempt using this
approach to analyze hypothetical consequences for relatively simple operations and
procedures. As established previously in the text, the level of completed design can
also dictate which types of analyses will be most effective. During the concept and
design phases (see Figure 3.4, Chapter 3), only general information may be available.
Hence, a detailed HAZOP could not really be performed. During these phases, when
specific details of a project or process are not yet fully established, the focus should
be on the prevention of accidents through analysis of specific events (i.e., those that
have the potential to impact total system safety). The What-If analysis is one of many
possible tools to accomplish this objective. It should also be noted that, depending
on the specific scope of a particular analysis exercise, the What-If approach can be
successfully used in all phases of the product life cycle.
What-If Analysis Steps
To initiate a What-If analysis, the review team must establish certain assumptions
about the process or system under review. These assumptions help establish the
boundaries of the overall review and ensure the analysis remains focused on providing
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
172
HAZOP AND WHAT-IF ANALYSES
value-added recommendations to project management. To illustrate the need and use
of assumptions, the What-If analysis of the vapor degreaser, assumes the following:
1. Process equipment is compatible with materials used and is properly designed;
2. The facility is operated with an adequate and properly trained staff as intended
by the design philosophy;
3. The failures of process equipment, instrumentation, and safety devices occur
randomly;
4. The failure rates and demand rates of safety devices are considered to be low;
5. The safety of personnel and property and the preservation of the environment
are top priorities for project management and employee labor representatives;
6. The facility is designed, operated, and maintained to good management and
engineering standards.
With these assumptions in place, the review team will not waste valuable time
pursuing issues such as the use of incompatible materials, operator training ineffi-
ciencies, high rates of equipment failure, or inappropriate environmental, safety and
health (ES&H) management policies and directives.
The next step is to determine the types of failure events that are possible for the
system under review. It is critical to differentiate between events that are considered
likely to occur (credible) and those that are considered extremely unlikely (non-
credible). Again, the purpose is to establish workable boundaries for the review and
to ensure that the team stays focused on only those issues that will add value to the
overall process. For the vapor degreaser operation, Table 14.2 provides examples
TABLE 14.2
Partial List of Credible Failure Events for the Vapor Degreaser Operation
Vapor degreaser operation
Credible failure events
Examples
A single human error with or without
established operating instructions
Incorrect sequencing of steps; improper positioning
of controls; prolonged exposure of parts to
degreasing vapors; materials moved from
degreasing tank to quickly; solvent tank level not
maintained
Two simultaneous human errors with or
without established operating procedures
Incorrect sequencing of steps; improper positioning
of controls; incorrect crane movement and/or
function; unacceptable coolant and/or solvent
temperatures
A single instrument or mechanical failure
Compressor failure; loss of coolant flow; loss of
solvent flow; refrigerant tank pressure regulator
failure; loss of cooling
A single human error, coupled with a single
instrument or mechanical failure
Compressor failure; improper interpretation of
console instruments; loss of coolant flow; loss of
solvent flow; refrigerant tank pressure regulator
failure; unacceptable coolant and/or solvent
temperatures
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
CONDUCTING THE WHAT-IF ANALYSIS
173
TABLE 14.3
Partial List of Non-credible Failure Events for the Vapor Degreaser Operation
Vapor degreaser operation
Non-credible failure events
Examples
Simultaneous failure of two essential
independent instrument or mechanical
systems
Malfunction or simultaneous failure of compressor
and refrigerant system; loss of cooling and failure
of flow level shut-off sensors in tank
Failure of both the crane automatic stop safety
device and the crane magnetorque braking
device
Loss of crane lowering control limits and inability to
stop crane movement into tank
Simultaneous loss of main electric service
power and backup electric generator power
Complete loss of power to compressor, crane,
operator console, solvent heating system,
refrigerant cooling system
Facility destruction due to uncontrollable
external events
Earthquake, terrorist attack or civil unrest, flood, etc.
of credible failure events and Table 14.3 shows examples of those that would be
considered non-credible and will, therefore, not be subjected to analysis.
The What-If Analysis Worksheet
As with numerous other analytical techniques presented and discussed in this text, a
worksheet developed for the What-If analysis greatly facilitates the documentation
and review of data points. Figure 14.1 provides an example of a What-If worksheet.
WHAT-IF ANALYSIS WORKSHEET
AREA:
TEAM MEMBERS:
DATE:
ITEM
WHAT IF………..
HAZARD
RECOMMENDATIONS
PAGE:
SAFEGUARDS
REMARKS
CONSEQUENCES
Figure 14.1
Sample What-If Analysis worksheet.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
174
HAZOP AND WHAT-IF ANALYSES
WHAT-IF ANALYSIS WORKSHEET
AREA:
TEAM MEMBERS: J. Doe; T. Smith; C. Hope; V. Jones; A. Ford 
Vapor Degreaser
DATE:
ITEM
WHAT IF………..
CONSEQUENCES
HAZARD
RECOMMENDATIONS
PAGE:
SAFEGUARDS
REMARKS
29 September 2012
1  of  1
The wrong solvent is
introduced into the
system instead of
Freon 113?      
1
Contamination; 
undesired
reaction  
Equipment damage;
product loss; waste
disposal issues;
production
downtime   
Develop verification
procedures prior to
acceptance of
product   
Vendor
Certificate of
Acceptance;
sampling/testing
before off-
loading   
None 
Solvent unloading
line fails?    
2
Released of
solvent liquid and
vapor at high
pressure    
Environmental
impact; personnel/
public (off-site)
effects; public
relations; product
loss  
Investigate 
availability of 
alternative high
pressure hoses and
lines   
Engineering
controls; system
design/layout,
equipment;
personal
protective
equipment;
SOPs in use;
controlled
access; low
pressure switch;
remote switch;
dikes/
containment            
Materials
used now
are not
always
compatible
with
chemical
commodities    
All lines, valves, or
vessels are not 
identified
as to contents?  
3
None
to
catastrophic
None
to
catastrophic
None 
Periodic
inspections;
common
industry practice   
None 
Spare parts control
procedure is not
adequate?  
4
None
to
catastrophic
None
to
catastrophic
Evaluate current
purchasing practices
for critical spares   
Critical parts 
have been
identified 
None 
Figure 14.2
Partially completed What-If analysis worksheet for the vapor degreaser system.
By placing specific questions in the “What-If . . . ” column, the analyst can evaluate
the consequences of credible hypothetical situations and events.
Figure 14.2 shows the partially complete What-If analysis worksheet for the vapor
degreaser facility. Note that many more “what-if” questions can (and should be)
asked to completely exhaust all possible events that could effect the safety of overall
system operation. Quite typically, a properly completed What-If analysis will address
many dozens of individual items and encompass numerous worksheet pages before
all credible events have been evaluated. The intent of Figure 14.2 is to demonstrate
the use of the worksheet in a What-If analysis. For each expected use of the What-
If analysis, it would be helpful if a What-If checklist is developed before-hand.
Checklists will establish all possible questions that could be asked for a given system
or process. This will facilitate the actual What-If analysis since all questions will be
readily available for consideration. For example, in addition to the what-if questions
appearing on the worksheet in Figure 14.2, additional questions to be asked may
include the following:
What if facility electrical power is lost or interrupted?
What if the overhead crane magnetorque brake fails?
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
CONDUCTING THE HAZOP STUDY
175
What if the refrigerant level is too low?
What if the system pressure is too low?
What if the system pressure is too high?
What if the solvent level is too high?
What if the solvent level is too low?
What if the facility heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) system fails?
What if the main compressor fails?
What if the refrigerant tank relief valve malfunctions?
What if the sprinkler system activates inadvertently?
What if process flow diagrams or drawings are not current?
What if obsolete or unused equipment is installed?
What if the solvent tank fails?
What if the sanitary sewer system fails?
The questions should continue until all elements are addressed. If a more detailed
and complete HAZOP study should be required, the information contained on
the What-If analysis worksheets will help facilitate and streamline the pending
HAZOP study.
CONDUCTING THE HAZOP STUDY
The more complex the system or process to be evaluated, the more essential is the
need for a HAZOP study. The HAZOP study is conducted in much the same way as
the What-If analysis, usually by the same review team. There are minor differences,
however, in terminology and approach. In the HAZOP study, certain “guidewords”
are normally used to aid the review team and help identify specific areas where
deviations from design intent can occur. Guidewords can include pressure, flow,
level, temperature, power, and so on. HAZOP also attempts to identify the severity
of the outcome if such deviations from the norm occur as well as the probability
or likelihood of occurrence. The Hazard Risk Matrix established and explained in
Chapter 2 (Table 2.3) can be used for this purpose since it provides both severity and
probability rankings for a given hazardous situation.
The HAZOP Worksheet
Taking the above stated differences between the What-If Analysis Worksheet and the
HAZOP process, Figure 14.3 provides an example of a typical HAZOP Worksheet.
Note the headings over each column. Some are identical to those found on the What-
If worksheet and, therefore, transfer of the information from any previous What-If
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
176
HAZOP AND WHAT-IF ANALYSES
HAZOP WORKSHEET
AREA:
EQUIPMENT/PROCESS:
TEAM :
DATE:
ITEM
POSSIBLE
CAUSES
POSSIBLE
CONSEQUENCES
RECOMMENDED
ACTION(S)
PAGE:
SAFEGUARDS
REMARKS
GUIDE
WORD
RAC
DEVIATION
Figure 14.3
Sample HAZOP worksheet.
analyses would be relatively simple. Figure 14.4 shows the beginning of what should
conceivably be an extremely detailed HAZOP study of the various systems and
components (nodes) of the vapor degreaser system. A similar review of each node in
the entire system will produce a comprehensive study of all possible deviations from
design intentions. Once these are evaluated and understood, decisions can be made
as to the safeguards that should or should not be employed.
THE ANALYSIS REPORT
Once all What-If analysis questions have been asked and answered along with all
completed HAZOP studies of system components, a final report should be written
to document all findings and recommendations. In the chemical industry (in the
United States), this report is normally referred to as a Process Hazard Analysis.
This report is required under both Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA) and Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulations for facilities that
handle or contain certain chemical commodities at certain defined quantity thresholds.
However, when HAZOP studies and What-If analyses are used in general industry
application, the documentation of the results can be included in a written report along
with any other system safety analyses that may have been performed (as described
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SUMMARY
177
HAZOP WORKSHEET
AREA:
Vapor Degreaser
EQUIPMENT/PROCESS:
Freon 113 Transfer
TEAM : J. Doe; T. Smith; C. Hope; V. Jones; A. Ford 
DATE:
DEVIATION
ITEM
POSSIBLE
CAUSES
POSSIBLE
CONSEQUENCES
RECOMMENDED
ACTION(S)
PAGE:
SAFEGUARDS
REMARKS
29 September 2012
1  of  1
GUIDE
WORD
RAC
None
Pump deadhead
Valve closed
Flow
1
Engineering
design; By-pass 
line
None 
No Flow   
None 
None 
Back-up pumps
None
Pump failure
None 
None 
Back-up pumps
None
Pump off
4D
4D
4E
None
Power failure
Procedural
control;
Periodic
inspection of
lines; Monitored
operations  
Ensure back-up is
functional  
None 
Back-up
generator
None
None
Spill of chemicals
Line break
4E
3C
Inadequate
transfer; Tank
vacuum not
possible (Tank
open to
atmosphere)  
Pump reversed
Flow
2
Ensure operator
training is
adequate  
Procedures
require rotation
check. Vent and
line caps in
place.   
None 
Low Flow   
System
obstruction
Inadequate
transfer;
Contamination
None
None
Procedures
require rotation
check. Vent and
line caps in
place.   
3C
3B
None
Pump deadhead
Closed valve
Pressure
3
Procedures;
Training 
None 
High
Pressure   
3C
Inadequate
transfer;
Contamination 
System
obstruction
None 
None 
Procedures
require
rotation check.
Vent and line
caps in pl  
3B
Figure 14.4
Partially complete HAZOP worksheet for the vapor degreaser system.
in previous chapters). If the HAZOP and What-If exercises were conducted as stand-
alone analyses, then a final written report should be developed to present all findings,
recommendations, and conclusions. In this case, Table 14.4 provides a suggested
outline of the content of such a report.
SUMMARY
The analytical techniques known as the HAZOP study and the What-If analysis
have their roots in the chemical industry. Their specific utility, either when used
together or separately, has been demonstrated time and again in the analysis of
hypothetical failure events and scenarios in large and small-scale chemical production
and processing facilities. However, there is no reason why the advantages of these
analytical tools cannot be extended to industry in general.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
178
HAZOP AND WHAT-IF ANALYSES
TABLE 14.4
Sample Table of Contents for a HAZOP Final Report
Paragraph
Description
1.0
INTRODUCTION
1.1
GENERAL (general information about the project, process, or facility)
1.2
COMPANY POLICY (statement of company ES&H management policy)
1.3
PURPOSE & SCOPE (defines the objective and applicability of the HAZOP)
2.0
PROCESS REVIEW TEAM
2.1
AREAS REPRESENTED (identifies those work areas represented on the team)
2.2
TEAM MEMBERSHIP (provides name and contact information of team
members)
3.0
REFERENCE STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES
If there are only a few, they can be listed here. If the list is excessive, then an
Attachment at the end of the Report is recommended
4.0
DEFINITIONS
Provides essential definitions, such as HAZOP Study and What-If Analysis, here
5.0
METHODOLOGY
5.1
APPROACH (describes the approach taken to complete the analysis)
5.2
PARAMETERS (explains the operational parameters that were reviewed)
6.0
ASSUMPTIONS
Describes the assumptions that were taken prior to the initiation of the analysis
and upon which the analysis is based
7.0
DRAWINGS
List and describe the drawings that were used to accomplish and/or support the
analyses. Be sure to include drawing numbers and issue/revision dates.
8.0
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
8.1
WHAT-IF ANALYSIS RECOMMENDATIONS (summaries of results)
8.2
HAZOP ANALYSIS RECOMMENDATIONS (summaries of results)
9.0
REVIEWER COMMENTS AND CONCLUSIONS
9.1
GENERAL (provides general comments and conclusions for management)
9.2
SPECIFIC (if applicable, provide any specific comments and conclusions)
ATTACHMENT
DESCRIPTION
1
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
2
WHAT-IF ANALYSIS WORKSHEETS
3
HAZOP REVIEW WORKSHEETS
EXHIBITS
DESCRIPTION
1
PHOTOGRAPHIC DOCUMENTATION
2
FACILITY SKETCHES OF PROCESS FLOW
This chapter briefly described the use and application of both the HAZOP study
and What-If analysis, when each can and should be performed during the various
phases of the product or project life cycle, and how each can be used to evaluate the
viability of a new or, more commonly, an existing system. The occupational safety
and health practitioner should seriously consider using these techniques to ensure a
more comprehensive analysis and overall understanding of the inherent safety of any
system of process.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
15
Special Use Analysis
Techniques
INTRODUCTION
Although system safety, as a separate discipline, has existed for over 60 years, it is
still subject to the ever-changing hazard reduction needs of modern-day industry. Its
techniques and methods undergo constant modification and tailoring depending upon
a specific hazard analysis requirement or set of requirements.
As technological advancements have continued to provide improvements over
traditional methods of production, new types of hazard risk have also been introduced
which are unique to these technologies. Therefore, to ensure a continued emphasis
on the objective of risk reduction and/or control, certain system safety techniques
have also been devised to address the particular types of hazard risk associated with
new or expanding technologies.
To illustrate this point, this chapter will address two system safety analytical
methods that have been developed as a result of technological improvements: The
Sneak Circuit Analysis and Software Hazard Analysis. Each shall be briefly discussed
here to demonstrate their applicability and utility in the practice of industrial safety
and health.
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
179
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
180
SPECIAL USE ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES
SNEAK CIRCUIT ANALYSIS
The Sneak Circuit Analysis, or SCA, is a system safety analytical technique (also
known as sneak analysis) used to identify and evaluate the different possible ways in
which inherent system design characteristics can either
1. Permit an undesired function to occur,
2. Prevent a desired function from occurring, or
3. Adversely effect critical operational timing.
A “sneak” is a combination of conditions which cause an unexpected event. Such
events are usually independent of hardware failure, meaning that they can occur
during an operational mode when no system hardware failure is evident. Because
these conditions can occur without any apparent of directly obvious cause, they
may not be detected during systems tests. Hence the term “sneak” is particularly
appropriate. Typically associated with analysis of electrical or electronic systems and
other energy transfer systems (pneumatic, hydraulic, etc.), SCA has gained increasing
popularity as more and more complex systems are being developed. Because of the
insidious nature of sneak hazards, the occurrence is possible during all phases of the
product or system life cycle.
From an industrial safety perspective, an excellent example where the SCA has
particular applicability and utility is in the evaluation of the effectiveness of an
organization’s Lockout/Tagout (LOTO) program. Under the OSHA Standard for
LOTO (i.e., The Control of Hazardous Energy), employers are required to verify
the adequacy of their LOTO program at least annually to ensure that the minimum
requirements established by OSHA are being followed [Ref: For General Industry—
29 CFR §1910.147(c)(6). For the Construction Industry—29 CFR §1926.417]. Use of
an SCA to examine the effectiveness of the overall LOTO program in conjunction with
other documented verification and inspection methodologies is an excellent approach
to ensuring compliance with the OSHA inspection requirement. In addition, SCA
can be used to verify the effectiveness and adequacy of a specific LOTO operation to
ensure that all possible energy sources have been properly identified and isolated.
Types and Causes of Sneaks
Basically, the ways in which sneaks can occur and the potential results of these
events can be grouped into four primary categories, as indicated in Table 15.1. Each
type, if possibly applicable to a specific system, requires separate analysis. Since
sneaks characteristically have no readily evident cause–effect relationships, particular
attention to detail is essential in an SCA. For example, potentially devastating data
or energy transfer may occur along an entirely unexpected path due to a minor error
in system switching or circuitry design (a sneak path).
Sneaks occur due to a wide variety of causes, the most common of which include,
but are not limited to, the following:
– Complete system overview is extremely difficult and, subsequently, potential
sneak risks from design-phase errors are overlooked;
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SNEAK CIRCUIT ANALYSIS
181
TABLE 15.1
Categories of “Sneaks” and Their Potential Effects
Sneak Circuit Analysis
Category
Potential effect
Sneak Path
May inadvertently cause current or data to flow along an unexpected route or
path leading to an increase in hazard risk and a possible fault event
Sneak Timing
May inadvertently cause current or data to flow at unexpected or unplanned
times during system operation, which could result in system failure,
damage, or loss
Sneak Indication
May cause a false, inaccurate, or otherwise confusing display of system
operating conditions that could result in operator error
Sneak Label
Improperly labeled control sequences, operating instructions, hardware
controls, etc., may lead to incorrect operator actions
– Improper assembly, connection, or command of devices and sensors during the
production and/or operation phase;
– Inadvertent use of conflicting instruction labels, instructions, and/or operating
procedures during the operational and even the disposal phases of the life cycle;
– As a result of changes or modifications to existing systems where all potential
transfer paths or modes are not fully evaluated based upon the change.
SCA Input Requirements
To perform an SCA, the analyst requires access to all detailed design schematics
and drawings, particularly those that integrate subsystems within a system. Wire lists
and other such graphical information are also usual in the SCA. When specifications
for particular components are available either from a vendor/supplier or generated
within the design function, they should also be made available to the analyst during
the SCA.
Although software hazard analysis is a separate system safety technique and
is discussed later in this chapter as such, a review of compiler and/or assembly
languages as well as any applicable system reference manuals and interface control
specifications is advisable during the SCA. Sneak risks have been discovered due to
improper or inappropriate software command initiatives.
As with all types of system safety analysis techniques discussed in this part, a
complete description of the system, its intended purpose and design functions, as
well as any operational flow diagrams must also be evaluated during the performance
of an SCA. If the analyst is not entirely familiar with these system characteristics,
the subsequent SCA will potentially be inaccurate, incomplete, and flawed.
While no particular worksheet is typically used during the performance of an
SCA, an example of one is shown in Figure 15.1. The data collected here should be
transferred to the Sneak Circuit Report for submission to management.
Advantages and Disadvantages of the SCA
There are obviously many possible benefits which result from utilization of the
SCA technique, not the least of which are cost reduction and increased overall
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
182
SPECIAL USE ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES
SNEAK CIRCUIT ANALYSIS
PROGRAM:
DATE:
ENGINEER:
ITEM
EQUIPMENT EVALUATED
RECOMMENDED ACTIONS
PAGE:
SNEAK EXPLANATION
POTENTIAL IMPACT
Figure 15.1
Sample sneak circuit analysis worksheet.
system safety, reliability, and maintainability. Reduction in system development
delays as well as fewer operational scheduling impacts are also potential advantages
of the SCA.
In the area of cost reduction, for example, savings in the cost of the overall project
will result due to the following considerations:
– Costs to perform an SCA are typically far less than those which could potentially
occur as a result of undetected sneaks;
– Costs will most always be much less than that which will be required to fix a
sneak detected much later in the product life cycle;
– Additional dollars will be saved if the SCA is performed in combination with
other analyses.
An increase in the overall level of confidence in system safety and reliability will
be realized through the use of the SCA as follows:
– The completed SCA provides an independent evaluation of the entire system
(its hardware, software, and their interfaces within the system);
– The SCA will identify specific critical transfer and/or control problems that are
typically missed during normal system functional testing;
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SNEAK CIRCUIT ANALYSIS
183
– It provides a systematic, consistent, and thorough analytical review of data
transfer/logic and/or current flow paths;
– The SCA method is conducive to the isolation of specific system faults which
facilitate other analyses that may be performed.
In addition to those particular advantages highlighted above, the SCA will also
reduce the time required to test a system by identifying specific problem areas ahead
of time as well as those particular problems that may be created as a result of any
engineering changes or system modifications.
Although there are not as many limitations as there are benefits associated with
the use of the SCA, three primary concerns should be considered as follows:
– The SCA results do not usually provide an explanation of any definitive param-
eters for sneak occurrence. The potential hazard risk consequences associated
with a given, identified sneak may vary dramatically depending upon circum-
stances and operational requirements.
– The SCA does not usually consider the effects of the many variable and potential
environmental factors which may impose certain restrictions on the operation
of a system.
– An SCA is not capable of validating the risk, if any, associated with software
algorithms. The SCA will only perform software language and interface eval-
uations and cannot analyze the actual methods a system uses to solve a certain
kind of problem. Hence, hazard risks associated with these methods may go
undetected during analysis.
Software Hazard Analysis
Software Hazard Analysis, or SWHA, is a system safety analytical technique whose
primary function is to systematically evaluate any potential faults in both operating
system and applications software requirements, codes, and programs as they may
effect overall system operation. The purpose of the SWHA is to ensure that safety
specifications and related operational requirements are accurately and consistently
translated into computer software programs. In this regard, the analysis will verify
that specific operational safety criteria, such as fail-safe or fail-passive, have been
properly assimilated into operational software. The SWHA will also identify and
analyze those computer software programs, routines, or functions which may have
direct control over, or indirect influence on, the safe operation of a given system. Also,
in the operation of the computer software command function, there is a potential that
the actual coded software may cause identified hazardous conditions to occur or
inhibit a desired function thereby creating additional hazard potential.
Types of SWHA Techniques
Within the SWHA arena, a number of techniques have gained increasing popularity
as automated system complexity progresses. Each type of SWHA has its use during
the various phases of a product’s life cycle, as described here.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
184
SPECIAL USE ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES
The Software Preliminary Hazard Analysis
Used to identify software program
routines that are considered to be safety critical, this analysis is conducted prior to
software program coding. To perform the analysis, the analyst should make reference
to any available system specifications, interface documentation, functional flow dia-
grams, software flow charts, storage and file allocation specifications, and any other
program descriptive information.
As a first-step evaluation of large, software intensive systems, it has the added
advantage of providing for the separation of software interfaces into safety critical
and safety noncritical functions which greatly facilitates the overall analysis effort.
Obviously, proper performance of a software analysis in the preliminary stages will
also reduce the potential cost of any subsequent analyses.
The major disadvantage is that, at the preliminary level, the analysis is not a
structured technique; it is somewhat limited to only high level functions and, thus,
additional analyses of complex systems are often required, especially where safety
critical software functions have been identified.
Software Fault Hazard Analysis
Similar in concept and structure to the system
hazard analysis (SHA) which is conducted on system hardware, the software fault
hazard analysis will analyze and evaluate a computer software program to identify
critical areas in the programming which may contribute to or directly cause a hazard
risk. Such risks may be due to an undetected hardware failure or incorrect inputs
into the operation of the system software. The software “FHA” will also attempt to
uncover any probable errors that can possibly develop in the software after system
activation.
Since input and/or output variables typically fail in a discrete manner, the eval-
uation of any single-point failure effects upon the software program, the computer
hardware, and/or the system can be accomplished through the software FHA. The
drawback here is that the specific effect of any such failure may be somewhat diffi-
cult to define since they are typically a function of the actual operational state of the
computer at the exact time the failure occurs. Hence, even evaluation of hypothetical
scenarios could be a monumental task since so many possible variables are bound to
exist. Also, the software FHA can be an extremely lengthy and quite tedious process
that may or may not yield any significant results. A decision to proceed with such an
effort must therefore be weighed against the anticipated benefits which are expected
upon its completion.
Software Fault Tree (“Soft Trees”)
The soft tree technique is used to determine
what software event, failure, or combination of each will result in a real or hypothet-
ical loss event (a top event). This top-down analytical approach, which assumes a
problem and then evaluates effecting conditions backward to determine causal factors,
also takes into consideration any influencing environmental factors. It is primarily
concerned with the analysis of any hardware/software interfaces that deal directly
with the operation of mechanical components.
Because it is a fault tree technique, the soft tree provides a graphic illustration of the
potential effect of multiple and/or simultaneous failures. The tree method also allows
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SUMMARY
185
for the quantification of analysis results, if desired. The primary disadvantage here
is that, when using a fault tree method for hypothetical analysis of a loss event, the
analysis is subjective since the analyst must choose which events to evaluate. The risk
is that not all possible events will be considered. Because the soft tree is also a costly
exercise, certain decisions must be made as to the extent of the analysis and, hence,
the likelihood that potential loss events will be overlooked is further increased. Also,
the soft tree does not consider timing in its evaluation, only simultaneous failure
events, and it only evaluates what is there to evaluate and does not consider the
potential impact of unintentional omissions which may also adversely impact overall
system safety.
Emulation Analysis
This technique determines the ability of established software
programming to detect specific hardware and/or software faults purposely introduced
into the microprocessing system. Usually, output results from the tested system are
compared to that of a controlled, uninfected system to determine if all faults were
properly detected. This method allows for the quantification of faults detected in
microprocessor or program codes and provides a method for bit manipulation of
software programming.
Timing in emulation analysis is much slower than that of the actual program and,
therefore, the results may not accurately predict true bit coverage under real-time
operating conditions. The method is also quite costly to perform.
Software System Hazard Analysis
Conducted similar to a hardware SHA, this
method analyzes software functional processing steps to determine if they may have
any particular hazardous effect on the system. The analysis utilizes a hazard-risk index
to illustrate the severity of each potential failure. The main advantage to this method
is in its ability to positively identify safety critical hardware and software functions as
well as consider the effect of the human element in system software operations. The
results of the software SHA, which identifies single-point failures or errors within a
system, can often be used to assist in the development of a software fault tree analysis
or, to some degree, a system FMEA. However, as with the other various SWHA
techniques briefly described above, this method is also time-consuming and costly
to perform.
SUMMARY
As the practice of system safety moves into its seventh decade of existence, special
use analysis methods and techniques have been developed due to the steady increase
in system complexity and acceleration in technological advancements. These changes
have brought with them new concerns over the adequacy of existing hazard reduction
and control techniques. Automated systems that incorporate complicated data and
energy flow transfer paths, as well as those who’s correct operation depends primarily
upon proper software programming, can impose significant risk of system hazards
that would otherwise go undetected during normal system testing.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
186
SPECIAL USE ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES
The system safety analysis techniques known separately as sneak circuit analysis
and software safety analysis have been developed in an effort to address these concerns
over system safety and reliability assurance. While there are various types of sneak
hazards which can be identified by analysis, and a variety of software hazard analysis
techniques are commonly used, each method is primarily concerned with the same
essential objective explained throughout this text: hazard risk elimination or reduction
to acceptable levels.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Epilogue
This second edition of a Basic Guide to System Safety has been designed to provide
the reader with a fundamental understanding of the system safety discipline, the
assessment of risk, the hazard analysis process, and some of the common tools and
techniques that can be used to determine levels of hazard risk. Numerous examples
have been developed throughout the text in an attempt to demonstrate the applicability
of system safety engineering and analysis in the practice of the industrial safety and
health professional.
In fact, the primary objective of the text has been to impart a basic level of
appreciation for the value and utility of a working system safety program in the
occupational or industrial safety and health arena. In order to accomplish this, it
is considered crucial that the reader first have a clear understanding of how system
safety developed as a necessary subdiscipline of systems engineering during the early
missile and space programs of the United States Air Force. Acknowledgment of these
beginnings will help the reader further appreciate the ability of proper system safety
engineering and analysis to ensure maximum reduction of hazard risk in a given
system, product, program, or service.
Therefore, Part I of this text focused primarily on the development of system safety,
its military connections, the importance of including system safety requirements in
contract acquisitions, the criticality of obtaining management commitment in support
of the system safety effort, the process of risk analysis and assessment, probability
theory and statistical analysis as they relate to system safety, and, perhaps of most
value, how the fundamental principals of system safety are closely related to those
of occupational safety and health management.
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
187
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
188
EPILOGUE
ESTABLISH SAFETY
CRITERIA
AS REQUIRED
IDENTIFY REAL
AND POTENTIAL
HAZARDS
ASSESS
SAFETY
RISKS
RECOMMEND
OPTIMIZED 
CORRECTIVE
ACTIONS
REPORT DECISIONS
AND ANY
RESIDUAL RISKS
TRACK RESULTS
Figure E.1
Summary of the system safety process.
In Part II, the reader was exposed to a variety of the most common tools and
techniques currently used in the system safety profession. It is hoped that the numer-
ous examples provided will assist in developing an appreciation for system safety
analysis in the evaluation of risk, no matter how complex or simple the system may
be. Although these various examples did not constitute complete and detailed anal-
yses, it is presumed that enough information has been presented to ensure a basic
understanding of common system safety analysis techniques and methods.
Figure E.1 represents the simple flow of the system safety process and provides a
graphic summary of the materials presented in this text. This flow shows the typical
functions of the system safety life cycle.
Finally, upon completion of this text, the reader should be in a position to make an
informed decision to further pursue the field of system safety engineering, analysis,
and/or management based upon their individual needs. Appendix A provides a brief
listing of respectable sources where further, more detailed information and training
may be obtained.
Whatever your decision may be, it will help to remember that ancient Chinese
proverb: … if you don’t know where you are going, then any road will take you
there! A properly implemented and managed system safety program can provide an
excellent “road map” to help individuals, organizations, and entire corporations find
their way to a safe, productive, and profitable destination while ensuring the lowest
possible level of acceptable risk with a maximum return on investment.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Appendix A
Sources of Additional
Information/Training
The following is a compilation of sources where the interested reader may obtain
additional information and/or training in the area of system safety engineering and/or
management. There are, of course, many more excellent references available to the
system safety practitioner. However, those listed here will provide the reader of this
Basic Guide to System Safety additional information presented at the next technical
level.
Professional Organizations:
1. The International System Safety Society (SSS)
P.O. Box 70
Unionville, VA 22567-0070
(504) 854-8630
http://www.system-safety.org/
An international, nonprofit organization in the United States and other countries
around the world. The SSS is dedicated to the safety of systems, products, and
services. Originally organized in 1962, it was incorporated in 1973 and has its head-
quarters in the Washington, DC area. Active chapters are organized to promote the
system safety philosophy and further professional development. Their journal, Haz-
ard Prevention, is published on a quarterly basis and features articles on current
developments in the system safety profession.
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
189
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
190
SOURCES OF ADDITIONAL INFORMATION/TRAINING
2. American Society of Safety Engineers (ASSE)
1800 East Oakton Street
Des Plaines, IL 60018-2187
(847) 699-2929
http://www.asse.org/
The ASSE is an international organization with over 34,000 members (2012) in
the United States and in selected countries such as England and Saudi Arabia where
numerous American Safety Professionals work and live. Organized in 1911 and
incorporated in 1915, it is one of the oldest sustaining professional safety membership
organizations in the United States. Through its many Counsels, the ASSE is an
excellent source of information on a wide variety of safety and health topics, including
system safety. Their monthly journal, Professional Safety, often includes articles on
the subject of system safety analysis.
3. Board of Certified Safety Professional (BCSP)
2301 West Bradley Avenue
Champaign, IL 61821
(217) 359-9263
http://www.bcsp.org/
The BCSP is involved in the development, coordination, implementation, admin-
istration, and maintenance of professional certification examinations to individual
practitioners of various safety and health disciplines, including system safety. They
offer examination sessions throughout the year at specific, approved locations across
the country. The BCSP can provide additional detailed information concerning certi-
fication requirements.
4. Association of Computing Machinery (ACM)
2 Penn Plaza, Suite 701
New York, NY 10121-0701
(800) 342-6626
http://www.acm.org/
ACM is an excellent reference source on the current developments in software
safety analysis. Their publication, Computing Machinery, often features articles from
top industry leaders on the subject of software safety. ACM is the world’s largest
educational and scientific computing society that delivers resources to advance com-
puting as a science and a profession. ACM provides the computing field’s premier
Digital Library and serves its members and the computing profession with leading-
edge publications, conferences, and career resources.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SOURCES OF ADDITIONAL INFORMATION/TRAINING
191
Publications:
Many excellent publications exist on the subject of system safety.
The following are excellent, highly recommended reference sources for intermediate
and advanced system safety studies:
1.
Title:
Job Hazard Analysis: A Guide for Voluntary
Compliance and Beyond
Author/Year:
J. Roughfton and N. Crutchfield/2008
Publisher:
Elsevier, Inc.
Oxford, England OX2 8DP
2.
Title:
Hazard Analysis Techniques for System Safety
Author/Year:
C. Ericson/2005
Publisher:
John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
Hoboken, NJ 07030
3.
Title:
System Safety for the 21st Century
Author/Year:
R. Stephans/2004
Publisher:
John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
Hoboken, NJ 07030
4.
Title:
System Safety 2000
Author/Year:
J. Stephenson/1991
Publisher:
Van Nostrand Reinhold
New York, NY 10003
5.
Title:
System Safety Engineering and Management
Author/Year:
H. E. Roland and B. Moriarty/1991
Publisher:
John Wiley & Sons
New York, NY 10158
6.
Title:
Safety and Reliability in System Design
Author/Year:
M. Larson and S. Hann/Undated
Publisher:
Ginn Press
Needham Heights, MA 02194
7.
Title:
System Safety Technology and Application
Author/Year:
S. W. Malasky/1982
Publisher:
Garland STPM Press
New York, NY 10102
Training Courses and Seminars:
1.
Sponsor:
SoHar, Inc.
Address:
5721 West Slauson Avenue, Suite 140
Culver City, CA 90230
310-338-0990
http://www.sohar.com/index.html
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
192
SOURCES OF ADDITIONAL INFORMATION/TRAINING
SoHaR’s system safety training program is an integral part of the company’s consult-
ing services and as such draws the expertise and experience of the best professionals.
Courses are developed and designed to reflect current practices and include both
hands-on material and theoretical explanations. The goal is to provide not only for-
mulas to solve problems but also the know-how to deal with challenges and cases
that may be outside of the mainstream practice.
2.
Sponsor:
American Society of Safety Engineers
Address:
1800 East Oakton Avenue
Des Plaines, IL 60018-2187
(847) 699-2929
http://www.asse.org/
The American Society of Safety Engineers (“ASSE”) is a national, professional
organization with over 35,000 members (2012) practicing in all aspects of the safety
profession, including system safety. The organization sponsors numerous training
seminars and a yearly Professional Development Conference. A number of excellent
system safety courses are included in their extensive listing of available training
courses.
3.
Sponsor:
HCRQ, Inc.
Address:
P.O. Box 264
Williamsburg, VA 23187
757-564-7703
http://www.asse.org/
The company has extensive expertise in system safety (dating to 1988) and pro-
vides consulting services in all safety-critical sectors. They provide both training
courses and webinars in system safety and are fully conversant with all system safety
standards. They can develop specific training to meet client needs as well as provide
standard training in all areas of system safety analysis.
4.
Sponsor:
University of Washington
Professional and Continuing Education
Address:
1410 NE Campus Parkway
Seattle, WA 98195
206-543-2544
http://www.washington.edu/
In a course entitled System Safety Management, the University of Washington
offers an in-depth review of the management tasks appropriate for each phase of a
system’s life cycle, including the various life cycle phases of military and nonmilitary
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
SOURCES OF ADDITIONAL INFORMATION/TRAINING
193
systems and facilities, and an overview of the analytical and mathematical theory
necessary to perform system safety engineering tasks.
5.
Sponsor:
George Washington University
Address:
2121 Eye Street, NW
Washington, DC 20052
202-994-1000
http://www.gwu.edu/
The university’s continuing education program offers several courses in system
safety analysis and system reliability techniques. Most courses are taught in Wash-
ington, DC with some being presented at alternate locations in the United States.
6.
Sponsor:
University of Southern California
Institute of Safety and Systems Management
Address:
University Park Campus
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0021
213-740-2311
http://www.usc.edu/
Although most courses are primarily geared toward the aviation industry, the
university does offer an exceptional system safety course as well as a software safety
seminar.
7.
Sponsor:
Safety Links, Inc.
Address:
687 South Bluford Avenue
Ocoee, FL 34734
URL:
http://www.safetylinks.net/
Safety Links was founded in 1997 as a safety training provider. As the organization
grew, their focus shifted to safety consultation and then finally to business manage-
ment solutions. At that time, their clientele ranged from small manufacturing firms
to large construction companies. In 2003, Safety Links relocated to Orlando, Florida,
and has built strong relationships with a core group of clients and has progressively
grown as a result of referrals. Their services range across the broad spectrum of
consulting and training in the areas of occupational safety and health (to include job
hazard analyses).
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Appendix B
Acronyms and
Abbreviations
In the practice of system safety engineering and management, as well as in the safety
and health profession in general, numerous abbreviations and acronyms are used
quite regularly. The following is a reference listing of those most frequently used
or encountered, either in this text or in the system safety and/or safety and health
disciplines in general.
ACM
Association of Computing Machinery
AFOSH
Air Force Occupational Safety and Health
AFR
Air Force Regulation
AMA
American Medical Association
ANSI
American National Standards Institute
ARAR
Accident Risk Assessment Report
ASME
American Society of Mechanical Engineers
ASSE
American Society of Safety Engineers
BCSP
Board of Certified Safety Professionals
CASCA
Computer-Aided Sneak Circuit Analysis
CBA
Cost-Benefit Analysis
CGA
Compressed Gas Association
CCFA
Common Cause Failure Analysis
CDRL
Contract Data Requirements List
CEA
Cause and Effect Analysis
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
195
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
196
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
CFC
Chlorofluorocarbon
CFR
Code of Federal Regulations
CPSC
Consumer Product Safety Commission
CSPF
Critical Single-Point Failure
CSP
Certified Safety Professional
DID
Data Item Description
DOD
Department of Defense
DOE
Department of Energy
DOT
Department of Transportation
ECP
Engineering Change Proposal
EO
Engineering Order
EPA
Environmental Protection Agency
ETA
Event Tree Analysis
ETBA
Energy Trace and Barrier Analysis
EVA
Extreme Value Analysis
FAA
Federal Aviation Administration
FAR
Federal Aviation Regulation
Federal Acquisition Regulation
FHA
Fault (or Functional) Hazard Analysis
FM
Factory Mutual
FMEA
Failure Mode and Effect Analysis
FMECA
Failure Mode and Effect Criticality Analysis
FR
Federal Register
FTA
Fault Tree Analysis
GHA
Gross Hazard Analysis
GP
Government Practice
HA
Hazard Analysis
HAZOP
Hazard and Operability Studies
HFS
Human Factors Society
HPSSC
Health Physics Society Standards Committee
HTI
Hand Tools Institute
IEEE
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineering
IES
Illuminating Engineering Society
IME
Institute of Makers of Explosives
ISEA
Industrial Safety Equipment Association
ISSPP
Integrated System Safety Program Plan
JSA
Job Safety Analysis
JHA
Job Hazard Analysis
LSC
Life Safety Code
MIL-STD
Military Standard
MORT
Management Oversight and Risk Tree
NASA
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NASHP
National Association of Safety and Health Professionals
NAVOSH
Navy Occupational Safety and Health
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
197
NBS
National Bureau of Standards
NEC
National Electrical Code
NEMA
National Electrical Manufacturers Association
NFPA
National Fire Protection Association
NHB
NASA Handbook
NIOSH
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
NSC
National Safety Council
NSTS
National Space Transportation System
NTSB
National Transportation Safety Board
OHA
Operating Hazard Analysis
OHHA
Occupational Health Hazard Assessment
ORI
Operational Readiness Inspection
ORR
Operational Readiness Review
O&SHA
Operating and Support Hazard Analysis
OSHA
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
PET
Project Evaluation Tree
PHA
Preliminary Hazard Analysis
PHL
Preliminary Hazard List
PO
Purchase Order
PR
Problem Report
Purchase Request
PTI
Power Tool Institute
RAC
Risk Assessment Code
RFP
Request for Proposal
RIA
Robotic Industries Association
RNSA
Random Number Simulation Analysis
SAE
Society of Automotive Engineers
SCA
Sneak Circuit Analysis
SPF
Single-Point Failure
SIC
Standard Industry Classification
SOP
Standard Operating Procedure
SOW
Statement of Work
SHA
System Hazard Analysis
SSA
System Safety Analysis
SSDC
System Safety Development Center
SSHA
Subsystem Hazard Analysis
SSPP
System Safety Program Plan
SSS
System Safety Society
SSWG
System Safety Working Group
SWHA
Software Hazard Analysis
TCP
Task Change Proposal
THERP
Technique for Human Error Rate Prediction
TLA
Time-Loss Analysis
TORAR
Technical Operations Risk Assessment Report
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
198
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
TQM
Total Quality Management
TQMS
Total Quality Management System
UL
Underwriter’s Laboratories
WHO
World Health Organization
WSO
World Safety Organization
ZA
Zonal Analysis
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Glossary of Terms
The following are definitions for many of the terms which appear in this text or are
encountered in the practice of system safety. When appropriate, the source of an
individual definition is referenced parenthetically at the end of the definition.
Absolute Pressure: Pressure measured with respect to zero pressure or a vacuum.
It is equal to the sum of a pressure gauge reading and the atmospheric pressure at
the measurement location.
Absolute Temperature: Temperature based on an absolute scale expressed in either
degrees Kelvin or degrees Rankine corresponding, respectively, to the centigrade
or Fahrenheit scales. Degrees Kelvin are obtained by adding 273 to the centigrade
temperature or subtracting the centigrade temperature from 273 if below 0◦C.
Degrees Rankine are obtained by algebraically adding the Fahrenheit reading to
460. Zero K is equal to −273◦C and zero R is equal to −459.69◦F.
Acceleration: A vector representing the rate of change of velocity with time.
Acceleration Power: Measured in kilowatts. Pulse power obtainable from a battery
used to accelerate a vehicle. This is based on a constant current pulse for 30
seconds at no less than 2/3 of the maximum open-circuit voltage, at 80% depth-of-
discharge relative to the battery’s rated capacity and at 20◦C ambient temperature.
Acceptability: With regard to the use of instruments, the willingness of personnel
to use an instrument when considering its characteristics, such as weight, noise,
response time, drift, portability, reliability, interference effects, etc.
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
199
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
200
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Acceptable Risk: The residual risk that remains after all possible control measures
have been implemented that is deemed acceptable by the party or parties that are
exposed to the risk (e.g., management, employees, the public, the government).
Accident: An unwanted event resulting from the occurrence of one or more fault
incidents which have a negative impact on a system, product, equipment, or
personnel.
Accident Analysis: A concerted, organized, methodical, planned process of exam-
ination and evaluation of all evidence and records identified during investigation
of accidents.
Accident Investigation: A detailed and methodical effort to collect and interpret
facts related to an individual accident, conducted to identify the causes and develop
control measures to prevent recurrence; a systematic look at the nature and extent
of the accident, the risks taken, and loss(es) involved; an inquiry as to how and
why the accident event occurred.
Accident Phases: In an accident investigation, when evaluating the sequence of
events that resulted in an accident, the events are divided into three phases or cat-
egories: precontact (before the accident), contact (the accident), and postcontact
(after the accident). Analysis of the events occurring in each phase facilitates the
identification of loss-inducing activities and conditions. Also referred to as the
three stages of loss control.
Accident Potential: A situation comprised of human behaviors and/or physical
conditions having a probability of resulting in an accident.
Accident Risk: A measure of vulnerability to loss, damage, or injury caused by a
dangerous element or factor (MIL-STD-1574).
Accident Risk Assessment: A written evaluation of those hazards associated with
the operation of a given facility, including any equipment or hardware used in that
facility. A determination of the accident potential and an explanation of control
measures are also provided.
Accident Risk Factor: A dangerous element of a system, event, process, or activity
including casual factors such as design or programming deficiency, component
malfunction, human error or environment, which can propagate a hazard into an
accident if adequate controls are not effectively applied (MIL-STD-1574).
Accident Sources: Accidents generally involve one or all of five elements: peo-
ple, equipment, material, procedures, and the work environment, each of which
must interact for successful business operations. However, when something
unplanned and undesired occurs within either of these elements, there is usu-
ally some adverse effect on any one or all of the other elements, which if allowed
to continue uncorrected, could lead to an incident or accident and subsequent
loss.
Act of God: An act occasioned by an unanticipated grave natural disaster or other nat-
ural phenomenon of exceptional, inevitable, and irresistible character, the effects
of which could not have been prevented or avoided by the exercise of due care or
foresight.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
201
Active Restraint: A restraining device which has a positive locking feature and
requires no action by an individual to be held in place. An example would be a
seat belt system in an automobile at the time of collision.
Active Safety Measure: Any means of implementing safety precautions which
requires an individual to take some action, such as reading or comprehending.
An example would be a warning sign indicating an unsafe or hazardous condition.
Administrative Control: A measure initiated to reduce worker exposure to various
stresses in the work environment. An example is limiting the amount of time an
employee can work around health hazards.
Air Sampling: The collection of samples of air to determine the presence of and the
concentration of a contaminant, such as a chemical, aerosol, radioactive material,
airborne microorganism, or other substance by analyzing the collected sample
to determine the amount present and calculating the concentration based on the
sample volume.
Airborne Particulates: Total suspended particulate matter found in the atmosphere
as solid particles or liquid droplets. The chemical composition of particulates varies
widely, depending on location and time of year. Airborne particulates include
windblown dust, emissions from industrial process, smoke from burning of wood
and coal, and exhaust of motor vehicles.
Alarm: An indicator that some condition exists which may or will require human
action to correct in order to prevent loss of life, property, or equipment.
Amplitude: The instantaneous deviation or displacement from some baseline. The
peak-to-peak difference, maximum value, or averaged value of a signal.
Analysis: A study or evaluation, usually performed to determine the current status
of a given system or process. It will often utilize established standards or operating
criteria as a baseline for comparison.
As-Built Plan: A drawing which covers property boundaries, streets bordering the
site and building layout, and provides accurate scale and a north arrow.
Assembly: A combination of multiple components or parts grouped together to per-
form a single function or a specific set of functions within a system or subsystem.
Assessment: An evaluation or examination of a specific area of concern, such as a
program, policy, or procedural assessment.
Assistive Device: Any tool which either enables or enhances human–machine inter-
action for an individual with a physical handicap.
Audit: A detailed and systematic inspection or review of an occupational health and
safety program, environmental program, financial operating program, or some
other program, to determine compliance with company policies, practices, and
procedures, as well as the regulations that are applicable to the operations and
work being performed.
Barrier: A control (device, mechanism, structure, sign, etc.) intended to prevent the
transfer of energy from one element of a system to another. Any object, individual,
or structure which impeded progress toward a goal or which prevents entry to a
region for safety reasons.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
202
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Basic Event: As pertains to fault tree analysis (FTA) and/or the Management Over-
sight and Risk Tree (MORT), a root fault event or the first in the process to have
occurred that requires no further development or analysis. Represented graphically
as a circle.
Bathtub Curve: A graphical representation of the life cycle of products, systems,
or individual components in terms of frequency of failures relative to periods of
usefulness. In system safety, it is also known as a reliability curve.
Behavior: Any rating scale developed to evaluate individual behavioral patterns.
Bench Test: A small-scale test or study used to determine whether a technology is
suitable for a particular application.
Benchmark: A thoroughly documented reference value or standard or measurement
against which performance, response, or other characteristics may be compared
with confidence.
Binomial Distribution: A distribution of data or results describing probabilities of
the outcome of trials that can have one or two mutually exclusive results (e.g.,
exposure above or below a permissible exposure limit or “PEL”). This theoretically
discrete probability distribution for a binomial random variable is represented as:
P = n∕r pn(1 −p)n−r,
where n = total number of outcomes, r = number of successful outcomes, (n/r) =
number of combinations of n outcomes, taken r at a time.
Used to approximate the normal distribution for large sample sizes.
Blanking: The absolute closure of a pipe, line, or duct by the fastening of a solid
plate (such as a spectacle blind or skillet blind) that completely covers the bore
and that is capable of withstanding the maximum pressure of the pipe, line, or
duct with no leakage beyond the plate. Also called blinding.
British Thermal Unit (BTU): The amount of energy required to raise the tem-
perature of 1 pound of water 1 degree Fahrenheit (◦F) at or near 39.2◦F and
1 atmosphere of pressure. One British Thermal Unit (BTU) is about equal to the
heat given off by a blue-tip match.
Carcinogen: A substance known to cause cancer in humans and animals representing
a broad range of organic and inorganic chemicals, hormones, immunosuppresants,
and solid-state materials.
Carelessness: That behavior or mental functioning which does not exhibit adequate
attention or concern for the task being performed.
Carpal Tunnel: An internal passage in the wrist between the extensor retinaculum
and the carpal bones through which the median nerve, finger flexor tendons, and
blood vessels pass from the arm to the hand.
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome: A cumulative trauma disorder (CTD) often associated
with activities involving flexing or extending the wrists or repeated force on the
base of the palm and wrist. The carpal tunnel is an opening in the wrist under the
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
203
carpal ligament on the palmar side of the carpal bones in the wrist. The median
nerve, the finger flexor tendons, and blood vessels all pass through this tunnel.
Overuse of the tendons can cause them to become inflamed and swollen, creating
pressure against the adjacent median nerve and resulting in CTS. Symptoms
include tingling, pain, or numbness in the thumb and first three fingers.
Catastrophic Event: An occurrence, subsequent to the introduction of a hazard or
set of hazards into a system, that results in a level of injury, damage, or loss of such
severe magnitude that quick or total recovery would be highly improbable (e.g.,
death, crippling injuries, total system loss, irreplaceable property or equipment
loss or damage). The parameters for this categorization are usually established by
management in the System Safety Program Plan, or other policy-making docu-
mentation.
Catastrophic Release: According to OSHA, a major uncontrolled emission, fire,
or explosion, involving one or more highly hazardous chemicals, that presents
serious danger to employees in the workplace.
Causal Association: Having a demonstrable connection between the occurrence of
some factor and an incident, where the presence of that factor will increase the
probability and the absence of that factor will decrease the probability of that
incident.
Causal Factors: A combination of simultaneous or sequential circumstances which
contribute directly or indirectly to an accident, occupational disease, or other
effect.
Cause: In Safety, an event, situation, or condition which results, or could result
(potential cause), directly or indirectly, in an accident or incident. Each separate
antecedent of an event. Something that proceeds and brings about an effect or
result.
Cause-Effect Diagram: A graphical display of the causes linked to an effect.
Closed-Loop System: Any type of system in which the output or some derivative
of the output from the system is directed back into the system itself. Synonymous
with feedback control loop.
Coefficient: A number by which one value is to be multiplied in order to give another
value, or a number that indicates the range of an effect produced under certain
conditions.
Color Coding: The use of multiple colors for easier, more rapid visual identification,
access, and/or processing of groups of organized materials.
Combustible: Capable of being ignited with resultant burning or explosion.
Common Cause Failure Analysis: A system safety analytical technique (also
known as common cause analysis) used primarily in the evaluation of multiple
failures that have the occurrence of a single event as a common causal factor.
Component: A functional part of a subsystem or equipment which is essential to
operational completeness of the subsystem or equipment and which may consist
of a combination of parts, assemblies, accessories, and attachments (Larson and
Hann 1989).
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
204
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Concept Phase: That portion of a system’s, product’s, or other yet to be developed
program’s life cycle during which ideas are first conceptualized; precedes the
design phase.
Concurrent Causes: Causes acting contemporaneously and together causing injury,
which would not have resulted in the absence of either. Two distinct causes
operating at the same time to produce a given result, which might be produced by
either, are considered concurrent causes. However, two distinct causes, successive
and unrelated in an operation, cannot be concurring, and one will be regarded as
the proximate and efficient and responsible cause, and the other will be regarded
as the remote cause.
Conditional Event: As pertains to fault tree analysis (FTA) and/or the Management
Oversight and Risk Tree (MORT), an occurrence that, based upon its own unique
characteristics, imposes conditions or exclusions on the occurrence of other events
in the fault path. Represented graphically as an oval. See also Exclusive Event.
Contingency Analysis: An analysis performed to identify what abnormal situations,
errors, or malfunctions, a system may develop or encounter to improve system
performance or establish what special human responses may be required under
those circumstances.
Contributory Event: As pertains to fault tree analysis (FTA) and/or the Management
Oversight and Risk Tree (MORT), an event which significantly influences the
outcome of the top or primary event. Also known as a main event or secondary
event.
Coolant: A liquid or gas used to reduce the heat generated by power production in
nuclear reactors, electric generators, various industrial and mechanical processes,
and automobile engines.
Cost-Benefit Analysis: A system safety analytical technique used to evaluate various
possible courses of action with respect to the costs that are incurred compared to
the benefit of the results.
Credible Failure: Any failure that can physically occur without violating any sci-
entific law (Larson and Hann 1989).
Critical Condition: The most severe environmental condition in terms of loads,
pressures, and temperatures, or combinations thereof. Imposed on structures, sys-
tems, subsystems, and components during service life.
Critical Event: An occurrence, subsequent to the introduction of a hazard or set of
hazards into a system, that results in a level of injury, damage, or loss of a magni-
tude that quick or total recovery would be possible, although extremely difficult
(e.g., personnel injuries, partial system loss, property or equipment damage). The
parameters for this categorization are usually established by management in the
System Safety Program Plan, or other policy-making documentation.
Critical Incident Method: A performance appraisal technique for either a system
or employee. For a system: the process of gathering data by asking the users
of that system to describe significant incidents, according to some established
criteria. For an employee: the maintenance of a log documenting both favorable
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
205
and unfavorable behaviors exhibited during an evaluation period. Synonymous
with critical incident technique.
Criticality: A scale or ranking of the possible types of failures in a system as to the
importance of continued functioning of that system.
Crossover Analysis: An evaluation for costing purposes of what alternative work
methodologies should be used for different production levels.
Cumulative Error: An error whose sum does not converge to zero as the number
of samples increases.
Cut-Set: As pertains to fault tree analysis (FTA) and/or the Management Oversight
and Risk Tree (MORT), a defined set of events, under the top event, that can be
isolated from the remainder of the fault tree and examined as contributory to the
occurrence of the top or primary event.
Damage: The partial or total loss of hardware caused by component failure; exposure
to heat, fire, or other environments; human errors; or other inadvertent events or
conditions (MIL-STD-882).
Danger: Term of warning applied to a condition, operation, or situation that has the
potential for physical harm to personnel and/or damage to property.
Dangerous Condition: One in which there exists a substantial and probable risk
of injury and/or property damage. The risk may be imminent or merely possible
when such a condition exists.
Dead Man Control: A device requiring a constant force of a minimum magnitude
applied to the device for operating a piece of equipment, and having a default
mode which turns off or stops the equipment if that force is not applied.
Defect: Substandard physical condition, either inherent in the material or created
through another action or event.
Degreaser: A chemical agent, usually a solvent that is used to remove grease and oil
from machinery. Because these chemicals will also remove the protective layer of
oil on human skin, their use without protection can result in dermatitis.
Design: The process of developing the requirements, structure, dimensions, toler-
ances, and materials to be used for an entity.
Design Safety Factor: A factor used to account for uncertainties in material prop-
erties and analysis procedures. It is often referred to as design factor of safety or
simply safety factor.
Deviation: An alternate method of compliance with the intent of specific require-
ments (MIL-STD-1574A). A departure from established or usual conduct or ide-
ology. (2) The amount by which a score or other measure differs from the mean
or other descriptive statistic.
Electric System: Physically connected generation, transmission, and distribution
facilities operated as an integrated unit under one central management or operating
supervision.
Electric Component: A component such as a switch, fuse, resistor, wire, capacitor,
or diode in an electrical system.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
206
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Emergency Procedure: An action plan to be implemented in the event of an emer-
gency. It typically describes, as a minimum, roles and responsibilities, types of
emergency situations to be expected, emergency notification and/or communica-
tion procedures, public relations procedures during an emergency, and any other
contingency plans applicable to the facility and its processes.
Emergency Stop: A push button, switch, or other control device installed in or on
a piece of equipment which is capable of quickly cutting power to that equipment
in an emergency.
Empirical Distribution: A distribution of sampled events or data.
Empirical Probability: When many possible outcomes can result, including a
desired outcome, the probability of occurrence of such outcomes is referred to
as empirical and requires statistical evaluation to determine the likelihood of
expected results based upon past performance.
Empirical Workplace Design: The evolutionary design of the working environment
based on a combination of human factors engineering and experience.
Energy Trace and Barrier Analysis: A system safety analytical technique used
to evaluate the flow of energy through a system and analyze the effectiveness
of existing barriers within the system which are intended to prevent unwanted
transfers of that energy flow.
Engineering: A discipline in which knowledge of the mathematical and natural
sciences, gained by some combination of education, training, and practical expe-
rience, is integrated with various natural materials and forces to shape the envi-
ronment.
Engineering Controls: Measures taken to prevent or minimize hazard exposure
through the application of controls such as improved ventilation, noise reduction
techniques, chemical substitution, equipment and facility modifications, etc.
Ergonomics: The scientific study and analysis of the human, machine, and/or work-
ing environment interface and an investigation of those elements in the system
that effect optimum human performance on a given task or set of tasks.
Error: The difference between the true or actual value to be measured and the value
to be measured and the value indicated by the measuring system. Any deviation of
an observed value from the true value. (2) An inappropriate response by a system,
whether of commission, omission, inadequacy, or timing.
Event Tree: A graphical depiction of system or operational events as they are related
to the top event or failure condition.
Event Tree Analysis: A system safety analysis method, similar to fault tree analysis,
used to examine different system or operational responses to various positive or
negative conditions which occur during system operation.
Exclusive Event: As pertains to fault tree analysis (FTA) and/or the Management
Oversight and Risk Tree (MORT), a conditional event which places specific restric-
tions upon the occurrence of other events. Represented graphically as an oval. See
also Conditional Event.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
207
Explosion: A rapid build-up and release of pressure caused by chemical reaction or
by an overpressurization within a confined space leading to a massive rupture of
the pressurized container.
Extreme Value Projection: In system safety, a risk projection technique used to
provide information about potential losses (i.e., in the future) that are more severe
than those occurring in the past.
Fail: To fall short; be unsuccessful or deficient.
Fail Operational: A design characteristic which allows continued operation of a
system or subsystem despite a discrete failure.
Fail Operational, Fail Safe: A fail operational design which also remains acceptably
safe.
Fail Passive: A system or component design feature that, under failure conditions,
will have no effect on the operation of the overall system.
Fail Safe: A system or component design feature that, under failure conditions, will
permit the failed component or system to revert to a safe mode and not present an
unacceptable hazard risk or flow of energy due to the failure condition.
Failure: The inability of a component or system to perform its designed function
within specified limits.
Failure Assessment: The process in which the cause, effect, responsibility, and cost
of a failure are determined and reported.
Failure Condition: As pertains to fault tree analysis (FTA) and/or the Management
Oversight and Risk Tree (MORT), the top event, or that primary event subject to
a failure analysis through an event tree.
Failure Mode and Effect Analysis: An in-depth analysis of possible failures and
their effects related to system functions (functional FMEA) or system hardware
and components (hardware FMEA).
Failure Tolerance: The ability of a system to experience one or more failures and
still maintain some functional capability.
Fatigue (Structural): The progressive localized permanent structural change that
occurs in a material subjected to constant or variable amplitude loads at stresses
having a maximum value less than the ultimate strength of the material.
Fault (or Functional) Hazard Analysis: A system safety analysis method, usu-
ally an extension of the failure mode and effect analysis that evaluates the
overall effect of functional failures on other subsystems or the overall system
itself.
Fault Tolerance: The built-in ability of a system to provide continued correct oper-
ation in the presence of a specified number of faults or failures.
Fault Tree Analysis: A system safety analysis technique used as an inductive method
(top down) to evaluate fault or failure events.
Fixed Crane: A crane whose principal structure is mounted on a permanent or
semipermanent foundation.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
208
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Flammable: Any substance that is easily ignited and burns, or has a rapid rate of
flame spread. Capable of being ignited and burning. With respect to a fluid or gas,
means susceptible to igniting readily or to exploding.
Flashback Arrestor: A mechanical device utilized on a vent of a flammable liquid
or gas storage container to prevent flashback into the container, when a flammable
or explosive mixture ignites outside the container.
Flow Diagram: A scaled graphic/pictorial representation of the layout and locations
of activities or operations and the flow paths of materials between activities in a
process.
Fly-Fix-Fly: A description of the early approach to system safety, with reference to
the aviation industry, that focused upon an after-the-fact method of designing safe
systems.
Frequency Distribution: The tabulation of data from the lowest to the highest, or
highest to the lowest, along with the number of times each of the values was
observed or occurred in the distribution.
Frequent: In terms of probability of hazard or mishap occurrence, a hazard or event
likely to occur numerous times during the life of an item.
Gas Law: The thermodynamic law applied to a perfect gas that relates the pressure
of the gas to its density and absolute temperature.
Gauge Pressure: The pressure with respect to atmospheric pressure, or above atmo-
spheric pressure as indicated on the appropriate pressure gauge. The difference
between two absolute pressures, one of which is usually atmospheric pressure.
Gaussian Distribution: Pertaining to or having the appearance of a normal distri-
bution.
Gear Ratio: The number of revolutions a driving gear requires to turn a driven gear
one revolution. For a pair of gears, the ratio is found by dividing the number of
teeth on the driven gear by the number of teeth on the driving gear.
General Duty Clause: Refers to Section 5 (a)(1) of the Occupational Safety and
Health Act of 1970 which states: Each employer shall furnish to each of his
employees employment and a place of employment which are free from recognized
hazards that are causing or are likely to cause death or serious physical harm to
his employees, and shall comply with occupational safety and health standards
promulgated under this Act.
General Duty Clause Violation: Under the Occupational Safety and Health Act, a
violation of the general duty clause exists when OSHA can show that the hazard
is a recognized hazard, the employer failed to render its workplace free from
the recognized hazard, the occurrence of an accident or adverse health effect
was reasonably foreseeable, the likely consequence of the incident (accident or
adverse effect) was death or a form of serious physical harm, and there exists
feasible means to correct the hazard.
Grade D Breathing Air: Breathing air which meets the specifications of the Com-
pressed Gas Association (CGA) Commodity Specification for Grade D air. It must
have between 19.5% and 23% oxygen content and must contain maximums of
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
209
5 mg/m3 condensed hydrocarbons, 20 ppm carbon monoxide, and 1000 ppm
carbon dioxide; and it must have no pronounced odor.
Greater Hazard Defense: A well-established Occupational Safety and Health
Review Commission (OSHRC) doctrine that, on some occasions, allows employ-
ers to escape sanctions for violations of otherwise applicable safety regulations
because the act of abating the violation would itself pose an even greater threat to
the safety and health of their employees.
Guarded: Covered, shielded, fenced, enclosed, or otherwise protected by means of
suitable covers, casings, barriers, rails, screens, mats, or platforms to remove the
likelihood of approach to a point of danger or contact by persons or objects.
Guideline: A recommended practice or other nonbinding suggestion issued by an
agency, without the force of law.
Hazard: A condition or situation which exists within the working environment
capable of causing an unwanted release of energy resulting in physical harm,
injury, and/or damage.
Hazard Analysis: The analysis of systems, processes, and/or procedures to deter-
mine potential hazards and recommended actions to eliminate or control those
hazards.
Hazard and Operability Study (HAZOP): A formal, structured investigative sys-
tem for examining potential deviations of operations from design conditions that
could create process-operating problems and hazards.
Hazard Correction: The elimination or control of a workplace hazard in accord with
the requirements of applicable federal or state statutes, regulations, or standards.
Hazard Probability: The likelihood that a condition or set of conditions will exist
or occur in a given situation or operating environment.
Hazard Severity: A categorical description of hazard level or degree, based upon
real or perceived potential for causing harm, injury, and/or damage caused by a
given hazard condition.
Hazardous Condition: Circumstances which are causally related to an exposure to
a hazardous material.
Hazardous Pressure Systems: Systems used to store and transfer hazardous fluids
such as cryogens, flammables, combustibles, hypergols, etc.
Health Hazard: A property of a chemical, mixture of chemicals, physical stress,
pathogen, or ergonomic factor for which there is statistically significant evidence,
based on at least one test or study conducted in accordance with established
scientific principles, that acute or chronic adverse health effects may occur among
workers exposed to the agent.
Health Hazard Analysis: The Health Hazard Analysis (HHA) is an analysis tech-
nique for evaluating the human health aspects of a system’s design. These aspects
include considerations for ergonomics, noise, vibration, temperature, chemicals,
hazardous materials, etc. The intent is to indentify human health hazards during
design and eliminate them through design features. If health hazards cannot be
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
210
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
eliminated, then protective measures must be used to reduce the associated risk
to an acceptable level. Health hazards must be considered during manufacture,
operation, test, maintenance, and disposal (Ericson 2005).
Hertz (Hz): A measure of frequency in cycles per second (cps). The standard radio
equivalent of frequency in cycles per second of an electromagnetic wave. Kilohertz
(kHz) is a frequency of one thousand cycles per second. Megahertz (MHz) is a
frequency of one million cycles per second.
Histogram: A graphical representation of two or more amplitude measures using
rectangular shapes along either a discrete or continuous dimension. More com-
monly referred to as a bar graph or bar chart.
Hoist Angle: An angle at which the load line is pulled during a hoisting operation.
Human Error: The end result of multiple factors which influence human perfor-
mance in a given situation. An often overused causal factor finding which, by itself,
is not entirely descriptive of a true accident cause. Human error is considered more
a symptom than a cause. See also Human Factor.
Human Error Probability (HEP): A measure of the likelihood of occurrence of a
human error under special conditions:
HEP = error count/number of possibilities
Human Factor: Any one of a number of underlying circumstances or conditions
which directly or indirectly affect human performance. These include physical as
well as psychological factors that can potentially lead a person to make an error in
judgment or action (human error) resulting in an accident. See also Ergonomics.
Human Factors: A combination of those aspects which effect human performance
(such as personal, physical, psychological, situational, etc.) that may or may not
contribute to an accident, incident, or near-miss occurrence. See also Ergonomics.
Human Factors Analysis: A systematic study of those elements involving a human–
machine interface or other situation with the intent of improving working con-
ditions, operations, or an individual’s well-being. Also referred to as ergonomic
analysis.
Human Factors Engineering: A concerted effort or attempt to design products
and/or systems in consideration of human performance and those aspects which
act upon or influence the human element of system operation.
Human Reliability: An assessment of the probability that an individual or group
will adequately perform a given task at the appropriate time.
Hydraulic: Operated by water or any other liquid under pressure, including all
hazardous fluids as well as typical hydraulic fluids that are normally petroleum
based.
Hypothetical Question: In a What-If analysis, a form of question framed in such a
manner as to call for an opinion from an expert based on a series of assumptions.
Ignition: The introduction of some external spark, flame, or glowing object that
initiates self-sustained combustion.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
211
Immediately Dangerous to Life and Health (IDLH): The maximum level to which
a healthy individual can be exposed to a chemical for 30 minutes and escape
without suffering irreversible health effects or impairing symptoms.
Imminent Danger: Any conditions or practices in a place of employment which
are such that danger exists which could reasonably be expected to cause death or
serious physical harm immediately or before the imminence of such danger can
be eliminated.
Imminent Hazard: A hazardous situation, condition, or circumstance, the nature of
which poses a serious and imminent threat to human health or the environment. If
actions are not taken to immediately correct or stop the hazard cause, the results
could be catastrophic.
Improbable: In terms of probability of hazard or mishap occurrence, a hazard or
event whose occurrence is so unlikely during the life of an item, it can be assumed
that the hazard will not occur.
Incident: An occurrence, happening or energy transfer which results from either
positive or negative influencing events and may be classified as an accident,
mishap, near-miss, or neither, depending on the level and degree of the negative
or positive outcome.
Indirect Cause: A contributing causal factor other than direct cause associated with
an incident.
Industrial Engineering: That engineering discipline concerned with the design,
development, installation, and improvement of integrated systems of people, mate-
rials, equipment, and energy in the industrial environment.
Inspect: To verify quality, integrity, and/or safety through testing, observation, or
other processes.
Intangible Risk: A risk involving unwanted consequences which are primarily non-
physical, such as public opinion, employee morale, etc., but may have adverse
effects (SSDC-11).
Interface: A common boundary or point of connection between two or more parts
of a system or between systems, whether physical or perceptual.
Job Analysis: An evaluation of job requirements through an evaluation of the duties
and tasks, facilities and working conditions, and worker qualifications and respon-
sibilities necessary to perform a job.
Job Demand: The combined physiological, sensory-perceptual, and psychological
requirements for, or loads experienced by a worker, performing a particular job.
Job Design: The process of determining what the job content should be for a set of
tasks, how the tasks should be organized, and what linkage should exist between
jobs.
Job Hazard Analysis: See Job Safety Analysis.
Job Safety Analysis: A generalized examination of the tasks associated with the
performance of a given job and an evaluation of the hazards associated with
those tasks and the controls used to prevent or reduce exposure to those hazards.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
212
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Usually performed by the responsible supervisor for that job and used primarily
in the training and orientation of new employees. Also known as Job Hazard
Analysis.
Job Severity Index (JSI): A guideline for matching job design and employee place-
ment such that an acceptable risk of injury potential is present.
Kelvin Scale: A temperature scale with zero degrees equal to the theoretical tem-
perature at which all molecular motion ceases.
Key Event: One incident which is primarily responsible for the time, place, and
severity of an accident or other significant happening.
Knowledge-Based Behavior: A cognitive operating mode in which the individual
attempts to achieve a goal in a situation with no clearly preestablished rules.
Ladder Safety Device: Any device, other than a cage or well, designed to eliminate
or reduce the possibility of accidental falls and which may incorporate such
features as life belts, friction brakes, and sliding attachments.
Lessons Learned: A formal, documented account or report of both the positive and
negative aspects of operational or task experience which is compiled after the
conclusion of the task. Used generally to highlight those actions which should
or should not be allowed to occur during any subsequent performance of like or
similar tasks.
Life Cycle: A phased concept to explain the various stages of product or system
progression consisting of the concept phase, design phase, production phase,
operational phase, and disposal phase. In system safety, the product or system life
cycle is often used to indicate the timing of certain types of analytical evaluations.
Life-Cycle Characteristic Curve: See Bathtub Curve.
Life-Cycle Cost: The total cost of an item over its useful life, including purchase,
maintenance, and operations.
Light Duty: A work classification in which an individual is not permitted to do
heavy lifting for health or other reasons.
Limit Stop: Any device or mechanism which prevents further movement of a control,
door, drawer, or other object at a certain point when motion beyond that point might
have undesirable consequences. May be accomplished by audible click or tactile
sensation.
Line and Staff Organization: In the structure of an organization, those members that
are directly accountable and responsible for the daily operations of the enterprise
are considered Line management and have the authority to implement/change
company policy and operating procedures. Those that serve as advisors to the
Line and can only recommend changes are considered Staff management.
Load Limit: The maximum weight or stress which an individual, floor, vehicle, or
other structure can safely support.
Logic Gate: As pertains to fault tree analysis (FTA) and/or the Management Over-
sight and Risk Tree (MORT), a symbol used to identify the association between
events on a logic tree.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
213
Loss: Anything which increases costs or reduces productivity and has any adverse
effect to the organization or society resulting from either normal operations or
unplanned events (SSDC-11).
Machine Guard: Any piece of equipment or device on a machine intended to reduce
or eliminate the chance of injury through the use of that machine.
Main Event: See Contributory Event.
Maintainability: An expression of the ability of a given product or system to be
maintained (with minimum maintenance and repair) and remain in intended service
throughout the operational phase of the product life cycle.
Marginal Event: An occurrence, subsequent to the introduction of a hazard or set of
hazards into a system, that results in a level of injury, damage, or loss of minimal
consequences. Quick recovery would be possible and probable. The parameters
for this categorization are usually established by management in the System Safety
Program Plan or other policy-making documentation.
Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS): A compilation of data required under OSHA’s
Hazard Communication Standard on the identity of hazardous chemicals, their
health and physical hazards, exposure limits, and precautions.
Maximum Expected Operating Pressure (MEOP): The highest pressure that a
pressure vessel, pressurized structure, or pressure component is expected to expe-
rience during its service life and retain its functionality, in association with its
applicable operating environments. It includes the effect of temperature, pressure
transients and oscillations, vehicle quasi-steady and dynamic accelerations, and
relief valve operating variability.
Mean: In statistical analysis, the arithmetic average derived from the addition of
all value points in the sample, divided by the total number of points in the
sample.
Mean Deviation: The average of the absolute deviations of values in a distribution
from the mean.
Median: In statistical analysis, that value point which is precisely in the center (i.e.,
half the value points fall below the median and half lie above the median).
Methods Study: A systematic examination of the techniques, factors, and resources
involved in the component parts of one or more operations, with the intent of
improving techniques and productivity, while reducing costs.
Mishap: An occurrence which results in injury, damage, or both.
Mode: In statistical analysis, the most common or most frequent value that appears
during evaluation or observation of a sample population of values.
Moment: A statistic measure, represented by the sum of the deviations from the
mean, raised to some power, and divided by the number of terms used in accu-
mulating the sum. Also, the tendency of a force to generate rotation in a body or
torsion about an origin.
Monotony: The psychological state created by the lack of variety due to the repeated
performance.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
214
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Near-Miss: An occurrence which had the potential to result in serious injury, dam-
age, or both, but did not.
Negligible Event: An occurrence, subsequent to the introduction of a hazard or set
of hazards into a system, that results in a level of injury, damage, or loss of such
insignificant consequence that quick or total recovery would be highly probable
and possible. The parameters for this categorization are usually established by
management in the System Safety Program Plan, or other policy-making docu-
mentation.
Nip Point: The nearest point of intersection or near contact of two oppositely rotating
circular surfaces or a rotating circular surface and a planar surface.
Node: Term used to identify individual system components when conducting a
HAZOP study.
NonCausal Association: A statistical association in which no cause-and-effect rela-
tionship is apparent between two variables.
Nonrandom Sample: Any sample taken in such a manner that some members of
the defined population are more likely to be sampled than others.
Normal Distribution: In statistical analysis, that distribution of events which occurs
most often and is typically represented graphically as a bell-shaped curve.
Normal Event: As pertains to fault tree analysis (FTA) and/or the Management
Oversight and Risk Tree (MORT), an event which occurs as a normal function
in system operation that may or may not present a risk of hazard to that system.
Represented graphically by a house shape in FTA and a scroll shape in MORT.
Occasional: In terms of probability of hazard or mishap occurrence, a hazard or
event likely to occur sometime during the life of an item.
Operating and Support Hazard Analysis: A system safety analytical technique
(also know as the operational hazard analysis) which focuses primarily on the
hazards associated with or caused/enhanced by the human/task interface of system
operations.
Operating Life: The period of time in which prime power is applied to electrical or
electronic components without maintenance or rework.
Operations Process Chart: An abbreviated flow process chart consisting of a
graphic/symbolic description providing a top-level view of the sequence for
an entire operation, specifying such information as the actions and inspections
involved, materials used, and pints of introduction, etc.
Oxygen-Deficient Atmosphere: An atmosphere which contains less than the
approximately 20–21% of oxygen found in normal air; or, an atmosphere con-
taining less than 19.5% oxygen by volume. It is that concentration of oxygen
by volume below which atmosphere-supplying respiratory protection must be
provided.
Oxygen-Enriched Atmosphere: An atmosphere containing more than 23.5% oxy-
gen by volume.
Parameter: A characteristic of a population, such as the mean, standard deviation, or
the variance. A variable quantity or arbitrary constant appearing in a mathematical
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
215
expression, each value of which restricts or determines the form of the expression.
Also, an arbitrarily defined constant value under a given set of circumstances and
from which other values or functions may be defined.
Population: The total group of individual persons, objects, or items from which
samples may be taken to estimate characteristics of that population by statistical
methods.
Preassigned Probability: When the likelihood of all possible outcomes of a given
event is known or can be determined, the probability of such outcomes are said to
be preassigned (rolling dice, tossing a coin, etc.).
Preliminary Hazard Analysis (PHA): A system safety analysis method used to
formally evaluate and document the hazard risks associated with a new or modified
system.
Preliminary Hazard List (PHL): A “first-look” method of identifying potential or
existing hazards associated with system design.
Primary Event: See top event.
Probability: An event that can reasonably be expected to occur on the basis of avail-
able evidence. The value of the ratio of the number of ways one or more specified
events can occur to the total number of events which may occur. Expressed as a
number between 0 and 1. The likelihood of observing a particular result or event,
especially within a specified time or a given set of circumstances.
Probability Theory: In failure analysis, the examination of the likelihood of a
specific failure or fault event, given a single opportunity for occurrence of that
event.
Probable: In terms of probability of hazard or mishap occurrence, a hazard or event
likely to occur several times during the life of an item.
Process Hazard Analysis: A thorough, orderly, and systematic approach to identify,
evaluate, and control highly hazardous chemical processes. It involves a review
of what could go wrong and what steps may be taken to safeguard against highly
hazardous chemical releases.
Production Flow Analysis: The study of the routing of a part, component, or system
through the various machines and workplaces and the operations it undergoes in
a manufacturing or integration facility.
Program Manager: In military and/or other government agencies, as well as their
contracting organizations, the term used to identify that person responsible for
total contract management and administration, including the system safety effort.
Likened to the vice president or general manager in the private sector.
Project Evaluation Tree: A system safety analytical technique which was developed
from the more extensive management oversight and risk tree (MORT) method of
analysis. A simplified and efficient method to evaluate a project or operation.
Especially useful in the analysis of accidents and hazards.
Proximate Cause: The cause factor which directly produces the effect without the
intervention of any other cause. The cause nearest to the effect in time and space.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
216
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Qualitative: The characteristic attributes or qualities pertaining to an exposure based
on subjective information, nonrigorous quantitative data, and judgment.
Qualitative Risk Assessment: An examination of system risk based upon estab-
lished criteria that allow the analyst to evaluate risk levels in relation to other risks
or total system risk.
Quantitative: The property of anything which can be determined by measurement
and expressed as a quantity.
Quantitative Risk Assessment: An application of statistical techniques to mathe-
matically identify the level of probable risk associated with a given hazard, as it
relates to total system operation.
Questioning Technique: A method for analyzing and attempting to improve work
processes, generally by asking questions such as: (a) What is the purpose for some
activity? (b) Why is a particular sequence followed? (c) Why does a particular
person perform that job? and (d) Is the method being used to accomplish the task
the best possible?
Reliability: An expression of the level of confidence that a given system or product
will function, and continue to function, as intended throughout the life cycle.
Reliability Curve: See Bathtub Curve.
Remote: In terms of probability of hazard or mishap occurrence, a hazard or event
whose occurrence during the life of an item is considered unlikely, but still
possible.
Residual Risk: That risk which remains after the application or implementation of
controls, barriers, or other risk-reducing methods or techniques.
Risk: The likelihood or possibility of hazard consequences in terms of severity and
probability (Stephenson 1991). The probability of occurrence of a loss-producing
event, the chance of loss. The probability or a range of probabilities that a specific
adverse effect may occur under the conditions of human exposure. It may be
expressed in quantitative terms, taking values from zero (certainty that harm will
not occur) to one (certainty that it will). In many cases, risk can only be described
qualitatively (i.e., as high, low, or trivial).
Risk Analysis: A detailed examination of any activity or functioning system in which
potential adverse effects and their probabilities are calculated, and the various risks
are quantified or measured (SSDC-11).
Risk Assessment: The qualitative and quantitative evaluation performed in an effort
to define the risk posed to human health and/or the environment by the presence
or potential presence and/or use of specific pollutants.
Risk Assessment Code: An alphanumeric rating of hazard risk based upon its
anticipated frequency of occurrence and the resultant severity of exposure to such
risk.
Risk Cost-Benefit Analysis: A combination of cost-benefit analysis and risk assess-
ment. It is intended to assess the costs and benefits associated with prevention or
reduction of risks to human health and the environment.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
217
Risk Evaluation: An appraisal of the degree of undesirability of the various risks
after they have been quantified. Consideration is given to the various factors and
tradeoffs influencing risk acceptability (SSDC-11).
Risk Event: An occurrence with the potential to lead to an unwanted event such as
an accident or incident.
Risk Factor: A correlation of characteristics (e.g., sex, age, race, obesity) or vari-
ables (e.g., smoking, occupational exposure level) with increased probability of a
toxic effect.
Risk Management: The process, derived through the application of system safety
principles, whereby management decisions are made concerning control and min-
imization of hazards and acceptance of residual risks (SSDC-11).
Root-Cause Analysis: With regard to compliance, an analysis which looks beyond
superficial symptoms or underlying factors contributing to or causing shortcom-
ings or failures in the system. It looks at something that occurred and asks what
could have been done to have prevented it from happening in the first place.
Safe: A condition or situation that is free from hazards to health. Relatively free
from the risk of danger, injury, or damage.
Safety: A measure of the degree of freedom from risk or conditions that can cause
death, physical harm, or equipment/property damage (Leveson 1986).
Safety Critical: Any condition, event, operation, process, equipment, or system with
a potential for major injury or damage (MIL-STD-1574A).
Safety Engineering: Discipline concerned with the planning, development, imple-
mentation, maintenance, and evaluation of the safety aspects of equipment, the
environment, procedures, operations, and systems to achieve effective protection
of people and property.
Safety Factor: The ratio of design burst pressure over the maximum allowable
working pressure (MAWP) or design pressure; it can also be expressed as the ratio
of tensile or yield strength over the maximum allowable stress of the material.
Safety Professional: An individual who, by virtue of specialized knowledge, skill,
and educational accomplishments, has achieved professional status in the safety
field (ASSE).
Safety Relief Valve: A valve fitted on a pressure vessel, or other containment under
pressure, to relieve overpressure.
Safety Standard: Those standards designed to protect employees from hazards
such as slips, trips and falls, lacerations and amputation from using machinery,
fire hazards, and so on.
Sample Parameters: Estimators of population parameters such as the mean, stan-
dard deviation, etc. and are based on observations of a subset of the population.
Sneak Circuit Analysis: A system safety analytical technique (also known as sneak
analysis) used to identify and evaluate the different possible ways in which inherent
system design characteristics can either permit an undesired function to occur,
prevent a desired function from occurring, or adversely effect critical operational
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
218
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
timing. Typically associated with analysis of electrical or electronic systems and
other energy transfer systems (pneumatic, hydraulic, etc.).
Software Hazard Analysis: A system safety analytical technique whose function
is to evaluate potential faults in both operating system and applications software
requirements, codes, and programs as they may effect overall system operation.
Soft Tree: Also known as Software Fault Tree Analysis, a system safety technique
used to evaluate a single loss event and/or the effect of simultaneous failures with
a software system on that single loss, or “top” event.
Standard Deviation: In statistical analysis, a value equal to the square of the vari-
ance.
Standard Error of the Mean: A measure of the variability of the distribution
of sample arithmetic means with respect to the theoretical population standard
deviation.
Statistical Analysis: A mathematical evaluation of past performance. In failure
analysis, a focus on the total possible number of times a failure or fault event will
occur given many opportunities for that occurrence.
Statistical Significance: An inference that the probability is low that the observed
difference in quantities being evaluated could be due to variability in the data
rather than an actual difference in the quantities. The inference that an observed
difference is statistically significant is typically based on a test to reject one
hypothesis and accept another.
Statistics: The field of applied mathematics which is concerned with the analysis,
presentation, and derivation of conclusions from data.
Subsystem: An element of a system that, in and of itself, may constitute a system
(MIL-STD-882).
System: A combination of people, procedures, facility, and/or equipment all func-
tioning within a given or specified working environment to accomplish a specific
task or set of tasks (Stephenson 1991).
System Critical: A single-point failure item or component in the system the loss or
failure of which would result in a loss or failure of the entire system.
System/Subsystem Hazard Analysis: A system safety analytical technique used to
evaluate hazards occurring on the subsystem or component level and the effect of
their occurrence on overall system operations.
System Loss: Damage to an extent that renders repair impractical. Requires salvage
or system replacement (MIL-STD-1574A).
System Safety: A subdiscipline of systems engineering that applies scientific, engi-
neering, and management principles to ensure adequate safety, the timely identifi-
cation of hazard risk, and initiation of actions to prevent or control those hazards
throughout the life cycle and within the constraints of operational effectiveness,
time, and cost (Stephenson 1991). The use of system engineering principles to
provide a specified level of safety given the trade-offs involving cost, time, and
the operations involved.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
219
System Safety Analysis: A detailed, systematic method of evaluating the risk of
hazard associated with a given system, product, or program. It utilizes a variety of
techniques and approaches to accurately identify, resolve, or control exposure to
those hazards.
System Safety Engineer: An engineer who is qualified by training, certification,
and/or experience to perform system safety engineering tasks (MIL-STD-882).
System Safety Engineering: An engineering discipline requiring specialized pro-
fessional knowledge and skills in applying scientific and engineering principles,
criteria, and techniques to identify and eliminate hazards, or reduce the risk asso-
ciated with hazards (MIL-STD-882).
System Safety Management: An element of management that defines the sys-
tem safety program requirements and ensures the planning, implementation, and
accomplishment of system safety tasks and activities consistent with the overall
organizational requirements (MIL-STD-882).
System Safety Precedence: An ordered listing of preferred methods of eliminating
or controlling hazards. Typically, it is listed as:
1. Design for minimum risk,
2. Incorporate safety devices,
3. Provide warning devices,
4. Develop procedures and training,
5. Acceptance of residual/remaining risk.
System Safety Program: The combination of tasks and activities of system safety
management and system safety engineering that enhance operational effectiveness
by satisfying the system safety requirements in a timely, cost-effective manner
throughout all phases of the system life cycle (MIL-STD-882).
System Safety Program Objective: To reduce the risk of a given hazard or set of
hazards to its lowest possible level of acceptance (as determined by management)
without significant sacrifice of system effectiveness, operating schedules, or cost.
System Safety Program Plan: A written description of the planned method of
implementing a system safety program in a given organization. It identifies respon-
sibilities, objectives, system safety tasks to be performed, and the method of
integrating the program into the organization’s overall activities.
System Safety Tasks: Those activities, such as hazard analysis, associated with the
system safety engineering discipline that are performed to accomplish the system
safety program objective.
Task Analysis: An expansion of the Job Safety Analysis (JSA) method of identifying
hazards associated with a given job or task. Differs from the JSA in its level of
specific detail and consideration of the human interface in all aspects of the job
performance.
Time-Loss Analysis: A specialized system safety analytical technique used to eval-
uate responses to accidents in consideration of the actual moment in time the
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
220
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
response occurred following the accident. An evaluation is made of these responses
and a determination of their effectiveness is made based upon losses that occurred
up to the moment of intervention.
Top Event: As pertains to fault tree analysis (FTA) and/or the Management Over-
sight and Risk Tree (MORT), the primary fault event under analysis. Represented
graphically as a rectangle.
Trial and Error: Pertaining to a blind, initially random, uninformed search for the
correct solution or a path to that solution.
Undeveloped Event: As pertains to fault tree analysis (FTA) and/or the Manage-
ment Oversight and Risk Tree (MORT), an identified fault event that will not be
developed further because its occurrence has been determined insignificant with
regard to its effect on the top event, or insufficient data exist to further evaluate
the event, or the event is too complex for the purpose of a specific evaluation.
Represented graphically by a diamond shape.
Unsafe Act: Any act or action, either planned or unplanned, which has the potential
to result in an undesired outcome or loss (injury, property damage, lost production
time, etc.). Conduct that causes an unnecessary exposure to a hazard or a violation
of a commonly accepted procedure which directly permitted or resulted in a near-
miss or the occurrence of an accident.
Unsafe Condition: Any existing or possible condition which, if allowed to continue,
could result in an undesired outcome or loss (injury, property damage, lost pro-
duction time, etc.). Any physical state that deviates from the accepted, normal, or
correct practice and that has the potential to produce injury, excessive exposure to
a health hazard, or property damage.
Useful Life: That period of time in the existence of a machine or system follow-
ing any run-in phase and prior to the wear-out phase in which it is generally
functionally stable in its operation.
Value Analysis: A systematic study to determine costs in each production phase for
manufacturing an item, either during the engineering phase of product develop-
ment or on an already existing product, generally with the intent to reduce costs
by eliminating unnecessary steps.
Variance: A mathematical measure of the variation in the observed values of a
sample population.
Vulnerability Analysis: Assessment of elements in the community that are suscep-
tible to damage should a release of hazardous materials occur.
Wear-Out Phase: That period of time occurring after a system has performed much
of its useful life and components begin to fail due to aging or other factors.
What-If Analysis: An informal but somewhat structured investigative method for
introducing and evaluating hypothetical events, or series of events, associated with
the operation of a given facility or process.
Work Environment: The physical location, equipment, materials processed or used,
andthekinds of operations performedinthecourseof anemployee’s work, whether
on or off the employer’s premise, comprise the employee’s work environment.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
221
Work System: An integrated group of one or more machines and/or workers for
coordinated activities in the output of some product or service.
Yield Strength: The stress at which a material exhibits a specified permanent defor-
mation or set.
Zero-Fault Tolerant: Having no redundancy. Pertaining to a condition in which a
single fault in a system will cause that system or the function performed by it to
fail.
Zonal Analysis: A relatively new system safety analysis technique concerned with
evaluating the geographic arrangement of installed systems, and its interconnec-
tions, as well as the influence of external events on those systems.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Bibliography
Abendroth, G. H. and Grass, J. M. 1987. A contracting program manager’s guide to system
safety. Hazard Prevention 4:14–19.
ANSI A17.1–1991. Elevators and Escalators. 1991. New York: American National Standards
Institute, Inc.
Blackmane, H. S., Gertman, D. I., and Haney, L. N. September 1985. The Process of Task
Analysis (SSDC-31). U. S. Department of Energy, System Safety Development Center:
EG&G Idaho, Inc., Idaho Falls, ID.
Briscoe, G. J. September 1982. Risk Management Guide (SSDC-11R1). U. S. Department of
Energy, System Safety Development Center: EG&G Idaho, Inc. Idaho Falls, ID.
Brown, D. B. 1976. System Analysis and Design for Safety. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Browning, R. L. 1980. The Loss Rate Concept in Safety Engineering. New York: Marcel
Dekker.
Ericson, Clifton A. 2005. Hazard Analysis Techniques for System Safety. John Wiley and Sons.
Gloss, D. S., and M. G. Wardel. 1984. Introduction to Safety Engineering. New York: John
Wiley and Sons.
Hammer, W. 1972. Handbook of System and Product Safety. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Johnson, W. G. 1973. MORT, The Management Oversight Risk Tree. Washington, DC: U.S.
Atomic Energy Commission.
Knox, N. W. and Eicher, R. W. May 1983. MORT User’s Manual (SSDC-4R2). U. S. Depart-
ment of Energy, System Safety Development Center: EG&G Idaho, Inc. Idaho Falls, ID.
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
223
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
224
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Larson, M. S. and Hann, S. 1989. Safety and Reliability in System Design. Needham Heights,
MA: Ginn Press.
Larson, M. S. and Hann, S. 1990. Product Liability and Design Safety. Des Plaines, IL:
American Society of Safety Engineers (seminar handout manual).
Leveson, N. G. June 1986. Software safety: why, what, and how? Computing Surveys
18(2):125–163.
Leveson, N. “White Paper on Approaches to Safety Engineering.” April 23, 2005.
Malasky, S. W. 1982. System Safety Technology and Application. New York: Garland STPM
Press.
McCormick, E. J. 1976. Human Factors Engineering and Design. New York: McGraw Hill.
Roland, H. E. and Moriarty, B. 1983. System Safety Engineering and Management. New York:
John Wiley and Sons.
Nertney, R. J. and M. G. Bullock. February 1976. Human Factors in Design (SSDC-2). U.
S. Department of Energy, System Safety Development Center: EG&G Idaho, Inc. Idaho
Falls, ID.
Nolan, D. P. 1994. Application of HAZOP and What-If Safety Reviews to the Petroleum,
Petrochemical, and Chemical Industries. New Jersey: Noyles Publications.
NRI MORT User’s Manual, 2nd edn, 2009 (ISBN 978-90-77284-08-7). Noordwijk Risk Ini-
tiative, in Partnership with the Royal Dutch Navy, Koninklijke Marine, The Netherlands.
Olson, Richard. E. Undated. System Safety Handbook for the Acquisition Manager. Air Force
Space Division, Directorate of Safety. Distributed by the System Safety Society, Sterling,
Virginia.
Spurr, W. A. and Bonini, C. P. 1973. Statistical Analysis for Business Decisions. Homewood,
IL: Richard D. Irwin, Inc.
Stephenson, J. 1991. System Safety 2000. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Technical Analysis Incorporated (TAI). 1989. System Safety Engineering [Course Manual].
Houston, TX: TAI.
U.S. Air Force Regulation (AFR) 127-4. 1990. Investigating and Reporting U.S. Air Force
Mishaps. Department of the Air Force, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.
U.S. Department of Defense. August 1979. MIL-STD-1574A: System Safety Program for
Space and Missile Systems. Department of the Air Force, U.S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, DC.
U.S. Department of Defense. March 1984 (updated by Notice 1, 1987). MIL-STD-882 1984:
System Safety Program Requirements. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.
U.S. Department of Labor. July 1990. Regulations Relating to Labor—General Industry.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Code of Federal Regulations, Title 29,
Part 1910. Office of the Federal Register, National Archives and Records Administration,
Washington, DC.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Index
Abbreviations, 195–198
Acceptable risk, MORT applications,
159–160
Accident, defined, 111
Accident potential, industrial safety and
elimination of, 43
Accident prevention:
MORT analysis, 159–160
Prevention through Design (PtD)
program and, 47
system design and, 44–47
Accident Risk Assessment, 33
Acronyms, 195–198
Adequate factors, in MORT analysis,
163–165
After-the-fact analysis, system safety
process, 17
American Industrial Hygiene Association
(AIHA), Prevention through Design
(PtD) program and, 47
Analytical MORT, 158–160
ANSI/AIHA Z10 Occupational Health and
Safety Management Systems standard,
Prevention through Design (PtD)
program and, 47
ANSI/ASSE Z590.3 standard, Prevention
through Design (PtD) program and,
46–47
Assumed Risks, in MORT analysis,
162–163
Australian National OHS Strategy, 45–46
Bathtub curve, statistical analysis, 66–67
Before-the-fact analysis, system safety
process, 17
Behavior analysis, system design and,
44–47
Bell curve, statistical analysis, 65–66
Catastrophic event, Operating and Support
Hazard Analysis, 106–109
Chance events, probability theory, 63
Change analysis, MORT applications,
159–160
Closed-Loop Hazard Tracking System,
32–35
Collision, defined, 72
Color coding, in MORT analysis, 163–165
Compliance audits, system safety and,
7–8
Basic Guide to System Safety, Third Edition. Jeffrey W. Vincoli.
© 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
225
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
226
INDEX
Component analysis, Failure Modes and
Effects Analysis, 119–132
Concept phase:
Energy Trace and Barrier Analysis and,
118
of life cycle, 37
preliminary hazard analysis and, 90
Conditional probability theory, 64
Contamination, defined, 76
Contract Deliverable Requirements List
(CDRL), 31–32
Corrosion, defined, 76
Cost analysis:
Prevention through Design (PtD)
program and, 47
risk acceptance and, 24–27
Critical single failure points (CSFPs),
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis,
123–132
Deduction, probability theory, 62–64
Deductive reasoning approach, Failure
Modes and Effects Analysis, 119–120
Design by code, system safety and, 11
Design phase:
Energy Trace and Barrier Analysis and,
118
of life cycle, 37
Disposal phase, of life cycle, 39
Disturbance control algorithms, system
safety and, 7–8
Electrical shock, defined, 77
Empirical probability, 65–66
Emulation analysis, 185
Energy-Barrier concept, 111–118
Energy source evaluation checklist, 72, 74,
83
Energy Trace and Barrier Analysis (ETBA),
72, 111–118
example, 114–118
MORT analysis and, 159–160
performance of, 112–113
system description, 114
uses of, 112
worksheet, 113–114
Engineering management, system safety
integration in, 58
Environmental engineering, system safety
integration in, 59
Equipment analysis, system safety process,
16–17
Equipment design engineering, system
safety integration in, 57–58
Ergonomics:
accident prevention and, 44–47
industrial safety and, 43–44
Operating and Support Hazard Analysis,
99–101
Event factors, in MORT analysis, 163–165
Event tree models, MORT analysis,
160–163
Expected loss index, cost and risk
acceptance, 24–27
Explosion, defined, 77
Facility engineers, system safety integration
and, 57
Facility inspection reports, 36
Failure analysis, probability theory, 62–64
Failure condition, fault or functional hazard
analysis, 136–137
Failure Modes and Effects Analysis
(FMEA):
categories of, 119–120
development of, 72–78
example of, 124–132
overview of, 119
performance, 120–121
report, 121–124
Subsystem Hazard Analysis, 95–98
system safety integration in, 58
Fault Hazard Analysis (FHA), 135–143
example, 137–143
process, 136–137, 139–141
Fault Tree Analysis (FTA), 64
Functional Hazard Analysis process and,
136–137
overview, 145–156
top events in, 136–137
Fault trees, Software Hazard Analysis,
184–185
Fire, defined, 77
5 × 5 risk matrix, 20
Fly-fix-fly approach:
system safety, 3–7
system safety process, 17
Forward-looking process, system safety,
16–17
“4 × 5 risk matrix,” 20
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
INDEX
227
Functional FMEA, 119–120
Functional Hazard Analysis (FHA),
135–143
example, 137–143
process, 136–137, 139–143
General Duty Clause (OSHA), industrial
safety and, 41–43
Generic Hazard Group, 72, 76–78
Glossary of terms, 199–221
Government contracts, system safety in,
31–36
Hardware FMEA, 120–132
Hazard, defined, 16
Hazard analysis:
cost and risk acceptance, 25–27
operations and support systems,
99–109
preliminary hazard analysis (PHA),
71–90
system safety criteria, 19–23
Hazard and Operability (HAZOP) analysis:
background, 168–169
definitions, 168
node concepts in, 170–171
objectives, 169
overview, 167–178
procedures for, 175–176
reference data requirements, 169–170
reporting guidelines, 176–177
team members, 169
worksheet, 175–176
Hazard evaluation checklist, 72–73,
81–82
Hazard probability:
defined, 16
levels, 18–19
Hazard reduction, order of precedence
process flow, 23
Hazard Report, 33–34
Hazard risk matrix, 19–20
Hazard severity:
categories, 18–19
defined, 16
Job Safety Analysis (JSA) and changes
in, 56
High-risk systems, quantitative risk
assessment, 26
Histogram of distributive values, 64–65
Human errors, Operating and Support
Hazard Analysis, 99–101
Human factors element:
industrial safety, 43–44
system safety process, 16–17
Identify, analyze, and eliminate approach,
system safety and, 6–7
Incident:
defined, 111
MORT analysis of, 159–160
Inductive reasoning approach, Failure
Modes and Effects and Analysis, 120
Industrial safety:
accident prevention, through system
design, 44–47
human factors element in, 43–44
job safety analysis, 48–56
Occupational Safety and Health Act and,
41–43
organizational structure for, 57–59
system safety and, 7–8
task analysis, 47–48
Inferred prediction, probability theory, 63
Information sources, system safety,
189–193
Insufficient data, in MORT analysis,
163–165
Job Safety Analysis (JSA) (Job Hazard
Analysis (JHA)):
changes in hazards/scope, 56
example of, 50–53
preparation guidelines for, 50, 54–56
signatures and approvals for, 56
system safety and, 48–50
Judging criteria, MORT analytic chart,
158–160
Less than Adequate (LTA) factors, in
MORT analysis, 163–165
Life cycle phases:
Operating and Support Hazard Analysis
and, 101–103
Prevention through Design (PtD)
program and, 46–47
system safety process and, 36–39
Lockout/Tagout (LOTO) program, 180–183
Loss index, system safety and, 8, 24–27
Loss of habitable atmosphere, defined, 77
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
228
INDEX
Maintenance models, system safety
integration in, 58
Management:
commitment to system safety, 27–28
marketing safety to, 30–31
Management, in MORT analysis, 162–163
Management Oversight and Risk Tree
(MORT), 36
analytical chart, 158–159
applications, 159–160
color coding, 163–165
energy-barrier concept and, 111–112
event tree, 160
example of, 161–163
overview of, 157–165
procedure for, 165
symbols, 160–161
Manufacturing systems, system safety
integration in, 58
Marketing system safety, to management,
30–31
Median, statistical analysis, 66
Minimum risk design, 21
Minimum safety requirements:
industrial safety, OSHA regulations,
42–43
risk assessment and, 11
Minuteman Intercontinential Ballistic
Missile (ICBM), system safety and,
6–7
Mishap, defined, 16
Mishap/accident/incident reporting, 33–36
Missile production, system safety and, 3–7
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA), 6–7
National Institute of Occupational Safety
and Health (NIOSH), Prevention
through Design (PtD) program, 44–47
Near-miss, defined, 16
Node concepts, in HAZOP and What-If
analysis, 170–171
Normal distribution, 65–66
Not Applicable factors, in MORT analysis,
163–165
Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA):
industrial safety and, 41–43
system safety and, 11–12
Operating and Support Hazard Analysis
(O&SHA), 99–109
ergonomics, 99–101
Failure Modes and Effects and Analysis
and, 120
risk assessment in, 105–109
scheduling of, 101–103
scope and purpose of, 103–104
Operations phase:
Job Safety Analysis during, 49–50
of life cycle, 39
system safety integration in, 58
Order of precedence, preliminary hazard
analysis and, 90
Organizational structure, system safety
integration in, 57–59
“OSHA Cowboy,” 11–12
Passive components, Failure Mode and
Effects Analysis and, 127–132
Pathological injury, defined, 77
Personnel training. See training programs
Planning tasks, life cycle phases and,
37–39
Preassigned probability, statistical analysis,
64–67
Precedence, in system safety, 20–23
Prediction, probability theory, 62–64
Preliminary Hazard Analysis (PHA),
71–90
development process, 72–78
Energy Trace and Barrier Analysis and,
112
example, 78–90
Failure Modes and Effects and Analysis
and, 120, 124–132
Job Safety Analysis (JSA) and, 48–50
Operating and Support Hazard Analysis
and, 102–103
preliminary assessment, 81
report, 78
risk evaluation in, 81, 84–90
Software Preliminary Hazard Analysis,
184
Subsystem Hazard Analysis and, 91–98
system description in, 79–80
system operation in, 80
Preliminary Hazard List (PHL), 71, 75
Energy Trace and Barrier Analysis and,
112
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
INDEX
229
Operating and Support Hazard Analysis
and, 102–103
Subsystem Hazard Analysis and, 91–98
Preliminary hazard matrix, 72, 76–78
Prevention through Design (PtD), accident
prevention and, 44–47
Primary system safety tasks, life cycle
phases and, 37–39
Probability theory:
cost and risk acceptance, 24–27
Operating and Support Hazard Analysis,
106–109
overview of, 61–64
preliminary hazard analysis, 90
quantitative risk assessment, 26
system safety process, 16–17
Procedures development:
in MORT analysis, 165
for system safety, 22–23
Process of elimination, in MORT analysis,
161–163
Process standards, system safety and, 8
Production phase, of life cycle, 37, 39
Professional organizations in system safety,
189–191
Programmatic MORT, 158–160
Psychological injury, 77
Qualitative methods, HAZOP and What-If
analyses, 167–178
Quality Assurance, system safety
integration in, 58
Quantitative risk assessment, cost and risk
acceptance, 25–26
Radiation exposure, 77
Reference data requirements, HAZOP and
What-If analyses, 169–170
Reliability curve, 67
Reliability models, system safety
integration in, 58
Reporting requirements:
facility inspection reports, 36
Failure Modes and Effects Analysis,
121–132
Hazard Report, 33–34
HAZOP and What-If analyses, 176–177
mishap/accident/incident reporting, 33,
35–36
Subsystem Hazard Analysis, 92–93
Request for Proposal (RFP), system safety
requirements, 31–36
Risk, defined, 16
Risk acceptance:
cost analysis and, 24–27
Prevention through Design (PtD)
program and, 47
in system safety, 23
Risk assessment:
accident risk assessment, 33
Operating and Support Hazard Analysis,
105–109
in Preliminary Hazard Analysis, 81,
84–90
probability theory, 63–64
quantitative risk assessment, 25–26
Subsystem Hazard Analysis (SSHA),
95–98
system safety and, 8–13
Risk Assessment Code (RAC), 72
Energy Trace and Barrier Analysis and,
113
preliminary hazard analysis, 90
Risk management, principles of, 27
Safety:
defined, 15
definitions, 8–10
Safety-by-accident, system safety, 3–7
Safety devices, incorporation in system
safety, 21–22
Safety reviews, system safety and, 7–8
The Safety Charter, 29–30
Scope of hazard, Job Safety Analysis (JSA)
and changes in, 56
Severity categories, preliminary hazard
analysis, 90
Sneak Circuit Analysis (SCA), 180–183
advantages and disadvantages, 181–183
input requirements, 181
Software Fault Hazard Analysis, 184
Software Fault Tree, 184–185
Software Hazard Analysis (SWHA),
183–185
Software Preliminary Hazard Analysis,
184
Software System Hazard Analysis, 185
Special use analysis, techniques for,
179–186
Standard deviation, statistical analysis, 66
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
230
INDEX
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs),
government contracts, 31–36
Statement of Work (SOW), system safety
requirements, 31–36
Statistical analysis:
overview of, 64–67
quantitative risk assessment, 26
Strict liability, human factors element and,
43–44
Subsystem Hazard Analysis (SSHA), 72–78
basic principles, 91–98
Energy Trace and Barrier Analysis and,
112
example, 93–98
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis and,
123–132
fault or functional hazard analysis,
136–137
Functional Hazard Analysis and,
136–137
report guidelines, 92–93
risk evaluation, 95–98
sample worksheet, 91–92, 97
system description in, 93–95
Support tasks, life cycle phases and,
37–39
Symbols, in MORT analysis, 160–161
System, defined, 15
System Hazard Analysis (SHA), 72–78,
91–98
Energy Trace and Barrier Analysis and,
112
fault or functional hazard analysis,
136–137
Functional Hazard Analysis and,
136–137
Operating and Support Hazard Analysis
and, 102–103
System operation, Failure Mode and Effects
Analysis and, 128–132
System safety:
acronyms and abbreviations, 195–198
analytical techniques and methods, 36,
69
criteria, 18–23
future research issues, 187–188
glossary of terms, 15–16
government contracts and, 31–36
historical background, 3–7
industrial safety and, 7–8
information and training sources,
189–193
Job Safety Analysis (JSA) and, 48–50
life cycle phases and process of, 36–39
management commitment to, 27–28
precedence, 20–23
process, 16–17
professional organizations, 189–191
program process flow, 31–32
program requirements, 29–39
risk assessment and, 8–13
techniques and methods, 11–13
System safety precedence, defined, 15
System Safety Program Plan (SSPP),
government contracts, 31–36
Systems engineering, system safety and,
4–7
Task analysis. See also Job Safety Analysis
(JSA) (Job Hazard Analysis (JHA))
industrial safety and, 47–48
Temperature extremes, 77
Total reliability concept, industrial safety
and, 43–44
Training programs:
sources for, 189–193
system safety integration in, 22–23,
58–59
Update Operating and Support Hazard
Analyses, 102–103
Variance, statistical analysis, 66
Warning devices, incorporation in system
safety, 21–22
What-If analysis:
background, 168–169
definitions, 168
node concepts in, 170–171
objectives, 169
overview, 167–178
procedures for, 171–175
reference data requirements, 169–170
reporting guidelines, 176–177
steps in, 171–173
team members, 169
worksheet, 173–175
Work environment, system safety process,
16–17
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
WILEY END USER LICENSE
AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook
EULA.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

