Basic Management 
Accounting 
for the Hospitality 
Industry
Second edition
M.N. Chibili MSc, MA

Basic Management Accounting for the Hospitality Industry


Basic Management
Accounting for the
Hospitality Industry
Michael N. Chibili
Second edition
Noordhoff Uitgevers Groningen | Houten

Cover design: G2K Designers
Cover illustration: www.stocksy.com
If you have any comments or queries about this or any other publication,
please contact: Noordhoff Uitgevers bv, Afdeling Hoger Onderwijs,
Antwoordnummer 13, 9700 VB Groningen, e-mail: info@noordhoff.nl
0 / 16
© 2016 Noordhoff Uitgevers bv Groningen/Houten, the Netherlands
Apart from the exceptions provided by or pursuant to the Copyright Act of
1912, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in an automated
retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior written
approval of the publisher. Insofar as the making of reprographic copies from
this publication is permitted on the basis of Article 16h of the Copyright Act of
1912, the compensation owed must be provided to the Stichting Reprorecht
(postbus 3060, 2130 KB Hoofddorp, Netherlands, www.cedar.nl/reprorecht). To
use specific sections of this publication for anthologies, readers or other
compilations (Article 16 of the Copyright Act of 1912), contact the Stichting
PRO (Stichting Publicatie- en Reproductierechten Organisatie, postbus 3060,
2130 KB Hoofddorp, Netherlands, www.cedar.nl/pro).
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise without prior written permission of the publisher.
ISBN (ebook) 978-90-01-86735-5
ISBN 978-90-01-86733-1
NUR 782

Preface to the first edition
Welcome to the Basic Management Accounting for the Hospitality
Industry. This text provides an introduction to the basic management
accounting concepts and applications relevant to students in any
hospitality or tourism-related education. It examines the basic
concepts and shows how they can be used to improve the quality of
decisions made by managers in the related fields. Geared towards
students who use English as a second language, the language is simple
and in case of need, the concepts are illustrated with worked examples
to ease their understanding. This book is introductory in nature, and
whenever necessary, the student can independently explore some of
the topics in other books which could provide more detailed
information.
In this text, I have interchangeably made use of company, business
entity, concern, organization, operation, and establishment, to mean
the same in the sense that they represent the desire for
entrepreneurship with the profit motive in mind. It should not be
confusing to anyone. The topics have been selected based on the need
of the target group and include the introduction to management
accounting, the balance sheet, the profit and loss account statement,
adjustments to the balance sheet and the profit and loss account
statement, the cash flow statement, analyzing financial statements,
ratio analysis and types of ratios, management of working capital, cost
management, pricing and revenue management, cost-volume-profit
analysis, internal control, forecasting, budgeting and variance
analysis, and lastly, capital investment decisions. Each chapter ends
with a complete glossary of the key words, five multiple choice
questions and four practice exercises.
I want to place on record my gratitude to colleagues and friends for
the advice and help I received in the course of writing this text. I am
particularly grateful to Klaas-Wybo van der Hoek for believing in me.
The management and staff of the Mövenpick Hotel, Amsterdam are
recognized for their help. To the dean – Hans Zwart, and my
colleagues of the financial management team in the Institute of
International Hospitality Management – Marcus Hoekstra, Ale
Hoekstra, Jurgen Coerts, and Cor Penning, I say once again thanks for
the support through all the stages of writing this text. For help with
reviewing the manuscript, I would have not been able to complete
this text without the gallant assistance of the following colleagues and
students – Harry Jippes, Eef Heinhuis, Billy Stelljes, Richard Henricus
(Rik) van der Berg, David Dirk de Roest, Stephanie Enninga, Frank
Schoenmaker, Harpinder Singh, Sjoerd Gehrels, Koen Bramer, Annika
Jochheim, and Osborne Green. Special thanks go to Miss Ramona
Nolde who has worked tirelessly to make sure that the content should
be as error-free as it is humanly possible. 

This book is accompanied by a website www.hospitalitymanagement.
noordhoff.nl that contains exercises and other materials for both
students and lecturers. 
As a new book, comments and suggestions will be very welcome.
Michael N. Chibili
February 2010
For Lebongwo, Njingu and Afiandem
in the hope that their lights shine brightly

Preface to the second edition
Welcome to the second edition of Basic Management Accounting for the
Hospitality Industry that includes several changes. These changes have
been driven by all the responses and comments from both colleagues
who are using its first edition, as well as the students who used it.
Many thanks are due to all of them for their useful and constructive
ideas, comments and feedback that have contributed to what I hope
will be an improved edition.
The foremost changes content-wise are as follows:
1 The changes that have affected financial statements due to the
evolution of the Uniform System of Accounts for the Lodging
Industry (USALI) from its 10th edition to the 11th edition have been
taken into account in the major financial statements especially as
they affect the contents of Chapter 3 and Chapter 5.
2 The essence of the International Financial Reporting Standards
(IFRS) has now been more infused into the text.
3 Additional relevant ratios have been integrated into, while
redundant ones (due to the changes in the USALI) have been
removed from the text especially in Chapter 7, and the
performance review process has been simplified.
4 The Cash Conversion Cycle has been included and illustrated in
Chapter 8.
5 Information on price elasticity of demand has been extended in
Chapter 10 with additional information related to income and
cross elasticities.
6 Risk and uncertainty analyses has been extended, and the weighted
average cost of capital (WACC) has been included.
7 The Break-even Time (BET) has been included as one of the
methods of analysing capital investments.
8 Where appropriate, the tables have been updated.
I believe that this up-to-date and comprehensive coverage of basic
management accounting within the hospitality industry makes this
second edition an essential addition to the library of any hospitality
management student. It is my hope that students and lecturers alike
will find it to be a significant contribution to the field of hospitality
management education and keep on ensuring its continued success.
Michael N. Chibili
September 2015


© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Table of contents
1
Introduction to management accounting 15
1.1
Setting the scene 16
1.1.1
Information needs – management and external users 16
1.1.2
Financial accounting and management accounting 17
1.1.3
Basic principles of accounting 18
1.1.4
The management accounting process 21
1.2
Understand the hospitality industry 22
1.2.1
The nature of the hospitality industry 22
1.2.1.1
Goods and services offered 23
1.2.1.2
The distinguishing features 26
1.2.2
Industry organization and recent developments 27
1.2.3
Summary of the key characteristics of the hospitality industry 28
Glossary 29
Multiple choice questions 31
Exercises 31
2
The balance sheet 35
2.1
The components of a balance sheet 36
2.1.1
Assets 36
2.1.2
Liabilities 40
2.1.2.1
Current liabilities 40
2.1.2.2
Long term liabilities 42
2.1.3
Owners’ equity 43
2.2
Formats of balance sheets 46
2.3
Establishing simple balance sheets 47
2.4
The Statement of Retained Earnings 50
Glossary 52
Multiple choice questions 54
Exercises 54
3
The profit and loss account statement 57
3.1
Definition and categories of activities 58
3.2
Formats and content of the profit and loss account statements 60
Glossary 67
Multiple choice questions 68
Exercises 68
4
Adjustments to the balance sheet and the profit and loss account 71
4.1
Accounting conventions – accruals and recognition 72
4.2
Adjusting the accounts 72
4.2.1
Stock (inventory) 72
4.2.2
Accounts receivable 74
4.2.3
Depreciation and amortization 75
4.2.4
Returns of goods 76
4.2.5
Discounts 77

4.2.6
Delivery charges 77
Glossary 78
Multiple choice questions 79
Exercises 79
5
The cash flow statement (also called the statement of cash flow) 81
5.1
Cash in the business 82
5.1.1
The importance of cash in the business 82
5.1.2
Differentiating profits from cash 83
5.1.3
The need for cash flow statements 83
5.1.4
Categories of activities 84
5.2
Establishing cash flow statements 86
5.2.1
Determine the net cash flow from operating activities 86
5.2.2
Determine the net cash flow from investing activities  88
5.2.3
Determine the net cash flow from financing activities 89
5.2.4
Collate all the previous 3 net cash flows into the definitive SCF 89
5.3
A worked example in the establishment of the SCF using the indirect 
method 89
Glossary 95
Multiple choice questions 96
Exercises 96
6
Analyzing financial statements 99
6.1
Purposes of analyzing statements 100
6.2
Horizontal analysis 105
6.3
Base-year analysis 107
6.4
Vertical analysis 108
Glossary 112
Multiple choice questions 113
Exercises  113
7
Ratio analysis and types of ratios 117
7.1
Purpose and usefulness of ratio analysis 118
7.2
Classification of ratios 119
7.2.1
Liquidity ratios 120
7.2.2
Solvency ratios 122
7.2.3
Profitability ratios 124
7.2.4
Activity ratios 131
7.2.5
Operating ratios 134
7.3
Performance review process 136
7.4
DuPont analysis 138
Glossary 141
Multiple choice questions 146
Exercises 146
8
Management of working capital 149
8.1
The importance of working capital management 150
8.2
The working capital cycle 150
Glossary 160
Multiple choice questions 161
Exercises 161
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

9
Cost management 165
9.1
The nature of costs and assumptions 166
9.2
Types of costs 166
9.3
Activity-based costing 169
9.4
Allocating indirect (overhead) costs to the operating departments 172
9.4.1
Responsibility accounting 172
9.4.2
Determining allocation bases 173
9.4.3
Common methods of cost allocation 174
9.4.4
Illustration of the direct method of cost allocation 176
9.4.5
Illustration of the step method of cost allocation 178
9.5
Separating mixed-costs between their fixed and variable elements 181
9.5.1
High/low two-point method 182
9.5.2
Scatter diagram 185
9.5.3
Regression analysis 186
Glossary 189
Multiple choice questions 191
Exercises 191
10
Pricing and Revenue Management 195
10.1
The importance of pricing and the relationship between price and quantity 196
10.2
Approaches to pricing 202
10.3
Pricing rooms 203
10.3.1
The rule of a thousand approach 203
10.3.2
The bottom up approach (Hubbart formula or required rate of return) 203
10.3.3
Relative room size approach 205
10.3.4
Differential room pricing 207
10.3.4.1
Calculating single and double rates 207
10.3.4.2
Integrating the effects of seasonality 209
10.3.5
Room rate discounting 210
10.4
Pricing food and beverage products 212
10.4.1
Subjective pricing methods 213
10.4.1.1
The reasonable price method 213
10.4.1.2
The highest price method 213
10.4.1.3
The loss leader method 213
10.4.1.4
The intuitive price method 213
10.4.2
Objective pricing methods 213
10.4.2.1
Using a mark-up multiplier 214
10.4.2.2
Contribution margin pricing method 217
10.4.2.3
Ratio pricing method 218
10.4.2.4
Simple prime costs method 219
10.4.2.5
Specific prime costs method 221
10.5
Menu engineering 225
10.6
Revenue management 229
Glossary 232
Multiple choice questions 234
Exercises 234
11
Cost-volume-profit analysis 237
11.1
Definition, assumptions and limitations 238
11.2
Contribution margin 238
11.3
Breakeven analysis 239
11.3.1
Establishing the breakeven point 239
11.3.2
Single service analysis 240
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
11.3.3
Other considerations in breakeven analysis 243
11.3.3.1
First situation – two room types 243
11.3.3.2
Second situation – two room types plus additional services 244
11.3.3.3
Third situation – integrating desired profit levels 246
Glossary 248
Multiple choice questions 249
Exercises  249
12
Internal control 251
12.1
Need for internal control 252
12.2
Special characteristics of the hospitality industry from an internal control
perspective 253
12.3
Principles of internal control 254
12.4
Basic internal control proposals 259
12.5
Bank reconciliation 267
Glossary 270
Multiple choice questions 271
Exercises  271
13
Forecasting 273
13.1
Nature and limitations of forecasting 274
13.2
Understanding historical data patterns 275
13.3
Approaches to forecasting 276
13.3.1
Qualitative forecasting methods 277
13.3.2
Quantitative forecasting methods 277
13.3.2.1
Time series forecasting methods 278
13.3.2.2
Causal forecasting methods 281
13.4
Selecting forecasting methods 283
13.5
Forecasting in hospitality industry practice 284
Glossary 285
Multiple choice questions 287
Exercises 287
14
Budgeting and variance analysis 291
14.1
The budget and the budget process 292
14.2
Objectives of budgeting 293
14.3
Approaches to budgeting and types of budgets 294
14.4
Types of budgets 298
14.5
Variance analysis 300
14.5.1
Identifying and attributing variances 300
14.5.2
Variance analysis overview 301
14.5.3
Analyzing variances to ascertain causes 302
Glossary 308
Multiple choice questions 310
Exercises 310
15
Capital investment decisions 313
15.1
Types of capital budgeting decisions 314
15.2
Basic methods for making investment decisions 315
15.3
Simple and compound interest 320
15.4
Process of discounting 322
15.5
Understanding factor tables 323
15.6
Discounted cash flow (DCF) methods 332

15.7
Incidence of taxes on DCF analysis 344
15.8
Choosing between projects 348
Glossary 350
Multiple choice questions 352
Exercises 352
References for further reading 355
Answers to end of chapter multiple choice questions 357
Appendix Factor tables 359
About the author 372
Picture credits 373
Index 374
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv


Introduction to
management accounting
1.1
Setting the scene
1.2
Understanding the hospitality industry
Information is very important for the management process and
accounting is one of the main information systems that can be found
in an organization. It is as such necessary that managers within an
organization obtain a basic understanding of accounting for them to
be able to effectively and responsibly carry out their management
functions. The information needs to come from all the areas of their
management activities as well as used in all the related areas. Section
1.1 sets the scene: by showing how information is generated and used
within an organization; by differentiating management from financial
accounting; by introducing the basic principles of accounting; and by
introducing the management accounting process. In Section 1.2 the
hospitality industry is introduced with the aim of highlighting some
of its special characteristics as well as how it is organized.
15
1
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

1.1
Setting the scene
Organizations of very different types affect us on a daily basis by
providing all the goods and services needed for our existence. All
these different types of organizations have two things in common.
First, every organization will have its set of goals or objectives. An
example is that of the Compass Hotels Ltd. They state their goals and
objectives in the following way: “Our goals and objectives are
straightforward and seek to ensure we run a professional, profitable and
ethical company, building relationships with suppliers and investors, driving
business in the hotels and developing the business as a whole”. In these
goals, they have highlighted some important aspects of their
relationship with all their major stakeholders (professional –
management and employees; profitable – shareholders; ethical – all
stakeholders) as well as mentioning their suppliers and investors.
Second, for an organization to be able to meet their established goals,
its managers will need information. This section attempts to show
why this information is needed, who uses it, as well as establish the
general characteristics of the hospitality industry. The structure of the
subsections is as follows:
1.1.1
Information needs – management and external users
1.1.2
Financial accounting and management accounting
1.1.3
Basic principles of accounting
1.1.4
The management accounting process
1.1.1
Information needs – management and external users
Before proceeding with the discussion on managements’ need for, and
use of information, accounting will be defined. Accounting is
generally concerned with the reporting, summarizing and recording
in monetary terms the transactions of an individual or an
organization. A basic definition of accounting as provided by the
American Institute of Certified and Public Accountants (AICPA) in
1941 is “the art of recording, classifying, and summarizing, in a significant
manner and in terms of money, transactions and events which are in part at
least, of a financial character, and interpreting the results thereof”.
However, this definition of accounting left some issues that could not
be fully understood. In this regard, the American Accounting
Principles Board in 1970 defined accounting as a service activity:
“Its function is to provide quantitative information primarily financial in
nature, about economic entities that is intended to be useful in making
economic decisions and in making reasoned choices among alternative
courses of actions”.
To the individual, accounting information can be used in planning
future spending levels, planning the acquisition of additional finance,
controlling spending levels, and making decisions on how best to
spend their money. As such, at this level accounting basically has
3 functions which are; planning, controlling and decision support.
On the contrary, at the level of an organization, accounting is used to
control its activities, plan the acquisition of finance, plan future
16 1 Introduction to management accounting
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

activities, and finally report upon the activities and successes of the
organization to other users.
The users of accounting information can be broadly split into two
major categories; the internal users and the external users. The
internal users would basically be the management of the organization.
They will need this information due to the following reasons:
planning; controlling; stewardship; and decision making. This type of
accounting is by nature mostly managerial and would differ
depending on the type of organization. The external users would
generally be limited to the other major stakeholders of a company.
These will include the employees of a company, the owners, lenders,
suppliers, customers, the local community, and the government.
Generally, these stakeholders are provided with accounting
information through the establishment of annual reports. This type of
accounting would on the contrary be mostly financial in nature.
1.1.2
Financial accounting and management accounting
Financial accounting is that area of accounting mostly concerned
with the preparation of financial statements destined for decision
makers. These decision makers may include shareholders, suppliers,
financial institutions, employees, local authorities, and government
agencies. The fundamental need of financial accounting is to bring to
a minimum any possible conflicts between principals and agents by
measuring and monitoring the agent’s performance and reporting the
results to the interested users on an annual or more frequent basis.
There are many similarities between financial and management
accounting, because they all collect data from a company’s basic
accounting system. This basic accounting system is a system of
procedures, personnel and computers used to accumulate the financial
data from within a company. It should be noted that financial
accounting is generally regulated by various standards at the
international level. Exhibit 1.1 shows in a table form the basic
differences between financial accounting and management
accounting arranged around some simple features.
Management accounting is much more concerned with the provision
and use of accounting information to managers within an
organization. This permits the managers to be able to make informed
business decisions and as such become better equipped in their
management and control functions. As opposed to financial
accounting, management accounting information is usually
confidential and used by management alone. Secondly, it is forward
looking, historical, and computed using extensive management
information systems and internal controls instead of complying with
accounting standards, be they national or international.
Management accounting experience and knowledge can be obtained
from various fields and functions within a company such as
information management, treasury, auditing, marketing, valuation,
pricing, logistics, etc. Some of the primary services performed by 
1.1 Setting the scene 17
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

management accountants can comprise the following: cost allocation;
annual budgeting; capital budgeting; product profitability; cost
benefit analysis; cost-volume-profit analysis; variance analysis; cost
analysis, etc.
1.1.3
Basic principles of accounting
The basic accounting principles form the foundation of the
understanding of accounting methods. These are called the generally
accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and they provide the basis for
the preparation of financial statements. Below are the most important
principles, followed by an introduction of the USALI and IFRS:
Cost principle
This principle indicates that a transaction should be recorded at its
acquisition price or cash cost and this should represent its accounting
value. It is difficult for example to compare income statements for
different periods during periods of long-lasting inflation or deflation.
There are however some exceptions such as in the case of valuing
inventory for resale, which can be done in terms of current currency
values instead of the historical value.
Business entity principle
This principle indicates that accounting and financial statements are
based on the concept that each business maintains its own set of
accounts and that these accounts are separate from those of the
owners. By this principle, the separation of the personal transactions
of the owners from the company is an accounting or more so legal
obligation that must be maintained. It should be this way even in the
Exhibit 1.1 Comparison between financial accounting and management accounting
Features
Financial Accounting
Management Accounting
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Who
Principally outsiders to the organization (investors, Principally insiders of the organization (the 
creditors, the state, analysts, and reporters)
management and operators)
What
General information on the whole organization
Internal information on the subunits of the
organization
Type
Financial and monetary data
Economic, financial, and physical data such as
data related to employees, sales volumes, and
customers etc.
Rules
Regulated by the various accounting standards’ 
Unregulated but mostly based on cost/benefit 
boards and based on the GAAP
analysis
Characteristics
Factual information based on reliability, 
Estimated information to ensure efficiency, 
objectivity, accuracy, and consistency
relevance and timeliness
Time
Historical perspective
Historical, current as well as forward looking
such as sales budgets and cash flow forecasts
Format
Determined by different regulatory elements such 
No pre-determined format but aligned to the 
as company law, accounting standards and the 
specific wishes of management
stock exchanges
Frequency
Delayed with emphasis on annual reports
Continuous reporting
18 1 Introduction to management accounting
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

cases whereby such owners work in or for the company. The assets,
debts and expenditures of the owners form no part of the company.
Time period principle
This principle indicates that a company has to complete its analysis to
report the financial condition and profitability of its business
operation over a specific operating time period. This could be daily,
weekly, monthly, quarterly, semi-annually, or annually. An accounting
year is an accounting period of one year. In hospitality businesses,
statements are regularly prepared on monthly or even weekly basis.
Going concern principle
This principle indicates that at the time the business is preparing its
statements, it is expected to live forever and that liquidation should
not be a prospect. Generally, the going concern principle assumes that
a company will operate indefinitely. This also assumes that the cost of
business assets will be recovered over time by way of profits that are
generated by successful operations.
Monetary unit principle
This principle indicates that the financial statements should be based
on transactions expressed in the primary national (or regional in the
case of some European countries with the Euro) monetary unit. This
should be used to record the numerical values of business exchanges
and operating transactions. The monetary unit also expresses financial
information within the financial statements and reports. 
Objectivity principle
This principle indicates that all accounting transactions should be
justified as much as possible on objective evidence. This evidence is
required to support a transaction before it can be entered into the
accounting records. Some examples include the receipt for the
payment of a guest cheque, or an invoice for the purchase of a new
oven. In rare situations where such evidence cannot be obtained,
expert estimates can be assumed.
Full disclosure principle
This principle indicates that the financial statement should provide all
information necessary for the understanding of the financial
statement. Financial statements are primarily concerned with a past
period. This principle states that any future event that can have an
impact on the financial position of the business should be disclosed to
the readers of the statements and these disclosures will normally be
found in the footnotes to the statements. These disclosures could be
of the following types: changes in accounting practices during the
period, any contingent liabilities, and exceptional events.
Consistency principle
This principle indicates that once an accounting method has been
chosen by management, this should be used from period to period
unless a change is necessary and this change must be disclosed. This
principle was established to ensure comparability and consistency of
the procedures and techniques used in the preparation of financial
statements from one accounting period to the next.
1.1 Setting the scene 19
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Matching principle
This principle indicates that expenses should be related to their
revenues. This principle requires that for each accounting period all
sales revenues earned, whether received or not, must be recognized.
It goes the same way with operating expenses, in the sense that they
should all be recognized during the period, whether paid or not paid.
This principle ensures that resulting net incomes or net losses provide
the most accurate estimate of profit or loss for the period.
Conservatism principle
This principle indicates that expenses should be recognized as soon as
possible whereas revenues should be recognized only when they are
verified. A business should not understate its expenses or liabilities.
On the other hand it should not overstate its assets or revenues.
Materiality principle
This principle indicates that events or information must be accounted
for if they make a difference to the user of the financial information.
This means that, items that may affect the decision of a user of
financial information which are considered important must be
reported in a correct way.
Realization principle
This principle indicates that revenues are only recognized only when
it is earned. Generally, realization occurs when goods are sold or a
service is rendered.
The Uniform System of Accounts for the Lodging Industry (USALI) in brief
Most organizations in the hospitality industry (hotels, motels, resorts,
restaurants, and clubs) use the Uniform System of Accounts for the
Lodging Industry (USALI). This was initiated by the Hotel Association
of New York in the original Uniform System of Accounts for Hotels
(USAH) in 1925. The system was designed for classifying, organizing,
and presenting financial information so that uniformity prevailed and
comparison of financial data among hotels was possible. A major
advantage of accounting uniformity is that information can be
collected and compared between similar organizations within the
hospitality industry. Changes are constantly made to the USALI in
order to keep pace with the evolving hospitality business
environment, and it is now in its 11th revised edition (2014).
The International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) in brief
An accounting standard is a set of rules and regulations containing
detailed guidance on the preparation of financial accounts. Since the
1970s the International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC)
replaced in 2001 by the International Accounting Standards Board
(IASB) has been foreseeing and is responsible for the establishment of
international standards known as International Financial Reporting
Standards (IFRS). IFRS began as an attempt to harmonize accounting
across the European Union but the value of harmonization quickly
made the concept attractive around the world.
Accounting provides companies, investors, regulators and others with
a standardised way to describe the financial performance of an entity.
20 1 Introduction to management accounting
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Accounting standards present preparers of financial statements with a
set of rules to abide by when preparing an entity’s accounts, thus
ensuring standardisation across the market. Companies listed on
public stock exchanges are legally required to publish financial
statements in accordance with the relevant accounting standards.
The International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) is a single set of
accounting standards, developed and maintained by the IASB with the
intention of those standards being capable of being applied on a globally
consistent basis – by developed, emerging and developing economies –
thus providing investors and other users of financial statements with the
ability to compare the financial performance of publicly listed companies
on a like-for-like basis with their international peers.
The IFRS are designed as a common global language for business affairs so
that company accounts are understandable and comparable across
international boundaries. They are a consequence of growing international
shareholding and trade and are particularly important for companies that
have dealings in several countries as is the case with many hospitality
operations that have chains and brands operating across many countries at
the same time. The IFRS are progressively replacing the many different
national accounting standards. The IFRS are now mandated for use by
more than 100 countries, including the European Union and by more
than two-thirds of the G20 countries. The G20 and other international
organisations have consistently supported the work of the IASB and its
mission of global accounting standards. Since 2005, the European Union
has decided that all listed companies should prepare their financial
statements in compliance with these international standards.
1.1.4
The management accounting process
The management accounting process revolves around the identification,
measurement, accumulation, analysis, preparation, interpretation and
communication of information used by management to plan, evaluate
and control and to assure appropriate use of, and accountability for
resources. The process can be summarized in the following four topics:
Setting business objectives
This is the identification of the objectives of the organization and
directing the activities of the business to meet these objectives.
Assessing alternatives and making decisions and plans
The management will need information about alternative actions it
can take. With such information it will be able to make decisions and
detailed plans for the future.
Monitoring the outcomes
The management will use the information to assess how correctly
their plans have succeeded or their objectives met.
Controlling and redefining its objectives and plans
Based on the review of planned and actual outcomes, the management
might find it necessary to redefine the general objectives of the
organization and as such redefine plans to achieve these new objectives.
1.1 Setting the scene 21
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

1.2
Understand the hospitality industry
One of the fastest growing sectors of the economies of today is the
hospitality industry. It is an expanding multi-billion euro business. It is
exciting, never boring and offers unlimited opportunities. The hospitality
industry is diverse enough for people to work in different areas of interest
and still be employed within the hospitality industry. It covers such areas
as lodging, restaurant, travel and tourism, institutional management,
recreational management and meeting and convention planning
industries. All of these separate yet related segments of the hospitality
industry are interrelated to deliver kind and generous services to guests. It
is one of the oldest businesses in history. People have always gone out to
eat sometimes and travelled for work or leisure purposes. The structure of
the subsections is as follows:
1.2.1
The nature of the hospitality industry
1.2.2
The organization of the hospitality industry and recent
developments
1.2.3
Summary of the key characteristics of the hospitality
industry
1.2.1
The nature of the hospitality industry
People all over the world are called on a daily basis to travel for a
variety of reasons. These could be for business, tourism or simply to
visit friends and relatives. Whatever the reasons behind their travel,
many of them will end up staying in hotels or other types of
temporary accommodation. Some of these types of accommodation
are not only places to stay, but are considered destinations in their
own right. In the Arnold Encyclopaedia of Real Estate a destination
hotel is defined as a place of lodging not chosen for convenience and
not chosen for people in transit to other areas. The following typically
are characteristics of a destination hotel:
·
Amenities which are quite complete and self-contained
·
Upscale nature of the lodging operation
·
Distinctive characteristics of the building, gardens or adjacent
natural feature
·
Activity set which makes leaving the property unnecessary
There are several distinct types of destination hotels that would
include geographically remote locations, urban settings, conference
centre oriented, specialized activities, unusual construction (e.g. ice
hotels, cave hotels or tree-house hotels), as well as boutique hotels.
Resort hotels and casino hotels are very good examples of destination
hotels and the article in Exhibit 1.2 portrays the unusual story of the
world’s first ice hotel. The structure of the subsections is as follows:
1.2.1.1 introduces the goods and services offered while 1.2.1.2
illustrates its distinguishing features.
22 1 Introduction to management accounting
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

■Exhibit 1.2 Jukkasjärvi Icehotel
What is ICEHOTEL? A hotel built of ice and snow, would be the most
common response. The first and the largest in the world, someone might add.
But we have more thrilling stories to tell. Lean closer to your computer screen
and we’ll whisper them in your ear.
Like most companies, we have a history and a business concept. Our ideas
originate from the place we stand on; Jukkasjärvi. The river Torne that flows
outside our office windows, the cold arctic climate, The Northern Lights and
the Midnight Sun.
Every season allows us to get inspired by the river, whether it is crystal clear
ice, rapids shooting on a riverboat or a magnificent, recently caught grayling.
This is what we have promised to offer the rest of the world; with Jukkasjärvi
and Torne River as a starting point, develop and offer sensuous, inspiring and
unique experiences within art, nature, accommodation and gastronomy. That
reflects all seasons of the year.
So it is not a only a hotel we build each winter, it is an ephemeral art project.
And it is not a menu we create for every season, we cultivate the many
flavours of Swedish Lapland.
Each year, we attract visitors from all over the world to a little village in
Lapland, 200 km north of the Arctic Circle. Many of them we take further
north, explore the high mountains, all the way to the northern Norway to visit
the fjords.
Others encounter us and the Torne River ice in world cities such as London
and Tokyo, or at a trade fair in Chicago or Barcelona. See, our river is not only
the most well-travelled one – it is also famous all over the world.
Source: www.icehotel.com
The nature of the hospitality industry can be summarized under the
following topics
1.2.1.1
Goods and services offered
The hotels and other accommodations are as different as the many
family and business travellers they accommodate. The industry
includes all types of lodging, from luxurious 5-star hotels to youth
hostels and RV parks. While many provide simply a place to spend the
night, others cater to longer stays by providing food service,
recreational activities, and meeting rooms. The total number of hotel
and other accommodation rooms in the world is difficult to
determine as new rooms are constructed on a daily basis. Exhibits 1.3
and 1.4 present an evaluation carried out by MKG Consulting in 2008
showing the 2008 European Hotel rankings split by both the groups
and the brands within the groups.
.......................................................................................................................................................
1.2 Understand the hospitality industry 23
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Exhibit 1.3 Top 10 Hotel groups in Europe 2008
2008 European hotel ranking
Top 10 hotel groups (27 countries of the EU)
Rank 
Rank 
Groups
Hotels 
Hotels
Rooms
Rooms
Evol.
2008
2007
2008
2007
2008
2007
Ch.07/08
–––––
–––––
–––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
1
1
ACCOR
2 207
2 205
239 507
241 046
–0.6%
2
3
IHG
541
505
82 123
77 721
5.7%
3
2
BEST WESTERN
1 201
1 215
79 205
80 318
–1.4%
4
5
GROUPE DU LOUVRE
844
823
58 411
56 339
3.7%
5
8
SOL MELIA
199
198
42 448
41 771
1.6%
6
7
NH HOTELES
298
270
41 270
38 466
7.3%
7
6
TUI
168
190
41 322
48 843
–15.4%
8
9
CARLSON/REZIDOR
207
195
39 079
37 271
4.9%
9
4
HILTON HOTEL
144
257
37 333
56 675
–34.1%
10
11
CHOICE INTERNATIONAL
369
390
35 411
32 243
3.4%
–––––
–––––
–––––––
–––––––
––––––
TOTAL 
6 178
6 188
696 149
710 693
–2.0%
Source: Data base MKG Hospitality – official supplier of hotel chains – March 2008
Exhibit 1.4 Top 20 Hotel brands in Europe 2008
2008 European hotel ranking
Top 20 hotel brands (27 countries of the EU)
Rank 
Rank 
Brands
Groups
Hotels
Rooms
Evol.
2008
2007
2008
2008
Ch.08/07
–––––
–––––
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
1
1
BEST WESTERN
BEST WESTERN
1 201
79 205
–1.4%
2
2
IBIS
ACCOR
641
67 112
1.9%
3
3
MERCURE
ACCOR
536
61 406
0.7%
4
5
HOLIDAY INN
IHG
292
44 893
5.5%
5
4
NOVOTEL
ACCOR
252
40 244
–5.9%
6
6
HILTON
HILTON CORP.
137
36 162
2.8%
7
7
PREMIER INN
WHITBREAD
505
31 000
11.0%
8
8
NH HOTELS
NH
254
34 424
9.0%
9
9
ETAP HOTEL
ACCOR
365
34 090
8.4%
10
11
RADISSON
REZIDOR/CARLSON
118
25 362
2.6%
11
13
CAMPANILE
LOUVRE HOTELS
382
24 220
1.6%
12
12
FORMULE 1
ACCOR
315
23 289
–2.7%
13
16
TRAVELODGE
DUBAI INVEST. CAP.
331
22 375
17.4%
14
14
SCANDIC
SCANDIC
114
20 694
-0.5%
15
15
MARRIOTT
MARRIOTT
84
19 616
0.8%
16
17
HOLIDAY INN EXPRESS
IHG
178
18 818
9.9%
17
19
RAMADA HOTEL
WYNDHAM HOTELS
145
18 056
8.4%
18
10
RIU HOTELS
TUI
58
17 911
–19.1%
19
20
QUALITY INN
CHOICE HOTELS
145
16 998
–2.3%
20
24
PREMIERE CLASSE
LOUVRE HOTELS
219
15 614
3.0%
Source: Data base MKG Hospitality – official supplier of hotel chains – March 2008
24 1 Introduction to management accounting
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

MKG Consulting equally announced the following prospects for the
global hospitality industry as contained in Exhibit 1.5.
■Exhibit 1.5 Global hotel rooms horizon 2015
First 20 hotel groups announce 1.1 million rooms by 2015
For the years to come, the major hotel groups have announced tremendous
developments. Their projected pipelines signed or under way, are particularly
important:
·
The first 20 hotel groups have announced the opening of 8 500 hotels to
come with 1.1 million new rooms by the end of 2015, that is a 20%
increase of their supply.
·
Majority of the projects should concern:
–
Northern America with 1 000 hotels for 400 000 rooms
–
Pacific Asia with 1 100 hotels for 230 000 rooms
–
Europe with 1 000 hotels for 180 000 rooms
–
South America, 780 hotels for 80 000 rooms
–
Africa and Middle East with 250 hotels and 70 000 rooms
As an example, Marriott announces 80 000 rooms, Accor more than 200 000
rooms by 2010, Hilton Hotels forecasts 900 hotels and 120 000 rooms, Choice
International goes towards 78 000 rooms and even the Chinese group Jin
Jiang has 22 000 new rooms under way.
Source: Data base MKG Hospitality – official supplier of hotel chains – March 2008
Hotels and motels make up the majority of establishments in the
hospitality industry and are generally classified as offering either full-
service or limited service. Full-service properties offer a variety of
services for their guests, but they almost always include at least one or
more restaurant and beverage service options – from coffee bars and
lunch counters to cocktail lounges and formal restaurants. They also
usually provide room service. Larger full-service properties usually
have a variety of retail shops on the premises, such as gift boutiques,
newsstands, and drug and cosmetics counters, some of which may be
geared to an exclusive clientele. Additionally, a number of full-service
hotels offer guests access to laundry and valet services, swimming
pools, beauty salons, and fitness centres or health spas. A small, but
growing, number of luxury hotel chains also manage condominium
units in combination with their transient rooms, providing both hotel
guests and condominium owners with access to the same services and
amenities.
The largest hotels often have banquet rooms, exhibit halls, and
spacious ballrooms to accommodate conventions, business meetings,
wedding receptions, and other social gatherings. Conventions and
business meetings are major sources of revenue for these properties.
Some commercial hotels are known as conference hotels – fully self-
contained entities specifically designed for large-scale meetings. They
provide physical fitness and recreational facilities for meeting
attendees, in addition to state-of-the-art audiovisual and technical
equipment, a business centre, and banquet services.
Limited-service hotels are free-standing properties that do not have
on-site restaurants or most other amenities that must be provided by a
staff other than the front desk or housekeeping. They usually offer
.................................................................................................................
1.2 Understand the hospitality industry 25
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

continental breakfasts, vending machines or small packaged items,
Internet access, and sometimes unattended game rooms or swimming
pools in addition to daily housekeeping services. The numbers of
limited-service properties have been growing. These properties are not
as costly to build and maintain. They appeal to budget-conscious
family vacationers and travellers who are willing to sacrifice amenities
for lower room prices.
1.2.1.2
The distinguishing features
Hotels can also be categorized based on a distinguishing feature
provided by the hotel:
Conference hotels
These provide meeting and banquet rooms, and usually food service,
to large groups of people. They are usually designed to meet the
business needs of the guests offering all types of services to cater for
the needs of the conference delegates.
Airport hotels
These are hotels located on airport properties in major urban markets.
These hotels permit guests to walk directly between one’s hotel room
and the flight boarding area and also save travellers time and money
related to ground transportation. If in addition they have conference
facilities, this adds to the convenience for meetings involving parties
from multiple destinations. They are particularly convenient for
guests with flight delays or cancellations.
Resort hotels
These offer luxurious surroundings with a variety of recreational
facilities, such as swimming pools, golf courses, tennis courts, game
rooms, and health spas, as well as planned social activities and
entertainment. Resorts typically are located in vacation destinations
or near natural settings, such as mountains, seashores, theme parks, or
other attractions. As a result, the business of many resorts fluctuates
with the season. Some resort hotels and motels provide additional
convention and conference facilities to encourage customers to
combine business with pleasure. During the off season, many of these
establishments seek for conventions, sales meetings, and incentive
tours to fill their otherwise empty rooms; some resorts even close for
the off-season.
Extended-stay hotels
These typically provide rooms or suites with fully equipped kitchens,
entertainment systems, office space with computer and telephone
lines, fitness centres, and other amenities. Typically, guests use these
hotels for a minimum of 5 consecutive nights often while on an
extended work assignment or lengthy vacation or family visit. All-suite
hotels offer a living room or sitting room in addition to a bedroom.
Casino hotels
These provide both lodging and legalized gaming on the same
premises. Along with the typical services provided by most full-service
hotels, casino hotels also contain casinos where patrons can wager at
26 1 Introduction to management accounting
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

table games, play slot machines, and make other bets. Some casino
hotels also contain conference and convention facilities.
Bed-and-breakfast inns
These provide lodging for overnight guests and are included in this
industry. Bed-and-breakfast inns provide short-term lodging in private
homes or small buildings converted for this purpose and are
characterized by highly personalized service and inclusion of breakfast
in the room rate. Their appeal is charm, with unusual service and decor.
RV parks and campgrounds
These cater to people who enjoy recreational camping at moderate
prices. Some parks and campgrounds provide service stations, general
stores, shower and toilet facilities, and coin-operated laundries. While
some are designed for overnight travellers only, others are for
vacationers who stay longer. Some camps provide accommodations,
such as cabins and fixed campsites, and other amenities, such as food
services, recreational facilities and equipment, and organized
recreational activities. Examples of these overnight camps include
children’s camps, family vacation camps, hunting and fishing camps,
and outdoor adventure retreats that offer trail riding, white-water
rafting, hiking, fishing, game hunting, and similar activities.
Other short-term lodging facilities in the hospitality industry include
guesthouses, or small cottages located on the same property as a main
residence, and youth hostels – dormitory-style hotels with few frills,
occupied mainly by students travelling on limited budgets. Also
included are rooming and boarding houses, such as fraternity houses,
sorority houses, off-campus dormitories, and workers’ camps. These
establishments provide temporary or longer term accommodations
that may serve as a principal residence for the period of occupancy.
These establishments also may provide services such as housekeeping,
meals, and laundry services.
1.2.2
Industry organization and recent developments
In recent years, the hotel industry has become dominated by a few
large hotel chains. To the traveller, familiar chain establishments
represent dependability and quality at predictable rates. Many chains
recognize the importance of brand loyalty to guests, and have
expanded the range of lodging options offered under one corporate
name, to include a full range of hotels from limited-service, economy-
type hotels to luxury inns. While these big corporations own some of
the hotels, many properties are independently owned but affiliated
with a chain through a franchise agreement or management contract.
As part of a chain, individual hotels can participate in the company’s
national reservations service or incentive program, thereby appearing
to belong to a larger enterprise.
For those who prefer more personalized service and a unique
experience, boutique hotels are becoming more popular. These smaller
hotels are generally found in urban locations and provide patrons
good service and more distinctive décor and food selection.
1.2 Understand the hospitality industry 27
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

While RV parks and campgrounds could be found around any country
and managed nationally or internationally, most small lodging
establishments are individually owned and operated by a single
owner, who may employ a small staff to help operate the business.
The lodging industry is moving towards more limited-service
properties mostly in suburban, residential, or commercial
neighbourhoods, often establishing hotels near popular restaurants.
Many full-service properties are limiting or quitting the food service
business altogether, choosing to contract out their food service
operations to third party restaurateurs, including long-term
arrangements with chain restaurant operators. Urban business and
entertainment districts are providing a greater mix of lodging options
to appeal to a wider range of travellers.
Increased competition among establishments in this industry has
spurred many independently owned and operated hotels and other
lodging places to join international reservation systems. This allows
travellers to make multiple reservations for lodging, airlines, and car
rentals with one telephone call or Internet search. Nearly all hotel
chains and many independent lodging facilities operate online
reservation systems through the Internet or maintain websites that
allow individuals to book rooms. Online marketing of properties is so
popular with guests that many hotels promote themselves with
elaborate websites and allow people to investigate availability and
rates.
1.2.3
Summary of the key characteristics of the hospitality
industry
The key characteristics of the hospitality industry are summarily listed
below:
·
As a service sector industry the production of the service is
inseparable from its delivery
·
The main product (rooms space) is highly perishable because if not
sold on any day, it is lost forever
·
The customers are regarded as guests who must always be satisfied
·
It is a round the clock (24/7) activity and it is very labour intensive
·
There is a lot of ethnic, cultural and religious diversity of both
guests and staff
·
The industry suffers from a lot of occupational and public health
and safety issues
·
It is seasonal and results from people making their spending
decisions after all other obligatory expenditures have been taken
care of (discretionary expenditure)
·
The industry has high fixed capital costs
·
The industry has highly irregular variable operating costs
·
The industry has low barriers to entry for capital and labour
·
There is a big inequality of functions within the industry and these
functions depend on each other
·
There is high sales volatility within the day, week, season, or as
defined by the economic cycles
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
28 1 Introduction to management accounting

Glossary
Accounting system – is the system of procedures, personnel and data
management tools that exist within a company and used to accumulate its
financial information. It is made up of the set of manual and computerized
procedures and controls that provide for identifying relevant transactions
or events; preparing accurate source documents, entering data into the
accounting records accurately, processing transactions accurately, updating
master files properly, and generating accurate documents and reports.
Business entity principle – is where the business is seen as an entity separate
from its owner(s) that keeps and presents financial records and prepares the
final accounts and financial statements. The accounting is kept for each
entity as a whole.
Conservatism principle – is where the accounting for a business should be fair
and reasonable. This principle indicates that expenses should be recognized
as soon as possible whereas revenues should be recognized only when they
are verified. A business should not understate its expenses or liabilities. On
the other hand it should not overstate its assets or revenues. 
Consistency principle – is where the accountants are expected to use the same
methods from period to period unless a change is necessary and this change
must be clearly explained in the financial statements. 
Cost principle – is where a company is required to record its transactions
(especially those related to fixed assets) at the acquisition price or cash cost
and this should represent the accounting value of the transactions.
Financial accounting – is the area of accounting concerned with reporting
financial information to external stakeholders.
Full disclosure principle – is the requirement that the financial statement
should provide all relevant and material facts necessary for the
understanding of the financial statement.
Generally accepted accounting principles – is a recognized common set of
accounting principles, standards, and procedures. GAAP is a combination of
accepted methods of doing accounting and policy board set authoritative
standards.
Going concern principle – is the assumption that the accounting entity will
maintain proper accounting records from the date of its establishment to
the date of its liquidation. 
Hospitality industry – the industry that is most concerned with the cordial
reception of guests. It is made up of a wide range of businesses, each of
which is dedicated to the service of people away from home.
29
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Management accounting – is the process of identification, measurement,
accumulation, analysis, preparation, interpretation, and communication of
financial information used by management to plan, evaluate, and control
within an organization and to assure appropriate use of, and accountability
for its resources. 
Matching principle – is the requirement for the recognition of all expenses
that are directly related to the realization of the revenues in the income
statement of the period.
Materiality principle – is the requirement that events or information must be
accounted for if they make a difference to the user of the financial
information.
Monetary unit principle – is the requirement that financial statements should
be based on transactions expressed in the primary monetary unit of the
environment.
Objectivity principle – is the requirement that all accounting transactions
should be justified as much as possible on objective evidence. This means
that accounting transactions should be based on fact and not on personal
opinion or feelings. 
Realization principle – is the recognition of revenues only when they are
earned.
Time period principle – is the requirement that a company has to complete its
analysis to report the financial condition and profitability of its business
operation over a specific operating time period. 
30 1 Introduction to management accounting
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Multiple choice questions
1.1
Which of the following is one of the key characteristics of the hospitality
industry?
a
consistent activity level throughout the year
b long distribution channels
c
low barriers to entry for capital and labour
d slow transformation of the raw materials into a finished product
1.2
The full disclosure principle of accounting is:
a
the assumption that the accounting entity will maintain proper
accounting records from the date of its establishment to the date of its
liquidation
b the requirement that events or information must be accounted for if
they make a difference to the user of the financial information
c
the requirement that all accounting transactions should be justified as
much as possible on objective evidence
d the requirement that the financial statement should provide all relevant
and material facts necessary for the understanding of the financial
statement 
1.3
The generally accepted accounting principle that supports recording the
value of a property at the purchase price when the market value is higher is
the:
a
conservatism principle
b cost principle
c
going concern principle
d monetary principle
1.4
Which of the following branches of accounting is often limited to preparing
and distributing financial reports?
a
auditing
b cost accounting
c
financial accounting
d managerial accounting
1.5
One of the basic purposes of managerial accounting is to provide
information to various management levels in order to:
a
be better equipped for the management and control functions
b determine the business’ competitive position
c
evaluate the accounting records and procedures of the business
d improve the business’s products and services
Exercises
1.1
Fill in the blanks below with the accounting principle that best applies.
Business entity
Matching
Conservatism
Materiality
Consistency
Monetary unit
Cost
Objectivity
Full disclosure
Realization
Going concern
Time period
Exercises 31
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

a A new terrace is recorded at the amount that was paid for its construction
instead of the original contract price because of the ______________
principle.
b A hotel modifies its inventory values to reflect the market values of its food
stocks which are higher than the original cost, because of the
______________ principle.
c A restaurant does not reduce the value of its glassware to liquidation value
because of the ______________ principle
d A hotel records accrued wages at the end of the accounting period because
of the ______________ principle.
e The cost of beverages taken home for the personal use of the owner is
recorded as a withdrawal because of the ______________ principle.
1.2
Match the following situations with the accounting principle that best
applies. In some cases, more than one principle may apply.
Conservatism
Materiality
Consistency
Monetary unit
Cost
Objectivity
Full disclosure
Realization
Going concern
Time period
Matching
a A hotel corporation is preparing its end of year financial statements.
Management has informed the accountant that in six weeks it will begin to
close 12 of its properties. The accountant will provide information related
to these future actions on the current end of year financial statements
because of the ______________ principle and the ______________ principle.
b A caterer purchases a delivery van for €7,500 from another caterer having
problems. Based on the ______________ principle, the delivery van purchase
is recorded at €7,500, even though the caterer could sell it again for
€10,000.
c A hotel receives advance payments of €2,500 from a conference organizer.
This is not a sale due to the ______________ principle.
d A restaurant has traditionally used the straight line method to depreciate all
its heavy duty kitchen equipment. This year it decides to start using the
double declining balance depreciation method on the same equipment.
This change must be announced in the financial statements due to the
______________ principle.
1.3
Which branch of accounting is best described by each statement below?
·
This branch of accounting is unregulated but mostly based on
cost/benefit analysis.
·
The type of data in this branch is mostly financial and monetary.
·
The time perspective of this branch is principally historical.
·
This branch of accounting has no pre-determined format but is aligned
to the specific wishes of management.
·
This branch of accounting provides general information on the whole
organization.
·
The branch of accounting is based on a continuous reporting frequency.
32 1 Introduction to management accounting
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

·
The main characteristic of this branch of accounting is the focus on
estimated information to ensure efficiency, relevance and timeliness.
·
This branch of accounting will provide information to external
stakeholders.
1.4
Write brief explanations on the following types of hospitality operations:
·
Airport hotels
·
Bed-and-breakfast inns
·
Casino hotels
·
Conference hotels
·
Extended-stay hotels
·
Guesthouses
·
Resort hotels
·
Motels
·
RV parks and campgrounds
·
Youth hostels
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exercises 33


© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
35
2.1
The components of a balance sheet
2.2
Formats of balance sheets
2.3
Establishing simple balance sheets
2.4
The Statement of Retained Earnings
The balance sheet also at times called the statement of financial
position is a list of all the assets owned by an organization, the debts
owed by the organization and also the sum of all the investments
brought into the organization by its owners. Despite the fact that the
balance sheet is a result of the organization’s activities over time, it
however is a representation of the worth and obligations of the
organization at a very specific date. It is one of the most prominent
financial statements of any organization. Section 2.1 introduces the
various parts of the balance sheet. In Section 2.2 various formats used
in establishing balance sheets will be discussed while Section 2.3 will
illustrate the establishment of a simple balance sheet.
The balance sheet
2

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
36 2 The balance sheet
2.1
The components of a balance sheet
The balance sheet shows the balance between the assets of an
organization with its liabilities and owners’ equity. This balance is
symbolized in the fundamental accounting equation as follows:
Assets = liabilities + owners’ equity
For this fundamental equation to be respected at all times, an increase
in an asset must be accompanied by a corresponding decrease in
another asset or an increase in either a liability or owners’ equity. The
balance sheet is the only one of the five major accounting statements
that is established at a given point in time and that shows a balance
between its two parts. The major sections of the balance sheet are as
defined in the fundamental accounting equation and they define the
structure of the subsections as follows:
2.1.1
Assets
2.1.2
Liabilities
2.1.3
Owners’ equity
2.1.1
Assets
An asset is everything of value that is owned by a person or a
company. In a balance sheet, all things owned are recorded in their
monetary values. There are two major classes of assets which are
tangible and intangible assets. Tangible assets are those that have a
physical substance whereas intangible assets lack a physical substance
but have a value to the company. In the hospitality industry, assets
are sub-divided into the following categories: current assets, non-
current receivables, investments, property and equipment, and other
assets. These are all explained below.
Current assets
Current assets are those assets that are expected to be converted into
cash in a relatively short time or in the normal operating cycle of the
business. These assets are continually turned over in the course of a
business during normal business activity. Current assets are generally
listed in their order of liquidity. The primary items in this category of
current assets within the hospitality industry are the following:
‘Cash’: it is the most liquid asset and includes cash on hand (house
banks), demand deposits, and temporary cash investments (that have
to be collected within 3 months). Cash is shown in the balance sheet
at its face value.
‘Restricted cash’: relates to cash that has been restricted for a specific
purpose. In the current assets section, such purposes could be for
example to pay for current debts or other current expenses.
Short term investments (marketable securities): as opposed to
temporary cash investments, these are securities bought and held for
sale within the year. The near future should generate income on short

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
2.1 The components of a balance sheet 37
term price differences. Short term investments are shown in the
balance sheet at their market value.
Receivables: these consist of accounts receivable, notes receivable,
current maturities of non-current receivables, other receivables, and
the allowance for doubtful accounts. Receivables are usually reported
as net of the allowance on collectible allowance. Accounts receivable
are open accounts carried in the guest and city ledgers by the
customers. Notes receivable due within a year are equally listed within
this category. An allowance for doubtful accounts should be
subtracted from receivables. Other receivables are those that fall under
none of the previous categories of receivables such as accrued interest
receivable. The allowance for doubtful accounts is the part of
receivables that the property, based on experience and account
appraisal, will consider very difficult to collect.
Due to/from owner, management company, or related party: these
contain the balances due to or from the respected parties such as
loans, advances, management fees, other expenses and advances
provided to a property.
Inventories: these consist of merchandise that has been purchased for
resale such as food, beverage and supplies used in running the
property. The inventory value reported on the balance sheet is most of
the time the historical cost or fair market value. If the cost of unused
supplies to be used in operating the property is significant, then these
too should be included in the value of the inventory. The method of
valuing the inventory should be disclosed in the footnotes to the
financial statements. In cases where, individual inventory categories
are significant, these should be listed separately in the financial
statement.
Operating equipment: these will include items whose estimated usage
is less than one year. At the time of the purchase of the operating
equipment, the property should establish the consumption period of
the equipment and then expense the purchase over the determined
period.
Prepaid expenses: these represent the use of cash to purchase goods,
services or benefits to be used by the property with the passage of
time. These are generally reduced on a monthly basis and shown in
the income statement as expenses. Examples include prepaid
insurance, prepaid rents, prepaid advertising, prepaid license fees, and
prepaid taxes. Prepaid expenses that would benefit a company beyond
the scope of one year should be classified as other assets.
Deferred income taxes (current): these represent the tax effects of
temporary differences noticed between the bases of current assets and
current liabilities for financial and income tax assessment purposes.
Other: these include items that have not been included in other parts
of the current assets and which are expected to be transformed into
cash in the coming year.

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
38 2 The balance sheet
Non-current receivables
Different from the receivables described under current assets, non-
current receivables are those accounts that are not expected to be
collected within the year. In this sub-category are included amounts
due from owners, officers, employees, and other third parties. As with
current receivables, an allowance for doubtful accounts will have to be
created for those that are deemed to be very difficult or impossible to
collect.
Investments
Investments in other companies or in property or plant not connected
with the daily operations of the property are equally considered as a
separate asset category. These generally include debt or equity
securities as well as ownership interests. Some examples are: shares
held in group companies; loans to group companies, shares in related
companies; loans to related companies; shares in non-related or group
companies; as well as shares in own company in cases where
companies can purchase their own shares. The valuation of
investments generally poses problems where there is no stock
exchange.
Fixed assets (property, plant and equipment – PP & E)
Fixed assets also known as property, plant and equipment (PP & E)
refer to those assets and property within a company which cannot
easily be converted into cash. Fixed assets are long lived and of a more
permanent and physical nature. They primarily exist to be used in the
running of the business and not for sale. They include items of value
purchased by the organization destined to be used over long periods
of time. Fixed assets normally include land and buildings,
transportation equipment, office equipment and furniture,
computers, fixtures and fittings, construction in progress, and plant
and machinery. Fixed assets are usually noted at their acquisition cost.
The acquisition cost generally includes their purchase price which
might include import duties and other deductible trade discounts and
rebates. The acquisition cost will also include all costs attributable to
transporting and installing the asset and the initial estimate of
dismantling and removing the asset.
With the exception of land, all property and equipment is depreciated
over time. Depreciation is simply the expense generated by the use of
a fixed asset. It represents the wear and tear of an asset or a reduction
in its historical value due to its use. At any point in time, it represents
the cost of an asset less any salvage value over its estimated economic
useful life. Depreciation is considered to be an expense because it is
matched against the revenue generated through the use of the asset.
Depreciation is usually spread over the economic useful life of the
asset. Whatever depreciation method is used, it should be disclosed
using footnotes at the bottom of the balance sheet and it should be in
accordance with the GAAP. The total accumulated depreciation and
amortization should appear as a separate item which is deducted from
the total plant, property and equipment. This will lead to the net
plant, property and equipment line.

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
2.1 The components of a balance sheet 39
Intangible assets
These are defined as non-monetary assets that cannot be seen,
touched or physically measured, which are created through time and
effort and that are identifiable as a separate asset. There are primarily
two forms of intangible assets; the legal intangibles and the
competitive intangibles. Legal intangibles generate legal property
rights defensible in a court of law. Competitive intangibles directly
affect effectiveness, productivity, wastage, and opportunity costs
within a company. The legal intangibles include such elements as
trade secrets, list of customers, patents, copyrights, trademarks, and
goodwill. The competitive intangibles include amongst others, know-
how, knowledge, collaboration activities, leverage activities, and
structural activities. One very common intangible asset is goodwill
which is the excess of the purchase price over the fair market value of
a business at the time of its purchase. Rules on amortizing goodwill
over time are contained in the GAAP.
Cash surrender value of life insurance
In cases where a company has purchased life insurance on the lives of
some of its principal promoters and individuals, the cash surrender
values of such life policies can be recorded as an asset. These are
adjusted periodically via the insurance expense to reflect any changes
in their values.
Deferred charges
A deferred charge is basically a prepaid expense that is recognized on
the balance sheet as an asset until it is used. They typically relate to
financing activities and represent the direct costs of obtaining such
financing. Examples will include loan fees and bond issuance costs.
Recording deferred charges in this way ensures that a company
respects the principles of the GAAP by matching revenues with
expenses. Such costs are usually amortized over the life of the related
financing and the amortization method should be disclosed in the
notes to the financial statements.
Deferred income taxes (non-current)
These represent the collection of the future tax liabilities of the
company that will typically be summed up and shown as one line
item on the balance sheet. These are to be paid more than one year in
the future. They generally result from income already earned and
recognized for accounting, but not tax, purposes. Also, differences
between tax laws and accounting methods can result in a temporary
difference in the amount of income tax payable by a company. This
difference is recorded as deferred income tax.
Operating equipment
As explained above, operating equipment with periods of
consumption of less than one year are classified as current assets. In
cases where bulk purchases of operating equipment are made for
example china, and are expected to be consumed over longer periods,
the difference will have to be stated as other assets.

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
40 2 The balance sheet
Restricted cash
As is the case with operating equipment, cash that is equally restricted
for purposes that go beyond the year should be classified as non-
current under other assets.
Other
Items that cannot be grouped into any of the previous categories,
such as costs to organize the company, security deposits, initial
franchise costs, unamortized franchise costs, and other miscellaneous
or individually immaterial assets, are included under this caption.
Their nature and amortization policies should be clearly indicated in
the notes to the financial statements.
2.1.2
Liabilities
A liability is an amount that an individual or a company is under
obligation to pay to other persons or organizations. Liabilities
generally have the following characteristics:
·
they result from all types of borrowing;
·
they represent a duty or responsibility to others that entails
settlement by future transfers;
·
the duty or responsibility obligates the entity, leaving it little or no
discretion to avoid it; and lastly;
·
the transaction or event obligating the event has already taken
place.
Liabilities are generally divided into the two sub-categories of current
liabilities and long term liabilities. In 2.1.2.1 the detailed elements of
the current liabilities section of a balance sheet are discussed while in
2.1.2.2, those related to the long term liabilities will be discussed.
2.1.2.1
Current liabilities
These are obligations at the balance sheet date which are reasonably
expected to be paid back within the next 12 months. They generally
consist of one of the following five types:
·
Payables resulting from the acquisition of goods, services, and
labour and the applicable payroll taxes.
·
Payments received in advance for the delivery of goods or services.
·
Obligations to be paid relating to fixed assets purchases.
·
Dividends payable.
·
Incomes taxes payable.
Exhibit 2.1 illustrates the importance of the prudent management of
the liabilities of a hotel, the absence of which might lead to
liquidation and bankruptcy.

Exhibit 2.1 Hotel group yet to repay all its debts
The major classifications of current liabilities are:
Notes payable
Notes payable represent the short term notes due to banks and other
creditors that have to be repaid within 12 months.
Due to/from owner, management company, or related party
Due to/from owner, management company, or related party which
contain the balances due to or from the owner, a management
company, or other related entities for loans, advances for capital
improvements, management fees, and other expenses or advances
provided to a property. These accounts are classified as current or long
term based on their payment terms.
Accounts payable
Accounts payable represents amounts due to suppliers. Amounts due
to other parties for guest charges collected by the property may be
included with Accounts payable or shown separately.
Accrued expenses
Accrued expenses are expenses incurred before the balance sheet date
but are not due till after the balance sheet date. Examples include
salaries and wages and related benefits, vacation pay, interest,
management fees, rent, taxes other than on income, and utilities.
Breaffy House Hotel has still not
paid back cash owed to a number of
its creditors but is promising to do so
within a matter of weeks. In
November last year, an examiner was
appointed by the High Court to the
hotel’s parent company, the Lynch
Hotel Group. The examiner met with
Breaffy House’s creditors at a
meeting in the hotel where it was
agreed the company would pay back
just 10 per cent of its overall debts.
Creditors were supposed to have
been paid by December 20, but when
contacted last week, several local
businesses had yet to receive any
payment. “We haven’t got a penny
from them,” said one local business
person. “I’ve been chasing and
chasing them.” The hotel owed more
than €1m to unsecured creditors, the
bulk of which are from Co Mayo.
The company’s accounts revealed
that money is owed to a range of
local businesses and firms. Mayo
County Council is Breaffy House’s
biggest creditor with €102,784 owed
to the local authority, which was
listed as a preferential creditor. The
debts were across virtually every
sector of the local economy – from a
florist who was owed €6,000 to a
meat supplier owed almost €30,000.
Each of the four newspapers in the
county was owed money, ranging
from almost €7,000 to €1,200. 
The Lynch Hotel Group, which
employs 530 people in seven hotels
in the West of Ireland, gained court
protection from its creditors in July.
A previous court hearing was told the
company had debts of €22.8m,
which it was unable to pay.
Approximately 125 full and part-
time staff are employed at the
Breaffy House Resort which was
bought by the Lynch Group in 2001.
Michael B Lynch, managing director
of the Lynch Hotel Group, said the
company had decided to go into
voluntary examinership to secure the
long-term safety of the group. “It is a
long-term step to ensure the future of
the Lynch Hotel Group. We are
professional hoteliers with a
fundamentally sound business and, at
this time, are planning to restructure
our financial position. “We are very
confident that our 40 years of
experience in the hotel business, our
customer and staff loyalty and
recognised innovation practices will
see the company through this
process.” Mr Lynch told the Western
People yesterday evening (Monday)
that the “vast bulk” of creditors had
been paid and the remainder will be
paid “in the next few weeks”. 
■
Hotel group yet to repay all its debts
by Keith Bourke
Source: Western People, Wednesday, January 20, 2010
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
2.1 The components of a balance sheet 41

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
42 2 The balance sheet
Advance deposits
Advance deposits represent amounts received that are to be applied as
part of the payment for future sales of rooms, food and beverage, or
other goods and services.
Income taxes payable
Income taxes payable represents the estimated obligations for income
taxes to be honoured within the next 12 months.
Deferred income taxes (current)
Deferred income taxes (current) represent the tax effects of temporary
differences between the bases of current assets and current liabilities
for financial and income tax reporting purposes. For example, revenue
recognized in the financial statements before it is taxable will result in
deferred income taxes (current) if it will be taxable in the next year.
These can be found in both current assets as well as current liabilities
depending on the situation.
Current maturities of long-term debt
Current maturities of long-term debt include the principal payments
of mortgage notes, other notes, and similar liabilities, and the
instalments on capitalized leases due within the next 12 months.
Other current liabilities
Items that cannot be grouped into any of the previous current liability
categories are shown here. The category is normally used to show
those small items that cannot be independently classified. Some
examples are the unearned portion of amounts received or charged to
non-guests for the use of recreational facilities, unredeemed gift
certificate sales, unclaimed wages, and the net liability under barter
contracts.
Current liabilities are often compared with current assets. The
difference between the two is commonly known as working capital
(see Chapter 8 for a more profound analysis).
2.1.2.2
Long term liabilities
These are obligations, which on the date of the balance sheet are
expected to be paid back beyond the next 12 months. Common
hospitality industry-related long term liabilities are:
Mortgage notes, other notes, and similar liabilities
In this caption, information related to the following will have to be
disclosed: interest rates, payment of sinking fund requirements,
maturity dates, collateralization and assets pledged, financial
restrictive covenants, as well as payment and sinking fund payments
required for each of the five years following the balance sheet date.
Obligations under capital leases
Just as in the previous caption, disclosure is required with regard to
the future minimum lease payments for each of the five years
following the balance sheet date and the total future minimum lease
obligations.

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
2.1 The components of a balance sheet 43
Other long-term liabilities
Long-term liabilities that do not require satisfaction within a year and
are not included under other captions are included here. Examples
include deferred compensation, deferred management fees, tenants’
lease deposits, and accrued obligations for pension and other post-
employment benefits.
Deferred income taxes (non-current)
Deferred income taxes (non-current) represent the tax effects of
temporary differences between the bases of non-current assets and
non-current liabilities for financial and income tax reporting
purposes. They generally result from income already earned and
recognized for accounting, but not tax, purposes. Also, differences
between tax laws and accounting methods can result in a temporary
difference in the amount of income tax payable by a company. This
difference is recorded as deferred income tax. For example, the use of
accelerated depreciation for tax purposes and straight-line
depreciation for financial reporting purposes will result in non-current
deferred income taxes.
Commitments and contingencies
These are indicated to draw attention to their existence. Currency
amounts are not indicated and adequate disclosure should be made in
the notes to the financial statements. Some examples are:
employment contracts; management agreements; purchase contracts;
long-term leases; pending or threatened lawsuits; as well as third party
cautions and guarantees.
2.1.3
Owners’ equity
At the start of a business, the owners bring in some funding into the
business to finance the acquisition of their assets. Based on the
fundamental accounting equation, all acquired assets would have
been funded either through debt (liabilities) or by the owners
themselves (owners’ equity). When all liabilities have been accounted
for, the positive difference is considered to be the interest of the
owners in the business.
The detail of the owners’ equity section in the balance sheet is a
function of the type of organization in which the business is
operating. There are four major types of business organizations – sole
proprietorships, partnerships, limited liability companies and
corporations.
Sole proprietorships
The owner’s equity section in the balance sheet of a sole
proprietorship will simply be denoted using the name of the sole
proprietor. Exhibit 2.2 indicates the interest on one owner. Any
changes during the period should be indicated in the statement of
owner’s equity. This section will equally indicate the contributions
(invested by the owner) as well as the withdrawals (taken by the
owner) during the period.

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
44 2 The balance sheet
■Exhibit 2.2 Owner’s equity section in the balance sheet of a sole
proprietorship
Sole proprietorship
Owner’s equity 
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of income tax 
Total owner’s equity 
Partnerships
Unlike the case of sole-proprietorships with the name of a single
individual, in partnerships, the owners’ equity section represents the
net equity of the partners in the partnership. This can be classified
depending on the situation as, general partners’ equity or limited
partners’ equity. Similarly any changes during the period should be
indicated in the statement of owners’ equity. This section will equally
indicate the contributions (invested by the partners) as well as the
withdrawals (taken by the partners) during the period. The owners’
equity section in the balance sheet of a partnership will as such
contain the names and contributions of the partners as shown in
Exhibit 2.3 in which 3 of the partners are general partners and 2 are
limited partners. A general partner manages the partnership and
typically holds an economic interest in it. The general partner also
receives a percentage of the profits off the top, before the limited
partners receive theirs. Limited partners are not involved in the day-
to-day management of the partnership and have limited liability.
■Exhibit 2.3 Owners’ equity section in the balance sheet of a partnership
Partnership
Partners’ equity
General partners
Partner A
Partner B
Partner C
Limited partners
Partner D
Partner E
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of income tax 
Total partners’ equity 
Limited liability companies
Similar to the partnerships, the owners’ equity section in limited
liability companies will represent the net equity of the members. This
can equally be classified, where appropriate, as general member equity
or limited member equity. Similarly any changes during the period
should be indicated in the statement of owners’ equity. This section
will equally indicate the contributions (invested by the members) as
well as the withdrawals (taken by the members) during the period.
The owners’ equity section in the balance sheet of a limited liability
company is shown in Exhibit 2.4.
....................................
.....................................................................

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
2.1 The components of a balance sheet 45
■Exhibit 2.4 Owners’ equity section in the balance sheet of a limited
liability company
Limited liability companies
Members’ equity
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of income tax 
Total Members’ Equity 
Corporations
For corporations, the phrase stockholders’ equity (or shareholders’
equity) is used to denote owners’ equity. The main components of
stockholders’ equity are the following:
Capital stock
Capital stock represents the common and preferred stock a company
is authorized to issue, according to its articles of association. The par
or stated value and the number of shares authorized and issued for
each class of stock is presented in the balance sheet. As in all cases
related to owners’ equity, any changes during the period should be
indicated in the statement of stockholders’ equity.
Additional paid-in capital
A value that is included in the contributed surplus account in the
stockholders’ equity section of a company’s balance sheet. The
account represents the excess paid by an investor over the par-value
price of a stock issue. Additional paid-in-capital can arise from issuing
either preferred or common stock. This includes the cash, property,
and other capital contributed to a corporation by its shareholders.
As in all cases related to owners’ equity, any changes during the
period should be indicated in the statement of stockholders’ equity.
Retained earnings
Retained earnings represent the portion of net earnings not paid out
as dividends, but retained by the company to be reinvested in its core
business or to pay debt. It is calculated by adding net income to (or
subtracting any net losses from) beginning retained earnings and
subtracting any dividends paid to shareholders. Negative retained
earnings are called deficits. As in all cases related to owners’ equity,
any changes during the period should be indicated in the statement
of stockholders’ equity.
Treasury stock
Treasury stock represents the portion of shares that a company keeps
in their own treasury. Treasury stock may have come from a
repurchase or buyback from shareholders; or it may have never been
issued to the public in the first place. These shares don’t pay
dividends, have no voting rights, and do not have to be included in
the calculation of outstanding shares. As in all cases related to owners’
equity, any changes during the period should be indicated in the
statement of stockholders’ equity.
The stockholders’ equity section in the balance sheet of a corporation
is shown in Exhibit 2.5 on the next page.
....................................

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
46 2 The balance sheet
■Exhibit 2.5 Stockholders’ equity section in the balance sheet of a
corporation
Corporations
Stockholders’ equity
Capital stock
Additional paid-in capital in excess of par
Retained earnings
Treasury stock
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of income tax 
Total stockholders’ equity 
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
The last major element in the owners’ equity section of the balance
sheet is the accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and it is
relevant to all the types of business organizations seen above.
Accumulated other comprehensive income refers to the net income
(loss) plus “other comprehensive incomes (losses).” These include
certain revenues, expenses, gains, and losses that are reported as
separate components of equity instead of net income. The common
sources of other comprehensive income (losses) are: foreign currency
translation adjustments; gains and losses on foreign currency
transactions; unrealized gains and losses on available-for-sale
marketable securities; unrealized gains and losses that result from a
transfer of a debt security; changes in the fair value of a derivative
instrument; gains and losses on inter-company foreign currency
transactions of a long-term investment nature following
consolidation; and minimum pension liability adjustments.
2.2
Formats of balance sheets
Balance sheets are usually arranged using the account (or horizontal)
format or the report (vertical) format. In the account format, the
information related to the assets on the one hand, and the liabilities
and owners’ equity on the other hand, are put side-by-side, with the
assets put on the left hand side and the liabilities and owners’ equity
put on the right hand side. In the report format, the information
related to the assets is initially indicated, then the information related
to the liabilities and owners’ equity is indicated below in a vertical
arrangement. The report format is more popular nowadays because it
is easier to use it in multi-year spreadsheet analysis with each year’s
information just occupying one column. Both of these formats are
shown in Exhibit 2.6 that contains the summary balance sheet
headings of the Afilen Hotels.
..........................................................

Exhibit 2.6 The account format and the report format presentations of the balance sheet
Afilen Hotels
Balance sheet
31st December 2016
Assets
Liabilities and owners’ equity
Current assets
Current liabilities
Property and equipment
Long-term liabilities
Other assets
Owners’ equity
Total assets
Total liabilities and owners’ equity
Account or horizontal format
Afilen Hotels
Balance sheet
31st December 2016
Assets
Current assets
Property and equipment
Other assets
Total assets
Liabilities and owners’ equity
Current liabilities
Long-term liabilities
Owners’ equity
Total liabilities and owners’ equity
Report or vertical format
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
2.3 Establishing simple balance sheets 47
2.3
Establishing simple balance sheets
Find below a comprehensive example on how a balance sheet is
established based on available information.
The Europa Alliance Hotels Plc. is a corporation and its shareholders
have handed over the overall day-to-day management of the hotels in
their portfolio to the Alliance Management Company. At the end of
operations for the year 2016, the various balance sheet account
balances were as follows:

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
48 2 The balance sheet
In conformity with the USALI and using the vertical (report) format of
the balance sheet, the balance sheet of the Europa Alliance Hotels Plc.
will look as indicated in Exhibits 2.7a and 2.7b.
House banks
€
35,400
Demand deposits
€
75,000
Temporary cash investments
€
22,500
Restricted cash
€
92,000
Short-term investments
€
15,000
Accounts receivable
€
135,000
Notes receivable
€
72,000
Current maturities of non-current receivables
€
54,000
Other receivables
€
28,000
Allowance for doubtful accounts
€
32,500
Due from Alliance Management Company
€
84,500
Inventories
€
95,000
Operating equipment
€
123,000
Prepaid expenses
€
46,000
Other current assets
€
12,000
Non-current receivables (net of current maturities)
€
325,000
Investments
€
425,000
Land
€
1,300,000
Buildings
€
54,800,000
Leaseholds and leaseholds improvements
€
4,300,000
Furnishings and equipment
€
7,800,000
Construction in progress
€
2,740,000
Accumulated depreciation and amortization
€
13,450,000
Intangible assets
€
158,200
Cash surrender value of life insurance
€
4,200,000
Deferred charges
€
82,000
Operating equipment to be consumed beyond 12 months
€
48,200
Restricted cash above 12 months
€
84,500
Initial franchise costs
€
73,500
Notes payable to banks
€
145,000
Notes payable and to others
€
90,600
Due to Alliance Management Company
€
135,070
Accounts payable
€
154,000
Accrued expenses
€
115,000
Advance deposits
€
41,800
Income taxes payable
€
90,800
Unclaimed wages
€
20,000
Mortgage notes
€
13,568,500
Current maturities of mortgage notes
€
67,000
Other notes and similar liabilities 
€
1,120,100
Obligations under capital leases
€
132,000
Other long-term liabilities
€
185,000
Deferred income taxes (non-current)
€
198,130
Commitments and contingencies
€
75,000
Common stock
€
20,000,000
Paid-in capital in excess of par
€
16,500,000
Retained earnings
€
10,062,000
Accumulated other comprehensive income (net of income tax)
€
2,400,000
Treasury stock
€
1,250,000

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
2.3 Establishing simple balance sheets 49
Exhibit 2.7a Balance sheet of the Europa Alliance Hotels Plc (assets section)
Europa Alliance Hotel Plc.
Balance Sheet
December 31, 2016
Assets
Current Assets
Cash
House banks
€
35,400
Demand deposits
€
75,000
Temporary cash investments
€
22,500
Total Cash
€
132,900
Restricted Cash
€
92,000
Short-term investments
€
15,000
Receivables
Accounts Receivable
€
135,000
Notes Receivable
€
72,000
Current maturities of non-current receivables
Other
€
28,000
Total Receivable
€
289,000
Less Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
€
(32,500)
Net Receivables
€
256,500
Due from Alliance Management Company
€
84,500
Inventories
€
95,000
Operating Equipment
€
123,000
Prepaid Expenses
€
51,200
Other
€
12,000
Total Current Assets
€
862,100
Non-current Receivables (net of current maturities
€
325,000
Investments
€
425,000
Property and Equipment
Land
€
1,300,000
Buildings
€
54,800,000
Leaseholds and leaseholds improvements
€
4,300,000
Furnishings and Equipment
€
7,800,000
Contruction in progress
€
2,740,000
Total property and equipment
€
70,940,000
Less accumulated depreciation and amortization
€ (13,450,000)
Net Property and Equipment
€
57,490,000
Other Assets
Intangible assets
€
158,200
Cash surrender value of life insurance
€
4,200,000
Deferred charges
€
82,000
Operating equipment
€
82,700
Restricted cash
€
84,500
Other
€
73,500
Total Other Assets
€
4,680,900
Total Assets
€
63,783,000

2.4
The Statement of Retained Earnings
As it is closely linked to the Balance Sheet, the Statement of Retained
Earnings will be discussed in this section. The Statement of Retained
Earnings can as well be called an equity statement, a statement of
owner’s equity for sole proprietorships, statement of partners' equity
for partnerships, statement of financial position, and statement of
retained earnings and stockholders' equity for corporations. The
statement explains the changes in a company's retained earnings from
the end of one accounting period to the end of the next. The
statement reconciles the opening and closing balances in the equity
accounts as would be found in the two end-of-period balance sheets.
Retained earnings are part of the balance sheet (within the owners’
equity section) and they are mostly affected by the net income earned
during the period by the company less any dividends paid to the
company's owners within that same period. The IFRS in its IAS 1
requires all business entities to present a separate statement of
changes in equity as one of the components of their financial
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
50 2 The balance sheet
Exhibit 2.7b Balance sheet of the Europa Alliance Hotels Plc (liabilities and owners’ equity
section)
Liabilities and Owners’ Equity
Current Liabilities
Notes Payable
Banks
€
145,000
Others
€
90,600
Total Notes Payable
€
235,600
Due to Alliance Management Company
€
135,070
Accounts Payable
€
154,000
Accrued Expenses
€
115,000
Advance Deposits
€
41,800
Income Taxes Payable
€
90,800
Current Maturities of Long Term Debt
€
67,000
Other
€
20,000
Total Current Liabilities
€
859,270
Long-term Debt (net of current maturities)
Mortgage notes
€
13,501,500
Other notes and similar liabilities
€
1,120,100
Obligations under capital leases
€
132,000
Total Long-term debt
€
14,753,600
Other Long-Term liabilities
€
185,000
Deferred Income Taxes (non-current)
€
198,130
Commitments and Contingencies
€
75,000
Total Liabilities
€
16,071,000
Stockholders’ Equity
Common Stock
€
20,000,000
Paid-in capital in excess of par
€
16,500,000
Retained Earnings
€
10,062,000
Accumulated other comprehensive income (net of income tax)
€
2,400,000
Less Treasury stock
€
(1,250,000)
Total Stockholders’ Equity
€
47,712,000
Total Liabilities and Owners’ Equity
€
63,783,000

statements. According to the USALI, the Statement of Owners’ Equity 
will be designed according to the type of hospitality operation (sole
proprietorships, partnerships, limited liability companies, and
corporations). Exhibit 2.8 is an example of a Statement of Owner’s
Equity of a sole proprietorship and based on the USALI 11th Revised
Edition.
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exhibit 2.8 Statement of Owner’s Equity of a sole proprietorship based on the USALI 11th
Revised Edition
Statement Of Owner’s Equity
Owner
Accumulated
Total
Other
Comprehensive
Income (Loss),
Net of Income
Taxes
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––
Balance At Beginning Of Prior Year
€
€
€
Add (Deduct)
Net Income
Contributions
Change in Unrealized Gains (Losses)
Withdrawels
Other
Balance At End Of Prior Year
€
€
€
Add (Deduct)
Net Income
Contributions
Change in Unrealized Gains (Losses)
Withdrawels
Other
Balance At End Of Current Year
€
€
€
Cumulative foreign currency translation adjustments should also be reflected in this statement
The configuration of the statement as shown in Exhibit 2.8 is the
same for partnerships and limited liability companies (with changes
only in the titles: statement of partners’ equity, and in which there
will be a distinction between the general and limited partners; and
statement of members’ equity). For public corporations, the
configuration is different with the inclusion of the volume and values
of the different types of shares outstanding (preferred or common),
additional paid-in capital, retained earnings and treasury stock. If
desired, small hospitality operations can omit to create the statement
of changes in equity if the hospitality operation has no owner
investments or withdrawals other than dividends, and they may
decide to present a combined statement of comprehensive income
and retained earnings.
2.4 The Statement of Retained Earnings 51

Glossary
Account format – is an arrangement of balance sheet items that puts the assets
accounts on the left side and the liabilities and owners’ equity accounts on
the right side of the page.
Accounts payable – this account represents amounts due to suppliers.
Accounts receivable – is a current asset representing money due for services
performed or goods sold on credit. They are open accounts carrying the
guest and city ledgers by the customer.
Accrued expenses – these are expenses incurred before the balance sheet date
but are not due till after the balance sheet date.
this account represents the excess paid by an investor over the par-value
price of a stock issue.
Advance deposits – represent amounts received that are to be applied as part of
the payment for future sales.
Asset – is anything owned by an individual or a business, which has a
commercial or exchange value.
Balance sheet – is list of all the assets owned by an organization, the debts
owed by the organization and also the sum of all the investments brought
into the organization by its owners.
Capital stock – represents the common and preferred stock a corporation is
authorized to issue, according to its articles of association.
Corporation – is a type of business organization chartered by a state and given
many of the legal rights as a separate entity.
Current assets – are those assets that are expected to be converted into cash in
a relatively short time or in the normal operating cycle of the business.
Current liabilities – these are debts or any other form of claim on the company
that are supposed to be honoured within one year.
Fixed assets (property, plant and equipment – PP & E) – refer to those assets and
property within a company which cannot be easily converted into cash.
Fixed assets are long lived and of a more permanent and physical nature.
Accounting equation – is the mathematical expression used to describe the
relationship between the assets, liabilities and owners’ equity of the
business. The equation states that assets equal liabilities plus owner’s equity.
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
52

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Liabilities – in management accounting, this is a debt, expense, or any other
form of claim on the assets of the company that must be paid or otherwise
honoured by the company.
Limited liability companies – these are companies in which the separate legal
entity that is owned by shareholders for the purpose of carrying on business
does not go beyond the shareholders’ investment in the business. Assets
and liabilities of owners (shareholders) are separate from the company.
Notes payable – this represents the short term notes due to banks and other
creditors that have to be repaid within 12 months.
Owners’ equity – is total assets minus total liabilities.
Partnership – is an unincorporated business that has more than one owner.
Report format – is an arrangement of balance sheet items that lists the assets
accounts first, followed by the liabilities and owners’ equity accounts.
Retained earnings – these represent the portion of net earnings not paid out as
dividends, but retained by the company to be reinvested in its core business
or to pay debt.
Treasury stock – represents the portion of shares that a company keeps in their
own treasury. Treasury stock may have come from a repurchase or buyback
from shareholders; or it may have never been issued to the public in the
first place.
Glossary 53

Multiple choice questions
2.1
Which of the following items will not be shown in the balance sheet of a
hotel?
a
accounts payable
b accrued taxes
c
customer loyalty value
d intangible assets
2.2
Which of the following is not a characteristic of a liability?
a
liabilities obligate the borrower
b liabilities represent a responsibility still to be honoured
c
liabilities result from all types of borrowing
d the obligating transaction event is in the future
2.3
The section of the balance sheet that changes with the type of company is:
a
assets
b current liabilities
c
long term liabilities
d owners’ equity
2.4
Under which category are temporary cash investments reported in the
balance sheet?
a
current assets
b current liabilities
c
investments
d other assets
2.5
Deferred management fees are reported in the balance sheet under:
a
current assets
b current liabilities
c
other assets 
d long term liabilities
Exercises
2.1
The total assets of a hospitality company are €2,150,875.00 and its total
liabilities are €1,350,000.00. What amount is the owners’ equity?
2.2
Based on the USALI format of the balance sheet, classify the following
accounts into the major categories
Accounts payable
Accounts receivable
Accrued expenses
Accumulated depreciation and amor-
tization
Accumulated other comprehensive
 income (net of income tax)
Advance deposits
Allowance for doubtful accounts
Buildings
Cash surrender value of life insurance
Commitments and contingencies
Common stock
Construction in progress
Current maturities of mortgage notes
Current maturities of non-current
 receivables
Deferred charges
Deferred income taxes (non-current)
Demand deposits
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
54 2 The balance sheet

2.3
Based on the balance sheet account balances of the newly created Sense of
Taste Restaurant at the end of December 2016, prepare its balance sheet
according to the USALI format.
2.4
Using its balance sheet as established in 2.3, describe what type of company
you think the Sense of Taste Restaurant is. How could you make the
difference?
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exercises 55
Furnishings and equipment
House banks
Income taxes payable
Initial franchise costs
Intangible assets
Inventories
Investments
Land
Leaseholds and leaseholds improve-
ments
Mortgage notes
Non-current receivables (net of cur-
rent maturities)
Notes payable
Notes receivable
Operating equipment to be consumed
beyond 12 months
Operating equipment
Other receivables
Paid-in capital in excess of par
Prepaid expenses
Restricted cash above 12 months
Retained earnings
Short-term investments
Temporary cash investments
Treasury stock
Unclaimed wages
Accounts payable
€
11,500.00
Accrued expenses
€
30,850.00
Buildings
€
175,000.00
Cash
€
31,500.00
Cash surrender value of life insurance
€
75,000.00
Current maturities ofmortgage payable
€
15,054.00
Current maturities of notes payable
€
23,676.00
Furnishings and equipment
€
160,250.00
Income taxes payable
€
200.00
Intangible assets
€
7,560.00
Inventories
€
17,500.00
Land
€
25,000.00
Mortgage notes
€
184,946.00
Notes payable
€
151,324.00
Operating equipment
€
6,500.00
Owner’s equity
€
107,500.00
Prepaid expenses
€
23,190.00
Receivables
€
2,500.00
Restricted cash
€
1,050.00


The profit and loss account
statement
3.1
Definition and categories of activities 
3.2
Formats and content of profit and loss
account statements
The measurement of profit is perhaps the most important function of
accounting and all the main stakeholders are interested in knowing
how well an organization is performing. The profit and loss account
statement shows the flow of activities and transactions between the
organization’s top line (revenues) and its bottom line (net income).
Its purpose is to show managers and investors whether the company
made or lost money during the period. Charitable organizations that
are required to publish financial statements do not produce profit and
loss statements but on the contrary produce a statement that reflects
funding sources compared against program expenses, administrative
costs, and other operating commitments. Section 3.1 defines the
profit and loss statement and introduces the various categories of
activities, while Section 3.2 shows the formats and content of the
profit and loss account statement.
57
3
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

3.1
Definition and categories of activities
The income statement, equally known as the profit and loss
statement, the statement of earnings, the statement of income, and
the statement of operations (in the case when the statement reflects a
net loss) describes a company’s financial performance for a period of
time and in many cases it is considered as the most important
financial statement. The main purpose of the statement is to provide
to the users of the financial statements, information relating to the
profitability of the hospitality operation over a particular period of
time which could be on a weekly or monthly basis for internal
management use, and on a quarterly, semi-annual or annual basis for
all the external users. An extension of the income statement is the
statement of comprehensive income as shown in Exhibit 3.1, which
indicates the change in equity [net assets] of a business enterprise
during a period from transactions and other events, and
circumstances from non-owner sources. It includes all changes in
equity during a period except those resulting from investments by
owners and distributions to owners.
Since 1 January 2009, a business entity adopting IFRS must include:
·
a statement of comprehensive income, or
·
two separate statements comprising:
-
an income statement, and
-
a statement of comprehensive income
The major elements of an income statement are:
Under operating activities
·
Revenues which represent the amount of assets created by the
hospitality operation during its normal business activities from the
delivery or production of goods and services during a specific time
58 3 The profit and loss account statement
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exhibit 3.1 Statement of Comprehensive Income
Current Year
Prior Year
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
Net Income
€
€
Other Comprehensive Income, Before Tax
Unrealized gains on available - for - sale marketable 
securities
Unrealized gains for the period
Less: Reclassification adjustment included in net income
Unrealized gains on available - for - sale securities
Foreign currency translation adjustments
Minimum pension liability adjustments
Other Ccomprehensive Income, Before Income Tax
Income tax benefit (expense) related to items of other
comprehensive income
Other Comphrehensive Income (loss), net of Income Tax
Comprehensive Income
€
€

period. Revenues are usually presented as sales less all sales
discounts, returns and allowances.
·
Expenses which represent the amount of assets consumed from the
performance of the normal business activities of the hospitality
operation during a period while delivering or producing goods and
services. Generally, the most prominent expense item is the cost of
the items sold to the customers. Other expenses might include
salaries, utilities, supplies, transportation, marketing, insurance,
research and development, commissions, rents, interests, repairs
and maintenance, depreciation and taxes to list just a few.
·
Net income or net loss represents the difference between the revenues
and the expenses. If revenues are more than the expenses there is a
positive net income or profit. On the contrary, if the expenses are more
than the revenues there is a negative net income or loss.
Under non-operating activities
·
Gains or other revenues represent what the hospitality operation
makes from activities other than its primary business activity. This
could include items such as rents and patents.
·
Losses or other expenses represent expenses or losses not related to
the primary business activity. For example, a loss caused by an act
of nature such as a tornado.
Within the hospitality industry, revenues, gains, expenses, and losses
are all reported distinctly from each other. Management is generally
held responsible in the first instance for their success in operations
determined by revenues and expenses. Management is on the other
hand only secondarily held responsible for gains and losses.
Exhibit 3.2 is an extract from the hotelsmag.com site illustrating at
the beginning of 2009 the broad profitability situation of hotels across
Europe based on a TRI Hospitality Consulting survey.
■Exhibit 3.2 Profit continues to fall across Europe
Profit continues to fall across Europe – Hotels, 2/27/2009 10:05:00 a.m.
The trend of falling occupancy, revenue and profit across key European hotel
markets continued during January, according to the latest HotStats survey by
TRI Hospitality Consulting.
In Vienna the sample of international branded hotels saw daily profit –
expressed as income before fixed charges (IBFC) – decline by nearly two thirds
to just €9.80 per available room. In Prague profit more than halved and in
Amsterdam the decline was 45.2 per cent. The only city in the survey not to
report a double-digit decline in profit was Hamburg.
“There has been considerable supply growth in both Vienna and Prague since
January 2008. More than 2,000 extra graded bedrooms entered the Vienna
market and at least 800 branded hotel rooms opened in Prague. Combined
with the decline in overnights from these cities’ key source markets (Germany,
3.1 Definition and categories of activities 59
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
..............................................................................................

the UK, and the US) all of which are now firmly in recession, the growing
number of bedrooms is diluting performance,” said Jonathan Langston,
managing director, TRI Hospitality Consulting.
Vienna payroll exceeds 50 per cent. The factor which pushed Vienna’s
profitability further into the red was its traditionally high labour costs. Payroll
increased 8.3 percentage points to 55.5 per cent of total revenue. In
Amsterdam, payroll rose from 37.4 to 43.9 per cent of total revenue.
“The fixed payroll component tends to take up a greater percentage of total
revenue at the start of the year when sales are generally at their weakest. This
January’s year-on-year falls in revenue have heightened this trend further,
particularly in Austria which has strong labour laws and a high standard of
living,” said Langston.
Although relatively high, payroll costs were at their most stable year-on-year in
Germany. Berlin and Hamburg both reduced the payroll percentage despite
falls in revenue and profit.
London drops room rates: Paris and London reported similar falls in occupancy
and profit. Occupancy was down 3.3 percentage points to 70 per cent in
London and in Paris down by 3.5 points to 69.3 per cent. Profit fell back by
20.6 per cent in Paris and 21.5 per cent in London. There was greater
discounting in the London market, however. Average room rate dropped by
8.4 per cent in the UK capital compared to -3.7 per cent in Paris. Relatively
high reductions to rack, corporate, conference and leisure rates meant that
London slipped from its historical place as the most profitable city in the
survey.
In absolute terms, Paris had the highest average room rate and the best room
revenue performance making it number one for profit with daily IBFC of
€55.13 per available room.
Source: http://www.hotelsmag.com/article/36402
3.2
Formats and content of profit and loss account
statements
A uniform system of accounts is used in the hospitality industry,
and it contains detailed information about accounts classification
and formats that help in standardizing the accounting system. A
uniform system of accounts permits easy comparisons between the
results of the various entities that make up the hospitality industry.
One of such a system of accounts is called the Uniform System of
Accounts for the Lodging Industry (USALI) already introduced in
Chapter 1. The USALI is designed to be used much more at the
property level instead of the corporate level and it can be adapted to
single properties or single units.
.........................................................................................................................................................................................
60 3 The profit and loss account statement
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

In general, the basic profit and loss account statement would look as
follows:
Revenues
minus
Cost of goods sold
equals
Gross profit
minus
Overhead expenses
equals
Net income
On the other hand, based on the USALI, the profit and loss account
statement will generally look as shown in the table below:
Revenues
minus
Direct operating expenses
equals
Departmental operating income
minus
Overhead expenses
equals
Net income
This USALI format introduces the notion of the contribution margin
profit and loss account statement. The contribution margin profit and
loss account statement emphasizes the classification of costs/expenses
into their variable and fixed character. In this format, the
departmental operating income (in other words the contribution
margin of the department) highlights the proportion of the revenue
that is taken up by the direct operating expenses made up of the
variables costs of sales as well as the variable operating expenses.
For management purposes, the summary operating statement
prepared for owners in conformity with the USALI 11th Revised
Edition will contain the revenue and expenses lines analysed between
operating periods and including forecasts as shown in Exhibit 3.3.
The design of the income statement destined for internal
management’s use permits the management on a single sheet to be
able to compare their current performance with both their past
performance as well as how the performance relates to their originally
budgeted plans as contained in the forecast column. This comparison
permits the management to identify significant variations that may
warrant urgent corrective actions.
The USALI emphasizes the reporting of profit and loss statement
accounting information based on operating centres. These operating
centres are generally those areas that have direct contact, and as such,
sales to guests and customers. Exhibit 3.4 shows the basic statement of
income format of a standard hotel in conformity with the USALI 11th
Revised Edition, and destined for external users.
................................................
................................................
3.2 Formats and content of profit and loss account statements 61
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

62 3 The profit and loss account statement
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exhibit 3.3 Summary operating statement in conformity with the USALI 11th Revised Edition
Summary Operating Statement [For Owners]
Period of
Current Period
Year-to-date
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Actual
Forecast/
Prior year
Actual
Forecast/
Prior year
Budget
Budget
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––
–––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––– –––––––––
––––––––––
Rooms Availeble
Rooms Sold
Occupancy
ADR
Rooms RevPar
Total RevPar
Period of
Current Period
Year-to-date
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Actual
Forecast/
Prior year
Actual
Forecast/
Prior year
Budget
Budget
––––––––
–––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––– –––––––––
––––––––––
€
%
€
%
€
%
€
%
€
%
€
%
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––  ––––
––––  ––––
––––  ––––
––––  ––––
––––  ––––
––––  ––––
Operating Revenue
Rooms
Food and Beverage
Other Operated Departments
Miscellanious Income
Total Operating Revenue
Departmental Expenses
Rooms
Food and Beverage
Other Operated Departments
Total Departmental Expenses
Total Departmental Profit
Undistributed Operating Expenses
Administrative and General
Information and Telecommunications Systems
Sales and Marketing
Property Operations and Maintenance
Utilities
Total Undistributed Expenses
Gross Operating Profit
Management Fees
Income Before Non-Operating Income And Expenses
Non-Operating Income and Expenses
Income
Rent
Property and other taxes
Insurance
Other
Total Non-Operating Income and Expenses
Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciations, and Amortization
Interest, Depreciation, and Amortization
Interest
Depreciation
Amortization
Total Interest, Depreciation, and Amortization
Income Before Income Taxes
Income Taxes
Net Income
All revenues and expenses should be shown as a percentage of total operating revenue, except departmental
expenses, which should be shown as a percentage of their respective departmental revenue.

3.2 Formats and content of profit and loss account statements 63
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exhibit 3.4 Basic statement of income in conformity with the USALI 11th Revised Edition –
external users
Statement of Income
Period
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Current year
Prior year
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
€
€
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
Revenue
Rooms
Food and Beverage
Other Operated Departments
Miscellaneous Income*
Total Revenue
Expenses
Rooms
Food and Beverage
Other Operated Departments
Administrative and General
Information and Telecommunications Systems
Sales and Marketing
Property Operation and Maintenance
Utilities
Management Fees
Non-Operating Expenses
Interest Expense
Depreciation and Amortization
Loss (or Gain) on the Disposition of Assets
Total Expenses
Income before Income Taxes
Income Taxes
Current
Deferred
Total Income Taxes
Net Income
* For the Statement of income, Miscellanious income includes non-operating income.
This differs from Miscellanious income on the Summary Operating Statements.
The main elements of the profit and loss statement are further
explained below:
Revenues (also called turnover)
Generally, revenue or as used in many countries nowadays, turnover,
is that income that a company receives from its normal business
activities. These business activities result from the sale of goods and
services to customers. For some types of businesses, most of their
revenue results from the sale of goods, for example manufacturing
companies. On the other hand, service businesses receive their
revenues from rendering services such as a bank. There are hybrid
cases however in which the primary business of the organization will
contain elements of rendering services and selling goods such as a full

service hotel. Revenues are usually presented as sales less all sales
discounts, returns and allowances from the related revenues.
Some businesses do equally generate revenues that are incidental to
their primary business concerns. Such revenues will be considered as
revenues but not as sales. For example in a hotel, revenue generated
from the exchange of F & B products and room space will be
considered as sales, whereas if this hotel disposes of some of its
property this will be considered as revenue but not sales.
It is important to note that sales revenue does not include the sales
tax and value added tax (VAT) collected on behalf of the taxation
authorities by the company. Companies are normally required to
disclose in their notes to the accounting statements information
related to the analysis of their turnover. This information should
include if this organization carried out its business in more than one
class of business, if these classes of business are substantially different
from each other. Secondly, it should provide information if these
revenues were generated in different geographical markets.
Cost of goods sold (cost of sales)
Cost of sales or cost of goods sold is made up of the direct costs/expenses
attributable to the production of the goods sold by the organization. The
accounts included in the calculation of the cost of goods sold differ from
one type of organization to another. Within the hospitality industry for
example, the cost of goods sold is determined as follows:
Beginning inventory
plus
Inventory purchases
equals
Goods available for sale
minus
Ending inventory
equals
Costs of goods consumed
minus
Goods used internally
equals
Cost of goods sold
Beginning inventory represents the value of the inventory existing in the
company at the beginning of the accounting period. Inventory purchases
represent the acquisition cost of the goods for sale and this will include all
shipping and transportation costs. The ending inventory represents the
value of the inventory existing in the company at the end of the
accounting period. The category of goods used internally will represent
those goods that have been given to a certain class of consumers free of
charge. This class of consumers might include employees (employee
meals), guests for promotional purposes (promotion for food),
entertainers (complimentary food), and other departments of the same
company (transfers to the department). It should be noted that while
these transfers are deducted from the food department they should be
accounted for in the other affected departments of the company. For
.....................................................................
64 3 The profit and loss account statement
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

3.2 Formats and content of profit and loss account statements 65
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
example, cost of employee meals for the Rooms Department employees
will have to be shown as an expense in the Rooms Department.
Other expenses
In this section, still respecting the guidelines of the USALI format, the
following major expense categories will be looked into:
·
Payroll and related expenses
This category includes the salaries and wages of employees in their
respective departments. This category equally includes all the
payroll taxes and related benefits.
·
Other departmental expenses
This category includes only the direct departmental expenses.
Examples could include cleaning supplies, contract services, laundry
and dry cleaning, uniforms, commissions, reservations, etc.
Departmental income or loss
The departmental income or loss will simply represent the net
revenue of each department minus all related cost of sales, payroll and
related expenses, and other expenses. It will be an income if the result
is positive and a loss if it is negative. This will have to be shown on
each departmental income statement in the organization.
Undistributed operating expenses
As not all departments are revenue generating departments in a company,
certain categories of expenses are generated by departments that are called
service departments. A service department generally supports the profit
centres in their revenue generating activities. There are 5 categories in this
section of undistributed operating expenses which are:
1 Administrative and general expenses
These include such service areas as the general manager’s office and
the accounting office. Items here will include salaries, wages,
employee benefits and related payroll expenses, information
services, professional fees, security, training, credit card
commissions, etc.
2 Information and telecommunications systems expenses
With the greater integration of ICT into the hospitality this has been
created to consolidate all system-related technology expenses and
items here will include salaries, wages, employee benefits and related
payroll expenses, cost of service, system expenses and other expenses.
3 Sales and marketing expenses
These include the salaries, wages, employee benefits and related
payroll expenses of the employees working in the sales and
marketing department. Additionally they might contain items like
sales expenses (contract services, trade shows, complimentary
services and gifts, printing and stationary, etc). Marketing expenses
will include items such as agency fees, direct mailing costs, media
costs, photography, etc.
4 Property and operations maintenance expenses
These include the salaries, wages, employee benefits and related
payroll expenses of the property and operations maintenance
personnel as well as the cost of various supplies used in
maintaining the buildings, grounds, equipment, and all furniture
and fixtures.

5 Utility expenses
These represent the cost of electricity, gas, oil, water and other
fuels. It should be noted that taxes assessed on utilities are included
in their costs.
Deducting these undistributed operating expenses from the total
operated departmental incomes will lead to the gross operating profit
(GOP). In cases where there are management fees, deducting these
fees from the GOP will lead to the Income Before Non-Operating
Income and Expenses (IBNOIE).
Non-Operating Income and Expenses
In this category will be found non-operating income (cost recovery
income, interest income, and other income), rents (land and
buildings, and other property and equipment), property and other
taxes and expenses (business and occupation taxes, other taxes and
assessments, personal property taxes, real estate taxes), insurance
(building and contents, liability, and deductible), and other (cost
recovery expense, gain/loss on fixed assets, owner expenses, and
unrealized foreign exchange gains or losses).
Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization
The Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization
(EBITDA) is determined by subtracting the Total Non-Operating
Income and Expenses from the Income Before Non-Operating Income
and Expenses (IBNOIE). Deducting the levels of Interest, Depreciation
and Amortization leads to the Income Before Taxes (IBT). Note that in
some cases, when the level of Interest payments are reintegrated to
the IBT, it becomes known as the Income Before Interests and Taxes
(IBIT), or as it is more commonly known, as the Earnings Before
Interests and Taxes (EBIT).
Net Income
To reconcile the Net Income presented in the Summary Operating
Statement (Exhibit 3.3), to the Net Income presented on the
Statement of Income (Exhibit 3.4), those expenses typically paid by
the owner are deducted from the EBITDA. These expenses include
Interests, Depreciation, Amortization, and Income Taxes. The Net
Profit or Loss equally known as the Net Income or Loss represents the
bottom line of the income statement. It represents the absolute
difference between all the sources of revenue of the company and all
its expenses in a given operational period. If this difference is positive
it is called the Net Income or Net Profit. If the difference is negative, it
is called the Net loss.
Principally for companies, the Net Income is used in two ways. It
could be distributed as Dividends to the owners of the company,
and/or maintained within the company as Reserves. These Reserves
are normally noted in the Balance Sheet at the date ending the
accounting period as changes in the Retained Earnings.
66 3 The profit and loss account statement
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Glossary
Cost of goods sold (cost of sales) – this is made up of the direct costs of sales,
adjusted for closing inventory, plus the overhead expenses attributable to
the production of the F & B products sold by the company.
Departmental income (or loss) – this represents the net revenue of each
department minus all related cost of sales, payroll and related expenses, and
other expenses. This is an income if the result is positive and a loss if it is
negative.
Expenses – these represent the amount of assets consumed during the
performance of business operations in a period while delivering or
producing goods and services.
Gains – represent what the company makes from activities other than its
primary business activity.
Losses – represent expenses or losses not related to the primary business
activity.
Net income – represents the difference between revenues and expenses. If
revenues are more than the expenses there is a net income. On the
contrary, if the expenses are more than the revenues there is a net loss.
Profit and loss account – this is a statement that shows the flow of activities
and transactions between the organization’s revenues and its net income.
Revenues – represent the amount of assets created during business operations
from the delivery or production of goods and services.
Turnover – see Revenue
Uniform system of accounts for the lodging industry (USALI) – this is a standardized
system of accounting used by the lodging industry that provides easy
comparison with similar business operations and improves decision
making.
67
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Multiple choice questions
3.1
What an organization generates from activities, other than its primary
business activity, will be shown in its income statement as:
a
expenses
b gains
c
losses
d revenues
3.2
The amount of assets consumed during the performance of business
operations in a period while delivering or producing goods and services will
be shown in the income statement as:
a
gains
b losses
c
expenses
d revenues
3.3
Which of the following questions cannot be answered when analyzing the
information presented in an income statement?
a
How much was spent to pay salaries during the period?
b What was the cash balance at the end of the period?
c
What was the profit for the period?
d What were the sales for the period?
3.4
Which of the following will not be shown as an undistributed operating
expense in an income statement destined for internal purposes and based
on the USALI?
a
administrative and general expenses
b fixed charges
c
property operations and maintenance expenses
d utility costs
3.5
Based on the USALI, payroll and related expenses as shown on the income
statement include:
a
fringe benefits
b payroll taxes
c
salaries and wages
d all of the above
Exercises
3.1
Calculate the gain or loss in the transactions that the Caterer’s United
Services carried out during 2016 when they had to dispose of two of their
old delivery vans. The information related to the transactions is as follows:
a The first van that was bought for €12,500.00 and depreciated to the tune of
€10,500.00 was sold at €2,500.00
b The second van that was bought for €15,000.00 and depreciated to the tune
of €11,500.00 was sold at €3,250.00
3.2
The owners of the Sweet Sauces Restaurant provide you with the following
data for the month of November 2016;
68 3 The profit and loss account statement
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

You are requested to determine the following:
·
The beverages available for sale
·
The food available for sale
·
The cost of food consumed
·
The cost of beverage consumed
·
The cost of food sold
·
The cost of beverage sold
3.3
The Falcon Road Stop has provided you with the information below related
to their operations of the last three months ending at September 30th 2016.
The Falcon Road Stop has three profit centres – the rooms department, the
food department, and lastly the beverage department. The management of
the Falcon Road Stop desires to have their end of quarter income statement
established according to the rules contained in the USALI for external users
as shown in Exhibit 3.4. You are as well informed that the average tax rate is
32%.
Establish the income statement.
Food
Beverages
––––––––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
Beginning inventory
€ 7,000.00
€
2,000.00
Ending inventory
€ 11,000.00
€
4,500.00
Inventory purchases
€ 54,000.00
€ 22,500.00
Goods used internally
€ 2,500.00
€
500.00
Account
Account Balance
Administration and general expense
€
780,000.00
Advertising
€
195,000.00
Amortization
€
32,500.00
Beverage department salaries and wages
€
260,000.00
Beverage revenues
€ 1,300,000.00
Cost of beverages sold
€
390,000.00
Cost of food sold
€ 1,170,000.00
Depreciation
€
325,000.00
Dividend income
€
97,500.00
Food department salaries and wages
€ 1,040,000.00
Food revenues
€ 3,510,000.00
Franchise fees
€
162,500.00
Heating expense
€
260,000.00
Insurance
€
130,000.00
Interest expense
€
552,500.00
POM contact expense
€
390,000.00
Management fees
€
325,000.00
Utility cost
€
195,000.00
Property taxes
€
325,000.00
Room revenues
€ 6,500,000.00
Rooms department allowances
€
13,000.00
Rooms department salaries and wages
€
975,000.00
Supplies rooms department
€
520,000.00
Supplies beverage department
€
97,500.00
Supplies food department
€
260,000.00
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exercises 69

3.4
Using the data provided by the Falcon Road Stop in Exercise 3.3, establish
the summary income statement destined for internal management
purposes, in conformity with the USALI and as shown in Exhibit 3.3. Limit
the summary income statement only to the current and actual activity
levels.
70 3 The profit and loss account statement
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Adjustments to the
balance sheet and the
profit and loss account
4.1
Accounting conventions – accruals and
recognition
4.2
Adjusting the accounts
Quite often, financial statements will be presented using trial
balances. These trial balances will be accompanied with a number of
adjustments that have to be made in order to arrive at the definitive
statements. Although much more relevant within the domain of
financial accounting, this chapter will briefly explain some of the
underlying principles and conventions related to making such
adjustments. Section 4.1 discusses the basic accruals and recognition
accounting conventions while Section 4.2 shows the major examples
of account adjustments. Those interested in furthering their
knowledge within the area could consult any financial accounting
textbook.
71
4
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

4.1
Accounting conventions – accruals and recognition
Accounting conventions are used when determining the amounts at
which items should be stated in the financial statements, or if these
items should be stated at all. There are two broad conventions which
are:
The accruals convention
This is also called the matching convention, it is very important in
the calculation of profit. It simply indicates that the effects of a
transaction should be recognized in the accounting period in which
this transaction took place. In some cases, this is not necessarily going
to be the same period in which the transaction is invoiced or settled.
The recognition convention
This is also called the realization convention comes into play when
income and expense items are brought into the accounting
statements. Generally, the point at which items are recognized is
straight forward in terms of cash sales. However, credit sales are not so
straight forward. As a result of this, it should be noted that the total
recorded for sales in an accounting period will not necessarily be
equal to the cash received. Amounts due at the end of the accounting
period will be considered as accounts receivables and as such included
in the balance sheet. On the side of expenses for example, goods
received till the end of the accounting period are considered as
purchases. However, all amounts still to be paid in respect of the
acquisition of these goods at the year’s end will be considered as
accounts payable and included in the balance sheet.
4.2
Adjusting the accounts
For the definitive statements to be made, the trial balances will have
to be adjusted. The adjustments will generally impact stock, accounts
receivable, depreciation and amortization, return of goods, discounts
and delivery charges. The structure of the subsections is as follows:
4.2.1
Stock (inventory)
4.2.2
Accounts receivable
4.2.3
Depreciation and amortization
4.2.4
Return of goods
4.2.5
Discounts
4.2.6
Delivery charges
4.2.1
Stock (inventory)
Generally the value of inventory at the end of the year is equal to the
number of items in stock multiplied by the value of these individual
items. The number of items in stock is usually assessed by counting
these items on the stock taking day which could be the last day of the
accounting period. The value of stock is generally affected by certain
other factors such as accidental damage or loss in quality.
72 4 Adjustments to the balance sheet and the profit and loss account
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

The basic rule is that inventory should be valued at the lower of costs
and net realizable value. The net realizable value is the amount for
which the inventory could be sold minus all incidental expenses
related to its sale. Comparing the costs and the net realizable value is
important to ensure that the balance sheet is not going to contain
inventory at overvalued amounts.
Inventory at any time does not constitute a large part of the current
assets in most hotels. Using the periodic inventory accounting system,
an inventory count is periodically made to determine the level of
inventory. Under a periodic inventory system, the purchases of
supplies are recorded by debiting the supplies purchases account.
Exhibit 4.1 is a worked example of how inventory is determined in a
periodic inventory system.
■Exhibit 4.1 Worked example of how inventory is determined in a
periodic inventory system
As office manager at the Afilen Hotel that uses the periodic inventory system
to evaluate their office supplies, Jan Smits was asked by the accountant on
December 31st 2016 to carry out the end-of-year inventory count of office
supplies. The count showed that available office supplies were worth €4,000.
Jan equally noted that the opening balance of the office supplies account as of
January 1st 2016 was €5,600. In the course of the year 2016 Jan had made
purchases of office supplies worth €28,000. To determine the cost of office
supplies used in 2016 the following schedule can be used to solve for the
unknown in it (quantity of supplies used in 2016):
Opening balance (01/01/2016)
€
5,600
add purchases (all of 2016)
€
28,000
equals available supplies (for the year 2016)
€
33,600
less supplies used  (to be determined)
unknown
equals ending balance (31/12/2016)
€
4,000
Since it is clear that the available supplies during 2016 was €33,600 and the
year ended with only €4,000, then it means that supplies used in 2016 was
€33,600 – €4,000 = €29,600
The periodic system of inventory has a major drawback in the sense
that the management might not have a complete administrative
overview of what is in stock. This drawback can be eliminated by the
use of a perpetual inventory system in which the inventory account
will be debited immediately every time inventory is purchased, and
also immediately crediting the inventory account every time a sale is
made or inventory is issued out of the storerooms. The choice
between using either a periodic or perpetual inventory system is often
hampered by the high costs involved in instituting a perpetual
inventory system. Further discussion on this issue is beyond the scope
of this chapter.
.......................................................................................................................
4.2 Adjusting the accounts 73
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

4.2.2
Accounts receivable
Accounts receivable result from credit sales accorded by the
organization to its clients or customers. The recording takes place
when the transaction is recognized (matching principle). That is at the
time of sale of the product or the rendering of the service. However in
real life, there is always a time lag between the sale of the product or
delivery of the service, and the reception of the payment for the
product or service. Credit sales generally entail a risk. There is a risk
that the client or customer might not be able to fully or partially pay
for the products or services.
Accounts receivable thus represents the total value of all unpaid sales
invoices. An accumulation of unpaid sales invoices generally causes
problems to business organizations be they large or small. More large
organizations will often have their own credit management
departments whereas smaller organizations may have one employee
taking care of the management of the credit invoices. Both small and
large organizations depend on the size of their accounts receivables
and depending on the severity of the impact on their business, might
use external consultants and agencies to help them reduce their
accounts receivable balances.
To ensure that the balance sheet indicates acceptable figures, the
amounts of accounts receivable should be indicated in their
recoverable amounts. For this to be done, allowances are normally
created. There are basically two types of allowances used to adjust
accounts receivable amounts:
·
The Allowance for Bad Debts: created in such situations whereby
there is a certainty that they will be unable to collect these
particular debts.
·
The Allowance for Doubtful Accounts: created in such situations
whereby they think they might still get back some of their debts
whatever part that may be.
To take care of these allowances, provisions are made which are then
deducted from the accounts receivable end of year figures.
Adjustments to the accounts receivable account is illustrated in
Exhibit 4.2.
■Exhibit 4.2 Steps in adjusting for bad debts and doubtful accounts
At the end of any accounting period, an adjusting entry needs to be made to
account for uncollectible receivables. The following three steps outline a
widely adopted approach to accounting for bad and doubtful debts.
Step 1
Create a provision by periodically updating the records to reflect and
provide for the problem of potentially non-collectible accounts. If
every month credit sales come up to about €40,000 and historically
the company has an uncollectible rate of 1.5%, then an amount of
€600 should be credited monthly into the allowance for doubtful
accounts
Step 2
Adjust for accounts that are definitely bad. If for example one of the
debtors becomes bankrupt, the company can no longer expect to 
.....................................................................
74 4 Adjustments to the balance sheet and the profit and loss account
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

receive the payment. In this case the adjustment will be carried out
by debiting the allowance for doubtful accounts and crediting the
accounts receivable account
Step 3
Carry out an end of year adjustment. If at the end of the year it is
realized that the provisions for doubtful accounts made in the course
of the year were insufficient to effectively cover for the uncollectible
debts, then an appropriate adjustment as in Step 1 above have to be
carried out to compensate for the difference. The exact opposite
adjustment will have to be made in the instance whereby the
provisions turned out to be far more than what the real situation of
uncollectible debts were.
4.2.3
Depreciation and amortization
Based on the matching or accruals convention, adjustments for the
depreciation and amortization of fixed assets can be made. Fixed
assets generally have an economic useful life, at the end of which they
will have to be replaced. The cost of using the fixed asset will have to
be matched based on the matching convention in the accounting
period. There are generally some obvious costs such as insurance and
repairs but some are not so obvious. This includes the impact of how
much value of the fixed asset is being used in the process within the
accounting period. The value attributed to this use of the asset is
called the depreciation of the asset.
In Exhibit 4.3 two of the commonly used depreciation methods are
explained.
■Exhibit 4.3 Two common depreciation methods
To illustrate the commonly used methods of depreciation, assume that the
Afilen Hotel has just acquired a new cold storage facility at a cost of €56,000.
This new equipment has an assumed economically useful life of 7 years and it
is expected that at the end of the 7 years they will be able to dispose of it
through a second-hand dealer and receive €12,000 for it. This amount of
€12,000 is commonly called the salvage value.
1
The straight line or linear method of depreciation
In this most widely used method, the original acquisition cost of the
equipment (or other fixed asset) minus any expected salvage value is
spread in an equal manner over the life of the asset. The formula is:
Annual Depreciation Charge =
As such, the annual depreciation charge for the new cold storage facility
will be €6,285.71 calculated as follows:
Annual Depreciation Charge = 
56,000
7
– 12,000

Acquisition value of equipment  salvage value

Estimated life of equipment
..........................................................
4.2 Adjusting the accounts 75
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
...............................................................................................................................

2
The declining balance method of depreciation
In this method, the company assumes a certain yearly percentage as usage
of the equipment and each year, that percentage is applied to the value of
the equipment to determine the depreciation charge for the year. In this
method, the annual depreciation charge reduces per equipment because
the net book value (which is the difference between the acquisition cost of
the equipment and all accumulated depreciation on the equipment till that
date) reduces as time goes by.
Now, if the Afilen Hotel used the declining balance method of
depreciation, then the annual depreciation charges will look as shown in
the table below:
Note how the accumulated depreciation on the equipment rises as the
years go by and how the salvage value was not taken into consideration in
the declining balance method.
Based on the matching convention, the total depreciation for the
accounting period should be set off against the sales of the accounting
period. This is noted in the income statement as an expense. Since
depreciation has an effect on the value of the fixed assets in that it
reduces this value as time goes by, it is therefore deducted from the
initial values of the fixed assets every year. The accumulation of these
deductions is noted in the balance sheet as accumulated depreciation.
Amortization, which is accounted for in a similar way like
depreciation is applicable only to intangible fixed assets.
4.2.4
Returns of goods
There are cases in business transactions when errors do occur and
have to be returned. This could be like a customer buying a pair of
shoes for a friend and it turned out that the size was inappropriate or
a company ordering some parts for its kitchen equipment which did
not fit. In such instances, there are implications for the profit and loss
account statement of the parties concerned in the transaction. 
In cases where such returns occur frequently, this leads to an
accumulation in the course of the accounting period. As such, sales
return have to be deducted from the sales of the period as well as
purchase returns must be deducted from the purchases of the period
before the profit and loss statement is established.
Years
Opening
Depreciation
Ending
Accumulated
Book Value
at 25%
Book Value
Depreciation
––––––
–––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––
1
€ 56,000.00
€ 14,000.00
€ 42,000.00
€ 14,000.00
2
€ 42,000.00
€ 10,500.00
€ 31,500.00
€ 24,500.00
3
€ 31,500.00
€ 7,875.00
€ 23,625.00
€ 32,375.00
4
€ 23,625.00
€ 5,906.25
€ 17,718.75
€ 38,281.25
5
€ 17,718.75
€ 4,429.69
€ 13,289.06
€ 42,710.94
6
€ 13,289.06
€ 3,322.27
€ 9,966.80
€ 46,033.20
7
€ 9,966.80
€ 2,491.70
€ 7,475.10
€ 48,524.90
76 4 Adjustments to the balance sheet and the profit and loss account
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
............................................................................................................................................................

4.2.5
Discounts
Discounts are generally reductions in prices attributed to customers.
In normal business these discounts are of two types (trade discounts
and financial discounts).
Trade discounts
Trade discounts relate to discounts given to loyal customers or when
customers make large purchases. With trade discounts, no special
adjustments need to be made to the profit and loss account statement
because the prices already indicate the value of either the sales or
purchases made by the company or clients.
Financial discounts
Financial discounts result from the fact that businesses provide credit
facilities to their customers. One element of providing a credit facility
is to determine the possible date of repayment. Whatever the standard
used by the company in terms of days, it might, in order to incite the
debtors to pay earlier provide them with a financial discount. For
example, regular payments are required within 60 days but if this bill
is settled within 30 days pay 2% less. However, it should be noted that
the costs of such discounts should be carefully weighed against the
benefits of receiving the sales revenue earlier. Unlike trade discounts,
financial discounts permit that payments will be registered in the
balance sheet as accounts receivable pending payment and managed
just as indicated in Subsection 4.2.2.
4.2.6
Delivery charges
In instances where businesses are called upon to incur the expense of
distributing their products to customers, they have to account for
these distribution expenses. As such, these expenses will be shown in
the expenses section of the profit and loss account statement. These
delivery charges might include road costs, handling costs, rail costs,
excise duties, and import duties.
4.2 Adjusting the accounts 77
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Glossary
Accounting conventions – are accounting agreements, principles or statements,
either expressed or implied, that are used to solve given types of accounting
problems. Placing debits on the right and credits on the left of an account is
an example of an accounting convention.
Accruals convention – is the convention that indicates that the effects of a
transaction should be recognized in the period in which the transaction
took place. This might not necessarily be the same period in which the
transaction is invoiced or settled.
Amortization – is the expense charged by the company to compensate for the
cost of an intangible asset over its expected life.
Depreciation – is the expense charged by the company to compensate for the
cost of a plant or machine over its useful life taking into account wear and
tear, obsolescence, and salvage value.
Discounts – these are the reductions in prices commonly attributed to
customers by businesses.
Inventory – these are the raw materials and items available for sale or in the
process of being made ready for sale.
Matching convention – see accruals convention
Realization convention – see recognition convention
Recognition convention – is the convention that indicates that revenues should
be recognized at the time the goods are sold and the services are rendered.
Due to the existence of credit sales, the total sales in an accounting period
will be different from the cash received. Amounts due at the end of the
accounting period will be considered as accounts receivables and included
in the balance sheet while amounts still to be paid at the year’s end will be
considered as accounts payable and included in the balance sheet.
78
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Multiple choice questions
4.1
The accounting convention that indicates that a transaction should be
recognized in the period in which it took place is:
a
the accruals convention
b the realization convention
c
the recognition convention
d none of the above
4.2
The recognition convention is also called the:
a
the accruals convention
b the matching convention
c
the realization convention
d none of the above
4.3
The allowance for bad debts is created in situations whereby
a
the company has cleared the bad debts from their records
b the company thinks they might collect a part of the debt
c
there is a certainty that the company will be unable to collect the debt
d none of the above
4.4
Adjustments for depreciation and amortization are made based on the
following convention:
a
the matching convention
b the realization convention
c
the recognition convention
d none of the above
4.5
The salvage value is not taken into consideration in the following common
depreciation method:
a
declining balance method of depreciation
b linear method of depreciation
c
straight line method of depreciation
d none of the above
Exercises 
4.1
The management of the Rolling Hills Hotel uses the periodic inventory
system to evaluate their guest supplies. On December 31st 2016, the balance
showed an amount of €8,000. You are informed that on December 31st
2015, the balance was €10,300. Guest supplies purchases in 2016 came up
to a total of €47,250. You are requested to determine the following:
a the available guest supplies for the year 2016
b the guest supplies used in 2016
4.2
New equipment was purchased at a cost of €32,000 and it has an assumed
economic life of 7 years. It is expected that at the end of its economically
useful life the company can receive €2,800 when disposing of the
equipment. You are asked to calculate the annual depreciation charge for
the equipment using the straight line method of depreciation.
Exercises 79
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

4.3
Use the information that is contained in Exercise 4.2. You are informed that
the company applies an annual depreciation proportion for such
equipment of 32%. Establish the annual depreciation schedule over the
seven years of its economically useful life using the declining balance
method of depreciation.
4.4
A motel uses the periodic inventory system to evaluate their office supplies.
You are provided with the following information:
Purchases for the year
€
26,000
Supplies used during the year
€
34,200
Balance at year’s end
€
2,800
You are requested to determine the following:
a the balance at the beginning of the year for office supplies
b the available office supplies for the year
80 4 Adjustments to the balance sheet and the profit and loss account
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

The cash flow statement
(also called the statement
of cash flow)
5.1
Cash in the business
5.2
Establishing cash flow statements
5.3
A worked example in the establishment of the
SCF using the indirect method
Companies can only survive if they have enough cash in hand to be
able to take care of all their expenses. Cash is considered as the
lifeblood of any business. Users of financial statements who assess
only the statement of profit and loss to try and determine the
financial health of the company might later on realize that their
assessment may have been incorrect. Profitable companies have been
known to have suddenly failed because they did not adequately
manage their cash flows. An understanding of the importance and
management of cash is a must if any company’s management would
want to avoid sudden liquidity problems. Section 5.1 discusses the
place of cash in a business, while at the same time differentiating
profits from cash. Section 5.2 provides the rules in the establishment
of the cash flow statement, while Section 5.3 is a worked example of
the cash flow statement using one of the well established methods.
81
5
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

5.1
Cash in the business
Cash is money, in the form of notes and coins, which constitutes
payment for goods or services at the time of their purchase or
consumption. Cash is not only cash in hand but also deposits and
overdrafts which are commonly called cash equivalents. All
transactions whether they are settled immediately or settled in the
future are ultimately conducted by cash or cash equivalents. Just like
all other assets, cash is an asset with the same properties like other
assets, and also many more. The structure of the subsections is as
follows:
5.1.1
The importance of cash in the business
5.1.2
Differentiating profits from cash
5.1.3
The need for cash flow statements
5.1.4
The categories of activities
5.1.1
The importance of cash in the business
Cash in general represents money in its physical form such as coins
and bank notes. Additionally, in businesses it may refer to currency or
currency equivalents that can be easily assessed. Cash and cash
equivalents generally comprise the most liquid current assets. Cash
equivalents are current assets that are readily convertible into cash, for
example, money market holdings, treasury bills, short-term
government bonds, marketable securities and commercial papers.
Cash equivalents are characterized by their short-term existence
maturing within 3 months. Cash and cash equivalents form the most
basic business resource and without them, transactions would be very
difficult to complete. In the absence of cash it would be virtually
impossible to pay creditors, to buy inventory and to invest in fixed
assets.
Cash is generally generated from the following sources:
·
Cash generated from the business itself through its sales
·
Cash made available to the business by the owners
·
Cash borrowed from third parties, which could include individuals,
lending institutions and other businesses
Cash flows (also called net cash flows) represent the net balance
between amounts of cash received in the organization (cash inflows)
and the cash paid by the organization (cash outflows) during a period
of time. Cash inflows represent increases in cash to the organization
whereas cash outflows represent decreases in cash to the organization.
Net cash flows represent the net effect of cash inflows and outflows.
Profitable businesses are expected to generate enough cash for their
day to day operating activities. However, some businesses can be
profitable but find themselves short of cash. A better understanding of
this paradox would entail an understanding of the principles of
working capital management, which is discussed in Chapter 8.
82 5 The cash flow statement (also called the statement of cash flow)
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

5.1.2
Differentiating profits from cash
Over time, profitable businesses are able to generate enough cash. In
the short term however, profits are not equal to cash. Based on the
matching principle, costs are matched against the revenues they help
to generate. As a result of this, income and costs that have not been
received or paid in the form of cash can be recognized. An example is
annual depreciation and amortization allocations are deducted in the
establishment of the net income despite the fact that these do not
entail any outward movements in cash.
In situations of the acquisition of fixed assets, cash can be used but
this may have no immediate and direct effect on the income
statement. For example, purchasing an item of machinery, cash as a
current asset item will be used and in the balance sheet this will be
replaced by the creation of a fixed asset item. This has no immediate
impact on profit, though over time this fixed asset item will be
reduced as it is depreciated.
To illustrate this difference between profit and cash, let’s use the
following example. A company purchases a catering van that will be
used for 5 years at a cost of €10,000.00 and the company uses straight
line depreciation method. The impact on cash would be a reduction
of €10,000.00 and fixed assets will increase by the acquisition value of
the van of €10,000.00. There will be no immediate impact on profit.
Over the years, there will be an allocation to depreciation of
€2,000.00 per year in the income statement but this will have no
effect on the cash levels.
5.1.3
The need for cash flow statements
The cash flow statement like the income statement is established over
a certain period. The SCF reflects the flow of money in to and out of a
business over time. Unlike the balance sheet and income statement
which are based on accrual accounting, the SCF is based on actual
cash flows. The primary function of the SCF is to provide needed
information to concerned stakeholders – especially investors,
suppliers, and creditors, about where the money in the business
comes from and how it is used. The SCF excludes transactions that do
not directly affect the movements in cash.
The importance of the SCF can be summarized as follows:
·
Shows the organization’s ability to generate positive future cash
flows. Despite the fact that the SCF is historical in nature, it at least
provides information on how the organization generated its cash
in the past which could be used to evaluate the organization’s
ability to generate cash in the future.
·
Shows the organization’s ability to honour its obligations to its
creditors. By providing information on the organization’s liquidity
and solvency, concerned stakeholders will be better placed to make
decisions on their future transactions with the organization.
5.1 Cash in the business 83
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

·
Shows the difference between the organization’s profit and its cash
movements. The SCF easily shows the sources of cash within a
company as it displays such information under the 3 headings of
direct operating activities, investing activities and financing
activities. Concerned stakeholders will be much more interested in
organizations that generated most of their cash from their primary
operating activities.
·
Shows the effect of both cash and non-cash financing and
investing activities during the accounting period.
·
Highlights the comparability of different organizations’ operating
performance in eliminating the effects of different accounting
methods. This results from the fact that the SCF is established
according to the 3 major categories of activities – operating,
investing, and financing activities.
Exhibit 5.1 illustrates how important cash is to businesses without
which they will be unable to carry out their day to day activities.
Exhibit 5.1 The importance of cash
5.1.4
Categories of activities
The SCF is split into 3 major categories of activities which are
operating activities, investing activities and financing activities as the
major areas of activities. However, some non-cash activities are also
taken into consideration and must be included in the footnotes to the
SCF.
84 5 The cash flow statement (also called the statement of cash flow)
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Robert Booth, The Guardian,
Monday 13 October 2008
For retail magnate Sir Philip Green,
the rationale for his weekend
shopping trip to Iceland to buy debts
held by the country’s collapsed
banks should be obvious.
“If you’re on your way home and
you go past a house with a sign
outside saying ‘half price’, you’re
going to knock on the door, aren’t
you?” he said yesterday.
The Topshop owner jetted to Iceland
last Friday to negotiate a deal with
the stricken Icelandic retail investor
Baugur. It could deliver him, at a big
discount, stakes in or control of high-
street brands including House of
Fraser, Mappin & Webb, Oasis,
Warehouse and Whistles. If it comes
off, shoppers will be able to throw a
stone on London’s Oxford Street and
be pretty sure it will hit a Green-
owned store.
As his advisers tried to untangle
Baugur’s web of debts and holdings,
Green told the Guardian yesterday
that the dynamic behind the deal was
simple: “There’s a buyer and there’s
a seller and that’s how business has
always been done. It’s just that there
are not many buyers now.”
Green, 56, is one of the few tycoons
with the funds to spare. With a
personal fortune estimated at more
than £4.3bn by the Sunday Times
rich list, he is Britain’s ninth
wealthiest man. He expects a
significant discount on debts that he
said yesterday could be worth £1bn
to £2bn.
His proposal may appeal to Iceland’s
authorities because it would inject a
substantial amount of foreign
currency into the country’s monetary
system. With most banks and private
investors unable to raise funds,
Green’s move has highlighted the
power of cash-rich individuals in the
current climate.
Green denied he was preying on a
crippled investor, and said that the
deal could help prop up confidence
on Britain’s high street, which is
facing a recession.
“It’s not my fault they have to sell,”
said Green. “I don’t want to see any
of these brands fail. If something
happens to shock the high street that
may get out of control. We don’t
want a major retail accident.”
He said the deal would take up to
48 hours to complete.
■
Topshop billionaire hunts a
bargain in Iceland
Source: Guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media Limited 2009

Operating activities
The first sub-heading in the SCF is the net cash from operating
activities. Operating activities include the production, sales and
delivery of the organization’s products and services as well as the
collection of payments from its customers or clients. These represent
the principal revenue producing activities of the organization and
those other activities that do not have an investing or financing
character.
Operating activities would include transactions related to revenues
(cash inflows) and expenses (cash outflows) linked to the primary
activity of the organization. Cash inflows for a hospitality
organization might include the following: sale of food, beverages and
other goods, receipts on services to guests and interest and dividend
income to the organization. Cash outflows on the other hand would
include payments for inventory, salaries, wages, taxes, interests, etc.
Investing activities
Investing activities generally relate to the acquisition and disposal of
property and equipment as well as short-term investments
(marketable securities). Examples of investing activities are the
purchase of any asset which will lead to cash outflows, as well as loans
made to third parties will also lead to cash outflows. Investing
activities are generally much easier to deal with as they affect the
balance sheet and the cash flow in the same way. Most investing
activities lead to cash outflows only. However there are some
exceptions when the company for example disposes of its property
and equipment. In such situations cash inflows will be created.
Financing activities
Financing activities include the cash inflows from investors and
shareholders, and cash outflows to the shareholders in the form of
dividends. These relate to cash flows raised by the issue of shares,
debentures, loans, etc., and cash flows used to redeem shares or
debentures or pay back long term debt. Summarily, financing
activities relate to anything that has an impact on the long term
financing of the organization. Examples of financing activities cash
flows are:
·
proceeds from the issue of shares;
·
proceeds from the issue of short term or long term debts;
·
payments of dividends;
·
repayment of debt principal including capital leases; and
·
payments for the repurchase of capital stock
Recognition of non cash activities
These non cash activities are to be included in the footnotes of the
SCF. These non cash activities normally have an impact on the
financing and investing activities. They should be noted because such
non cash activities will have influences on the future cash flows of the
organization. Examples of non cash activities are:
5.1 Cash in the business 85
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

·
the conversion of liabilities to equity;
·
leasing an asset to purchase it eventually;
·
exchanging non cash assets or liabilities for other non cash assets
or liabilities; and
·
issuing shares in exchange for assets
5.2
Establishing cash flow statements
In order to be able to adequately establish a SCF, it is necessary to
have the following documents and information:
·
The income statement for the period concerned
·
The statement of retained earnings for the period concerned
·
The balance sheet established at the date beginning the period
concerned
·
The balance sheet established at the date ending the period
concerned
·
Details to all transactions that affected all fixed asset elements of
the organization in the period between the two balance sheets.
When all of the above documents, statements and information are in
place, the SCF is then established through a 4 step approach as shown
in the subsections below:
5.2.1
Determine the net cash flow from operating activities
5.2.2
Determine the net cash flow from investing activities
5.2.3
Determine the net cash flow from financing activities
5.2.4
Collate the three net cash flows into the SCF
5.2.1
Determine the net cash flow from operating activities
To determine the net cash flow from operating activities, two methods
are used, which are the direct method and the indirect method.
The direct method
The direct method requires bringing together the beginning cash level
to the ending cash level. This is done by reporting the major
categories of cash inflows and cash outflows. Under the direct
method, cash and bank accounts are analyzed to identify cash flows
during the period. The cash flows can equally be determined using a
worksheet for each major account and by eliminating the effects of
accrual basis accounting. This will permit the establishment of the net
cash effect of that account during the period.
Examples of items that will be included are:
86 5 The cash flow statement (also called the statement of cash flow)
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Cash received from customers
Action
Item
Where found
Start with
Net sales (revenues)
Income statement
Add
Accounts receivable
Initial balance sheet
Deduct
Accounts receivable
Ending balance sheet
Equals
Cash received from
customers
Cash paid to employees
Action
Item
Where found
Start with
Salaries and wages
Income statement
Add
Salaries and wages payable
Initial balance sheet
Deduct
Salaries and wages payable
Ending balance sheet
Equals
Cash paid to employees
Cash used to pay for inventory
Action
Item
Where found
Start with
Costs of Goods Sold
Income statement
Deduct
Inventory
Initial balance sheet
Add
Inventory
Ending balance sheet
Add
Accounts payable 
Initial balance sheet
Deduct
Accounts payable
Ending balance sheet
Equals
Cash used to pay for
inventory
Cash used to pay interest
Action
Item
Where found
Start with
Interest expense
Income statement
Add
Interest payable
Initial balance sheet
Deduct
Interest payable
Ending balance sheet
Equals
Cash used to pay interest
Cash used to pay taxes
Action
Item
Where found
Start with
Tax expense
Income statement
Add
Taxes payable
Initial balance sheet
Deduct
Taxes payable
Ending balance sheet
Equals
Cash used to pay taxes
Cash used to pay for operating expenses
Action
Item
Where found
Start with
Operating expenses
Income statement
Deduct
Depreciation
Income statement
Add or deduct
Increase or decrease in
prepaid expenses
Both balance sheets
Add or deduct
Decrease or increase in
accrued expenses
Both balance sheets
Equals
Cash used to pay for
operating expenses
Using the direct method the sums of all the totals are reported as cash
flows from operating activities in its section of the SCF. Similar types
of calculations are used to determine the cash flows to be reported in
the investing activities section and the financing activities section of
the SCF.
The indirect method
The indirect method of establishing the net cash flow from operating
activities requires bringing together the beginning cash level to the
5.2 Establishing cash flow statements 87
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
..............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

ending cash level but starts with the net income for the period
concerned. The net income is then adjusted for non cash movements
found in the income statement. The most common non cash item
that is deducted to determine net income is depreciation.
Depreciation is thus added to net income in calculating the net cash
flow from operating activities. The general principle in establishing
the operating activities cash flow using the indirect method is to
reverse out entries to income and expense accounts that have no cash
movement implications, and show the relevant changes to the net
working capital. Such movements that affect net income but do not
represent cash flows could be for example incomes earned but not yet
received, accrued expenses, amortization of prepaid expenses, and
depreciation and amortization.
The basic rule of thumb in assessing the changes in working capital is
shown in Exhibit 5.2:
Using the indirect method, the operating activities section of the SCF
will be determined as such:
·
Net income as derived from the income statement
·
Plus all entries to expense accounts that do not represent cash flows
·
Less all entries to income accounts that do not represent cash flows
·
Equals cash flow before the changes in working capital
·
Plus or minus the changes in working capital as shown in the rule
of thumb above
This will then result in the establishment of cash provided or used in
the operating activities. The cash flows from investing activities and
financing activities will then be presented in the same manner as
under the direct method.
5.2.2
Determine the net cash flow from investing activities
In determining the net cash flow from investing activities, care should
be taken to make sure that all information related to the acquisition
and disposal of property and equipment as well as short term
investments are accounted for.
Exhibit 5.2 Rule of thumb in assessing changes in working capital for SCF establishment 
using the indirect method
Changes in the account balance during the accounting period
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
If the account balance 
If the account balance 
increases
decreases
–––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Current assets
Deduct the change from the 
Add the change to the net income.
net income
Current liabilities
Add the change to the 
Deduct the change from the net 
net income.
income
88 5 The cash flow statement (also called the statement of cash flow)
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

5.2.3
Determine the net cash flow from financing activities
In determining the net cash flow from financing activities, emphasis
is laid on changes in the long term liabilities and owners’ equity
accounts. As such, all information related to financing activities such
as the issue of shares, debentures, loans, and cash flows used to
redeem shares or debentures or pay back long term debt should be
taken into consideration.
5.2.4
Collate all the previous 3 net cash flows into the
definitive SCF
Net Cash Provided by (Used In) Operating Activities
+
Net Cash Provided by (Used In) Investing Activities
+
Net Cash Provided by (Used In) Financing Activities
=
Increase (Decrease) in Cash and Temporary Cash Investments
+
Cash and Temporary Cash Investments, Beginning of Period
=
Cash and Temporary Cash Investments, Ending of Period
In using either the direct or indirect method to establish the net cash
flow from operating activities the net cash flow is expected to be the
same. Accounting standard boards normally require companies to 
use the direct method. In practice however, since the information
needed while using the indirect method is much more easily available
to the companies, most company management prefer using the
indirect method.
The next section provides a worked example on the establishment of
a SCF.
5.3
A worked example in the establishment of the SCF using
the indirect method
The financial statements of the Skyline Hotel for the years 2015 and
2016 are provided below with some additional information. With this
information, the SCF of the Skyline Hotel for the year 2016 will be
developed. In addition to the financial statements below, the Skyline
Hotel in the course of the year 2016 carried out the following
transactions that will be significant in determining the SCF:
·
Investments of an initial value of €125,000 were sold for €375,000
resulting in a gain on the sale of investments of €250,000
·
All investment and equipment purchases during the year were
made with cash.
·
There was the conversion of long-term liabilities of €625,000 into
capital shares in a non-cash transaction. There was no other issue
of shares as well as no repurchase of shares.
...........................................................
5.3 A worked example in the establishment of the SCF using the indirect method 89
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

The condensed income statement of the Skyline Hotel for the year 2016
Comparative balance sheets of the Skyline Hotel for the years ending December 31st 2015
and 2016
Skyline Hotel
Balance sheets
December 31, 2015 and 2016
2015
2016
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––
Assets
Current assets
Cash
€
12,500
€
25,000
Accounts receivable
€
75,000
€
65,000
Inventory
€
25,000
€
30,000
Total current assets
€
112,500
€
120,000
Investments
€
125,000
€
750,000
Property and equipment:
Land
€
500,000
€
500,000
Building
€ 25,000,000
€ 25,000,000
Equipment
€
2,500,000
€
2,750,000
Less: Accumulated depreciation
(€ 12,500,000)
(€ 13,750,000)
Total property and equipment
€ 15,500,000
€ 14,500,000
Total assets
€ 15,737,500
€ 15,370,000
Liabilities and owners’ equity
Current liabilities:
Accounts payable
€
15,000
€
16,250
Accrued wages
€
10,000
€
11,250
Income taxes payable
€
17,500
€
15,000
Dividends payable
€
25,000
€
37,500
Total current liabilities
€
67,500
€
80,000
Long-term liabilities
€ 11,250,000
€
9,375,000
Total liabilities
€ 11,317,500
€
9,455,000
Owners’ equity
Capital
€
2,500,000
€
3,125,000
Retained earnings
€
1,920,000
€
2,790,000
Total owners’ equity
€
4,420,000
€
5,915,000
Total liabilities and owners’ equity
€ 15,737,500
€ 15,370,000
Sales
€
17,500,000 
Cost of goods sold
€
2,500,000
Payroll expenses
€
6,125,000
Other expenses
€
6,000,000
Depreciation expense
€
1,250,000
Income taxes
€
625,000 
Gain on the sale of investments
€
250,000
Net income
€
1,250,000 
90 5 The cash flow statement (also called the statement of cash flow)
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

The Statement of retained earnings of the Skyline Hotel for 2016
Using the indirect method, follow the four steps.
Net income
€
1,250,000 
Retained earnings – 12/31/2015
€
1,920,000 
Dividends declared
€
380,000 
Retained earnings – 12/31/2016
€
2,790,000 
5.3 A worked example in the establishment of the SCF using the indirect method 91
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Step 1 Determine the net cash flow from operating activities
Using the indirect method, commence with the net income (taken from
the income statement) of €1,250,000. Adjust this figure with items found
in the income statement that did not provide or use cash. In this case,
adjust for the depreciation expense (€1,250,000) and the gain on the sale
of investment (€250,000) as follows:
Proceed with the adjustments of both the current asset and current
liability  accounts that changed during the period as per the balance sheet
information and following the basic rule of thumb. Note that since it is
the change in the cash account that is being established, it is excluded in
these adjustments.
Combining all of these adjustments will lead to the net cash flow from
operating activities of the Skyline Hotel for 2016
Net Income
€ 1,250,000
Add the depreciation expense since it was subtracted in the income 
statement to arrive at the net income
+ € 1,250,000
Deduct the gain on the sale of investments as this is an investment 
activity (to be reviewed later on) 
– €
250,000
Accounts receivable declined from €75,000 to €65,000 between 2015
and 2016. As a current asset, following the rule of thumb, the positive 
difference must then be added to the net income 
+ €
10,000
Inventory increased between 2015 and 2016 by €5,000 and as such will 
be deducted
– €
5,000
Accounts payable increased between 2015 and 2016 by €1,250 and as 
this is a current liability, it will be added to the net income following the 
rule of thumb
+ €
1,250
Similarly accrued wages increased by €1,250 and will also be added to 
the net income
+ €
1,250
Finally income taxes payable decreased by €2,500 and as per the rule
will be deducted from the net income
– €
2,500

92 5 The cash flow statement (also called the statement of cash flow)
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Step 2 Determine the net cash flow from investing activities
Based on the additional information at the beginning of this example,
proceeds from the sale of investments came up to €375,000. This will be
considered as a positive investing activity cash inflow.
A look at the balance sheet equally reveals that investments changed
between 2015 and 2016 from €125,000 to €750,000. For the Skyline
Hotel to have arrived at such investment levels at the end of 2016, they
used up cash to acquire new investments to the sum of €625,000. Note
equally that from the additional information; investments worth
€125,000 were sold, indicating that an additional investment worth
€125,000 would have been bought using cash to the tune of €125,000.
Summing these figures together (€125,000 + €625,000), leads to the total
usage of cash in 2016 for the purchase of new investments by the Skyline
Hotel of €750,000.
Finally, the balance sheet of the Skyline Hotel reveals that equipment
increased between 2015 and 2016 by €250,000. This equally indicates use
of cash for the purchase of the new equipment.
Collating the above figures leads to the net cash flow from investing
activities:
Step 3 Determine the net cash flow from financing activities
The balance sheet of the Skyline Hotel indicates two changes relevant to
analyzing the movement of cash for financing activities. Note that the
change in capital was due to a non-cash transformation of long term
liabilities into shares.
First of all, there is the change in their long term liabilities. There is a
decrease in these liabilities between 2015 and 2016 from €11,250,000 to 
Net cash flow from operating activities 
Net income 
€ 1,250,000
Adjustments to reconcile net income to cash flows 
from operating activities 
Depreciation 
€ 1,250,000
Gain on sale of investments 
(€
250,000)
Decrease in accounts receivable 
€
10,000
Increase in inventory 
(€
5,000)
Increase in accounts payable 
€
1,250
Increase in accrued wages
€
1,250
Decrease in income taxes payable 
(€
2,500)
€ 1,005,000
Net cash flow from operating activities 
€ 2,255,000
Sale of investments (a cash inflow)
€ 375,000
Purchase of investments (a cash outflow)
(€ 750,000)
Purchase of equipment (a cash outflow)
(€ 250,000)
Net cash flow from investing activities
(€ 625,000)

5.3 A worked example in the establishment of the SCF using the indirect method 93
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
€9,375,000 indicating a possible cash usage of €1,875,000 to honour
those debts. However note that from the additional information at the
top of this example, long term liabilities worth €625,000 were converted
into capital shares in a non cash transaction. This means that not all of
the reduction in the long term liabilities led to the use of cash. So this
amount of €625,000 has to be deducted from €1,875,000 to establish the
exact amount of cash used in honouring their long term obligations. This
leads to €1,250,000 as cash effectively used.
Secondly, the statement of retained earnings indicated that dividends
were declared during 2016 by the Skyline Hotel. The amount was
€380,000. This figure will permit the establishment of what was really
paid out as dividends to the shareholders in 2016. Declaring dividends
does not mean that they have actually been paid out through cash
disbursements to the shareholders. To establish what the shareholders
actually received in the form of dividends, the current liabilities account
called dividends payable must be analyzed. Between 2015 and 2016,
dividends payable increased by €12,500 (€37,500 – €25,000). At the end
of 2015, Skyline Hotel’s shareholders still had €25,000 worth of dividends
to collect from the company. Adding the amount of dividends declared in
the course of 2016 (€380,000), and then deducting what will be paid out
to the shareholders in 2017 (€37,500), leads to the amount of cash
effectively disbursed in 2016 as dividends to the shareholders.
To round up, the net cash flow from financing activities of the Skyline
Hotel is
Change in long term liabilities between 2015 and 2016
€ 1,875,000
Conversion of long term liabilities into shares in 2016 (non-cash)
_ €
625,000
Cash actually used to honour the long term obligations
= € 1,250,000
Dividends payable end 2015
€
25,000
Dividends declared in 2016
+ € 380,000
Dividends payable end 2016
– €
37,500
Dividends actually received by the shareholders in 2016 in cash
= € 367,500
Cash used to honour long term obligations
(€ 1,250,000)
Cash used to pay dividends
(€
367,500)
Net cash flow from financing activities
(€ 1,617,500)

94 5 The cash flow statement (also called the statement of cash flow)
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Step 4 Collating all the above activity cash flows leads to the statement of
cash flow of the Skyline Hotel for 2016.
Skyline Hotel
Statement of cash flows for the year ended December 31st 2016
Net Cash from Operating Activities 
Net income
€ 1,250,000
Adjustments to reconcile net income to cash flows from operating activities 
Depreciation 
€ 1,250,000
Gain on sale of investments 
(€
250,000)
Decrease in accounts receivable 
€
10,000
Increase in inventory 
(€
5,000)
Increase in accounts payable 
€
1,250
Increase in accrued wages
€
1,250
Decrease in income taxes payable 
(€
2,500)
€ 1,005,000
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities 
€ 2,255,000
Net cash from Investing Activities
Sale of investments 
€
375,000
Purchase of investments 
(€
750,000)
Purchase of equipment 
(€
250,000)
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
(€
625,000)
Net cash from Financing Activities
Cash used to honour long term obligations
(€ 1,250,000)
Cash used to pay dividends
(€
367,500)
Net Cash Used in Financing Activities
(€ 1,617,500)
Increase in Cash and Temporary Cash Investments
€
12,500
Cash and Temporary Cash Investments, Beginning of Period
€
12,500
Cash and Temporary Cash Investments, End of Period
€
25,000

Glossary
Cash equivalents – these are short term and highly liquid investments.
Cash flow statement – measures the flow of money in and out of a business.
One of four financial statements found in the annual report, it categorizes a
company’s cash receipts and disbursements for a given fiscal year by three
major activities: operations, investments and financing.
Cash inflows – these represent the cash received in the course of an
accounting period by a business.
Cash outflows – these represent the cash paid out in the course of an
accounting period by a business
Direct method – this method requires bringing together the beginning cash
level to the ending cash level. Under the direct method, cash and bank
accounts are analyzed to identify cash flow during the period.
Financing activities – those activities that help to raise the financial resources
received from owners and creditors, and the associated repayments of the
resulting obligations.
Indirect method – this method starts with the net income for the period
concerned. The net income is then adjusted for non cash movements found
in the income statement.
Investing activities – the purchase and sale of operating equipment or other
assets intended to produce revenue in the long run. Also include activities
related to non-operating assets strictly intended for investment purposes,
such as buying shares of other companies.
Operating activities – these represent the principal revenue producing activities
associated with the day-to-day running of a business on an ongoing basis.
95
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Multiple choice questions
5.1
Which of the following stakeholders will consider using a company’s
statement of cash flows to assess its ability to generate enough cash from its
operations?
a
creditors
b investors
c
suppliers
d all of the above
5.2
Which of the following will not be included in a cash flow statement?
a
a new long term loan
b interests paid in the period
c
new dividends declared
d purchase of land
5.3
In the cash flow statement, which of the following will be used in assessing
the net cash flow from financing activities?
a
payments of accounts payable
b payments to acquire property and equipment
c
repayment of long term debt
d tax payments
5.4
In the cash flow statement, transactions related to accounts receivable and
accounts payable will be used when establishing the net cash flows related
to:
a
financing activities
b investing activities
c
operating activities
d all of the above
5.5
Using the basic rule of thumb is assessing changes in working capital, a
decrease in accounts payable is shown in the cash flow statement designed
on an indirect basis as an __________ of cash in the __________ activities
section.
a
inflow; financing
b inflow; investing
c
inflow; operating
d none of the above
Exercises
5.1
The activities listed below featured amongst those carried out by the Invast
Hotels in the course of the last year. 
·
bought a new piece of land
·
bought beverages
·
bought food
·
declared dividends
·
exchanged some shares for a long-term note
·
opened an account in a new bank to process salaries
·
paid a distiller for whiskies
·
paid interests on long-term loan
96 5 The cash flow statement (also called the statement of cash flow)
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

·
paid taxes
·
received interest income
·
reclassified a long-term note as current notes payable
·
recorded depreciation
·
sold beverages on credit
·
sold equipment
Classify each activity under its appropriate heading based on the following
possibilities
a financing activity
b investing activity
c
noncash transaction
d operating activity
e
none of the above
5.2
The following table lists current asset and current liability accounts. Identify
each as either a current asset or a current liability account. After identifying
each account, determine how the change in the account balance is treated
when using the indirect method. If cash increases fill in “add”; and if it
decreases, fill in “deduct”.
5.3
The Europa Motel carried out various activities as described below:
·
In 2016, the Europa Motel declared dividends of €450,000. The
dividends payable account was €55,000 at the beginning of the year and
€32,000 at the end of the year. Determine the dividends paid by the
motel in 2016.
·
In 2016, the Europa Motel had cash sales of €1,800,000 and credit sales
of €3,250,000. During the year, accounts receivable decreased by
€85,000. Determine the cash received from the guests in 2016.
Account
Current asset or 
If it increases
If it decreases
current liability
––––––––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––
Accounts receivable
Accounts payable
Inventories
Notes receivable
Prepaid expenses
Notes payable
Accrued expenses
Marketable securities
Interests payable
Exercises 97
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

·
In 2016, the Europa Motel had cost of food used of €900,000. During the
year, food inventory decreased by €24,000 and the food suppliers
accounts payable increased by €43,000. Determine the cash payments for
food purchases in 2016.
·
In 2016, the Europa Motel’s long-term debts were €2,200,000 on January
1st 2016. These increased to €3,100,000 by December 31st 2016. In 2016,
€850,000 of long-term debt was converted to common stock, and
€450,000 of long-term debt was reclassified as current debt. Determine
the cash received as long-term debt in 2016.
·
In 2016, the income tax expense of the Europa Motel was €122,000. The
income taxes payable account was €15,500 on January 1st 2016 and
€25,000 on December 31st 2016. Determine the amount of income taxes
paid during the year.
5.4
Prepare the statement of cash flow of the Constant Visits Restaurant based
on its condensed balance sheets and additional information presented
below:
Note: The net income of Constant Visits Restaurant for 2016 is €152,000.00.
Constant Visits Restaurant
Condensed Balance Sheets
December 31st
2015
2016
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––
Current assets
Cash
€
120,000.00
€
160,000.00
Accounts receivable
€
312,000.00
€
280,000.00
Iventory
€
160,000.00
€
192,000.00
Total current assets
€
592,000.00
€
632,000.00
Property and equipment
€ 2,480,000.00
€ 2,520,000.00
less accumulated depreciation
€ 1,200,000.00
€ 1,280,000.00
Total assets
€ 1,872,000.00
€ 1,872,000.00
Current liabilities:
Accounts payable
€
120,000.00
€
136,000.00
Dividends payable
€
184,000.00
€
96,000.00
Total current liabilities
€
304,000.00
€
232,000.00
Long term liabilities:
Notes payable
€
640,000.00
€
640,000.00
Total long term liabilities
€
640,000.00
€
640,000.00
Common stock
€
800,000.00
€
880,000.00
Retained earnings
€
128,000.00
€
120,000.00
Total Liabilities & Owners’ Equity
€ 1,872,000.00
€ 1,872,000.00
Additional information
Dividends declared in 2016
€
160,000.00
Old equipment which cost
€
160,000.00
was sold at
€
80,000.00
its net book value was
€
40,000.00
98 5 The cash flow statement (also called the statement of cash flow)
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Analyzing financial
statements
6.1
Purposes of analyzing statements
6.2
Horizontal analysis
6.3
Base-year analysis
6.4
Vertical analysis
Financial reports result from a combination of facts contained in the
statements to be analysed and the personal judgements of the
analysts. These facts and personal judgements are all influenced by
the accounting principles discussed in Chapter 1. These principles
determine how the reports will have to be presented to the concerned
stakeholders. Good financial analysis requires that the stakeholder for
whom the analysis is being carried out is clearly identified with the
purpose of the analysis. For the analysis to be considered valid, all the
factors relevant to the business performance of the organization
should be taken into account. These factors include amongst others,
principally the size of the organization, the socio-political and
economic conditions, the trends in the industry, the risks entailed in
carrying out the business as well as changes in technology. In Section
6.1 the purposes of analyzing financial statements are discussed,
followed in Section 6.2 by a description of how horizontal analysis is
carried out. Section 6.3 introduces the two ways of carrying out base-
year analysis and this chapter ends with a description of how vertical
analysis is carried out in Section 6.4.
99
6
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

6.1
Purposes of analyzing statements
Financial statements most of the time present a summary of a
company’s activities over a given period or as in the case of balance
sheets at a given point in time. This summary of activities is done in
monetary terms. The income statement presents the revenues and
expenses related to a particular period, the balance sheet gives an
insight into the financial worth of the organization at a given date.
The SCF shows how cash was generated or used during a certain
period within the organization while the statement of retained
earnings indicates how the net profit generated is either distributed as
dividends or ploughed back into the company as reserves.
For financial statements to be meaningful they have to be analyzed
because just having the financial statement figures on their own does
not generally answer all the questions of concerned stakeholders.
Analyzing financial statements involves examining relationships
between the financial figures and the tendencies that these figures
show over time. A primary purpose of financial statement analysis is
to review the past performances of a company and see how this can
be used to predict the company’s future performance. This particular
purpose is considered as the forecasting function of financial
statement analysis. Secondly, financial statement analysis permits a
company to review its performances in order to be able to identify
areas that need special attention. This is considered as the problem-
solving function of financial statement analysis and it is historical in
nature.
The relationship between financial statement figures are called
financial ratios and these are discussed in chapter 7. In general, the
more thorough the analysis that is carried out, the more realistic the
information generated from the analysis will be. The following
financial statements of the Europa Alliance Hotel Plc. (Exhibits 6.1 –
balance sheets, 6.2 – income statements, 6.3 – cash flow statements,
6.4 – other information, 6.5 – condensed F & B departmental
statement) will be used in all the analyses that will follow in this
chapter.
100 6 Analyzing financial statements
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

6.1 Purposes of analyzing statements 101
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exhibit 6.1 Balance sheets of The Europa Alliance Hotel Plc. for the years ending 
December 31st 2014, 2015, and 2016
Balance Sheet
Europa Alliance Hotel Plc.
For the year ending December 31st
2014
2015
2016
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
Assets
Current Assets
Cash
€ 1,100,000.00
€ 1,155,000.00
€ 1,320,000.00
Marketable Securities
€ 3,300,000.00
€ 4,455,000.00
€ 7,975,000.00
Net Accounts Receivable
€ 5,500,000.00
€ 4,950,000.00
€ 7,700,000.00
Inventories
€
770,000.00
€
935,000.00
€
825,000.00
Prepaid Expenses
€
715,000.00
€
660,000.00
€
770,000.00
Total Current Assets
€ 11,385,000.00
€ 12,155,000.00
€ 18,590,000.00
Investments
€ 2,365,000.00
€ 1,925,000.00
€ 2,200,000.00
Property and Equipment:
Land
€ 3,767,500.00
€ 3,767,500.00
€ 3,767,500.00
Buildings
€ 44,550,000.00
€ 46,750,000.00
€ 48,400,000.00
Furniture, and Equipment
€ 9,350,000.00
€ 10,450,000.00
€ 11,440,000.00
€ 57,667,500.00
€ 60,967,500.00
€ 63,607,500.00
Less: Accumulated Depreciation
€ 14,300,000.00
€ 17,600,000.00
€ 20,955,000.00
China, glassware, silver, linen, and uniforms
€
632,500.00
€ 1,127,500.00
€ 1,254,000.00
Total Property and Equipment
€ 44,000,000.00
€ 44,495,000.00
€ 43,906,500.00
Total Assets
€ 57,750,000.00
€ 58,575,000.00
€ 64,696,500.00
Liabilities and Owners’ Equity
Current Liabilities:
Accounts Payable
€ 3,300,000.00
€ 2,942,500.00
€ 3,905,000.00
Accrued Income Taxes
€ 1,650,000.00
€ 1,760,000.00
€ 1,870,000.00
Accrued Expenses
€ 3,850,000.00
€ 4,686,000.00
€ 4,675,000.00
Current Portion of Long-term Debt
€ 1,375,000.00
€ 1,182,500.00
€ 1,320,000.00
Total Current Liabilities
€ 10,175,000.00
€ 10,571,000.00
€ 11,770,000.00
Long-term Debt:
Mortgage Payable
€ 23,375,000.00
€ 22,550,000.00
€ 22,000,000.00
Deferred Income Taxes
€ 2,200,000.00
€ 2,354,000.00
€ 2,475,000.00
Total Long-term Debt
€ 25,575,000.00
€ 24,904,000.00
€ 24,475,000.00
Total Liabilities
€ 35,750,000.00
€ 35,475,000.00
€ 36,245,000.00
Owners’ Equity:
Common Stock
€ 3,025,000.00
€ 3,025,000.00
€ 3,025,000.00
Paid-in Capital in excess of par
€ 6,050,000.00
€ 6,050,000.00
€ 6,050,000.00
Retained Earnings
€ 12,925,000.00
€ 14,025,000.00
€ 19,376,500.00
Total Owners’ Equity
€ 22,000,000.00
€ 23,100,000.00
€ 28,451,500.00
Total Liabilities and Owners’ Equity
€ 57,750,000.00
€ 58,575,000.00
€ 64,696,500.00

102 6 Analyzing financial statements
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exhibit 6.2 Income statements of The Europa Alliance Hotel Plc. for the years 2015 and 2016
Income Statement
European Alliance Hotel Plc.
For the years
2015
2016
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
Total Revenue
€ 71,500,000.00
€ 74,360,000.00
Rooms:
Revenue
€ 42,900,000.00
€ 44,550,000.00
Payroll and Related Expenses
€ 7,425,000.00
€ 7,975,000.00
Other Direct Expenses
€ 3,437,500.00
€ 3,300,000.00
Departmental Income
€ 32,037,500.00
€ 33,275,000.00
Food and Beverage:
Revenue
€ 23,650,000.00
€ 24,475,000.00
Cost of Sales
€ 7,810,000.00
€ 8,140,000.00
Payroll and Related Expenses
€ 9,625,000.00
€ 9,900,000.00
Other Direct Expenses
€ 2,387,000.00
€ 2,475,000.00
Departmental Income
€ 3,828,000.00
€ 3,960,000.00
Health Club:
Revenue
€ 2,200,000.00
€ 2,310,000.00
Cost of Sales
€ 1,650,000.00
€ 1,705,000.00
Payroll and Related Expenses
€
550,000.00
€
577,500.00
Other Direct Expenses
€
275,000.00
€
247,500.00
Departmental Income
(€
275,000.00)
(€
220,000.00)
Rental and Other Income Revenue
€ 2,750,000.00
€ 3,025,000.00
Total Operated Departments Income
€ 38,340,500.00
€ 40,040,000.00
Undistributed Operating Expenses:
Administrative & General
€ 5,775,000.00
€ 5,967,500.00
Marketing
€ 2,832,500.00
€ 3,025,000.00
Property Operations & Maintenance
€ 3,588,750.00
€ 3,712,500.00
Utility Costs
€ 4,413,750.00
€ 4,482,500.00
Total Undistributed Operating Expenses
€ 16,610,000.00
€ 17,187,500.00
Income After Undistributed Operating Expenses
€ 21,730,500.00
€ 22,852,500.00
Rent
€ 1,100,000.00
€ 1,100,000.00
Property Taxes
€ 1,100,000.00
€ 1,320,000.00
Insurance
€
302,500.00
€
330,000.00
Interest
€ 2,970,000.00
€ 3,300,000.00
Depreciation
€ 3,300,300.00
€ 3,355,000.00
Total Fixed Charges
€ 8,772,500.00
€ 9,405,000.00
Income Before Income Taxes
€ 12,958,000.00
€ 13,447,500.00
Income Taxes
€ 5,186,500.00
€ 5,379,000.00
Net Income
€ 7,771,500.00
€ 8,068,500.00

6.1 Purposes of analyzing statements 103
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exhibit 6.3 Statement of cash flows of The Europa Alliance Hotel Plc. for the years 2015 
and 2016
Statement of Cash Flows
Europa Alliance Plc.
For the Years
2015
2016
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net Income
€ 7,771,500.00
€ 8,068,500.00
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net
cash provided by operations:
Depreciation expense
€ 3,300,000.00
€ 3,355,000.00
Inc./Dec. In accounts receivable
€
550,000.00
(€ 2,750,000.00)
Inc./Dec. In inventories
€
165,000.00
€
110,000.00
Inc./Dec. In prepaid expenses
€
55,000.00
(€
110,000.00)
Inc./Dec. In accounts payable
(€
357,500.00)
€
962,500.00
Increase in income taxes
€
110,000.00
€
110,000.00
Inc./Dec. In accrued expenses
€
836,000.00
(€
11,000.00)
Inc./Dec. In deferred taxes
€
154,000.00
€
121,000.00
Net cash from operating activities
€12,254,000.00
€9,856,000.00
Cash Flows from investing activities
Purchase of marketable securities
(€ 1,155,000.00)
(€ 3,520,000.00)
Sale of investments
€
440,000.00
€
–
Purchase of buildings
(€ 2,200,000.00)
(€ 1,650,000.00)
Purchase of furniture
(€ 1,100,000.00)
(€
990,000.00)
Purchase of china etc.
(€
495,000.00)
(€
126,500.00)
Purchase of investments
€
–
(€
275,000.00)
Net cash from investing activities
(€ 4,510,000.00)
(€ 6,561,500.00)
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Payment of dividends
(€ 6,671,500.00)
(€ 2,717,000.00)
Payment of long-term debt
(€ 1,375,000.00)
(€ 1,182,500.00)
Borrowed long term debt
€
357,500.00
€
770,000.00
Net cash from financing activities
(€ 7,689,000.00)
(€ 3,129,500.00)
Net increase in Cash
€
55,000.00
€
165,000.00
Additional information
Investments sold in 2015
€
440,000.00

Exhibit 6.5 Condensed food and beverage department statement of The Europa Alliance
Hotel Plc. for the year 2016
Condensed Food and Beverage Department Statement
Europa Alliance Hotel Plc.
For the Year
2016
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Food
Beverage
Sales
€ 16,500,000.00
€ 7,975,000.00
Cost of Sales
Beginning Inventory
€
605,000.00
€
330,000.00
Purchases
€ 6,600,000.00
€ 1,540,000.00
Less: Ending Inventory
€
495,000.00
€
330,000.00
Cost of Goods Used
€ 6,710,000.00
€ 1,540,000.00
Less: Employee Meals
€
110,000.00
€
–
Cost of Goods Sold
€ 6,600,000.00
€ 1,540,000.00
Gross Profit
€ 9,900,000.00
€ 6,435,000.00
Expenses:
Payroll and Related Expenses
€ 7,425,000.00
€ 2,475,000.00
Other Expenses
€ 1,650,000.00
€
825,000.00
Total Expenses
€ 9,075,000.00
€ 3,300,000.00
Departmental Income
€
825,000.00
€ 3,135,000.00
Exhibit 6.4 Statement of retained earnings and other information of The Europa Alliance
Hotel Plc. for the years 2015 and 2016
Statement of Retained Earnings and Other Information
Europa Alliance Hotel Plc.
For the Years
2015
2016
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
Retained Earnings – beginning of the year
€ 12,925,000.00
€ 14,025,000.00
Net Income
€ 7,771,500.00
€ 8,068,500.00
Dividends Declared
€ 6,671,500.00
€ 2,717,000.00
Retained Earnings – end of the year
€ 14,025,000.00
€ 19,376,500.00
Other Information
Room Sold
1,127,500.00
1,155,000.00
Paid Guest
1,292,500.00
1,320,000.00
Rooms Occupied by Two or More Guests
132,000.00
137,500.00
Complimentary Rooms
8,250.00
8,800.00
Shares of Common Stock Outstanding
3,025,000.00
3,025,000.00
Food Covers
3,052,500.00
3,080,000.00
Food Sales
€ 15,400,000.00
€ 16,500,000.00
Beverage Sales
€ 8,250,000.00
€ 7,975,000.00
104 6 Analyzing financial statements
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

6.2
Horizontal analysis
Horizontal analysis essentially compares two financial statements over
at least two periods (last month against this month), two dates
(December 31st 2014 against December 31st 2015) or two reasons
(budgeted amounts against actual results). If the information available
covers many more dates or periods it is then possible to carry out a
trend analysis which permits to discover long term business
tendencies.
Another name for horizontal analysis is comparative analysis as it will
cover the same elements over different periods, dates or reasons. This
form of analysis is the most basic in financial statement analysis but
at the same time necessary in the reporting of the financial
information of a company.
The changes in horizontal analysis are expressed either in absolute
form or in relative form. The absolute change will indicate the
changes in the currency amounts between the two periods or dates for
the specific item. The relative change which is also called the
percentage change is derived from dividing the absolute change figure
by the amount of the initial period or date. Exhibit 6.6 is an
illustration of horizontal analysis using the Europa Alliance Hotel Plc.
balance sheets as of December 31st 2014 and 2015.
To illustrate horizontal analysis, consider the value for buildings in
the balance sheets. On 31/12/2014, buildings had a value of
€44,550,000.00 and this changed to €46,750,000.00 on 31/12/2015.
The absolute difference is calculated as follows:
€46,750,000.00 – €44,550,000.00 = €2,200,000.00
The relative difference is calculated as follows:
× 100 = 4.94%
It can thus be said that in terms of the gross value of their buildings,
the Europa Alliance Hotel Plc. increased their buildings value by
€2,200,000.00 in the course of the year 2015. On the other hand, it
can equally be said that the Europa Alliance Hotel Plc. raised their
buildings value by 4.94% between the two balance sheet dates.
A specialized vocabulary is used to indicate changes in horizontal
analysis. If the change is positive, then it would be interpreted as an
increase in the specific item between the two dates or simply stated
that the movement was upward. On the other hand, if the change was
negative, then it would be interpreted as a decrease in the specific
item between the two dates or simply stated that the movement was
downward. These two movements do not indicate gains or losses but
simply differences in the amounts of the items between the two dates.
If the amounts of the items are equal between the two dates (for 
€2,200,000.00

€44,550,000.00
6.2 Horizontal analysis 105
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

■Exhibit 6.6 Illustration of horizontal analysis indicating absolute and
relative changes
106 6 Analyzing financial statements
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Comparative Balance Sheets
Europa Alliance Hotel Plc.
For the year ending December 31st
Absolute 
Relative 
Difference
Difference
2014
2015
Amount
Percentage
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
Assets
Current Assets
Cash
€ 1,100,000.00
€ 1,155,000.00
€
55,000.00
5.00%
Marketable Securities
€ 3,300,000.00
€ 4,455,000.00
€ 1,155,000.00
35.00%
Net Accounts Receivable
€ 5,500,000.00
€ 4,950,000.00
(€
550,000.00)
–10%
Inventories
€
770,000.00
€
935,000.00
€
165,000.00
21.43%
Prepaid Expenses
€
715,000.00
€
660,000.00
(€
55,000.00)
–7.69%
Total Current Assets
€ 11,385,000.00
€ 12,155,000.00
€
770,000.00
6.76%
Investments
€ 2,365,000.00
€ 1,925,000.00
(€
440,000.00)
–18.60%
Property and Equipment:
Land
€ 3,767,500.00
€ 3,767,500.00
€
–
0.00%
Buildings
€ 44,550,000.00
€ 46,750,000.00
€ 2,200,000.00
4.94%
Furniture, and Equipment
€ 9,350,000.00
€ 10,450,000.00
€ 1,100,000.00
11.76%
€ 57,667,500.00
€ 60,967,500.00
€ 3,300,000.00
5.72%
Less: Accumulated Depreciation
€ 14,300,000.00
€ 17,600,000.00
€ 3,300,000.00
23.08%
China, glassware, silver, linen, and uniforms €
632,500.00
€ 1,127,500.00
€
495,000.00
78.26%
Total Property and Equipment
€ 44,000,000.00
€ 44,495,000.00
€
495,000.00
1.13%
Total Assets
€ 57,750,000.00
€ 58,575,000.00
€
825,000.00
1.43%
Liabilities and Owners’ Equity
Current Liabilities:
Accounts Payable
€ 3,300,000.00
€ 2,942,500.00
(€
357,500.00)
–10.83%
Accrued Income Taxes
€ 1,650,000.00
€ 1,760,000.00
€
110,000.00
6.67%
Accrued Expenses
€ 3,850,000.00
€ 4,686,000.00
€
836,000.00
21.71%
Current Portion of Long-term Debt
€ 1,375,000.00
€ 1,182,500.00
(€
192,500.00)
–14.00%
Total Current Liabilities
€ 10,175,000.00
€ 10,571,000.00
€
396,000.00
3.89%
Long-term Debt:
Mortgage Payable
€ 23,375,000.00
€ 22,550,000.00
(€
825,000.00)
–3.53%
Deferred Income Taxes
€ 2,200,000.00
€ 2,354,000.00
€
154,000.00
7.00%
Total Long-term Debt
€ 25,575,000.00
€ 24,904,000.00
(€
671,000.00)
–2.62%
Total Liabilities
€ 35,750,000.00
€ 35,475,000.00
(€
275,000.00)
–0.77%
Owners’ Equity:
Common Stock
€ 3,025,000.00
€ 3,025,000.00
€
–
0.00%
Paid-in Capital in excess of par
€ 6,050,000.00
€ 6,050,000.00
€
–
0.00%
Retained Earnings
€ 12,925,000.00
€ 14,025,000.00
€ 1,100,000.00
8.51%
Total Owners’ Equity
€ 22,000,000.00
€ 23,100,000.00
€1,100,000.00
5.00%
Total Liabilities and Owners’ Equity
€ 57,750,000.00
€ 58,575,000.00
€
825,000.00
1.43%
......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

example land in exhibit 6.6), then it is simply indicated that there was
no change.
Despite its necessity in the reporting of the financial information of a
company, horizontal analysis is weighed down with primarily two
problems:
·
First of all, it is difficult to recognize the effects of very rapid
changes taking place in the organization’s business. Since the
figures may not really be comparable, this creates the need for
adjustments to be made regularly when dealing with horizontal
analysis in rapidly changing situations.
·
Secondly, horizontal analysis cannot adequately take into account
the effects of inflation. So to be able to make workable conclusions,
adjustments have to be made to take into account the effects of
changes caused by changing prices.
As a whole, horizontal analysis does not always provide answers to
the analyst but will point the analyst in the right direction for further
analysis.
6.3
Base-year analysis
This is a variation of horizontal analysis in which a certain period or
date is fixed as a base period or date. Such a base is selected and all the
comparisons are made with it. In general, the figures of the base
period or date are indexed at 100. Exhibit 6.8 is an illustration of base
year analysis using two different approaches:
·
The index approach: this is done by using only indices to represent
the changes between the items of the statements.
·
The percentage approach: this is done by using percentages to
represent the changes between the items of the statements.
Note that in Exhibit 6.8 all the information related to December 31st
2014 (considered as the base date) have all been converted to 100.00
or 100.00%.
One of the best known European indices is the DAX (Deutscher
Aktien IndeX – German stock index) which is a stock market index of
the 30 major German companies that trade at the Frankfurt stock
exchange. The base date for the DAX is December 30th 1987 and it
started from a base value of 1,000. At the date of inserting this
information in this section, it stood at 5704.24 (February 23rd 2010 –
http://deutsche-boerse.com). Exhibit 6.7 shows the evolution of the
DAX over the six months September 2009 until February 2010, and
collected on February 23rd 2010. It showed a high degree of volatility
with the lowest point during the period in early September 2009
(around 5300) and the highest point at the beginning of January 2010
at about 6050.
6.3 Base-year analysis 107
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

To illustrate base year analysis, consider the value for investments in
the balance sheet of the Europa Alliance Hotel Plc. in Exhibit 6.8. The
date of December 31st 2014 is indexed at 100.00 while December 31st
2015 is indexed at 81.40 which indicates that the level of investments
on December 31st 2015 is 18.60 (100.00 – 81.40) points (or percentage
points) less than that in the base year. As well, on December 31st 2016,
the level of investments is 6.98 (100.00 – 93.02) points less than in
the base year.
6.4
Vertical analysis
Vertical analysis (also known as common size analysis – when the
vertical analysis is extended over more than one accounting period) is
a form of analysis in which all the information found in the financial
statements are reduced to percentages. This reduction is based on the
following denominators:
·
As it concerns balance sheets, the denominator is the total assets
(or total liabilities + owners’ equity).
·
As it concerns income statements, the denominator is generally the
total revenues of the organization. In cases where there are
departmental revenues, such revenues will form the denominator
for departmental analyses. In such organizations when analyzing
the non-revenue generating service centres, the denominator is
equally the total revenues of the organization.
Exhibit 6.7   Illustration of the evolution of the DAX
More Xetra DAX charts
5740
5730
5720
5710
5700
5690
5680
6200
6000
5800
5600
5400
5200
© Digital Look
© Digital Look
9am
2 pm
Oct
Jan
1 Day Chart
Price Changes
Period
1 week
1 month
3 months
6 months
Price
5,592.12
5,695.32
5,801.48
5,462.74
Change
+107.69
+4.49
–101.67
+237.07
Percent Change
+1.93%
+0.08%
–1.75%
+4.34%
6 Month Chart
108 6 Analyzing financial statements
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Exhibit 6.8 Illustration of base-year analysis using indices as well as percentages
Comparative Balance Sheets Using Base Year Analysis
Europa Alliance Hotel Plc.
For the year ending December 31st
Base Year = 2014
Base Year = 2014
––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––––––
2014
2015
2016
2014
2015
2016
2014
2015
2016
––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––
––––––––––––
––––––––––––
–––––– –––––– ––––––
–––––– –––––– ––––––
Using Indices
Using Percentages
Assets
Current Assets
Cash
€ 1,100,000.00
€ 1,155,000.00
€ 1,320,000.00
100.00
105.00
120.00
100.00% 105.00% 120.00%
Marketable Securities
€ 3,300,000.00
€ 4,455,000.00
€ 7,975,000.00
100.00
135.00
241.67
100.00% 135.00% 241.67%
Net Accounts Receivable
€ 5,500,000.00
€ 4,950,000.00
€ 7,700,000.00
100.00
90.00
140.00
100.00%
90.00% 140.00%
Inventories
€
770,000.00
€
935,000.00
€
825,000.00
100.00
121.43
107.14
100.00% 121.43% 107.14%
Prepaid Expenses
€
715,000.00
€
660,000.00
€
770,000.00
100.00
92.31
107.69
100.00%
92.31% 107.69%
Total Current Assets
€11,385,000.00
€12,155,000.00
€18,590,000.00
100.00
106.76
163.29
100.00% 106.76% 163.29%
Investments
€ 2,365,000.00
€ 1,925,000.00
€ 2,200,000.00
100.00
81.40
93.02
100.00%
81.40%
93.02%
Property and Equipment:
Land
€ 3,767,500.00
€ 3,767,500.00
€ 3,767,500.00
100.00
100.00
100.00
100.00% 100.00% 100.00%
Buildings
€44,550,000.00
€46,750,000.00
€48,400,000.00
100.00
104.94
108.64
100.00% 104.94% 108.64%
Furniture, and Equipment
€ 9,350,000.00
€10,450,000.00
€11,440,000.00
100.00
111.76
122.35
100.00% 111.76% 122.35%
€57,667,500.00
€60,967,500.00
€63,607,500.00
100.00
105.72
110.30
100.00% 105.72% 110.30%
Less: Accumulated Depreciation €14,300,000.00
€17,600,000.00
€20,955,000.00
100.00
123.08
146.54
100.00% 123.08% 146.54%
China, glassware, silver, linen, 
and uniforms
€
632,500.00
€ 1,127,500.00
€ 1,254,000.00
100.00
178.26
198.26
100.00% 178.26% 198.26%
Total Property and Equipment
€44,000,000.00
€44,495,000.00
€43,906,500.00
100.00
101.13
99.79
100.00% 101.13%
99.79%
Total Assets
€57,750,000.00
€58,575,000.00
€64,696,500.00
100.00
101.43
112.03
100.00% 101.43% 112.03%
Liabilities and Owners’ Equity
Current Liabilities:
Accounts Payable
€ 3,300,000.00
€ 2,942,500.00
€ 3,905,000.00
100.00
89.17
118.33
100.00%
89.17% 118.33%
Accrued Income Taxes
€ 1,650,000.00
€ 1,760,000.00
€ 1,870,000.00
100.00
106.67
113.33
100.00% 106.67% 113.33%
Accrued Expenses
€ 3,850,000.00
€ 4,686,000.00
€ 4,675,000.00
100.00
121.71
121.43
100.00% 121.71% 121.43%
Current Portion of Long-term 
Debt
€ 1,373,000.00
€ 1,182,500.00
€ 1,320,000.00
100.00
86.00
96.00
100.00%
86.00%
96.00%
Total Current Liabilities
€10,175,000.00
€10,571,000.00
€11,770,000.00
100.00
103.89
115.68
100.00% 103.89% 115.68%
Long-term Debt:
Mortgage Payable
€23,375,000.00
€22,550,000.00
€22,000,000.00
100.00
96.47
94.12
100.00%
96.47%
94.12%
Deferred Income Taxes
€ 2,200,000.00
€ 2,354,000.00
€ 2,475,000.00
100.00
107.00
112.50
100.00% 107.00% 112.50%
Total Long-term Debt
€25,575,000.00
€24,904,000.00
€24,475,000.00
100.00
97.38
95.70
100.00%
97.38%
95.70%
Total Liabilities
€35,750,000.00
€35,475,000.00
€36,245,000.00
100.00
99.23
101.38
100.00%
99.23% 101.38%
Owners’ Equity:
Common Stock
€ 3,025,000.00
€ 3,025,000.00
€ 3,025,000.00
100.00
100.00
100.00
100.00% 100.00% 100.00%
Paid-in Capital in excess of par
€ 6,050,000.00
€ 6,050,000.00
€ 6,050,000.00
100.00
100.00
100.00
100.00% 100.00% 100.00%
Retained Earnings
€12,925,000.00
€14,025,000.00
€19,376,500.00
100.00
108.51
149.91
100.00% 108.51% 149.91%
Total Owners’ Equity
€22,000,000.00
€23,100,000.00
€28,451,500.00
100.00
105.00
129.33
100.00% 105.00% 129.33%
Total Liabilities and Owners’ Equity €57,750,000.00
€58,575,000.00
€64,696,500.00
100.00
101.43
112.03
100.00% 101.43% 112.03%
6.4 Vertical analysis 109
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Vertical analysis is very useful in that it can be used in comparing the
financial statements of an organization with those of other
organizations as well as with industrial averages. This comparison can
be made between organizations of vastly different sizes since all the
data is reduced to comparable percentages. Exhibit 6.9 is the
illustration of the common size analysis of the Europa Alliance Hotel
Plc. for the years 2015 and 2016.
110 6 Analyzing financial statements
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exhibit 6.9 llustration of common size analysis
Common Size Income Statement
Europa Alliance Hotel Plc.
For the years
Common Size
–––––––––––––––––––––
2015
2016
2015
2016
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––
Total Revenue
€ 71,500,000.00
€ 74,360,000.00
100.00%
100.00%
Rooms:
Revenue
€ 42,900,000.00
€ 44,550,000.00
60.00%
59.91%
Payroll and Related Expenses
€ 7,425,000.00
€
7,975,000.00
10.38%
10.72%
Other Direct Expenses
€ 3,437,500.00
€
3,300,000.00
4.81%
4.44%
Department Income
€32,037,500.00
€ 33,275,000.00
44.81%
44.75%
Food and Beverage:
Revenue
€ 23,650,000.00
€ 24,475,000.00
33.08%
32.91%
Cost of Sales
€ 7,810,000.00
€
8,140,000.00
10.92%
10.95%
Payroll and Related Expenses
€ 9,625,000.00
€
9,900,000.00
13.46%
13.31%
Other Direct Expenses
€ 2,387,000.00
€
2,475,000.00
3.34%
3.33%
Departmental Income
€ 3,828,000.00
€ 3,960,000.00
5.35%
5.33%
Health Club:
Revenue
€ 2,200,000.00
€
2,310,000.00
3.08%
3.11%
Cost of Sales
€ 1,650,000.00
€
1,705,000.00
2.31%
2.29%
Payroll and Related Expenses
€
550,000.00
€
577,500.00
0.77%
0.78%
Other Direct Expenses
€
275,000.00
€
247,500.00
0.38%
0.33%
Departmental Income
– €
275,000.00
– €
220,000.00
–0.38%
–0.30%
Rentals and Other Income Revenue
€ 2,750,000.00
€
3,025,000.00
3.85%
4.07%
Total Operated Departments Income
€ 38,340,500.00
€ 40,040,000.00
53.62%
53.85%
Undistributed Operating Expenses:
Administrative & General
€ 5,775,000.00
€
5,967,500.00
8.08%
8.03%
Marketing
€ 2,832,500.00
€
3,025,000.00
3.96%
4.07%
Property Operations & Maintenance
€ 3,588,750.00
€
3,712,500.00
5.02%
4.99%
Utility Costs
€ 4,413,750.00
€
4,482,500.00
6.17%
6.03%
Total Undistributed Operating Expenses
€16,610,000.00
€ 17,187,500.00
23.23%
23.11%
Icome After Undistributed Operating Expenses
€ 21,730,500.00
€ 22,852,500.00
30.39%
30.73%
Rent
€ 1,100,000.00
€
1,100,000.00
1.54%
1.48%
Property Taxes
€ 1,100,000.00
€
1,320,000.00
1.54%
1.78%
Insurance
€
302,500.00
€
330,000.00
0.42%
0.44%
Interest
€ 2,970,000.00
€
3,300,000.00
4.15%
4.44%
Depreciation
€ 3,300,000.00
€
3,355,000.00
4.62%
4.51%
Total Fixed Charges
€ 8,772,500.00
€ 9,405,000.00
12.27%
12.65%
Income Before Income Taxes
€ 12,958,000.00
€ 13,447,500.00
18.12%
18.08%
Income Taxes
€ 5,186,500.00
€
5,379,000.00
7.25%
7.23%
Net Income
€ 7,771,500.00
€
8,068,500.00
10.87%
10.85%

Limiting this particular review to the bottom line of the income
statement (the net income) it is noticed that the net income for 2016
is substantially higher that the net income for 2015. However, looking
at the situation vertically, the net income of 2016 is only 10.85% of
their overall revenues of 2016. This percentage is slightly lower than
the situation of 2015 which is 10.87%. Based on common size
analysis, 2015 is a much more profitable year than 2016.
6.4 Vertical analysis 111
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Glossary
Base year analysis – this is a variation of horizontal analysis in which a certain
period or date is fixed as a base period or date. Such a base is selected and
all the comparisons are made with this base.
Common size analysis – this is a variation of vertical analysis in which the
financial data of more than one period is analyzed at the same time.
Comparative analysis – see horizontal analysis
Horizontal analysis – this is the comparison of financial statements for two or
more accounting periods in terms of both absolute and relative differences
for each item.
Vertical analysis – this is an analysis of the relationships amongst various
financial items on a particular financial statement. These relationships are
expressed as percentages of a certain total depending on which financial
statement is being analyzed.
112
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Multiple choice questions
6.1
The type of balance sheet analysis that will set total assets at 100% is called:
a
base year analysis
b comparative analysis
c
horizontal analysis
d vertical analysis
6.2
Which of the following will be included in common size balance sheets?
a
current assets as a percentage of current liabilities
b current assets as a percentage of total assets
c
the absolute difference between the current assets
d the relative difference between the current assets
6.3
The type of balance sheet analysis that compares the balance sheets of
several periods with the balance sheet of one selected period is called:
a
base year analysis
b common size analysis
c
horizontal analysis
d vertical analysis
6.4
At the end of 2015, the income statement of the Fast Eaters Spot indicated
revenues of €5,025,000 and at the end of 2016; it indicated revenues of
€5,400,000. The absolute difference in revenues from the end of 2015 to the
end of 2016 is determined to be:
a
(€375,000)
b €375,000
c
6.94%
d 7.46%
6.5
At the end of 2015, the income statement of the Fast Eaters Spot indicated
revenues of €5,025,000 and at the end of 2016; it indicated revenues of
€5,400,000. The relative difference in revenues from the end of 2015 to the
end of 2016 is determined to be:
a
(€375,000)
b €375,000
c
6.94%
d 7.46%
Exercises
6.1
Prepare a comparative analysis for the Constant Visits Restaurant based on
the information presented in their condensed balance sheets below:
Exercises 113
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

6.2
The condensed income statement of the Three Corners’ Restaurant for the
years 2015 and 2016 are presented in the table below with information
related to the number of customers served in those periods. Use the
information to prepare common size income statements as well as
comment on the restaurant’s performance.
Three Corners’ Restaurant
Condensed income statement
For the years
2015
2016
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
Revenues
€
616,250.00
€
659,750.00
Cost of sales
€
159,500.00
€
177,625.00
Salaries
€
184,875.00
€
216,050.00
Laundry
€
29,000.00
€
30,450.00
China, glass, silver
€
7,250.00
€
7,975.00
Other expenses
€
116.000.00
€
112.375.00
Total expenses
€
496,625.00
€
544,475.00
Income before taxes
€
119,625.00
€
115,275.00
Taxes (32%)
€
38,280.00
€
36,888.00
Net Income
€
81,345.00
€
78,387.00
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
Number of customers served
101,500
108,750
Constant Visits Restaurant
Condensed Balance Sheets
December 31st
2015
2016
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
Current assets
Cash
€
120,000.00
€
160,000.00
Accounts receivable
€
312,000.00
€
280,000.00
Inventory
€
160,000.00
€
192,000.00
Total current assets
€
592,000.00
€
632,000.00
Property and equipment
€
2,480,000.00
€
2,520,000.00
less accumulated depreciation
€
1,200,000.00
€
1,280,000.00
Total assets
€
1,872,000.00
€
1,872,000.00
Current liabilities:
Accounts payable
€
120,000.00
€
136,000.00
Dividends payable
€
184,000.00
€
96,000.00
Total current liabilities
€
304,000.00
€
232,000.00
Long term liabilities:
Notes payable
€
640,000.00
€
640,000.00
Total long term liabilities
€
640,000.00
€
640,000.00
Common stock
€
800,000.00
€
880,000.00
Retained earnings
€
128,000.00
€
120,000.00
Total Liabilities & Owners’ Equity
€
1,872,000.00
€
1,872,000.00
114 6 Analyzing financial statements
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

6.3
Using the current liabilities information of the Corporate Lunchroom for
the years 2013 till 2016, prepare an index-based base year analysis using
2013 as the base year.
6.4
Using the current liabilities information of the Corporate Lunchroom for
the years 2013 till 2016, prepare a percentage-based base year analysis using
2014 as the base year.
Corporate Lunchroom
Current liabilities
December 31st 2013, 2014, 2015 and 2016
2013
2014
2015
2016
–––––––––––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
Current liabilities
Notes payable
€ 24,750.00
€ 32,500.00
€ 28,400.00
€ 35,200.00
Accounts payable
€ 12,500.00
€ 14,250.00
€ 13,500.00
€ 18,600.00
Accrued expenses
€
2,500.00
€ 2,400.00
€ 2,650.00
€ 3,240.00
Advance deposits
€
5,240.00
€ 2,500.00
€ 3,800.00
€ 5,200.00
ncome taxes payable
€
2,410.00
€ 3,105.00
€ 2,860.00
€ 3,150.00
Current maturities of 
long-term debt
€
5,400.00
€ 5,400.00
€ 5,400.00
€ 5,400.00
Total current liabilities
€ 52,800.00
€ 60,155.00
€ 56,610.00
€ 70,790.00
Corporate Lunchroom
Current liabilities
December 31st 2013, 2014, 2015 and 2016
2013
2014
2015
2016
–––––––––––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
Current liabilities
Notes payable
€ 24,750.00
€ 32,500.00
€ 28,400.00
€ 35,200.00
Accounts payable
€ 12,500.00
€ 14,250.00
€ 13,500.00
€ 18,600.00
Accrued expenses
€
2,500.00
€ 2,400.00
€ 2,650.00
€ 3,240.00
Advance deposits
€
5,240.00
€ 2,500.00
€ 3,800.00
€ 5,200.00
Income taxes payable
€
2,410.00
€ 3,105.00
€ 2,860.00
€ 3,150.00
Current maturities of 
long-term debt
€
5,400.00
€ 5,400.00
€ 5,400.00
€ 5,400.00
Total current liabilities
€ 52,800.00
€ 60,155.00
€ 56,610.00
€ 70,790.00
Exercises 115
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv


Ratio analysis and types of
ratios
7.1
Purpose and usefulness of ratio analysis
7.2
Classification of ratios
7.3
Performance review process
7.4
DuPont analysis
Ratio analysis has multiple definitions all of which relate to
understanding the relationships between the accounting data of an
organization. In Wall Street Words: An A to Z Guide to Investment
Terms for Today’s Investor, it is simply defined as “a study of the
relationships between financial variables”. On the contrary, the Farlex
Financial Dictionary extends the definition by emphasizing on the
significance of what ratios represent as such “ratio analysis is the
study of the significance of financial ratios for a company”. Ratio
analysis is important in understanding the financial wellbeing of any
organization. It permits intra- and inter-company evaluations as 
well as comparisons with industrial averages. Section 7.1 establishes
the purpose and usefulness of ratio analysis followed by the various
classifications of ratios in Section 7.2. In Section 7.3, the performance
review process is introduced and the chapter ends with an
introduction of one common method of performance analysis, 
the DuPont analysis in Section 7.4.
117
7
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

118 7 Ratio analysis and types of ratios
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
7.1
Purpose and usefulness of ratio analysis
A ratio is simply a notation of the relationship between two or more
things such as:
A = X
Y

in which,
A is the result
X is called the numerator, and
Y is called the denominator
It should be noted that it is the relationship which the ratio is
expressing that must be understood. This understanding is of primary
importance because without it, however precise the calculations are,
they will have no meaning. Ratios permit the creation of new, much
more meaningful and useful information that goes beyond the facts
and figures found in financial statements.
On its own, a financial ratio says nothing. When put in its proper
context, a financial ratio can permit an analyst to have a good
overview of a company’s performance and any upcoming trends.
Additionally the ratios on their own will not be able to say whether a
situation was acceptable or unacceptable except when these ratios are
compared to other data and standards. This means that ratios have to
be looked at in the context of other information and experiences.
Note however that ratios permit analysts to cope with changes over
time in absolute amounts as well as to compare organizations of
different sizes.
In hospitality organizations the stakeholders (essentially the investors,
creditors and the management) will have different perspectives when
considering the ratios that result from the analysis of the financial
statements. Investors would use the ratios to evaluate the performance
of the hospitality organization. The ratios might permit them to be
able to make judgments as to the dividends policy of the organization.
The creditors make use of ratios to assess how solvent the organization
is and if it will be able to pay back its debts in the future. Creditors will
most of the time even use ratios to set conditions before credit is
provided to the organization. The management will use ratios to help
them evaluate the attainment of their objectives and monitor their
performances.
Standards
A standard is generally considered to be a basis for comparison. This
can be seen as a point of reference against which other things can be
evaluated, and it might relate to quality levels, behaviour levels or
units of measurements. Within the hospitality industry and when
analyzing ratios, the standards commonly used can be split into three
categories which are:
·
Ratios from the past performance of the organization: this permits
a company to compare its current performances with those of its
past in order to discover if there are any significant changes.

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
·
Planned ratios that are the budgeted ratios of the organization:
differences in actual performances from the budgeted plans can
equally be analyzed in order to enhance efficiency in the
management of the organization.
·
The averages of the industry: industrial averages, also called
industrial benchmarks are used by organizations to evaluate the
various aspects of their performances in relation to the best
practices within their particular industry.
It should be noted that different results may be generated when
comparing ratios against different standards; as such the purpose of
the ratio analysis should be considered before any conclusions are
made.
Expression of ratios
Ratios are commonly expressed in the following formats:
·
As a decimal (0.54), representing for example, the profit margin.
·
As a percentage (10.5%), this is simply, a decimal multiplied by a
100, representing for example the multiple occupancy percentage.
·
On a per unit basis (€25.20) representing for example, the average
food service cheque.
·
As a turnover (1.5) representing for example, the number of guests
visiting a restaurant during a given period compared to the number
of seats in the restaurant.
·
As coverage of so many times (1.5:1 – read as 1.5 is to 1)
representing for example, the number of times the total liabilities
are absorbed by the total assets.
The expression of ratios depends entirely on the particular ratio and
the nature of the significant relationship that it is trying to express
between the figures it is relating to. It is equally a function of how the
information the ratios provide is to be used.
7.2
Classification of ratios
There are various categories of ratios which might differ depending on
the industry being analyzed. Within the hospitality industry, it is
common acceptance to make use of the following categories of ratios:
liquidity, solvency, profitability, activity and operating. The structure
of the subsections is as follows:
7.2.1
Liquidity ratios
7.2.2
Solvency ratios
7.2.3
Profitability ratios
7.2.4
Activity ratios
7.2.5
Operating ratios
7.2 Classification of ratios 119

120 7 Ratio analysis and types of ratios
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
7.2.1
Liquidity ratios
A liquidity ratio measures the availability of cash within the
organization to pay its current debts. It is used to determine the
organization’s ability to pay off its short term obligations. The higher
the value of the ratio, the better will be the margin of safety that the
organization has to cover its short term obligations. A company’s
ability to transform its current assets into cash to take care of its debts
is of primary importance when its creditors are seeking payment.
These are the most common liquidity ratios that are in use within the
hospitality industry.
Current ratio
The current ratio shows the direct relationship between the current
assets and the current liabilities. It is expressed as shown in the
formula:
The current ratio is normally expressed as coverage of so many times,
for example 1.24 times or 1.24:1. Owners normally prefer a low
current ratio because shareholders regard investments in current assets
as less productive. On the other hand, creditors would prefer a higher
current ratio because it gives them the assurance that the organization
can pay back its debts in time.
Acid test ratio
The acid test ratio which is also known as quick ratio shows the direct
relationship between the quick assets and the current liabilities. Quick
assets are generally those current assets that can or will be converted
into cash fairly soon. The common ones are cash, marketable
securities and accounts receivable. Quick assets exclude inventories
and prepaid expenses. It is expressed as shown in the formula:
The acid test ratio is expressed as coverage of so many times, for
example 1.12 times or 1.12:1. It is equally viewed by the owners and
creditors in the same way as the current ratio.
Operating cash flow ratio
The operating cash flow ratio shows the relationship between the net
operating cash flow and the average current liabilities. It is expressed
as shown in the formula:
The operating cash flow ratio is normally expressed as a decimal
(0.79) or percentage (79%), the users of accounting ratios prefer to see
it high because it means that the organization has enough cash to pay
off its current liabilities.
Net operating cash flow

Average current liabilities
Current assets – inventories and prepaid expenses

Current liabilities
Current assets

Current liabilities

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Accounts receivable turnover
The accounts receivable turnover indicates how well accounts
receivable are collected within the organization. Calculating the
accounts receivable turnover is a 2 step process:
The accounts receivable turnover is expressed as coverage of so many
times, for example 8.2 times. This ratio indicates how well accounts
receivable are being collected. The higher the turnover figure
compared to whatever benchmark is being used indicates that the
organization is effectively collecting its revenues and that its
customers are paying their bills on time. A higher figure equally
indicates that the organization’s credit and collection policies are
sound and effective.
Average collection period
The average collection period is an outcome of the accounts
receivable turnover ratio and it is calculated as follows:
The average collection period is normally expressed in days such as
27 days. For any given period, the higher the accounts receivable
turnover, the lower will be the average collection period. As an
outcome of the accounts receivable turnover it is viewed by the
stakeholders in the same manner.
Working capital turnover ratio
The working capital turnover ratio is also known as the net sales to
working capital ratio. It indicates the organization’s effectiveness in
using its working capital. It is calculated as follows:
The average working capital is determined as follows:
(Current assets – current liabilities in the beginning of the period) +
(Current assets – current liabilities at the end of the period)

2
Total revenue

Average working capital
The number of days in the period

Accounts receivable turnover
Step 1
Calculate the average accounts receivable by looking for the
mean of the accounts receivable for the period under analysis:
Step 2
Calculate the accounts receivable turnover by dividing the total
revenues by the average accounts receivable:
Total revenues

Average accounts receivable
Accounts receivable at the beginning of the year + 
Accounts receivable at the end of the year

2
7.2 Classification of ratios 121

122 7 Ratio analysis and types of ratios
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
The working capital turnover ratio is normally expressed as coverage
over a number of times, such as 14 times. In general, owners prefer a
lower working capital turnover ratio whereas creditors would prefer a
higher working capital turnover ratio.
7.2.2
Solvency ratios
Solvency ratios indicate the ability of a company to meet its
obligations when they are due, including the principal and interest on
their long term debts. There are principally 2 basic sources of funds to
finance a company which are; funds received from the owners, and
financing received through contracting debts with third parties,
which may include finance houses, suppliers, employees and the
state. Other terms for solvency ratios are leverage or gearing ratios.
The owners may provide substantially all of the funds that a company
needs or there will be a combination of owner participation and
financing from third parties. The risk of insolvency of organization
depends on the amount of funding brought in by the owners and by
the other parties. Leverage refers to the amount of long term debt that
is used to finance the assets of a company compared to the amounts
of owners’ equity. A company with significantly more debt than
equity is considered to be highly leveraged.
Solvency ratios as a category are made up of ratios that can be split
into 2 subgroups;
·
those ratios which are based on the balance sheet (solvency ratio,
debt to equity ratio, long term debt to total capitalization ratio);
·
those based on the income statement (the number of times interest
earned ratio, the fixed charge coverage ratio, and the debt service
coverage ratio) as well as the operating cash flows to total liabilities
ratio which is based on both the balance sheet and the SCF.
From the general perspective of management and with the expanded
use of leases, management contracts, joint ventures, and other
financing techniques, leverage ratios must be carefully evaluated before
conclusions are drawn. Generally, if the interests on the borrowed
funds are less than the earnings which can be generated from using
these funds then it will be advantageous to make use of leverage.
Solvency ratio
The solvency ratio, as a specific ratio, indicates the organization’s
ability to take care of its long term obligations. The solvency ratio is
calculated by using the following formula:
The solvency ratio is normally expressed as coverage of so many
times, for example 2.34 times or 2.34:1. This ratio is a measure of the
solvency of a company at a given point time, but it ignores the effects
of future inflows of funds from the operations of the organization.
The greater the leverage used by the organization the lower will be the
solvency ratio. Creditors generally prefer a high solvency ratio as it
gives them the assurance of having something paid back in the event
Total assets

Total liabilities

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
of the liquidation and disposal of the organization’s assets. On the
contrary, owners would prefer lower solvency ratios because this will
help them in maximising their returns on investment.
Debt to equity ratio
The debt to equity ratio shows the relationship between the total
liabilities and total owners’ equity. It is calculated by using the
following formula:
The debt to equity ratio is generally expressed as coverage of so many
times such as, 1.52:1. It indicates the organization’s ability to survive,
and at the same time honour the repayment of its long term debts. It
is viewed in the same way as the solvency ratio by the owners and
creditors. Creditors use this ratio as an indicator of the risk involved
in providing credit to the organization and as such will prefer a lower
debt to equity ratio. Owners on the other hand, in their desire to
maximise their returns on investment using leverage, will prefer a
higher debt to equity ratio.
Long term debt to total capitalization ratio
The long term debt to total capitalization ratio shows the relationship
between the long term debts and the available capital. It is calculated
as follows:
The long term debt to total capitalization ratio is normally expressed
as a percentage, such as 38%. This is a variation of the debt to equity
ratio and it calculates the proportion of a company’s long term debt
compared to its available capital. The available capital is derived by
adding the long term debt to the owners’ equity. Using this ratio
permits creditors and investors to assess the leverage used by the
organization and are able to compare it to other organizations in their
analysis of the organization’s exposure to risk. Creditors generally
prefer a lower percentage since this will indicate a reduced exposure to
risk while owners will prefer a higher percentage because of their
desire to earn higher returns using leverage.
Number of times interest earned ratio
The number of times interest earned ratio shows the relationship
between the earnings before interest and taxes and the interest
expense. It is calculated using the following formula:
The number of times interest earned ratio is expressed as coverage of
so many times such as 4.2 times, this ratio shows a company’s past
ability to meet its interest payments. It also indicates the margin of
safety or the amounts which profits could decline and still meet the
interest obligations of a company. All the major stakeholders
(creditors, management and owners) prefer a relatively high ratio.
EBIT

Interest expense
Long term debt

Long term debt + owners’ equity
Total liabilities

Total owners’ equity
7.2 Classification of ratios 123

124 7 Ratio analysis and types of ratios
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Debt service coverage ratio
The debt service coverage ratio shows the relationship between the
EBITDA and the debt service payments (principal expense and/or
interest expense). In its complete form it is calculated as follows:
The debt service coverage ratio is expressed as coverage of so many
times such as 6.18 times, and it measures the extent to which a
company creates enough EBITDA to cover its debts.
In those situations where there are no cash transfers to replacement
reserves, the formula simply becomes
All the major stakeholders would prefer to have a high debt service
coverage ratio.
Operating cash flows to total liabilities ratio
The operating cash flows to total liabilities ratio combines
information from the balance sheet as well as information from the
statement of cash flow. It is calculated as follows:
The operating cash flows to total liabilities ratio is expressed as a decimal
(0.315) or a percentage (31.5%). It introduces a dynamic notion into the
assessment of solvency by bringing in operating cash flows (from the
SCF) which covers a period of time into solvency analysis unlike the
debt to equity ratio, equity ratio and the long term debt to capitalization
ratio which comes from the balance sheets (fixed point in time). All the
major stakeholders prefer this ratio to be relatively high.
7.2.3
Profitability ratios
Profitability ratios are used to measure the business’ ability to generate
earnings compared to its expenses and other relevant costs during
its operations for a specific period of time. These ratios permit
management and owners to compare their performances to that of
others within the same property or across companies as well as compare
to their own expectations as defined in their budgets. As a primary
objective of most hospitality operations is to make profit which can be
paid out through dividends or retained in the company as retained
earnings, the assessment of a company’s profitability is of primary
importance. Creditors always want to notice increases in the company’s
profitability soon as this will reduce the risk the creditors bear.
Gross return on assets
The gross return on assets shows the relationship between the EBIT
and the average total assets. It is calculated as follows:
EBITDA – cash transfers to replacement reserves

Debt service payments
EBITDA

Debt service payments
Operating cash flows

Average total liabilities
EBIT

Average total assets

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
The gross return on assets is expressed as a percentage. It measures the
effectiveness of management’s use of the organisation’s assets
regardless of financing methods. It is useful in assessing the likelihood
of obtaining more debt financing. It is assessed based on industry
standards and individual company expectations.
Net return on assets
The net return on assets is the relationship between net income and
average total assets. It is calculated as follows:
The net return on assets is equally expressed as a percentage. It
evaluates the possibility of seeking for equity financing instead of
debt financing. It is a general indicator of the company’s profitability.
The net return on assets can equally be calculated by multiplying the
profit margin ratio by the asset turnover ratio. Its assessment is based
on industry averages as well as the company’s own profile developed
through time.
Profit margin
The profit margin ratio shows the relationship between net income
and total revenue. It is calculated as follows:
The profit margin is expressed as a percentage, it is equally known as
the net income to sales revenue ratio. It measures management
effectiveness in generating sales and controlling expenses. The higher
the profit margin the better the situation.
Operating efficiency ratio
The operating efficiency ratio shows the relationship between the gross
operating profit and the total revenue. It is determined as follows:
The operating efficiency ratio is expressed as a percentage. It is also called
gross operating profit margin ratio or simply gross operating ratio. It
measures the company’s ability to generate sales and control its expenses.
Since it is calculated before the deduction of management expenses, it is
useful in comparing comparable properties operated by third party
management companies with owner operated properties. The higher the
outcome of the efficiency ratio, the better will be the situation.
Return on owners’ equity
The return on owners’ equity shows the relationship between the net
income and the average owners’ equity. It is derived as follows:
Net income

Total revenue
Gross operating profit

Total revenue
Net income

Average total assets
Net income

Average owners’ equity
7.2 Classification of ratios 125

The return on owners’ equity is expressed as a percentage. It shows
the effectiveness of the management’s use of equity funds. It
compares the profits of the company to the investments brought in
by the shareholders. If the company has different types of shares
(common and preferred) the return on owners’ equity can be
modified as follows:
This now will be called the return on common shareholders’ equity.
Earnings per share
The earnings per share in its simplest form, where there are no
preferred shares, is calculated as:
In situations where preferred shares exist the formula is modified as
such:
The earnings per share is expressed in currency values. It serves as an
indicator of a company’s profitability. It is generally considered as the
single most important element in determining share price and it is
used in assessing the price-to-earnings valuation ratio.
Price-to-earnings valuation ratio
The price-to-earnings valuation ratio shows the relationship between
the market value per share and the earnings per share. It is calculated
as follows:
The price-to-earnings valuation ratio evaluates a company’s current
share price to its earnings per share. This ratio is affected by how buyers
and sellers view the stability of the company, its potential growth in
earnings, and the risk of investing in the shares of the company.
Gross operating profit per available room (GOPPAR)
The gross operating profit per available room (GOPPAR) shows the
relationship between the gross operating profit and the total rooms
for sale. It is determined as follows:
The gross operating profit per available room (GOPPAR) reflects the
gross operating profits of the hotel as opposed to its revenues and it
provides a clearer indication of its overall performance than the REVPAR
(discussed in 7.2.5 below). GOPPAR takes into consideration
management control and containment costs. It is useful in comparing
gross operation profits across properties within the same competitive set.
Net income – preferred dividends

Average outstanding shares
Market value per share

Earnings per share
Gross operating profit

Total rooms for sale
Net income

Average outstanding shares
Net income – preferred dividends

Average owners equity
126 7 Ratio analysis and types of ratios
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Income before non-operating income and expenses per available room
The income before non-operating income and expenses per available
room shows the relationship between the income before non-
operating income and expenses per available room and the available
rooms in a hotel. It is determined as follows:
The income before non-operating income and expenses per 
available room is expressed in currency units. It measures the
management’s ability to produce profits through sales while
controlling all departmental costs, undistributed expenses, and
management fees.
Income before non-operating income and expenses margin ratio
The income before non-operating income and expenses margin 
ratio shows the relationship between the net operating 
income and the total operating revenue. It is calculated as 
follows:
The income before non-operating income and expenses margin ratio
is expressed in units. It measures the management’s ability to produce
profits through sales while controlling all departmental costs,
undistributed expenses, and management fees.
EBITDA per available room
The EBITDA per available room shows the relationship between the
EBITDA and the available rooms. It is determined as follows:
The EBITDA per available room is expressed in currency units. It
measures the management’s ability to produce profits through sales
while controlling all departmental costs, undistributed expenses,
management fees, property taxes, insurance and rents. It should
be noted that care must be exercised in comparing EBITDA among
comparable properties, since not all hotels have ground, building, or
major equipment leases.
EBITDA margin ratio
The EBITDA margin ratio shows the relationship between the EBITDA
and the total operating revenue. It is calculated as follows:
The EBITDA margin ratio is expressed in units. It measures the
management’s ability to produce profits through sales while controlling
all departmental costs, undistributed expenses, management fees, and
non-operating income and expenses. It should be noted that care must
be exercised in comparing EBITDA among comparable properties, since
not all hotels have ground, building, or major equipment leases.
EBITDA

Available rooms
Income before non-operating income and expenses

Total operating revenue
Income before non-operating income and expenses per available room

Available rooms
EBITDA

Total operating revenue
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
7.2 Classification of ratios 127

128 7 Ratio analysis and types of ratios
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Cash on cash return
The cash on cash return shows the relationship between the amount
of cash that was used in the business during the period and the
average owners’ equity. It is calculated as follows:
The cash on cash return is expressed in percentages and it is one of
the methods of estimating return on investments. The higher the
return, the more satisfied are the investors.
Market capitalization
Market capitalization is the total market value (in currency terms such
as in €, £ or $) of all of a company's outstanding shares. Note that
outstanding shares are defined as a the sum of all the shares of a
company that is currently held by all its shareholders, including the
share blocks held by institutional investors as well as restricted shares
owned by the company’s officers and insiders. Market capitalization is
determined as follows:
Shares outstanding × Current market price of one share
Market capitalization is expressed as an amount in the currency in
which the shares are traded, and investors will normally prefer using
market capitalization to determine the size of a company instead of
the volume of the company’s assets or its revenue figures. However, it
should be recalled that market capitalization reflects only the equity
value of a company, to the exclusion of its debts.
Sales per share
The sales per share ratio, which is also called the revenue per share
ratio, is used to calculate the total revenue earned by a share over a
12-month period. The sales per share ratio is determined as follows:
The sales per share ratio is also expressed as an amount in the
currency in which the shares are traded and it is used to evaluate a
company's business activities in relation to its share price. The sales
per share ratio is an indicator of how active a company is. The higher
the ratio, the more active the company will be considered to be.
Free cash flow
Free cash flow represents the amount in cash that a company is able to
generate after taking care of all the necessary expenses used to expand or
maintain its asset base. The free cash flow is determined as follows:
EBIT(1 – tax rate) + Depreciation and amortization – Change in net
working capital – Capital expenditure
or alternatively by
Operating cash flow – Capital expenditure
Total revenue (sales)

Average shares outstanding
EBITDA – Debt service

Average owners' equity

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
The free cash flow is expressed in currency amounts, and investors
believe that it gives a much clearer view of the ability to generate cash
(and thus profits). It should be noted that even if the free cash flow
turns out to be negative, that would not necessarily be a bad business
indicator, but it could be a sign that a company is making large
investments, and if these investments can earn high returns, then such
a strategy could be potentially very good for the future of the company.
Dividends per share
The dividends per share ratio represents the relationship between the
sum of declared dividends for every ordinary share issued. The
dividends per share is determined as follows:
The dividends per share ratio is equally expressed as an amount in the
currency in which the shares are traded, and can be easily found in
the annual reports of companies or on stock exchange quote sites. In
those instances where they exist, special dividends (dividends which
are only expected to be issued once) are not taken into account in
assessing the dividends per share. Since dividends are a form of profit
distribution to the shareholders, an increasing value in the dividends
per share over time can be a sign that the company’s management
believes that their growth is sustainable.
Price-to-sales ratio
The price-to sales ratio (also known as the sales multiple, or the revenue
multiple) is a valuation ratio that compares a company’s share price to
its revenues. The price-to-sales ratio is an indicator of the value placed
on each currency amount of a company’s revenue or sales. The price-to-
sales ratio can be determined in two ways as follows:
Or on a per share basis by
The price-to-sales ratio is simply expressed as a whole number or as a
fraction. Like most ratios, the price-to-sales ratio is most relevant
when used in industry average comparisons. When compared as such,
a lower ratio may indicate a possible undervaluation of the company,
whereas a ratio that is significantly higher than the industry average
may suggest an overvaluation of the company. The price-to-sales ratio
varies significantly from sector to sector due to the fact that they have
very different capital structures. The price-to-sales ratio is particularly
useful for comparing the valuation of early-stage companies that have
revenues but are not yet profitable (since their price-to-earnings
valuation ratio cannot be calculated).
Price-to-book ratio
The price-to-book ratio, which is also sometimes known as the
market-to-book ratio or the price-to-equity ratio, is used to compare a
company's current market price to its book value. Note that book
Market capitalization

Total annual revenue
Share price

Sales per share
Sum of dividends over a period (usually 1 year) – Special dividends

Shares outstanding for the period
7.2 Classification of ratios 129

130 7 Ratio analysis and types of ratios
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
value represents the net asset value of a company, which is calculated
by total assets less intangible assets and liabilities. The price-to- book
ratio can be equally determined in two ways as follows:
Or on a share basis
The price-to-book ratio is simply expressed as a whole number or as a
fraction. The price-to-book ratio equally varies by industry. Industries
that require more infrastructure capital will usually have much lower
price-to-book ratios. Comparatively within an industry, a higher price-
to-book ratio implies that, ceteris paribus, investors expect
management to create more value from a given set of assets. Whereas
a lower price-to-book ratio could mean that the shares are
undervalued. Note however that the price-to-book ratio does not
directly provide any information on the ability of the firm to generate
profits or cash for shareholders. It also gives some idea of whether an
investor is paying too much for what would be left if the company
went bankrupt immediately.
Dividend yield
The dividend yield, equally called the dividend-price ratio shows how
much a company pays out in dividends each year relative to its share
price. In the absence of any capital gains, the dividend yield is the
return on investment for a share. The dividend yield represents how
much investors get for their equity investments. The dividend yield is
determined as follows:
The dividend yield is expressed as a percentage, and investors who
require a minimum stream of cash flow from their investment portfolio
can secure this cash flow by investing in shares paying relatively high,
and stable dividend yields. A high dividend yield can be considered to
be evidence that the shares are under-priced or that the company has
fallen on hard times and future dividends will not be as high as previous
ones. Similarly a low dividend yield can be considered evidence that the
shares are over-priced or that future dividends might be higher. While
some investors may find a higher dividend yield attractive, others may
not because of the potential of increasing their tax bills.
Pay-out ratio
The pay-out ratio, which is also called the dividend pay-out ratio,
represents the proportion of earnings that is paid out as dividends to
the shareholders of a company. The pay-out ratio can be determined
in two ways as follows;
Annual dividends per share

Price per share
Share price

Net asset value per share
Market capitalization

Net asset value
Dividends per share

Earnings per share

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Or alternatively
The pay-out ratio is expressed as a percentage, and it is a key financial
ratio that is used to determine the sustainability of a company’s
dividend payment policies. A lower pay-out ratio is generally
preferable to a higher pay-out ratio, with a ratio greater than 100%
indicating that the company is paying out more in dividends than it
is making in net income. It should be noted that there is no single
value that can be considered as an appropriate pay-out ratio, because
this depends on the industry concerned, thus the need for industry-
specific analyses. Companies that have stable and predictable earnings
and cash flows can support much higher pay-outs than companies
operating within cyclical industries since their earnings fluctuate
significantly in line with the economic cycles.
7.2.4
Activity ratios
Activity ratios measure management’s effectiveness and ability 
to convert its resources into cash or sales. They are equally 
called turnover or efficiency ratios. They help in measuring
management’s effectiveness in making use of the assets of the
company.
Food inventory turnover ratio
The food inventory turnover ratio shows the relationship between the
cost of food used and the average food inventory. It is determined as
follows:
The food inventory turnover ratio is expressed as a number of times
during the period. It shows how quickly the food inventory is used.
The average food inventory which forms the denominator in the
formula is calculated as follows:
Generally the quicker the food inventory turnover the more desirable
is the situation because food inventory costs a lot to maintain.
Beverage inventory turnover ratio
The beverage inventory turnover ratio shows the relationship between
the cost of beverage used and the average beverage inventory. It is
determined as follows:
The beverage inventory turnover ratio is expressed as a number of
times during the period. It shows how quickly the beverage inventory
Cost of food used

Average food inventory
Inventory at the beginning of the period + inventory at the end of the period

2
Dividends

Net income
Cost of beverage used

Average beverage inventory
7.2 Classification of ratios 131

is used. The average beverage inventory which forms the denominator
in the formula is determined as follows:
Generally the quicker the inventory turnover the more desirable is the
situation because beverage inventory costs a lot to maintain.
Inventory holding period
The inventory holding period shows the relationship between the
operating days in the period and the inventory turnover ratio for the
period. It is calculated as follows:
The inventory holding period should be split between the two major
types of inventory (food & beverages). Expressed in number of days, it
represents the number of times during a given period that the specific
inventory is theoretically brought down to zero.
Fixed asset turnover
The fixed asset turnover ratio shows the relationship between the total
revenues and the average total fixed assets. It is determined as follows:
The fixed asset turnover ratio is expressed as a number of times. It
measures the effectiveness of the use of fixed assets in generating
sales. The average total fixed assets shown in the formula is
determined as follows:
In general within the hospitality industry, this ratio can range from
1.5 to more than 2 times a year. Restaurants could have ratios of more
than 5 times a year if they are in rented properties. A high ratio
indicates management’s effectiveness in the use of fixed assets,
whereas a low ratio indicates that management is not that effective
and might to need to dispose some of its property. All stakeholders
would want to have a high ratio.
Asset turnover
The asset turnover ratio shows the relationship between total sales
and average total assets. It is calculated as follows:
The asset turnover ratio is expressed as a number of times. It measures
the effectiveness of the use of total assets in generating sales. The
average total asset is calculated as follows:
Total sales revenue

Average total fixed assets
Total fixed assets in beginning of period + total fixed assets end of period

2
Inventory at the beginning of the period + inventory at the end of the period

2
Operating days in the period

Inventory turnover ratio for the period
Total sales

Average total assets
Total assets in beginning of period + total assets end of period

2
132 7 Ratio analysis and types of ratios
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
A high asset turnover ratio indicates management’s effectiveness in
the use of its assets, whereas a low ratio indicates that management is
not that effective and might need to dispose some of its property.
All stakeholders would want to have a high ratio.
Paid occupancy percentage
The paid occupancy percentage shows the relationship between the
rooms sold and the available rooms. It is determined as follows:
Available rooms are derived from the available number of rooms in
the property multiplied by the number of days in the year. Expressed
as a percentage, it is a major indicator of management’s success in
selling its rooms. It can be split between the general occupancy
percentage, the transient occupancy percentage, group occupancy
percentage, contract occupancy percentage, complimentary
occupancy percentage and multiple occupancy percentage, some of
which are shown below.
Complimentary occupancy percentage
The complimentary occupancy percentage is a variation of the paid
occupancy percentage in which only the occupied complimentary
rooms are assessed. It is determined as follows:
Also expressed as a percentage, it shows the weight of the
complimentary rooms in the overall rooms’ sales.
Average occupancy per room
The average occupancy per room shows the relationship between the
number of guests and the number of rooms occupied by guests. It is
calculated as follows:
The average occupancy per room is expressed in guest units and
should be assessed in relation to industrial averages and company
expectations.
Multiple occupancy percentage
The multiple occupancy percentage shows the relationship between
the rooms occupied by two or more persons and the total number of
rooms occupied by guests. It is calculated as follows:
The multiple occupancy percentage is also called double occupancy
and it is expressed as a percentage. As with all occupancy percentages,
the higher the percentage the better will be the situation.
Complimentary rooms

Available rooms
Number of guests

Number of rooms occupied by guests
Paid rooms occupied

Available rooms
Rooms occupied by two or more persons

Number of rooms occupied by guests
7.2 Classification of ratios 133

134 7 Ratio analysis and types of ratios
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Food service seat turnover
The food service seat turnover shows the relationship between the
total guests served and the number of seats available for the period.
It can be calculated as follows:
The food service seat turnover is expressed as a number of times
covered and the higher the level the better the situation.
7.2.5
Operating ratios
Operating ratios measure the efficiency of a company’s management
by comparing its operating expenses to its sales. These operating ratios
can be calculated on a daily, weekly, monthly or annual basis and are
very useful for control purposes. The detailed information that is used
to compute these ratios are generally reserved for internal management.
Within the hospitality industry more than 200 operating ratios can be
generated, but here, only a few are discussed.
Average daily rate (ADR)
The average daily rate (ADR) shows the relationship between the
rooms’ revenue and the number of rooms occupied. It is calculated as
follows:
The average daily rate (ADR) is also called the average room rate.
Hotels make use of this global rate despite the fact that within the
same property room prices may vary considerably. In case of need,
this rate can be calculated for each particular market segment.
Sales revenue per available room (REVPAR)
The sales revenue per available room (REVPAR) shows the relationship
between the total rooms’ revenue and the total number of available
rooms. It is calculated as follows:
The sales revenue per available room (REVPAR) can be equally derived
from the relationship between the paid occupancy percentage and the
average daily rate (paid occupancy percentage × ADR).
Total REVPAR
The total REVPAR shows the relationship between the total property
revenue and the number of available rooms. It is determined as
follows:
Total REVPAR introduces into the REVPAR analysis the contributions
from the sale of non room items such as F & B products in the
assessment of the REVPAR.
Rooms revenue

Rooms occupied
Total rooms revenue

Total available rooms
Total guests served (covers)

Number of seats for the period
Total property revenue

Available rooms

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Sales revenue per available customer (REVPAC)
The sales revenue per available customer (REVPAC) shows the
relationship between the total revenue from the hotel guests and the
total number of guests. It is calculated as follows:
The sales revenue per available customer (REVPAC) brings the idea of
revenue assessment right down to the level of a single guest.
Labour cost percentage
The labour cost percentage shows the relationship between the overall
labour costs and the total revenue. It is calculated as follows:
In cases of multiple operated departments the labour cost percentages
can be separated such as rooms labour cost percentage, F & B labour
cost percentage. In such instances the salaries and its related
components should result only from the specific department as well
as the revenue should come only from that department. In cases of
the non-operated departments, the labour cost percentages will be
related to the total revenue of the property.
Food cost percentage
The food cost percentage shows the relationship between the cost of
food sold and the food sales. It is determined as follows:
The food cost percentage is one of the most important ratios in
analyzing food service operations. It permits the company to
determine how reasonable or not are their food costs – time-wise and
industry-wise.
Beverage cost percentage
The beverage cost percentage shows the relationship between the cost
of beverage sold and the beverage sales. It is determined as follows:
The beverage cost percentage has the same significance like the food
cost percentage to beverage services operations.
Average food service cheque
The average food service cheque shows the relationship between the
total food revenue and the number of guests served. It is calculated as
follows:
Cost of food sold

Food sales
Cost of beverages sold

Beverage sales
Total revenue from hotel guests

Total number of guests
Salaries + wages + bonuses + payroll taxes + fringe benefits

Total revenue
Total food revenue

Number of food covers
7.2 Classification of ratios 135

136 7 Ratio analysis and types of ratios
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
The average food service cheque can be calculated separately per meal
period as well as separately per the different food service outlets.
Covers represent the number of guests served in the food service
outlet during a period.
Mix of sales
The mix of sales is the proportion of sales coming from the different
departments or products within an establishment. It indicates the
individual contribution of the various departments to the overall
sales. Exhibit 7.1 illustrates the sales mix of a simple hotel. It shows
for example that the rooms department contributes 55.93% of the
total revenues.
7.3
Performance review process
The main aim of a performance review is to provide an understanding
of the business, and, together with an analysis of all the relevant
information, provide an interpretation of the results. A performance
review is generally undertaken using a standard format and
methodology. The most effective performance review is provided from
a balanced view of each of the activities of the organization, which
necessarily involves close cooperation amongst all the departments.
A performance review using financial statements may be undertaken
for a number of reasons, for example:
·
to assist in investment decisions
·
to identify possible takeover targets
·
to evaluate the financial strength of potential or existing customers
or suppliers
All performance reviews must use some sort of benchmark.
Comparisons may be made against past periods and against budget;
they may also be made against other companies and using general
data relating to the industry within which the company operates.
The steps of the performance review process can be summarized as
follows:
Exhibit 7.1 Illustration of the mix of sales
Department
Sales
Percentage
–––––––––––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––
–––––––––––
Rooms
€ 44,550,000.00
55.93%
Food & Bevarage
€ 24,475,000.00
30.72%
Rentals and other incomes
€ 10,635,000.00
13.35%
–––––––––––––––
––––––––
Total
€ 79,660,000.00
100.00%

This performance review process finishes with the establishment of a
proper report to the management that will be able to give them an
effective insight into the functioning of the company.
Limitations of the performance review process
There are some limitations to the performance review process as
described above. The following points should be taken into account
when comparing performance against other companies (and
sometimes within the company itself – past periods), or when
industrial averages are used:
·
there may be a lack of uniformity in accounting definitions and
techniques
·
the balance sheet is only a snapshot in time, and only represents a
single estimate of the company’s position
·
there may actually be no standards for comparison
Step 1
Based on all available financial statements, the various sector and
industry publications, and any background information that can
be extracted from the applicable accounting policies, the annual
reports, the auditors’ reports, and details of any significant events
that may have occurred in the period under analysis, study the
major features of the company and its operations within its
industry, and establish its SWOT.
Step 2
Assess the profitability of the company by analysing its major
profitability ratios for the period under review (see 7.2.3).
Step 3
Assess the efficiency of the company by analysing its major
operating and activity ratios (see 7.2.4 and 7.2.5), its operating
cycle, as well as carry out a vertical (common size) analysis (see
6.4) of its income statements for the period under review.
Step 4
Assess the growth of the company by carrying out a comparative
(horizontal) analysis (see 6.2) of its balance sheets and income
statements for the period under review which may provide
indications as to the trends in the performance of the company.
Step 5
Assess the liquidity of the company by analysing its major
liquidity ratios for the period under review (see 7.2.1).
Step 6
Verify the financing of the company by analysing its major solvency
ratios (see 7.2.2) as well as its gearing for the period under review.
Step 7
Assess the company’s management of financial risk from the
perspectives of types and areas of investment, markets,
exchange and interest rates, as well as levels of trade credit for
the period under review.
Step 8
Assess the company’s investment policy by verifying the various
relationships between its capital expenditure to its sales, to the
level of depreciation, and also to the levels of plant, property
and equipment for the period under review.
Step 9
Conclude the performance review by providing an adequate
summary of all the previous steps.
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
7.3 Performance review process 137

·
changes in the environment and changes in money values, together
with short-term fluctuations, may have a significant impact
·
the past should really not be relied on as a good predictor of the
future
The overall essence will be for the performance review to be able to
paint the correct picture of the performance of the company that
should be able to permit its management make proper decisions.
7.4
DuPont analysis
DuPont analysis (also known as the DuPont identity, the DuPont
model, the DuPont formula, or the DuPont method) is a method of
performance measurement that was started by the DuPont Corporation
(USA) in the 1920s. As ratios are not entirely independent, the
performance on one is related to the performance of others.
The DuPont system of analysis is used to determine the return on
assets (ROA) and the return on equity (ROE) by multiplying related
ratios as will be shown in this section.
DuPont analysis shows that the ROA is affected by two things:
·
The operating efficiency, which is measured by the profit margin,
and
·
The asset use efficiency, which is measured by the total asset
turnover
ROA = Profit margin × Asset turnover
This can be transformed, by using the various components of the
ratios into:
ROA = 
×
ROA measures how a firm uses its assets to generate profits. The profit
margin reveals how the firm generates net income in relation to its
revenue. The asset turnover reveals the firm’s ability to generate sales
with assets. A desired ROA can be achieved in a number of different
combinations of profit margin and asset turnover ratios. For example,
assume the desired ROA level is 14%. This can be achieved with
different possible combinations of profit margin ratios and asset
turnover ratios. Exhibit 7.2 is an illustration of this possibility in which
the desired ROA of 14% is achieved through three different options.
Total revenue

Average total assets
Net income

Total revenue
Exhibit 7.2 ROA from different options
Option
Profit Margin
Asset Turnover
ROA
–––––––
–––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
–––––––
A
28.00%
0.5
14.00%
B
18.67%
0.75
14.00%
C
14.00%
1
14.00%
138 7 Ratio analysis and types of ratios
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
As with the ROA, DuPont analysis also shows that the ROE is on its
own affected by three things:
·
The operating efficiency,
·
The asset use efficiency, and
·
The financial leverage, which is measured by the equity multiplier
(also called the financial leverage multiplier)
ROE = Profit margin × Asset turnover × Equity multiplier
This can be transformed, by using the various components of the
ratios into:
ROE = 
×
×
Essentially, ROE is determined by multiplying the ROA by the equity
multiplier. The greater the equity multiplier of a firm with a given
ROA, the greater will be the ROE. The higher the ROE, the greater will
be the financial risk associated with that higher ROE.
This analysis enables the analyst to understand the source of superior
(or inferior) return by comparison with companies in similar
industries (or between industries). The DuPont identity, however, is
less useful for some industries, that do not use certain concepts, or for
which the concepts are less meaningful. Variations may be used in
certain industries, as long as they also respect the underlying structure
of DuPont analysis. DuPont analysis is illustrated in Exhibit 7.5 based
on the data contained in Exhibits 7.3 and 7.4.
Average total assets

Average owners’ equity
Total revenue

Average total assets
Net income

Total revenue
Exhibit 7.3 Condensed balance sheet of the Europa Alliance Hotel Plc. December 31st 2016
Balance Sheet – Europa Alliance Hotel Plc 
on December 31st 2016
Current assets
€ 12,155,000.00
Fixed Assets
€ 46,420,000.00
–––––––––––––––
Total Assets
€ 58,575,000.00
Current Liabilities
€ 10,571,000.00
Long Term Liabilities
€ 24,904,000.00
–––––––––––––––
Total Liabilities
€ 35,475,000.00
Common Stock
€
3,025,000.00
Other Owners’ Equity
€ 20,075,000.00
–––––––––––––––
Total Owners’ Equity
€ 23,100,000.00
7.4 DuPont analysis 139

Exhibit 7.4 Condensed income statement of the Europa Alliance Hotel Plc. December 31st 2016
Income Statement – Europa Alliance Hotel Plc 
FTY ending December 31st 2016
Revenues
€ 71,500,000.00
Cost of Sales
€ 33,159,500.00
Indirect Expenses
€ 16,610,000.00
Fixed Charges
€
8,772,500.00
Income Tax
€
5,186,500.00
–––––––––––––––
Net Income
€€ 7,771,500.00
Exhibit 7.5   An Excel generated DuPont Analysis of the Europa Alliance Hotel Plc. 
 
December 31st 2016
DuPont Analysis – Europa Alliance Hotel Plc. Decmber 31st 2016
Income statement
Balance sheet
Cost of Sales
33,159,500.00
€
Indirect Expenses
16,610,000.00
€
Fixed Charges
8,772,500.00
€
Income Tax
5,186,500.00
€
Revenues
71,500,000.00
€
Current Assets
12,155,000.00
€
Fixed Assets
46,420,000.00
€
Current Liabilities
10,571,000.00
€
Long Term Liabilities
24,904,000.00
€
Net Income
7,771,500.00
€
Revenues
71,500,000.00
€
Total Assets
58,575,000.00
€
Total Liabilities
35,475,000.00
€
Total Owners’ Equity
23,100,000.00
€
Net Profit Margin
Asset Turnover
10.87%
1.22
Return on Assets (ROA)
13.27%
Return on Equity
(ROE)
33.64%
Total Liabilities +
Owners’ Equity
58,575,000.00
€
Total Owners’ Equity
23,100,000.00
€
Equity Multiplier
2.54
Divided by
Multiplied by
Multiplied by
Divided by
Divided by
Plus
140 7 Ratio analysis and types of ratios
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

141
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Glossary
Accounts receivable turnover – is the ratio of total revenue divided by the
average accounts receivable. It measures how quickly guests pay their bills.
Acid test ratio – is the ratio obtained through dividing the liquid assets by
current liabilities. It is one of the main indicators of the liquidity of a
company.
Activity ratios – is the group of accounting ratios that measure a company’s
ability to convert its different balance sheet accounts into cash or sales.
Asset turnover – is the ratio that measures a company’s ability to generate
sales in relation to total assets. It is calculated through dividing the total
revenue by the average total assets.
Average collection period – is the number of days it takes for a company to
collect all its accounts receivable. It is calculated through dividing the
accounts receivable turnover by the number of days in the period.
Average daily rate (ADR) – is the ratio that indicates the level of a hotel’s
performance. It is calculated through dividing the rooms revenue by the
number of rooms sold. It is also called the average room rate.
Average food service cheque – is the average amount of guests consumption of
food services. It is calculated through dividing the total food revenues by
the total number of food covers.
Average occupancy per room – is the ratio that indicates the company’s ability
to use the room facilities. It is calculated through dividing the number of
guests by the number of rooms occupied by guests.
Average room rate – see average daily rate
Beverage cost percentage – is the ratio that compares the cost of beverage sold
to beverage revenues. It is calculated through dividing the cost of beverage
sold during a given period by the beverage revenues of the same period.
Beverage inventory turnover – is the ratio that shows how quickly the beverage
inventory is used. It is calculated through dividing the cost of beverage used
by the average beverage inventory.
Cash on cash return – it is the ratio that shows the relationship between the
amount of cash that was used in the company during the period and the
average owners’ equity. It is calculated through dividing the adjusted net
operating income less debt service by the average owners’ equity.
Complimentary occupancy percentage – is the ratio that shows the relationship
between the complimentary rooms and the available rooms. It is calculated
through dividing the complimentary rooms by the available rooms.
141

142 7 Ratio analysis and types of ratios
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Current ratio – is the ratio of the relationship between the current assets and
the current liabilities. It is calculated through dividing the total current
assets by the total current liabilities. It is one of the main indicators of the
liquidity of a company.
Debt service coverage ratio – is the ratio that shows the extent to which a
company creates enough EBITDA to cover its debts. It is calculated through
dividing the EBITDA less cash transfers to replacement reserves by the debt
service payments.
Debt to equity ratio – is the ratio that shows the company’s ability to survive
and as such honour the payments of its long term debts. It is calculated
through dividing the total liabilities by the total owners’ equity.
Dividends per share – is the ratio that shows the relationship between the sum
of declared dividends for every ordinary share issued. It is calculated
through dividing the sum of dividends over a period less any special
dividends by the shares outstanding for the period.
Dividend yield – which is equally called the dividend-price ratio shows how
much a company pays out in dividends each year relative to its share price.
It is calculated through dividing the annuals dividends by the share price.
DuPont analysis – is a method of performance measurement used in
determining the return on equity (ROE) and the return on assets (ROA).
Earnings per share – is the ratio that is a general indicator of the profitability of
a company. It is calculated through dividing the net income by the average
outstanding shares.
EBITDA margin ratio – is the ration that shows the relationship between the
EBITDA and the total operating revenue. It is calculated by dividing the
EBITDA by the total operating revenue.
EBITDA per available room – is the ratio that shows the relationship between the
EBITDA and the available rooms. It is calculated by dividing the EBITDA by
the rooms available.
Equity multiplier – is the ratio that shows the amount of assets owned by the
company for each equivalent monetary unit the owners have put into the
company. It is calculated through dividing the average total assets by the
average owners’ equity. The equity multiplier is one of the measures of
financial leverage and represents both profit and risk measurement. It is
used to determine the return on equity (ROE) when it is applied to the
return on assets (ROA). It also reflects how many assets can go into default
before a company becomes insolvent.
Fixed asset turnover – is the ratio that measures the effectiveness of the use of
fixed assets in generating revenues. It is calculated through dividing the
total revenue by the average total fixed assets.
Food cost percentage – is the ratio that compares the cost of food sold to food
revenues. It is calculated through dividing the cost of food sold during a
given period by the food revenues of the same period.

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Food inventory turnover ratio – is the ratio that shows how quickly the food
inventory is used. It is calculated through dividing the cost of food used by
the average food inventory.
Food service seat turnover – is the measure of the number of seats turned over
(number of guests) during a meal period. It is calculated through dividing the
total guests served (covers) by the number of available seats for the meal period.
Free cash flow – is the ratio that represents the amount in cash that a
company is able to generate after taking care of all the necessary expenses
used to expand or maintain its asset base. It is calculated by deducting
capital expenditures from the operating cash flow.
Gross operating profit per available room (GOPPAR) – is the ratio that provides a
clearer indication of the overall performance of a hotel than the REVPAR
because it takes into account management control and containment costs.
It is calculated through dividing the gross operating profit by the total
rooms for sale.
Gross return on assets – measures the effectiveness of the use of a company’s
assets by the management. It is calculated through dividing the earnings
before interest and taxes (EBIT) by the average total assets.
Income before non-operating income and expenses margin ratio – is the ratio that
measures the management’s ability to produce profits through sales while
controlling all departmental costs, undistributed expenses and management
fees. It is calculated through dividing the income before non-operating
income and expenses by the total operating revenue.
Income before non-operating income and expenses per available room – is a variation
of the income before non-operating income and expenses margin ratio in
the sense that it is calculated through dividing the income before non-
operating income and expenses by the available rooms.
Inventory holding period – is the ratio that shows the number of times in a
given period that a specific inventory is theoretically brought down to zero.
It is calculated through dividing the number of operating days in the period
by the inventory turnover ratio.
Labour cost percentage – is the ratio that compares the labour costs per
department to the revenues generated by the departments (for revenue
centres), or to the total revenue (for service centres). It is calculated through
dividing the overall labour costs by the related revenues.
Liquidity ratios – is the group of accounting ratios that measure a company’s
ability to honour its short term obligations.
Long term debt to total capitalization ratio – is a variation of the debt to equity
ratio and it compares the company’s long term debt to the available capital.
It is calculated through dividing the long term debt by the long term debt
and owners’ equity.
Market capitalization – is the total market value of all of a company's
outstanding shares
Glossary 143

144 7 Ratio analysis and types of ratios
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Mix of sales – is the proportion of sales coming from the different
departments or products within an establishment. It indicates the
individual contribution of the various departments to the overall sales.
Multiple occupancy percentage – is also called double occupancy percentage and
the ratio indicates the relationship between rooms occupied by more than
one guest to the number of rooms occupied by guests. It is calculated
through dividing the number of rooms occupied by two or more guests by
the number of rooms occupied by guests.
Net return on assets – is a ratio that shows the after tax earnings of assets and is
an indicator of the profitability of a company. It is calculated through
dividing the net income by the average total assets.
Number of times interest earned ratio – is the ratio that shows a company’s past
ability to honour its interest payments. It is calculated through dividing the
earnings before interest and taxes by the interest expense.
Operating cash flow ratio – is a ratio that measures how well current liabilities
are covered by the cash flow generated from a company's operations. It is
calculated through dividing the net operating cash flow by the average
current liabilities.
Operating cash flow to total liability ratio – is a variation of the operating cash
flow ratio and it is calculated through dividing the operating cash flow by
the average total liabilities.
Operating efficiency ratio – also called the gross operating profit ratio, it
measures the company’s ability to generate sales and control its expenses. It
is calculated through dividing the gross operating profit by the total
revenue.
Operating ratios – is the group of accounting ratios that helps a company’s
management to analyse their operations.
Paid occupancy percentage – is a ratio that shows the relationship between the
rooms sold and the available rooms. It is calculated through dividing the
rooms sold by the available rooms.
Pay-out ratio – which is also called the dividend pay-out ratio, represents the
proportion of earnings that is paid out as dividends to the shareholders of a
company. It is calculated either by dividing the dividends per share by the
earnings per share, or by dividing the dividends by the net income.
Price-to-book ratio – which is also known as the market-to-book ratio or the
price-to-equity ratio, is the ratio that is used to compare a company's
current market price to its book value. It is calculated either by dividing the
market capitalization by the net asset value or by dividing the share price
by the net asset value per share.
Price-to-earnings valuation ratio – is a ratio that evaluates a company’s current
share price in relation to its earnings per share. It is calculated through
dividing the market value per share by the earnings per share.

Price-to sales ratio – which is also known as the sales multiple, or the revenue
multiple compares company’s share price to its revenues. It is calculated
either by dividing the market capitalization by the total annual revenue or
by dividing the share price by the sales per share.
Profit margin – is a ratio that measures the management’s effectiveness in
generating revenues and controlling its expenses. It is calculated through
dividing the net income by the total revenue.
Profitability ratios – is the group of accounting ratios that show how effective
the management has been.
Ratio – shows the arithmetic relationship between two or more elements.
Return on owners’ equity (ROE) – is a ratio that shows how effective the
management has been in their use of equity funding. It is a general
indicator of the profitability of the company. It is calculated through
dividing the net income by the average owners’ equity.
Revenue per available customer (REVPAC) – is a ratio that shows the revenues
received per guest served. It is calculated through dividing the total revenue
from the hotel guests by the total number of guests.
Revenue per available room (REVPAR) – is a ratio that shows the revenues received
per available room in the property. It is calculated through dividing the
total rooms’ revenue by the total available rooms.
Sales per share ratio – which is also called the revenue per share ratio, is used
to calculate the total revenue earned by a share over a one year period. It is
calculated by dividing the total revenue by the average shares outstanding.
Solvency ratio – is a ratio that measures the solvency of a company at the
given point of time, by showing how far the company is able to meet its
long term obligations. It is calculated through dividing the total assets by
the total liabilities.
Solvency ratios – is the group of ratios that show how far a company is
financed by debt and if it can honour its long term obligations.
Standard – is a basis for comparison which can be seen as a point of reference
against which other things can be evaluated.
Working capital turnover ratio – is a ratio that indicates the company’s
effectiveness in using its working capital. It is calculated through dividing
the total revenues by the average working capital.
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Glossary 145

146 7 Ratio analysis and types of ratios
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Multiple choice questions
7.1
Hospitality managers use ratios mainly to help them:
a
clarify why the guests may not be loyal
b evaluate the attainment of their objectives and monitor their performances
c
recognize specific problems and the solutions to them
d verify the effectiveness of the competition
7.2
Creditors will generally use ratio analysis to evaluate the __________ of a
business.
a
activity
b efficiency
c
liquidity
d solvency
7.3
Which of the following categories of ratios shows how effective management
has been in a particular period?
a
activity
b liquidity
c
profitability
d solvency
7.4
Using the information below, the multiple occupancy percentage is equal to:
Available rooms
220,000
Rooms occupied by guests
146,000
Number of guests
180,000
Rooms occupied by 2 or more guests
25,400
a
11.5%
b 14.1%
c
17.4%
d none of the above
7.5
DuPont analysis shows that the ROA is affected by:
a
the operating efficiency and the equity multiplier
b the asset use efficiency and the equity multiplier
c
the financial leverage and the equity multiplier
d none of the above
Exercises
7.1
Using this selection of some of the financial ratios of the New Standards
Restaurant, write a short commentary on their liquidity position during the
years analyzed.
2014
2015
2016
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
Acid-test ratio
1.15:1
1.25:1
1.35:1
Current ratio
1.4:1
1.6:1
1.8:1
Inventory turnover
21 times
23 times
25 times
Accounts receivable turnover
23 times
20 times
17 times

7.2
Determine the food cost percentage of the Corporate Road stop during the
month of March 2016 based on the following financial information:
7.3
The balance sheet and condensed income statement of the Sea View Motel
are given below
Beginning food inventory
€
30,600.00
Ending food inventory
€
27,200.00
Food sales
€ 408,000.00
Food purchases
€ 139,400.00
The Sea View Motel
Balance sheet
December 31st 2016
Assets
Current assets
Cash
€
157,500.00
Accounts receivable
€
186,000.00
Inventories
€
10,500.00
Total current assets
€
354,000.00
Property and equipment:
Land
€
93,000.00
Building (net)
€
465,000.00
Furniture & equipment (net)
€
138,000.00
Total property and equipment
€
696,000.00
Total assets
€
1,050,000.00
Liabilities and owners’ equity
Current Liabilities
Accounts payable
€
270,000.00
Note payable
€
22,500.00
Current maturity of martgage payable
€
37,500.00
Total current liabilities
€
330,000.00
Long term liabilities
Notes payable
€
75,000.00
Mortgage payable
€
150,000.00
Total long term liabilities
€
225,000.00
Total Liabilities
€
555,000.00
Owners’ Equity
Common stock
€
165,000.00
Retained earnings
€
330,000.00
Total owners’ equity
€
495,000.00
Total liabilities and owners’ equity
€
1,050,000.00
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exercises 147

Using the data provided in the statements of the Sea View Motel, calculate
the following ratios:
·
Acid-test ratio
·
Asset turnover (assume the total assets stayed the same during 2016)
·
Current ratio
·
Debt to equity ratio
·
Number of times interest earned ratio
·
Operating efficiency ratio
·
Profit margin
7.4
Using the information contained in Exercise 7.3, carry out the following
activities
·
establish the complete DuPont analysis as shown in Exhibit 7.5
·
make a brief performance report about the Sea View Motel for 2016
The Sea View Motel
Condensed Income Statement
For the year anded December 31st 2016 
Revenues
€
2,325,000.00
Cost of goods sold
€
307,500.00
Operating expenses
€
1,215,000.00
Contribution margin
€
802,500.00
Undistributed operating expenses
€
183,000.00
Income after undistributed operating expenses
€
619,500.00
Interest
€
36,000.00
Other fixed charges
€
262,500.00
Income before taxes
€
321,000.00
Income tax (32%)
€
102,720.00
Net income
€
218,280.00
148 7 Ratio analysis and types of ratios
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Management of working
capital
8.1
The importance of working capital
management
8.2
The working capital cycle
Cash is the most fundamental business resource through which
creditors, suppliers, employees, the state, shareholders and other
stakeholders can be satisfied. Sources of cash include those placed in
the business by the owners, those borrowed from third parties
(individuals, other business establishments or lending institutions),
and those generated by the business itself. In Section 8.1 the
importance of working capital management is discussed followed by
the explanation and illustration of the working capital cycle in
Section 8.2.
149
8
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

8.1
The importance of working capital management
Working capital is defined as the surplus of current assets over current
liabilities and indicates the amounts available to the business to
conduct its revenue generating activities. It is expressed in the
following formula:
Working capital = current assets – current liabilities
Decisions related to working capital and short term financing are
called working capital management decisions and they are all meant
to ensure that the business is able to continue its operations with
sufficient cash that will be able to satisfy its current obligations as well
as operational expenses. Profitable businesses generally generate cash
but some businesses can be profitable but lack sufficient cash during
certain periods of the operating cycle. It is very important to ensure
that working capital in the business is properly controlled to eliminate
problems such as: too much or too little inventory; too high or too
little receivables; too high or too little payables; and lastly, too high or
too little levels of cash.
Working capital analysis permits the evaluation of working capital
during an operating period for the following reasons:
·
Exposes the increases in the working capital by showing the
various inflows that caused the increase.
·
Exposes decreases in working capital by showing the various
outflows that caused the decrease.
·
Exposes the net changes to working capital during the period.
·
Exposes the effectiveness of working capital controls during the
period.
·
Exposes to prospective lenders information that will permit them
to make informed decisions related to the business.
As a general rule working capital should always be positive in the long
run because if it was negative, the company would be financing its
property and equipment with current liabilities.
8.2
The working capital cycle
The working capital cycle (also called the “cash cycle” or the
“operating cycle”) is used to determine the period of time which
elapses from the point where cash is spent on any investment in
current assets, until the point of the inflow of cash from the guests.
Exhibit 8.1 illustrates in a simplified form the flow of cash within a
well organised company.
150 8 Management of working capital
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

8.2 The working capital cycle 151
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Inventory Debtors Cash Creditors
To illustrate the cycle, assume that the company is a restaurant. The
cycle will begin with the restaurant acquiring F & B products as well as
other operating supplies from their suppliers which have to be paid
for in cash, either immediately (cash) or after some delay (creditors).
These operating supplies as well as F & B products accumulate as
inventory (inventory) which will eventually be transformed and sold
to the guests. These guests will pay in cash, either directly (cash) or on
account (debtors). All of these movements create inflows and outflows
of cash for the restaurant. The cycle can be extended to take into
account those other inflows and outflows of cash that would be
considered for investment and financing purposes. The various
components of the working capital cycle are summarily discussed
below.
Cash management
The statement of cash flow was discussed in chapter 5 in which an
introduction to cash management was equally stated (section 5.1).
It is important to recall that net cash flow is not the same as the profit
earned during a particular period. Any failure to recognise this
fundamental difference between net cash flows and net profits can
lead hospitality managers to bankruptcy. To avoid such failures it is
necessary to establish cash budgets in which management will be able
to identify periods in which they foresee cash deficits, as well as
periods of cash surpluses. Consider a situation in which a hotel runs
out of cash and cannot find a lender at short notice. It might find
itself trying to liquidate some of its assets, arrange for some long-term
financing, or miss on some of its due liability repayments.
Good cash management does not simply mean avoiding having too
little cash. Too much cash can be detrimental to the profitability for
the business. Since investors get into businesses to make profits in the
form of return on investment, they expect to make more out of their
investment than if they had kept the money in their own banks in
the form of cash. If there is too much cash within a company, it will
Exhibit 8.1   The Working Capital Cycle
Inventory
Inventory
Cash
Creditors
Debtors
Purchase of property
and equipment,
withdrawals,
capital investments
Long-term loans,
capital acquisition
Cash sales
Credit sales
Debtors
settle
their debts
Creditors
receive their
cash in
settlement of bills
Supplies
Other
outflows
Other
inflows

be advisable for management to try and invest it in such a way that it
could generate returns for the company instead of staying idle in their
bank accounts.
The Cash Conversion Cycle (CCC)
The cash conversion cycle expresses the length of time that it takes for
a company to convert its resource inputs into cash flows and it is
expressed in number of days. It seeks to measure the amount of time
the currency values of the net inputs are tied up in the production
and sales process before they get converted into cash through sales to
customers. It looks at the amount of time needed to sell the
inventory, the amount of time needed to collect the accounts
receivable, and the length of time the company is given to pay its bills
by its own creditors without incurring any penalties. In some cases,
the cash conversion cycle is simply called the cash cycle. The cash
conversion cycle is determined in the following manner:
Days Inventory Outstanding
+
Days Sales Outstanding
–
Days Payable Outstanding
Usually a company acquires inventory on credit (resulting in accounts
payable), while it also sells on credit (resulting in accounts receivable).
No cash is involved until the time that the company settles the
accounts payable, and collects the accounts receivable. So the cash
conversion cycle measures the time between the disbursement of cash
and the collection of cash. The shorter the cycle, the less time capital
is tied up in the business process, and thus the better for the
company's profits. It can be especially useful for comparing close
competitors, because the company with the lowest cash conversion
cycle is often the one with better management. Exhibit 8.2 is an
illustration of the various elements related to the cash conversion
cycle placed on a timeline arrow.
The cash conversion cycle is a combination of several activity ratios
that are connected to the accounts receivable, the accounts payable
and the inventory turnover, and these ratios indicate how efficiently
management is using short-term assets and liabilities to generate cash.
If for example the company sells what people want to buy, cash
moves quickly through the business, but if on the contrary, too much
inventory builds up, cash will be tied up in goods that are not being
sold, and will be bad for the company. Equally, if accounts receivable
are handled poorly that would mean that the company might be
having problems in collecting payments from its customers, and the
longer the company has to wait to be paid, the longer that money will
be unavailable to take care of other business needs.
152 8 Management of working capital
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

To calculate the cash conversion cycle for a certain period, the
following information will be required:
·
Accounts Payable at the beginning and at the end of the period;
·
Accounts Receivable at the beginning and at the end of the period;
·
Inventory at the beginning and at the end of the period;
·
Revenue and Cost of Goods Sold (COGS) for the period; and 
·
The number of days in the period.
The Days Inventory Outstanding determines the number of days it
takes to sell the entire inventory. The smaller the value, the better the
situation. It is calculated as follows:
Days Inventory Outstanding =
Recall that average inventory is determined as follows:
Average Inventory = 
The Days Sales Outstanding determines the number of days needed to
collect on sales and involves the accounts receivable. Here as well, the
smaller the value, the better the situation. It is calculated as follows:
Days Sales Outstanding =
Do as well recall that average accounts receivable is determined as
follows:
Average accounts receivable =
The Days Payable Outstanding is related to the determining the
number of days that the company takes to pay its own bills and
Average inventory

Cost of goods sold per day
Beginning inventory + ending inventory

2
Average accounts receivable

Revenue per day
Beginning accounts receivable + ending accounts receivable

2
8.2 The working capital cycle 153
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exhibit 8.2   Illustrating the cash conversion cycle
Raw materials
Order
placed
Delivery
+ Invoice
Days in inventory
incl. production
Average days in
accounts payable
Raw materials 
Payment date
Average days in
accounts receivable
Expected
Payment date
Payment
delay
Time
Cash Conversion Cycle
Operating Cycle
Sale
+ Delivery
+ Invoice
Days Sales
Outstanding
Actual
Payment

involves the accounts payable. Here, unlike in the previous cases, the
larger the value the better it is for the company because it holds its
cash for much longer. It is calculated as follows:
Days Payable Outstanding =
Do equally recall that the average accounts payable is determined as
follows:
Average accounts payable =
Using all the above formulas with the hypothetical data as illustrated
in Exhibit 8.3, the cash conversion cycle is calculated.
It should be noted that on its own the cash conversion cycle is of little
relevance and it is best used in assessing a company’s performance
over time as well as review with its competition taking into account
that the lower the comparative values, the better the situation. The
cash conversion cycle is principally valuable for those types of
companies that have inventories that are sold to customers, while for
example, it will be a meaningless metric for companies involved with
consultancies, software development or the insurance domain.
Average accounts payable

Cost of goods sold per day
Beginning accounts payable + ending accounts payable

2
Exhibit 8.3 Calculating the cash conversion cycle
Item
Year 2015
Year 2016
Sales (Revenue)
Not required
€18,500,000.00
Cost of Goods Sold
Not required
€12,400,000.00
Inventory
€ 2,200,000.00
€ 1,800,000.00
Accounts receivable
€ 1,250,000.00
€ 1,550,000.00
Accounts payable
€ 2,200,000.00
€ 3,100,000.00
Average inventory
€ 2,000,000.00
Average accounts receivable
€ 1,400,000.00
Average accounts payable
€ 2,650,000.00
Days in period
365
366
Days Inventory Outstanding
59.03 days
Days Sales Outstanding
+
27.70 days
Days Payable Outstanding
–
78.22 days
Cash Conversion Cycle
=
8.51 days
154 8 Management of working capital
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Accounts receivable management
Accounts receivable results from sales on account, or in other words,
credit sales to customers. In order to push up sales, hospitality
operations are called upon to make credit available to their guests.
These accounts receivable are expected in the normal course of
business to be transformed into cash within a short period of time.
Extending credits to customers entails two types of costs:
·
The absence of the monetary value of the completed sales, and
·
The lost revenue if the accounts receivable becomes uncollectible
Due to these costs, the establishment should try to ensure that the
credit period given to the customers is neither too long nor too short
and this should be given only to creditworthy customers. If the
accounts receivable are too high it means that the company is not
collecting its cash quickly enough, which could lead to bottlenecks in
the working capital cycle. On the other hand, if the level of accounts
receivable is too low it may mean that the company is offering
insufficient levels of credits to its customers, and as such not
benefitting enough from its sales’ potentials.
Accounts receivable are generally monitored using ratios as shown in
7.2.1 (accounts receivable turnover which indicates how well accounts
receivable are collected within the organization, and the average
collection period which relates the collection days to the accounts
receivable turnover ratio). The analysis of the accounts receivable
balance can be conducted by using what is called the account
receivable ageing schedule which is a listing of the customers making
up the total accounts receivable balance. It is normally prepared at the
end of each month. Analysing the accounts receivable ageing
schedule may help to easily identify sources of potential cash flow
problems.
A typical accounts receivable ageing schedule consists of six columns
and it is illustrated in Exhibit 8.4.
·
Column 1 lists the name of each customer with an accounts
receivable balance;
·
Column 2 lists the total amount due from the customers listed in
column 1;
·
Column 3 is the current column in which is listed the amounts due
from customers for sales made during the current month;
·
Column 4 shows the unpaid amount due from sales made in the
previous month;
·
Column 5 lists the amounts due from sales made two months
earlier;
·
Column 6 lists the amount due from sale over two months earlier.
8.2 The working capital cycle 155
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

The accounts receivable ageing schedule can be used to identify the
customers that are extending their payment times. If the bulk of the
overdue amount in receivables is attributable to one customer such as
customer DEF in Exhibit 8.4, then steps can be taken to see that this
customer’s account is properly supervised to avoid undue surprises.
Overdue amounts attributable to many customers at the same time
may signal that the business needs to tighten its general credit policy
towards new and existing customers. The ageing schedule also
identifies any recent changes in the accounts making up the total
accounts receivable balance. Changes in the makeup of the accounts
receivable balances can be easily spotted between the months and the
accounts receivable ageing schedule can sound an early warning and
help protect the business from cash-flow problems.
Inventory management
Having low inventory levels is a very good way of conserving cash;
however care has to be taken to ensure that neither too much nor too
little inventory is held at any time. High levels of inventory will lead
to the following problems:
·
Higher insurance costs for inventory
·
Higher handling costs
·
Higher storage costs and space needs
·
Higher maintenance costs
·
Loss in quality and value
·
More exposure to pilferage
·
Unavailability for other investment purposes
Low levels of inventory can lead to the risk of not having enough in
stock to satisfy current customer demands which might lead to loss of
sales as well as the negative effects it might have on customer
satisfaction. To determine correct inventory levels is really a matter of
judgement based on the evaluation of the various inventory turnover
Exhibit 8.4 Sample accounts receivable ageing schedule
Accounts Receivable Ageing Schedule
Hospitality Caterers United
June 30th 2016
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
2
3
4
5
6
–––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––
–––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––––
Customer Name
Total Accounts 
Current
1-30 days 
31-60 days Over 60 days
Receivable
past due
past due
past due
–––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––
––––––––––––
Customer ABC
€
2,000.00
€
400.00
€
600.00
€
600.00
€ 400.00
Customer DEF
€
4,100.00
€ 4,100.00
–
–
–
Customer GHI
€
1,200.00
€ 1,200.00
–
–
–
Customer JKL
€
2,600.00
€ 1,300.00
€
650.00
€
650.00
–
Customer MNO
€
500.00
–
€
500.00
–
–
Customer PQR
€
750.00
€
750.00
–
–
–
Customer STU
€
1,600.00
€ 1,600.00
–
–
–
Total
€ 12,750.00
€ 9,350.00
€ 1,750.00
€ 1,250.00
€ 400.00
Percentage
100%
73%
14%
10%
3%
156 8 Management of working capital
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

ratios. Another way of inventory management is the use of the
economic order quantity model which enables the estimation of the
optimal order size for purchase orders and illustrated in Exhibit 8.5.
■Exhibit 8.5 Using the economic order quantity model to determine
optimal order size
The economic order quantity (EOQ) is the most economical quantity of a
product that should be purchased at one time. It is based on all the associated
costs for ordering and maintaining the product.
The model determines the amount of goods to order to meet projected
demand while minimizing inventory costs. The original version of the model
assumed the following: 
a) Demand for inventory is predictable.
b) The ordering costs do not vary with the size of order.
EOQ is computed as such:
Q = 
in which:
Q = optimal order quantity
D = annual demand quantity of the product 
C = fixed cost per order 
H = annual holding cost per unit (also known as carrying cost)
Example:
The Spice & Taste Restaurant has a good wine list. On an average, Spice &
Taste Restaurant sells 850 cases of wines each year and the average cost of
each case is €80.00. Based on past observation, the cost of ordering and
receiving one shipment of wine is €18.00. And the opportunity cost of any
excess working capital is assumed to be 4% as this is the remuneration rate
received by Spice & Taste Restaurant in their short term deposits with the
bank. Based on this, the holding cost per case is calculated as 4% of €80.00 =
€3.20. The EOQ of their wines inventory can be calculated as such:
Q = 
Q = 
Q = 98
This means that if the Spice & Taste Restaurant orders its wines in shipments
of 98 cases its annual ordering and carrying costs will be minimized.
Current liabilities management
Current liabilities management is limited to principally dealing with
accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities. The
primary objective will be to delay, as much as it is possible, payments
to third parties until these payments are due and required. However
2CD

H
2 × 850 × 18

3.20
9562.5
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
8.2 The working capital cycle 157
....................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

care should be exercised to avoid late payment situations which might
result in the company becoming blacklisted – that is registered in the
list of companies with bad payment history. Blacklisting might result
in greater difficulties in obtaining credit, as well as it might result in
obtaining credit at penalty rates. Blacklisting also might lead to most
of the company’s payments to be requested on cash-only basis.
An accounts payable ageing schedule may help determine cash
outflows for certain expenses in the near future – 30 to 60 days. This
will give a good estimate of the cash outflows necessary to pay all the
accounts payable on time. The cash outflows for every business can be
classified into one of four possible categories: costs of goods sold;
operating expenses; major purchases; and debt payments. The
accounts payable ageing schedule can help determine how well the
company is (or not) paying its invoices. While it is good cash-flow
management to delay payment until the invoice due date, take care
not to rely too heavily on trade credit and stretch the goodwill of the
suppliers. Paying bills late can indicate that the company is not
managing its cash flow the way a successful business should.
An accounts payable ageing schedule looks almost like an accounts
receivable ageing schedule except that it lists what the company owes
its various suppliers. It is thus a breakdown by supplier of the total
amount in the accounts payable balance.
Exhibit 8.6 is an illustration of a sample accounts payable ageing
schedule for the Hospitality Caterers United:
The accounts payable ageing schedule is a useful tool for analysing the
makeup of the accounts payable balance. The schedule permits the
company to detect problems in the management of payables early
enough to protect the company from any major trade credit
Exhibit 8.6 Sample accounts payable ageing schedule
Accounts Payable Ageing Schedule
Hospitality Caterers United
October 31st 2016
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
2
3
4
5
6
––––––––––
––––––––––––––
–––––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––––
Supplier
Total Accounts 
Current
1-30 days 
31-60 days 
Over 60 days 
Payable
past due
past due
past due
–––––––––––
––––––––––––––
–––––––––––
––––––––––
–––––––––
––––––––––––
Supplier 1
€
840.00
€
420.00
€
210.00
€ 210.00
–
Supplier 2
€ 1,250.00
€ 1,000.00
€
250.00
–
–
Supplier 3
€
900.00
€
500.00
€
400.00
–
–
Supplier 4
€
580.00
€
580.00
–
–
–
Supplier 5
€ 1,400.00
€
700.00
€
700.00
–
–
Supplier 6
€ 1,525.00
€
525.00
€
500.00
€ 500.00
–
Supplier 7
€
680.00
€
680.00
–
–
–
Total
€ 7,175.00
€ 4,405.00
€ 2,060.00
€ 710.00
€
–
Percentage
100%
61%
29%
10%
0%
158 8 Management of working capital
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

problems. For example in Exhibit 8.6, if supplier 6 was an important
supplier to Hospitality Caterers United, then the past due amounts
listed for supplier 6 should be paid in order to protect the trade credit
established. The accounts payable schedule can also be used to help
manage and improve the company’s cash flow. Based on the schedule
in Exhibit 8.6, Hospitality Caterers United will need to generate at
least €4,405.00 in income to cover the current month’s purchases on
account.
As with all current liabilities, the general rule then is for management
to pay their bills only when they are due except in situations where
they might receive cash discounts for early payments. Cash discounts
should be considered only when the assessment of the cash discounts
and its resulting effective interest rate might lead to the lowering of
the costs to the company. Payment of bills before their due dates
result in higher business costs, but management should also take into
account other factors such as the relationship with the suppliers. For
those interested in assessing the effect of cash discounts for early
payments, the effective interest rate is calculated by using the formula
below:
Effective interest rate = 
×
It is beyond the scope of this chapter to go into any further analysis of
effective interest rates.
Days in the year

Days between end of discount 
period and final due date
Discount Percentage

100% – Discount Percentage
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
8.2 The working capital cycle 159

Glossary
Accounts payable ageing schedule – is a listing of what the company owes to its
suppliers at any given date. The total of the schedule should be equal to the
balance of the accounts payable account on that given date.
Accounts receivable ageing schedule – is a listing of what customers owe the
company at any given date. The total of the schedule should be equal to the
balance of the accounts receivable account on that given date.
Accounts receivable management – is the management of the accounts
receivable balances of a company in order to ensure that the amounts of
credit extended to the customers, and the periods of credit allowed them
are properly supervised. It helps to protect the company from cash flow
problems.
Cash management – is the management of the cash balances of a company in
order to maximize the availability of cash that is not invested in fixed assets
or inventories, and to avoid the risk of insolvency. The most important tool
in cash management is the use of the cash budget which will help the
management to identify periods in which they foresee cash deficits or
surpluses.
Current liabilities management – is the management of the current liabilities
account balances of a company in order to ensure that the current liabilities
are properly honoured when they are due.
Economic order quantity – is a model that permits the establishment of the
most economic quantity of a product that should be ordered at one time.
It ensures that the customers are adequately served while at the same time
minimizing the inventory costs.
Inventory management – is the management of the inventory levels in order to
avoid either too much or too little inventory being held at any given
moment.
Trade credit – is the credit offered by suppliers without charging any interest.
Working capital – is the difference between the current assets and the current
liabilities.
Working capital cycle – is the illustration of the flow of cash within a company
from the moment cash is spent for the production of any good or service
until the moment cash is received from consumers of the good or service.
160
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Multiple choice questions
8.1
Only one of the following activities is relevant when referring to a
company’s management of its cash balances and its cash flow situation.
Which one?
a
cash management
b forecasting
c
internal control
d pricing
8.2
The working capital cycle is
a
the flow of capital within a company
b the flow of cash within a company
c
the flow of current assets within a company
d none of the above
8.3
Only one of the statements below constitutes an assumption of the
economic order quantity.
Which one?
a
demand for inventory is unpredictable
b ordering costs do not vary with the size of the order
c
ordering costs vary with the size of the order
d supply of inventory is predictable
8.4
Costs that result from hospitality companies extending credit to their
customers are of two types. The first is the absence of the monetary value of
the sale and the second is:
a
the absence of the accounts payable
b the absence of the accounts receivable
c
the lost revenue in case the accounts payable becomes uncollectible
d the lost revenue in case the accounts receivable becomes uncollectible
8.5
One of the major advantages of an accounts payable ageing schedule is that
it:
a
permits the company to detect problems in the management of its
relations with its customers
b permits the company to detect problems in the management of its
relations with its owners
c
permits the company to detect problems in the management of its
relations with its suppliers
d all of the above
Exercises
8.1
Indicate the effects on cash of the following account movements that took
place during the month of September 2016 in the activities of the Town
University Hotel:
·
Accounts payable decreased by €23,400
·
Accounts receivable decreased by €14,200
·
Accrued expenses increased by €23,100
·
Inventory increased by €12,600
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exercises 161

·
Marketable securities decreased by €4,700
·
Income taxes payable increased by €1,700
·
Salaries and wages payable decreased by €3,500
8.2
The projected sales of the Four Junctions Café are as shown in the table that
follows:
In general, the café sells 25% in cash and 75% on credit. 25 % of the
accounts receivable are collected during the month of sale, 65% in the
month after the sale, and the last 10%, the following month. Use this
information and determine the estimated cash receipts for May 2016.
8.3
The projected sales of the Logical Eating Spot are as shown in the table that
follows:
In general, their sales are 30% in cash and 70 on credit. The accounts
receivable are collected in the following manner:
Use this information and determine their estimated cash receipts for
November 2016.
Period
Projected sales
–––––––––––
–––––––––––––––
March 2016
€ 180,000
April 2016
€ 210,000
May 2016
€ 195,000
Period
Projected sales
––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––
June 2016
€ 275,000
July 2016
€ 310,000
August 2016
€ 345,000
September 2016
€ 330,000
October 2016
€ 290,000
November 2016
€ 255,000
Month of sale
15%
Month after
55%
Second month after
18%
Third month after
11%
Bad debts
1%
Total
100%
162 8 Management of working capital
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

8.4
You have been asked to determine the economic order quantity for the
Munching Moose Motel that purchases on average 345 cases of wine
annually. From past experience, the average cost of each case is €75.00 and
the cost of ordering and receiving each wine shipment is €15.64. The
opportunity cost of any excess working capital of the motel is 4%.
a
calculate the holding cost per case of wine
b how many cases should the motel order per shipment in view of
minimizing its ordering and carrying costs?
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exercises 163


Cost Management
9.1
The nature of costs and assumptions
9.2
Types of costs
9.3
Activity-based costing
9.4
Allocating indirect (overhead) costs to the
operating departments
9.5
Separating mixed-costs between their fixed
and variable elements
For managers to be able to choose between the alternative
opportunities open to them, they need information related to the
future costs and revenues and the way in which these change at
different levels of operation. Costs represent the money
measurements of the efforts that a company has to make in order to
achieve its objectives. Consequently, costs play a very important role
in management decision making. In Section 9.1 the nature of costs
and the basic assumptions related to costs are discussed, followed by
the description of the basic types of costs in Section 9.2. Section 9.3
introduces the notion of activity-based costing, and this is followed in
Section 9.4 with a discussion on the allocation of indirect costs. The
various methods of separating mixed-costs into their fixed and
variable elements are explained in Section 9.5.
165
9
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

9.1
The nature of costs and assumptions
At the most basic level, costs can be defined as the sacrifices made in
order to achieve a specific goal. Cost can have many meanings
depending on the context in which it is used. In management
accounting, cost is considered as an expense that is incurred in order
to increase revenues. For most hospitality operations as much as 90%
of all revenues are used to pay for costs. For this reason, cost
management is very important. One way of controlling costs in order
to improve net income is through cost budgeting and analysis.
Before proceeding with the types of costs, it is necessary to note that
accountants generally employ cost functions that are linear. This is
based on a certain number of assumptions which will be summarized
below:
·
Fixed costs are assumed to remain constant over different levels of
production activity
·
Variable costs are assumed to vary with different levels of
production activity but are constant per unit of output
·
It is assumed that all costs can be separated into either fixed or
variable
·
It is assumed that the levels of efficiency and productivity remain
constant over all production activity levels
·
It is assumed that costs behaviour can be explained by causing
changes on any one of the related independent variables.
Costs may have been incurred in the past, as well be a cost for the
future. In such a case the alternative use of resources may play an
important role in the decision to go ahead with possibly incurring
that future cost.
9.2
Types of costs
Before any analysis of costs is done within an organization, a
comprehensive understanding of its costs structure is necessary. This
understanding can only result from knowing all the types of costs that
can exist within an organization. Following is a basic description of
the various types of costs. 
Standard cost
Standard cost is the measure of how much a product or service should
normally cost based on a given volume or sales. These costs have to be
established by each organization based on past experiences because
the many factors that influence standard costs differ from
organization to organization. The establishment of standard costs
provides the basis for decision making, permits costs analysis and
control, and permits the measurement of inventory and cost of goods
sold. Standard costs serve as benchmarks against which actual costs
are compared. Differences between standard costs and actual costs are
called variances, and these are discussed in Section 14.5 of Chapter 14
– Budgeting and variance analysis.
166 9 Cost Management
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Fixed cost
Fixed costs are those expenses that do not change in relation to the
volume of the business within a specific period or production level.
Examples of fixed costs include management salaries and fire
insurance expenses. In the long run these costs can change but in the
short run they are not expected to change.
Variable cost
Variable costs are those expenses that change proportionately to
changes in the volume of the business. Very few costs will have a
directly linear relationship to the changes to the volume of the
business, however within the hospitality industry two good examples
of variable costs are the cost of food sold and the cost of beverage
sold. If for example the food cost percentage is 25% this means that if
the total food sales for the period are €85,000.00 then cost of food
sold will be €21,250.00. This relationship will be assumed to be the
same even if the total food sales for the period were €170,000.00 or
€40,000.00.
Semi-fixed and semi-variable costs
Some costs cannot be finely split into their fixed or variable
components. These are expenses that contain both fixed costs
components and variable costs components. The fixed costs
component is the part that will need to be paid whatever the level of
business activity. The variable cost component is the part that will
vary proportionately to the business activity. Examples include
utilities and maintenance costs. Cost of electricity is a good example.
It has both fixed and variable components. Electricity is essential for
the basic operation of the business for light and heat. With demand
increases more energy is required to keep up with the increase in
demand. Cost of electricity will as such rise accordingly as production
activities increase. In some literature these costs are also called mixed-
costs.
Direct cost
Direct costs are those costs that can be traced to a particular operating
department and is the responsibility of that department. In general
most direct costs are variable costs. The cost of linen and laundry
within the rooms division is an example, as well as the salaries and
wages of the rooms division employees.
Indirect cost
Indirect costs are costs that are not directly identified and are not
traceable to a particular operating department. Such costs cannot be
charged to any particular department. Indirect costs can either be
fixed or variable and some examples are general administration
expenses, taxes and security costs. Indirect costs are equally called
undistributed or overhead costs.
Joint cost
Joint costs are those costs that are shared and are the responsibility of
two or more departments. These costs will have to be appropriately
allocated to the responsible departments. For example if an employee
9.2 Types of costs 167
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

in the main kitchen is producing food for the banqueting department,
then this employee’s salary will have to be allocated appropriately to
the F & B and the banqueting departments. The main issue here is to
seek for a rational way of allocating these costs to the departments.
Cost allocation is discussed in Section 9.4 of this chapter.
Controllable and non-controllable costs
Controllable costs are those costs that the department heads can
directly influence in the short run. An example will be the F & B
manager’s ability to determine the amount of money to be spent on
wines. On the other hand, this F & B manager will not be able in the
short run to influence the amounts paid for rents. Those costs that
cannot be influenced are therefore called non-controllable costs.
Discretionary cost
These are costs that managers can choose to avoid, mainly for
budgetary reasons, in the short run and are mainly of a fixed
character. Such avoidance decisions are normally made by the general
manager. Avoiding these costs has little effect on operations in the
short run, but in the long run they cannot be avoided because sales
might eventually become seriously affected. Examples of discretionary
costs are advertising, maintenance and employee training
programmes.
Relevant and non-relevant costs
Relevant costs are costs that change depending on decisions that are
made, as well as affecting these decisions. For a cost to become
relevant it should be in the future and it should differ between the
possible alternatives. An example would be the possibility of replacing
an old oven in the kitchen by a combi-steamer. The relevant costs will
be the costs of a new combi-steamer (minus any trade-offs of the old
oven, the cost of training the employees to use the new combi-
steamer as well as all maintenance related costs of the combi-steamer).
In such a situation the labour cost of the kitchen employees will not
be affected and as such do not form part of the decision making
process. These employees’ labour costs will be considered as non-
relevant costs in making the decision to acquire the combi-steamer.
Sunk cost
Sunk costs are costs that have been incurred and as such cannot be
recovered. An example of a sunk cost derived from the example in
relevant cost above could be the following. Assume that prior to
making the decision to buy the new combi-steamer, management had
requested and paid for the services of a consultant to produce a report
on the advantages of using a combi-steamer instead of a conventional
oven. The amount of money paid for the consultant’s services will be
considered a sunk cost and it should not make any difference to the
decision to acquire the new combi-steamer. This cost should equally
not be included in the assessment of the cost of the combi-steamer.
Opportunity cost
Opportunity cost, also called the economic opportunity loss is a very
important concept in economics. It represents the value of the
168 9 Cost Management
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

forgone next best alternative that results from a decision. Opportunity
costs are not assessed only in monetary terms but equally in terms of
anything of value. As an example, still in line with our combi-steamer,
the opportunity cost of acquiring the combi-steamer will be the
monetary value attributed to acquiring the conventional oven.
Another example without monetary terms would be in the situation
that during a particular weekend, the hotel guests have the
opportunity to either attend on the Saturday night a musical, or
experience a special sunset evening at the beach. To the guest who
attends the musical, the opportunity cost will be missing out on the
experience of the special sunset evening at the beach. 
9.3
Activity-based costing
Activity-based costing (ABC) is a costing approach that assigns
resource costs to cost objects such as products, services, or customers
based on activities performed for the cost objects. The premise of this
costing approach is that an organization’s products or services are the
results of activities, and activities use resources which incur costs. By
controlling activities managers ensure that costs are controlled at their
source. Costs of resources are assigned to activities based on the
activities that use or consume resources, and the costs of activities are
assigned to cost objects based on activities performed for the cost
objects. ABC recognizes the causal or direct relationships between
resource costs, cost drivers, activities, and cost objects in assigning
costs to activities and then to cost objects. A wise manager will not
concentrate on how to calculate product or service costs but will
concentrate more on why the costs were there in the first place. When
designing an activity based costing system this should be used as a
departure point.
In order to design an activity based costing system it is important to
remember that the objectives should be met at the minimum cost and
complexity. To be successful, the final activity based costing system
should provide the right kind of information at the right level of
detail. In addition to this the design of the system should be as simple
as possible without being too simple, since it may report inaccurate
costs if it is too simple. The answer is to strike a balance between
simplicity and complexity. In addition to this, performance measures
should be identified at process level and for key activities. They
should be used to monitor and evaluate activities or processes and
must be used to promote consistent improvement. This should be
done without unnecessarily complicating the design of the system.
Seven assumptions underlie the design of an activity-based costing
system and they are the following:
·
All activities within an organization consume resources
·
Producing products or services makes use of activities
·
The business model is focused on consumption rather than
spending
·
There could be many causes to the consumption of the resources of
the organization
9.3 Activity-based costing 169
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

·
The organization can be able to internally identify and measure a
wide variety of activities
·
The costs pools in the organization should be homogeneous
·
The costs in each pool are variable
Taking into consideration these assumptions, there are a number of
different approaches possible when introducing an activity-based
costing system. The introduction of such a system usually entails the
following three steps:
Step 1
identifying resource costs and activities
The first step in designing an ABC system is to conduct an
activity analysis to identify the resource costs and activities of
the firm. Most firms record resource costs in specific accounts in
the accounting system. Examples of these accounts include
supplies, purchasing, materials handling, warehousing, office
expenses, furniture and fixtures, buildings, equipment, utilities,
and salaries and benefits.
Step 2
assigning resource costs to activities
The second step is for the organization to choose resource
consumption cost drivers based on cause-and-effect
relationships. Typical resource consumption cost drivers include
the number of (1) labour hours for labour intensive activities;
(2) employees for payroll-related activities; and (3) surface area
for general maintenance and cleaning activities. The cost of the
resources can be assigned to activities by direct tracing or
estimation. Direct tracing requires measuring the actual usage of
resources by activities. For example, fuel consumed by an oven
can be traced directly by reading the gas meter attached to the
oven. When direct tracing is not available, department
managers and supervisors need to estimate the amount or
percentage of time (or effort) employees spend on each
identified activity.
Step 3
assigning activity costs to cost objects (products, services
or customers)
The last step is to assign costs of activities to cost objects based
on the appropriate activity consumption cost drivers. Outputs
are the cost objects for which firms or organizations perform
activities. Typical outputs for a cost system are products and
services; however, outputs also can include customers, projects,
or business units. For example, the outputs of a bar-restaurant
may be number and types of coffee cups served, or amount of
waiters serving during a banquet. Firms use activity
consumption cost drivers to assign activity costs to cost objects.
Activity cost drivers should explain why the cost of a cost object
goes up or down. Typical activity consumption cost drivers are
purchase orders, receiving reports, and direct labour-hours.
170 9 Cost Management
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

In ABC, the greatest accuracy in costing is achieved by recognising
five different levels of activities: the unit level activities; the batch
level activities; the service level activities; the company level activities
and lastly the customer level of activities. The design of an ABC
system is a complicated and complex process that needs the
cooperation of many different functional heads within the
organization. To simply match the level of the activity driver with the
activity does not always ensure that the desired level of accuracy is
achieved. A part of the answer may be found in involving the
correctly motivated individuals at the correct time with a strong
mandate and then to let the team establish the correlation between
the performance of the activity and the activity driver.
ABC is suitable for market-oriented sectors such as the lodging industry.
It has been proposed that ABC is the most effective and accurate
costing method for customer profitability analysis – CPA in a hotel
environment. There are certain types of customers who consume far
more costs than others, for example, the longer the stay of the
customer, the lower the overhead costs per room night incurred 
(check-in and check-out costs, for instance). However, the use of ABC in
the hotel industry is still limited because although there is considerable
knowledge of the theory of ABC, there is still a low understanding of
how it should be used in the hospitality industry.
Exhibit 9.1 shows an illustration of how the three steps of the ABC
process can be applied within the hospitality industry.
ABC Process
An important factor in adapting an activity-based costing system is
the information required for such a system. With advances in data
management systems and computing it is nowadays much easier for
companies to adopt activity-based costing systems.
Exhibit 9.1   Illustration of the three steps of the ABC Process in the hospitality industry
Identify Resource Costs and Activities
Step 1
Overhead cost accounts
Resource cost drivers
Assign resource costs to activities
Step 2
Revenue Centre B
Revenue Centre A
Revenue Centre C
Activity cost drivers
Assign activity costs to cost objects (products, services or customers)
Step 3
Cost objects (services and customers)
9.3 Activity-based costing 171
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

9.4
Allocating indirect (overhead) costs to the operating
departments
Cost allocation is the distribution of overhead expenses and costs by
management among the profit and sales revenue centres of an
operation. It is based on the principle of responsibility accounting.
Cost allocation has the advantage that it permits the management to
make better decisions since their decisions are made based on fully
allocated income statements. The structure of the subsections is as
follows:
9.4.1
Responsibility accounting
9.4.2
Determining allocation bases
9.4.3
Common methods of cost allocation
9.4.4
Illustration of the direct method of cost allocation
9.4.5
Illustration of the step method of cost allocation
9.4.1
Responsibility accounting
Responsibility accounting is a system of accounting that separates
revenues and costs into areas of departmental responsibility in order to
assess performance attained by the departments to which the authority
has been given. The important point is that department heads or
managers should be held accountable for their performance and the
performance of the employees in their departments. An argument in
favour of allocating indirect expenses to departments is that, although
departmental managers are not responsible for controlling those costs,
they should be aware of what portion of the costs is related to their
departments since this could have an impact on departmental decision
making, such as establishing selling prices at a level that covers all
costs and not just direct costs. The main reasons for creating
responsibility centres are:
·
It allows the top-level management to delegate responsibility and
authority to department heads so they can achieve departmental
operating goals compatible with the overall company’s goals.
·
It provides the top-level management with the necessary
information to measure the performance of each department in
achieving its operating goals.
Within a single organization practicing responsibility accounting,
departments can be identified as cost centres, sales revenue centres,
profit centres, or investment centres.
A cost centre
A cost centre is one that generates no direct revenue (such as the
maintenance department). In such a situation, the department
manager is held responsible only for the costs incurred.
A sales revenue centre
A sales revenue centre receives sales revenue, but has little or no direct
costs associated with their operation. For example, a major resort
hotel might lease out a large part of its floor space to retail stores. The
rent income provides revenue for the department, all of which is
profit.
172 9 Cost Management
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

A profit centre
A profit centre is one that has costs but also generates sales revenues
that are directly related to that department such as the rooms division
where the manager is responsible for generating revenue from guest
room sales. The manager of a profit centre should have some control
over the sales revenue it can generate.
An investment centre
An investment centre will usually exist in large or chain organizations
with units located in several different places. Each unit is given full
authority over how it operates and is held responsible for the results
of its decisions. Such decentralized units are measured by the rate of
return their general managers achieve on the investment in the
centre.
The overhead costs are all the expenses, other than the direct
expenses generated by the specific revenue or profit centre of the
operation. These are considered to be indirect costs. Examples include
the following:
·
Undistributed operating expenses (for example administration and
general, marketing and sales, property operations and
maintenance, and utility costs)
·
Management fees
·
Fixed charges (for example insurance, rent, depreciation, and
interest)
9.4.2
Determining allocation bases
A major issue in the allocation of costs to the various departments is
the selection of a rational allocation base. To help in solving this
issue, the 9th edition of the USALI (omitted in subsequent editions)
suggested certain bases as shown in exhibit 9.2. An allocation base is
the factor that determines how much of an overhead expense will be
allocated to a department. For example the administration and
general expenses of a hotel could be allocated on the basis of the
number of employees in each department.
The bases, as suggested in Exhibit 9.2 should be considered to be just
what they are. Each management will have to make its own decisions
based on their own experiences and realities of their own companies.
Once an allocation base has been selected, it should be consistently
used in order to ensure meaningful internal future comparisons of the
income statements.
There are generally two approaches to selecting the allocation bases –
the SABA and the MABA. SABA stands for the single allocation base
approach. In this method, a single allocation base is used to allocate
all the overhead costs among the departments. In most SABA cases,
the surface area occupied by the various departments is used in the
allocation process. However, contrary to the SABA is the MABA which
stands for multiple allocation base approach. In the MABA, multiple
allocation bases are used in the allocation process. However it should
9.4 Allocating indirect (overhead) costs to the operating departments 173
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

be noted that these bases have to be defined in advance by the
management of the property for the sake of consistency. In general,
the MABA is preferable to the SABA, because it allocates overhead
costs on the basis of some pre-observed relationship between the
service and the profit and revenue centres.
9.4.3
Common methods of cost allocation
Cost allocation is carried out using three common methods – the
direct method, the step method, and the formula method. In the
direct method, all the overhead costs are allocated directly from the
service centres to the profit centres. As such, no parts of the overhead
costs are allocated to the service centres. The step method of cost
allocation requires a two-step process whereby in the first step, the 
Exhibit 9.2 Suggested allocation bases
Costs and Expenses
Suggested Allocation Base
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Rent
Percentage applicable to source of revenue
Surface area in m2
Property Taxes
Surface area in m2
Insurance
Surface area in m2
Surface area in m2 + equipment value
Interest
Surface area in m2
Surface area in m2 + equipment value
Depreciation – Building
Surface area in m2
Depreciation – Equipment
Surface area in m2
Department assets record
Depreciation – Capital Leases
Surface area in m2
Department use of leased equipment
Telephone
Number of extensions
Payroll Taxes and Employee Benefits
Number of employees
Detailed payroll records
Salaries and wages
Administrative and General
Accumulated costs
Number of employees
Data processing
Accumulated costs
Number of employees
Marketing
Departmental revenue percentage
Guest Entertainment
Departmental revenue percentage
Energy costs
Sub-metres
Surface area in m3
Property Operations and Maintenance
Job orders
Number of employees
Surface area in m2
Human Resources
Number of employees
Tranportation
Number of employees
174 9 Cost Management
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

fixed costs are first of all allocated to both the profit and service
centres. This is then followed in the second step by the allocation of
the costs of the service centres (including their own parts of the
allocated fixed costs) to the profit centres. The formula method
equally requires two steps in the allocation process. In the first step,
similar to those of the step method, the allocation of the fixed costs is
carried out. The second step introduces the full consideration of the
services carried out by the service centres to each other. This is
however a complex method that requires the use of advanced
computational techniques and is beyond the scope of this text to
illustrate. To illustrate the direct and step methods of cost allocation
using the MABA, the unallocated income statement of the Blue
Ribbon Roadside Inn shown in Exhibit 9.3 will be used.
Exhibit 9.3 Unallocated income statement of the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn
The Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn
Unallocated Income Statement
For the year ending December 31st 2016
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Net
Cost of
Payroll and
Other
Departmental
Department
Revenues
Sales
Related 
Expenses
Income
Expenses
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––
––––––––––––
––––––––––––
––––––––––––
Rooms
€
565,000.00
€
–
€ 225,000.00
€ 102,000.00
€ 238,000.00
Food and Beverage
€ 1,590,000.00
€ 725,000.00
€ 440,000.00
€
75,000.00
€ 350,000.00
––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
––––––––––––
––––––––––––
––––––––––––
Total
€ 2,155,000.00
€ 725,000.00
€ 665,000.00
€ 177,000.00
€ 588,000.00
Undistributed Operating Expenses
Administration and General
€
96,000.00
€
18,000.00
€ 114,000.00
Sales and Marketing
€
75,000.00
€
16,000.00
€
91,000.00
Human Resource Management
€
69,000.00
€
3,000.00
€
72,000.00
Property Operations, Maintenance and Utility Costs
€
58,000.00
€
15,000.00
€
73,000.00
––––––––––––
Total Undistributed Operating Expenses
€ 350,000.00
Income Before Fixed Charges
€ 238,000.00
Fixed Charges
Insurance
€
40,000.00
Depreciation
€ 125,000.00
––––––––––––
Total Fixed Charges
€ 165,000.00
Income Before Income Taxes
€
73,000.00
Income Taxes
€
24,000.00
––––––––––––
Net Income
€
49,000.00
9.4 Allocating indirect (overhead) costs to the operating departments 175
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

The bases used by the management of the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn
to allocate all of their overhead expenses are shown in Exhibit 9.4
To complete the basic information required to establish the allocation
bases, the management of the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn provides the
following additional data about their operations as shown in Exhibit
9.5
9.4.4
Illustration of the direct method of cost allocation
To illustrate the direct method of cost allocation using the MABA of
the unallocated income statement of the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn,
Exhibit 9.6 shows how the various overhead costs of administration
and general (A & G), sales and marketing (S & M), human resource
management (HRM), property operations and maintenance plus
utility costs (POM & UC), insurance as well as depreciation have been
allocated.
As shown in Exhibit 9.6, the first action is to determine the proportions
of the various bases that will be given to the profit centres. For example,
the administration and general expenses are to be allocated using the
number of employees in the profit centres (rooms division, and food
and beverage). In these two departments, the total number of
employees comes up to 20. Consequently the rooms division will be
allocated 30% (which is 6 divided by 20) of the A & G expenses, and
all the other expenses that will be allocated on the basis of number of
employees. Similar calculations will then be made for all the other 
Exhibit 9.4 Allocation bases used by the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn
Allocation Bases used by the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
A & G
Number of employees
S & M
Departmental revenue percentage
HRM
Number of employees
POM & UC
Surface area in m2
Insurance
Book value of fixed assets
Depreciation
Surface area in m2
Exhibit 9.5 Additional information required to establish allocation bases
Department
Book value of 
Surface 
Number of 
fixed assets
area (m2)
employees
–––––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––
––––––––––
–––––––––––––
Rooms
€
4,000,000.00
2000
6
Food and Beverage
€
2,500.000.00
1500
14
A & G
€
200,000.00
200
3
S & M
€
80,000.00
100
2
HRM
€
70,000.00
100
2
POM & UC
€
550,000.00
300
3
Total
€
7,400.000.00
4200
30
176 9 Cost Management
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

bases bearing in mind that the denominators in the calculations will
be limited only to the sums of the parts related to the profit centres.
The next action is to use these percentages to allocate the overhead
costs to the profit centres. For example, the costs of HRM allocated to
the food and beverage department is determined as follows:
€72,000.00 × 70% = €50,400.00
The final action will be to design an allocated income statement based
on the new figures. Exhibit 9.7 shows the allocated income statement
of the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn based on the direct method of cost
allocation using the MABA.
If after allocation, all the profit centres remain profitable as in the case
of the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn – Direct Method shown in Exhibit
9.7, then there is little that management can do but to continue
operating in such a positive environment. If on the contrary, after
Exhibit 9.6 Allocation of the overhead costs of the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn using 
the MABA
Proportions to
Amounts allocated to
––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Costs to 
Amount to 
Allocation 
Rooms
Food and 
Rooms
Food and 
be allocated
be allocated
bases
Beverage
Beverage
––––––––––––
––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
–––––––
–––––––––
––––––––––––
––––––––––––
A & G
€ 114,000.00
Number of employees
30%
70%
€
34,200.00
€
79,800.00
S & M
€
91,000.00
Departmental revenu percentage
26%
74%
€
23,858.47
€
67,141.53
HRM
€
72,000.00
Number of employees
30%
70%
€
21,600.00
€
50,400.00
POM & UC
€
73,000.00
Surface area in m2
57%
43%
€
41,714.29
€
31,285.71
Insurance
€
40,000.00
Book value of fixed assets
62%
38%
€
24,615.38
€
15,384.62
Depreciation
€ 125,000.00
Surface area in m2
57%
43%
€
71,428.57
€
53,571.43
Total
€ 515,000.00
€ 217,416.71
€ 297,583.29
Exhibit 9.7 Fully allocated income statement of the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn – direct method
The Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn
Fully Allocated income Statement
For the year ending December 31st 2016
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
Department
Net
Cost of
Payroll and
Other
Departmental
Allocated
Departmental
Revenues
Sales
Related
Expenses
Income
Expenses
Income
Expenses
After 
Allocation
–––––––––––
–––––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
––––––––––––
Rooms
€ 565,000.00
€
–
€ 225,000.00
€ 102,000.00
€ 238,000.00
€ 217,416.71
€ 20,583.29
Food & 
Beverage
€1,590,000.00
€ 725,000.00
440,000.00
€ 75,000.00
€ 350.000.00
€ 297,583.29
€ 52,416.71
–––––––––––
Total
€2,155,000.00
€ 725,000.00
665,000.00
€ 177,000.00
€ 588,000.00
€ 515,000.00
€ 73,000.00
–––––––––––
Income Taxes
€ 24,000.00
–––––––––––
Net Income
€ 49,000.00
9.4 Allocating indirect (overhead) costs to the operating departments 177
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

cost allocation a profit centre is shown to be unprofitable, then
management has the ability to make certain decisions based on at
least the following four factors:
·
The level of income of the underperforming department
·
The extent to which the overhead costs allocated to the
underperforming department are fixed
·
The extent to which the existence and performance of the
underperforming department affects the other profit centres
·
The operating alternatives available for the underperforming
department
9.4.5
Illustration of the step method of cost allocation
The step method of cost allocation using the MABA of the unallocated
income statement of the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn is made up of two
steps. The first step is to allocate the fixed charges to all the
departments of the company – both the service centres and the profit
centres. The common fixed charges include rents, property taxes,
interests, insurance, depreciation and amortization.
In the case of the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn the fixed charges to be
allocated first to all the centres are:
·
Insurance of €40,000.00 which will be allocated based on the book
value of the fixed assets (BV of FA), and
·
Depreciation of €125,000.00 which will be allocated based on the
surface areas in square metres occupied
Step 1 is illustrated in Exhibit 9.8.
Exhibit 9.8 shows how the various profit and service centres will be
affected by the allocation of insurance and depreciation (fixed costs).
Exhibit 9.8 Step 1 – Allocating the fixed charges of the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn
Step 1
Cost to be allocated
Allocation Base
Amount
Insurance
BV of FA
€
40,000.00
Depreciation
Surface area in m2
€ 125,000.00
Department
Book Value of 
Surface area 
BV of FA %
SA %
Insurance 
Depreciation
Fixed Assets
in m2
allocation
allocation
–––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––
–––––––––––
––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––––
Rooms
€ 4,000,000.00
2000
54.05%
47.62%
€ 21,621.62
€ 59,523.81
Food & Beverage
€ 2,500,000.00
1500
33.78%
35.71%
€ 13,513.51
€ 44,642.86
Adm & Gen
€
200,000.00
200
2.70%
4.76%
€
1,081.08
€
5,952.38
Sales & Marketing
€
80,000.00
100
1.08%
2.38%
€
432.43
€
2,976.19
HRM
€
70,000.00
100
0.95%
2.38%
€
378.38
€
2,976.19
POM & UC
€
550,000.00
300
7.43%
7.14%
€
2,972.97
€
8,928.57
Total
€ 7,400,000.00
4200
100.00%
100.00%
€ 40,000.00
€ 125,000.00
178 9 Cost Management
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Step 2 starts by using the predefined bases to sequentially calculate
the various proportions to be used in allocating the service centre
costs to the remaining service centres and the profit centres. In the
example of the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn, the service centre costs will
be allocated based on the following sequence: A & G; POM & UC;
HRM; and lastly S & M. This order is based on the perception of the
volume of services transferred from the service centres to the profit
centres. Exhibit 9.9 shows the various proportions based on the data
set of the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn.
Based on the proportions shown in Exhibit 9.9, the overhead costs of
the service centres are then allocated sequentially to the other centres
until all the service centre costs are completely allocated. For example
since the A & G expenses are to be initially allocated, the A & G
column has only 0.00% whereas all the other departments have
proportions as contained in the A & G row from 22.22% for rooms,
through 51.85% for F & B, 11.11% for POM & UC and 7.41% for both
HRM and S & M. Applying these proportions now to the existing costs
in a sequential manner leads to complete allocation of the costs as
shown in Exhibit 9.10.
Exhibit 9.9 Sequential allocation proportions based on the data set of the Blue Ribbon 
 Roadside Inn
Step 2 – Part 1
Sequential Allocation Proportions
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Allocation Base
Rooms
F & B
A & G
POM & UC
HRM
S & M
Control
––––––––––
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––
––––––––––
––––––
––––––
–––––––
A & G
Number of employees
22.22%
51.85%
0.00%
11.11%
7.41%
7.41%
100.00%
POM & UC
Surface area in m2
54.05%
40.54%
0.00%
0.00%
2.70%
2.70%
100.00%
HRM
Number of employees
27.27%
63.64%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
9.09%
100.00%
S & M
Departmental revenu percentage
26.22%
73.78%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
100.00%
Exhibit 9.10 Sequential allocation of the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn Service Centre Costs
Step 2 – Part 2
Department
Unallocated 
Allocated 
Initial Costs
Allocating
Allocating
Allocating
Allocating 
Total
Service
per
to be 
Costs 
Costs of 
Costs of
Costs of 
Centre costs
Step 1
Allocated
of A & G
POM & UC
HRM
S & M
––––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––
Rooms
€
–
€
81,145.43
€
–
€
26,896.32
€ 53,162.00
€ 23,721.30
€ 29,872.71
€ 214,797.77
Food & 
Beverage
€
–
€
58,156.37
€
–
€
62,758.09
€ 39,871.50
€ 55,349.71
€ 84,066.56
€ 300,202.23
Adm & Gen
€ 114,000.00
€
7,033.46
€ 121,033.46
€
–
€
–
€
–
€
–
€
–
POM & UC
€
73,000.00
€
11,901.54
€
84,901.54
€
13,448.16
€
–
€
–
€
–
€
–
HRM
€
72,000.00
€
3,354.57
€
75,354.57
€
8,965.44
€
2,658.10
€
–
€
–
€
–
Sales & 
Marketing
€
91,000.00
€
3,408.62
€
94,408.62
€
8,965.44
€
2,658.10
€
7,907.10
€
–
€
–
Total
€ 350,000.00
€ 165,000.00
€ 375,698.20
€ 121,033.46
€ 98,349.71
€ 86,978.11
€113,939.27
€ 515,000.00
new POM & UC €
98,349.71
new HRM
€
86,978.11
new S & M
€ 113,939.27
9.4 Allocating indirect (overhead) costs to the operating departments 179
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

In Exhibit 9.10, the first service centre costs allocated are those of the
A & G. The amount to be allocated of the A & G is equal to the costs
allocated to A & G in Step 1 (€7,033.46) plus its own costs of
€114,000.00 making a total of €121,033.46. Based on the proportions
already established in Exhibit 9.9 (Step 2 – Part 1) the amount of
€121,033.46 is then allocated to the remaining service centres (POM
& UC, HRM and S & M), as well as the profit centres (Rooms and F &
B). The next step in the sequence is to allocate the costs of the POM &
UC. However, for this to be carried out, the newly allocated portion of
the costs of the A & G should be added to the initial costs of the POM
& UC before proceeding. This total is shown in Exhibit 9.10 as new
POM & UC of €89,856.79 eventually. Similar actions are then carried
out with the remaining service centre costs (new HRM and new 
S & M).
As was shown when the direct method was illustrated, a fully
allocated income statement is then established that will show the
final performance of the profit centres. Exhibit 9.11 is the fully
allocated income statement of the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn based on
the step method.
The effects on the departmental incomes of the two allocation
methods can be easily noticed by comparing the incidences of the
allocation methods on the profit centres’ departmental incomes. This
is illustrated in Exhibit 9.12.
Exhibit 9.12 showed that based on the step method of cost allocation,
the departmental income of the rooms division became better than
when the direct method was used, and the opposite goes for the
performance of the food and beverage department. Any decisions
made by the management based on after-allocation performance
should take into account the factors earlier stated in this section. 
Exhibit 9.11 Fully allocated income statement of the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn – step method
The Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn
Fully Allocated Income Statement
For the year ending December 31st 2016
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Net
Cost of
Payroll and
Other
Departmental
Allocated
Departmental 
Department
Revenues
Sales
Related 
Expenses
Income
Expenses
Income
Expenses
After 
Allocation
–––––––––––
–––––––––––––
––––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
––––––––––––
Rooms
€ 565,000.00
€
–
€ 225,000.00
€ 102,000.00
€ 238,000.00
€ 214,797.77
€ 23,202.23
Food & 
Beverage
€1,590,000.00
€ 725,000.00
€ 440,000.00
€ 75,000.00
€ 350,000.00
€ 300,202.23
€ 49,797.77
–––––––––––
Total
€2,155,000.00
€ 725,000.00
€ 665,000.00
€ 177,000.00
€ 588,000.00
€ 515,000.00
€ 73,000.00
–––––––––––
Income Taxes
€ 24,000.00
–––––––––––
Net Income
€ 49,000.00
180 9 Cost Management
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Recall that they relate to levels of income, how fixed the overhead
costs are, the service relationships between the departments and lastly
the available operating alternatives.
To conclude, in assessing both allocation methods the following
observations can be made:
·
The direct method is simple and easy to understand. It however
omits the allocation of overhead costs to the service centres
themselves.
·
The step method uses more time and energy in its establishment. It
resolves the problem of the direct method with the initial
attribution of all the fixed costs to all the departments of the
operation. However it omits to consider the reciprocal provision of
services between the service centres themselves. This is solved via
the formula method which is, as earlier indicated, beyond the
scope of this book.
9.5
Separating mixed-costs between their fixed and variable
elements
When called to make certain pricing, marketing and expansion
decisions, management should be able to determine the fixed and
variable components in each mixed-cost. Mixed-costs (see Section 9.2)
are those costs that cannot be finely split into their fixed or variable
components. To assist managements in separating these mixed-costs,
three common methods used are the high/low two-point method, the
scatter diagram, and lastly regression analysis.
To illustrate all these methods of separating mixed-costs, information
about the monthly room sales and the POM & UC expenses of the
Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn for the year 2016 will be used and this is
shown in Exhibit 9.13. The POM activities of the Blue Ribbon
Roadside Inn are outsourced and all POM & UC expenses are
considered to be mixed costs.
Exhibit 9.12 Comparison of the effects on the profit centres
Comparison of the effect on the profit centres
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
MABA
MABA
Department
Direct
Step Method
–––––––––––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––––
Rooms
€ 20,583.29
€ 23,202.23
Food & Beverage
€ 52,416.71
€ 49,797.77
9.5 Separating mixed-costs between their fixed and variable elements 181
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

The structure of the subsections is as follows:
9.5.1
High/low two-point method
9.5.2
Scatter diagram
9.5.3
Regression analysis
9.5.1
High/low two-point method
The high/low two-point method is the simplest of the approaches
used in estimating fixed and variable elements in mixed-costs. It is
also called the high-low method or the maximum-minimum method.
The high/low two-point method uses data from only two periods in
the time span of the organization’s operations. In the case of the Blue
Ribbon Roadside Inn, the month of January with 450 rooms sold is
the low point in 2016 whereas August with 750 rooms is the high
point in 2016. The high/low two-point method will be illustrated
using the following 5 steps:
Exhibit 9.13 Monthly breakdown of room sales and POM & UC expense of the Blue Ribbon
Roadside Inn for 2016
The Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
2016
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 
Month
Rooms
POM & UC
Sold
Expense
––––––––––
–––––––
––––––––––
January
450
€ 4,520.00
February
470
€ 4,680.00
March
520
€ 5,300.00
April
580
€ 5,750.00
May
600
€ 6,100.00
June
680
€ 6,900.00
July
720
€ 7,300.00
August
750
€ 7,450.00
September
690
€ 6,800.00
October
650
€ 6,600.00
November
590
€ 6,000.00
December
510
€ 5,600.00
Total
7210
€73,000.00
182 9 Cost Management
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Step 1 – Calculate the differences in the total mixed-cost and
activity between the high and low periods
Month
Rooms
POM & UC
Sold
Expense
–––––––––––––
–––––––
––––––––––
August (high)
750
€ 7,450.00
January (low)
450
€ 4,520.00
Difference
300
€ 2,930.00

9.5 Separating mixed-costs between their fixed and variable elements 183
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
The difference in rooms sold between the high and low periods in 2016 is
300, while that in the cost category POM & UC is €2,930.00.
Step 2 – Divide the mixed-cost difference by the activity difference
to determine the variable cost per unit
Variable cost per room sold = 
Variable cost per room sold = 
Variable cost per room sold = 
Variable cost per room sold = €9.766667 (rounded to 9.77)
This result indicates that for every additional room sold by the Blue
Ribbon Roadside Inn, they will incur a POM & UC variable expense of
€9.77.
Step 3 – Determine the total variable costs for the periods of high
or low activity
This is done by multiplying the rooms sold for the periods by the variable
cost per room. For the month of August 750 x €9.77 = €7,325.00.
Step 4 – Determine the total fixed costs for the periods of high or
low activity
€2,930.00

300
POM & UC expense difference

Rooms sold difference
Mixed cost difference

Rooms sold difference
Total Variable POM & UC Expenses
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Month
Rooms
Total Variable
Sold
POM & UC Expense
–––––––––––––
–––––––
––––––––––––––––––
August (high)
750
€ 7,325.00
January (low)
450
€ 4,395.00
Determining the Total Fixed Costs
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Month
POM & UC
Total Variable
Total Fixed
Expense
POM & UC Expense
POM & UC Expense
–––––––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––––––
August (high)
€ 7,450.00
€ 7,325.00
€125.00
January (low)
€ 4,520.00
€ 4,395.00
€125.00

The high/low two-point method is quick and simple to use and can
also be calculated using graphs by plotting the cost (vertical axis) and
sales (horizontal axis) data of the high and low periods and by
drawing and extending the line linking the two observed intersection
points to the vertical axis. The high/low two-point data of the POM &
UC expenses of the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn is plotted in a graph
and shown in Exhibit 9.14. If the graph is accurately drawn, the same
monthly figure of approximately €125.00 is obtained.
The high/low two-point method has some limitations:
·
It assumes that the extreme periods are a fair reflection of the high
and low points for the year
·
either one or both of the sets of figures may not be typical of the
relationship between sales and the expenses for the year
·
Distortions can be built into the figures
These limitations notwithstanding, the ease of the use of the high/low
two-point method makes it quite popular with small businesses.
184 9 Cost Management
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
This is done by deducting the total variable POM & UC expense for each
period from the POM & UC expense for that period. Such as for January
the total POM & UC expense was €4,520.00 less the total variable
expense of €4,395.00 which gives a fixed cost of €125.00 for the low
period.
Step 5 – Determine the total values for the year
It is thus seen that out of the total POM & UC expense of €73,000.00 the
fixed cost amounted to €1,500.00 only. A very large proportion of the
POM & UC expense was made up of variable elements.
The Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn
2016
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Month
POM & UC
Total Fixed
Total Variable
Expense
POM & UC Expense
POM & UC Expense
––––––––––––
–––––––––––
––––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––––––
January
€
4,520.00
€
125.00
€
4,395.00
February
€
4,680.00
€
125.00
€
4,555.00
March
€
5,300.00
€
125.00
€
5,175.00
April
€
5,750.00
€
125.00
€
5,625.00
May
€
6,100.00
€
125.00
€
5,975.00
June
€
6,900.00
€
125.00
€
6,775.00
July
€
7,300.00
€
125.00
€
7,175.00
August
€
7,450.00
€
125.00
€
7,325.00
September
€
6,800.00
€
125.00
€
6,675.00
October
€
6,600.00
€
125.00
€
6,475.00
November
€
6,000.00
€
125.00
€
5,875.00
December
€
5,600.00
€
125.00
€
5,475.00
Total
€ 73,000.00
€ 1,500.00
€ 71,500.00

9.5.2
Scatter diagram
To help improve on the lack of accuracy of the high/low two-point
method in determining the fixed costs of an organization, the scatter
diagram can be used. This is much more detailed and involves the
following steps:
Based on these two steps and using the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn data
Exhibit 9.15 is drawn. The line might vary depending on who draws
it, but it should represent the best possible fit. In Exhibit 9.15, there
are 5 points below or just below the line, 1 point cut by the line, and
6 points above or barely above the line. The projected line in Exhibit
9.15 meets the expenses (vertical) axis around the value of €250
which is then assumed to be the monthly fixed costs in the total POM
& UC expenses. The annual fixed POM & UC expenses is then 
Exhibit 9.14   Determining the fixed cost by plotting on a graph
€8,000.00
€7,000.00
€6,000.00
€5,000.00
€4,000.00
€3,000.00
€2,000.00
€1,000.00
€0.00
POM & UC
Expenses
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Rooms Sold
€4,395.00
€7,325.00
Step 1
Establish and plot a graph showing the independent variable on the
horizontal axis and the dependent variable on the vertical axis. In the
case of the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn, the number of rooms sold is the
independent variable whereas the POM & UC expenses are the dependent
variable because these expenses vary with the number of rooms sold.
Step 2
Draw a straight line through the points ensuring that an equal number of
points are located above and below the line. Extend this line to meet
with the vertical axis. The point where the line meets the vertical axis is
considered to be the fixed costs for the period. Using this monthly fixed
cost level, the annual fixed costs can then be assessed.
9.5 Separating mixed-costs between their fixed and variable elements 185
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

calculated to be €3,000.00 and the total variable POM & UC expenses
for 2016 is equal to €70,000.00 (€73,000.00 minus €3,000.00). Per
room sold, the variable POM & UC expenses is equal to €9.71 which is:
The scatter diagram is an improvement over the high/low two point
method but it is also time consuming and only an approximation
instead of the exact measurement of the real value of the fixed costs.
To correct this situation, regression analysis can be used.
9.5.3
Regression analysis
Regression analysis is the mathematical approach that permits perfectly
fitting a straight line to any given set of data. Its main objective is to
explore the relationship between a given variable (usually called the
dependent variable) and one or more other variables (usually called the
independent variables). With regression analysis, the outcome of a
given key business indicator can be predicted based on the interactions
with other related business drivers. The formula used in regression
analysis makes it unnecessary to draw a graph, plot points, and draw a
line through them. Mathematically, the simple linear regression model
is represented by the following equation whose goal is to find the
equation of the straight line:
y = a + bx
in which
“a” is the intercept, and
“b” is the regression coefficient (slope).
Exhibit 9.15   Scatter diagram of the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn POM & UC expenses
8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Room Sales
POM & UC
Expenses
€70,000.00

7,210
186 9 Cost Management
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

The formula for calculating “a” is:
The formula for calculating “b” is:
The Greek symbol Σ means “the sum of” thus for example Σx
means the sum of all x values.
To separate the costs in the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn POM & UC
expenses using regression analysis, the first thing to do is to recognize
which of the data values represent the “a” in the straight line
equation. In the straight line equation
y = a + bx
in which
y represents the total POM & UC expenses for any of the periods, 
a, the fixed cost for that period, 
b the slope of the straight line, and 
x the number of rooms sold in each period. 
Using the formula for calculating a, Exhibit 9.16 shows the values for
the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn for 2016.
 x2  y –  x  xy

n  x2 –  x
2
n  xy –  x  y

n  x2 –  x
2
Exhibit 9.16 Using Regression Analysis to determine the fixed costs of the Blue Ribbon
 Roadside Inn
The Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn
2016
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Month
Rooms Sold
POM & UC 
Expense
––––––––––
–––––––––––––
x
y
x2
xy
–––––––––––
––––––––––
–––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––––
January
450
€ 4,520.00
202,500
€ 2,034,000.00
February
470
€ 4,680.00
220,900
€ 2,199,600.00
March
520
€ 5,300.00
270,400
€ 2,756,000.00
April
580
€ 5,750.00
336,400
€ 3,335,000.00
May
600
€ 6,100.00
360,000
€ 3,660,000.00
June
680
€ 6,900.00
462,400
€ 4,692,000.00
July
720
€ 7,300.00
518,400
€ 5,256,000.00
August
750
€ 7,450.00
562,500
€ 5,587,500.00
September
690
€ 6,800.00
476,100
€ 4,692,000.00
October
650
€ 6,600.00
422,500
€ 4,290,000.00
November
590
€ 6,000.00
348,100
€ 3,540,000.00
December
510
€ 5,600.00
260,100
€ 2,856,000.00
Total
∑x = 7210
∑y = 73,000.00
∑x2 = 4,440,300
∑xy = 44,898,100.00
9.5 Separating mixed-costs between their fixed and variable elements 187
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Replacing the values contained in exhibit 9.16 in the formula to
calculate “a” – the monthly fixed costs shows that the monthly fixed
cost in POM & UC is €328.28.
Monthly fixed costs = 
Monthly fixed costs = €328.28
Based on these monthly fixed costs, the annual fixed cost is
determined to be €3,939.35 (that is €328.28 × 12 months). The total
variable POM & UC expenses for 2016 is equal to €69,060.65
(€73,000.00 minus €3,939.35). Per room sold, the variable POM & UC
expenses is equal to €9.58, which is
A comparative analysis of the results obtained using the three methods
of the fixed/variable breakdown of the Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn’s
POM & UC expenses for 2016 can be made as shown in Exhibit 9.17
Exhibit 9.17 shows a big difference between the fixed costs established
by the high/low two point method and the regression analysis of up
to €2,439.35. Regression analysis is known to be the most accurate of
the methods and can be easily done using programmable calculators
or spreadsheet programmes such as Excel.
(73,000)(4,440,300) – (7,210)(44,898,100)

12(4,440,300) – (7,210)(7,210)
€69,060.65

7,210
Exhibit 9.17 Comparing the three methods
The Blue Ribbon Roadside Inn
POM & UC Expense for 2016
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Method
Fixed
Variable
Variable
Total
component
component
unit cost
––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––––
––––––––
–––––––––––
High/low two point method
€ 1,500.00
€ 71,500.00
€ 9.77
€ 73,000.00
Scatter diagram
€ 3,000.00
€ 70,000.00
€ 9.71
€ 73,000.00
Regression analysis
€ 3,939.35
€ 69,060.65
€ 9.58
€ 73,000.00
188 9 Cost Management
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Glossary
Activity-based costing – the costing approach that assigns resource costs to cost
objects based on activities performed for the cost objects.
Allocation base – is that factor that determines how much of an overhead
expense will be allocated to a department.
Controllable costs – these are costs that the departmental managers can
directly influence in the short run.
Cost allocation – is the process of distributing overhead expenses among the
various departments.
Cost centre – is that department that generates no direct revenues.
Cost objects – these are the outputs such as products, services or customers for
which companies perform their activities 
Discretionary costs – these are costs that departmental managers can choose to
avoid in the short run.
Direct costs – are those costs that can be traced to a particular operating
department and is the responsibility of that department
Fixed costs – are those costs that do not change in relation to the volume of
business within a specific period or production level.
High/low two-point method – this is the simplest approach to estimating the
fixed and variable elements of a mixed cost.
Indirect costs – are those costs that are not directly identified and not
traceable to a particular operating department.
Investment centre – these are decentralized units within very large or chain
organizations that have full authority over how they operate and are
responsible for their decisions.
Joint costs – are those costs that are shared and are the responsibility of two
or more departments
Mixed costs – these are costs that cannot be finely split into their fixed or
variable elements. These are also called semi-fixed or semi-variable costs.
Multiple allocation base approach (MABA) – this is the use of different allocation
bases to allocate different overhead costs among departments.
Non controllable costs – are those costs that cannot be influenced by the
departmental heads.
189
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Opportunity cost – this represents the value of the foregone next best
alternative that results from a decision in a situation involving several
alternatives.
Overhead costs – see indirect costs.
Profit centre – is that department that has costs but also generates sales
revenue that is directly related to the department.
Regression analysis – is a mathematical approach that permits perfectly fitting
a straight line to any given set of data.
Relevant costs – are those costs that change depending on decisions that are
made, as well as affecting those decisions.
Sales revenue centre – is that department that receives sales revenues but has
little or no direct costs associated with their operations.
Scatter diagram – this is a graphic approach used in determining the fixed and
variable elements of a mixed cost.
Semi-fixed and semi-variable costs – see mixed costs
Single allocation base approach (SABA) – is the allocation of overhead costs
among departments using a single allocation base.
Standard costs – is the measure of how much a product or service should
normally cost based on a given volume or sales.
Sunk costs – are those costs that have already been incurred and as such
cannot be recovered.
Variable costs – are those costs that change proportionately to changes in the
volume of the business. 
190 9 Cost Management
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Multiple choice questions
9.1
Which of the following types of costs is the measure of how much a
product or service should normally cost?
a
direct cost
b discretionary cost
c
fixed cost
d standard cost
9.2
Which cost does not change in a specific period or production level as
activity changes?
a
fixed
b indirect
c
joint
d variable
9.3
Which of the following statements is false?
a
cost centre managers are responsible for the costs of all the departments
b cost, sales revenue, profit and investment centres result from
responsibility accounting
c
department heads are responsible for the direct costs of their departments
d sales revenue centres have little or no direct costs
9.4
Which of the following types of costs is generally allocated among profit
centres of a hospitality operation?
a
discretionary costs
b incremental costs
c
indirect costs
d standard costs
9.5
A sunk cost is:
a
a cost that is incurred and recoverable
b a cost that is incurred and unrecoverable 
c
a quantifiable future cost
d shared and joint responsibility of two or more departments
Exercises
9.1
Classify the following expenses into their principal cost types (multiple
types per expense item is a possibility)
a Cost of beverages sold
b Cost of food sold
c
Depreciation
d General manager’s salary
e
Guest supplies
f
Income taxes
g
Laundry expenses
h Property fire insurance
i
Property taxes
j
Repair and maintenance
k
Rooms division salaries
l
Telephone expense
Exercises 191
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

9.2
The quarterly POM expenses and occupancy percentages of the Sweet Sour
Restaurant for 2016 are as detailed in the accompanying table:
Using the high/low two point method, calculate the following based on the
provided information:
a the quarterly fixed element in the POM expenses for 2016
b the quarterly variable element in the POM expenses per occupancy
percentage for 2016
c knowing that the POM expenses will rise by 4% in 2017, what will be 
the expected annual POM expenses for 2017 with an average occupancy 
of 71%
9.3
The owner of the Ocean Front Restaurant needs an analysis of the salary
expenses in the restaurant and provides you with the following data:
Using the high/low two point method, calculate the following based on the
provided information:
a the variable salary expense per customer 
b the annual total variable cost
c the fixed monthly component in the salary expense of the restaurant
d the annual fixed cost
POM expenses
Occupancy
––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––
31 March 2016
€ 28,980.00
58%
30 June 2016
€ 31,740.00
72%
30 September 2016
€ 29,900.00
67%
31 December 2016
€ 32,200.00
76%
The Ocean Front Restaurant
Salaries 2016
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Customers
Salaries
–––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––
January
6400
€ 23,250.00
Febrary
3840
€ 15,675.00
March
5920
€ 27,750.00
April
7120
€ 28,500.00
May
7040
€ 28,500.00
June
7680
€ 30,375.00
July
8000
€ 30,750.00
August
6240
€ 27,750.00
September
6080
€ 27,000.00
October
4960
€ 23,250.00
November
4640
€ 22,875.00
December
4800
€ 24,975.00
192 9 Cost Management
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

9.4
The monthly sales of the Sushi Delight at different performance levels are
given in the accompanying table.
You are asked to carry out the following activities:
a use the variable, fixed or mixed classification of costs to classify the costs of
the Sushi Delight
b establish the regression equation of monthly total costs for the Sushi Delight
c use the regression equation to estimate the total costs of the Sushi Delight if
sales were 51,200 sushi rolls
Sushi Rolls
19200.00
38400.00
57600.00
Cost of sales
€ 28,800.00
€
57,600.00
€
86,400.00
Salaries
€ 22,400.00
€
32,000.00
€
41,600.00
Supplies
€
3,840.00
€
7,680.00
€
11,520.00
Utilities
€
2,304.00
€
2,688.00
€
3,072.00
Other operating costs
€
9,600.00
€
19,200.00
€
28,800.00
Rent
€
6,400.00
€
6,400.00
€
6,400.00
Depreciation
€
1,280.00
€
1,280.00
€
1,280.00
Total costs
€ 74,624.00
€ 126,848.00
€ 179,072.00
Exercises 193
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv


© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
195
10.1
The importance of pricing and the
relationship between price and quantity
10.2
Approaches to pricing
10.3
Pricing rooms
10.4
Pricing food and beverage products
10.5
Menu engineering
10.6
Revenue management
Pricing is defined as the method companies use to set the selling
prices for their products and services, and it is a very important aspect
of the decision making process within hospitality operations. Because
of this, pricing theory will entail that hospitality operations price
their rooms, F & B and other products in such a way that they control
their costs and maximize their incomes but at the same time ensure
that the service experience of their customers are not negatively
affected. Section 10.1 deals with the importance of pricing and the
relationship between pricing and quantity. In Section 10.2 the various
approaches to pricing are discussed and Section 10.3 shows the
various methods of setting room rates. In Section 10.4 the methods of
pricing Food and Beverage products are explained, while Section 10.5
introduces the concepts of Menu Engineering. In the last Section 10.6,
the concept of Revenue Management is introduced.
Pricing and Revenue
Management
10

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
196 10 Pricing and Revenue Management
10.1
The importance of pricing and the relationship between
price and quantity
Pricing is a very challenging aspect of the decision making process
within hospitality operations. This results from the great diversity in
the number and types of meals that have to be priced as well as the
different room types and configurations that have to be priced.
Pricing is furthermore challenging due to the service nature of the
industry and the interactions between the guests and the servers that
lead to different experiences even if the service delivery was exactly
the same.
Pricing is just one of the ways through which the hospitality
operation can influence the demand for its products and services. For
example revenues can be increased through advertisement, expanding
the sales and marketing personnel as well as improving their product
presentation and service delivery. Modifying pricing policies may not
turn out to be the best way possible to increasing sales and improving
net incomes. It should be noted that this chapter is about pricing
which is just one of the factors that can be used to influence sales and
net income levels.
The relationship between price and quantity is principally explained
by the principle of price elasticity. In this specific instance the notion
discussed is that of price elasticity of demand. Price elasticity of
demand is that measure of the responsiveness in the quantity
demanded for a product or service as a result of changes in the price
of that product or service. The price elasticity of demand is measured
as the ratio of percentage changes between the quantity demanded
and changes in its price.
The basic formula in the determination of the price elasticity of
demand is as follows:
Price elasticity n = 
in which:
n = price elasticity
% = percentage
Δ = change
Q = quantity
P = price
This formula always result in a negative value, however by
convention, the negative values are ignored.
The various levels of the price elasticity of demand are summarily
discussed below:
Perfect inelasticity (n = 0)
If the result is exactly equal to zero it is said that the demand is
perfectly inelastic which means that whatever changes affect the
price, the demand is not affected.
%ΔQ

%ΔP

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
10.1 The importance of pricing and the relationship between price and quantity 197
Relative inelasticity (–1 < n < 0)
If the result is between zero and minus one, it is said to be relatively
inelastic which means that the relative change in the quantity
demanded is less than the relative change in the price.
Unit elasticity (n = –1)
If the result is exactly equal to minus one then it is said to be unitary
elastic which means that the relative change in the quantity
demanded is exactly equal to the relative change in price.
Relative elasticity (– ∞ < n < – 1)
If the result is smaller than minus one then it is said to be relatively
elastic which means that the change in quantity demanded is slightly
higher than the change in price.
Perfect elasticity (n = – ∞)
If the result is near infinity it indicates that the demand is perfectly
elastic which means that the slightest change in price would lead to
an infinite change in the quantity demanded.
Measuring the price elasticity of demand
The data contained in Exhibit 10.1 shows the market demand
schedule for a certain product within a certain time period, in which
the price elasticity of demand has been determined at the various
price and quantity levels using the basic price elasticity of demand
formula and making use of the convention of ignoring the resultant
negative values.
From Exhibit 10.1, it can be noticed that price elasticity of demand is
not the same at the different price and quantity levels. Thus price
elasticity of demand varies at different levels of price and quantity,
and the direction of the movement equally has an influence on the
result. Take for example if prices increase from €60.00 to €70.00, then
quantity will reduce from 200 units to 100 units leading to a price
elasticity of demand (PED) of 7 that is determined as follows:
PED =
×
=
×
= −7 = 7 ⇒Elastic
Exhibit 10.1 Demand schedule for a product
Price
Quantity
Elasticity
Category of Elasticity
 € 80.00
0
∞
Infinitely elastic
€ 70.00
100
7.00
Elastic
€ 60.00
200
3.00
Elastic
€ 50.00
300
1.67
Elastic
€ 40.00
400
1.00
Unit elasticity
€ 30.00
500
0.60
Inelastic
€ 20.00
600
0.33
Inelastic
€ 10.00
700
0.14
Inelastic
0.00
800
0
Zero elasticity
70

100
−100

10
IP

IQdd
ΔQdd

Δp

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
198 10 Pricing and Revenue Management
On the contrary, if prices fell from €70.00 to €60.00, then quantity
will increase from 100 units to 200 units leading to a price elasticity
of demand (PED) of 3, which is now less elastic, determined as
follows:
PED =
×
=
×
= −3 = 3 ⇒Elastic
Thus as indicated in Exhibit 10.2, which is the demand curve based
on the data contained in Exhibit 10.1, the price elasticity of demand
for the product varies along the different sections of the demand
curve.
Demand curve
Based on the illustration in Exhibit 10.2, it is as such realized that the
price elasticity of demand can only be referred to in relation to a
section of the demand curve, and not the whole curve.
There is a variation in the formula for determining the price elasticity
of demand called the arc method. Its formula is as follows:
Arc method =
÷
Using the arc formula, and considering the data in Exhibit 10.1,
assume a fall in price from €30.00 to €20.00 leading to an increase in
demand from 500 units to 600 units. The mid-quantity will be 550
units (500 plus 600 divided by 2), while the mid-price will be €25.00
60

200
100

−10
IP

IQdd
ΔQdd

Δp
Exhibit 10.2   Demand curve showing different levels of price elasticity of demand along
 the curve
Infinitely elastic
Elastic
Unit elasticity
Zero elasticity
Inelelastic
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Demand curve for the product
Quantity in units for the period
Price
90.00
80.00
70.00
60.00
50.00
40.00
30.00
20.00
10.00
–
Δ Price

Mid-Price
ΔQuantity

Mid-Quantity

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
10.1 The importance of pricing and the relationship between price and quantity 199
(€30.00 plus €20.00 divided by 2). Still cognizant of the convention to
ignore the negative sign, the price elasticity of demand using the arc
method is determined as follows:
÷
0.18 ÷ 0.40
thus = 0.45
The outcome is inelastic (being less than 1). Note however that the
result will stay the same if the situation was reversed with a price rise
from €20.00 to €30.00 leading to a fall in quantity demanded from
600 units to 500 units during the period.
Major factors that affect price elasticity of demand
There are various factors that affect the price elasticity of demand for
a product:
1 Demand and the nature of the product – goods are classified into
either goods of necessity or as luxury products based on their
usage. There are certain products, which are frequently demanded
by consumers leading to an inelastic demand for it. For example
the demand for necessities such as rice or bread will be inelastic in
nature. Whatever be the price for these products, they would be
demanded, since they are essential, and whatever the increases in
their prices they will have to be consumed. On the contrary there
are other types of products whose demand can be postponed, such
as for luxury products hence having an elastic demand. The
demand for products like cars or plasma TVs will fall rapidly when
there are slight increases in their prices.
2 Habits and product loyalty – some habits and customs have an
influence on the behaviour of consumers generally leading to
inelastic demand. For instance if some consumers are very loyal to
a particular brand of cigarettes, they would not change their
demand, even if the price of the cigarettes increased.
3 Money spent on the product – the elasticity of demand for a
product also depends on the proportion of income spent on the
product. If the consumer spends a small proportion of their
incomes for a particular product, then the price elasticity of
demand for that product will be inelastic. For instance, an increase
in the price of salt for most people would have a very little impact
on the quantity of salt bought, leading to an inelastic demand as
the proportion of income spent on salt is very small. As such, those
with very high incomes may be less sensitive to changes in the
prices of products than those with lower incomes.
4 Substitutes – the greater the number of substitutes available
within the same price range for a product, the greater will be its
elasticity of demand. This is the most important influence on
10

25
100

550

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
200 10 Pricing and Revenue Management
price elasticity of demand. For instance, the demand for various
brands of beer or types of food is elastic but the demand for
food in general or beer in general is inelastic. Products having
substitutes have elastic demand, and those without substitutes
have inelastic demand. When the price of a product rises, the
consumers would shift their preference to a substitute product
whose price is lower. For example a rise in the price of rice
would force the consumers to buy more of its substitute product
that is wheat leading to an elastic demand for rice. On the other
hand if the product has no substitutes, even at higher prices,
consumers would be forced to buy the product rather than to go
without it, such as the need for warm clothing during winter
months.
5 Time factor – time has a great influence on price elasticity of
demand. With price changes, the elasticity of demand will tend
to be greater in the long run than in the short run. This is
because it is easier to find more substitutes for goods over
longer periods. For example, very little can be done within a
period of one or two months to react to increases in fuel prices.
However, as the years go by, more fuel-efficient cars would
likely come into place or people might equally adjust by
moving closer to their work places thus rendering the demand
for fuel elastic.
6 Use of the product – the demand for multi-use goods is more elastic
when compared to single-use goods. When the price of a multi-use
good decreases, consumers would increase its consumption.
Therefore, the percentage change in the demand for multi-use
goods is more with respect to the percentage change in their prices.
For example, electricity can be used for a number of purposes, such
as lighting, cooking, and various commercial and industrial
purposes. If the price of electricity decreases, consumers may
increase its usage for various other purposes. Similarly, if the price
of milk decreases, consumers may increase its consumption by
using it for various purposes, such as making curd, butter, cream,
and ghee. In such a case, the demand for milk would be highly
elastic. On the contrary, if the price of milk increases, its use might
be restricted to urgent purposes only such as for feeding babies and
sick persons only.
The analysis of price elasticity of demand helps in understanding
the needs and preferences of consumers. For the hospitality
industry, understanding price elasticity of demand will help in
understanding the needs of the guests, especially as it relates to
their provision of the different types of accommodation and food.
Forecasting the demand in the hotel industry can be related to the
flow of customers into a restaurant or a hotel and their demand.
Thus an analysis can be made on the number of visitors, their
various demand trends over time, and as such the ability to forecast
needed changes for the future.

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
10.1 The importance of pricing and the relationship between price and quantity 201
Other common forms of elasticity of demand
Income elasticity of demand measures the degree of responsiveness of
quantity demanded of a product to changes in income. The
coefficient of income elasticity of demand measures the percentage
change in the quantity demanded of a good per unit time as a result
of a percentage change in the income of the consumer. Its formula is
as follows:
Income elasticity of demand = 
It is worth noting that the outcome of this calculation can be either
positive or negative, and therefore it is absolutely important to
include the sign. Thus, while a positive income elasticity of demand
implies that demand increases with an increase in income (such as for
luxury goods), a negative income elasticity of demand would imply
that demand falls with an increase in income (such as for inferior
goods). However a zero income elasticity of demand implies that
demand remains constant as income rises (such as for normal goods).
The various characteristics of income elasticity of demand are
recapitulated in Exhibit 10.3.
Cross elasticity explains the proportionate change in demand of a
certain product X due to a proportionate change in the price of
another product Y depending on whether they are substitute or
complementary goods. Its formula is as follows:
Cross elasticity of demand = 
The concept of cross elasticity of demand is very important as a
means of assessing the extent to which the goods are related either as
substitute goods or as complementary goods. These relationships can
be summarized as follows:
•
If the two products are substitutes, their cross elasticity of demand
will be positive
•
If the two products are complements, their cross elasticity of
demand will be negative
•
If the two products have no relationship, then their cross elasticity
of demand will be zero.
Exhibit 10.3 Characteristics of income elasticity of demand
Category
Value
Characteristic
Negative income elastic demand
E < 0
Demand falls as income rises
Zero income elastic demand
E = 0
Demand does not change as income changes
Income inelastic demand
O < E < 1
Demand rises by a smaller proportion than income
Unit income elastic demand
E = 1
Demand changes by the same proportion as income
Income elastic demand
1 < E
Demand rises by a greater proportion than income
Note: E = income elasticity of demand
Proportionate change in demand of product X

Proportionate change in price of product Y
Percentage change in quantity demanded

Percentage change in income

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
202 10 Pricing and Revenue Management
The most important determinant of cross elasticity of demand is how
close the products are as substitutes or as complements. The closer
they are, the bigger will be the effect on the first product of a change
in the price of the substitute or complement, and hence the greater
the cross elasticity of demand – either positively or negatively.
10.2
Approaches to pricing
There are many different approaches to pricing used within the
hospitality industry and some of them are summarily explained
below. More details about room-specific or menu-specific approaches
are dealt with in Sections 10.3, 10.4 and 10.5.
Rule of thumb method
The rule of thumb is a method in which the prices are set at a certain
rate based on the initial costs. For example prices are set at 60% of the
cost of goods sold.
Intuitive method
In this informal method prices are simply established based on
intuition. No research about costs, profits, competition and the
market as a whole would have been carried out. Prices are set in the
hope that they are correct and the guests will accept them.
Trial and error method
In this informal method prices are tentatively set to evaluate the effect
it would have on sales and net incomes. The price is finally set at
levels where the net incomes are apparently maximized. 
Price cutting method
In competitive situations, prices are set at levels below those of the
competition. This is an informal method and generally risky because
in case the competition reacts by similar reductions in price, this
might lead to a price war.
High price method
Similarly in competitive situations prices might be set higher than the
competition due to product differentiation. Also informal, it is equally
risky in the sense that if the guests cannot easily make the price-
quality relationship, they might tend to move elsewhere.
Competitive method
In this informal method prices are set at the same level as those of the
competition. However, some non price factors such as location and
atmosphere can lead to differentiation. In situations where there is a
dominant operator in the market who normally sets the price trend,
this is called ‘follow-the-leader’ method.
Mark-up method
Specific to restaurants the mark-up is the difference between the costs of
the products and the selling price. The mark-up generally includes the
related costs such as labour, utilities, supplies and the expected profit.

10.3
Pricing rooms
The supply of rooms is generally fixed in the short term and rooms
are characterized by the fact that if its sales revenue for a particular
day is not received then it is lost forever. For these reasons, the pricing
of rooms should be done in such a way that the fixed costs of the
rooms can be recovered as well as the maximum occupancy levels can
be obtained. There are various methods of setting room rates as will
be described in the following subsections. The structure of the
subsections is as follows:
10.3.1
The rule of a thousand approach
10.3.2
The bottom up approach
10.3.3
Relative room size approach
10.3.4
Differential room pricing
10.3.5
Room rate discounting
10.3.1
The rule of a thousand approach
This is a basic rule of thumb approach in which the price of a hotel
room is set at one thousandth (1/1000) of the investment costs incurred
in the development of the room. Assume that the total cost of
building a 75-room hotel is €12,500,000.00 and that 30% of this
investment relates to other non-rooms related hotel activities. Then
the price of one room will be assessed as such:
Total rooms investment = €12,500,000.00 × 70% = €8,750,000.00
Cost of one room =
= €116,666.67
Room selling price =
= €116.67
Using this method, the hotel will sell its rooms at an average rate of
€116.67.
This method fails to address issues such as seasonality and all the
other services that the guest might pay for within the hotel. As well, it
does not consider the time at which the investment was made in the
hotel, and also what the competition does.
10.3.2
The bottom up approach (Hubbart formula or required
rate of return)
This approach involves determining what room rate must be charged
in order to generate the annual revenue that will be sufficient to cover
all costs and taxes as well as to meet the owners’ expected profit
levels. This is a bottom up approach that was developed for the
American Hotel & Motel Association and it is commonly referred to as
the ‘Hubbart formula’. It is called bottom up approach because it
progresses from the bottom line of the income statement (net income)
upwards towards sales revenues which make up the first item in the
income statement.
€8,750,000.00

75
€116,666.67

1,000
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
10.3 Pricing rooms 203

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
204 10 Pricing and Revenue Management
The Hubbart formula can be summarized as:
= Average room rate
In using the Hubbart formula, the following steps should be
respected:
■Exhibit 10.4 Illustration of the application of the Hubbart formula
Afilen Hotels Plc. operates a 300-room hotel. The capital invested is
€22,500,000 and the company is expecting a net profit of 10% after paying
tax at the rate of 30%. They expect an average occupancy rate of 68%.
Rooms departmental expenses are expected to amount to €3,000,000 and
profits from other departments are expected to be €1,400,000. The overhead
expenses are:
Operating costs + required return – Income of other depertments

Expected number of room nights
Step 1
Calculate the total amount invested in the hotel.
Step 2
Decide on the required annual rate of return on the investment
(this may be a percentage of the amount invested)
Step 3
Estimate the overhead expenses.
Step 4
Combine steps 2 and 3 to find the required gross operating
 income.
Step 5
Estimate the probable profits from all other sources (i.e.
 restaurants, bars etc).
Step 6
Deduct step 5 from step 4 to find out how much profit you
need to make from room sales.
Step 7
Estimate rooms department’s expenses (include fixed and
 variable costs based on forecasted occupancy)
Step 8
Add steps 6 and 7 to find out how much you need to make
from the rooms
Step 9
Estimate the number of room nights you are likely to achieve
per year (based on forecasted occupancy)
Step 10
Divide step 8 by step 9 to find out the average room rate you
should charge.
Administrative and General
1,140,000
Sales & Marketing
825,000
Utilities
500,000
POM
570,000
Depreciation
1,640,000
Insurance, licences and property taxes
740,000
Interest
850,000
.....................................................................................................

Step 1
Total investment = €22,500,000
Step 2
10% of €22,500,000 = €2,250,000 (pre tax income =
€3,214,286)
Step 3
Overhead expenses = €6,265,000
Step 4
The required gross operating income (€3,214,286 + €6,265,000)
= €9,479,286
Step 5
Profits from other sources are expected to amount to
€1,400,000
Step 6
Total room revenue needed of €8,079,286
Step 7
Add the departmental cost of €3,000,000 to the needed
amount of €8,079,286
Step 8
The hotel needs to make €11,079,286 from room sales.
Step 9
300 rooms × 365 days = 109,500 = 100% room occupancy
Therefore = 74,460 = 68% room occupancy
Step 10 Average room rate 
= €148.79
€11,079,286

74,460 Room nights
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
10.3 Pricing rooms 205
The Hubbart formula can be used for varying occupancy percentages. This can
be done by simply reviewing steps 7 to 9.
10.3.3
Relative room size approach
One of the main problems with both the rule of a thousand and
bottom-up approaches is that they only produce an average room
rate. This would have been a nice thing if the hotel had only one
room type, but in reality this is not always the case. The relative room
size approach permits the establishment of room rates that would take
into effect the relative sizes of the various rooms within the
hospitality operation.
Let’s assume that one of the properties belonging to Afilen Hotels Plc.
has two different room types. 50 rooms of Type A and 100 rooms of
Type B. Type A rooms measure 40 square metres and Type B rooms
measure 30 square metres. The occupancy percentage of the room
types are 65 and 70 percent for Types A and B respectively.
The hotel expects to make revenue of at least €6,205,000 for the next
year in which it will be operating all the 365 days of the year. With
the above information, at what rates should the rooms be priced?
......................................................................................................................

To cross check if, based on the above occupancy levels and room rates,
the expected revenue will be attained the following can be done:
Step 1
Assess the surface area of the rooms sold daily 
Step 2
Determine the average revenue required per day:
This is done by dividing the expected annual sales by the number of days
of operation.
Expected annual sales = 
= €17,000.00
Step 3
Determine the average rate to charge each square meter of room space:
This is done by dividing the average daily revenue by the total square
metres sold.
= 
= €5.00
Step 4
The last step is to determine the specific rates to charge each room type
as follows:
This is done by multiplying the room size by the price per square metre:
The Type A rooms should be charged €200.00 and the Type B rooms at
€150.00.
6,205,000.00

365
Average daily revenue

Total square metres sold daily
€17,000.00

3,400.00 m2
Number of rooms
m2
Occupancy
Total m2 sold
––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––
–––––
––––––––––––
––––––––––––
Type A
50
×
40
×
65%
=
1,300
Type B
100
×
30
×
70%
=
2,100
––––––
3,400
Room size
Price per m2
Room charge
––––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
––––––––––––
Type A
40
×
€5.00
=
€200.00
Type B
30
×
€5.00
=
€150.00
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
206 10 Pricing and Revenue Management

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
10.3 Pricing rooms 207
From the above verification it is noticed that the total revenue equals
the initial expected revenue for next year for Afilen Hotels Plc.
10.3.4
Differential room pricing
In situations where the hotel has different types of rooms, the pricing
methods are as well adapted to the specific room types. Following are
examples of how the room rates are determined under different
situations. In 10.3.4.1 the calculation of single and double rates are
shown, while 10.3.4.2 shows how the effects of seasonality are
integrated in the calculation of the room rates.
10.3.4.1
Calculating single and double rates
After having looked at the effect of the room size and room pricing
the analysis can be extended further into the establishment of single
and double rates.
Assume that Afilen Hotels Plc. has another property with 180 rooms
and an overall occupancy percentage of 72%. The 180 rooms are
distributed between the three room types as follows:
Proceed by attributing weights for the various occupancy levels types.
These weights are established based only on the management’s
judgement. In this example, the following weights are attributed:
Number 
Occupancy
Rate
Annual 
Total 
of rooms
operating days
revenue
–––––––––
––––––––––
–––––––––––
––––––––
––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
Type A
50
×
65%
×
€200.00
×
365
= € 2,372,500.00
Type B
100
×
70%
×
€150.00
×
365
= € 3,832,500.00
€ 6,205,000.00
Code
Number 
Occupancy
of Rooms
Rate
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––
––––––––––
–––––––––––
Single, single occupancy
S
60
68%
Double, single occupancy
D-s
20%
Double, double occupancy
D-d
90
60%
Executive, single occupancy
E-s
9%
Executive, double occupancy
E-d
30
48%
Total
180

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
208 10 Pricing and Revenue Management
At this point the average revenue target per day based on an ADR of
€175.00 has to be calculated. 
The average revenue per day would be
ADR × occupancy percentage × number of rooms = 
= €175.00 × 72.17% × 180 = €22,732.50
Realise now that based on the combination of the number of rooms,
the occupancy percentages, the given weights and the expected revenue
the various room rates have been determined. Thus for the three room
types, single, double and executive the following rates will be charged:
Weight
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––
Single, single occupancy
1
Double, single occupancy
1.5
Double, double occupancy
1.9
Executive, single occupancy
1.9
Executive, double occupancy
2.5
Code
Rooms
Occ.
Average
Weight
AO
Revenue
Room
%
occupied
×
expected
rate*
rooms
Weight
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––
–––––––
––––––
––––––––––
–––––––
–––––––
––––––––––
––––––––
Single, single occupancy
60
68%
40.8
1
40.8
€ 4,384.65
€ 107.47
Double, single occupancy
20%
18
1.5
27
€ 2,901.61
€ 161.20
Double, double occupancy
90
60%
54
1.9
102.6
€11,026.12
€ 204.19
Executive, single occupancy
9%
2.7
1.9
5.13
€
551.31
€ 204.19
Executive, double occupancy
30
48%
14.4
2.5
36
€ 3,868.81
€ 268.67
180
211.53
€22,732.50
* These room rates can be rounded up for convenience purposes
in which:
Average occupied rooms: number of rooms multiplied by the occupancy percentage for the 
type of room.
AO × weight: average occupied rooms × weight
Revenue expected: AO × weight divided by the total AO × weight as percentage of the total 
average revenue target per day.
Room rate: revenue expected divided by the average occupied rooms.
Single room
€ 107.47
Double room, single occupancy
€ 161.20
Double room, double occupancy
€ 204.19
Executive, single occupancy
€ 204.19
Executive, double occupancy
€ 268.67

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
10.3 Pricing rooms 209
10.3.4.2
Integrating the effects of seasonality
A further step in understanding differential room pricing is to bring in
the notion of the effects that seasonality has on hotel occupancy.
Hotels normally experience two seasons: a high season and a low
season. Exhibit 10.5 shows the integration of the effects of seasonality
using the Afilen Hotels Plc. example that was explained in 10.4.3.1.
This seasonality effect is brought in by attributing weights to the
various seasons. The selection of these weights is simply a matter of
judgement. In this particular example a weight of 4 will be given to
the low season and a weight of 6 will be given to the high season.
Exhibit 10.5 clearly brings out the differences caused by the low and
high season effects on the room rates asked by the Afilen Hotels Plc.
In the low season the following rates will be charged:
This is sharply in contrast to what the Afilen Hotels Plc. will charge
during the high season as shown below:
Exhibit 10.5 The effect of seasonality on room rates calculation
Code
Rooms
Occ.
Average
Weight
Seasonal
AO
Revenue
Room
%
occupied
weights
×
expected
rate
rooms
Weight
––––––––––––––––
–––––––
––––––
––––––––––
–––––––
–––––––––
–––––––
––––––––––
––––––––
Low season
S
60
63%
37.8
1
4.0
151.2
€ 1,811.24
€ 95.83
D-s
90
18%
16.2
1.5
4.0
97.2
€ 1,164.37
€ 143.75
D-d
50%
45
1.9
4.0
342
€ 4,096.85
€ 182.08
E-s
30
6%
1.8
1.9
4.0
13.68
€
163.87
€ 182.08
E-d
30%
9
2.5
4.0
90
€ 1,078.12
€ 239.58
High season
S
60
73%
43.8
1
6.0
262.8
€ 3,148.10
€ 143.75
D-s
90
22%
19.8
1.5
6.0
178.2
€ 2,134.67
€ 215.62
D-d
70%
63
1.9
6.0
718.2
€ 8,603.38
€ 273.12
E-s
30
12%
3.6
1.9
6.0
41.04
€
491.62
€ 273.12
E-d
66%
19.8
2.5
6.0
297
€ 3,557.79
€ 359.37
In this instance the AO × weight = average occupied rooms × room weight × seasonal weight
Single room
€
95.83
Double room, single occupancy
€ 143.75
Double room, double occupancy
€ 182.08
Executive, single occupancy
€ 182.08
Executive, double occupancy
€ 239.58
Single room
€ 143.75
Double room, single occupancy
€ 215.62
Double room, double occupancy
€ 273.12
Executive, single occupancy
€ 273.12
Executive, double occupancy
€ 359.37

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
210 10 Pricing and Revenue Management
10.3.5
Room rate discounting
The discounting of room rates is generally practiced in the hospitality
industry. Discounting room rates simply means reducing the room
price to levels below the rack rate. The rack rate is defined as the
maximum rate that will be quoted for a room. This is practiced due to
the specific characteristics of rooms, that cannot be carried over to the
next day if not sold, and the effect of seasonality. Discounting rates
for rooms prevents the hotel from achieving its maximum potential
average room rate as well as the maximum potential total sales
revenue. Discounting can be done in cases of large convention
groups, regular guests, corporate and government travellers. Discounts
are a normal cost of business in order to maintain occupancy levels.
The reductions in rooms revenue is most of the time balanced by the
extra sales that will be achieved from the guests’ making use of the
hotel’s other paying facilities such as F & B products, spa and health,
telecommunication, etc.
One of the peculiarities of a hotel room is the difference between the
variable cost of an occupied room and the room rate. For example a
guest room with a rack rate of about €175.00 with a variable cost of
€25.00 leads to a contribution to the fixed costs of €150.00. In case
the room rate is discounted to €120.00, this will still lead to a
contribution of the fixed costs of €95.00. Thus an additional income
of €95.00 is obtained from selling the room that would have
otherwise been unoccupied. Theoretically the hotel can reduce its rate
to a level just above the variable costs per room and still make some
additional contributions to the fixed costs. However, this does not
mean that selling all rooms at such low levels would be a good long-
run decision. In the long-run, it is necessary that only those rooms
that could not have been sold should be discounted. It is of
importance to take all measures necessary to sell the hotel rooms at
the rack rate before any discounting. Considering the price sensitivity
of the particular group of guests the hotel should be able to determine
its discount policy. The more price-sensitive they are, the more they
can have access to discounted rates and vice versa.
To help in the process of making discounting decisions, hotels
generally prepare what is called a discount grid. The grid generally
shows the effect of various room rate discounts on the total room
sales revenue. To develop a grid, the variable costs of selling each
additional room should be known and these are normally easy to
determine by hotel managements.
In order for a hospitality operation to achieve this, the equivalent
room contribution margin and equivalent occupancy (EO) should be
determined. This is done as follows:
Equivalent occupancy (EO) = 
original occupancy × (rack rate – marginal cost)

[rack rate × (1 – discount percentage)] – marginal cost

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
10.3 Pricing rooms 211
This can be summarized as:
EO = 
To better understand the notion of equivalent occupancy and its
effect on the discount rate, assume the following:
A hotel has a rack rate of €175.00 with a marginal cost of €25.00.
Assuming an occupancy level of 70% and an expected discounting of
10%, the equivalent occupancy can be calculated as follows:
EO = 
EO = 
EO = 
EO = 
thus the EO = 0.7924528 or 79.24528%
To verify the effectiveness of the concept of equivalent occupancy
(EO), Exhibit 10.6 will be used. In Exhibit 10.6, it is assumed that the
hotel has 200 rooms, a rack rate of €175.00 and currently has an
occupancy rate of 70%.
■Exhibit 10.6 Verifying the effectiveness of the equivalent occupancy
concept
Revenue before discounting
= 200 rooms × 70% occupancy × €175 rack rate = €24,500.00
Total variable cost 
= 200 rooms × 70% occupancy × €25 variable cost = €3,500.00
Net rooms revenue = €24,500 – 3,500 = €21,000
After discounting at 10% the occupancy will be 79.24528%
Revenue after discounting 
= 200 rooms × 79.24528% occupancy × €157.5 = €24,962.26
Total variable cost
= 200 rooms × 79.24528% occupancy × €25 variable cost =
€3,962.26
Net discounted rooms’ revenue
= €24,962.26 – €3,962.26 = €21,000.00
Exhibit 10.6 clearly illustrates that while discounting and based on the
equivalent occupancy concept the net rooms’ revenue remains the same.
original occupancy × current contribution margin

revised contribution margin
70% × (€175 – €25)

[€175 × (1 – 10%)] – €25
0.7 × €150

(€175 × 0.9) – €25
€105

€157.5 – €25
€105

€132.5
.......................................................................................................................................

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
212 10 Pricing and Revenue Management
Similar calculations as has been done in Exhibit 10.6 can be made for
various occupancy levels and discount percentages. These results can
be transformed into a grid called the discount grid. An example of a
discount grid based on a rack rate of €175.00 with variable costs of
€25.00 is shown in Exhibit 10.7.
Based on Exhibit 10.7, it means that if the average occupancy of the
hotel is about 60% for example, and it needs to apply a discount of
15%, then in order to maintain its level of profitability the rooms’
occupancy will have to rise to 72.7%.
10.4
Pricing food and beverage products
Food service operations must establish appropriate selling prices for
their menu items. In establishing the prices of Food and Beverage
products, two groups of pricing methods are used. First of all are the
subjective pricing methods which are mostly based on assumptions
and guesses. On the contrary, the objective pricing methods ensure
that the property’s profit requirements, as well as the value guests
attach to the entire dining experience are incorporated into the selling
price. The food pricing approaches examined in this chapter are:
10.4.1
Subjective pricing methods
10.4.2
Objective pricing methods
Exhibit 10.7 Discount table for a €175 rack rate with a variable cost of €25
Rack rate
€175.00
Variable cost
€ 25.00
Required EO levels to maintain profitability if rates are discounted.
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
100%
106.2%
113.2%
121.2%
130.4%
141.2%
153.8%
169.0%
95%
100.9%
107.5%
115.2%
123.9%
134.1%
146.2%
160.6%
90%
95.6%
101.9%
109.1%
117.4%
127.1%
138.5%
152.1%
85%
90.3%
96.2%
103.0%
110.9%
120.0%
130.8%
143.7%
80%
85.0%
90.6%
97.0%
104.3%
112.9%
123.1%
135.2%
75%
79.6%
84.9%
90.9%
97.8%
105.9%
115.4%
126.8%
70%
74.3%
79.2%
84.8%
91.3%
98.8%
107.7%
118.3%
65%
69.0%
73.6%
78.8%
84.8%
91.8%
100.0%
109.9%
60%
63.7%
67.9%
72.7%
78.3%
84.7%
92.3%
101.4%
55%
58.4%
62.3%
66.7%
71.7%
77.6%
84.6%
93.0%
50%
53.1%
56.6%
60.6%
65.2%
70.6%
76.9%
84.5%
45%
47.8%
50.9%
54.5%
58.7%
63.5%
69.2%
76.1%
40%
42.5%
45.3%
48.5%
52.2%
56.5%
61.5%
67.6%
35%
37.2%
39.6%
42.4%
45.7%
49.4%
53.8%
59.2%
30%
31.9%
34.0%
36.4%
39.1%
42.4%
46.2%
50.7%
25%
26.5%
28.3%
30.3%
32.6%
35.3%
38.5%
42.3%
20%
21.2%
22.6%
24.2%
26.1%
28.2%
30.8%
33.8%
15%
15.9%
17.0%
18.2%
19.6%
21.2%
23.1%
25.4%
Note that this grid will serve only for a €175 rack rate with a variable cost of €25.

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
10.4 Pricing food and beverage products 213
10.4.1
Subjective pricing methods
These are methods that are simply based on the manager’s assump -
tions or guesses about what the prices should be, and as such apply
such prices. Some examples of such methods are described below:
10.4.1.1
The reasonable price method
This method uses a price that the food service manager thinks will
represent a value to the guest. The manager presumes to know – from
the guest’s perspective – what charge is fair and equitable.
10.4.1.2
The highest price method
In this method, the manager sets the highest price that he or she
thinks guests are willing to pay.
10.4.1.3
The loss leader method
In this method, an unusually low price is set for an item (or items).
The manager assumes that guests will be attracted to the property to
purchase the low-priced item(s) and that they will then select other
items while they are there. Beverage or food prices on some items are
set low to bring guests into the property, but purchases of other items
are necessary for the operation to meet profit requirements. This
pricing method is sometimes used as an “early bird” or senior citizen
discount to attract specific segments of the market.
10.4.1.4
The intuitive price method
When prices are set by intuition alone, the manager makes little more
than a wild guess about the selling price. Closely related to this
approach is a trial-and-error pricing plan – if one price doesn’t work,
another is tested. The intuitive price method differs from the
reasonable price method in that there is less effort to determine what
represents value from the guests’ perspective.
These subjective pricing methods may be common in the food service
indus try simply because they have been used in the past, because the
manager setting prices has no information about product costs or
profit requirements to work with, and/or because the manager is not
familiar with more objective methods. In today’s market, with
increased consumer demands for value in dining, and with higher
purchase prices for products needed by the property, these plans
seldom work.
10.4.2
Objective pricing methods
Objective pricing methods based upon data in the approved operating
budget help the manager transfer budget plans into selling prices.
Before any objective pricing method can be used, three basic cost
procedures must be in place and consistently used:
·
Standard recipes must be available – Standard recipes dictate the
type and amount of each ingredient required to produce a menu
item. Also, they indicate the portion size to be served. A standard
recipe must be available for each item when a selling price is being
developed.

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
214 10 Pricing and Revenue Management
·
Pre-costing with current costs – Each affected recipe must be pre-
costed with current market cost data to determine the cost to produce
one portion of each component of the menu item being priced.
·
Standard recipes must be consistently used – Many operations have
standard recipes available but do not consistently use them. If
recipes are not used, there is no reason to have them or to cost them.
The following five objective food pricing methods are discussed below:
10.4.2.1
Using a mark-up multiplier 
10.4.2.2
Contribution margin pricing method
10.4.2.3
Ratio pricing method
10.4.2.4
Simple prime costs method
10.4.2.5
Specific prime costs method
10.4.2.1
Using a mark-up multiplier
In using the mark-up multiple to determine food and beverage prices,
the mark-up is the difference between the costs of the products and the
selling price. There are several ways of using the mark-up in establishing
food and beverage prices and these include the simple mark-up by a
multiplier, the ingredients mark-up, prime ingredient mark-up, mark-up
with accompaniment costs pricing methods. The rules on determining
the multiplier will be explained at the end of this subsection.
Simple mark-up by a multiplier
The simple mark-up generally includes the related costs such as labour,
utilities, supplies and the expected profit. This approach is equally
called cost-plus-pricing and it involves indentifying costs that can be
traced to the F & B food item that is to be priced. It is much easier to
mark-up beverages than to mark-up food items. Beverages (with the
exception of cocktails) generally contain at most not more than two or
three ingredients. On the other hand, meals contain many ingredients
and determining the cost of the meal can be very difficult. This
difficulty could be for such reasons as the kitchen labour component
as well as seasonal, weekly or daily price fluctuations. Three of such
methods are the ingredients mark-up pricing, prime-ingre dient mark-
up pricing, and the mark-up with accompaniment costs.
Ingredients mark-up pricing method
The ingredients mark-up pricing method attempts to consider all
product costs: food costs when pricing food items, and beverage costs
when pricing beverages. The steps to pricing with this method are as
follows:
Step 1
Determine the ingredients’ costs
Step 2
Determine the multiplier to use in marking up the ingredients’
costs
Step 3
Establish a base selling price by multiplying the ingredients’
costs by the multi plier to calculate a final selling price
Step 4
Determine if the base selling price will be accepted within the
market

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
10.4 Pricing food and beverage products 215
A base selling price is not necessarily the final selling price. The simple
output from formulas may not be an appropriate final selling price.
Rather, a base sel ling price is considered a starting point from which
other factors must be assessed and the price adjusted accordingly.
These other factors are addressed later under important pricing
considerations.
The multiplier determined in step 2 is generally based on the desired
food (or beverage) cost percentage. For example, if the desired food
cost percentage is 33% percent, the multiplier would be 3.03,
determined as follows:
Multiplier = 
3.03 = 
To illustrate the ingredients mark-up approach to pricing, Exhibit 10.8
below based on a mark-up multiple of 3.03 shows the ingredients and
costs of a beef filet dinner.
Exhibit 10.8 shows that based on the total cost price of €6.95 the
restaurant will expect to sell the dish at €21.06 which can be rounded
to €21.00. If this price appears reasonable based on the market for
beef filet dinners, then the item is sold for about €21.00.
Prime-ingredient mark-up method
The prime-ingredient mark-up pricing method differs from the
ingredients mark-up method in that only the cost of the prime
ingredient is marked-up. In addition, the multiplier used must be
greater than the multiplier used when considering the total cost of all
ingredients.
1

Desired food cost percentage
1

33%
Exhibit 10.8 Ingredients mark-up pricing method
Ingredient
Quantity
Cost
–––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––
Beef tenderloin
200 grams
€ 4.00
Salt and black pepper
1
€ 0.10
Garlic clove
1
€ 0.05
Clarified butter
10 grams
€ 0.20
Champignons
80 grams
€ 0.40
Brandy
5 ml
€ 0.50
Lemon juice
5 ml
€ 0.10
Chicken liver pâté
80 grams
€ 0.80
Cream
20 ml
€ 0.60
Horse-radish
5 grams
€ 0.20
Total cost price
€ 6.95
Mark-up
3.03
Selling price
€ 21.06

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
216 10 Pricing and Revenue Management
If the prime ingredient approach was used in exhibit 10.5, then the
cost price of the beef tenderloin (€4.00) would be multiplied by a
mark-up multiple different from the one that was used (3.03) based
on the experience and arbitrary assumptions of the management. For
example a mark-up multiple of 5 can be used. This will lead to an
expected selling price of €20.00 based on the information contained
in Exhibit 10.8.
If the cost of the beef tenderloin in this example increases to €4.50 for
the dinner portion, the new price would be €22.50 (€4.50 × 5).
The prime-ingredient approach assumes that the costs of all
ingredients change in proportion to the prime ingredient. That is,
when the prime ingredient’s cost increases 10%, then other
ingredients’ costs are assumed to increase also by 10%.
Mark-up with accompaniment costs
Using the mark-up with accompaniment costs pricing method,
managers determine ingredient costs based only upon entrée items
and then add a standard accompaniment or “plate” cost to this
amount before multiplying by a multiplier. This plate cost is an
average cost for all non- entrée and other relatively inexpensive items
including salads, vegetables, bread, butter, and non-alcoholic
beverages. For example
Note that the “plate” cost, covering the estimated food cost of all
items other than the entrée cost, is added to the entrée cost before the
multiplier is used.
An advantage of this method is its simplicity. Careful calculations for
only the expensive entrée costs are necessary. Time can be saved by
combining all other food costs into an estimated plate cost. A
disadvantage may be that plate costs are not truly representative of
food costs associated with these other items. Managers must also
establish a reasonable and objective mul tiplier that relates to profit
requirements. If this is not done, the mark-up with accompaniment
costs pricing method is no better than the subjective pricing methods.
Determining the mark-up multiplier
The mark-up pricing methods just discussed are simple to use and, for
that reason, are commonly used in the food service industry. They
however have a significant disadvantage which involves determining
Entrée Costs
€
3.50
Plate Cost
+
€
2.00
–––––––––
Estimated Food Cost
€
5.50
Multiplier
×
3.03
–––––––––
Base Selling Price
€
16.67

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
10.4 Pricing food and beverage products 217
the multiplier. For many managers, it is a subjective decision based
primarily upon experience and “rule of thumb”. To help in this
regard, the following formulas can be used:
Ingredients mark-up pricing method
Multiplier = 
Prime ingredient mark-up method
Multiplier = 
Mark-up with accompaniment costs method
Multiplier = 
The little time required to generate and use this multiplier based on
the operating budget makes it especially cost effective for many small-
volume operations. Using the multiplier has some disadvantages such
as omitting the impact of the sales mix, and not reflecting the higher
or lower labour, energy, or other costs associated with the production
of specific menu items. Rather, they either assume that all operating
costs relate in some direct way to food costs or that these cost
differences can be ignored. The mark-up pricing methods using a
multiplier also assume that all food costs associated with producing a
menu item are known. In fact, many other costs may be excluded
from the cost of ingredients used as the base for the multiplier.
10.4.2.2
Contribution margin pricing method
The term contribution margin refers to the amount left after a menu
item’s food cost is subtracted from its selling price. The contribution
margin is the amount that the sale of a menu item “contributes” to
pay for all non-food costs allocated to the food service operation and
to help with profit requirements. With a contribution margin pricing
method, managers can set base selling prices for menu items by
following two steps:
Assume that the approved operating budget for the year provides the
manager with the following data: all non-food costs are €225,000.00,
the required profit is set at €35,000.00 and 25,000 guests are expected
to be served. The manager can calculate the base selling price for a
menu item with a standard food cost of €7.50 as follows: 
1

Desired food cost percentage
Total food revenue

Total entrée cost
1

Desired Food Cost Percentage
Step 1
Determine the average contribution margin required per guest
by dividing all non-food costs plus required profit by the
number of expected guests
Step 2
Determine the base selling price for a menu item by adding the
average con tribution margin required per guest to the item’s
standard food cost

Step 1
Determine the average contribution margin required per guest
using the following formula: 
= Average contribution margin
required per guest
= €10.40
Step 2
Determine the base selling price for a menu item by adding the
average con tribution margin required per guest to the item’s
standard food cost
Base selling price = Standard food cost + Average contribution
margin  required per guest
€17.90 = €7.50 + €10.40
225,000 + 35,000

25,000
Non food costs + required profit

Expected guests
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
218 10 Pricing and Revenue Management
Advantages of this method are its ease and practicality when
reasonably accu rate information is available from the operating
budget. It is also useful in those operations where costs associated
with serving each guest are basically the same, with the exception of
varying food costs. Also, this method tends to reduce the range of
selling prices on the menu, since the only difference is reflected in the
actual food cost incorporated into the selling price. A potential
disadvantage of this method is that it assumes that each guest should
pay the same share of the property’s non-food costs and profit
requirements.
10.4.2.3
Ratio pricing method
The ratio pricing method determines the relationship between food
costs and all non-food costs plus profit requirements and uses this
ratio to develop base selling prices for menu items. The method is
made up of the following three steps:
Assume that the approved operating budget of a restaurant (with no
alcoholic beverage sales) provides the following information: food
costs are €117,000.00, all non-food costs (labour and other costs) are
€225,000.00, and the required profit is €35,000.00. Using the ratio 
Step 1
Determine the ratio of food costs to all non-food costs plus
required profit by dividing all non-food costs plus profit by food
costs
Step 2
Calculate the amount of non-food costs plus profit required for a
menu item by multiplying the standard food cost of the menu
item by the ratio calculated in step 1
Step 3
Determine the base selling price of a menu item by adding the
result of step 2 to the standard food cost of the menu item

Step 1
Determine the ratio of food costs to all non-food costs plus
required profit by dividing all non-food costs plus profit by food
costs
= Ratio
= 2.22
This ratio means that for each €1 of revenue required to cover food costs,
€2.22 of additional revenue is needed to pay for non-food costs and meet
profit requirements
Step 2
Calculate the amount of non-food costs plus profit required for a
menu item by multiplying the standard food cost of the menu
item by the ratio calculated in step 1
Standard food cost × Ratio = Amount of non-food costs and profit
required for menu item
€7.50 × 2.22 = €16.67
This is accomplished by multiplying the standard food cost of the menu
item by the ratio calculated in step 1. Therefore, if the standard food cost
of the menu item is €7.50, the amount of non-food costs and profit
required is €16.67 (€7.50 × 2.22).
Step 3
Determine the base selling price of a menu item by adding the
result of step 2 to the standard food cost of the menu item
This is done by adding the result of step 2 to the standard food cost of
the menu item. The base selling price for the item with a €7.50 food cost
would be €24.17 (€7.50 + €16.67)
€225,000.00 + €35,000.00

€117,000.00
All non-food costs + Required profit

Food Cost
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
10.4 Pricing food and beverage products 219
pricing method, the manager establishes a base selling price for a
menu item with a standard food cost of €7.50 as follows:
The ratio method of menu pricing is simple to use and can be based
on operating budget requirements. However, it does have several
disadvantages. In an operation offering both food and beverages, it is
necessary to separate non-food costs and profit requirements between
the two revenue centres. Also, under this pricing method, each meal
assumes an equal share of non-food costs and profit. The ratio pricing
method does not compensate for higher labour costs associated with
the prep aration of labour-intensive menu items.
10.4.2.4
Simple prime costs method
The prime costs refer to the most significant costs in a food service
opera tion: product (food and beverage) and labour. A simple prime
costs pricing method involves assessing the labour costs for the food
service operation and factoring these costs into the pricing equation. 

Step 1
Determine the labour cost per guest by dividing labour costs by
the number of expected guests
Labour cost per guest = 
€6.20 = 
Step 2
Determine the prime costs per guest by adding the labour cost
per guest to the menu item’s food cost
Prime costs per guest = €13.70
Step 3
Determine the menu item’s base selling price by dividing the
prime costs per guest by the desired prime cost percentage
Base selling price = 
€20.76 = €13.70

66%
Prime costs per guest

Desired prime cost percentage
€155,000.00

25,000.00
Labour costs

Number of expected guests
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
220 10 Pricing and Revenue Management
The steps of the simple prime costs pricing are as follows:
Exhibit 10.9 shows how the steps of the simple prime costs pricing
method are used to determine the base selling price.
■Exhibit 10.9 Application of the simple prime costs pricing method
Assume that the food service manager has obtained the following data:
Menu item food cost
€
7.50
Labour costs
€ 155,000.00
Number of expected guests
25,000
Desired prime costs percentage
66%
The food cost for the menu item is the standard cost derived by costing the
item’s standard recipe. Labour costs and estimated guests are obtained from
the approved operating budget. The desired prime costs percentage combines
projected food and labour cost percentages.
Step 1
Determine the labour cost per guest by dividing labour costs by
the number of expected guests
Step 2
Determine the prime costs per guest by adding the labour cost
per guest to the menu item’s food cost
Step 3
Determine the menu item’s base selling price by dividing the
prime costs per guest by the desired prime costs percentage
.............................................................................................................................................................................................

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
10.4 Pricing food and beverage products 221
Exhibit 10.9 shows that the food service manager would then adjust
the base selling price in relation to other factors, such as the
operation’s target markets and the competition. Advan tages of this
method are its focus on both food and labour costs and the fact that it
is easy to use. An obvious disadvantage is the need to assign an equal
labour cost to each menu item, even though the actual labour costs
for menu items may vary greatly. This problem is reduced in the
specific prime costs pricing method.
10.4.2.5
Specific prime costs method
With the specific prime costs pricing method the food service
manager develops multipliers for menu items so that the base selling
prices for the items cover their food costs and their fair share of labour
costs. Items with extensive preparation have higher labour costs and
should have higher mark-ups. Conversely, items not requiring
extensive preparation have lower labour costs that can be reflected in
a lower mark-up.
The manager first divides all menu items into two categories: those
that do and those that do not involve extensive preparation labour.
The definition of extensive preparation labour is left to the manager
to determine. For example, perhaps stew made from scratch is
considered labour-intensive to prepare, while a steak that only has to
be broiled is considered non-labour-intensive. Typically, all items are
assumed to require approximately the same amount of labour for
service and cleanup; these labour costs are shared by both categories
of menu items.
Next, the manager allocates appropriate percentages of total food
costs and labour costs to each category of menu items. Let’s assume
that the manager’s analysis of menu items sold during a recent period
showed that:
60 percent of the total food costs are expended for items requiring
extensive preparation (Category A items).
40 percent of total food costs are expended for items requiring little
preparation (Category B items).
55 percent of all labour costs are incurred for preparation of all menu
items (both Category A and Category B items).
45 percent of all labour costs are incurred for service, cleanup, and
other non-preparation activities.
Given this information, Exhibit 10.10 demonstrates the calculations
to be made using the specific prime costs pricing method.
Note that line items from the approved operating budget are listed in
column (1) – Budget items. These line items include: food cost, labour
cost, all other costs, and profit. Operat ing budget percentages for each
line item are noted in column (2). These figures represent percentages
of forecasted revenue. For example, the operating budget specifies a
35 percent food cost – 35 percent of expected revenue will go toward
paying food costs. These percentages are re-allocated in column (3) for
menu items that involve extensive preparation labour (Category A) 

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
222 10 Pricing and Revenue Management
and in column 4 for items that do not involve extensive preparation
labour (Category B).
Recall that the manager’s previous analysis of menu items sold during
a recent period showed that the food costs required to produce
Category A items (involving extensive preparation) equalled 60
percent of the food costs incurred for the period. An adjusted food
cost percentage for labour-intensive menu items of 21 percent can be
calculated by multiplying the 35 percent total food cost by 60 percent
(.35 × .6 = .21 x 100 = 21 percent). Similarly, an adjusted food cost
percentage for non-labour-intensive menu items of 14 percent is
calculated by multiplying the 35 percent total food cost by 40 percent
(.35 × .4 = .14 × 100 = 14 percent).
The manager now needs to allocate the total labour cost percentage
(30 percent as shown in column 2) between preparation and non-
preparation labour items. In this particular case, the manager decides
to allocate all of the preparation labour to Category A menu items
because little or no labour expense is incurred for Category B menu
items. Recall that the manager’s previous analysis showed that 55
percent of all labour cost is incurred for the preparation of menu
items. Since all of this labour cost will be allocated to Category A
menu items, the manager multiplies 30 percent (the percentage of
revenue representing total labour costs) by 55 percent (the percentage
of total labour costs for preparing menu items) and the result,
rounded to 17 percent (.30 × .55) of the total labour cost is charged to
menu items involving extensive preparation.
The remaining 13 percent of the total labour costs (30 percent labour
costs from the operating budget minus 17 percent labour costs for
preparation of menu items) is allocated between both Category A and
Category B menu items, since this is the cost of labour incurred for
service, cleanup, and other activities that should be shared equally.
However, sharing equally does not necessarily mean a 50/50 split.
Because food costs have been allocated on the 60/40 basis, this
Exhibit 10.10 Calculations for specific prime costs pricing
Calculations for specific prime costs pricing
Budget item
Operating budget 
Category A
Category B
percentage
(Extensive preparation) 
(Non-extensive preparation)
items
items
––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Food cost
35%
60% of 35% = 21%
40% of 35% = 14%
Labour cost
30%
55% of 30% = 17%
60% of 13% =  8%
40% of 13% = 5%
All other costs
20%
60% of 20% = 12%
40% of 20% = 8%
Profit
15%
60% of 15% =  9%
40% of 15% = 6%
Total
100%
67%
33%
Multiplier
100% ÷ 35% = 2.9
67% ÷ 21% = 3.2
33% ÷ 14% = 2.4

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
10.4 Pricing food and beverage products 223
approach is also used to allocate non-preparation labour. Therefore,
8 percent of labour costs are charged to Category A menu items 
{.60 × .13 = .08 (rounded) × 100 = 8 percent}. This labour cost is
identified in column 3. The remaining 5 percent of non-preparation
labour cost (13 percent – 8 percent = 5 percent) is allocated to
Category B menu items. This labour cost is identified in column 4.
All other costs (20 percent of forecasted revenue as shown in column
2) and profit (15 percent of forecasted revenue as noted in column 2)
are also allocated on the 60/40 basis between Category A and
Category B menu items.
At this point in the process, the manager can determine several
multipliers. Multipliers are set by adding the individual cost
percentages (food cost, labour cost, all other costs, and profit) and
dividing by the desired food cost percentage.
For example, a multiplier based on the 35 percent desired food cost
from the current operating budget (column 2) is 2.9. This is calculated
by dividing 100 percent (the total cost and profit percentage shown at
the bottom of column 2) by the budgeted food cost percentage of 35
percent {1 divided by .35 equals 2.9 (rounded)}.
The multiplier for menu items requiring extensive preparation
(column 3) is calculated by dividing 67 percent (the total cost and
profit percentage shown at the bottom of column 3) by the desired
food cost percentage of 21 percent for this cate gory of menu items
{.67 divided by .21 equals 3.2 (rounded)}.
The multiplier for menu items requiring little preparation (column 4)
is calcu lated by dividing 33 percent (the total cost and profit
percentage shown at the bot tom of column 4) by the desired food cost
percentage of 14 percent for this category of menu items {.33 divided
by .14 equals 2.4 (rounded)}.
Note that the multiplier for items involving extensive preparation
(3.2) is higher than that for items in the non-extensive preparation
category (2.4). Assume that the food cost of a menu item involving
extensive preparation is €7.50. The food service manager determines a
base selling price for that item by multiply ing €7.50 by 3.2. This
yields a base selling price for the menu item of €24.00. Note that the
resulting base selling price (€24.00) is higher than if the item’s food
cost was marked up by only 2.4 (the mark-up for menu items that
require little prepara tion), which would yield an €18.00 base selling
price. This lower price reflects the fact that there is much less labour
required to produce the menu item.
While the specific prime costs pricing method establishes base selling
prices for the items to cover their fair share of labour costs, there are
several disadvantages to this pricing method. Significant time may be
spent in classifying menu items into extensive-preparation and non-
extensive-preparation categories. Time will also be spent performing
the necessary calculations. Also, this pricing method forces managers

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
224 10 Pricing and Revenue Management
to assume that the relationships among all other operating costs vary
in the same proportion as food costs. While this is often a reasonable
assump tion, there may be costs, such as higher energy costs,
associated with preparing some items that reduce the accuracy of this
method.
Important pricing considerations
This section has suggested that the result of menu pricing cal culations
is a base selling price. This is because the simple output of formulas
used in the examples may not be an appropriate final selling price for
a menu item. Rather, it is a starting point from which other factors
must be assessed.
The concept of value (price relative to quality) is always important.
Guests pay for more than just the product (food and beverage) when
they visit the opera tion. Quality of service, cleanliness of the facility,
and atmosphere are also part of the dining experience and should,
even if subjectively, be factored into the selling price decision.
The basic law of supply and demand is another factor to be
considered. Ulti mately, the price that can be charged is established by
the guests themselves as they decide whether to return to the
property.
Volume concerns must also be considered. As fewer guests are served,
overhead charges per guest increase; selling prices must be higher. The
reverse is also true: more guests may allow the manager to reduce
overhead costs in the pricing decision.
The price charged by the competition for a similar product is another
concern. The more an operation can differentiate its products from
those of the competition, the more freedom the operation has in
setting a selling price.
For example, perhaps two properties offer a similar steak dinner.
While the price charged for the steak is important, there are other
factors that may influence people to visit one property or the other.
Perhaps one property provides entertain ment, while the other offers
an attractive atmosphere. Emphasizing the differences between the
property’s own products and services and those offered by other  
busi nesses is one way to remain competitive.
One technique that can be used to attract guests from competitors is
lowering menu prices. This may succeed in bringing more people into
an operation, but only if the lower priced items are considered by
guests as substitutes for what the competition offers. If there are no
significant differences between what one opera tion offers and what
the competition offers, then guests may see price as the main factor in
selecting one property over the others. However, if there are non-
price-related differences that are important to guests (such as
atmosphere, entertainment, etc.) this technique may not work.

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
10.5 Menu engineering 225
Raising prices is also a way of responding to pressures from the
competition. With higher prices, fewer menu items will need to be
sold for the operation to meet profit requirements. However, raising a
menu item’s selling price may be effective only if the increased
revenue from the price increase makes up for the revenue lost as
demand falls off and current guests begin to buy other menu items as
substi tutes. In fact, in some cases, a more effective strategy for
increasing total revenue may be lowering a menu item’s selling price.
Lowering prices may increase the volume of unit sales, and this
increase may produce an increase in total revenue.
10.5
Menu engineering
One other method of menu analysis and food pricing is called menu
engineering. This concept of menu engineering was first established
in a book by Kasavana, M. L. and Smith, D. I. called Menu Engineering
– A Practical Guide to Menu Analysis, 4th revised edition (Okemos,
Michigan: Hospitality Publications Inc., 2002). For this purpose a
worksheet as illustrated in Exhibits 10.11 and 10.12 has to be
established for each meal period (breakfast, lunch, dinner), as well as
for each menu category (starters, entrées, desserts) within each meal
period. The emphasis is on the contribution margin of each menu
item combined with its popularity and as such food cost percentages
are ignored.
The contribution margin is considered as high or low when compared
to the average contribution margin for all items sold. For example, if
the average contribution is €12.00 for all items, an item with a
contribution margin of €10.50 is considered to be low, whereas an
item with a contribution margin of €15.00 is considered to be high. In
the same line, each menu item is further classified by its popularity.
This is defined as either high or low by comparing the sales revenue
mix percentage to the average sales mix percentage. The formula is:
Average popularity would be 100% divided by the number of menu
items. So in a situation of 10 menu items, the average popularity of
each item would be expected to be 10% of all items sold. However,
Kasavana and Smith state that in real life it will be unreasonable to
expect that every menu item will achieve the minimum level of sales
and therefore suggested that the minimum popularity of each menu
item should be only 70% of the average popularity number. In this
case the formula is transformed as such.
70% ×
So according to Kasavana and Smith, in a situation where there are 10
menu items, if the item sells more than 7% of the total items sold, it
would be considered to have a high popularity and vice versa.
The popularity and profitability for each menu item can be classified
under four categories: Stars, puzzles, plough horses and dogs.
Quantity sold of each menu item

Total quantity sold of all menu items
Quantity sold of each menu item

Total quantity sold of all menu items

The last column in the menu engineering worksheet as shown in
Exhibit 10.11 indicates profit factors. The average profit factor for all
items is always equal to one. Since the average is always equal to one,
it means that if some menu items have factors higher than one, these
will be equally counterbalanced by other menu items that will have
profit factors lower than one. A balanced menu will be one in which
the profit factors of all the items are very close to one. Because of this
it is not necessarily a nice thing to assume that an item with a very
high profit factor is a good situation.
Exhibit 10.12 is an illustration of the dinner menu items worksheet of
the Beach and Sand Restaurant.
The information contained in Exhibit 10.12 can be plotted in a graph
as shown in Exhibit 10.13. The basic information needed will be the
number of menu items sold (plotted on the y-axis), and the
contribution margin per menu item (plotted on the x-axis). Plotting
this basic data on the graph clearly shows the demarcation lines
between the menu item classifications (plough horses, dogs, stars, and
puzzles).
Stars are considered to be the most profitable items on the menu. For
these menu items, rigid specifications for quality, portion size and
presentation should be maintained. These items should be in a highly
visible position on the menu because of their relative popularity. Their
prices can easily be raised without affecting their popularity and as
such increasing profit. Their prices should never be reduced because
the quantity sold will likely not be affected but total contribution
margin will be reduced. If the demand for stars is more elastic, a price 
Exhibit 10.11 Menu engineering worksheet
Menu engineering worksheet
Restaurant name:
Date:
Meal period:
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
L
P
R
S
T
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
––––––
Menu
Number
Menu
Food 
Selling
CM (E-D)
Menu
Menu
Menu
CM
Menu
Menu
Profit 
item
sold
mix %
cost
price
costs
revenues
CM
category
mix %
item
factor
name
(D × B)
(E × B)
(F × B)
category
classifi-
cation
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
N
I = ∑G
J = ∑H
M = ∑L
Average CM = M ÷ Menu items
Totals
–––––––––––––––
–––––––
––––––––––––––––––
Additional computations:
K=I ÷ J
O=M ÷ MN
Q = (100 ÷ items) (70%)
226 10 Pricing and Revenue Management
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exhibit 10.12 Completed menu engineering worksheet
Menu engineering worksheet
Restaurant name:
Date:
Meal period:
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
L
P
R
S
T
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
––––––
Menu
Number
Menu
Food 
Selling
CM (E-D)
Menu
Menu
Menu
CM
Menu
Menu
Profit 
item
sold
mix %
cost
price
costs
revenues
CM
category
mix %
item
factor
name
(D × B)
(E × B)
(F × B)
category
classifi-
cation
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
––––––
Steak 200gr
350
16.92%
6.95
23.144
16.2
2433
8100.23
5667.73
Low
High
Plough 
1.55
horse
Steak 400gr
152
7.35%
8.8
29.304
20.5
1338
4454.21
3116.61
High
High
Star
0.85
Steak 600gr
120
5.80%
10.6
35.298
24.7
1272
4235.76
2963.76
High
Low
Puzzle
0.81
Salmon
308
14.89%
7.2
23.976
16.8
2218
7384.61
5167.01
Low
High
Plough 
1.41
horse
Lamb
270
13.06%
10.4
21.6
11.2
2808
5832.00
3024.00
Low
High
Plough 
0.82
horse
Chicken
112
5.42%
6.9
22.977
16.1
772.8
2573.42
1800.62
Low
Low
Dog
0.49
Game
212
10.25%
8.7
28.971
20.3
1844
6141.85
4297.45
High
High
Star
1.17
Pork
184
8.90%
8.1
26.973
18.9
1490
4963.03
3472.63
High
High
Star
0.95
Ribs
140
6.77%
7.5
24.975
17.5
1050
3496.50
2446.50
Low
Low
Dog
0.67
Sole
220
10.64%
9.2
30.636
21.4
2024
6739.92
4715.92
High
High
Star
1.29
–––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
N
I = ∑G
J = ∑H
M = ∑L
Average CM = M ÷ Menu items
Totals
2068
17249
53921.529
36672.23
3667.2229
–––––––––––––––
–––––––
––––––––––––––––––
Additional Computations:
K = I ÷ J
O = M ÷ N
Q = (100 ÷ items) (70%)
31.99%
17.73319
7.00%
Exhibit 10.13   Graphical representation of the menu engineering results contained 
 
in Exhibit 10.12
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Numbers
sold
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Contribution Margin
Dogs
Puzzles
Plough Horses
Stars
10.5 Menu engineering 227

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
228 10 Pricing and Revenue Management
reduction might increase the sales revenue derived from these items
with a similar effect on profits.
Plough horses (in some cases also called cash cows) are those items
that are popular, even though they do not yield a high contribution
margin. They are normally items popular with price-sensitive guests.
These items should be kept on the menu, but the management should
try to increase their contribution margin without affecting demand.
One of the ways to do this is to raise the prices of the items. A second
way is to try to decrease the cost of ingredients by reviewing the
recipes and agreements with the suppliers. If their contribution
margins cannot be increased, they should be reduced to a lower
position on the menu. Note that it will not be a nice idea to lower
their prices since their contribution margins are already low.
Puzzles are those items that are low in popularity but yield a higher
than average contribution margin. Management should generally
consider taking them off the menu. However, caution should be
exercised before such a decision is taken. The elements that might
affect their popularity such as price and quality could be examined to
determine if they remain on the menu or not. They could be
renamed, better packaged or better positioned on the menu. Their
prices could equally be reduced especially if it has a relatively high
contribution margin and an elastic demand. Caution should be
exercised with price reductions in order not to take business away
from the stars which will reduce the contribution margin.
Dogs are the losers in the business because they are both unpopular
and have low contribution margins. These items may have to be
eliminated or their price increased to see whether they can at least
reach the status of puzzles. Dogs are the least desirable items of the
menu. If their situation cannot be improved, they should be replaced
with new items. Sometimes, it might be necessary not to remove it
because it might be what some regular guests consume. In order not
to dissatisfy these guests, an increase in price can be considered in the
hope that it will move into the puzzle category.
Explanation of the menu engineering worksheet
Column A Menu item name: This contains the list of all the items in
the menu categories.
Column B Number sold (the menu mix MM): this contains the records
of the quantity of each menu item sold for the period. The
total is recorded at the bottom of the column in Box N.
Column C Details the percentages of the menu mix. It is a vertical
analysis of the items in column B as a percentage of the
total found in box N.
Column D Food cost: This shows the food cost of each menu item.
Column E
Selling price: This shows the selling price of each menu
item.
Column F
Contribution margin (CM): This indicates the CM of each
menu item. It is calculated by deducting the food costs
from the selling price. In other words it is column E
minus D.

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
10.6 Revenue management 229
Column G Menu costs: This lists the total cost for each menu item. It
is calculated by multiplying the number sold by the sold
(B) by its food cost (D).
Column H Menu revenues: This lists the total sales for each menu
item. It is calculated by multiplying the numbers sold (B)
by the selling price (E).
Box I
Is the sum of column G and it represents the total cost of
all the menu items sold.
Box J
Is the sum of column H and it represents the total revenue
generated from the sale of the menu items
Box K
Represents the overall food cost percentage. It is
calculated by dividing I by J, and it is a percentage. 
Column L Menu contribution margin: indicates the total CM for
each menu item. It is calculated by multiplying column B
by column F.
Box M
Is the sum of column L.
Box N
Is the sum of column B.
Box O
Represents the average contribution margin for all the
items. It is calculated by dividing M by N. It is used to
compare the CM of each item to see if it is higher or lower
than the average.
Column P
Contribution margin category: Is used to fill in the High
or Low score for each menu item after its contribution
margin is compared with the result in Box O.
Box Q
This indicates the average popularity of all the menu
items. Based on the main observation by Kasavana and
Smith as noted earlier in this section, this is then reduced
to 70% of the popularity. It is calculated as such: (100
divided by the items) × (70%).
Column R Menu mix percentage category: This indicates either a
high or a low based on the comparison between each
item’s menu mix percentage (C) with the result in box Q.
Column S
Menu item classification: Lists the menu items into one of
the four categories (stars, plough horses, puzzles and
dogs).
Column T
Profit factor: This shows the comparison between each
item’s total contribution margin to the average
contribution margin for each item. It is calculated in two
steps:
Step 1 Divide the menu’s total contribution margin by
the number of items on the menu. That is Box M
divided by the number of menu items
Step 2 Divide each item’s total contribution margin by
the average contribution margin.
10.6
Revenue management
Revenue management (at times also referred to as yield management)
is generally referred to as the process of selling the right product to
the right guests at the right time for the right price. Revenue
management is based on the two notions of price discrimination and
market segmentation. Price discrimination helps to achieve sales

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
230 10 Pricing and Revenue Management
increases in two ways. Higher prices charged to relatively price
inelastic segments of the market can lead to higher revenues. At the
same time, charging discounted prices to price elastic segments of the
market can lead to higher sales volumes which might offset the
revenue effect of the reduced prices. Common to many industries,
revenue management is considered more of an art than a science, in
which businesses are motivated to maximize the profitability of each
unit sold under existing demand and market conditions. Some
common examples of revenue management practices are clearance
sales, seasonal pricing, preferred customer pricing, volume discounts,
and “early bird” specials. The advantages of revenue management
become clearer but at the same time more complicated when dealing
with perishable goods and services such as hotel rooms. An unsold
hotel room is revenue lost forever. The major challenge to hospitality
companies is to sell as many perishable rooms as possible while at the
same time maximizing the ADR.
Nowadays, revenue management is considered by most hospitality
operations as both a business philosophy and a process oriented
approach crucial to their ability to increase revenues and maximize
profits. Most major hotel chains have adopted revenue management
practices. They use sophisticated revenue management systems such
as RevparGuru that are integrated with their distribution channels.
Examples of such channels are GDS (Amadeus and Sabre) and
internet-based distribution systems ranging from 3rd party websites
such as Expedia, Orbitz or Travelocity to opaque or auction sites such
as Hotwire and Priceline. Hotel operations need to review total
customer worth of guest bookings through these channels since these
services are costly and have an incidence on the contribution
margins. Some of these operations have revenue managers at the
property level, regional revenue managers, and even revenue
management departments at their corporate head quarters. The hotels
generally receive benchmarking data from a wide variety of sources
that most of the times are integrated into their reservation systems,
for example Market Vision and Travel Click. The existence of
sophisticated revenue management systems coupled with the
expansion of internet technology cannot however eliminate the great
importance of human judgement in the revenue management
decision making process. Effective revenue management should be
based on a strategic approach that will help good decision making
based on the best available information.
Demand forecasting will allow a revenue manager to anticipate
business and as such appropriately establish the rates before
reservations are made. It is essential in this process for the managers
to understand as well the demand composition of the guests’ base.
This is called market segmentation. Some examples of market
segments within the hospitality industry are: individual business
week, individual business weekend, business group, leisure individual
weekend, leisure group, and government. Each particular market
segment will have its own demand pattern as well as price ranges.
Revenue managers can then make their decisions based on their
comprehensive understanding of each particular segment as well as
the time period concerned.

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
10.6 Revenue management 231
Hotel management’s main objective is to maximize sales revenue, also
referred to as yield, from the available rooms. Two of the main
statistics used to assess rooms’ sales (the occupancy percentage and
the ADR) unfortunately have certain limitations. The occupancy
percentage does not indicate if revenues are maximized. The ADR can
be raised at the expense of sending away potential guests unwilling to
pay the increased rates. To mitigate these limitations, the yield
statistic which relates the actual sales to the potential sales is a better
measure of a room’s department manager’s performance. The yield
statistic thus presents a more meaningful and consistent measure of a
hotel’s performance. The yield formula is:
Yield = 
× 100
A potential sale is defined as the room sales that will be generated if
100% occupancy is achieved and each room is sold at its rack rate. For
example, if a hotel has 200 rooms and a rack rate of €175, then the
potential sales would be 200 × €175 = €35,000 per day. If on a
particular day, rooms’ revenue was €28,200 then the yield would be:
Yield = 
× 100 = 80.57%
Note that the yield can also be calculated by multiplying the actual
occupancy percentage by the average rate ratio. The formula is
Average rate ratio = 
For indicative purposes only, listed below are some commonly used
yield formulas:
Potential average single rate = 
Potential average double rate = 
Multiple occupancy percentage = 
Rate spread: Potential average double rate – potential average single
rate
Potential average rate: (Multiple occupancy percentage ×
rate spread ) + potential average single rate
Room rate achievement factor = 
Yield statistic: occupancy percentage × room rate achievement factor
Identical yield percentage = Current occupancy percentage ×
Current rate

Proposed rate
Actual average rate

Potential average rate
Rooms occupied by two or more persons

Rooms occupied by guests
Double revenues at rack rate

Number of rooms sold as doubles
Single room revenues at rack rate

Number of rooms sold as singles
Actual average rate

Average maximum potential rate
(€28,200)

(€35,000)
(Actual sales)

(Potential sales)

Glossary
Bottom up approach (Hubbart formula) – is an approach that involves
determining the average room rate which must be charged in order to
generate the annual revenue that will be sufficient to cover all costs and
taxes as well as to meet the owners’ expected profit levels.
Contribution margin pricing – is a pricing approach in which menu items are
priced taking into consideration an analysis of the contribution margin of
the item. The contribution margin is the difference between the food costs
and its selling price. This pricing method helps in determining the specific
contribution of each menu item towards covering for all the non-food costs
in the operation as well as in generating profits.
Cross elasticity of demand – is an expression of the degree to which customers
change their demand for a certain product due to a change in the price of
another product to which it is related either as a substitute product or as a
complementary product.
Differential room pricing – is an approach that takes into consideration the
different room types on the hospitality operations before the room type
rates are established.
Equivalent occupancy – is that level of occupancy that is required to maintain a
constant level in the total revenues less the variable costs if the rack rate is
discounted.
Income elasticity of demand – is an expression of the measure of the degree of
responsiveness of quantity demanded of a product to changes in income.
Mark-up – is the amount that is added to the cost of goods sold in order to
produce the desired profit. It is established with the purpose of covering all
the costs that have to be incurred in the production of the good or service.
Menu engineering – is a method of menu analysis and food pricing in which
prices are regularly reviewed based on their popularity and profitability.
Price elasticity of demand – is an expression of the degree to which customers
respond to price changes. Price elasticity of demand is measured as the ratio
of percentage changes between the quantity demanded and changes in its
price. Price elasticity of demand values determine the sensitivity or not of
the customers, and this sensitivity ranges from perfect inelasticity in which
whatever the change in price, demand will not be affected; to perfect
elasticity in which the slightest change in price will lead to an infinite
change in the quantity demanded.
Prime costs – are the most significant costs in a food service operation and
primarily consist of the direct material costs (of the food and beverage
products) plus the associated labour costs in producing the menu item.
232
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Ratio pricing – is an approach in which using standard food costs, a base
selling price for menu items is established taking into account the ratio of
the relationship between food costs and all non-food costs plus profit
requirements.
Relative room size approach – is an approach that permits the establishment of
room rates based on taking into account the effect the relative sizes of the
various rooms within the hospitality operation.
Revenue management – is that management process in which capacity and
sources of revenues are carefully and skilfully managed, controlled and
directed while taking into account the constraints of demand and supply. It
is generally referred to as the process of selling the right product to the right
guests at the right time for the right price and in some circles commonly
referred to as yield management.
Room rate discounting – in order to mitigate the negative effects of some of the
peculiarities of the room as a product, room rate discounting is practiced
and it simple means reducing the room prices to levels below the rack rate.
This practice however prevents the hotel from achieving its maximum
potential average room rate as well as the maximum potential total sales
revenue, but is considered necessary in order to maintain occupancy levels.
Rule of a thousand approach – is a basic approach in which the price of a hotel
room is set at one-thousandth (1/1000) of the value of the investment costs
that were incurred towards the development of the room.
Rule of thumb – is a simple but at times useful principle or method which is
based on more on the experiences of the decision makers rather than on
precisely accurate measures
Glossary 233
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
234 10 Pricing and Revenue Management
Multiple choice questions
10.1
When demand is inelastic, how will a price increase affect total revenues?
a
total revenues will decrease
b total revenues will increase
c
total revenues will increase, and then decrease
d total revenues will decrease, and then increase
10.2
Which of the following is a formal approach to pricing?
a
price cutting approach
b high price approach
c
rule of a thousand approach
d competitive approach
10.3
Informal approaches to pricing do not take into account:
a
the associated costs.
b location and atmosphere.
c
prices set by the competition.
d the intuition of the managers.
10.4
The prime ingredient cost of an organic grilled chicken dinner is €5.35. The
desired food cost percentage for organic grilled chicken is 24%. The mark-
up multiplier is 4.25. Using the prime-ingredient mark-up method, the price
of the organic grilled chicken will be:
a
€22.29
b €23.72
c
€22.74
d €17.71
10.5
Menu engineering classifies a menu item that is low in contribution margin
and high in menu mix category as a:
a
puzzle
b plough horse
c
star
d dog
Exercises
10.1
Last year, the King’s Cottage’s ADR was €75 and its occupancy percentage
was 72%. The management hopes to achieve an ADR this year of €80 based
on an expected occupancy level of 70%. Determine the price elasticity of
demand of the King’s Cottage’s rooms.
10.2
The Way Ahead is a 40-room roadside motel and it expects its occupancy in
2016 to be 75%. The capital invested in the motel is €1,280,000 and the
owners expect an after-tax net profit of 14%. The tax rate is 30%. From
vending machines and parking charges, they expect to make about €65,000
in 2016. The direct expenses of running the rooms are expected to be
€400,000, while the overhead expenses for 2016 are expected to be as
follows:
·
Administration and general expenses €225,000
·
Sales and marketing expenses €68,000

© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exercises 235
·
POM €72,000
·
Interest €75,000
·
Depreciation €150,000
·
Insurance €64,000
·
Other expenses €155,000
Based on this information,
a what should be the ADR of the Way Ahead in 2016?
b what should be the single and double room rates if the motel operates at
24% double occupancy and has a difference of €15 between its single and
double rates? Assume one common room size all with the same rates.
10.3
Peter & Petra’s Place is a proposed 45-room motel with a fully equipped
restaurant that will cost them €1,750,000 to build. The projected occupancy
rate is 75% for the year. Peter and Petra desire a 14% after-tax net profit.
The tax rate is 30%. The estimated overhead expenses, not including
income taxes, are €650,000. The estimated direct expenses of the rooms
department are €8.50 for each room sold and they expect a double
occupancy rate of 45%.
Based on this information,
a determine the ADR using the Hubbart formula and assume the restaurant
produced nothing
b determine the single and double rates if there is a €16 price difference
between the single and double rooms
c determine to what extent the ADR can be lowered and still meet Peter and
Petra’s financial expectations if the restaurant makes a departmental profit
of €45,000 each year
10.4
The Sunset Delight is a new 75-seat, lunch and dinner only, restaurant that
will operate 5 days a week. The owners invested €375,000 in all the
equipment and held €25,000 as initial working capital. The tax rate is 30%.
Their estimates for the first year of operation are as follows:
·
Depreciation on equipment
15%
·
Fixed salary elements
€95,200
·
Insurance
€2,400
·
Menu selling prices
170% over cost of food sold
·
Other variable costs
5.5% of total revenue
·
Rent
€30,000
·
Expected after-tax net profit
14%
·
Variable salary elements
26% of total revenue
·
Lunch revenue
35% of total revenue
·
Lunch seat turnover
1.8
·
Dinner revenue
65% of total revenue
·
Dinner seat turnover
1.5
Calculate the average food service cheque per meal period that will cover all
costs taking into account the expected after-tax net profit.


Cost-volume-profit analysis
11.1
Definition, assumptions, and limitations
11.2
Contribution margin
11.3
Breakeven analysis
Cost-volume-profit analysis (CVP), a short run and marginal analysis
is a set of analytical tools that are used to determine the levels of sales
needed to be carried out at any desired level of profit. The analytical
tools could be in either a graphic or equation form.
When management is trying to decide on a new business activity (for
example starting a new catering outlet), certain questions may arise
such as:
·
‘How many units will have to be sold in order to break even?’
·
‘How much will we need to sell in order to achieve our target profit
level?’
·
‘What is the amount of additional sales needed to cover the cost of
the new activity while providing the needed level of profit?’
On the other hand, when decisions have to be made related to current
activities, the following types of question may arise:
·
‘What will happen to profit if sales are increased by 15%?’
·
‘How much more would we have to sell in order to maintain our
current level of profit if we increase our marketing costs by 10%?’
·
‘What increases in sales will be required to cover the cost of a 5%
increase in salaries while providing the needed level of profit?’
To help in understanding cost-volume-profit analysis and to be able to
answer questions like these, this chapter is organized in the following
way. Section 11.1 sets the foundation of this understanding by
defining CVP analysis as well as explaining the underlying
assumptions and limitations. In Section 11.2 the concept of the
contribution margin is further developed, and Section 11.3 shows in
detail the various calculations related to breakeven analysis.
237
11
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

11.1
Definition, assumptions, and limitations
In order to be able to answer such and similar questions, CVP analysis
helps management to make the informed and rational decisions.
CVP analysis is based on several assumptions, the most common of
which are that:
·
Mixed costs can be divided into their variable and fixed elements
with a reasonable level of accuracy.
·
Identified fixed costs will remain unchanged during the period
under consideration.
·
Variable costs will increase or decrease in a linear relationship with
sales revenue during the period under consideration.
·
All costs can be attributed to the individual operated departments
with the analysis limited to specific situations, operating divisions,
or departments.
·
The mix of sales remains constant during the period under
consideration.
·
Revenues have a linear relationship to the volume of sales.
·
All units produced during the period under consideration are sold.
·
The economic conditions will be relatively stable during the period
under consideration.
CVP analysis equally has certain limitations of which the principal
ones are:
·
Only quantitative factors are taken into consideration to the
exclusion of important qualitative factors such as employee
morale.
·
Joint costs cannot be attributed to individual operated
departments.
·
The result of CVP analysis is only an estimate to help management
make decisions.
·
CVP analysis does not take into consideration the possible effects
of the decisions made either internally (employee analysis) or
externally (guests, social, and environmental analyses)
These limitations notwithstanding, CVP analysis and the
establishment of the breakeven point, forms an important measure for
many organizations. 
11.2
Contribution margin
In the previous chapter the contribution margin was introduced
(subsection 10.4.2.2). Now, it will be further explained. The primary
focus in CVP analysis is trying to determine future levels of
profitability which requires an understanding of how much costs and
profits will be affected following any changes in sales.
The CVP analysis is generally presented in the form of a contribution
margin income statement in which the details of the variable and
fixed costs are separately indicated. The USALI formatted income
statement for internal purposes is designed on such lines. The
contribution to fixed costs is referred to as the contribution margin.
238 11 Cost-volume-profit analysis
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

The contribution margin (CM) = revenues – direct operating
 expenses (also called the variable costs)
This can also be expressed as a percentage of the revenues in what
is called the contribution margin ratio (CMR).
Contribution margin ratio (CMR) = 
The CMR represents the part of sales that is contributed towards the
fixed costs and or profits.
11.3
Breakeven analysis
The major premise on which CVP analysis is done is called breakeven
analysis. Some authors do even use the terms interchangeably.
Breakeven analysis relates to the determination of a single point (the
breakeven point) at which no gains or losses will be made in a
business. The breakeven point is consequently the point at which the
net income is exactly equal to zero. At this point, all the costs or
expenses and revenue are equal. With breakeven analysis, the margin
of safety is calculated, which is the amount that revenues exceed the
breakeven point. The margin of safety is the amount by which
revenues can fall while still staying above the breakeven point. The
structure of the subsections is as follows:
11.3.1
Establishing the breakeven point
11.3.2
Single service analysis
11.3.3
Other considerations in breakeven analysis
11.3.1
Establishing the breakeven point
Breakeven analysis is a supply-side analysis which only analyzes the
costs of the sales excluding any analysis on how demand may be
affected at different price levels.
The breakeven point can be expressed as an equation as follows:
Profit = total revenue – total costs = zero
This equation can be broken down into its constituent elements as
follows: 
0 = (X × S) – {(V × X) + F} = P
in which: 
X = quantity sold
S = sales price
V = variable cost
F = fixed cost
P = profit
This can be further simplified to:
0 = SX – VX – F
CM

Revenues
11.3 Breakeven analysis 239
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

in which:
SX = total revenue
VX = total variable cost
Assuming a situation of the sale of a single product, the equation
can be rearranged to solve for any one of its four variables as
 follows:
Fixed costs at breakeven:
F = SX – VX
Variable cost per unit at breakeven:
V = S – 
Selling price at breakeven:
S = 
+ V
Quantity sold at breakeven:
X = 
The best way to understand the breakeven analysis is by using
examples and for this purpose multiple considerations will be made.
The first one will be analyzing the single service after which other
considerations will be taken into account.
11.3.2
Single service analysis
Afilen Hotels Plc. manages two hotels along the southern coast – the
Blue Beach Hotel, and the White Beach Hotel. In the Blue Beach
Hotel, the rooms’ division manager would like to determine the levels
of occupancy that will permit the hotel attain breakeven in the
following year.
The information at his disposal is:
·
There are 220 rooms in the hotel
·
The hotel will be open for 365 days 
·
Annual fixed costs related to the Rooms Division are €6,475,002.00
·
The ADR is €165.00
·
The per-room variable cost is €24.00
In keeping in line with the formulas provided in subsection 11.3.1,
this information can be transformed as follows:
X = 220 rooms
F = €6,475,002.00
V = €24.00
S = €165.00
F

S – V
F
X
F
X
240 11 Cost-volume-profit analysis
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

The contribution margin (CM) of the Blue Beach Hotel is
CM = S – V = €165.00 – €24.00 = €141.00 
The breakeven number of rooms (X) for the Blue Beach Hotel will
thus be:
X = 
= 
= 45,922 Rooms
With this breakeven number of 45,922 rooms, the breakeven level of
occupancy can be determined as such:
× 100
Consequently for the Blue Beach Hotel:
Required number of rooms at breakeven = 45,922
Available room nights = 220 × 365 = 80,300
thus
Breakeven level of occupancy = 
= 57.19%
(rounded to two decimal places)
The ADR at breakeven is verified as follows:
ADR = 
+ V
+ €24.00 = €165.00
The variable cost per unit at breakeven is verified as follows:
V = S – 
€165.00 –
= €24.00
The fixed costs at breakeven is verified as such:
F = SX – VX
(€165.00 × 220 × 0.5719 × 365) – (€24.00 × 220 × 0.5719 × 365)
= €7,577,130.00 – €1,102,128.00
= €6,475,002.00
Exhibit 11.1 is a graphical representation of the breakeven point based
on the Blue Beach Hotel’s information. The number of rooms sold is
indicated in the x-axis (horizontal axis), while the currency values (€)
are indicated in the y-axis (vertical axis). If the total sales revenue line
and also the total cost line for all levels of activity are drawn in, the
breakeven point can be determined.
€6,475,002.00

€45,922.00
F
X
€6,475,002.00

€45,922.00
F
X
45,922

80,300
Required number of rooms at breakeven

available room nights
F

CM
€6,475,002.00

141
11.3 Breakeven analysis 241
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

As breakeven occurs at that activity level where total cost equals total
sales, breakeven is represented by the point where the sales and total
cost lines cross each other. In Exhibit 11.1, this breakeven point
(45,922 rooms sold) is highlighted by the vertical dotted line. The
breakeven revenue (€7,577,130.00) is highlighted by the horizontal
dotted line. Any level of sales to the right of the vertical dotted line
will result in a profit. Any level of sales to the left of the line will
result in a loss.
An extension of the basic breakeven analysis is the use of the concept
of the safety margin. The safety margin represents the excess of
expected or actual sales over the breakeven sales. The margin of safety
can be expressed in terms of revenues (€), units (for example rooms),
as well as in occupancy percentages.
Margin of safety in revenues = current (or expected) sales revenue 
– sales revenue at breakeven level
Margin of safety in units = current (or expected) units sold 
– units required to breakeven
Occupancy % safety margin = current (or expected) occupancy % 
– occupancy % required to break even
Assume now that the revenues of the Blue Beach Hotel for the period
came up to €9,750,345.00. This represents the sale of 59,093 rooms
and consequently an occupancy level of 73.59%.
The margin of safety in revenues = €9,750,345.00 – €7,577,130.00 =
€2,173,220.00. This means that sales could fall by up to this amount
before the Blue Beach Hotel incurs a loss.
Similarly the margin of safety in rooms is 13,171 (59,093 – 45,922),
and in occupancy percentage is 16.4% (73.59% – 57.19%).
Exhibit 11.1   Breakeven point – Blue Beach Hotel
€7,577,130
€6,475,002
Revenues
45922
Rooms sold
Fixed
costs
Breakeven point
Total variable
costs
Total
costs
Revenue
Profit area
Loss area
242 11 Cost-volume-profit analysis
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

11.3.3
Other considerations in breakeven analysis
The previous example made use of the basic breakeven situation. In
the following subsections, examples of variations in the breakeven
analysis will be shown. The structure of the subsections is as follows:
11.3.3.1
First situation – two room types
11.3.3.2
Second situation – two room types plus additional services
11.3.3.3
Third situation – integrating desired profit levels
11.3.3.1
First situation – two room types
To illustrate examples of variations in breakeven analysis, now,
assume that the second of the Afilen Hotels Plc. hotel (the White
Beach Hotel) provides the following information:
·
120 single rooms
·
100 double rooms
·
The hotel will be open for 365 days
·
ADR single room €160.00
·
Per-room variable cost single room is €24.00
·
ADR double room €190.00
·
Per-room variable cost double room is €32.00
·
Annual fixed costs related to the White Beach Hotel’s Rooms
Division are €7,255,360.00
·
The historical sales mix is 4 double rooms to every 5 single rooms
sold
The breakeven analysis will be done as follows:
Determine the various contribution margins of the rooms
CM single rooms = €136.00 (€160.00 – €24.00)
CM double rooms = €158.00 (€190.00 – €32.00)
Establish sales packages and calculate the CM of the package
Based on the historical sales mix (4 double rooms for every 5 single
rooms) the CM from the sale of one package is:
(5 × CM of the singles) + (4 × CM of the doubles)
(5 × €136.00) + (4 × €158.00) = €680.00 + €632.00 = €1,312.00
The amount of €1,312.00 represents then the contribution margin
from the sale of one package.
Calculate the breakeven based on the established packages
Using the standard formula of
X = 
F

CM
11.3 Breakeven analysis 243
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

the breakeven in number of packages is:
= 5,530 packages
This implies that the White Beach Hotel will have to sell 5,530
packages to breakeven. This can be translated into single and double
rooms as follows:
Each package = 5 singles and 4 doubles
5,530 packages = (5 × 5,530) singles and (4 × 5,530) doubles
Thus the White Beach Hotel will have to sell 27,650 single rooms and
22,120 double rooms to break even.
11.3.3.2
Second situation – two room types plus additional services
Building on the previous situation, now, assume that the White Beach
Hotel plans to establish a breakfast-service-only restaurant and needs
to know what the effect will be on their breakeven level. The
additional estimated information is:
·
The average breakfast price will be €20.00
·
The average variable cost for the breakfast will be €6.00
·
The fixed costs of the White Beach Hotel will increase by
€1,412,290.00
·
40 percent of the single room guests will eat breakfast
·
25 percent of the double room guests will eat breakfast (note that
all double room sales bring in two guests)
The determination of the different contribution margins of the room
nights will now be as follows:
Determine the contribution margins of the rooms taking into account
their breakfast effect
CM single rooms = €136.00 + (0.4 × 14) = €141.60
CM double rooms = €158.00 + (0.25 × 2 × 14) = €165.00
Establish sales packages and calculate the CM of each package
Based on the historical sales mix (4 double rooms for every 5 single
rooms) the CM from the sale of one package is
(5 × CM of the singles) + (4 × CM of the doubles)
(5 × €141.60) + (4 × €165.00) = €708.00 + €660.00 = €1,368.00
Calculate the breakeven based on the established packages
Using the standard formula of
X = 
the breakeven in number of packages is calculated as follows:
€7,255,360.00

€1,312.00
F

CM
244 11 Cost-volume-profit analysis
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

The expected annual fixed costs (F) is
€7,255,360.00 + €1,412,290.00 = €8,667,650.00
Thus
= 6,336 packages
This implies that the White Beach Hotel will have to sell 6,336
packages to breakeven. This can be translated into single and double
rooms as follows:
Each package = 5 singles and 4 doubles
6,336 packages = (5 × 6,336) singles and (4 × 6,336) doubles, thus
the White Beach Hotel will have to sell 31,680 single rooms and
25,344 double rooms to breakeven.
These breakeven volumes can be verified to make sure that the
 established levels really lead to zero profit:
Contribution from the single rooms = number of rooms sold × CM
single rooms
Contribution from the double rooms = number of rooms sold × CM
double rooms
Contribution from the single rooms’ breakfast = number of rooms
sold × CM breakfast × ratio of single breakfast
Contribution from the double rooms’ breakfast = number of rooms
sold × CM breakfast × ratio of double breakfast 
Thus,
Contribution from the single rooms = 
31,680 × €136.00
€4,308,481.00
Contribution from the double rooms = 
25,344 × €158.00
€4,004,353.00
Contribution from the single rooms’ breakfast = 
31,680 × €14.00 × 0.4
€177,408.00
Contribution from the double rooms’ breakfast = 
25,344 × €14.00 × 0.25 × 2
€177,408.00
These contributions are summed up and then the fixed cost deducted
from the solution as follows:
Singles contribution
+
4308481.00
Double contribution
+
4004353.00
Singles breakfast contribution
+
177408.00
Double breakfast contribution
=
177408.00
–––––––––––––
Total CM
–
8667650.00
Fixed costs
8667650.00
–––––––––––––
Profit
0
€8,667,650.00

€1,368.00
11.3 Breakeven analysis 245
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

This zero profit result indicates that the White Beach Hotel will break
even with sales of 31,680 single rooms and 25,344 double rooms
when they integrate the breakfast-service-only restaurant.
11.3.3.3
Third situation – integrating desired profit levels
Now, assume that the Management of the Blue Beach Hotel (see
11.3.2) desires to buy an adjoining 18-hole golf course at the end of
the next year’s operations. For this to be realized, they expect to
generate enough profit that will permit them to make the purchase.
For the management to know what will be the exact effect of these
expectations on their breakeven volumes, they have to first of all
decide which approach to use in the analysis. There are two
approaches possible:
·
Decide on a pre-income tax analysis
·
Decide on a post-income tax analysis
Pre-income tax analysis
Recall that the basic data of the Blue Beach Hotel is as follows:
·
There are 220 rooms in the hotel
·
The hotel will be open for 365 days 
·
Annual fixed costs related to the rooms division are €6,475,002.00
·
The ADR is €165.00
·
The per-room variable cost is €24.00
Now, assume that for the management to be able to make the
purchase of the golf course at the end of the year, they need to attain
a pre-income tax profit level of €1,657,455.00. With this expectation,
the breakeven volume will be calculated as such:
The contribution margin (CM) of the Blue Beach Hotel is
CM = S – V = €165.00 – €24.00 = €141.00
The required breakeven number of rooms (X) for the Blue Beach
Hotel will now become:
X = 
= 57,677 rooms
The Blue Beach Hotel will have now to sell extra 11,755 rooms
(57,677 – 45,922) in order to be able to generate enough profit that
will permit them to carry out the purchase of the golf course.
Post-income tax analysis
Assuming now that incomes are taxed at 35%, the breakeven volume
will be computed as follows:
X = 	

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
CM
F + Post-Income Tax Desired Profit

1 – Tax rate
€6,475,002.00 + €1,657,445.00

€141.00
F + desired profit

CM
246 11 Cost-volume-profit analysis
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

X = 
X = 
X = 
X = 
X = 64006.62 This can be rounded to 64,007 rooms.
The Blue Beach Hotel will have now to sell extra 18,085 rooms
(64,007 – 45,922) in order to be able to generate enough post-income
tax profit that will permit them to carry out the purchase of the golf
course.
€9,024,933.00

€141.00
	 €6,475,002.00 + 
€1,6
1
5
–
7
3
,4
5
5
%
5.00


€141.00
€6,475,002.00 + €2,549,931.00

€141.00
	 €6,475,002.00 + 
€1,65
6
7
5
,
%
455.00


€141.00
11.3 Breakeven analysis 247
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Glossary
Breakeven analysis – see cost-volume-profit analysis.
Breakeven point – is the point at which all the costs or expenses and the
revenue are equal. At this point the net income is exactly equal to zero.
Contribution margin – is the difference between the costs of a product or
service and its selling price. It represents the revenues less all direct
operating expenses.
Contribution margin ratio (CMR) – is the proportion of sales revenue that is
contributed towards the fixed costs and or profits.
Cost-volume-profit (CVP) analysis – is a set of analytical tools that are used to
determine the levels of sales needed to be carried out at any desired profit
level. It is commonly called breakeven analysis.
Margin of safety – is the excess of expected or actual sales over the breakeven
sales.
248
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Multiple choice questions
11.1
After the break-even point in number of rooms, rooms revenue generated
during the particular period will:
a
be considered as pure profit
b cover the fixed costs of the extra room sales
c
increase at a faster rate than the variable costs of the extra room sales
d increase in proportion to the extra room sales
11.2
Which of the following does not belong amongst the common assumptions
in cost-volume-profit analysis?
a
Fixed costs do not change during the period under consideration
b Mixed costs can be reasonably divided into their fixed and variable
elements
c
Revenues vary indirectly with fixed costs
d Variable costs have a linear relationship with revenues during the period
under consideration
11.3
The Munching Moose Motel expects to sell 10,666 room nights during a
period with a per-room variable cost of €27. If total fixed costs of the period
are expected to be €351,978, what would the ADR be at the breakeven
point?
a
€60
b €65
c
€70
d €75
11.4
The Red Sands Hotel’s breakeven point is achieved when 17,750 rooms are
sold during a period. Its average daily rate (ADR) is €80, and the per-room
variable cost sold is €32. The total fixed costs for the period equal:
a
€568,000
b €852,000
c
€1,420,000
d none of the above
11.5
A motel has an average daily rate (ADR) of €50. The fixed costs for each of
the 2,200 rooms sold during a period were €15. If it has a variable cost
percentage of 20%, what is the contribution margin per room sold?
a
€15
b €35
c
€40
d €50
Exercises
11.1
A restaurant with an average food service cheque of €18 per guest has the
following average monthly figures:
Revenues
€ 850,000
Variable costs € 380,000
Fixed costs
€ 182,000
Exercises 249
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Using this information, determine the following:
a the breakeven level of revenue
b their operating income if revenues fell to €750,000
c the breakeven number of guests
d the number of guests if revenues fell to €750,000
11.2
The Gouda Split Restaurant is made up of a café and a bar. The café’s
variable cost is 45% and it provides 62% of the total revenues. The bar’s
variable cost is 36%. Determine the following:
a the café’s contribution margin
b the bar’s contribution margin
c the combined contribution margin
d the additional revenues needed if the management expects an increase of
€75,000 in net operating income
11.3
Jan Marcus recently invested €350,000 in equipment to run a rented bistro.
The income tax rate is 30%. The projected variable expenses are as follows:
Cost of food
24% of revenue
Salaries and wages
32% of revenue
Other expenses
12% of revenue
The projected annual fixed expenses are as follows:
·
Depreciation
€
35,000
·
Insurance
€
3,000
·
Rent
€
18,000
·
Salaries and wages €
72,000
·
Other
€
34,000
Using this information, determine the following:
a the breakeven level of sales
b the breakeven level of sales if Jan Marcus wants to earn 14% on €350,000
11.4
The Sunnyside Motel’s rooms department has annual revenues of
€3.000,000 with accompanying variable costs of €900,000. The motel’s food
department has annual revenues of €1,000,000 with variable costs of
€800,000. The fixed expenses of the motel are €1,100,000. The total
revenues of the Sunnyside Motel come up to €4,000,000. Proceed with the
following activities:
a calculate the breakeven point. Assume that the ratio of revenues from the
rooms and food departments stay the same at all levels of activity
b in order to boost restaurant revenues, the owners plan to carry out an
advertising campaign that will cost €5,000. Assuming room revenues stay
the same; determine the extra food revenues that need to be made to
compensate for the advertising costs.
250 11 Cost-volume-profit analysis
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Internal control
12.1
Need for internal control
12.2
Special characteristics of the hospitality
industry from an internal control perspective
12.3
Principles of internal control
12.4
Basic internal control proposals
12.5
Bank reconciliation
For the managers within hospitality operations to effectively carry out
their duties, they need information which is provided by the
management accounting system. This information should at all times
be current as well as accurate. Management will use the information
to make decisions and implement procedures that will help to
safeguard the assets of the organization, enhance their efficiency,
increase sales, and also maximize their profitability. The responsibility
for internal control lies in all the employees of the organization. It is
ultimately top management’s responsibility to ensure that controls are
in place. However, that responsibility will have to be delegated to each
area of operation. This delegation of responsibility in larger
organizations is usually done through the establishment of
organizational charts. An organizational chart which generally
establishes lines of communication and levels of authority and
responsibility within the organization is considered to be the base of
any good internal control system. Exhibit 12.1 is the top-level
organization chart of the Mövenpick Hotel Amsterdam City Centre.
In Exhibit 12.1 for example notice the lines of responsibility moving
from the executive sous-chef, through the executive chef via the
director of F & B, the hotel manager before reaching the general
manager. You will notice further that there are four different levels of
authority as separated by the different colour shades in the
organizational chart. Smaller or owner-operated organizations have
fewer levels of responsibility and consequently fewer control points.
In such organizations, the managers or owners are most of the time
present, and they generally handle those sensitive operations such as
the receipt of cash and the disbursement of cash or other payment 
251
12
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

activities. Internal control in this chapter is studied in the following
manner. Section 12.1 establishes the reasons why internal control is a
must for any organization, while Section 12.2 gives those special
characteristics that make internal control problematic within the
hospitality industry. Section 12.3 introduces the reader to those
common elements of internal control applicable to any type of
industry; while Section 12.4 based on the hotel internal control guide
lists in a summary fashion basic internal control proposals. To end the
chapter Section 12.5 introduces the internal control activity of bank
reconciliation.
12.1
Need for internal control
Internal control is that aspect of management that deals with the
prevention of fraud and embezzlement. Internal control is principally
a function of top management but also concerns everyone in the
organization. The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants
(AICPA) has defined internal control as follows:
Internal control comprises the plan of organization and all of the
coordinate methods adopted within a business to safeguard its assets,
check the accuracy and reliability of its accounting data, promote
operational efficiency, and encourage adherence to prescribed 
managerial policies. This definition is possibly broader than the 
Exhibit 12.1   Organization chart of the Mövenpick Hotel Amsterdam City Centre
Mövenpick Hotel Amsterdam City Centre
Organization Chart
Management Team
General
Manager
Human
Resources
Manager
Financial
Controller
Sr. Sales
Manager
G & C
Manager
Purchase
Manager
IT
Manager
Res-
taurant
Manager
Banquet
Manager
Front
Office
Manager
Director
of
Sales
Revenue
Manager
Chief
Engineer
Exec.
Sous
Chef
Executive
Chef
Head
Barman
Director
of F & B
Security
Supervisor
Mainte-
nance
Supervisor
Ass.
House
keeper
Hotel
Manager
Reception
Manager
Guest
Service
Manager
Executive Team
HOD
252 12 Internal control
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

meaning sometimes attributed to the term. It recognizes that a system
of internal control extends beyond those matters which relate directly
to the functions of the accounting and financial departments. A well-
developed system of internal controls might include budgetary
controls, standard costs, periodic operating reports, statistical 
analyses, a personal training program and an internal staff audit.
Four central objectives, sub-divided into two control sub-groups can
be derived from the above definition:
1
Accounting controls
·
Safeguard assets – requires the prevention of theft as well as their
proper maintenance, and spoilage reduction.
·
Ensure the accuracy and reliability of accounting data – this is
needed in order to help management make the correct decisions as
well as prevent legal actions and fines from government.
2
Administrative controls
·
Promote operational efficiency – to ensure that their products and
services will be delivered without incurring unnecessary costs.
·
Encourage the observation of management’s policies – to ensure
that all the employees keep to the internal rules and regulations of
the organization.
Internal control systems are made up of the following two requirements:
·
The existence of methods and procedures for the employees at all
levels to follow. These methods and procedures ensure that
employees keep to the management policies, operate efficiently,
and also protect the organization’s assets from waste, theft, and
embezzlement.
·
The existence of reliable forms and reports that will measure
employee efficiency and effectiveness and lead to problem
identification. These reports must be accurate, timely, and cost
effective because it will make no sense to have a control system
that will be costlier to implement than the possible losses to be
incurred in case of its non-implementation.
Controls are of two types:
·
Preventive controls, which are designed to discourage errors or
irregularities such as assigning a cash bank to each waiter, and
·
Detective controls, which are designed to discover errors or
irregularities after they have occurred as well as monitor preventive
controls such as the activities of the night auditor.
12.2
Special characteristics of the hospitality industry from an
internal control perspective
Businesses of all types have much the same type of problems related
to internal control. The hospitality industry however has certain
characteristics that make it more exposed to fraud and embezzlement.
This greater exposure makes it more difficult for internal control to be
implemented. These general characteristics can be summarized as
follows:
12.2 Special characteristics of the hospitality industry from an internal control perspective 253
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Volume of cash transactions
Despite the expansion of electronic means of settling transactions
using credit and debit cards and the use of charge accounts, many
transactions still have to be carried out using cash especially in the
bars and restaurants. Some of these outlets also operate all day and
night and this would require many shift changes. These revenue
departments do accumulate lots of cash in the course of the day and
this makes it easier for the cash to be stolen.
Size of the business
Most hospitality properties are considered to be small even if they are
part of a large chain. The various revenue departments most of the
time operate separately. This separation makes it difficult for the
properties to have enough resources that will enable them establish
robust control systems that economies of large scale can create.
Employee turnover and job status
Most of the jobs in the industry are carried out by relatively low-
skilled employees (clerks, waiters, cashiers etc) receiving lower wages
and considered lower in social status ranking. Generally filled with
part-timers and students in their search for better employment
elsewhere, the turnover rates are quite high, training levels as well as
loyalty levels are low. These conditions render it more difficult for
comprehensive and long lasting internal control procedures to be
established.
Items in inventory
Items found in hospitality inventory are generally those items that
employees would normally need for their own use – beverage and
food items as well as lodging. Additionally, some of these items are of
high value relative to their size or weight and can be easily consumed
on the spot or hidden to be taken away later. Products such as quality
wines, seafood, steak, and expensive containers of food products are
valuable to dishonest employees who might remove them for their
personal use or for sale to third parties.
12.3
Principles of internal control
The principles of internal control – sometimes referred to as elements
of internal control – apply to all types of businesses.
Institute management leadership and supervision
The management board should establish the policies at the highest
level and these should be communicated and enforced at all levels.
Employees are generally honest but may yield to temptations in the
absence of good internal control systems. Management’s involvement
in the internal control process will lead the way for the employees to
follow. It should be about ‘doing what we do’ and not only doing
‘what we tell you to do’.
254 12 Internal control
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Establish preventive instead of detective control procedures
From the adage ‘prevention is better than cure’ it is preferable to
eliminate the opportunity for theft and embezzlement than to play
the detective after the crime has been committed. In the long run,
prevention is more cost effective and productive, and with proper
preventive procedures, nothing will be left for detection.
Create effective monitoring of the control system
All existing control systems must be constantly monitored to ensure
that they still provide the needed output, and also be flexible enough
to be modified in case of need. To have employees spend time and
energy to fill in forms that are not checked is both expensive and
discouraging. If a reporting form needs to be changed or is redundant,
then it should be modified, or replaced entirely with a more adequate
one.
Maintain adequate records
An important consideration for effective internal control is to have
good written records. These forms, reports and records include such
forms as registration cards, time cards, folios, guest cheques, payroll
cheques, purchase orders and receiving reports. These documents
should be designed in such a way that all the users can easily
understand them. To make the control process easier, these
documents should be pre-numbered and they should be only
prepared at the time of the transaction to reduce the possibility of
errors. When pre-numbered documents are issued, the employee
receiving the documents should be required to sign for them to
establish responsibility and accountability for the documents. The
accounting department should oversee all documents, even though
they are actually used by employees in other departments. With good
forms, reports and records, employees will be more careful, and theft
and fraud reduced to a minimum. The types of forms, reports, and
other records used in the internal control system will depend entirely
on the size and type of establishment.
Establish written procedure manuals
Each job or activity within the hospitality industry can be described
in written form in what is called the procedure manual. This manual
should list the details of each position, describing how and when to
carry out each activity. This will permit the employees to know what
the policy and procedures are. These written procedures are
particularly important in the hospitality industry, where employee
turnover is relatively high and continuous employee training to
support the system of internal control is necessary. The procedure
manuals help maintain consistent job performance especially as new
employees are concerned, as well as in cases where employees are
called to temporarily fill in for absent colleagues.
Design the organizational chart
In very small operations, one owner/manager can effectively supervise
all the employees; however most operations are divided into various
functional areas such as general management, human resources, sales
and marketing, production, finance and accounting, and property
12.3 Principles of internal control 255
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

operations and maintenance. The organizational chart shows the
organizational structure of the operation indicating the relationships
and relative ranks of its parts and positions or jobs. The employees
must know the organizational chart and respect the chain of
command except in exceptional situations like management fraud
where the employees may be called to skip some of the links in the
chain.
Establish fixed responsibilities
Responsibility for a specific task or activity should always be given to
a single person who will then be fully informed of his or her duties
and obligations. This attribution of responsibility will permit
management to know exactly where to start investigations in cases of
problems. However, this principle should also be viewed from the
employee’s perspective. Since the employees are responsible for their
actions, they need these conditions to allow them carry out their
responsibilities effectively and no one should be allowed to interfere
in the actions except after proper delegation of the duties.
Establish proper authorization procedures and create audit trails
All business transactions must be properly authorized by the
supervisory persons. Management’s authorization can be in two
forms: general or specific. General authorization is provided to the
employees for the normal performance of their duties such as selling
the items on the menus at the listed prices. Specific authorization will
be needed in case where there are to be deviations to the general
authorization such as putting a limit to the amount of fixed assets
that can be purchased beyond which, the CEO must approve by a
written authorization. The audit trail will document each transaction
from the time that it was initiated through to the final recording of
the transaction in the operation’s general ledger. A good audit trail
creates the possibility of tracking transactions from start to finish.
Maintain a division of duties
Also referred to as separation of duties or segregation of duties, it is
the most important principle of internal control. This principle means
that no one involved in any transaction should have complete control
over the transaction. This is done by separating the custody of assets
from the recordkeeping or accountability of those assets. This
segregation of duties prevents theft and fraud and at the same time
detects theft and fraud. This principle can only be thwarted in cases of
collusion whereby two or more employees decide to defraud the
establishment by acting together.
Split responsibilities in related transactions
Responsibility for related transactions should be separated so that the
work of one employee is verified by the work of another. This keeps
one person from having too much control over assets and may
prevent their theft. Splitting responsibilities in related transactions
does not mean that there will be unnecessary and costly duplication
of work but to have two tasks that must be carried out for control
reasons done by two separate employees. The additional costs of the
second person’s time conducting the verification will normally be
256 12 Internal control
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

more than recovered in the increased net income that will result from
the reduction of losses due to undetected errors.
Establish careful selection, training and supervision procedures for
employees
In the hospitality industry, it is very important to have competent,
trustworthy and well-trained employees to ensure sustainable and
profitable operations. This will entail that hospitality establishments
should have good systems for the pre-employment screening of job
applicants, selecting the employees, providing adequate employee
orientation, on-the-job training, and periodic evaluation. Personnel at
all levels must be trained properly for them to be able to accomplish
their activities. The employees must know what their activities entail
and also how to carry them out. The employees should be able to
recognize the importance of their particular activities and jobs in the
overall objectives of the establishment. Supervisory personnel should
have the skills necessary to maintain the standards of the
establishment and motivate the personnel under their supervision.
The establishment should equally have adequate reward policies for
the employees with clearly defined future possibilities in cases of
continued employment.
Limit the number of employees with access to assets
The number of employees who have access to assets such as cash and
inventory should be limited. The more the number of employees with
access to cash or inventory, the greater the risk of losses – whether by
theft or through simple mismanagement. Responsibility for an asset
cannot be fixed in a single employee if all other employees have
unlimited and uncontrolled access to the asset. Additionally, the
quantities of such assets should be maintained at the barest
minimum. Limiting access and maintaining low quantity levels may
lead to some operational conflicts. There should be the balancing act
of ensuring that there are always enough quantities to prevent
running out of stock. The limitation of access to assets should also not
be so cumbersome that they severely restrict efficient operations.
Rotate employees and schedule mandatory vacations
Wherever feasible, employees in especially in the accounting, cash-
handling and other clerical positions should be rotated. Employees
who know they are not going to be doing the same job for a long time
will be less likely to be dishonest and job rotation prevents employees
from becoming bored from constantly carrying out the same tasks.
Rotation builds flexibility into job assignments and gives the
employees a better understanding of how the jobs relate to each other.
Scheduling mandatory vacations for all employees should be part of
management’s human resources’ policies. Employees may be
discouraged from theft or fraud if they know that during their
vacation some other person will have control of the assets under their
control and that, if theft or fraud has occurred, it may be discovered
during such a vacation. In situations where theft or fraud has not yet
occurred, the new person may discover weaknesses in the control
system that was not previously apparent. This may then lead to the
creation of new preventive internal control measures.
12.3 Principles of internal control 257
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Perform surprise checks by other employees as well as carry out
independent performance checks
Random but expected checks of cash, merchandise and inventories
should be frequently carried out by independent employees. Such
checks should be frequent but not routine and systematic. Top
management should get occasionally involved in the process. In most
hospitality operations, the independent performance checks are
carried out by the internal auditors. The internal audit is the appraisal
of the operating and accounting controls of an organization to ensure
that internal control procedures are being followed and assets are
adequately safeguarded. The internal auditors are responsible for
appraising the effectiveness of the operating and accounting controls,
and for verifying the reliability of forms, records, reports, and other
supporting documentation to ensure that internal control policies and
procedures are being followed and assets are adequately safeguarded.
All companies should undergo periodic external audits carried out by
independent external auditors. The external auditors do not only
verify the financial statements, but equally study and test the internal
accounting control system. The stronger the internal accounting
control system, the more it can be relied upon and all other things
being equal, a strong internal control system will require less external
auditing.
Establish performance standards and evaluate the results
Standards and standard costs were introduced in chapter 9 (see 9.2)
and it was indicated that their establishment provides the basis for
decision making, permits costs analysis and control, and permits the
measurement of inventory and cost of goods sold. These are all
necessary conditions for the establishment of a good internal control
system. It is also necessary to establish a good reporting system that
will be able to show that all aspects of the business are functioning
properly. Establishing the standards and reporting about them
properly will ensure that management can verify if actual results are
in line with the expected standards of performance.
Establish forms, budgets and internal reports
In order to be able to properly evaluate the results, forms and reports
providing information about all aspects of the business have to be
designed. These forms and reports will provide management with the
information needed to determine if the standards are respected and to
take corrective actions in cases of discrepancies as well on how to
improve the standards. Budgets will help to ensure that the
management goals are attained. Examples of internal reports include
the daily operations’ report, the weekly forecasts, the future bookings’
report and the annual budget.
Set up physical controls and use machines
Physical controls will include security devices and measures for
safeguarding the assets of the property such as CCTV cameras, safes,
locked storerooms, and locked storage compartments as well as
mechanical and electronic equipment used in the execution and
recording of transactions. Machines vastly reduce the possibilities of
theft or fraud and they should be set up wherever possible. Installing
258 12 Internal control
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

machines if an employee is no longer required to perform a task
manually equally has the advantage of reducing labour costs and
enhancing efficiency. Common machines include the front office
billing and audit equipment, bar and restaurant cash registers, point-
of-sale systems (POS), and mechanical or electronic drink-dispensing
bar equipment.
Bond those employees who have access to cash, records, or stores
Employees with access to cash, records, or stores as well as top
management should be bonded through an insurance policy called
the fidelity bond. The fidelity bond protects the operation from losses
incurred by employee dishonesty because the establishment is
reimbursed up to the face value of the insurance policy for the loss
suffered.
12.4
Basic internal control proposals
In this section basic internal accounting control proposals based on
the Hotel Internal Control Guide are simply indicated. It should be
noted that each hospitality operation should review the various areas
and determine which control proposals will be most suited to its
needs. As this is a basic text on management accounting, it will be out
of the scope of this book to go in detail into all the proposed control
measures in all the areas of a hospitality operation. Those interested
in further details can consult the Hotel Internal Control Guide
published by the Committee on Financial Management of the AHMA.
Front of house internal control proposals
A Room revenue
I
Establishing prices
1
Authorize room rates to be charged
2
Communicate approved room rates to appropriate parties
3
Authorize deviations from approved rates
II
Accepting reservations
1
Obtain complete and accurate reservation information
2
Accept reservations in accordance with established policies
III
Checking in the guest
1
Receive reservation information in a timely manner
2
Established approved methods of payment
3
Obtain necessary guest information
4
Train front desk personnel
5
Obtain evidence of guest check-in
6
Maintain current room status information
IV
Recording room revenue
1
Bill all occupied rooms
2
Post charges in a timely and accurate manner
3
Provide a statement of charges to the guest
4
Authorize rebates and allowances
V
Checking out the guest
1
Close out guest records in the guest ledger
2
Update the current room status
12.4 Basic internal control proposals 259
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

B Food and beverage revenue
I
Planning and pricing the menu
1
Plan, price, and periodically update menu items and
product lists
2
Authorize prices to be charged
3
Authorize officers’ cheques, complimentary meals and
discounts
4
Document guest reservation procedures
5
Establish staffing guidelines based on forecasted business
6
Establish seating rotation procedures
7
Establish and maintain adequate par stocks
8
Establish and implement suggestive-selling techniques
9
Establish and implement hospitality training programmes
10
Set up a shopping service – establish an independent
review of guest service and control procedures
II
Recording revenue
1
Establish order/entry procedures and train staff in the
proper use of the POS system
2
Authorize and account for void cheques and
transactions/adjustments
3
Verify cash transactions and settlements
4
Prove the mathematical accuracy of F & B cheques and
verify the posting of revenues and settlements
5
Calculate beverage sales potentials
6
Independently control guest/cover counts
7
Establish additional cheque controls for the restaurant
buffet
8
Audit banquet cheques
9
Establish procedures for banquet cash bars
10
Balance, post, and verify all F & B transactions by night
and income auditor
11
Record minibar consumption daily
12
Authorize steward sales
III
Minimizing general risks
1
Establish a food safety programme
2
Establish an alcohol awareness programme
C Telephone revenue
I
Establishing prices
1
Select a telephone switch
2
Select a long-distance carrier and rate structure
3
Select a call-accounting vendor
4
Establish a mark-up margin
II
Recording revenue
1
Post charges in a timely and accurate manner
2
Reconcile total charges from the call-accounting vendor
report to the total posted telephone charges
3
Establish procedures for operator-assisted calls
4
Provide a statement of charges to the guest
5
Authorize rebates and allowances
6
Establish procedures for manual systems
7
Restrict the outside operator without restricting emergency
calls
260 12 Internal control
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

III
Reviewing the long-distance invoice to guest charges
1
Review the mark-up margin
2
Review potential operator-assisted calls (e.g., overseas,
third-party charges) to guest postings
3
Review for unusual charges (e.g., 0900 numbers)
4
Review the call-accounting configuration
5
Review the call-accounting database
D Other revenue
I
Services provided by an external vendor
1
Selecting services and vendors
a
Determine whether to provide service internally or
contract outside the hotel 
b Authorize a vendor
c
Obtain a written contract with the vendor
d Establish a commission rate
e
Review the vendor’s insurance limits
2
Recording revenue
a
Establish procedures for how charges will be accepted
from the vendor
b Post charges in a timely and accurate manner
c
Provide a statement of charges to the guest
d Authorize rebates and allowances
3
Reviewing the vendor invoice to guest charges
a
Reconcile the vendor invoice to guest postings and
allowances
b Review the commission rate for accuracy
c
Audit concessionaires and outside vendors
d Ensure that the vendor has the necessary licenses and
permits
II
Services provided internally
1
Establishing prices
a
Select a recording method for sales and receipts (e.g.,
separate utlet or all through the front desk)
b Develop a system to accumulate applicable expenses
c
Authorize rates to be charged for services
2
Recording revenue
a
Bill all applicable services
b Post charges in a timely and accurate manner
c
Provide a statement of charges to the guest
d Authorize rebates and allowances
3
Controlling expenses
a
Train appropriate personnel
b Compare revenue with related expenses 
E Cashiering
I
Maintaining cash receipts – house funds
1
Provide a secure storage area
2
Limit access to cash monies
3
Define the terms and conditions for maintenance of the
house fund
4
Establish accountability for the house fund
5
Perform periodic, independent bank counts
II Maintaining cash receipts – cash banks
1
Provide a secure storage area
2
Limit access to cash monies
12.4 Basic internal control proposals 261
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

3
Define the terms and conditions for maintenance of cash
banks
4
Establish accountability for operating banks
5
Perform periodic, independent bank counts
III
Maintaining cash receipts – cash transactions
1
Post all guest payments immediately upon receipt
2
Establish a cheque log for cheques received in the mail
3
Establish accountability
4
Provide receipts for payments on accounts to guests
IV
Maintaining cash receipts – cheque cashing
1
Establish standards for cheque-cashing approval
2
Establish cheque-cashing procedures
3
Train cashiers to be alert to characteristics that may indicate
a bad cheque
V
Maintaining cash receipts – petty cash
1
Define criteria for the use of petty cash
2
Establish standards for authorizing the use of petty cash
3
Record the payment of petty cash
4
Record expenses represented by petty cash payments on a
timely basis
VI
Maintaining cash receipts – paid outs
1
Establish standards authorizing a paid out
2
Establish accountability
3
Post all paid outs in a timely and accurate manner
VIIi Maintaining cash receipts – deposits
1
Establish a system of deposits
2
Establish accountability
3
Ensure the accuracy and timeliness of cash deposits
4
Account for and secure cash deposits
VIII Maintaining cash receipts – cheque payments
1
Accept cheques for payment of accounts, advance deposits,
and miscellaneous income in accordance with established
policies
2
Post cheque payments in a timely and accurate manner
3
Provide a credited folio as a receipt of payment to the guest
IX
Maintaining cash receipts – credit card transactions
1
Apply all credit card payments to guest accounts
2
Approve credit cards
3
Post payments in a timely and accurate manner
4
Provide a credited folio as a receipt of payment to the guest
X
Controlling food and beverage revenue
1
Bill all food and beverage charges
2
Post charges in a timely and accurate manner
3
Provide a statement of charges to the guest
XI
Controlling banquet and meeting room revenue
1
Bill all banquet and meeting room charges
2
Post charges in a timely and accurate manner
3
Provide a statement of charges to the guest
XII Controlling miscellaneous revenue
1
Bill all miscellaneous charges
2
Post charges in a timely and accurate manner
3
Provide a statement of charges to the guest
262 12 Internal control
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

XIII Controlling adjustments
1
Authorize all adjustments
2
Post all adjustments in a timely and accurate manner
Back of house internal control proposals
A Purchasing
I
Ordering
1
Establish and authorize purchase specifications
2
Communicate requirement to vendors
3
Select the optimal vendor(s) and establish bid procedures
4
Implement the use of authorized purchase orders or
contracts, and requests
5
Establish and maintain purchase procedures
II
Receiving
1
Advise the receiver as to the goods expected
2
Check the quality and quantity of goods or services
received
3
Record the receipt of goods or services and establish
procedures for errors, returns, and goods received without
invoice
4
Communicate the receipt to stores and accounts payable
5
Match the receiver’s report and related purchase
documentation
III
Paying vendors
1
Ensure that purchases are properly recorded, valued,
classified, and accounted for
1
Authorize the disbursement voucher
3
Restrict access to critical forms, records, and processing
areas
4
Ensure that cash disbursements are valid, accounted for,
properly recorded, in the correct amount, and classified
B Inventories
I
Controlling the storeroom
1
Establish storeroom controls for inventory items – based on
the size of the hotel and the availability of sufficient storage
space (food and beverage; general supplies; guest supplies;
engineering supplies; non-circulating operating equipment
– china, glass, silver, and linen
2
Use forms and procedures to record the receipt and issue of
inventory stores
3
Maintain physical protection; safeguard assets
II
Controlling inventory count and valuation
1
Perform an inventory count and adjust physical records
accordingly; ascertain the reasons for the differences
2
Reconcile the perpetual record to the general ledger control
account monthly, where applicable
III
Controlling operating equipment
1
Establish a procedure for the control of and accounting for
reserve and in-use operating equipment
C Food and beverage costs
I
Purchasing and receiving
1
Establish purchase specifications to maintain consistency in
food and beverage purchases
12.4 Basic internal control proposals 263
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

2
Establish guidelines for determining the quantities of food
and beverage purchases
3
Establish procedures for the creation and maintenance of
purchasing records
4
Establish procedures for receiving food and beverage items
5
Establish procedures for goods received without invoice, for
delivery errors, and for returns
II
Storing and issuing
1
Establish physical controls and standards for the storage
and retention of perishable and non-perishable food and
beverage items
2
Secure storage areas; restrict access to authorized personnel
3
Establish requisition procedures
4
Establish procedures for transfers from one storeroom to
another, and between storerooms and food and beverage
outlets
III
Controlling daily and month-end F & B cost
reconciliations/potentials and yields
1
Establish procedures for monitoring and controlling daily
and monthly food and beverage costs
2
Establish procedures for calculating and monitoring of food
and beverage pars, standards, yields, and potentials
3
Establish procedures for recording the sales values and cost
equivalents for A & G or S & M food and beverage cheques
of officers and other employees. Include the guidelines and
authorization for application 
IV
Controlling banquets
1
Establish procedures to monitor banquet food and beverage
costs
D Personnel administration
I
Complying with government requirements
1
Require new employees to complete the necessary
immigration forms
2
Require minors to have work permits
3
Comply with minimum wage requirements
4
Comply with workers’ compensation laws
5
Comply with the equal employment opportunity
requirements
6
Maintain the necessary work related insurances
II
Following company guidelines
1
Require applicants to complete job application forms
2
Conduct reference and background checks on candidates
3
Establish fair wage guidelines
4
Monitor employees’ eligibility for insurance benefits
5
Monitor employees’ eligibility for paid vacation time
6
Conduct an annual review of each employee
7
Complete a termination checklist
8
Conduct exit interviews
9
Keep detailed employment and termination records 
E Payroll
I
Authorizing wages, salaries, withholdings, and deductions
1
Hire and retain employees only at rates, benefits, and
perquisites determined in accordance with management’s
general or specific authorization
264 12 Internal control
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

2
Determine payroll withholdings and deductions based on
evidence of appropriate authorization
II
Preparing and recording
1
Compensate company employees only at authorized rates
and only for services rendered (hours worked) in
accordance with management’s authorization
2
Correctly compute gross pay, withholdings, deductions,
and net pay based on authorized rates, services rendered,
and properly authorized withholding exemptions and
deductions
3
Correctly accumulate, classify, and summarize payroll costs
and related liabilities in the appropriate accounts and
periods
4
Make comparisons of personnel, payroll, and work records
at reasonable intervals for the timely detection and
correction of errors
III
Controlling disbursements
1
Remit net pay and related withholdings and deductions to
the appropriate employees and entities, respectively, when
due
2
Make disbursements only for expenditures incurred in
accordance with management’s authorization
3
Make adjustments to cash accounts only in accordance
with management’s authorization
4
Record disbursements at correct amounts in the appropriate
period and properly classify disbursements in the accounts
5
Restrict access to cash and cash disbursement records to
minimize opportunities for irregular or erroneous
disbursements
IV
Separating functions and physical safeguards
1
Assign function so that no single individual is in a position
to both perpetuate and conceal fraud in the normal course
of duties
2
Limit access to personnel and payroll records to minimize
opportunities for errors and irregularities
V
Reconciling banks
1
Make comparison of detail records, control, accounts, and
bank statements at reasonable intervals for the detection
and appropriate disposition of errors or irregularities
Administration internal control proposals
A General accounting and financial reporting
I
Ensuring the accuracy and completeness of the financial data
provided to various parties
1
Authorize accounting principles
2
Authorize entries and adjustments
3
Authorize the issuance of specific financial statements
4
Prepare general journal entries
5
Summarize general ledger balances
6
Combine departmental information accurately
7
Prepare appropriate disclosures
8
Protect records from hazards and misuse
12.4 Basic internal control proposals 265
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

B Loss prevention and risk management
I
Keeping guests and employees safe
1
Promote safety awareness
2
Fill out incident reports accurately and submit time on a
timely basis
II
Restricting access to the property
1
Protect the perimeter
2
Designate an employee entrance and exit
3
Restrict access to interior areas
III
Protecting the guestroom
1
Establish physical security in guestrooms
2
Inform guests of guestroom safety features
IV
Controlling keys
1
Issue keys only to employees requiring access
2
Document key issuance
3
Rekey locks
V
Protecting against fires and planning for emergencies
1
Educate all employees in fire prevention and safety
2
Maintain adequate fire protection equipment
3
Institute an emergency response and evacuation plan
VI
Evaluating the loss prevention programme
1
Establish a protection committee
2
Perform periodic safety audits
VII Reducing internal theft
1
Verify applicant information
VIII Limiting property liability and loss
1
Provide safe-deposit-box protection
2
Obtain cost-effective insurance coverage
3
Assign insurance coordination responsibilities to a qualified
individual
C Computer systems
I
Control access to computer systems and applications
II
Protect sensitive company information from accidental or
intentional misuse or disclosure
III
Establish a security administration function for each major
system
IV
Include security awareness training in the employees’ training
programme
V
Establish an appropriate environment for the equipment in the
computer room
VI
Purchase sufficient insurance coverage for all computer assets
VII Cover all major hardware with preventative maintenance
contracts, and arrange for the use of backup equipment in an
emergency
VIII Ensure the reliable installation, maintenance, and physical
security of all telecommunications
IX
Make sure all acquisitions of software and hardware are fully
justified, approved, and compatible with the existing
environment
X
Implement controls over all software and hardware changes
XI
Make sure computer systems are used effectively and for their
intended purposes
266 12 Internal control
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

D Administration
I
Controlling annual forecasts
1
Forecast revenue for each revenue centre by month, based
on forecasted occupancy
2
Forecast expenses based on the occupancy volumes used to
generate revenues
3
Review and compare monthly forecasts of revenues and
expenses
II
Controlling capital expenditures
1
Obtain, in writing, all approvals necessary to proceed with
projects
2
Prepare forms necessary for the initiation of projects:
purchase orders, major expense forms, contracts, etc.
3
Document any change of the original project, purchase
order, or contract
4
Ensure the proper payments for planned projects
5
Compare the budget to actual expenditures and planned
expenditures
6
Prepare an overview of capital expenditures made in the
previous seven years
7
Prepare a list of all projects that may be desired or needed
8
Prepare the funding amounts to be spent on projects
9
Prioritize the project listing by importance to the ongoing
operation and the objectives of management
12.5
Bank reconciliation
Bank reconciliation is an internal control activity that brings together
the cash balance in the organization’s bank statement with the cash
balance according to the accounting records within the organization.
It helps to detect any accounting, bookkeeping or banking errors.
Based on the internal control principle of separation of duties, the
bank reconciliation should be carried out by employees who have no
role in cash receipts or cash disbursements. On a regular basis
(depending on the amount of transactions carried out in the
organization’s account with the bank) a bank statement is issued by
the bank to the organization. The bank statement will show the
beginning and ending cash balances, deposits, cashed cheques,
transfers received and other transactions. In most cases, the ending
cash balance in the organization’s accounting record will not match
the amount shown in the bank statement for the period even though
they might all be correct.
The essence of the bank statement reconciliation is to bring the
organization’s bank statement balance into equality with the cash
balance per the books. Adjustments are made to the bank balance by
adding or deducting information shown in the cash balance per the
books but not yet handled by the bank. In general, bank omissions
will be deposits in transit and outstanding cheques.
Bank reconciliation is carried out in steps. It is made in two parts
leading to an adjusted bank balance and also an adjusted book
balance. These balances should become equal. Exhibit 12.2 shows a
format for bank reconciliation.
12.5 Bank reconciliation 267
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

The ± bookkeeping errors in the format (Exhibit 12.2) are explained as
follows:
·
Deduct the amount if the cheque actually issued is more than the
amount recorded in the chequebook
·
Add the amount if the cheque actually issued is less than the
amount recorded in the chequebook
·
Deduct the amount if the deposit entered in the books is more
than the amount in the bank statement
·
Add the amount if deposit entered in the books is less than the
amount in the bank statement
To illustrate how the bank reconciliation is carried out, the following example
is provided:
The Red Herring Restaurant has received its bank statement for the month
ending July 31st 2015, which shows the following:
Upon verifying the accounting records, the accountant notes that:
The 31st July current account balance in their books is €14,556.45. A deposit 
of €1,050.00 made on July 31st is not showing on the bank statement. Three
cheques of €550.00, €840.00 and €310.00 issued respectively on July 28th 2015,
Ending balance
€ 15,156.30
Service charge
€
10.15
Insufficient funds cheque
€
40.00
Exhibit 12.2 Format for bank reconciliation
Bank reconcilation
Date
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––
Ending balance per bank statement
+ Deposits in transit
– Outstanding cheques
= Adjusted bank balance
Ending balance per books
+ Unrecorded interest earned
– Unrecorded bank service charges
– Unrecorded withdrawals
– Unrecorded cheques with insufficient 
funds
± Bookkeeping errors
= Adjusted book balance
List of outstanding cheques
Date issued
Cheque number
Amount
Total
268 12 Internal control
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
.................................................................................................

July 29th 2015, and July 30th 2015 with numbers 147856, 147857, and 147858
do not also feature in the bank statement. The completed bank reconciliation of
the Red Herring Restaurant for July 31st 2015 will look as in Exhibit 12.3:
Note that the Red Herring Restaurant’s adjusted bank balance is now exactly
equal to the adjusted book balance, and this is all that bank reconciliation is
about.
Exhibit 12.3 Bank reconciliation – Red Herring Restaurant July 31st 2015
Red Herring Restaurant
Bank reconciliation – July 31st 2015
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Ending balance per bank statement
€
15.156,30
Deposits in transit
plus
€
1.050,00
Outstanding cheques
less
€
1.700,00
Adjusted bank balance
equals
€
14.506,30
Ending balance per books
€
14.556,45
Unrecorded bank service charges
less
€
10,15
Unrecorded cheques with insufficient funds
less
€
40,00
Adjusted book balance
equals
€
14.506,30
List of outstanding cheques
Date issued
Cheque number
Amount
28-07-2009
147856
€
550,00
29-07-2009
147857
€
840,00
30-07-2009
147858
€
310,00
Total
€
1.700,00
12.5 Bank reconciliation 269
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
..................................................................................................................................................................

Glossary
Accounting controls – these are those controls that are meant to safeguard the
assets and ensure the accuracy and reliability of the accounting data of the
company
Administrative controls – these are those controls that are meant to promote
the operational efficiency as well as encourage adherence to the company’s
managerial policies.
Bank reconciliation – this is an internal control activity of bringing together
the cash balance in the company’s bank statement with the cash balance
according to the accounting records within the company.
Detective controls – these are those controls that are designed to discover
errors or irregularities after they have occurred as well as monitor
preventive controls.
Organizational chart – this is a chart showing the lines of communication and
levels of authority and responsibility within an organization.
Preventive controls – these are those controls that are designed to discourage
errors or irregularities.
270
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Multiple choice questions
12.1
Which one of the following managerial accounting functions is used to
encourage the observation of management’s policies?
a
accounting controls
b administrative controls
c
capital budgeting
d operations budgeting
12.2
Which one of the following internal control tools lists the details of each
position, saying how and when to carry out each activity?
a
organization charts
b job descriptions
c
division of duties
d none of the above
12.3
In an internal control system, the primary purpose of splitting
responsibilities in related transactions is to:
a
bond the members of the personnel
b evaluate the results, forms and reports
c
prevent any employee from having too much control over the assets
d rotate the members of the personnel
12.4
Which of the following is not an effective procedure for controlling cash
receipts?
a
define criteria for the use of petty cash
b limit access to cash
c
provide a secure storage area
d train appropriate personnel
12.5
The principal purpose of bank reconciliation is to:
a
control cash forecasts
b control the cashier
c
equalize cash balances
d restrict access to the bank
Exercises
12.1
Classify the actions listed below into their control types (accounting or
administrative, as well as preventive or detective) and explain the reasons
for your selection. There is the possibility of a control action having dual
functions.
Exercises 271
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

12.2
Kristine van de Leeuw received last year the best housekeeper’s award. Now,
the general manager has offered to pay her the same rates as the hotel for
her to work 6 hours weekly at his private residence during her time off work
at the hotel. You are requested to critique this assignment handed to
Kristine by the general manager.
12.3
The June 30th 2016 bank statement of the Blue Golf Café showed a balance
of €22,556.30 with service charges of €75.42, unrecorded interests of €25.14
and an insufficient funds cheque of €480.00. The owner/manager notes
that the balance in the café’s books reads €25,706.58. A deposit of
€5,420.00 made on June 29th 2016 is not showing on the bank statement.
Three cheques of €1,340.00, €1,800.00 and €1,200.00 issued on June 28th
2016 with numbers 58404, 58405, and 58406 do not also feature in the
bank statement. The internal records show that a withdrawal was made on
June 21st by the owner/manager for an amount of €1,540.00.
Prepare the bank reconciliation of the Blue Golf Café for June 30th 2016 
12.4
The March 31st 2016 bank statement of the Slippery Road Motel showed a
balance of €17,589.00 with service charges of €38.12, and an insufficient
funds cheque of €210.00. The accountant notes that the balance in the
motel’s books is €18,712.12. A deposit of €1,750.00 made on the evening 
of March 30th 2016 is not shown in the bank statement. Two cheques of
€475.00 and €400.00 issued on March 29th and March 30th respectively 
with numbers 2341 and 2342 have also not been presented at the bank for
payment.
Prepare the bank reconciliation of the Slippery Road Motel for March 31st
2016. 
Accounting or
Preventive
Administrative
or Detective
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
Cash receipts are deposited on a daily basis
Meat is stored in the cold store at the proper 
temperatures
Supplier invoices are cross-checked each month with 
delivery statements
Surprise checks by external auditors
The internal auditor prepares the bank reconciliation 
at regular intervals
The motel uses a cash register 
The time clock is in front of the manager’s office
The work of the housekeepers is checked by a supervisor
272 12 Internal control
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Forecasting
13.1
Nature and limitations of forecasting
13.2
Understanding historical data patterns
13.3
Approaches to forecasting
13.4
Selecting forecasting methods
13.5
Forecasting in hospitality industry practice
Forecasts are the financial documents that are used to update the
operating budget of an organization. Forecasts are flexible and provide
the possibilities open to the management to carry out modifications
in the operating budget during the operating cycle. This permits the
management to take into consideration changes caused by the
economic and market conditions as well as adapting to current trends.
Forecasts are used to update the budget so that it reflects current
business levels and conditions. Forecasting involves using current
information and combining this information with established ratios
and formulas to estimate or project future business levels and
operations. Forecasting is the key management tool used to plan the
details of the daily operations in the very short term such as
tomorrow, next week or next month. For example, weekly activity
forecasts will be used to predict and develop weekly part-time
employee schedules. In Section 13.1 the nature and limitations of
forecasting are discussed; while Section 13.2 introduces the four main
patterns in historical data. Section 13.3 introduces the two main
approaches to forecasting, and the factors that determine the selection
of forecasting methods are discussed in Section 13.4. Section 13.5
closes the chapter with a brief discussion on the practically of
forecasting within the hospitality industry.
273
13
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

13.1
Nature and limitations of forecasting
As an important management tool, it is necessary to understand the
nature and limitations of forecasting. These can amongst others
include the following:
·
Forecasting deals with the future and the reliability of forecasting is
generally inversely proportional to how far the future is from the
time the forecast is made. Forecasting sales for the next day is
generally easier to carry out than to forecast the sales for the next
year. The further away the forecast period is from the date of the
forecast, the greater will be the difficulty in making the forecast as
well as the greater will be the possibility that the actual results will
differ from the forecasted figures. It should be noted however that
forecasts can always be revised as time goes by to take into
consideration the changing circumstances.
·
As forecasting is concerned with the future, it as such involves
uncertainty. Managers in the hospitality industry face uncertainties
in their daily management activities. Facing uncertainties then
should not be a problem to them. This implies that management
must gather all the required information available and make
judgments based on such information. Mathematical forecasting
cannot replace experience and individual judgment and are thus
expected to play a greater role in management decision making.
·
Most forecasting methods rely on historical data, which though
they may not be good indicators of future activity are considered to
be good starting points. Management should in such cases adjust
the forecasts by using common sense, experience and good
judgement as noted in the previous paragraph.
·
The use of forecasting techniques generally leads to precise
mathematical results that are only as good as the data that was
used in establishing the forecasts in the first place. For example, if
the forecast for occupied rooms are not good, then the forecast for
housekeeping expenses will not be reliable.
·
Since by their nature forecasts are generally less accurate than
desired, the management of the organization should consider using
more sophisticated forecasting models or tools when their costs are
justified, carry out frequent updates of the forecasts, and also plan
more carefully based on the forecasts.
·
Most of the models used in forecasting do not consider variables
that can be directly controlled by management. For example, a
forecast of restaurant sales based on historic sales revenue will have
to be adjusted in case the management has a planned marketing
campaign during the period that will have a positive impact on
their sales.
·
Due to all the preceding factors, the organization’s management
must plan to cover for the deviations between the forecast and the
actual result. They do this by automatically building in a deviation
factor of as much as 10%. For example, if actual sales historically
274 13 Forecasting
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

have exceeded forecasted sales by an average of 5%, then
management should make all necessary provisions to cover such a
deviation for the projected activity.
13.2
Understanding historical data patterns
Forecasting is based on the assumption that a pattern exists in the
available historical information that can be used in determining the
future forecasts. The job of the forecaster will then to try as much as
possible to link this historical information with the most appropriate
forecasting tool available in order to come up with the forecasts.
Historical data can be plotted into a graph which will enable the
underlying pattern to be recognized. Generally, four types of historical
patterns can be recognized: seasonal, cyclical, trend, and random
variations.
The seasonal pattern
The seasonal pattern exists when the series of data fluctuates in a
regular direction according to a particular period. This period could be
within a day (lunch as opposed to dinners); during the week (week
days as opposed to weekends); during the month (weekly variations
within the month caused for example by the spending patterns of the
inhabitants of the area in relation to their income flows); as well as
the year (high season as opposed to low season). Management should
be able to factor in such seasonal variations in their forecasts.
The cyclical pattern
The cyclical pattern results from the recurring and fluctuating levels
of activity that a business or economy will experience over a long
period of time. The five stages of the business cycle are growth, peak,
recession, trough and recovery. Due to their irregularity, frequency,
magnitude and duration variations it is much more difficult to make
forecasts based on the cyclical pattern. When plotted on a graph, it is
similar to the seasonal pattern except for the length of the pattern.
The trend pattern
The trend is the overall projection of the long-term forecast of the
activity that is being analyzed. Trends represent the general
movement of a market or of an activity. This movement is either
upwards or downwards. In general, it is best to move with the trends.
This means that if the trend is upward, then forecasts should reflect
that upward tendency and also caution should be exercised about
making forecasts in situations where the trend is downward. Trends
can vary in length from short, to intermediate, to long term.
Random variations
Historical data are also affected by random variations. Random
variation simply indicates the absence of any pattern in the historical
data. Statistical tools such as random factor analysis are normally used
to try and understand if the outlying data is caused by an underlying
trend or just simply a random event. If the random data is caused by
an underlying trend, that trend will need to be addressed and
remedied accordingly. For example, consider a random event such as a
13.2 Understanding historical data patterns 275
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

volcano eruption. Sales of breathing masks may skyrocket, and if
someone was just looking at the sales data over a multi-year period
this would look like an outlier, but analysis would attribute this data
to this random event.
These patterns can be placed for a visual effect in a graph, as shown in
Exhibit 13.1.
Exhibit 13.1 is a graphical representation of the seasonal, cyclical and
trend historical data patterns (excluding randomness) showing how
the three of them relate to each other when time and output are
plotted on a graph. Time is plotted on the x-axis whereas quantity is
plotted on the y-axis.
13.3
Approaches to forecasting
Forecasting is carried out in many different ways which range from
very simple methods to very advanced methods. The simple
approach, also called informal approach, is usually based on intuition
and most of the time reserved for very limited and specific
circumstances. Informal approaches involve the use of basic
extrapolations of recent trends to make judgments on what the future
outcome will be. The formal approaches can be sub classified into two
major categories – the qualitative forecasting methods and the
quantitative forecasting methods. For the purposes of this book, more
emphasis will be placed on the use of quantitative methods but a brief
review of some qualitative methods follows. The structure of the
subsections is as follows:
13.3.1
Qualitative forecasting methods
13.3.2
Quantitative forecasting methods
Exhibit 13.1   Graphical representation of historical data patterns
Quantity
Time
Seasonal
Cyclical
Trend
276 13 Forecasting
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

13.3.1
Qualitative forecasting methods
Qualitative forecasting methods are based on the educated opinions
of appropriate persons depending on the situation under analysis. The
most common qualitative forecasting methods are:
The Delphi method
This is a forecasting method developed by a panel of experts who
anonymously answer a series of questions; their answers are fed back
to the panel of experts, who may then change their original responses
until they arrive at a consensus on the future events as they would
affect the organization’s activities. Generally considered to be very
time consuming and expensive but advances in groupware
technology makes this method more and more feasible.
Market research
This is any organized effort to gather information about markets or
customers. This is often carried out using panels, questionnaires, test
markets, surveys, etc the outcomes of which will guide the
management in making their decisions about their future activities.
Market research is often differentiated from marketing research, which
is the process of the systematic gathering, recording, and analysis of
data about issues relating to the marketing of products and services.
Marketing research is split into two sets of categorical pairs defined
either by the target market (consumer or business) or by the method
(qualitative or quantitative).
Product life-cycle analogy
In this method, the forecasts are made based on the life-cycles of
similar products, services, or processes. The forecasts are estimated
based on the position of the product in the four stages of its life-cycle
– introduction, growth, maturity, or decline.
Expert judgment
This is generally an in-house forecasting method in which the experts
or knowledgeable persons make the forecast. It can be split into two
sub categories – the jury of executive opinion, and the sales force
estimate. The jury of executive opinion will mean that the top
executives within the organization prepare the forecasts. On the other
hand, the sales force estimate is a bottom-up approach that brings
together the forecasts of the various sales units and managers.
13.3.2
Quantitative forecasting methods
Quantitative forecasting methods are those forecasting methods that
seek to predict the future outcomes based on the use of complex
mathematical and statistical modelling, measurement and research.
By assigning a numerical value to the variables, the forecasters try to
come up with the possible future outcomes. Quantitative forecasting
methods have some specific limitations. In the first instance, they
cannot be used in the case of very limited or no available past data.
Secondly, they are based on the assumption that past observed trends
will continue. Quantitative forecasting methods are further divided
13.3 Approaches to forecasting 277
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

into two sub categories, the time series approach and the causal
approach which will now be briefly reviewed in this subsections as
follows:
13.3.2.1
Time series forecasting methods
13.3.2.2
Causal forecasting methods
13.3.2.1
Time series forecasting methods
Time series forecasting methods are based on the analysis of historical
data. A time series is a set of observations measured at successive times
or over successive periods. It is assumed that past patterns in the data
can be used to forecast future data points. For the purposes of this
text, only the basic models will be looked into.
Naïve method
The naïve method is based on using a recently observed data as the
basis of the forecast. This can be made simply by considering for
example, the sales of yesterday or last month as a predictor for the
sales of today or next month. This generally does not take into
account the effect of seasonality. Seasonality can be taken into
consideration if the forecast is made based on similar days or periods
such as sales of low season periods used as predictors of the sales of
the future low season periods.
Simple moving averages
Simple moving averages are made in the desire to eliminate as much
as possible the effects of randomness. In this model, the forecast is
based on the arithmetic mean of a given number of past data points.
In this model, the forecast is made by calculating an average of actual
data from a specified number of prior periods. With each new
forecast, the data from the oldest period is dropped and replaced with
the data of the most recent period; thus, the data analyzed is
constantly moving over time. The basic formula is
Simple moving average = 
in which
n represents the number of periods used in the moving average
N represents the total number of periods
The larger the number of periods used, the less likely it is that any
random causes will affect the moving average. In this way, to make a
monthly forecast, a 12-month moving average can be used. The 12
monthly figures for the past year are added together and then divided
by 12. For example, suppose that for the past year a restaurant’s
monthly guest visits were as shown in Exhibit 13.2.
The forecast for 13th month will be the sum of all the guests served in
the last 12 months (18009) divided by the number of months (12).
= 1500.75
18009

12
total for each of the previous n periods

N
278 13 Forecasting
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

The result is 1500.75, and this can be rounded to 1501 guests
expected to be served in the 13th month. At the end of the 13th
month, a new moving average is calculated for the 14th month by
deleting from the total guest count of the 1st month and including the
guest count for the immediately past 13th month. This is an easy way
of forecasting and updating the database is normally an easy task for
hospitality operations.
If the actual guest visits for the 13th month were 1378, then the
forecast for the 14th month will become:
= 1495.25
And this can equally be rounded to 1495 guests as forecast for the
14th month.
The primary limitation to this method is that it gives the same
importance (or weight) to each of the data values gathered over the
number of periods. This limitation is taken care of in the next models.
Weighted moving averages
Weighted moving averages are often used when adjustments to the
general formula become needed. There is first of all the linearly
weighted moving average, which is a type of moving average that
assigns a higher weighting to recent data than does the simple
moving average. This average is calculated by taking each of the data
over the given time period and multiplying them by its position in
the data series. Once the positions of the time periods have been
accounted for, they are summed together and then divided by the
sum of the number of time periods.
For example, in a 12-month linearly-weighted moving average, the
last month’s data is multiplied by 12, the previous month’s by 11, and
so on until month 1 in the period’s range is reached and this last
month is multiplied by one. These results are then added together and
Exhibit 13.2 Restaurant monthly guests’ visits
Month
Guests served
––––––––––
––––––––––––––
1
1444
2
1500
3
1192
4
1098
5
1388
6
1555
7
1682
8
1805
9
1862
10
1650
11
1445
12
1388
18009 – 1444 (1st month) + 1378 (13th month)

12
13.3 Approaches to forecasting 279
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

divided by the sum of the multipliers (12 + 11 + 10 + 9 + 8 + ... + 3 + 2
+ 1 = 78). The linearly weighted moving average was one of the first
responses to placing a greater importance on recent data. The
popularity of this moving average has been diminished by the
exponential moving average, but none the less it still proves to be
very useful.
Secondly, there is the exponential moving average which is a type of
moving average that is similar to the linearly weighted moving
average, except that more weight is given to the latest data. The
exponential moving average is also known as “exponentially weighted
moving average”. This type of moving average reacts faster to recent
data changes than the linearly weighted moving average. Exhibit 13.3
shows forecasts for the 13th month based on the data in Exhibit 13.2,
and using both the linearly weighted moving average and the
exponentially weighted moving average. Recalling that the real figures
for the 13th month were 1378, see how much closer the exponentially
weighted moving average forecast of 1483 is to the real figure
compared to the other previously used methods in this chapter.
Exponential smoothing
Exponential smoothing uses a smoothing constant and recent actual
and forecasted activity to estimate the future activity. Exponential
smoothing forecasting approaches are very useful only when
reasonably accurate and short-term forecasts are required. There are
several exponential smoothing methods and in this book, only the
basic approach is illustrated. To calculate the smoothing constant in
this basic case, only two types of readily available data are required:
the forecasts from the two past periods, and the actual activity during
the earlier of the past two periods.
Exhibit 13.3 Forecasting compared – linearly weighted moving average versus 
exponentially weighted moving average
Month
Guests
Linear
Guests × linear
Exponential 
Guests × exponential
served
weights
weights ÷ Total
weights
weights ÷ Total
––––––
––––––––
––––––––
–––––––––––––––
––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––––––
1
1,444
1
18.51
1
0.35
2
1,500
2
38.46
2
0.73
3
1,192
3
45.85
4
1.16
4
1,098
4
56.31
8
2.15
5
1,388
5
88.97
16
5.42
6
1,555
6
119.62
32
12.15
7
1,682
7
150.95
64
26.29
8
1,805
8
185.13
128
56.42
9
1,862
9
214.85
256
116.40
10
1,650
10
211.54
512
206.30
11
1,445
11
203.78
1024
361.34
12
1,388
12
213.54
2048
694.17
Total
78
Total
4095
Forecast
1,548
1,483
280 13 Forecasting
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Smoothing constant = 
The example below results in a smoothing constant of 0.33.
If the activities of the operation have been relatively stable in the last
periods, then the smoothing constant will be generally small. If on
the contrary, the activities are experiencing rapid growth, then the
smoothing constant would be expected to be large.
Based on such a predetermined smoothing constant, forecasts for any
preceding period can be determined using the following formula:
New forecast = past forecast + smoothing constant × (actual output
in the past period – past forecast)
For example, assuming that in the table above, the actual output in
period 2 was 2560 and using the smoothing constant of 0.33 the
forecast for period 3 will be determined as follows:
Period 3 forecast = 2500 + 0.33(2560 – 2500) = 2520
13.3.2.2
Causal forecasting methods
Causal forecasting methods are based on a known or recognized
relationship between the factor to be forecast and other external or
internal factors. Causal forecasting uses historical data on
independent variables, such as promotional campaigns, economic
conditions, and competitors’ actions, to carry out the predictions.
There are many different methods. The most commonly used is
regression analysis (both simple and multiple) based on a
mathematical equation that relates a dependent variable to one or
more independent variables that are believed to influence the
dependent variable. Secondly, econometric models are used and these
are systems of interdependent regression equations that describe some
sector of economic activity. Thirdly, there are the input-output models
which describe the flows from one sector of the economy to another,
and so predict the inputs required to produce outputs in another
sector. Lastly is simulation modelling which is the manipulation of a
model in such a way that it operates on time or space to compress it,
thus enabling one to perceive the interactions that would not
otherwise be apparent because of their separation in time or space. In
this chapter only the basic simple linear regression analysis model will
be presented.
Period
Forecast
Actual Output
––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––––––
1
2490
2520
2
2500
Smoothing constant
0.33
Period 2 forecast – period 1 forecast

Period 1 actual data – period 1 forecast
13.3 Approaches to forecasting 281
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Regression analysis
Regression analysis has already been introduced in chapter 9 (see
9.5.3). Simple linear regression analysis is illustrated using the data in
Exhibit 13.4 that is an extension of the hypothetical restaurant
example in Exhibit 13.2. New data related to the guests served who
consumed wine during the months is now incorporated. With this
data, the number of guests who will consume wines can be predicted
based on the knowledge of the number of guests to be served in the
period.
Using the formula y = a + bx,
in which
y represents the guests who drank wine
x represents the number of guests served in the restaurant
a is the quantity of wine sold to guests who did not eat in the
 restaurant
b is the average wine consumption by the restaurant guests
Based on the data in Exhibit 13.4, and carrying out the necessary
calculations to determine “a” and “b” (done in this case using the
Excel spreadsheet program), the regression equation becomes:
y = 38 + 0.63(x)
This formula indicates that 38 clients who did not dine in the
restaurant bought wine every month, and that amongst those who
were regularly served in the restaurant, 63 out of every 100 bought
wine while dining.
Based on this equation and assuming that the forecast for the 13th
month was 1483 restaurant guests, the forecast for those who will
drink wine will be determined as follows:
Forecast for wine sales = 38 + 0.63(1483) = 972.29 which can be
rounded to 972.
Exhibit 13.4 Data set to illustrate simple linear regression forecasting
Months
Guests
Drank wine
x
y
––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––––––
1
1444
930
2
1500
980
3
1192
775
4
1098
720
5
1388
900
6
1555
1010
7
1682
1100
8
1805
1150
9
1862
1220
10
1650
1080
11
1445
940
12
1388
980
282 13 Forecasting
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

While quantitative forecasting methods and techniques are widely
used and, when used correctly, provide an effective and defensible
method on which to base conclusions about the “reasonably-
foreseeable” future, they are often data intensive and may require
considerable effort to determine if they will be useful in any
evaluation. In general, econometric and statistical techniques are
most applicable on large-scale systems where large datasets can be
easily obtained and individual events do not obscure broader trends.
Although widely available desktop software packages can make the
task of econometric and statistical analysis less time consuming,
trained professional judgment is required to ensure that statistical
measures are accurately applied, interpreted, and summarized.
13.4
Selecting forecasting methods
The main objectives for any organization to select a forecasting
method should be based on the need to maximize the accuracy of the
forecasts and also to minimize the bias related to using the method.
With this in mind, and as concerns time series forecasting methods, it
is necessary to select the method that will give the smallest bias; give
the smallest mean absolute deviation; give the smallest tracking signal;
and support the management’s beliefs about the underlying patterns.
Additionally, other relevant factors to be considered while selecting a
forecasting method include:
·
The frequency with which the forecasts will be updated
·
The turnaround required for the required forecast
·
The size and complexity of the hospitality operation
·
The forecasting skills of the people involved in the forecasting
activities
·
The purposes for which the forecasts are made
Studies show that the lowest forecasting errors result from the use of
trend projections, moving averages, and regression analysis rather
than judgmental methods. The forecasting method used should not
be the issue, but how effective the forecasts are and their practical
value in the operation. In a small hospitality operation that can adapt
quickly to changing circumstances, most forecasting will be done
using simple methods, such as adjusting the sales for the coming
month by a certain percentage increase or decrease over last year’s or
last month’s, or by using the fairly simple moving average method.
Larger enterprises will probably use more complex methods, such as
regression analysis.
Even though the regression analysis method requires more work, it
does not require tedious manual calculations because most calculators
are programmed to perform the arithmetic once each series of X and Y
variables have been entered. Spreadsheets can be used for budgeting,
forecasting, and variance analysis. Once sales revenue forecasts have
been completed, they can be used to help determine the quantities of
items such as food and beverages to be purchased and when they
should be purchased.
13.4 Selecting forecasting methods 283
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

13.5
Forecasting in hospitality industry practice
Forecasting involves using current information and combining this
information with established ratios and formulas to estimate or
project future business levels and operations. These ratios are based on
existing relationships between revenues and expenses. These ratios
can be applied aggressively or conservatively depending on the
current management strategy.
The income statement of the organization is the main focus of
forecasting for hospitality managers as it presents the historical record
of their day-to-day activities. In the forecasting process, the actual
financial performances of the past are projected to the future through
the development of an operations budget based on whatever
forecasting method is used in the organization. Though not found in
the income statements, forecasts are included in the internal
management reports that are generally reviewed daily and weekly.
This includes reviewing actual revenues and labour costs and
comparing them to the forecast, the budget, and last year’s figures.
Any changes or differences are explained in variation reports called
critiques.
The fact that weekly forecasts are not generally included in the
monthly or accounting period income statement does not mean they
are not important. It means that they are used primarily as an internal
management tool to plan, operate, and analyze the daily and weekly
operations. In fact, operations managers spend more time with the
weekly financial information than with the income statement. This is
because they use the forecasts daily in their operations, critique the
variations daily and weekly, and make any necessary changes that will
improve performance. Effectively using the weekly forecasts and other
internal management reports generally leads to better financial
performance on the monthly or period income statements.
Forecasting includes projecting future revenues and scheduling future
expenses to maintain productivity and profit margins. The forecasting
is primarily based on volumes as expressed in rooms sold or guests
served. The amount of activity in a hotel or restaurant will require an
established level of wages and other operating expenses to deliver the
expected products and services. As business volumes increase,
additional wages and operating expenditures will be necessary to
properly deliver these expected levels of service. Likewise, when
business levels decrease, these wage and operating expenses will also
need to be reduced to maintain productivity and avoid unproductive
waste in wage and operating costs. It is important for the operations
managers to possess adequate forecasting skills that will enable them
to adjust operating expenses with expected levels of business.
284 13 Forecasting
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Glossary
Causal forecasting approaches – are forecasting approaches based on historical
data in which there is the assumption that there is a recognized relationship
between the dependent and independent variables.
Cyclical pattern – is that pattern that results from the recurring and
fluctuating levels of activity that a business or economy will experience
over a long period of time.
Delphi method – this is a qualitative forecasting method that involves a panel
of expert who anonymously answer a series of questions in a continuous
feedback system until they come to a consensus on the future events.
Exponential smoothing – this is a forecasting method that uses a smoothing
constant and recent actual and forecasted activity to estimate the future
activity.
Market research – this is a qualitative forecasting method that revolves around
the organized gathering of information about markets or customers.
Naïve method – this is the most basic time series forecasting method in which
a recently observed data is used as the basis of the forecast.
Product life-cycle analogy – this is a qualitative forecasting method in which the
forecasts are made based on the life-cycles of similar products, services, or
processes.
Qualitative forecasting methods – these are forecasting methods based on the
educated opinions of appropriate persons and emphasize human judgment.
Quantitative forecasting methods – these are forecasting methods that try to
predict future outcomes based on the use of mathematical and statistical
modelling, measurement and research.
Seasonal pattern – is that pattern that exists when the series of data fluctuates
in a regular direction according to a particular period.
Simple moving averages – these are forecasts made by calculating an average of
actual data from a specified number of prior periods. With each new
forecast, the data from the oldest period is dropped and replaced with the
data from the most recent period.
Smoothing constant – this is a value used in exponential smoothing that is
determined by using forecasts from two consecutive past periods and the
actual data from the earlier of these two periods.
285
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Time series forecasting methods – these are forecasts methods that are based on
the analysis of historical pattern assuming that past patterns can be used to
predict future outcomes.
Trend pattern – is that pattern that represents the overall projection of the
long term forecasts of the activity that is being analyzed.
Weighted moving averages – these are forecasts made by introducing weights to
moving averages.
286 13 Forecasting
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Multiple choice questions
13.1
Which one of the following statements about forecasting is true?
a
advanced forecasting methods produce results that are more reliable
than desired
b as forecasting is about the future, historical data are useless
c
forecasting is about certainty
d the reliability of forecast is inversely proportional to how far the future is
from the time the forecast is made
13.2
Which of the following types of patterns would be noticed if a graph
showing fluctuations in a business, which were consistent from year to year
during the same period of the year?
a
cyclical pattern
b random variations
c
seasonal pattern
d trend pattern
13.3
Which of the following is a quantitative forecasting method?
a
market research
b naïve method 
c
product life-cycle analogy
d the Delphi method
13.4
The Starfish diner uses a four-week moving average approach to forecast its
dinner sales. If sales for the last four weeks were €21,400, €23,600, €22,700,
and €24,300, what would be the sales forecast for the next week?
a
€22,500
b €22,750
c
€23,000
d €24,000
13.5
The Sizzling Café forecasted sale of 2,700 and 2,600 muffins respectively for
periods one and two. The actual sale of muffins in period one was 2,600.
Calculate the smoothing constant that the Sizzling Café should use to
forecast its sale of muffins for the next period.
a
0.5
b 1
c
1.5
d 2
Exercises
13.1
The Pizzeria Italia forecasts its pizza sales based on the monthly pizza sales
of the previous year adjusted by a 2% monthly growth rate. The current
average prices per pizza are €0.75 higher than the prices practiced in the
previous year. The Pizzeria Italia’s sales during the last four months of 2016
were as follows:
Exercises 287
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Forecast their pizza sales of for the last four months of 2017
13.2
The Sandy Beach Hotel’s revenues during 2016 are shown below. It is
common knowledge that the accountants of the hotel use exponential
moving averages as a forecast tool. You are asked to provide their forecast
for the first month of 2017.
13.3
The number of guests and the number of persons who took breakfast at the
Europa Hotel in 2016 are as shown below:
Months
Guests
Breakfasts
served
––––––––––
––––––––––
–––––––––––
January
2,525
2,950
February
2,400
2,525
March
2,750
3,175
April
2,725
3,075
May
3,025
3,375
June
2,975
3,200
July
2,875
3,200
August
3,000
3,350
September
2,950
3,150
October
2,850
3,125
November
2,525
2,875
December
2,275
2,513
Months
Revenues
––––––––––
––––––––––––––––
January
€ 2,234,691.50
February
€ 2,153,904.00
March
€ 2,281,956.50
April
€ 2,275,976.50
May
€ 2,479,860.00
June
€ 2,419,726.50
July
€ 2,129,765.50
August
€ 2,072,300.00
September
€ 2,377,176.50
October
€ 2,482,160.00
November
€ 2,318,538.00
December
€ 1,902,226.50
Month
Pizzas
Average
sold
price
––––––––––
––––––––––
–––––––––––
September
14500
€ 6.55
October
15200
€ 6.35
November
15950
€ 6.85
December
14700
€ 6.90
288 13 Forecasting
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

You are required to:
a determine the regression equation that can be used to forecast the number
of persons who will take breakfast based on the number of hotel guests.
b forecast the number of persons who will take breakfast in January 2017 if
they expect to have 2600 guests.
13.4
The accountant at the 100-room Afilen Hotel has developed regression
equations to forecast restaurant sales based on the number of expected
guests. The monthly equations are as follows:
Breakfast – Forecast meals = 680 + 0.75 guests
Lunch – Forecast meals = 850 + 1.40 guests
Dinner – Forecast meals = 1250 + 0.51 guests
The expected occupancy for the month of December 2016 is 75% and their
expected multiple occupancy is 35%. The average food service cheque per
meal period is as follows:
Breakfast
€10.50
Lunch
€18.75
Dinner
€23.50
You are requested to calculate the restaurant’s forecast meal period sales,
both in number of guests as well as in revenues for December 2016.
Exercises 289
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv


Budgeting and variance
analysis
14.1
The budget and the budget process
14.2
Objectives of budgeting
14.3
Approaches to budgeting and types of
budgets
14.4
Types of budgets
14.5
Variance analysis
The operating budget is a business plan that has been converted into
monetary terms. Such a plan can be the forecasted revenue and
related expenses for the next months. The budget could also be in
non-monetary terms, such as the number of house-keeping staff
needed next week. A business that does not have a budget or a plan
will make decisions that do not contribute to the profitability of the
business because managers lack a clear idea of the goals of the
business. Forecasting (see Chapter 13) and budgeting systems are
expected to reflect realistic expectations. However, in real practice,
differences will arise between actual and projected performances. It is
thus necessary that the budgeting process should include control
systems that permit immediate feedback for corrective actions to be
taken within organizations. Section 14.1 defines the budget and
introduces the budget process. Section 14.2 highlights the objectives
of budgeting. In Section 14.3, different approaches to budgeting are
illustrated, while Section 14.4 defines the various types of budgets and
Section 14.5 discusses the variance analysis.
291
14
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

14.1
The budget and the budget process
The budget is a listing of the amount of all estimated revenues which
a company expects to receive as well as a listing of all the related costs
and expenses that will be incurred in obtaining the estimated revenue
during a particular period of time.
The budget helps:
·
To provide organized estimates of future unit sales, sales revenues,
expenses, net income, staffing requirements, or equipment needs,
broken down by operating period and department.
·
To provide management with both short-term and long-term goals;
this can be used to plan all future activities.
·
To provide information for control so that the actual results can be
evaluated against the budget plans and in case of differences,
adjustments are made to correct the situation
The budgeting process is essentially about planning for the future.
Planning can be split into three types:
Long-range planning (also referred to as strategic planning)
Long range planning is about providing long-term vision and goals to
the organization. It is a planning process that attempts to coordinate
the use of resources over time. Such plans could include making
decisions about future expansion or the creation of new markets and
products.
Operational planning
Operational planning is a sub-set of long-range planning. The
operational plan describes short-term ways of achieving milestones
and explains how, or what portion of, a strategic plan will be put into
operation during a given operational period. An operational plan is
the basis for, and justification of an annual operating budget request.
A good operational plan should contain: clear objectives; activities to
be delivered; quality standards; desired outcomes; staffing and
resource requirements and implementation timetables.
Project planning
Project planning covers the detailed activities on how to accomplish a
given project such as opening a new catering outlet. Project planning
is part of project management, which relates to the use of schedules
such as Gantt charts to plan and subsequently report progress about
the project. Good project planning involves the following steps: scope
definition; determination of methods to complete the project;
creation of a work breakdown structure; identification of the critical
paths using activity network diagrams; and the estimation and
allocation of the related revenues and expenses. Once established and
agreed, the plan becomes known as the baseline which is used to
measure the project’s progress.
292 14 Budgeting and variance analysis
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

14.2
Objectives of budgeting
A budget serves five main purposes – communication, coordination,
planning, control, and evaluation.
Communication
In the budgeting process, managers in every department justify the
resources they need to achieve their goals. They explain to their
superiors the scope and volume of their activities as well as how their
tasks will be performed. The communication between superiors and
subordinates helps affirm their mutual commitment to company
goals. In addition, different departments and units must
communicate with each other during the budget process to
coordinate their plans and efforts.
Coordination
Different units in the company must also coordinate the many
different tasks they perform. For example, the number and types of
packages to be marketed must be coordinated between the service and
revenue centres to ensure that the tasks are all performed
appropriately.
Planning
A budget is the plan for the operations of an organization for a period
of time. Many decisions are involved, and many questions must be
answered. Old plans and processes are questioned as well as new plans
and processes. Managers decide the most effective ways to perform
each task. They ask whether a particular activity should still be
performed and, if so, how. Managers ask what resources are available
and what additional resources will be needed.
Control
Once a budget is finalized, it is the plan for the operations of the
organization. Managers have authority to spend within the budget
and responsibility to achieve revenues specified within the budget.
Budgets and actual revenues and expenditures are monitored
constantly for variations and to determine whether the organization
is on target. If performance does not meet the budget, action can be
taken immediately to adjust activities. Without constant monitoring,
a company does not realize it is not on target until it is too late to
make adjustments.
Evaluation
One way to evaluate a manager is to compare the budget with actual
performance. Did the manager reach the target revenue within the
constraints of the targeted expenditures? Of course, other factors,
such as market and general economic conditions, affect a manager’s
performance. Whether a manager achieves targeted goals is an
important part of managerial responsibility.
14.2 Objectives of budgeting 293
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

14.3
Approaches to budgeting and types of budgets
There are various approaches to budgeting and whichever one is used
in the organization, for the sake of consistency, it should be
maintained. It can be changed if the management has reasons to do
so, but such a change should be adequately disclosed. Summarily,
these are some of the common approaches to budgeting:
Fixed or static budgeting approach
The term static budget refers to the budget total that is set at the
beginning of a budgeting period and that is geared to only one level
of activity – the budgeted level of activity. The static budget is
appropriate for the budgeted level of activity but is not realistic for
other levels of activity, especially in cases where variable costs are
significant. If activity is 5% higher than budgeted, then some costs are
likely to be 5% higher than budgeted as well. The budget total is
usually divided into 12 equal parts for the months of the year.
The primary weakness of this type of budgeting is that it does not
allow for monthly or seasonal variations. For example, suppose the
rooms’ department budget in a hotel is based on the average year-
round rooms’ occupancy of 75%. Operating costs (e.g., payroll,
supplies, linen, and laundry) are based on this level of occupancy. If
actual occupancy dropped to 70% because of unforeseen economic
conditions, it might be difficult for the rooms’ department manager
to know, in the short run, what the new payroll level should be. The
same is true for all other expenses. Despite the fact that this is the
simplest type of budget to determine, most managers feel it is too
difficult to compare, evaluate and relate to department’s actual
performance since it does not allow for variations in levels of activity.
Flexible budgeting approach
A flexible budget is prepared based on several levels of activity within
the relevant range and it is used to plan and control spending. The
flexible budget will show the cost formula for each variable cost and
total cost (possibly including fixed costs) at all the predetermined
levels of activity. The relevant range of activity represents the range of
volume or production from a low level to a higher level. For example,
the rooms department sales revenue could be forecasted at several
levels such as 55%, 65%, and 75% occupancy levels (or as many levels
as are appropriate). As the actual year progresses, it can be determined
at which level the operation is going to fit best, and the appropriate
expense levels will have already been determined for this level. In
such situations, adjustments are much more easily made.
The two primary disadvantages of the flexible budgeting approach is
that it requires more preparation and maintenance time and that it
establishes a range of activities instead of pinpointing the actual
volume of activity.
Variable budgeting approach
The variable budgeting approach permits managers to directly link the
budget plans to the actual performance volumes. This is done through
294 14 Budgeting and variance analysis
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

the establishment of various formulas to enable the generation of a
control budget directly related to the actual performance volumes.
This is done by using predetermined standards or budgeted rates and
multiplying these rates by the actual volume, which helps in
eliminating variances that may be caused by volume differences. The
variable budgeting approach requires that all the costs elements are
properly identified into one of the following three categories – fixed,
variable or mixed. The variable budgeting approach is effective in
departments in which it is difficult to budget work load volumes such
as in the F & B department, but is less effective in departments that
have relatively fixed or routine output volumes such as in
housekeeping or property operations and maintenance. The variable
budgeting approach can be a very effective management tool but it
also requires lots of preparation, maintenance time and cost.
Incremental budgeting approach
The incremental budgeting approach assumes that for most functions,
the base budget of the prior year is generally representative of base
needs in the current year. In this case, last year’s budget is used as a
starting point for the new budget. To this base budget, a certain
number of pre-programmed increases are then made based on such
elements like the expected inflation, changes in salary levels, and the
expected variations in the overall market situation. This approach to
budgeting is steady in nature, characterized by gradual changes which
are clearly visible. It is easy to synchronize between different other
budgetary documents. The approach is simple and easily
comprehensible, and helps the managers to operate consistently in
their individual departments. Some of the major drawbacks to this
approach include the assumption that the current methodology and
cost structure is the way forward, and it encourages a “spend it or lose
it” attitude. An incremental budget tends to become obsolete quickly,
when it does not associate with the existing activity level, as well as
any changes in the resource priorities, from those which are originally
set, tend to create discontent and confusion
Kaizen budgeting approach
Kaizen is a very simple concept, formed from two Japanese characters:
“kai”, meaning “change”; and “zen”, meaning “good”. Therefore,
“kaizen”, means, “change for the better”, or “continuous
improvement”. The creator of the concept of kaizen, or continuous
improvement, was Dr. W. Edwards Deming. The kaizen budgeting
approach explicitly incorporates continuous improvement during the
budget period into the budget numbers. The approach is based on
analyzing every part of a process down to the smallest detail, seeing
how every part of the process can be improved, looking at how
employees’ actions, equipment, and materials can be improved and
lastly looking at ways of saving time and reducing waste. Kaizen is
based on the belief that the people doing a particular job will often
know better than everyone else, including their superiors, how that
job can be improved; and that they should be given the responsibility
for making those improvements. The emphasis in the kaizen
budgeting approach is on many small improvements, rather than on
quantum leaps. The budget numbers are based on changes that are yet
14.3 Approaches to budgeting and types of budgets 295
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

to be implemented, rather than on current practices or methods. For
example the cleaning time per room could be budgeted in this
approach as follows:
Budgeted cleaning time per room
1st quarter: 28 minutes
2nd quarter: 27 minutes
3rd quarter: 26 minutes
4th quarter: 25 minutes
The effects of these reduced labour times would result in
corresponding reductions in the labour expense which is one of the
primary cost drivers in the rooms department. Unless the kaizen goals
are met, the actual hours will exceed the budgeted hours in the latter
quarters of the year. Managers will explore reasons for not meeting
these goals and will make the necessary adjustments to meet these
goals. The success of the kaizen budgeting approach depends not only
on achieving the numbers, but also on delivering the anticipated
improvements.
Zero-base budgeting approach
Zero-base budgeting is an approach that requires each manager to
justify the entire budget request in detail and places the burden of
proof on the manager to justify why authorization to spend any
money at all should be granted. It starts with the assumption that zero
will be spent on each activity – thus the term “zero-base”. What a
manager is already spending is not accepted as the starting point.
Managers are asked to prepare for each activity or operation under
their control a “decision package” that includes an analysis of costs,
alternative courses of action, measures of performance, and expected
benefits. The zero-base budgeting approach claims that in building
the budget from zero, two types of alternatives should be considered
by managers:
·
different ways of performing the same activity, and
·
different levels of effort in performing the activity
Success in implementing zero-base budgeting requires linkage of zero-
base budgeting to the long range planning process, sustained support
and commitment from executive management, innovation among
the managers who make up the budget decision packages, sale of the
procedure to the employees who must perform the work necessary to
keep the concept vigorous. Sound budgeting procedure should always
require a careful evaluation of all operating facts each time the budget
is prepared. Zero-base budgeting procedure is new and unique, mainly
in the approach rather than in the basic planning and control
philosophy. It is built on the concept that what one expects in the
future will be dependent on the ability to persuade the rest of the
management team that it is deserved.
Some advantages of the zero-base budgeting approach are:
·
results in an efficient allocation of resources
·
encourages managers to find out cost effective ways to improve
operations
296 14 Budgeting and variance analysis
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

·
detects inflated budgets
·
is useful for service department where the output is difficult to
identify
·
increases staff motivation by providing greater initiative and
responsibility in decision making
·
increases communication and coordination within the
organization
·
identifies and eliminates wastage and obsolete operations
Some of its disadvantages are:
·
that managers are forced to justify every detail related to
expenditure
·
that it is difficult to implement using spreadsheets
·
that it is very time-consuming
·
that it is necessary to train managers at all levels on the concept
otherwise it cannot be successfully implemented
·
that it is difficult to administer and communicate the budgeting
process because more managers are involved in the process
Activity-based budgeting approach
The activity-based budgeting approach, which is also known as the
performance-based budgeting approach focuses on the budgeted cost
of activities necessary to produce and sell products and services. In
this approach, the construction of the budget recognises the fact that
all costs in the business are generated by the activities of the business.
Activity-based budgeting is an important element of activity-based
management that developed from the first approaches to activity-
based costing. Activity-based management is based on the premise
that since people are involved in activities, and activities consume
resources, the control of activities allows the control of costs at their
sources. Activity-based budgeting thus provides an understanding of
the linkages between the drivers behind the activities. The desire is
then to control the cost drivers. For each identifiable activity, the cost
of a unit is measured, the demand is measured, a budgeted cost is set
for each unit of activity, and the budget is designed around activity
terms. The approach involves forecasting workloads of business
processes (activities) and expressing them in financial terms to
improve performance and achieve specific goals. This approach allows
for identification of value-adding activities as well as their impact on
key performance indicators (KPIs).
Some advantages of the activity-based budgeting approach are it:
·
permits managers to recognize the horizontal flow of products,
services and activities within the organization
·
ensures an optimum allocation of scarce resources in the
organization
·
allows managers to focus on those activities that might offer
opportunities for cost savings
·
allows managers to assign costs to activities rather than averaged
over a number of products or services
·
permits the analysis of the real cost drivers that might lead to
better cost focus and targeted customer pricing
14.3 Approaches to budgeting and types of budgets 297
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Some of its disadvantages are that:
·
much effort is required in order to measure and analyse the
activities
·
it assumes that activities are linked across departments forming
cross-functional processes
·
it assumes a causal and linear relationship between the activities
and the overhead costs which might be erroneous since many
factors may drive the costs such as the sharing of costs amongst the
activities and the methods used in cost allocation
14.4
Types of budgets
Hospitality operations have different kinds of budgets (operations
budget, capital budget, department budgets (profit and service
centres), cash budget as well as the master budget just to name a few).
Budgets can generally be either long-term or short-term. A long-term
budget would be a plan for a period beyond 1 year to about 5 years.
Such long-term budgets are also called strategic budgets. Short-term
budgets could be for a day, a week, a month, a quarter, or a year. Brief
explanations of the various types of budget follow.
Operations budgets
An operations budget, also called the revenue and expense budget, is
the management’s plans of generating revenues and incurring
expenses over a specific period. For example, the revenue forecast of a
motel for a month.
Capital budgets
A capital budget is a plan for the acquisition of new – as well as the
replacement of old – plant, property and equipment. For example, the
five years’ development plans to increase the number of rooms in a
property.
Department budgets
A department budget contains the planned activities of a single
department. For revenue and profit centres, the department budget
will include all its planned revenues as well as planned expenses for
the given period as the case may be. With service centres on the
contrary, the department budget will only show the projected
expenses for the given period. Department budgets are normally
prepared for a year and then sub-divided into months.
Cash budgets
A cash budget (also called cash flow budget) is the forecast of future
cash receipts and expenditures for a particular time period, generally
in the short term. It helps managements to determine when revenues
will be sufficient to cover expenses and when the company will need
to seek outside financing.
298 14 Budgeting and variance analysis
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Master budgets
After all the organization’s objectives, goals and strategies have been
identified, the master budget is developed to express the plans in
monetary terms. It is the most comprehensive of all budgets and it
serves as a tool for communication and coordination within the
organization. It is generally prepared for a year. An illustration of the
interconnections between the various budgets within the master
budget of a mid-sized hotel is shown in Exhibit 14.1
Exhibit 14.1 brings out clearly the two main parts within the master
budget: the operations budget and the financial budget. The operations
budget begins with the sales budget and ends with the budgeted
income statement. The financial budget includes the capital budget
along with the cash budget and the budgeted balance sheet. Collections
and payments link the operations and financial budgets together along
with all the budgeted changes in balance sheet accounts.
In very small owner-operated operations, the budget will be prepared
by the owner with or without an external accounting helper. At this
level the budget might be a written plan or an unwritten mental plan
of the owner. In larger operations, many individuals get involved in
the budget preparation process (department managers and their
employees). In very organized bottom-up operations, a budget
committee will exist consisting of the department managers, the
Exhibit 14.1   Parts of the master budget of a hospitality organization
Master Budget
Operations Budget
Collections
Cash Budget
Service Centres
Payments
Capital Budget
Food and Beverage
Ending Inventory
Rooms
Payments
Sales
Cost of Sales
Income Statement
Balance Sheet
Financial Budget
14.4 Types of budgets 299
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

financial controllers, and the general manager who gives the final
approval. The committee coordinates the preparation of the budget to
ensure that the final budget package is meaningful.
14.5
Variance analysis
A variance is the difference between a budgeted amount and the
actual amount. A variance is considered to be either favourable or
unfavourable. A favourable variance is when the actual amount is
better than the budgeted amount, and is considered unfavourable if
the actual amount is worse than the budgeted amount. The structure
of the subsections is as follows:
14.1.1
Identifying and attributing variances
14.1.2
Variance analysis overview
14.1.3
Analyzing variances to ascertain causes
14.5.1
Identifying and attributing variances
The method of determining if a variance is favourable or unfavourable
depends on whether it is a sales item or an expense item. A sales
variance is favourable if actual sales are greater than budgeted sales.
An expense variance is unfavourable if actual expenses are greater
than budgeted expenses. Exhibit 14.2 illustrates favourable and
unfavourable variances and shows alternative ways of displaying the
variances.
Exhibit 14.2 Favourable and unfavourable variances and shows alternative display format
Scenario 1:
Budget
Actual
Variance
––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
Revenues
€ 150,000.00
€ 165,000.00
€ 15,000.00
favourable
Food Costs
€
56,000.00
€
51,000.00
€
5,000.00
favourable
Interest Expense
€
2,500.00
€
3,200.00
€
700.00
unfavourable
Scenario 2:
Budget
Actual
Variance
––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
Revenues
€ 150,000.00
€ 142,000.00
€
8,000.00
unfavourable
Food Costs
€
56,000.00
€
65,000.00
€
9,000.00
unfavourable
Interest Expense
€
2,500.00
€
2,200.00
€
300.00
favourable
Logic to determine variances:
More actual sales = favourable
More actual expenses = unfavourable
Alternative Format to Display Budget Variances
Budget
Actual
Variance*
––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
Revenues
€ 150,000.00
€ 165,000.00
€ 15,000.00
Food Costs
€
56,000.00
€
51,000.00
€
5,000.00
Interest Expense
€
2,500.00
€
3,200.00
(€
700.00)
* Positive numbers indicate a favourable variance. Negative numbers indicate an unfavourable variance
300 14 Budgeting and variance analysis
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

There are no uniform rules for showing favourable and unfavourable
variances. Companies may use different terms to reflect variance
conditions. For instance, the label “better” might be used to indicate a
favourable variance and the label “worse” used to indicate an
unfavourable variance. One common practice is to show favourable
variances as positive numbers and unfavourable variances as negative
numbers (usually enclosed in parentheses).
14.5.2
Variance analysis overview
Due to the very simple and direct way that variance analysis has been
illustrated in the text “Accounting for Hospitality Managers – Prof.
Raymond Cote”; this subsection will adopt his approach in its entirety
(with some little modifications). Merely knowing that a budget
variance is favourable or unfavourable does not provide enough
information to manage and control a hospitality operation. Even
favourable variances (or no variances) might result from a hidden
problem. A department manager should find out why a variance has
occurred in order to manage the department efficiently and profitably
while providing the level of guest service prescribed by company
policy. Variance analysis is possible only if the supporting data used in
preparing the budget has been retained and systematically indexed.
For example, it is not enough to show that the budgeted revenue were
€30,000.00 for a month. It is important to show in the working
papers that a €30,000.00 revenue budget was computed using a
€10.00 average food service cheque and 3,000 covers. Accurate
variance analysis requires the maintenance of precise background
data. A manager must properly interpret budget variances to perform
appropriate corrective action. Variances occur because no budgeting
method or procedure can precisely predict the future. An experienced
hospitality manager generally recognizes which variances, large or
small, should be investigated.
Generally, a revenue variance is due to price, quantity, or both. Price is
the product selling price such as average room rate or average food
service cheque. Quantity is the revenue volume stated in units, such
as rooms or covers. Variance analysis might show that a favourable
revenue variance is not necessarily a positive thing if actual revenues
are higher because of price increases coupled with lower customer
volume. Higher prices might turn customers away, beginning an
unfavourable trend.
An unfavourable revenue variance might be due to a drop in customer
volume or customers spending less because of economic conditions.
Unfavourable rooms sales might result when too many rooms are out
of order or an unrealistic average room rate is used in the forecasting
process.
An expense variance is due to cost, quantity, or both. Cost is the unit
purchase cost of an expense item. Again, quantity is the sales volume
stated in units, such as rooms or covers.
14.5 Variance analysis 301
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

A favourable expense variance could conceal future problems if the
variance results from lower food cost due to buying lower quality or
lower-than-expected payroll costs because of understaffing. Under -
staffing could lead to diminished guest service. Lower purchase
quality might be readily apparent to guests. These situations are
critical to the success of any hospitality business because unsatisfied
guests are not repeat guests.
An unfavourable expense variance could be due to overstaffing or
staffing problems, excessive or unplanned overtime pay, and/or
supplier cost increases. Finding the causes helps management take
corrective action. The staffing and overtime problems might be due to
unreliable staff or perhaps unsatisfactory supervision. Extraordinary
supplier cost increases might be resolved by a meeting with the
supplier or by a change in supplier.
14.5.3
Analyzing variances to ascertain causes
Several methods may be used to determine causes of variances. The
uncomplicated procedures are just as precise as the sophisticated
techniques. Since financial management is results oriented, a simple
method is most satisfactory.
Price is related to a revenue variance, while cost is related to an
expense variance. In either case, the quantity is always sales volume
stated in covers, rooms, or other units of measurements. The same
procedure can be used to determine the causes of revenue variances
and expense variances: the formula merely interchanges the terms
cost and price.
The acronym BAD PQ is used to aid your recall of the variance
analysis procedure. This memory aid associates the letters BAD PQ
with the following:
Budget
Actual
Difference (variance)
Price (or cost)
Quantity
The BAD PQ approach is formatted on the working paper as follows:
Price
Quantity
Budget
Actual
Difference
The next step involves entering the data in each field.
Price column:
Enter the budgeted unit selling price (or cost).
Enter the actual unit selling price (or cost).
Subtract the actual from the budgeted price (or cost).
302 14 Budgeting and variance analysis
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Quantity column:
Enter the budgeted sales quantity (covers, rooms).
Enter the actual sales quantity (covers, rooms).
Subtract the actual from the budgeted quantity.
The causes of the variance may now be determined as follows:
Price difference × actual quantity = price cause
Quantity difference × budgeted price = quantity cause
The total of these two causes must agree with the total variance on
the budgetary report.
Note that the rules of algebraic multiplication are followed in the
multiplication process, as follows:
A positive number × a positive number = a positive result 
(favourable)
A positive number × a negative number = a negative result 
(unfavourable)
Below is a demonstration of the variance analysis process.
Determining causes of a revenue variance
Assume a rooms department monthly departmental budgetary report
shows, in part, the following:
At first glance, the favourable revenue variance might seem to
indicate that there is no need to analyze the variance. This example
will reveal that even favourable variances might conceal a weakness
that requires corrective action.
The manager’s budget preparation working papers and current actual
statistics from the accounting department are shown in Exhibit 14.3.
The revenue data from the manager’s budgetary working papers and
from the accounting department are then entered (using the BAD PQ
format) as shown in Exhibit 14.4.
The actual data is subtracted from the budgeted data to arrive at the
differences. The differences need to be labelled as favourable or
unfavourable, depending on whether revenue or expenses are
analyzed. When revenues are analyzed, the following logic is used:
Month
Budget
Actual
Difference
––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
Revenues
€ 195,000.00
€ 206,500.00
€ 11,500.00
Favourable
Guest supplies
expense
€
6,000
€
6,195
€
195
Unfavourable
14.5 Variance analysis 303
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

More customers than budgeted
= Favourable
Higher selling price than budgeted = Favourable
Exhibit 14.5 shows a mixed result. The price difference of €5.00 is
favourable because the actual average room rate exceeded the
budgeted rate. The quantity difference of 50 rooms is unfavourable
because the actual rooms sold were fewer than those budgeted.
These differences are used to explain the price and quantity
components of the total variance. Exhibit 14.5 shows the completed
revenue variance analysis. The cause due to price is determined as
follows (see next page).
Price cause
=
Price difference x actual quantity
=
€5.00 × 2,950
=
€14,750.00 favourable
The cause due to quantity is determined as follows:
Quantity cause
=
Quantity difference × budgeted price
=
(50) × €65.00
=
€(3,250.00) unfavourable
Exhibit 14.4 Entering price and quantity data for revenue variance
Price
Quantity
––––––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––
Budget
€ 65.00
ARR
3,000
Rooms Sold
Actual
€ 70.00
2,950
––––––
–––––
Difference
€
5.00
Favourable
50
Unfavourable
Exhibit 14.3 Manager’s budget preparation working papers and accounting department 
statistics
Information from manager’s budget working papers
Revenue Forecast Computation:
Average Room Rate:
€
65.00
Rooms Sold
3,000
Budgeted Revenue:
€ 195,000.00
Guest Supplies Expense Budget Computation:
Rooms Sold:
3,000
Unit Cost:
€
2.00
Budgeted Guest Supplies
€
6,000.00
Current Month’s statistics reported from the accounting department:
Average Room Rate:
€
70
Rooms Sold
2,950 (€70 × 2,950 = €206,500
Guest Supplies Unit Invoice Cost:
€2.10 (€2.10 × 2,950 = €6,195)
304 14 Budgeting and variance analysis
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

The causes of the variance are then explained as follows:
Favourable variance due to price
€ 14,750.00
Unfavourable variance due to quantity
€
(3,250.00)
Net favourable variance
€ 11,500.00
The €11,500.00 favourable variance matches the revenue variance
shown earlier on the budgetary report.
Determining causes of an expense variance
Referring again to the above rooms department monthly
departmental budgetary report, it may seem at first glance that the
small (€195.00) unfavourable guest supplies expense is compensated
for by the significant favourable revenue variance. This example will
again emphasize the importance of properly interpreting budgetary
reports and carefully analyzing variances.
The manager’s budget preparation working papers and current actual
statistics from the accounting department were shown in Exhibit 14.3.
The data from the manager’s budgetary working papers and from the
accounting department is then entered as shown in Exhibit 14.6.
Exhibit 14.5 Completed revenue variance analysis
Price
Quantity
Budget
€
65.00
ARR
3,000
Rooms Sold
Actual
€
70.00
2,950
––––––––
–––––
Difference
€
5.00
Favourable
50
Unfavourable
Determining the reasons for (causes of) the €11,500.00 Favourable Revenue Variance
Variance due to Price:
Cause
Price Difference
×
Actual Quantity
=
€ 14,750.00
Favourable
Price
€5
×
65
Variance due to Quantity:
Quantity Difference
×
Budgeted Price
(50)
×
€
65.00
=
€ (3,250.00)
Unfavourable
Quantity
Total of causes
€ 11,500.00
Favourable
(net)
Proof: Variance on Budgetary Report
€ 11,500.00
Summary
Favourable variance due to Price
€ 14,750.00
Unfavourable variance due to Quantity
€
(3,250.00)
Net Favourable Variance
€ 11,500.00
14.5 Variance analysis 305
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Notice that the BAD PQ format has now been altered to BAD CQ. The
change simply reflects the terminology used in an expense analysis.
The actual data is then subtracted from the budgeted data to arrive at
the differences. The differences must be labelled as favourable or
unfavourable. When expenses are analyzed, the following logic is
used:
More guests than budgeted
= Unfavourable
Higher unit purchase cost than budgeted
= Unfavourable
While more guests are desirable in a revenue analysis, a higher guest
figure has an opposite effect on an expense analysis. More guests
imply an increase to expense; any increase to revenue or profit is
ignored when an expense variance is analyzed.
Exhibit 14.6 shows a mixed result. The cost difference of €0.10 is
unfavourable because the actual unit purchase cost exceeded the
budgeted unit cost. The quantity difference of 50 rooms is favourable
because the actual rooms sold were less than those budgeted.
(Contrary to a revenue analysis, a lower guest figure is favourable in
an expense analysis.)
These differences are used to explain the price and quantity
components of the total variance. Exhibit 14.7 shows the completed
expense variance analysis.
The cause due to cost is determined as follows:
Cost cause
=
Cost difference × actual quantity
=
€(0.10) × 2,950
=
€(295.00) unfavourable
A negative number multiplied by a positive number produces a
negative result, which is translated as unfavourable.
The cause due to quantity is determined as follows:
Quantity cause
=
Quantity difference × budgeted cost
=
50 × €2.00
=
€100.00 favourable
Exhibit 14.6 Entering cost and quantity data for expense variance
Cost
Quantity
––––––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––
Budget
€
2.00
Unit Cost
3,000
Rooms Sold
Actual
€
2.10
2,950
––––––
–––––
Diffenrence
€ (0.10)
Unfavourable
50
Favourable
306 14 Budgeting and variance analysis
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

The causes of the variance are then explained as follows:
Unfavourable variance due to cost
€(295.00)
Favourable variance due to quantity€100.00
Net unfavourable variance €(195.00)
The €195.00 unfavourable variance matches the guest supplies
expense variance shown on the budgetary report.
Exhibit 14.7 Completed expense variance analysis
Cost
Quantity
Budget
€
2.00
Unit Cost
3,000
Rooms Sold
Actual
€
2.10
2,950
––––––––
–––––
Difference
€
(0.10)
Unfavourable
50
Favourable
Determining the reasons for (causes of) the €195 Favourable Expense Variance
Variance due to Price:
Cause
Cost Difference
×
Actual Quantity
=
€
(295.00)
Unfavourable
Cost
€0.10
×
2950
Variance due to Quantity:
Quantity Difference
×
Budgeted Price
(50)
×
€
2.00
=
€
100.00
Favourable
Quantity
Total of causes
€
(195.00)
Unfavourable
(net)
Proof: Variance on Budgetary Report
€
(195.00)
Summary
Unfavourable variance due to Cost
€
(295.00)
Favourable variance due to Quantity
€
100.00
Net Unfavourable Variance
€
(195.00)
14.5 Variance analysis 307
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Glossary
Activity-based budgeting approach – is that budgeting approach that focuses on
the budgeted costs of activities necessary to produce and sell products and
services.
BAD CQ – this is an acronym for budget, actual, difference, cost, and quantity,
used as a mnemonic aid in determining causes of sales and expense
variances.
BAD PQ – this is an acronym for budget, actual, difference, price, and
quantity, used as a mnemonic aid in determining causes of sales and
expense variances.
Budget – is a listing of the amount of all estimated revenues which a
company expects to receive as well as a listing of all the related costs and
expenses that will be incurred in obtaining the estimated revenue during a
particular period of time
Capital budget – is a plan for the purchase of new, as well as the replacement
of old plant, property, and equipment.
Cash budget – is generally a short term plan of future cash, cash receipts and
expenditures.
Department budget – is a plan that contains the details of the activities of a
single department.
Fixed budgeting approach – is that approach that sets the budget total at the
beginning of the period and which is geared to only one level of activity.
Flexible budgeting approach – is that approach that sets the budget on several
levels of activity within the relevant range.
Incremental budgeting approach – is that budgeting approach that uses the prior
year’s budget as a base to which pre-programmed increases are made to take
care of elements like inflation, salary changes and the overall market
conditions.
Kaizen budgeting approach – is that budgeting approach that explicitly
incorporates continuous improvements during the budget period into the
budget figures.
Long-range planning – is the creation of long term vision and goals for an
organization.
Master budget – is the overall budget within any organization that takes into
account the entire organization’s objectives, goals and strategies. It is an
organization’s main financial planning tool.
308
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Operational planning – these are the short term ways of achieving the
milestones within a strategic plan in a given operational period.
Operations budget – is the management’s plan within a specific period related
to all its revenues and expenses.
Project planning – this involves the detailed activities on how to accomplish a
given project.
Static budgeting approach – see fixed budgeting approach
Strategic planning – see long-range planning
Variable budgeting approach – is that budgeting approach that permits
managers to directly link the budget plans to the actual performance
volumes.
Variance – this is the difference between a budgeted amount and the actual
amount, and it can be either favourable or unfavourable
Variance analysis – this is the process of identifying and investigating causes of
significant differences between the budgeted amounts and the actual
amounts.
Zero-base budgeting – is that budgeting approach that requires managers to
prepare a budget starting at zero and to justify why any authorization to
spend money should be granted.
Glossary 309
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Multiple choice questions
14.1
One of the following activities does not form part of the main purpose of
budgeting. Which one?
a
communication
b coordination
c
evaluation
d supervision
14.2
The operations budget is the management’s plan in a specific period that
relates to its:
a
cash inflows and cash outflows
b plant, property and equipment
c
revenues and expenses
d all of the above
14.3
Which of the following budgeting approaches incorporates continuous
improvements in the budgeting process?
a
flexible budgeting approach
b incremental budgeting approach
c
kaizen budgeting approach
d variable budgeting approach
14.4
The budgeting approach that identifies and eliminates wastage and obsolete
operations is:
a
activity-based budgeting approach
b fixed budgeting approach
c
static budgeting approach
d zero-base budgeting approach
14.5
In analyzing revenue variances the main logic is as follows:
a
higher selling price than budgeted is unfavourable
b lower selling price than budgeted is favourable
c
more actual customers than budgeted is favourable
d more actual customers than budgeted is unfavourable
Exercises
14.1
The Simba snack bar has 160 seats and operates 6 days every week
excluding Mondays. The seat turnover and average food service cheques per
meal period and days are as shown below:
Seat turnover
Average food service cheque
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Breakfast
Lunch
Dinner
Breakfast
Lunch
Dinner
––––––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––
–––––––
––––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
Tuesday
1.20
1.00
0.50
€
6.50
€ 10.50
€ 16.80
Wednesday
1.10
1.20
0.60
€
7.40
€ 12.30
€ 17.40
Thursday
1.40
1.30
0.50
€
7.20
€ 13.20
€ 18.60
Friday
1.30
1.20
0.60
€
7.60
€ 12.80
€ 19.40
Saturday
0.60
1.00
0.90
€
6.40
€ 12.70
€ 23.20
Sunday
0.80
0.50
0.90
€
5.80
€ 10.80
€ 16.40
310 14 Budgeting and variance analysis
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

The snack bar generates extra revenues from the vending machines installed
by external companies and for which they receive annual sums of
€5,500.00. You are requested to determine the operating budget of the
snack bar and show the details per meal period. Assume that the first day of
the year is a Monday and there are 365 days in the year.
14.2
The 75-seat Safari Restaurant’s weekly and per meal period seat turnover is
as depicted in the following table:
The average food service cheques per meal period are €6.50 for the
breakfasts, €11.50 for the lunches and €17.50 for the dinners. Determine
the operating budget for the month of June knowing that the first day of
the month was a Tuesday.
14.3
The management of the Hilltop Rest House are in the process of preparing
their budget for the next year using flexible budgeting at four different
levels of sales. The levels of sales are 65%, 75%, 85%, and 95% of their full
capacity. At full capacity their revenues are €7,300,000. Use the following to
draw up the flexible budget of the Hilltop Rest House for the next year at
the four levels of activity:
14.4
Determine the causes of the following variance:
Budget
Actual
Variance
Food sales
€48,000
€38,000
€10,000 unfavourable
Cots of sales
24.00%
Fixed salary element
€ 450,000.00
Variable salary element
28.00%
Sales and marketing
2.00%
POM & UC
1.50%
Depreciation
€ 265,000.00
Taxes
30.00%
on pre-tax income
Seat turnover
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Breakfast
Lunch
Dinner
––––––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––
–––––––
Monday
1.26
1.05
0.53
Tuesday
1.16
1.26
0.63
Wednesday
1.47
1.37
0.53
Thursday
1.37
1.26
0.63
Friday
0.63
1.05
0.95
Saturday
0.84
0.53
0.95
Exercises 311
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Information from manager’s budget working papers:
Sales forecast computation
Average cheque
€12.00
Covers
4,000
Current month’s statistics reported from the accounting department:
Average cheque
€10.00
Covers
3,800
312 14 Budgeting and variance analysis
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Capital investment
decisions
15.1
Types of capital budgeting decisions
15.2
Basic methods for making investment
decisions
15.3
Simple and compound interest
15.4
Process of discounting
15.5
Understanding factor tables
15.6
Discounted cash flow (DCF) methods
15.7
Incidence of taxes on DCF analysis
15.8
Choosing between projects
Businesses are created with the aim of existing forever. For this to
become possible, the business must be able to earn profits over a
period of years. In this case, short term gains might have to be
sacrificed in the interest of long term goals. Decisions that involve the
acquisition of equipment, land, buildings, and vehicles are examples
of decisions that businesses will periodically have to make that have
an influence on their cash flows. In the hospitality industry, the
largest investments that are normally made will be about land or
building acquisition. However these are not decisions that are made
on a day-to-day basis. Whether the opportunity involves building a
new hotel, modernizing an old one, or extending a hotel, money
must be made available and spent on what might be called a ‘capital
investment’ that is expenditure incurred now in order to produce a
stream of benefits over a period of years which will, it is hoped, result
in the firm being in a more favourable position. Capital investment
decisions differ from operating decisions by reason of the nature of
the expenditure and the length of time before the full effect of the
decision is felt.
Capital investment decisions may concern the following:
·
The acquisition or replacement of long-lived assets, such as
buildings and equipment.
·
The investment of funds into another firm from which revenues
will flow.
313
15
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

·
A special project which will affect the firm’s future earnings
capacity.
·
The extension of the range of activities of the firm.
Capital investment decisions encompass two aspects of long-range
profitability: first, estimating the future net increase in cash inflows or
net savings in cash outflows which will result from the investment;
and second, calculating the total cash outflows required to effect the
investment. Section 15.1 introduces two main types of capital
budgeting decisions managers are called to make, and in Section 15.2
the basic methods for making investment decisions are introduced.
This is followed by a review of simple and compound interest in
Section 15.3, before the discounting process is introduced in Section
15.4. The use of basic factor tables is explained in Section 15.5, to be
followed by a review of the primary discounted cash flow (DCF)
methods in Section 15.6. How taxes affect the DCF analysis is
discussed in Section 15.7, and using DCF analysis in making decisions
about alternative projects is shown in Section 15.8.
15.1
Types of capital budgeting decisions
Capital investment decisions involving cash inflows and outflows
beyond the current year are called capital-budgeting decisions.
Managers encounter two types of capital-budgeting decisions
Acceptance-or-rejection decisions
In acceptance-or-rejection decisions, managers must decide whether
they should undertake a particular capital investment project. In such
a decision, the required funds are available or readily obtainable, and
management must decide whether the project is worthwhile. The
remainder of this chapter will principally be about acceptance or
rejection decisions.
Capital-rationing decisions
In capital-rationing decisions, managers must decide which of the
several worthwhile projects makes the best use of limited investment
funds. For example, a parent corporation may limit funds provided to
a subsidiary corporation, or a corporation may limit funds provided to
a division. Under capital rationing, the combination of projects with
the highest net present value should be selected. Capital rationing is
illustrated in Exhibit 15.1 since this will be the only place in which it
will be discussed.
Exhibit 15.1 considers five proposed projects and calculates several
possible combinations and their NPV’s (see 15.6.2). In Exhibit 15.1,
projects B and C are considered to be mutually exclusive and only
€360,000.00 is available for the projects. The optimum combination is
the projects A, B, and E, because this yields the highest combined
NPV. Other feasible combinations result in a lower NPV. If the
business has little cash, it may have to borrow in order to invest in
capital assets and projects. Borrowing costs money in the form of 
314 15 Capital investment decisions
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

regular interest payments, and of course, it cannot be infinitely
expanded (there is a point, for both businesses and individuals,
beyond which it is neither sensible nor practical to borrow more
money). Whether finance comes from the existing resources or from
outside the business, management is likely to have to face difficult
decisions about which assets and projects are to be preferred.
Over time, as managers make decisions about a variety of specific
programs and projects, the organization as a whole becomes the sum
total of its individual investments, activities, programs, and projects.
The organization’s performance in any particular year is the combined
result of all the projects under way during that year.
15.2
Basic methods for making investment decisions
In analysing investment decisions many of the important facts are
unknown. The first action then is to try and reduce this uncertainty as
much as possible before the decision is made. Secondly it will be
necessary to make sure that all the data are correctly assessed and
quantified. All of these known and unknown data are transformed
into monetary terms which are then used in making the investment
decision. There are three factors that affect investment decisions:
·
The net amount of the investment required.
·
The expected net cash inflows.
·
The rate of return of the investment.
The basic methods of making investment decisions include the payback
period, the accounting rate of return and the average rate of return.
While these simple methods ignore the time value of money (see
15.4) they are quick and simple to use.
Exhibit 15.1 Capital rationing – five proposed projects
Project
Project Cost
NPV
––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––
A
€ 144,000.00
€
72,000.00
B
€ 168,000.00
€
48,000.00
C
€ 120,000.00
€
36,000.00
D
€ 240,000.00
€
96,000.00
E
€
48,000.00
€
24,000.00
Combination
Total Investment
Total NPV
––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––
A, B, & E
€ 360,000.00
€ 144,000.00
A, C, & E
€ 312,000.00
€ 132,000.00
A & B
€ 312,000.00
€ 120,000.00
A & C
€ 264,000.00
€ 108,000.00
C & D
€ 360,000.00
€ 132,000.00
D & E
€ 288,000.00
€ 120,000.00
15.2 Basic methods for making investment decisions 315
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Payback method
This method attempts to forecast how long it will take for the
expected net cash inflows to pay back the net investment outflows.
The payback period is calculated as follows:
Payback period (years) = 
To illustrate the payback period assume that the Golden Nugget
Restaurant is considering the purchase of new kitchen equipment that
will reduce labour cost. In the first scenario, the basic investment data
are the following:
In Exhibit 15.2, the estimated annual cash savings are the same for all
the years (called annuities). The payback period is calculated as
follows:
Payback period = 
= 3.75 years or to be more exact 3 years 9 months
In this first scenario the Golden Nugget Restaurant will recover its
investments in 3 years 9 months. 
Now assume that the estimated cash savings were not the same for all
the years such as shown in Exhibit 15.3.
Exhibit 15.3 shows the differential net cash savings of the Golden
Nugget Restaurant over the life of the investment. Based on this
second scenario the payback period will be determined by deducting
the succeeding estimated cash savings as shown in Exhibit 15.4 from
the project cost until the point where the overall cost would have
been recovered.
Exhibit 15.3 Investment data of the Golden Nugget Restaurant with differential net cash flows
Net investment outflow (project cost)
€ 75,000.00
Estimated cash saving in year 1
€ 12,500.00
Estimated cash saving in year 2
€ 17,500.00
Estimated cash saving in year 3
€ 20,000.00
Estimated cash saving in year 4
€ 25,000.00
Estimated cash saving in year 5
€ 30,000.00
Estimated cash saving in year 6
€ 35,000.00
Estimated useful life
6 years
Salvage value
nil
Exhibit 15.2 Investment data of the Golden Nugget Restaurant showing annuities
Net investment outflows
€ 75,000.00
Estimated annual cash savings
€ 20,000.00
Estimated useful life
6 years
Salvage value
nil
€75,000.00

€20,000.00
Net investment outflows

Average net cash inflows
316 15 Capital investment decisions
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

It is shown in Exhibit 15.4 that the payback period is exactly 4 years
because in the course of that year the entirety of the investment costs
are recovered.
The payback method has the advantage of simplicity. By advocating
the selection of projects by reference only to the speed with which
investment outflows are recovered, it recommends the acceptance of
only the safest projects. It is a method which emphasizes liquidity
rather than profitability, and its limitations may be stated to be as
follows:
·
It emphasizes the payback period rather than the useful life of the
investment, and ignores the cash flows beyond the payback period.
Hence, it focuses on breaking even rather than on profitability.
·
It ignores the time profile of the net cash inflows, and any time
pattern in the net investment outflows. Any salvage value would
also be ignored. This method, therefore, treats all cash flows
through time as having the same value, so that in the first example
given above, the value of €75,000.00 invested now is equated with
€75,000.00 of net cash inflows received over 3 years 8 months.
The problems of the payback method can be illustrated using the
example that follows.
The Unity Star Resort is considering four different investment
proposals each estimated to cost €140,000.00. The information about
the various project proposals is indicated in Exhibit 15.5:
Exhibit 15.5 Assessing the problems of the payback method
Project Code
A
B
C
D
––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––
––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––
Project costs
€ 140,000.00
€ 140,000.00
€ 140,000.00
€ 140,000.00
Cash inflows
Year 1
€
63,000.00
€
77,000.00
€
21,000.00
€
70,000.00
Year 2
€
77,000.00
€
63,000.00
€
42,000.00
€
42,000.00
Year 3
€
56,000.00
€
28,000.00
Year 4
€
70,000.00
€
28,000.00
Year 5
€
70,000.00
€
21,000.00
Payback period
2 years
2 years
3 years 3 months
3 years
18 days
Exhibit 15.4 Calculating the payback period in situations of differential net cash flows
Project cost
€ 75,000.00
Less cash saving in year 1
€ 12,500.00
equal to
€ 62,500.00
Less cash saving in year 2
€ 17,500.00
equal to
€ 45,000.00
Less cash saving in year 3
€ 20,000.00
equal to
€ 25,000.00
Less cash saving in year 4
€ 25,000.00
equal to
0
15.2 Basic methods for making investment decisions 317
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Basic payback method analysis would lead to the selection of either
Project Code A or B but it would not be able to decide between the
two projects because as it is shown in Exhibit 15.5 they both have the
same payback period.
To conclude, the payback period is often used as a screening device in
conjunction with more sophisticated models, especially in high risk
situations. Some operations will not consider evaluating proposed
projects using the NPV or IRR approaches unless their initial review
using the payback model suggests that the proposed project is doable.
Accounting rate of return (ARR)
The accounting rate of return method focuses on the incremental
accounting income that results from a project and it is calculated by
using the following formula
ARR = 
* this includes depreciation and income taxes
To illustrate the accounting rate of return method, suppose the Unity
Star Resort is considering opening a new spa and health centre and
the investment information is as contained in Exhibit 15.6.
In the accounting rate of return method, the average annual income
will be calculated. As shown in Exhibit 15.6 in the net income column
(last column), the average annual income is equal to the sum total of
€148,750.00 divided by the 10 years of the project life. The average
annual income is €14,875.00.
The accounting rate of return = 
= 9.44%
€14,875.00

€157,500.00
Exhibit 15.6 Proposed investment in a new spa and health centre by the Unity Star Resort
Proposed investment in a new Spa and Health Centre by the Unity Star Resort
Investment cost € 157,500.00
Operating
Income
Income
Year
Revenues
Cost of sales
Expenses
Depreciation
Before Taxes
Taxes 30%
Net Income
––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
1
€ 150,000.00
€ 75,000.00
€ 38,000.00
€ 11,250.00
€ 25,750.00
€
7,725.00
€ 18,025.00
2
€ 150,000.00
€ 75,000.00
€ 38,000.00
€ 22,500.00
€ 14,500.00
€
4,350.00
€ 10,150.00
3
€ 150,000.00
€ 75,000.00
€ 38,000.00
€ 22,500.00
€ 14,500.00
€
4,450.00
€ 10,150.00
4
€ 150,000.00
€ 75,000.00
€ 38,000.00
€ 22,500.00
€ 14,500.00
€
4,350.00
€ 10,150.00
5
€ 150,000.00
€ 75,000.00
€ 38,000.00
€ 22,500.00
€ 14,500.00
€
4,350.00
€ 10,150.00
6
€ 150,000.00
€ 75,000.00
€ 38,000.00
€ 22,500.00
€ 14,500.00
€
4,350.00
€ 10,150.00
7
€ 150,000.00
€ 75,000.00
€ 38,000.00
€ 22,500.00
€ 14,500.00
€
4,450.00
€ 10,150.00
8
€ 150,000.00
€ 75,000.00
€ 38,000.00
€ 11,250.00
€ 25,750.00
€
7,725.00
€ 18,025.00
9
€ 150,000.00
€ 75,000.00
€ 38,000.00
€ 37,000.00
€ 11,100.00
€ 25,900.00
10
€ 150,000.00
€ 75,000.00
€ 38,000.00
€ 37,000.00
€ 11,100.00
€ 25,900.00
€157,500.00
€148,750.00
Average incremental revenue– average incremental expenses*

Initial investment
318 15 Capital investment decisions
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Average rate of return (ARR)
A slight modification to the accounting rate of return is the average
rate of return which compares the net annual return (net after
depreciation and income taxes) to the average of the investment. The
formula is:
ARR = 
* this includes depreciation and income taxes
A project’s average investment is defined as the average accounting
book value of the investment over the life of the project. Using the
example of the spa and health centre of the Unity Star Resort, the
average investment will be determined as shown in Exhibit 15.7.
To understand how to read the content of Exhibit 15.7, note that:
·
the “book value at end of year” is the “book value beginning of
year” less “depreciation” of the year
·
the “average book value during the year” is the “book value
beginning of the year” plus the “book value end of the year”
divided by 2
The average investment is equal to the sum of the average book value
during the year for all the years divided by number of years of the
project. Thus,
= €63,000.00
This leads to an average rate of return of 23.61% calculated as follows:
= 23.61%
€14,875.00

€63,000.00
€630,000.00

10
Exhibit 15.7 Establishing the average investment of a project
Average
Book Value at
Book Value at
Book Value
Year
Beginning of year
Depreciation
End of Year
During Year
–––––
––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
––––––––––––
1
€ 157,500.00
€ 11,250.00
€ 146,250.00
€ 151,875.00
2
€ 146,250.00
€ 22,500.00
€ 123,750.00
€ 135,000.00
3
€ 123,750.00
€ 22,500.00
€ 101,250.00
€ 112,500.00
4
€ 101,250.00
€ 22,500.00
€ 78,750.00
€
90,000.00
5
€
78,750.00
€ 22,500.00
€ 56,250.00
€
67,500.00
6
€
56,250.00
€ 22,500.00
€ 33,750.00
€
45,000.00
7
€
33,750.00
€ 22,500.00
€ 11,250.00
€
22,500.00
8
€
11,250.00
€ 11,250.00
€
–
€
5,625.00
Average incremental revenue – average incremental expenses*

Average investment
15.2 Basic methods for making investment decisions 319
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

In comparison, it is noted that average rate of return has produced a
higher percentage than the previously calculated accounting rate of
return.
Both methods are quite a simple way of screening investment
proposals. They equally overcome one disadvantage of the payback
method in that they attempt to calculate the profitability of the
project. They equally have some disadvantages which can be
summarized in the following way:
·
They fail to consider the changing value of money through time
·
They treat the value of future inflows as if they were the same
today
·
They ignore the differences that may occur through time in the
rate of net cash inflows
·
The disagreement about the single method of calculating the rate
of return (average or accounting)
15.3
Simple and compound interest
Interest is the payment for the use of money over a specified period of
time and it can be calculated either on a simple or a compound basis.
This distinction is important because it will affect the amount of
interest to be earned.
Simple interest is the interest payment computed on only the amount
of the principal for one or more periods. For example, assume an
investment of €10,000.00 at 10% interest for three years; the yearly
interest payment would be €1,000.00 (€10,000.00 × 0.10). The total
interest earned over the three years would simply be €3,000.00.
Compound interest on the other hand is computed on the amount of
the principal plus any interest that would have been accumulated till
that date. This means that, the accumulated interest of each period is
added to the principal of the period before the interest of the next
period is assessed. In this way interest is earned not only on the
principal but equally on the interest earned on each preceding
principal. Using the example above the compound interest over three
years will be calculated as shown in Exhibit 15.8.
Exhibit 15.8 Compound interest illustration
Year
Principal Amount
Annual Interest
Accumulated at
at Beginning of Year
Income, 10%
End of Year
–––––
–––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––
1
€ 10,000.00
€ 1,000.00
€ 11,000.00
2
€ 11,000.00
€ 1,100.00
€ 12,100.00
3
€ 12,100.00
€ 1,210.00
€ 13,310.00
320 15 Capital investment decisions
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

In Exhibit 15.8, it is now realized that the total interest earned over
the three years becomes €3,310.00 which is higher than the interest
earned using the simple interest method.
Compound interest can be calculated more than once each year. This
could be daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, or semi-annually. When
interest is compounded more than once a year, the necessary
adjustments are quite easy to carry out. For example, if interest is
compounded semi-annually there will then be two interest periods in
the year. The interest rate, which is stated in annual terms, must be
adjusted accordingly. Thus, in the example as shown in Exhibit 15.8,
if the compounding was to be done semi-annually then the rate of 5%
would be used for each half year. Interest compounded semi-annually
based on the example contained in Exhibit 15.8 is shown in Exhibit
15.9.
Exhibit 15.9 shows the advantage of multiple compounding within
the year of interest. It is noticed that the overall interest over the three
year period on €10,000.00 rose from €3,310.00 in Exhibit 15.8 to
€3,400.96 in Exhibit 15.9. The more the number of periods within the
year that the interest is compounded, the higher the accumulated
interest would become.
Compounding can be easily done using mathematical formulas. The
formula to determine the accumulated amount of a single deposit is
as follows:
Accumulated amount = p(1 + i)n
in which
p
= principal amount
i
= rate of interest
n = number of compounding periods
Using the simple example of €10,000.00 compounded annually for
3 years at 10% as shown in Exhibit 15.8, the accumulated amount can
be determined as follows:
Exhibit 15.9 Interest compounded semi-annually
Interest compounted semi-annually
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Year
Period
Principal Amount
Annual Interest
Accumulated at
at Beginning of Period
Income, 5%
End of Period
–––––
–––––––
––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––
1
1
€ 10,000.00
€ 500.00
€ 10,500.00
2
€ 10,500.00
€ 525.00
€ 11,025.00
2
3
€ 11,025.00
€ 551.25
€ 11,576.25
4
€ 11,576.25
€ 578.81
€ 12,155.06
3
5
€ 12,155.06
€ 607.75
€ 12,762.82
6
€ 12,762.82
€ 638.14
€ 13,400.96
15.3 Simple and compound interest 321
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

€10,000.00(1 + 0.1)3 = €10,000.00(1.1)3 = €10,000.00(1.331) =
€13,310.00
Using this formula produces the same result as was done sequentially
by year in Exhibit 15.8.
15.4
Process of discounting
Discounting is the reverse of compounding. In the example and
discussions of compounding it was noted that at a constant rate of 10%,
€10,000.00 invested now is the equivalent of €13,310.00 by the end of
year 3 (assuming annual compounding). Likewise it can be said that
€13,310.00 at the end of year 3 (future amount) is equal to €10,000.00
now (present amount). The rate of interest in the discounting process is
equally referred to as the rate of discount (discount rate).
The discounting formula is the inverse of the compounding formula
and it is determined as follows:
P = F 
in which
P = present amount
F = future amount
i = discount rate
n = number of years
For example, using the illustrated figures the present value can be
determined as follows:
P =
€13,310.00 
P =
€13,310.00 
P =
13,310.00 
P =
P = €10,000.00
The processes of compounding and discounting lead to future and
present value analyses. However it will be nice at this stage to be able
to distinguish between the two. The easiest way to do so is by using
timelines. The opposing perspectives are shown in Exhibit 15.10.
€13,310.00

1.331
1

1.331
1

(1.1)3
1

(1 + 0.1)3
1

(1 + i)n
322 15 Capital investment decisions
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Future Values
Based on the directional arrows contained in Exhibit 15.10, the
timeline related to the compounding example of an investment of
€10,000.00 at 10% interest for three years will be as shown in Exhibit
15.11.
In the opposite direction the time line related to the discounting example
of €13,310.00 discounted at 10% will be as shown in Exhibit 15.12.
Notice that the only change between the two timelines is in the
direction of the arrow.
Compounding and discounting calculations can be made for any
amount, rate of interest, and any number of years. It is however easier
to use factor tables introduced in Section 15.5.
15.5
Understanding factor tables
As an alternative to using formulas in the compounding and
discounting of future and present amounts, factors that have already
been pre-calculated and established in a table form can be used. These
factors are simply derived from the formulas and they interpret the
mathematical formulas. In this section four such factor tables will be
introduced – table of future value factors for a single amount, table of
future value factors for an annuity, table of present value factors for a
single amount and lastly table of present value factors for an annuity.
Exhibit 15.10   Comparing future and present values
Now
Future Values
Present Values
Tomorrow
Exhibit 15.12   Discounted present value timeline
Now
Future
0
1
2
3
€10,000.00
€13,310.00
Exhibit 15.11   Compounded future value timeline
Now
Future
0
1
2
3
€10,000.00
€13,310.00
15.5 Understanding factor tables 323
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

1
Table of future value factors for a single amount
Exhibit 15.13 shows the various pre-calculated future value factors of
€1.00 at rates ranging from 1% to 20% and for periods 1 to 20. To
illustrate, the future value of an investment of €10,000.00 at 10%
interest for three years can be calculated as follows:
Step 1
Seek for the factor to be used in establishing this future value
Step 2
Multiply the selected factor by the principal amount to get the
future value
As such
Step 1
Seek for the factor to be used in establishing this future value
The factor to be used in establishing the future value will be found
at the intersection between the number of periods in the scenario
and rate of interest. In exhibit 15.13, and for this example, at the
intersection between 10% and 3 years is the factor 1.331000. 
Step 2
Multiply the selected factor by the principal amount to get the
future value
The selected factor of 1.331000 will now be used to multiply the
principal amount to get to the future amount. 1.331000 ×
€10,000.00 = €13,310.00.
324 15 Capital investment decisions
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exhibit 15.13 Future value factors of a single amount
Future value interest factor of €1 per period at i% tor n periods, FVIF (i,n).
Period
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
––––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
1
1.010000
1.020000
1.030000
1.040000
1.050000
1.060000
1.070000
1.080000
1.090000
2
1.020100
1.040400
1.060900
1.081600
1.102500
1.123600
1.144900
1.166400
1.188100
3
1.030301
1.061208
1.092727
1.124864
1.157625
1.191016
1.225043
1.259712
1.295029
4
1.040604
1.082432
1.125509
1.169859
1.215506
1.262477
1.310796
1.360489
1.411582
5
1.051010
1.104081
1.159274
1.216653
1.276282
1.338226
1.402552
1.469328
1.538624
6
1.061520
1.126162
1.194052
1.265319
1.340096
1.418519
1.500730
1.586874
1.677100
7
1.072135
1.148686
1.229874
1.315932
1.407100
1.503630
1.605781
1.713824
1.828039
8
1.082857
1.171659
1.266770
1.368569
1.477455
1.593848
1.718186
1.850930
1.992563
9
1.093685
1.195093
1.304773
1.423312
1.551328
1.689479
1.838459
1.999005
2.171893
10
1.104622
1.218994
1.343916
1.480244
1.628895
1.790848
1.967151
2.158925
2.367364
11
1.115668
1.243374
1.384234
1.539454
1.710339
1.898299
2.104852
2.331639
2.580426
12
1.126825
1.268242
1.425761
1.601032
1.795856
2.012196
2.252192
2.518170
2.812665
13
1.138093
1.293607
1.468534
1.665074
1.885649
2.132928
2.409845
2.719624
3.065805
14
1.149474
1.319479
1.512590
1.731676
1.979932
2.260904
2.578534
2.937194
3.341727
15
1.160969
1.345868
1.557967
1.800944
2.078928
2.396558
2.759032
3.172169
3.642482
16
1.172579
1.372786
1.604706
1.872981
2.182875
2.540352
2.952164
3.425943
3.970306
17
1.184304
1.400241
1.652848
1.947900
2.292018
2.692773
3.158815
3.700018
4.327633
18
1.196147
1.428246
1.702433
2.025817
2.406619
2.854339
3.379932
3.996019
4.717120
19
1.208109
1.456811
1.753506
2.106849
2.526950
3.025600
3.616528
4.315701
5.141661
20
1.220190
1.485947
1.806111
2.Ï91123
2.653298
3.207135
3.869684
4.660957
5.604411

The use of the future value factor table can be summarized in the
following formula:
Future amount = Factor (from the table) × Present amount
This formula can then be used to solve a variety of related problems.
Any two of the elements in the formula can be used to determine the
missing element.
2
Table of future value factors for an annuity
An annuity represents a stream of equal payments that are made at
regular intervals over a fixed period of time. Examples of annuities are
regular payments into a deposit account, monthly mortgage
payments and yearly insurance payments.
Exhibit 15.14 shows the various pre-calculated future value factors of
an ordinary annuity of €1.00 at rates ranging from 1% to 20% and for
periods 1 to 20. To illustrate the use of this factor table assume the
following: the Mata Hari Spa & Health Centre wants to invest
€25,000.00 at the end of each year for the next eight years; the
investment will be compounded annually at an interest rate of 12%.
The future value of such a stream of annuities will be determined as
follows:
15.5 Understanding factor tables 325
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
10%
12%
14%
16%
20%
Period
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
1.100000
1.120000
1.140000
1.160000
1.200000
1
1.210000
1.254400
1.299600
1.345600
1.440000
2
1.331000
1.404928
i.481544
1.560896
1.728000
3
1.464100
1.573519
Ï.688960
1.810639
2.073600
4
1.610510
1.762342
1.925415
2.100342
2.488320
5
1.771561
1.973823
2.194973
2.436396
2.985984
6
1.948717
2.210681
2.502269
2.826220
3.583181
7
2.143589
2.475963
2.852586
3.278415
4.299817
8
2.357948
2.773079
3.251949
3.802961
5.159780
9
2.593742
3.105848
3.707221
4.411435
6.191736
10
2.853117
3.478550
4.226232
5.117265
7.430084
11
3.138428
3.895976
4.817905
5.936027
8.916100
12
3.452271
4.363493
5.492411
6.885791
10.699321
13
3.797498
4.887112
6.261349
7.987518
12.839185
14
4.177248
5.473566
7.137938
9.265521
15.407022
15
4.594973
6.130394
8.137249
10.748004
18.488426
16
5.054470
6.866041
9.276464
12.467685
22.186111
17
5.559917
7.689966
10.575169
14.462514
26.623333
18
6.115909
8.612762
12.055693
16.776517
31.948000
19
6.727500
9.646293
13.743490
19.460759
38.337600
20

326 15 Capital investment decisions
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exhibit 15.14 Future value factors for an annuity
Future value interest factor of an ordinary annuity of €1 per period at i% for n periods, FVIFA (i,n).
Period
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
1
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
2
2.010000
2.020000
2.030000
2.040000
2.050000
2.060000
2.070000
2.080000
2.090000
3
3.030100
3.060400
3.090900
3.121600
3.152500
3.183600
3.214900
3.246400
3.278100
4
4.060401
4.121608
4.183627
4.246464
4.310125
4.374616
4.439943
4.506112
4.573129
5
5.101005
5.204040
5.309136
5.416323
5.525631
5.637093
5.750739
5.866601
5.984711
6
6.152015
6.308121
6.468410
6.632975
6.801913
6.975319
7.153291
7.335929
7.523335
7
7.213535
7.434283
7.662462
7.898294
8.142008
8.393838
8.654021
8.922803
9.200435
8
8.285671
8.582969
8.892336
9.214226
9.549109
9.897468
10.259803
10.636628
11.028474
9
9.368527
9.754628
10.159106
10.582795
11.026564
11.491316
11.977989
12.487558
13.021036
10
10.462213
10.949721
11.463879
12.006107
12.577893
13.180795
13.816448
14.486562
15.192930
11
11.566835
12.168715
12.807796
13.486351
14.206787
14.971643
15.783599
16.645487
17.560293
12
12.682503
13.412090
14.192030
15.025805
15.917127
16.869941
17.888451
18.977126
20.140720
13
13.809328
14.680332
15.617790
16.626838
17.712983
18.882138
20.140643
21.495297
22.953385
14
14.947421
15.973938
17.086324
18.291911
19.598632
21.015066
22.550488
24.214920
26.019189
15
16.096896
17.293417
18.598914
20.023588
21.578564
23.275970
25.129022
27.152114
29.360916
16
17.257864
18.639285
20.156881
21.824531
23.657492
25.672528
27.888054
30.324283
33.003399
17
18.430443
20.012071
21.761588
23.697512
25.840366
28.212880
30.840217
33.750226
36.973705
18
19.614748
21.412312
23.414435
25.645413
28.132385
30.905653
33.999033
37.450244
41.301338
19
20.810895
22.840559
25.116868
27.671229
30.539004
33.759992
37.378965
41.446263
46.018458
20
22.019004
24.297370
26.870374
29.778079
33.065954
36.785591
40.995492
45.761964
51.160120
This future value analysis of annuities can be verified manually as
shown in Exhibit 15.15. At the end of year 8 they would have
accumulated the sum of €307,492.32 based on an annual end of year
investment of €25,000.00 and compounded at 12%.
Step 1
Seek for the factor to be used in establishing this future value
Step 2
Multiply the selected factor by the single annuity to get the
future value of the stream of annuities
As such
Step 1
Seek for the factor to be used in establishing this future value.
The factor to be used in establishing the future value will
be found at the intersection between the number of periods in
the scenario and rate of interest. In exhibit 15.14, and for this
example, at the intersection between 12% and 8 years is the
factor 12.299693.
Step 2
Multiply the selected factor by the single annuity to get the
future value of the stream of annuities.
The selected factor of 12.299693 will now be used to multiply the annuity
of €25,000.00 to get to the future amount. 12.299693 × €25,000.00 =
€307,492.32.

15.5 Understanding factor tables 327
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
10%
12%
14%
16%
20%
Period
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1
2.100000
2.120000
2.140000
2.160000
2.200000
2
3.310000
3.374400
3.439600
3.505600
3.640000
3
4.641000
4.779328
4.921144
5.066496
5.368000
4
6.105100
6.352847
6.610104
6.877135
7.441600
5
7.715610
8.115189
8.535519
8.977477
9.929920
6
9.487171
10.089012
10.730491
11.413873
12.915904
7
11.435888
12.299693
13.232760
14.240093
16.499085
8
13.579477
14.775656
16.085347
17.518508
20.798902
9
15.937425
17.548735
19.337295
21.321469
25.958682
10
18.531167
20.654583
23.044516
25.732904
32.150419
11
21.384284
24.133133
27.270749
30.850169
39.580502
12
24.522712
28.029109
32.088654
36.786196
48.496603
13
27.974983
32.392602
37.581065
43.671987
59.195923
14
31.772482
37.279715
43.842414
51.659505
72.035108
15
35.949730
42.753280
50.980352
60.925026
87.442129
16
40.544703
48.883674
59.117601
71.673030
105.930555
17
45.599173
55.749715
68.394066
84.140715
128.116666
18
51.159090
63.439681
78.969235
98.603230
154.740000
19
57.274999
72.052442
91.024928
115.379747
186.688000
20
3
Table of present value factors for a single amount
Exhibit 15.18 shows the various pre-calculated present value factors of
€1.00 at rates ranging from 1% to 20% and for periods 1 to 20. To
illustrate, assume that the Mata Hari Spa & Health Centre expects the
following stream of net cash flows at the end of the next five years.
Exhibit 15.15 Mata Hari Spa & Health Centre proposed investment
Mata Hari Spa & Health Centre Proposed Investment
Compound values at 12% with €25,000.00 invested at the end of each year
Year
Principal Amount
Annual Interest
Accumulated at
at beginning of Year
Income, 12%
End of Year
–––––
–––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––
1
€
–
€
–
€ 25,000.00
2
€ 25,000.00
€ 3,000.00
€ 53,000.00
3
€ 53,000.00
€ 6,360.00
€ 84,360.00
4
€ 84,360.00
€ 10,123.20
€ 119,483.20
5
€ 119,483.20
€ 14,337.98
€ 158,821.18
6
€ 158,821.18
€ 19,058.54
€ 202,879.73
7
€ 202,879.73
€ 24,345.57
€ 252,225.29
8
€ 252,225.29
€ 30,267.04
€ 307,492.32

Two sets of illustration will be done at this level.
Illustration 1: The Management of the Mata Hari Spa & Health Centre
might want to know the value today of the €95,000.00 they will get
in 3 years. They also know that the rate of discount is currently 8%.
Using the present value factor table as shown in Exhibit 15.18, they
will seek for the factor at the intersection between 3 years and 8%,
and then use this factor to multiply by the principal amount of
€95,000.00. Thus, they will multiply €95,000.00 by 0.793832. The
present value then is equal to €75,414.04. This means that the
€95,000.00 they expect to get at the end of year 3 under the present
conditions of an 8% discount rate is only worth €75,414.04 today.
Similarly, they can calculate the present values for all the other
expected net cash flows for each period under conditions of 8%.
Exhibit 15.16 Mata Hari Spa & Health Centre expected net cash flows
Mata Hari Spa & Health Centre Expected Net Cash Flows
Year
Net Cash Flow
End of Year
–––––
––––––––––––––
1
€
75,000.00
2
€
85,000.00
3
€
95,000.00
4
€ 105,000.00
5
€ 115,000.00
328 15 Capital investment decisions
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exhibit 15.18 Present value factors of a single amount
Present value interest factor of €1 per period at i% tor n periods, PVIF (i,n).
Period
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
––––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
1
0.990099
0.980392
0.970874
0.961538
0.952381
0.943396
0.934579
0.925926
0.917431
2
0.980296
0.961169
0.942596
0.924556
0.907029
0.889996
0.873439
0.857339
0.841680
3
0.970590
0.942322
0.915142
0.888996
0.863838
0.839619
0.816298
0.793832
0.772183
4
0.960980
0.923845
0.888487
0.854804
0.822702
0.792094
0.762895
0.735030
0.708425
5
0.951466
0.905731
0.862609
0.821927
0.783526
0.747258
0.712986
0.680583
0.649931
6
0.942045
0.887971
0.837484
0.790315
0.746215
0.704961
0.666342
0.630170
0.596267
7
0.932718
0.870560
0.813092
0.759918
0.710681
0.665057
0.622750
0.583490
0.547034
8
0.923483
0.853490
0.789409
0.730690
0.676839
0.627412
0.582009
0.540269
0.501866
9
0.914340
0.836755
0.766417
0.702587
0.644609
0.591898
0.543934
0.500249
0.460428
10
0.905287
0.820348
0.744094
0.675564
0.613913
0.558395
0.508349
0.463193
0.422411
11
0.896324
0.804263
0.722421
0.649581
0.584679
0.526788
0.475093
0.428883
0.387533
12
0.887449
0.788493
0.701380
0.624597
0.556837
0.496969
0.444012
0.397114
0.355535
13
0.878663
0.773033
0.680951
0.600574
0.530321
0.468839
0.414964
0.367698
0.326179
14
0.869963
0.757875
0.661118
0.577475
0.505068
0.442301
0.387817
0.340461
0.299246
15
0.861349
0.743015
0.641862
0.555265
0.481017
0.417265
0.362446
0.315242
0.274538
16
0.852821
0.728446
0.623167
0.533908
0.458112
0.393646
0.338735
0.291890
0.251870
17
0.844377
0.714163
0.605016
0.513373
0.436297
0.371364
0.316574
0.270269
0.231073
18
0.836017
0.700159
0.587395
0.493628
0.415521
0.350344
0.295864
0.250249
0.211994
19
0.827740
0.686431
0.570286
0.474642
0.395734
0.330513
0.276508
0.231712
0.194490
20
0.819544
0.672971
0.553676
0.456387
0.376889
0.311805
0.258419
0.214548
0.178431

Illustration 2: Assume now that the Management of the Mata Hari Spa
and Health Centre are conscious of the fact that the rates could be
rising year on year in the following order 8% for years 1 and 2, 10% for
years 3 and 4 and finally 12% for year 5. Based on these, they will
present the factors as shown in Exhibit 15.17, as collected from Exhibit
15.18 to establish the present values of the expected net cash flows.
The selection of the correct factors is based on the ability to identify
the correct rate of discount and relating it to its appropriate period.
Exhibit 15.17 Mata Hari Spa & Health Centre expected net cash flows
Present Values of Mata Hari Spa & Health Centre’s Expected Net Cash Flows
Year
Net Cash Flow
Discount Rate
Discount
Present
End of Year
to be Used
Factor
Value
–––––
––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
–––––––––
––––––––––––
1
€ 75,000.00
8.00%
0.925926
€ 69,444.45
2
€ 85,000.00
8.00%
0.857339
€ 72,873.82
3
€ 95,000.00
10.00%
0.751315
€ 71,374.93
4
€ 105,000.00
10.00%
0.683013
€ 71,716.37
5
€ 115,000.00
12.00%
0.567427
€ 65,254.11
15.5 Understanding factor tables 329
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
10%
12%
14%
16%
20%
Period
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
0.909091
0.892857
0.877193
0.862069
0.833333
1
0.826446
0.797194
0.769468
0.743163
0.694444
2
0.751315
0.711780
0.674972
0.640658
0.578704
3
0.683013
0.635518
0.592080
0.552291
0.482253
4
0.620921
0.567427
0.519369
0.476113
0.401878
5
0.564474
0.506631
0.455587
0.410442
0.334898
6
0.513158
0.452349
0.399637
0.353830
0.279082
7
0.466507
0.403883
0.350559
0.305025
0.232568
8
0.424098
0.360610
0.307508
0.262953
0.193807
9
0.385543
0.321973
0.269744
0226684
0.161506
10
0.350494
0.287476
0.236617
0.195417
0.134588
11
0.318631
0.256675
0.207559
0.168463
0.112157
12
0.289664
0.229174
0.182069
0.145227
0.093464
13
0.263331
0.204620
0.159710
0.125195
0.077887
14
0.239392
0.182696
0.140096
0.107927
0.064905
15
0.217629
0.163122
0.122892
0.093041
0.054088
16
0.197845
0.145644
0.107800
0.080207
0.045073
17
0.179859
0.130040
0.094561
0.069144
0.037561
18
0.163508
0.116107
0.082948
0.059607
0.031301
19
0.148644
0.103667
0.072762
0.051385
0.026084
20

330 15 Capital investment decisions
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exhibit 15.19 Present value factors of an annuity
Present value interest factor of an (ordinary) annuity of €1 per period at i% for n periods, PVIFA (i,n).
Period
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
––––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
1
0.990099
0.980392
0.970874
0.961538
0.952381
0.943396
0.934579
0.925926
0.917431
2
1.970395
1.941561
1.913470
1.886095
1.859410
1.833393
1.808018
1.783265
1.759111
3
2.940985
2.883883
2.828611
2.775091
2.723248
2.673012
2.624316
2.577097
2.531295
4
3.901966
3.807729
3.717098
3.629895
3.545951
3.465106
3.387211
3.312127
3.239720
5
4.853431
4.713460
4.579707
4.451822
4.329477
4.212364
4.100197
3.992710
3.889651
6
5.795476
5.601431
5.417191
5.242137
5.075692
4.917324
4.766540
4.622880
4.485919
7
6.728195
6.471991
6.230283
6.002055
5.786373
5.582381
5.389289
5.206370
5.032953
8
7.651678
7.325481
7.019692
6.732745
6.463213
6.209794
5.971299
5.746639
5.534819
9
8.566018
8.162237
7.786109
7.435332
7.107822
6.801692
6.515232
6.246888
5.995247
10
9.471305
8.982585
8.530203
8.110896
7.721735
7.360087
7.023582
6.710081
6.417658
11
10.367628
9.786848
9.252624
8.760477
8.306414
7.886875
7.498674
7.138964
6.805191
12
11.255077
10.575341
9.954004
9.385074
8.863252
8.383844
7.942686
7.536078
7.160725
13
12.133740
11.348374
10.634955
9.985648
9.393573
8.852683
8.357651
7.903776
7.486904
14
13.003703
12.106249
11.296073
10.563123
9.898641
9.294984
8.745468
8.244237
7.786150
15
13.865053
12.849264
11.937935
11.118387
10.379658
9.712249
9.107914
8.559479
8.060688
16
14.717874
13.577709
12.561102
11.652296
10.837770
10.105895
9.446649
8.851369
8.312558
17
15.562251
14.291872
13.166118
12.165669
11.274066
10.477260
9.763223
9.121638
8.543631
18
16.398269
14.992031
13.753513
12.659297
11.689587
10.827603
10.059087
9.371887
8.755625
19
17.226008
15.678462
14.323799
13.133939
12.085321
11.158116
10.335595
9.603599
8.950115
20
18.045553
16.351433
14.877475
13.590326
12.462210
11.469921
10.594014
9.818147
9.128546
4
Table of present value factors for an annuity
Exhibit 15.19 shows the various pre-calculated present value factors
for an annuity of €1.00 at rates ranging from 1% to 20% and for
periods 1 to 20. To illustrate the use of the factor table of annuities
assume that the Old-timers’ Motel has a mortgage in which the
annuity is €90,000.00 and has to be paid back in 10 years. The
mortgage was taken at a rate of 6%. This can be shown as in Exhibit
15.20:
Exhibit 15.20 Annual mortgage repayment schedule for the Old-timers’ Motel
The Old-timers’ Motel
Year
Annual Mortgage
Repayment
–––––
––––––––––––––––
1
€ 90,000.00
2
€ 90,000.00
3
€ 90,000.00
4
€ 90,000.00
5
€ 90,000.00
6
€ 90,000.00
7
€ 90,000.00
8
€ 90,000.00
9
€ 90,000.00
10
€ 90,000.00

15.5 Understanding factor tables 331
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
10%
12%
14%
16%
20%
Period
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
0.909091
0.892857
0.877193
0.862069
0.833333
1
1.735537
1.690051
1.646661
1.605232
1.527778
2
2.486852
2.401831
2.321632
2.245890
2.106481
3
3.169865
3.037349
2.913712
2.798181
2.588735
4
3.790787
3.604776
3.433081
3.274294
2.990612
5
4.355261
4.111407
3.888668
3.684736
3.325510
6
4.868419
4.563757
4.288305
4.038565
3.604592
7
5.334926
4.967640
4.638864
4.343591
3.837160
8
5.759024
5.328250
4.946372
4.606544
4.030967
9
6.144567
5.650223
5.216116
4.833227
4.192472
10
6.495061
5.937699
5.452733
5.028644
4.327060
11
6.813692
6.194374
5.660292
5.197107
4.439217
12
7.103356
6.423548
5.842362
5.342334
4.532681
13
7.366687
6.628168
6.002072
5.467529
4.610567
14
7.606080
6.810864
6.142168
5.575456
4.675473
15
7.823709
6.973986
6.265060
5.668497
4.729561
16
8.021553
7.119630
6.372859
5.748704
4.774634
17
8.201412
7.249670
6.467420
5.817848
4.812195
18
8.364920
7.365777
6.550369
5.877455
4.843496
19
8.513564
7.469444
6.623131
5.928841
4.869580
20
The Management of the Old-timers’ Motel can determine the present
value of this stream of annuities by simply selecting from the present
value factors of an annuity table (Exhibit 15.19) the factor that is at
the intersection between 6% and 10 years (7.360087), and multiply
this factor by a single annuity of €90,000.00.
€90,000.00 × 7.360087 = €662,407.83 
This amount of €662,407.83 represents the combined present value of
the 10 annuities of mortgage payments of €90,000.00 each. This can
be verified using the present value factors for single amounts as
contained in Exhibit 15.18 and as shown in Exhibit 15.21. It is
noticed in Exhibit 15.21 that the sum of the individual present values
of the mortgage payments is exactly equal to the result of multiplying
a single annuity of €90,000.00 by the factor 7.360087 derived from
Exhibit 15.19.

15.6
Discounted cash flow (DCF) methods
1
The notion of cost of capital and establishing a discount rate
In section 15.4 the discount rate was introduced. However on what
bases are these rates established? In this section the analysis will be
based on an investment project to be carried out by The Low Dyke
Hotel. The overall project, which is about the acquisition of a floating
restaurant, will cost the hotel €1,137,500.00 and the details are found
in Exhibit 15.22. Assume that The Low Dyke Hotel uses in its
investment analysis a discount rate of 12%, this would represent an
acceptable annual return for the activities of The Low Dyke Hotel.
If the general bank interest rate in the economy is 5% per year, why
would The Low Dyke Hotel expect to make more than that? The
answer relates to risk.
Investing in a business is a riskier venture than leaving money in a
bank. Normally, banks can be relied upon to survive and to carry on
paying interest at the advertised rates; a normal savings account rate is
more or less risk-free (there is always some level of risk; banks do
occasionally fail as the bank failures of 2008/2009 have shown).
A business investor is taking much more of a risk and therefore
expects to be rewarded by a greater return in the form of interest or
dividends. The 12% rate may be The Low Dyke Hotel’s best guess at
the risk-free rate plus a premium for the level of risk actually incurred
by them. Another helpful way of looking at the problem is to consider
the alternatives. If The Low Dyke Hotel invests in the new restaurant,
it needs to either borrow €1,137,500.00 or take it out of existing
resources. If there is an alternative use for that money that will yield
12% then the cost of money is (at least) 12%. The cost of money for a
particular business is known as its cost of capital.
The evaluation of an investment project by DCF analysis requires a
company to calculate its cost of capital. This is true in selecting the
Exhibit 15.21 Using single amount present value factors to verify the result of annuity factors
The Old-timer’ Motel
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Year
Annual Mortgage
Present Value
Present Value of
Repayment
Discount Factors @ 6%
Mortgage Repayment
–––––––
–––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––––––
1
€ 90.000.00
0.943396
€
84,905.66
2
€ 90.000.00
0.889996
€
80,099.68
3
€ 90.000.00
0.839619
€
75,565.74
4
€ 90.000.00
0.792094
€
71,288.43
5
€ 90.000.00
0.747258
€
67,253.24
6
€ 90.000.00
0.704961
€
63,446.45
7
€ 90.000.00
0.665057
€
59,855.14
8
€ 90.000.00
0.627412
€
56,467.11
9
€ 90.000.00
0.591898
€
53,270.86
10
€ 90.000.00
0.558395
€
50,255.53
––––––––
Total
€ 662,407.83
332 15 Capital investment decisions
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

discount rate for any analysis by means of the net present value
method, or for establishing an acceptable internal rate of return.
A major problem in using the cost of capital lies in its different
interpretations. From a lender’s point of view, the cost of capital
represents the cost to them of lending money which may be equated
to the return they could have obtained by investing in a similar
project with similar risks. This concept of the cost of capital is
founded on its ‘opportunity cost’. The opportunity cost approach to
the assessment of the cost of capital is one which a company must
always consider when evaluating an investment project. A company
may find, for example, that investing funds somewhere else may
produce higher returns than in an internal project. The main obstacle
to a more widespread use of the opportunity cost concept is that of
identifying investments of equal risks and hence measuring the
opportunity cost.
Risk is the degree of uncertainty. When a company estimates what it
costs to invest in a given project and what its benefits will be in the
future, it is coping with uncertainty. The uncertainty arises from
different sources, depending on the type of investment being
considered, as well as the circumstances and the industry in which it
is operating. Uncertainty may arise due to multiple reasons as found
in the questions that follow:
·
Economic conditions – Will consumers be spending or saving? Will
the economy be in a recession? Will the government stimulate
spending? Will there be inflation?
·
Market conditions – Is the market competitive? How long does it
take competitors to enter into the market? Are there any barriers,
such as patents or trademarks that will keep competitors away? Is
there sufficient supply of raw materials and labour? How much will
raw materials and labour cost in the future?
·
Taxes – What will tax rates be? Will the authorities change the tax
system?
·
Interest rates – What will be the cost of raising capital in the
future?
·
International conditions – Will the exchange rate between different
countries' currencies change? Are there stable governments in the
countries where the company does business?
These sources of uncertainty influence future cash flows. To evaluate
and select among projects that will maximize owners' wealth, it is
necessary to assess the uncertainty associated with the project's cash
flows.
Relevant cash flow risk
Management should worry about risk because the suppliers of capital
– the creditors and owners – demand compensation for their risk-
taking. They can either make their funds available to the company for
its investment purposes, or they could invest their funds elsewhere.
Therefore, there is an opportunity cost to consider, which as indicated
above is the cost of capital and it can be assessed as follows:
15.6 Discounted cash flow (DCF) methods 333
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Cost of capital = Compensation for the time value of money + Compensation for risk
The risk of a project is assessed taking into account the fact that the
assets of a company are the result of its prior investment decisions.
This means that the company is really a collection of projects. So
when the company adds another project to its collection, should the
company be concerned only about the risk of that additional project
or should the company be concerned about the risk of the entire
collection when the new project is added to it? To better understand,
it is necessary to review the different dimensions of risk of a project.
Different dimensions of project risk
If the company has some idea of the uncertainty associated with the
project's future cash flows and the probabilities associated with these
outcomes, it will have a measure of the risk of the project. But this is
the project's risk in isolation from the company's other projects. This
is the risk of the project ignoring the effects of diversification and it is
referred to as the project's total risk, or stand-alone risk.
Since most companies have other assets, the stand-alone risk of the
project under consideration may not be the relevant risk for analysing
the project. A company is a collection of assets and the returns of
these different assets do not necessarily move together. The company
should therefore not be concerned about the stand-alone risk of a
project, but rather how the addition of the project to their collection
of assets changes the risk of the company's entire collection.
Proceeding further, the shares of many companies may be owned by
investors who themselves hold diversified portfolios. These investors
are concerned about how the company's investments affect the risk of
their own personal portfolios. When owners demand compensation
for risk, they are requiring compensation for market risk, the risk they
cannot get rid of by diversifying. Recognizing this, a company
considering taking on a new project should be concerned with how it
changes their market risk. Therefore, if the company's owners hold
diversified investments, it is the project's market risk that is relevant
to the company's decision making.
Even though it is generally believed that it is the project's market risk
that is important to be analysed, stand-alone risk should not be
ignored. If the decisions relate to for example a small, closely-held
company, whose owners do not hold well-diversified portfolios, the
stand-alone risk gives a good idea of the project's risk. Even if the
investment decisions relate to large corporations that have many
products, and whose owners are well-diversified, the analysis of stand-
alone risk is still useful. Stand-alone risk is often closely related to
market risk – in many cases, projects with higher stand-alone risks
may also have higher market risks. And a project's stand-alone risk is
easier to measure than market risk.
Many companies consider risk in some manner in evaluating their
investment projects but considering risk is usually a subjective
analysis and companies that use DCF methods, tend to use a single
334 15 Capital investment decisions
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

cost of capital. But using a single cost of capital for all projects can be
hazardous. Suppose the company uses the same cost of capital for all
its projects. If all of them have the same risk and the cost of capital
being used is appropriate for this level of risk, there will be no
problem. But what if the company uses the same cost of capital but its
projects each have different levels of risk? Suppose the company uses
a cost of capital that is the cost of capital for the company's average
risk project and it applies DCF methods, it might end up:
·
rejecting profitable projects – which would have increased their
owners' wealth – that have risk below the risk of the average risk
project, because the company discounted their future cash flows
too much, and
·
accepting unprofitable projects whose risk is above the risk of the
average project, because the company did not discount their future
cash flows enough.
Companies that use a risk-adjusted discount rate usually do so by
classifying projects into risk classes by the type of project. For
example, a company with a cost of capital of 8% may use a 12% cost
of capital for new products and a much lower rate of 6% for
replacement projects. Given a set of costs of capital, the company
financial manager would only need to figure out into what class the
project would belong and then apply the rate assigned to that class.
Companies may also make adjustments in the cost of capital for
factors other than the type of project. For example, companies
investing in projects in foreign countries will sometimes make an
adjustment for the additional risk of the foreign project, such as
exchange rate risk, inflation risk, and political risk.
The cost of capital is generally based on an assessment of the
company's overall cost of capital. First, the company evaluates the
cost of each source of capital – common stock, preferred stock, bonds
and any other long-term debt. Then each category of capital is
proportionately weighted. This average is referred to as the weighted
average cost of capital (WACC). The WACC formula is as follows when
corporate taxes are taken into account (if no corporate tax
information is provided, the last section of the formula is simply
omitted):
WACC = ((E/V) × Re) + [((D/V) × Rd) × (1 – T)]
where:
E = Market value of company’s equity
D = Market value of the company’s debt
V = Total Market Value of the company (E + D)
Re = Cost of Equity
Rd= Cost of Debt
T = Tax Rate
To illustrate the calculation of the WACC, assume that a newly formed
corporation Dekker Plc. needs to raise €2,000,000.00 in capital so that
it can buy the equipment needed to conduct its business. Dekker Plc.
15.6 Discounted cash flow (DCF) methods 335
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

issues and sells 14,000 shares of stock at €100.00 each to raise the first
€1,400,000.00. As its shareholders expect a return of 5.00% on their
investment, the cost of equity is considered to be 5.00%. Dekker Plc.
then sells 600 bonds at €1,000.00 each to raise the remaining
€600,000.00 in capital. The investors who bought these bonds are
promised a 4.00% return, so Dekker Plc’s cost of debt is considered to
be 4.00%.
Dekker Plc’s total market value is now €2,000,000.00 (€1,400,000.00
equity + €600,000.00 debt), and assuming a corporate tax rate of 30%,
its WACC will be 4.34% determined as follows:
((1,€400,000.00 / €2,000,000.00) × 0.05) + [((€600,000.00 / €2,000,000.00) × 0.04) × (1 −0.3))]
(0.7 × 0.05) + [(0.3 × 0.04) × 0.7]
0.035 + (0.012 × 0.7)
0.035 + 0.0084
0.0434 →4.34%
Break-Even Time (BET)
The payback model studied in Section 15.2 showed how long it would
take for the net cash flows to pay back the net investment outflows.
Similar to the payback model, the break-even time assesses the
amount of time needed to recover the initial cost of the investment
but now uses its discounted cash flows instead of the net cash flows,
and it is considered to be a more advanced method compared to the
simple payback period. The BET (which should never be confused
with the break-even analyses as shown in Chapter 11, Section 11.3) is
calculated by deducting the succeeding estimated discounted cash
flows from the project cost until the point where the overall cost
would have been recovered, and it should be noted that
comparatively a longer break-even time equates to higher risks for the
investment. Using the calculated discounted cash flows (present
values) from Exhibit 15.23 and recalling that the project cost for the
Low Dyke Hotel’s acquisition of the Floating Oyster Restaurant is
€1,137,500.00, its BET is determined to be:
336 15 Capital investment decisions
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Project cost
€ 1,137,500.00
Still to be recovered
Less present value of cash flow of period 1
€
206,752.23
is equal to
€ 930,747.77
Less present value of cash flow of period 2
€
244,190.45
is equal to
€ 686,557.32
Less present value of cash flow of period 3
€
234,220.19
is equal to
€ 452,337.13
Less present value of cash flow of period 4
€
242,172.11
is equal to
€ 210,165.02
Present value of cash flow of period 5
€
245,731.29
As the present value of the cash flow of period 5 is more than what still needs to be recovered, the time fraction is then
established as follows:
To be recovered after period 4 (X)
€
210,165.02
Present value of cash flow of period 5 (Y)
€
245,731.29
Time fraction (X/Y)
0.86
Which can be approximated to 314 days
thus the BET will be said to be 4 years and 314 days, or 4 years 10 months and 10 days

DCF methods have gained widespread acceptance, for they recognize
that the value of money is subject to a time preference, that is, that
€1.00 today is preferred to €1.00 in the future unless the delay in
receiving €1.00 in the future is compensated by an interest factor.
This interest factor is expressed as a discount rate. DCF methods
attempt to evaluate an investment proposal by comparing the net
cash flows of the investment at their present value (Section 15.5) with
the value of funds to be invested. There are two widely used methods
of DCF analysis: the net present value method and the internal rate of
return method.
2
Net present value (NPV) method
The net present value is defined as the total present value (PV) of a
time series of cash flows. It is a standard method used in appraising
long term projects. The NPV measures the excess or shortfall of cash
flows in present value terms.
The following four steps constitute a net present value analysis of an
investment proposal:
To illustrate the NPV method, the investment proposal of The Low
Dyke Hotel to acquire a new floating restaurant will be used. In
addition the management of The Low Dyke Hotel considers 12% as
their cost of capital.
In Step 1, a table as illustrated in Exhibit 15.22 showing the cash flows
during each year of the proposed investment is established.
Step 1
Prepare a table showing the cash flows during each year of the
proposed investment.
Step 2
Compute the present value of each cash flow, using an
appropriate discount rate.
Step 3
Compute the net present value, which is the sum of the present
values of the cash flows.
Step 4
If the net present value (NPV) is equal to or greater than zero,
accept the investment proposal. Otherwise, reject it.
15.6 Discounted cash flow (DCF) methods 337
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

In Step 2 the present value of each cash flow at 12% is calculated.
Using discount factors for 12% over the various periods a table as
illustrated in Exhibit 15.23 is developed.
In Step 3, compute a table as illustrated in Exhibit 15.24 showing the
net present value, which is the sum of the present values of all the
cash flows. This includes the original investment cost (this is a cash
outflow). The original investment cost is indicated in Period 0 which
means “now” (the date at which the investment will be carried out).
As nothing changes now, the value of the cash outflow remains the
same.
Exhibit 15.23 Calculation of the present value of each cash flow
Period
Cash Flow
DF @ 12%
Present Value
–––––––
–––––––––––––
––––––––––
–––––––––––––
1
€ 231,562.50
0.892857
€ 206,752.23
2
€ 306,312.50
0.797194
€ 244,190.45
3
€ 329,062.50
0.711780
€ 234,220.19
4
€ 381,062.50
0.635518
€ 242,172.11
5
€ 433,062.50
0.567427
€ 245,731.29
6
€ 479,536.50
0.506631
€ 242,948.62
7
€ 527,312.50
0.452349
€ 238,529.40
8
€ 575,087.50
0.403883
€ 232,268.20
9
€ 622,862.50
0.360610
€ 224,610.46
10
€ 670,637.50
0.321973
€ 215,927.33
338 15 Capital investment decisions
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Exhibit 15.22 Proposed acquisition of the Floating Oyster Restaurant by the Low Dyke Hotel
The Low Dyke Hotel
Proposed Acquisition of the Floating Oyster Restaurant
Project Cost
€ 1,137,500.00
Linear Depreciation over 10 Years 
€
113,750.00
Years
1
2
3
4
5
––––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
Revenues
€ 1,000,000.00
€ 1,200,000.00
€ 1,400,000.00
€ 1,600,000.00 
€
1,800,000.00 
Expenses:
Labour
€
255,000.00
€
262,000.00
€
339,000.00
€
371,000.00
€
403,000.00
Cost of Sales
€
250,000.00
€
300,000.00
€
350,000.00
€
400,000.00
€
450,000.00
Supplies
€
50,000.00
€
60,000.00
€
70,000.00
€
80,000.00
€
90,000.00
Utilities
€
40,000.00
€
48,000.00
€
56,000.00
€
64,000.00
€
72,000.00
Depreciation
€
113,750.00
€
113,750.00
€
113,750.00
€
113,750.00
€
113,750.00
Other Operating Expenses
€
110,000.00
€
120,000.00
€
140,000.00
€
160,000.00
€
180,000.00
Income Taxes
€
63,437.50
€
103,687.50
€
115,937.50
€
143,937.50
€
171,937.50
Net income
€
117,812.50
€
192,562.50
€
215,312.50
€
267,312.50
€
319,312.50
Cashflow:
Net Income
€
117,812.50
€
192,562.50
€
215,312.50
€
267,312.50
€
319,312.50
Add: Depreciation
€
113,750.00
€
113,750.00
€
113,750.00
€
113,750.00
€
113,750.00
Total
€
231,562.50
€
306,312.50
€
329,062.50
€
381,062.50
€
433,062.50

In step 4, a decision has to be made following the rules as contained
in Exhibit 15.25.
Exhibit 15.24 Computation of the net present value
Period
Cash Flow
DF @ 12%
Present Value
–––––––
–––––––––––––––
–––––––––
––––––––––––––
0
(€ 1,137,500.00)
1
(€ 1,137,500.00)
1
€
231,562.50
0.892857
€
206,752.23
2
€
306,312.50
0.797194
€
244,190.45
3
€
329,062.50
0.711780
€
234,220.19
4
€
381,062.50
0.635518
€
242,172.11
5
€
433,062.50
0.567427
€
245,731.29
6
€
479,536.50
0.506631
€
242,948.62
7
€
527,312.50
0.452349
€
238,529.40
8
€
575,087.50
0.403883
€
232,268.20
9
€
622,862.50
0.360610
€
224,610.46
10
€
670,637.50
0.321973
€
215,927.33
––––––––––––––
NPV
€ 1,189,850.27
Exhibit 15.25 Illustration of rules concerning NPV outcomes
Positive
Acceptable, since it promises a return greater than the cost of capital
If the Net Present Value is
Zero
Acceptable, since it promises a return equal to the cost of capital
Negative
Not acceptable, since it promises a return less than the cost of capital
15.6 Discounted cash flow (DCF) methods 339
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
6
7
8
9
10
––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––
€
2,000,000.00
€
2,200,000.00
€
2,400,000.00
€
2,600,000.00
€ 2,800,000.00
€
447,500.00
€
488,000.00
€
528,500.00
€
569,000.00
€
609,500.00
€
500,000.00
€
550,000.00
€
600,000.00
€
650,000.00
€
700,000.00
€
100,000.00
€
110,000.00
€
120,000.00
€
130,000.00
€
140,000.00
€
80,000.00
€
88,000.00
€
96,000.00
€
104,000.00
€
112,000.00
€
113,750.00
€
113,750.00
€
113,750.00
€
113,750.00
€
113,750.00
€
196,000.00
€
214,000.00
€
232,000.00
€
250,000.00
€
268,000.00
€
196,962.50
€
222,687.50
€
248,412,50
€
274,137.50
€
299,862.50
€
365,787.50
€
413,562.50
€
461,337.50
€
509,112.50
€
556,887.50
€
365,787.50
€
413,562.50
€
461,337.50
€
509,112.50
€
556,887.50
€
113,750.00
€
113,750.00
€
113,750.00
€
113,750.00
€
113,750.00
€
479,537.50
€
527,312.50
€
575,087.50
€
622,862.50
€
670,637.50

In the case of The Low Dyke Hotel’s proposed acquisition of the
Floating Oyster Restaurant, the NPV is equal to €1,189,850.27 over
the 10 years of the analysis and thus if all other conditions remain the
same (ceteris paribus) it is an acceptable investment.
3
Internal rate of return (IRR) method
An alternative discounted cash flow method for analysing investment
proposals is the internal rate of return method. An asset’s internal rate
of return is the true economic return earned by the asset over its life.
Another way of stating the definition is that an asset’s internal rate of
return (IRR) is the discount rate that would be required in a net
present value analysis in order for the asset’s net present value to be
exactly zero. Although a number of the principles applicable to the
IRR method are similar to the NPV method, there is a notable
difference in the final outcome and the decision criteria. In the
application of the IRR method, it is necessary to calculate the exact
DCF rate of return which an investment opportunity is expected to
achieve, that is the rate of return at which the NPV is equal to 0, and
compare this with the hurdle rate, which should be the project’s cost
of capital. If the expected rate of return exceeds the hurdle rate, the
project should be undertaken. On the contrary, if the expected rate of
return is less than the hurdle rate the project should be rejected.
Without a computer or a programmable calculator, the calculation of
the internal rate of return is made by a trial and error technique called
interpolation. The first step is to calculate two net present values,
both as close as possible to zero. The closer to zero, the more accurate
will be the end result. Ideally, in applying these two rates the result
should be one NPV being positive and the other negative. It is then
necessary to use interpolation to establish the rate where NPV is 0.
Using the example of The Low Dyke Hotel’s proposed acquisition of
the Floating Oyster Restaurant the internal rate of return will be
determined in the following manner. Recall that at 12% the NPV is
€1,189,850.27 over the 10 years of the analysis. It should be noted
that the higher the discount rate used in a net present value analysis,
the lower the present value of all future cash flows will be. This is true
because a higher discount rate means that it is even more important
to have the money earlier instead of later. Thus, a discount rate higher
than 12% would be required to drive the proposed acquisition of the
Floating Oyster Restaurant’s net present value down to zero. Exhibit
15.26 indicates a positive NPV of €21,469.72 at a discount rate of 29%
and also a negative NPV of €17,023.23 at a discount rate of 30%. Both
amounts are relatively close to zero. This means that the real IRR is
situated between 29% and 30%.
The interpolation method assumes that the NPV rises in a linear
fashion between the two rates of return. The formula to apply is:
Internal rate of return interpolation = A + 
× (B – A)
P

(P + N)
340 15 Capital investment decisions
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

in which,
A is the (lower) rate of return with a positive NPV
B is the (higher) rate of return with a negative NPV
P is the absolute amount of the positive NPV
N is the absolute amount of the negative NPV
Now applying this formula to the data calculated for the project we
can calculate the IRR:
IRR = 29% + 
× (30% – 29%)
IRR = 29% + 
× 1%
IRR = 29% + 0.5577571 × 1%
IRR = 29% + 0.56% (rounded to 2 decimals places)
IRR = 29.56%
As the IRR of 29.56% is higher than the cost of capital (12%) then the
project proposal is acceptable.
The IRR of the Low Dyke Hotel’s acquisition of the Floating Oyster
Restaurant has been established in a situation in which the yearly
cash flows were different. In investment situations of annuities, where
the cash flows will be the same for all the years, the internal rate of
 return is determined in the following manner.
Assume that the Low Dyke Hotels can purchase new kitchen
 equipment at a cost of €72,000.03 that will save €19,974.53 per year
in operating costs. This kitchen equipment has a life of 7 years. The
calculation of the internal rate of return will be done in two steps.
Exhibit 15.26 IRR interpolation
IRR interpolation
Period
Cash flow
DF @ 29%
Present Value
DF @ 30%
Present Value
–––––––
–––––––––––––––
–––––––––
––––––––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––––––––
0
(€ 1,137,500.00)
1
(€ 1,137,500.00)
1
(€ 1,137,500.00)
1
€
231,562.50
0.775194
€
179,505.81
0.769231
€
178,125.00
2
€
306,312.50
0.600925
€
184,070.97
0.591716
€
181,250.00
3
€
329,062.50
0.465834
€
153,288.39
0.455166
€
149,778.11
4
€
381,062.50
0.361111
€
137,606.00
0.350128
€
133,420.57
5
€
433,062.50
0.279931
€
121,227.75
0.269329
€
116,636.32
6
€
479,537.50
0.217001
€
104,060.12
0.207176
€
99,348.76
7
€
527,312.50
0.168218
€
88,703.36
0.159366
€
84,035.85
8
€
575,087.50
0.130401
€
74,992.23
0.122589
€
70,499.67
9
€
622,862.50
0.101086
€
62,962.91
0.094300
€
58,735.68
10
€
670,637.50
0.078362
€
52,552.18
0.072538
€
48,646.80
NPV
€
21,469.72
NPV
(€
17,023.23)
€21,469.72

(€21,469.72 + €17,023.23
€21,469.72

€38,492.95
15.6 Discounted cash flow (DCF) methods 341
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

4
Comparing the NPV and IRR methods
The decision to accept or reject an investment proposal can be made
using either the NPV method or the IRR method. The different
approaches used in the methods are summarized as follows:
Net present value method
·
Compute the investment proposal’s net present value, using the
organization’s hurdle rate as the discount rate
·
Accept the investment proposal if its net present value is equal to
or greater than zero; otherwise reject it.
Internal rate of return method
·
Compute the investment proposals, internal rate of return, which
is the discount rate that yields a zero net present value for the
project.
·
Accept the investment proposal if its internal rate of return is equal
to or greater than the organization’s hurdle rate; otherwise reject it.
Notice that the hurdle rate is mentioned in each of the two methods.
The NPV method exhibits two potential advantages over the IRR
method. First, if the investment analysis is carried out by hand, it is
easier to compute a project’s NPV than its IRR. For example, if the
cash flows are uneven across time, trial and error must be used to find
the IRR. This advantage of the NPV approach is not as important,
however, when a computer is used.
342 15 Capital investment decisions
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Step 1
Determine the annuity discount factor
Step 2
Look in the factor tables (Exhibit 15.19) at the row of 7 periods
under what rate of discount the established discount factor is
positioned. That rate is then considered as internal rate of return.
As such, the IRR of the Low Dyke Hotels’ purchase of new kitchen
equipment will be established in the following manner:
Step 1: Determine the annuity discount factor.
This is done by dividing the initial investment cost by the annuity.
= 3.604592
Step 2: check in the present value factor of an annuity table (Exhibit
15.19) and try to locate in the row of 7 periods under what rate of
discount the factor 3.604592 is to be found. This factor is located under
rate of discount 20%. This 20% will then be considered as the internal
rate of return for the new kitchen equipment.
€72,000.03

€19,974.53

A second potential advantage of the NPV method is that the analyst
can adjust for risk considerations. For some investment proposals, the
further into the future that a cash flow occurs, the less certain the
analyst can be about the amount of the cash flow. Thus, the later a
projected cash flow occurs, the riskier it may be. It is possible to adjust
NPV analysis for such risk factors by using a higher discount rate for
later cash flows than earlier cash flows. It is not possible to include
such a risk adjustment in the IRR method, because the analysis solves
for only a single discount rate, the project’s IRR.
5
Assumptions underlying DCF analysis
Four main assumptions underlie the NPV and IRR methods of
investment analysis.
·
In the present value calculations used in the NPV and IRR
methods, all cash flows are treated as though they occur at the end
of the year. The additional computational complexity that would
be required to reflect the exact timing of all cash flows would
complicate an investment analysis considerably. The error
introduced by the year-end cash flow assumption generally is not
large enough to cause any concern.
·
DCF analyses treat the cash flow associated with an investment
project as though they were known with certainty. Although
methods of capital budgeting under uncertainty have been
developed, they are not widely used in practice. Most decision
makers do not feel that the additional benefits in improved
decisions are worth the additional complexity involved. As
mentioned above, risk adjustment can be made in a NPV analysis
to partially account for uncertainty about the cash flow.
·
Both the NPV and IRR methods assume that each cash inflow is
immediately reinvested in another project that earns a return for
the organization. In the NPV method, each cash inflow is assumed
to be reinvested at the same rate used to compute the project’s
NPV, the organization’s hurdle rate. In the IRR method, each cash
inflow is assumed to be reinvested at the same rate as the project’s
internal rate of return.
·
A DCF analysis assumes a perfect capital market. This implies that
money can be borrowed or lent at an interest rate equal to the
hurdle rate used in the analysis.
In practice, these four assumptions are rarely satisfied. Nevertheless,
DCF models provide an effective and widely used method of
investment analysis. The improved decision making that would result
from using more complicated models is seldom worth the additional
cost of information and analysis.
15.6 Discounted cash flow (DCF) methods 343
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

15.7
Incidence of taxes on DCF analysis
Generally when taxes affect a decision, an expert inside or outside the
organization should be consulted because tax laws are complex and
they change regularly. After tax cash flows should be used in DCF
calculations because tax payments constitute an outflow of cash, and
competing projects may have different tax allowances and charges
which might influence the investment decisions. The following
procedure is used for converting pre-tax cash flows to post-cash cash
flows.
·
Determine the investment incentives available for the equipment
·
The allowance are deducted from the pre-tax cash flow (net income
+ depreciation) leaving a figure of taxable income.
·
When the equipment is disposed of, any residual revenue is shown
as cash inflow.
·
Business tax is chargeable on each year’s taxable income and on the
average is expected to be paid 12 months later.
·
After tax cash flow which comes in for discounting consists of pre-
tax cash flows less tax paid.
·
It is usually assumed that there is income being generated elsewhere
in the company against which capital allowances may be offset.
Therefore a cash inflow of tax may be recorded in respect of a project
where insufficient profit is made on it to absorb tax allowance.
·
If no profits are available in the company to use up capital
allowances they may be carried forward until such time as there are
profits available against which to set the allowances.
When a business makes a profit, it usually must pay income taxes, just
as individuals do. Since many of the cash flows associated with an
investment proposal affect the company’s profit, they also affect the
company’s income tax liability. The following equation shows the
items that appear on an income statement.
Income = revenue – expenses + gains – losses
Any aspect of an investment project that affects any of the items in
this equation generally will affect the company’s income tax
payments. These income tax payments are cash flows, and they must
be considered in any DCF analysis. In some cases, tax considerations
are so crucial in a capital investment decision that they dominate all
other aspects of the analysis.
After-tax cash flows
The first step in a discounted cash flow analysis for a profit seeking
enterprise is to determine the after-tax cash flows associated with the
investment projects under consideration. An after-tax cash flow is the
cash flow expected after all tax implications have been taken into
account. Each financial aspect of a project must be examined carefully
to determine its potential tax impact.
A hotel will be used to illustrate the tax implications of various types
of financial items. The Lemon Tree Hotel is quite profitable, and the
management is considering several capital projects that will enhance
344 15 Capital investment decisions
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

the company’s future profit potential. Before analyzing these projects,
consider the tax issues the company faces. For this analysis assume
that The Lemon Tree Hotel’s income tax rate is 40.00%. Thus, if the
company’s income before tax is €1,000,000.00, its income tax
payment will be €400,000.00 (€1,000,000.00 × 40.00%).
Cash revenue
Suppose The Lemon Tree Hotel’s management is considering the
purchase of new restaurant equipment. The sales manager estimates
that new restaurant equipment will allow the company to increase
annual revenues by €100,000.00. Further, suppose that this
incremental revenue will be received in cash during the year (meaning
that all credit sales will be paid in cash within a short time period). The
Lemon Tree Hotel’s additional annual revenue results in an increase of
€70,000.00 per year in cost of goods sold. Moreover, the additional
merchandise sold will be paid for in cash during the same year as the
related sales. Thus, the net incremental cash inflow resulting from the
sales increase is €30,000.00 per year (€100,000.00 – €70,000.00).
What is The Lemon Tree Hotel’s after-tax cash flow from the
incremental sales revenue, net of cost of goods sold? As the following
calculation shows, the company’s incremental cash inflow from the
additional sales is only €18,000.00.
Incremental sales revenue, net of cost of goods sold 
(cash inflow)
€ 30,000.00
Incremental income tax (cash outflow) 
€30,000.00 × 40%
(€ 12,000.00)
After-tax cash flow (net inflow after taxes)
€ 18,000.00
Although the incremental sales amounted to an additional net cash
inflow of €30,000.00, the cash outflow for income taxes also increased
by €12,000.00. Thus, after-tax cash inflow from the incremental sales,
net of cost of goods sold, is €18,000.00. 
A quick method for computing the after-tax cash inflow from the
incremental sales is the following:
Incremental sales revenue, net of cost of goods sold × (1 – Tax rate)
= After-tax cash inflow
€30,000.00 × (1 – 40%) = €18,000.00
Cash expenses
What are the tax implications of cash expenses? Suppose the addition
of the restaurant equipment under consideration by The Lemon Tree
Hotel’s management will involve hiring an additional employee,
whose annual compensation and fringe benefits will amount to
€20,000.00. As the following computation shows, the company’s
incremental cash outflow is only €12,000.00.
Incremental expense (cash outflow)
€ 20,000.00
Reduction in income tax (reduced cash outflow) 
€20,000.00 × 40%
(€
8,000.00)
After-tax cash flow (net outflow after taxes)
€ 12,000.00
15.7 Incidence of taxes on DCF analysis 345
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Although the incremental employee compensation is €20,000.00, this
expense is tax deductible. Thus, the company’s income tax payment
will be reduced by €8,000.00. As a result, the after-tax cash outflow
from the additional compensation is €12,000.00.
A quick method for computing the after-tax cash outflow from the
incremental expense is shown below:
Incremental cash expense × (1 – tax rate) = After-tax cash outflow
€20,000.00 × (1 – 40%) = €12,000.00
Non-cash expenses
Not all expenses represent cash outflows. The most common example
of a non-cash expense is depreciation expense. Suppose The Lemon
Tree Hotel management is considering the purchase of the restaurant
equipment that costs €30,000.00. The equipment has no salvage value
and will be depreciated as follows:
The only cash flow shown in Exhibit 15.27 is the restaurant
equipment’s acquisition cost of €30,000.00 at time zero. The
depreciation expense in each of the next five years is not a cash flow.
However, depreciation is an expense on the income statement, and it
reduces the company’s income. For example, €3,750.00 depreciation
expense in year 1 will reduce The Lemon Tree Hotel’s taxable income
by €3,750.00. As a result, the company’s year 1 income tax payment
will decline by €1,500.00 (40% × €3,750.00).
The annual depreciation expense associated with the equipment
provides a reduction in income-tax expense equal to the firm’s tax
rate times the depreciated deduction. This reduction in income taxes
is called a depreciation tax shield. To summarize, depreciation is a non
cash expense. Although depreciation is not a cash flow, it does cause a
reduced cash outflow through the depreciation tax shield.
Depreciation or any other non cash expense × tax rate = Reduced
cash outflow for income taxes
Exhibit 15.28 shows The Lemon Tree Hotel depreciation tax shield
over the depreciable life of the proposed restaurant equipment.
Exhibit 15.27   Depreciation plan restaurant equipment
€3,750.00
€7,500.00
€7,500.00
€7,500.00
€3,750.00
Depreciation
Depreciation
Depreciation
Depreciation
Depreciation
Acquisition cost: €30,000.00
Time
2
1
0
3
4
5
Year 1   Depreciation of €3,750.00 × 40% = €1,500.00
Is not a cash flow
Is a cash flow
346 15 Capital investment decisions
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

The cash flows constituting the depreciation tax shield occur in five
different years, the last column of Exhibit 15.28. Thus, in a discounted
cash flow analysis, we still must discount these cash flows to find 
their present value.
Cash flows not in the income statement
Some cash flows do not appear on the income statement. They are
not revenues, expenses, gains, or losses. A common example of such a
cash flow is the purchase of an asset. If The Lemon Tree Hotel
purchases the restaurant equipment of €30,000.00, the acquisition
cost is a cash outflow but not an expense. A purchase is merely the
exchange of one asset (cash) for another. The expense associated with
the equipment’s purchase is recognized through depreciation expense
recorded throughout the asset’s depreciable life. Thus, the cash flow
resulting from the purchase of an asset does not affect income and has
no direct tax consequences.
Completing the analysis by preparing a NPV analysis of the proposed
restaurant’s equipment acquisition results in the situation depicted in
Exhibit 15.29 under conditions of an after-tax hurdle rate of 12%. Since
the NPV is positive, the restaurant equipment should be purchased.
Exhibit 15.28 The Lemon Tree Hotel depreciation tax shield
Year
Depreciation Expense
Tax Rate
Cash flow reduced
Tax Payment
–––––
––––––––––––––––––––––
––––––––
–––––––––––––––––
1
€ 3,750.00
40%
€ 1,500.00
2
€ 7,500.00
40%
€ 3,000.00
3
€ 7,500.00
40%
€ 3,000.00
4
€ 7,500.00
40%
€ 3,000.00
5
€ 3,750.00
40%
€ 1,500.00
Exhibit 15.29 Proposed purchase of restaurant equipment for the Lemon Tree Hotel
The Lemon Tree Hotel
Purchase of Restaurant Equipment
(r = 12%, n = 5)
Time 0
Time 1
Time 2
Time 3
Time 4
Time 5
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
–––––––––––
Acquisition cost
€ 30,000.00
After tax cash flow from
incremental sales revenue
net of cost of goods sold…
€ 18,000.00
€ 18,000.00
€ 18,000.00
€ 18,000.00
€ 18,000.00
After tax cash flow from
incremental compensation
expense…
€ 8,000.00
€
8,000.00
€
8,000.00
€
8,000.00
€
8,000.00
After tax cash flow
from depreciation tax shield,
depreciation expense…
€ 1,500.00
€
3,000.00
€
3,000.00
€
3,000.00
€
1,500.00
Total cash flow
€ 30,000.00
€ 11,500.00
€ 13,000.00
€ 13,000.00
€ 13,000.00
€ 11,500.00
Discount factor
1
0.892857
0.797194
0.711780
0.635518
0.567427
Present value
€ 30,000.00
€ 10,267.86
€ 10,363.52
€
9,253.14
€
8,261.73
€
6,525.41
NPV
€ 14,671.66
15.7 Incidence of taxes on DCF analysis 347
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Timing of tax deductions
It has been assumed in the analysis of The Lemon Tree Hotel
restaurant equipment purchase that the cash flows resulting from
income taxes occur during the same year as the related before tax cash
flows. This assumption is realistic, as most businesses must make
estimated tax payments throughout the tax year. They generally
cannot wait until the following year and pay their prior year’s taxes in
one lump sum.
15.8
Choosing between projects
Mutually exclusive projects (two or more project alternatives where
acceptance of one alternative automatically excludes acceptance of any
of the remaining) have been assumed to have the same useful life. In
reality, many mutually exclusive projects do not have equal lives. In
such situations, the three approaches to decision making are as follows:
·
Assume that the shorter lived project is followed with another
project and that the combined lives of the two projects equal the
life of the mutually exclusive longer lived project.
·
Assume that the longer lived project is disposed of at the end of the
shorter lived project’s life.
·
Ignore the difference in the lives of the two mutually exclusive
projects.
The third approach is reasonable, only if the lives are both long and
the difference is inconsequential. For example, a difference of one year
for proposed projects with 14- and 15-year lives may be immaterial.
The first approach is illustrated in Exhibit 15.30. In this example, a
hotel is considering whether to replace its laundry washer with
Machine A, which has a ten-year life and no salvage, or with Machine
B, which has a five-year life and no salvage value. At the end of
Machine B’s life, Machine C, which will have a five-year life and no
salvage, will be acquired. Thus, the life of Machine A (ten years)
equals the combined lives of Machines B and C. The capital budgeting
model and discount rate used are the NPV and 12%, respectively. The
results suggest that Machine B should be purchased now followed by
Machine C at the end of year five.
The second approach that of assuming the longer lived project is
disposed of at the end of the short-lived project’s life is illustrated in
Exhibit 15.31. The same situation is assumed as in Exhibit 15.30 except
the comparison is only for five years as Machine B is totally used at the
end of year five. In addition, at the end of year five, Machine A is
assumed to have a salvage value of €35,000.00. The NPV of Machines
A and B are €1,463.00 and €4,057.00, respectively. Therefore, based on
the available information, Machine B would be purchased.
·
Machine A costs €75,000.00 and provides a project cash flow of
€15,000.00 per year for its ten-year life.
·
Machine B costs €30,000.00 and provides a project cash flow of
€15,000.00 per year for its five-year life of years 1 through 5.
348 15 Capital investment decisions
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

·
Machine C (purchased to replace Machine B) costs €55,000.00 at
the end of year five and provides project cash flow of €15,000.00
per year for its five-year life of years 6 through 10.
In Exhibit 15.31 Machine A costs €75,000.00 and provides cash flow
of €15,000.00 per year for five years and then may be sold for
€35,000.00. Machine B costs €30,000.00 and provides project cash
flow of €15,000.00. It has no salvage value.
Exhibit 15.30 Comparison of machine acquisition with different lives – first approach
Cash Flows
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Years
Alternative A
Alternative B
Machine A
Machine B
Machine C
––––––
–––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
––––––––––––
0
€ 75,000.00
€ 30,000.00
1
€ 15,000.00
€ 15,000.00
2
€ 15,000.00
€ 15,000.00
3
€ 15,000.00
€ 15,000.00
4
€ 15,000.00
€ 15,000.00
5
€ 15,000.00
€ 15,000.00
€ 55,000.00
6
€ 15,000.00
€ 15,000.00
7
€ 15,000.00
€ 15.000.00
8
€ 15,000.00
€ 15,000.00
9
€ 15,000.00
€ 15,000.00
10
€ 15,000.00
€ 15,000.00
Alternative A
Alternative B
€ 84,753.35
€ 84,753.35
€ 75,000.00
€ 61,208.48
NPV
€ 9,753.35
NPV
€ 23,544.87
Exhibit 15.31 Comparison of machine acquisitions with different lives – second approach
Cash Flows
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Years
Machine A
Machine B
––––––
–––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––––
0
€ 75,000.00
€
30,000.00
1
€ 15,000.00
€
15,000.00
2
€ 15,000.00
€
15,000.00
3
€ 15,000.00
€
15,000.00
4
€ 15,000.00
€
15,000.00
5
€ 50,000.00
€
15,000.00
NPV – Machine A
NPV – Machine B
€ 45,560.24
€
54,071.64
€ 28,371.34
€ 75,000.00
€
30,000.00
NPV
– €
1,068.42
€
24,071.64
15.8 Choosing between projects 349
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Glossary
Acceptance-or-rejection decisions – these are decisions in which managers
already have or can easily have the funds and must make the decision
whether to accept or reject the project.
Accounting rate of return (ARR) – this is an approach to evaluating projects based
on the average annual project income divided by the initial investment.
Annuity – this is a stream of equal payments that are made at regular
intervals over a fixed period of time.
Average rate of return (ARR) – this is an approach to evaluating projects based
on the average annual project income divided by the average investment.
Break-even time – this is a method that tries to determine how long it will take
for the discounted cash inflows (the present values of the cash flows) to
recover the initial project costs.
Capital-rationing decisions – these are decisions whereby managers must decide
which of the several acceptable projects would be the best one to invest in.
Compound interest – this is an interest payment computed on the amount of
the principal plus any previously accumulated interest that affected the
original principal.
Cost of capital – is the rate of return that a business could make when executing
a project if it so chose and when compared with other investments with
equivalent risks. This can also be stated as the opportunity cost of the funds
used in the project.
Discount rate – this is the term attributed to the rate of interest used in the
discounting process when finding a present value.
Discounted cash flow (DCF) methods – these are investment analysis methods in
which an assessment of the present values of future net cash flows are taken
into consideration in the investment decision making process.
Hurdle rate – this is the minimum acceptable rate of return, comparable to
the project’s cost of capital, that must be met or exceeded for a project to be
accepted.
Internal rate of return (IRR) method – this is a common DCF method in which a
project is evaluated based on comparing its rate of return to the established
hurdle rate.
Net present value (NPV) method – this is a common DCF method in which the
present values of a project’s future cash flows are calculated and compared
to the initial project costs.
350
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Glossary 351
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Payback method – this is a method that tries to determine how long it will
take for the expected net cash inflows to payback the investment outflows.
Simple interest – this is an interest payment computed on only the amount of
the principal for one or more periods.
Time value of money – this is the notion that the value of a currency is worth
more today than in the future due to its possibility of earning interest if
invested.

Multiple choice questions
15.1
In which of the following type of capital budgeting decision must the man-
ager decide amongst alternative worthwhile projects?
a
capital rationing
b acceptance 
c
rejection 
d capital discounting
15.2
The following factor is excluded in the payback method of making capital
investment decisions?
a
the net cash inflows
b the net investment cash outflows
c
the project cost
d the time value of money
15.3
In assessing the accounting rate of return, the incremental accounting in-
come is divided by:
a
average investment
b incremental investment
c
initial investment
d marginal investment
15.4
The capital investment decision method in which the decision is made
based on its comparison to the true economic return earned by the asset
over its life is:
a
the average rate of return method
b the internal rate of return method
c
the net present value method
d the payback method
15.5
In a proposed investment project, what will be the course of action if the
internal rate of return is 16% and the hurdle rate is 17.5%?
a
the project should be accepted
b the project should be reassessed using the accounting rate of return
c
the project should be reassessed using the average rate of return
d the project should be rejected
Exercises
15.1
As accountant of the motel, your manager wishes to know the outcomes of
four possible investments 8 years from now, and you are asked to determine
the future values of each one.
Principal
Interest rate
Remarks
––––––––––––––––––
––––––––––––
––––––––––––
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
First investment
€ 850,000.00
14.00%
compounded annually
Second investment
€ 750,000.00
12.00%
simple interest
Third investment
€
70,000.00
12.00%
8 yearly investments and to be
compounded annually
Fourth investment
€ 900,000.00
13.00%
half now and half after four years
and to be compounded twice a year
352 15 Capital investment decisions
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

15.2
The table below present expected future net cash flows for the Mata Hari
Restaurant. Use the anticipated discount rates to determine the present
values of each of the expected cash flow.
15.3
Martin and Mirabel are about to put
their life savings of €50,000,000.00
into a new project that is expected
to generate the following net
income streams.
The project is expected to have no
salvage value at the end of the 10
years and you are asked to advise
Martin and Mirabel on how to
proceed using the accounting rate of
return method of capital investment
analysis. Martin and Mirabel also
inform you that they need a return
on their investment of at least 30%.
Should they proceed with the project?
15.4
The management of the Bull’s Run
are considering expanding their
activities by building and running
a 3-D entertainment hall. The
estimated investment information is
as follows:
The management has asked you to
provide them with answers to the
following questions:
a what will be the payback period?
b what is the accounting rate of return?
c what is the net present value?
d what is the internal rate of return?
Year
Expected cash flow
Anticipated discount rate
––––
––––––––––––––––––––
–––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
€ 1,250,000.00
11.00%
2
€ 1,320,000.00
11.00%
3
€ 1,450,000.00
12.00%
4
€ 1,510,000.00
12.00%
5
€ 1,654,000.00
13.00%
6
€ 1,760,000.00
12.00%
7
€ 1,985,000.00
12.00%
8
€ 2,135,000.00
11.00%
9
€ 2,456,000.00
11.00%
10
€ 3,125,000.00
10.00%
Exercises 353
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Projected net incomes
–––––––
–––––––––––––––––––––––
Year 1
(€ 1,834,250.00)
Year 2
€
197,340.00
Year 3
€
258,060.00
Year 4
€
3,495,448.00
Year 5
€
7,020,750.00
Year 6
€ 23,613,755.00
Year 7
€ 23,402,500.00
Year 8
€ 17,321,645.00
Year 9
€ 15,758,105.00
Year 10
€ 14,226,822.50
Investment
€ 1,000,000.00
Incremental annual 
revenues
€ 1,050,000.00
Incremental annual 
expenses
€
850,000.00
Depreciation
linear
Discount rate
14.00%
Salvage value
null
Investment horizon
10 years


References for further reading
Books:
AHMA-FMC, (1997), Hotel Internal Control Guide, Educational Institute –
American Hotel and Motel Association, Lansing, Michigan
Andrew, W, P, Damitio, J. W. & Schmidgall, R. S. (2007), Financial
Management for the Hospitality Industry, Pearson – Prentice Hall, Upper
Saddle River, New Jersey
Berry, A. & Jarvis, R., (2006), Accounting in a Business Context, 4th edition,
Thomson, Bedford Row, London
Cote, R. (2001) Accounting for Hospitality Managers, Educational Institute,
4th edition, – American Hotel and Lodging Association, Lansing, Michigan
Cote, R. (2006), Basic Hotel and Restaurant Accounting, 6th edition,
Educational Institute – American Hotel and Lodging Association, Lansing,
Michigan
Davies, T. & Boczko, T., (2005), Business Accounting and Finance,
2nd edition, McGraw-Hill Education, Maidenhead, Berkshire
Glautier, M. W. E. & Underwood, B (2001), Accounting Theory and Practice,
7th edition, Pearson Education Limited, Harlow, Essex
Gowthorpe, C., (2005), Business Accounting and Finance for non
specialists, 2nd edition, Thomson, Bedford Row, London
Guilding, C., (2002), Financial Management for Hospitality Decision
Makers, Butterworth-Heinemann, Jordan Hill, Oxford
HACNY/AH & LEI/HF & TP, (2006) Uniform System of Accounts for the
Lodging Industry, 10th revised edition
Hales, J. A., (2005), Accounting and Financial Analysis in the Hospitality
Industry, Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann, Jordan Hill, Oxford
Harris, P. J. & Hazzard, P. A., (1987) Managerial Accounting in the Hotel and
Catering Industry – volume 2, 4th edition, Hutchinson Education, London
Hilton, R. W., (2008), Managerial Accounting: Creating Value in a Dynamic
Business Environment, 7th edition, McGraw-Hill Irwin, Boston
Jagels, M. G., (2007), Hospitality Management Accounting, 9th edition,
John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey
355
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Schmidgall, R. S., (2006), Hospitality Industry Management Accounting,
6th edition, Educational Institute – American Hotel and Lodging
Association, Lansing, Michigan
Stice, E. K., & Stice J. D., (2006), Financial Accounting: Reporting and
Analysis, 7th edition, Thomson South Western, Mason, Ohio
Internet:
Bureau of Labour Statistics, U.S. Department of Labour, Career Guide to
Industries, 2008-09 Edition, Hotels and Other Accommodations, on the
Internet at http://www.bls.gov/oco/cg/cgs036.htm (visited October 18, 2009)
356 References for further reading
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Answers to end of chapter multiple choice questions
Answers chapter 1
1.1 c
1.2 d
1.3 b
1.4 c
1.5 a
Answers chapter 2
2.1 c
2.2 d
2.3 d
2.4 a
2.5 d
Answers chapter 3
3.1 b
3.2 c
3.3 b
3.4 b
3.5 d
Answers chapter 4
4.1 a
4.2 c
4.3 c
4.4 a
4.5 a
Answers chapter 5
5.1 d
5.2 c
5.3 c
5.4 c
5.5 d
Answers chapter 6
6.1 d
6.2 b
6.3 a
6.4 b
6.5 d
Answers chapter 7
7.1 b
7.2 d
7.3 c
7.4 c
7.5 d
Answers chapter 8
8.1 a
8.2 b
8.3 b
8.4 d
8.5 c
Answers chapter 9
9.1 d
9.2 a
9.3 a
9.4 c
9.5 b
Answers chapter 10
10.1 b
10.2 c
10.3 a
10.4 c
10.5 b
Answers chapter 11
11.1 c
11.2 c
11.3 a
11.4 b
11.5 c
Answers chapter 12
12.1 b
12.2 d
12.3 c
12.4 d
12.5 c
357
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Answers chapter 13
13.1 d
13.2 c
13.3 b
13.4 c
13.5 b
Answers chapter 14
14.1 d
14.2 c
14.3 c
14.4 d
14.5 c
Answers chapter 15
15.1 a
15.2 d
15.3 c
15.4 b
15.5 d
358 Answers to end of chapter multiple choice questions
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Appendix
Factor tables
Future value interest factor of €1 per period at i% for n peridods, FVIF (i,n).
Period
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
10%
Period
––––––– –––––––– –––––––– –––––––– –––––––– –––––––– –––––––– –––––––– –––––––– ––––––––
––––––––
–––––––
1
1.010000
1.020000
1.030000
1.040000
1.050000
Ï.060000
1.070000
1.080000
1.090000
1.100000
1
2
1.020100
1.040400
1.060900
1.081600
1.102500
1.123600
1.144900
1.166400
1.188100
1.210000
2
3
1.030301
1.061208
1.092727
1.124864
1.157625
1.191016
1.225043
1.259712
1.295029
1.331000
3
4
1.040604
1.082432
1.125509
1.169859
1.215506
1.262477
1.310796
1.360489
1.411582
1.464100
4
5
1.051010
1.104081
1.159274
1.216653
1.276282
1.338226
1.402552
1.469328
1.538624
1.610510
5
6
1.061520
1.126162
1.194052
1.265319
1.340096
1.418519
1.500730
1.586874
1.677100
1.771561
6
7
1.072135
1.148686
1.229874
1.315932
1.407100
1.503630
1.605781
1.713824
1.828039
1.948717
7
8
1.082857
1.171659
1.266770
1.368569
1.477455
1.593848
1.718186
1.850930
1.992563
2.143589
8
9
1.093685
1.195093
1.304773
1.423312
1.551328
1.689479
1.838459
1.999005
2.171893
2.357948
9
10
1.104622
1.218994
1.343916
1.480244
1.628895
1.790848
1.967151
2.158925
2.367364
2.593742
10
11
1.115668
1.243374
1.384234
1.539454
1.710339
1.898299
2.104852
2.331639
2.580426
2.853117
11
12
1.126825
1.268242
1.425761
1.601032
1.795856
2.012196
2.252192
2.518170
2.812665
3.138428
12
13
1.138093
1.293607
1.468534
1.665074
1.885649
2.132928
2.409845
2.719624
3.065805
3.452271
13
14
1.149474
1.319479
1.512590
1.731676
1.979932
2.260904
2.578534
2.937194
3.341727
3.797498
14
15
1.160969
1.345868
1.557967
1.800944
2.078928
2.396558
2.759032
3.172169
3.642482
4.177248
15
16
1.172579
1.372786
1.604706
1.872981
2.182875
2.540352
2.952164
3.425943
3.970306
4.594973
16
17
1.184304
1.400241
1.652848
1.947900
2.292018
2.692773
3.158815
3.700018
4.327633
5.054470
17
18
1.196147
1.428246
1.702433
2.025817
2.406619
2.854339
3.379932
3.996019
4.717120
5.559917
18
19
1.208109
1.456811
1.753506
2.106849
2.526950
3.025600
3.616528
4.315701
5.141661
6.115909
19
20
1.220190
1.485947
1.806111
2.191123
2.653298
3.207135
3.869684
4.660957
5.604411
6.727500
20
25
1.282432
1.640606
2.093778
2.665836
3.386355
4.291871
5.427433
6.848475
8.623081
10.834706
25
30
1.347849
1.811362
2.427262
3.243398
4.321942
5.743491
7.612255
10.062657 13.267678
17.449402
30
35
1.416603
1.999890
2.813862
3.946089
5.516015
7.686087 10.676581
14.785344 20.413968
28.102437
35
40
1.488864
2.208040
3.262038
4.801021
7.039989
10.285718 14.974458
21.724521 31.409420
45.259256
40
50
1.644632
2.691588
4.383906
7.106683
11.467400
18.420154 29.457025
46.901613 74.357520
117.390853
50
359
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

360 Appendix
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Future value interest factor of €1 per period at i% for n periods, FVIF (i,n).
Period
11%
12%
13%
14%
15%
16%
17%
––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––
1
1.110000
1.120000
1.130000
1.140000
1.150000
1.160000
1.170000
2
1.232100
1.254400
1.276900
1.299600
1.322500
1.345600
1.368900
3
1.367631
1.404928
1.442897
1.481544
1.520875
1.560896
1.601613
4
1.518070
1.573519
1.630474
1.688960
1.749006
1.810639
1.873887
5
1.685058
1.762342
1.842435
1.925415
2.011357
2.100342
2.192448
6
1.870415
1.973823
2.081952
2.194973
2.313061
2.436396
2.565164
7
2.076160
2.210681
2.352605
2.502269
2.660020
2.826220
3.001242
8
2.304538
2.475963
2.658444
2.852586
3.059023
3.278415
3.511453
9
2.558037
2.773079
3.004042
3.251949
3.517876
3.802961
4.108400
10
2.839421
3.105848
3.394567
3.707221
4.045558
4.411435
4.806828
11
3.151757
3.478550
3.835861
4.226232
4.652391
5.117265
5.623989
12
3.498451
3.895976
4.334523
4.817905
5.350250
5.936027
6.580067
13
3.883280
4.363493
4.898011
5.492411
6.152788
6.885791
7.698679
14
4.310441
4.887112
5.534753
6.261349
7.075706
7.987518
9.007454
15
4.784589
5.473566
6.254270
7.137938
8.137062
9.265521
10.538721
16
5.310894
6.130394
7.067326
8.137249
9.357621
10.748004
12.330304
17
5.895093
6.866041
7.986078
9.276464
10.761264
12.467685
14.426456
18
6.543553
7.689966
9.024268
10.575169
12.375454
14.462514
16.878953
19
7.263344
8.612762
10.197423
12.055693
14.231772
16.776517
19.748375
20
8.062312
9.646293
11.523088
13.743490
16.366537
19.460759
23.105599
25
13.585464
17.000064
21.230542
26.461916
32.918953
40.874244
50.657826
30
22.892297
29.959922
39.115898
50.950159
66.211772
85.849877
1Ï1.064650
35
38.574851
52.799620
72.068506
98.100178
133.175523
180.314073
243.503474
40
65.000867
93.050970
132.781552
188.883514
267.863546
378.721158
533.868713
50
184.564827
289.002190
450.735925
700.232988
1,083.657442
1,670.703804
2,566.215284
Future value interest factor of €1 per period at i% for n periods, FVIF (i,n).
Period
21%
22%
23%
24%
25%
30%
35%
––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––
–––––––––––
1
1.2100
1.2200
1.2300
1.2400
1.2500
1.3000
1.3500
2
1.4641
1.4884
1.5129
1.5376
1.5625
1.6900
1.8225
3
1.7716
1.8158
1.8609
1.9066
1.9531
2.1970
2.4604
4
2.1436
2.2153
2.2889
2.3642
2.4414
2.8561
3.3215
5
2.5937
2.7027
2.8153
2.9316
3.0518
3.7129
4.4840
6
3.1384
3.2973
3.4628
3.6352
3.8147
4.8268
6.0534
7
3.7975
4.0227
4.2593
4.5077
4.7684
6.2749
8.1722
8
4.5950
4.9077
5.2389
5.5895
5.9605
8.1573
11.0324
9
5.5599
5.9874
6.4439
6.9310
7.4506
10.6045
14.8937
10
6.7275
7.3046
7.9259
8.5944
9.3132
13.7858
20.1066
11
8.1403
8.9117
9.7489
10.6571
11.6415
17.9216
27.1439
12
9.8497
10.8722
11.9912
13.2148
Ï4.5519
23.2981
36.6442
13
11.9182
13.2641
14.7491
16.3863
18.1899
30.2875
49.4697
14
14.4210
16.1822
18.1414
20.3191
22.7374
39.3738
66.7841
15
17.4494
19.7423
22.3140
25.1956
28.4217
51.1859
90.1585
16
21.1138
24.0856
27.4462
31.2426
35.5271
66.5417
121.7139
17
25.5477
29.3844
33.7588
38.7408
44.4089
86.5042
164.3138
18
30.9127
35.8490
41.5233
48.0386
55.5112
112.4554
221.8236
19
37.4043
43.7358
51.0737
59.5679
69.3889
146.1920
299.4619
20
45.2593
53.3576
62.8206
73.8641
86.7362
190.0496
404.2736
25
117.3909
144.2101
176.8593
216.5420
264.6978
705.6410
1,812.7763
30
304.4816
389.7579
497.9129
634.8199
807.7936
2,619.9956
8,128.5495
35
789.7470
1,053.4018
1,401.7769
1,861.0540
2,465.1903
9,727.8604
36,448.6878
40
2,048.4002
2,847.0378
3,946.4305
5,455.9126
7,523.1638
36,118.8648
163,437.1347
50
13,780.6123
20,796.5615
31,279.1953
46,890.4346
70,064.9232
497,929.2230
3,286,157.8795

Appendix 361
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
18%
19%
20%
Period
––––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––
–––––––
1.180000
1.190000
1.200000
1
1.392400
1.416100
1.440000
2
1.643032
1.685159
1.728000
3
1.938778
2.005339
2.073600
4
2.287758
2.386354
2.488320
5
2.699554
2.839761
2.985984
6
3.185474
3.379315
3.583181
7
3.758859
4.021385
4.299817
8
4.435454
4.785449
5.159780
9
5.233836
5.694684
6.191736
10
6.175926
6.776674
7.430084
11
7.287593
8.064242
8.916100
12
8.599359
9.596448
10.699321
13
10.147244
11.419773
12.839185
14
11.973748
13.589530
15.407022
15
14.129023
16.171540
18.488426
16
16.672247
19.244133
22.186111
17
19.673251
22.900518
26.623333
18
23.214436
27.251616
31.948000
19
27.393035
32.429423
38.337600
20
62.668627
77.388073
95.396217
25
143.370638
184.675312
237.376314
30
327.997290
440.700607
590.668229
35
750.378345
1,051.667507
1,469.771568
40
3,927.356860
5,988.913902
9,100.438150
50
40%
45%
50%
Period
––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
–––––––
1.4000
1.4500
1.5000
1
1.9600
2.1025
2.2500
2
2.7440
3.0486
3.3750
3
3.8416
4.4205
5.0625
4
5.3782
6.4097
7.5938
5
7.5295
9.2941
11.3906
6
10.5414
13.4765
17.0859
7
14.7579
19.5409
25.6289
8
20.6610
28.3343
38.4434
9
28.9255
41.0847
57.6650
10
40.4957
59.5728
86.4976
11
56.6939
86.3806
129.7463
12
79.3715
125.2518
194.6195
13
111.1201
181.6151
291.9293
14
155.5681
263.3419
437.8939
15
217.7953
381.8458
656.8408
16
304.9135
553.6764
985.2613
17
426.8789
802.8308
1,477.8919
18
597.6304
1,164.1047
2,216.8378
19
836.6826
1,687.9518
3,325.2567
20
4,499.8796
10,819.3222
25,251.1683
25
24,201.4324
69,348.9783
191,751.0592
30
130,161.1116
444,508.5083
1,456,109.6060
35
700,037.6966
2,849,181.3270
11,057,332.3209
40
20,248,916.2398
117,057,733.7166
637,621,500.2141
50

362 Appendix
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Future value interest factor of an ordinary annuity of €1 per period at i% for n periods, FVIFA (i,n).
Period
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––
–––––––––––
1
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
2
2.010000
2.020000
2.030000
2.040000
2.050000
2.060000
2.070000
3
3.030100
3.060400
3.090900
3.121600
3.152500
3.183600
3.214900
4
4.060401
4.121608
4.183627
4.246464
4.310125
4.374616
4.439943
5
5.101005
5.204040
5.309136
5.416323
5.525631
5.637093
5.750739
6
6.152015
6.308121
6.468410
6.632975
6.801913
6.975319
7.153291
7
7.213535
7.434283
7.662462
7.898294
8.142008
8393838
8.654021
8
8.285671
8.582969
8.892336
9.214226
9.549109
9.897468
10.259803
9
9.368527
9.754628
10.159106
10.582795
11.026564
11.491316
11.977989
10
10.462213
10.949721
11.463879
12.006107
12.577893
13.180795
13.816448
11
11.566835
12.168715
12.807796
13.486351
14.206787
14.971643
15.783599
12
12.682503
13.412090
14.192030
15.025805
15.917127
16.869941
17.888451
13
13.809328
14.680332
15.617790
16.626838
17.712983
18.882138
20.140643
14
14.947421
15.973938
17.086324
18.291911
19.598632
21.015066
22.550488
15
16.096896
17.293417
18.598914
20.023588
21.578564
23.275970
25.129022
16
17.257864
18.639285
20.156881
21.824531
23.657492
25.672528
27.888054
17
18.430443
20.012071
21.761588
23.697512
25.840366
28.212880
30.840217
18
19.614748
21.412312
23.414435
25.645413
28.132385
30.905653
33.999033
19
20.810895
22.840559
25.116868
27.671229
30.539004
33.759992
37.378965
20
22.019004
24.297370
26.870374
29.778079
33.065954
36.785591
40.995492
25
28.243200
32.030300
36.459264
41.645908
47.727099
54.864512
63.249038
30
34.784892
40.568079
47.575416
56.084938
66.438848
79.058186
94.460786
35
41.660276
49.994478
60.462082
73652225
90.320307
1Ï1.434780
138.236878
40
48.886373
60.401983
75.401260
95.025516
120.799774
154.761966
199.635112
50
64.463182
84.579401
112.796867
152.667084
209.347996
290.335905
406.528929
Future value interest factor of an ordinary annuity of €1 per period at i% for n periods, FVIFA(i,n).
Period
11%
12%
13%
14%
15%
16%
17%
––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––
–––––––––––
1
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
2
2.110000
2.120000
2.130000
2.140000
2.150000
2.160000
2.170000
3
3.342100
3.374400
3.406900
3.439600
3.472500
3.505600
3.538900
4
4.709731
4.779328
4.849797
4.921144
4.993375
5.066496
5.140513
5
6.227801
6.352847
6.480271
6.610104
6.742381
6.877135
7.014400
6
7.912860
8.115189
8.322706
8.535519
8.753738
8.977477
9.206848
7
9.783274
10.089012
10.404658
10.730491
11.066799
11.413873
11.772012
8
11.859434
12.299693
12.757263
13.232760
13.726819
14.240093
14.773255
9
14.163972
14.775656
15.415707
16.085347
16.785842
17.518508
18.284708
10
16.722009
17.548735
18.419749
19.337295
20.303718
21.321469
22.393108
11
19.561430
20.654583
21.814317
23.044516
24.349276
25.732904
27.199937
12
22.713187
24.133133
25.650178
27.270749
29.001667
30.850169
32.823926
13
26.211638
28.029109
29.984701
32.088654
34.351917
36.786196
39.403993
14
30.094918
32.392602
34.882712
37.581065
40.504705
43.671987
47.102672
15
34.405359
37.279715
40.417464
43.842414
47.580411
51.659505
56.110126
16
39.189948
42.753280
46.671735
50.980352
55.717472
60.925026
66.648848
17
44.500843
48.883674
53.739060
59.117601
65.075093
71.673030
78.979152
18
50.395936
55.749715
61.725138
68.394066
75.836357
84.140715
93.405608
19
56.939488
63.439681
70.749406
78.969235
88.211811
98.603230
110.284561
20
64.202832
72.052442
80.946829
91.024928
102.443583
115.379747
130.032936
25
114.413307
133.333870
155.619556
181.870827
212.793017
249.214024
292.104856
30
199.020878
241.332684
293.199215
356.786847
434.745146
530.311731
647.439118
35
341.589555
431.663496
546.680819
693.572702
881.170156
1,120.712955
1,426.491022
40
581.826066
767.091420
1,013.704243
1,342.025099
1,779.090308
2,360.757241
3,134.521839
50
1,668.771152
2,400.018249
3,459.507117
4,994.521346
7,217.716277
10,435.648773
15,089.501673

Appendix 363
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
8%
9%
10%
Period
––––––––––
–––––––––
––––––––––
–––––––
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1
2.080000
2.090000
2.100000
2
3.246400
3.278100
3.310000
3
4.506112
4.573129
4.641000
4
5.866601
5.984711
6.105100
5
7.335929
7.523335
7.715610
6
8.922803
9.200435
9.487171
7
10636628
11.028474
11.435888
8
12.487558
13.021036
13.579477
9
14.486562
15.192930
15.937425
10
16.645487
17.560293
18.531167
11
18.977126
20.140720
21.384284
12
21.495297
22.953385
24.522712
13
24.214920
26.019189
27.974983
14
27.152114
29.360916
31.772482
15
30.324283
33.003399
35.949730
16
33.750226
36.973705
40.544703
17
37.450244
41.301338
45.599173
18
41.446263
46.018458
51.159090
19
45.761964
51.160120
57.274999
20
73.105940
84.700896
98.347059
25
113.283211
136.307539
164.494023
30
172.316804
215.710755
271.024368
35
259.056519
337.882445
442.592556
40
573.770156
815.083556
1163.908529
50
18%
19%
20%
Period
––––––––––––
––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
–––––––
1.000000
1.000000
1.000000
1
2.180000
2.190000
2.200000
2
3.572400
3.606100
3.640000
3
5.215432
5.291259
5.368000
4
7.154210
7.296598
7.441600
5
9.441968
9.682952
9.929920
6
12.141522
12.522713
12.915904
7
15.326996
15.902028
16.499085
8
19.085855
19.9234Ï3
20.798902
9
23.521309
24.708862
25.958682
10
28.755144
30.403546
32.150419
11
34.931070
37.180220
39.580502
12
42.218663
45.244461
48.496603
13
50.818022
54.840909
59.195923
14
60.965266
66.260682
72.035108
15
72.939014
79.850211
87.442129
16
87.068036
96.021751
105.930555
17
103.740283
115.265884
128.116666
18
123.413534
138.166402
154.740000
19
146.627970
165.418018
186.688000
20
342.603486
402.042491
471.981083
25
790.947991
966.712169
1,181.881569
30
1,816.651612
2,314.213721
2,948.341146
35
4,163.213027
5,529.828982
7,343.857840
40
21,813.093666
31,515.336327
45,497.190750
50

364 Appendix
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Future value interest factor of an ordinary annuity of €1 per period at i% for n periods, FVIFA (i,n).
Period
21%
22%
23%
24%
25%
30%
35%
––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––
––––––––––
––––––––––
–––––––––––
1
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
2
2.2100
2.2200
2.2300
2.2400
2.2500
2.3000
2.3500
3
3.6741
3.7084
3.7429
3.7776
3.8125
3.9900
4.1725
4
5.4457
5.5242
5.6038
5.6842
5.7656
6.1870
6.6329
5
7.5892
7.7396
7.8926
8.0484
8.2070
9.0431
9.9544
6
10.1830
10.4423
10.7079
10.9801
11.2588
12.7560
14.4384
7
13.3214
13.7396
14.1708
14.6153
15.0735
17.5828
20.4919
8
17.1189
17.7623
18.4300
19.1229
19.8419
23.8577
28.6640
9
21.7139
22.6700
23.6690
24.7125
25.8023
32.0150
39.6964
10
27.2738
28.6574
30.1128
31.6434
33,2529
42.6195
54.5902
11
34.0013
35.9620
38.0388
40.2379
42.5661
56.4053
74.6967
12
42.1416
44.8737
47.7877
50.8950
54.2077
74.3270
101.8406
13
51.9913
55.7459
59.7788
64.1097
68.7596
97.6250
138.4848
14
63.9095
69.0100
74.5280
80.4961
86.9495
127.9125
187.9544
15
78.3305
85.1922
92.6694
100.8151
109.6868
167.2863
254.7385
16
95.7799
104.9345
114.9834
126.0108
138.1085
218.4722
344.8970
17
116.8937
129.0201
142.4295
157.2534
173.6357
285.0139
466.6109
18
142.4413
158.4045
176.1883
195.9942
218.0446
371.5180
630.9247
19
173.3540
194.2535
217.7116
244.0328
273.5558
483.9734
852.7483
20
210.7584
237.9893
268.7853
303.6006
342.9447
630.1655
1,152.2103
25
554.2422
650.9551
764.6054
898.0916
1,054.7912
2,348.8033
5,176.5037
30
1,445.1507
1,767.0813
2,160.4907
2,640.9164
3,227.1743
8,729.9855
23,221.5700
35
3,755.9379
4,783.6447
6,090.3344
7,750.2251
9,856.7613
32,422.8681
104,136.2508
40
9,749.5248
12,936.5353
17,154.0456
22,728.8026
30,088.6554
120,392.8827
466,960.3848
50
65,617.2016
94,525.2793
135,992.1536
195,372.6442
280,255.6929
1,659,760.7433
9,389,019.6556
Present value interest factor of €1 per period at i%for n periods, PVIF (i,n).
Period
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
––––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
1
0.990099
0.980392
0.970874
0.961538
0.952381
0.943396
0.934579
0.925926
2
0.980296
0.961169
0.942596
0.924556
0.907029
0.889996
0.873439
0.857339
3
0.970590
0.942322
0.915142
0.888996
0.863838
0.839619
0.816298
0.793832
4
0.960980
0.923845
0.888487
0.854804
0.822702
0.792094
0.762895
0.735030
5
0.951466
0.905731
0.862609
0.821927
0.783526
0.747258
0.712986
0.680583
6
0.942045
0.887971
0.837484
0.790315
0.746215
0.704961
0.666342
0.630170
7
0.932718
0.870560
0.813092
0.759918
0.710681
0.665057
0.622750
0.583490
8
0.923483
0.853490
0.789409
0.730690
0.676839
0.627412
0.582009
0.540269
9
0.914340
0.836755
0.766417
0.702587
0.644609
0.591898
0.543934
0.500249
10
0.905287
0.820348
0.744094
0.675564
0.613913
0.558395
0.508349
0.463193
11
0.896324
0.804263
0.722421
0.649581
0.584679
0.526788
0.475093
0.428883
12
0.887449
0.788493
0.701380
0.624597
0.556837
0.496969
0.444012
0.397114
13
0.878663
0.773033
0.680951
0.600574
0.530321
0.468839
0.414964
0.367698
14
0.869963
0.757875
0.661118
0.577475
0.505068
0.442301
0.387817
0.340461
15
0.861349
0.743015
0.641862
0.555265
0.481017
0.417265
0.362446
0.315242
16
0.852821
0.728446
0.623167
0.533908
0.458112
0.393646
0.338735
0.291890
17
0.844377
0.714163
0.605016
0.513373
0.436297
0.371364
0.316574
0.270269
18
0.836017
0.700159
0.587395
0.493628
0.415521
0.350344
0.295864
0.250249
19
0.827740
0.686431
0.570286
0.474642
0.395734
0.330513
0.276508
0.231712
20
0.819544
0.672971
0.553676
0.456387
0.376889
0.311805
0.258419
0.214548
25
0.779768
0.609531
0.477606
0.375117
0.295303
0.232999
0.184249
0.146018
30
0.741923
0.552071
0.411987
0.308319
0.231377
0.174110
0.131367
0.099377
35
0.705914
0.500028
0.355383
0.253415
0.181290
0.130105
0.093663
0.067635
40
0.671653
0.452890
0.306557
0.208289
0.142046
0.097222
0.066780
0.046031
50
0.608039
0.371528
0.228107
0.140713
0.087204
0.054288
0.033948
0.021321

Appendix 365
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
40%
45%
50%
Period
––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
–––––––––––––
–––––––
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1
2.4000
2.4500
2.5000
2
4.3600
4.5525
4.7500
3
7.1040
7.6011
8.1250
4
10.9456
12.0216
13.1875
5
16.3238
18.4314
20.7813
6
23.8534
27.7255
32.1719
7
34.3947
41.2019
49.2578
8
49.1526
60.7428
74.8867
9
69.8137
89.0771
113.3301
10
98.7391
130.1618
170.9951
11
139.2348
189.7346
257.4927
12
195.9287
276.1151
387.2390
13
275.3002
401.3670
581.8585
14
386.4202
582.9821
873.7878
15
541.9883
846.3240
1,311.6817
16
759.7837
1,228.1699
1,968.5225
17
1,064.6971
1,781.8463
2,953.7838
18
1,491.5760
2,584.6771
4,431.6756
19
2,089.2064
3,748.7818
6,648.5135
20
11,247.1990
24,040.7161
50,500.3366
25
60,501.0809
154,106.6184
383,500.1185
30
325,400.2789
987,794.4630
2,912,217.2121
35
1,750,091.7415
6,331,511.8378
22,114,662.6419
40
50,622,288.0994
260,128,294.9257
1,275,242,998.4281
50
9%
10%
Period
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
0.917431
0.909091
1
0.841680
0.826446
2
0.772183
0.751315
3
0.708425
0.683013
4
0.649931
0.620921
5
0.596267
0.564474
6
0.547034
0.513158
7
0.501866
0.466507
8
0.460428
0.424098
9
0.422411
0.385543
10
0.387533
0.350494
11
0.355535
0.318631
12
0.326179
0.289664
13
0.299246
0.263331
14
0.274538
0.239392
15
0.251870
0.217629
16
0.231073
0.197845
17
0.211994
0.179859
18
0.194490
0.163508
19
0.178431
0.148644
20
0.115968
0.092296
25
0.075371
0.057309
30
0.048986
0.035584
35
0.031838
0.022095
40
0.013449
0.008519
50

366 Appendix
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Present value interest factor of €1 per period at i% for n periods, PVIF (i,n).
Period
11%
12%
13%
14%
15%
16%
17%
18%
––––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
1
0.900901
0.892857
0.884956
0.877193
0.869565
0.862069
0.854701
0.847458
2
0.811622
0.797194
0.783147
0.769468
0.756144
0.743163
0.730514
0.718184
3
0.731191
0.711780
0.693050
0.674972
0.657516
0.640658
0.624371
0.608631
4
0.658731
0.635518
0.613319
0.592080
0.571753
0.552291
0.533650
0.515789
5
0.593451
0.567427
0.542760
0.519369
0.497177
0.476113
0.456111
0.437109
6
0.534641
0.506631
0.480319
0.455587
0.432328
0.410442
0.389839
0.370432
7
0.481658
0.452349
0.425061
0.399637
0.375937
0.353830
0.333195
0.313925
8
0.433926
0.403883
0.376160
0.350559
0.326902
0.305025
0.284782
0.266038
9
0.390925
0.360610
0.332885
0.307508
0.284262
0.262953
0.243404
0.225456
10
0.352184
0.321973
0.294588
0.269744
0.247185
0.226684
0.208037
0.191064
11
0.317283
0.287476
0.260698
0.236617
0.214943
0.195417
0.177810
0.161919
12
0.285841
0.256675
0.230706
0.207559
0.186907
0.168463
0.151974
0.137220
13
0.257514
0.229174
0.204165
0.182069
0.162528
0.145227
0.129892
0.116288
14
0.231995
0.204620
0.180677
0.159710
0.141329
0.125195
0.111019
0.098549
15
0.209004
0.182696
0.159891
0.140096
0.122894
0.107927
0.094888
0.083516
16
0.188292
0.163122
0.141496
0.122892
0.106865
0.093041
0.081101
0.070776
17
0.169633
0.145644
0.125218
0.107800
0.092926
0.080207
0.069317
0.059980
18
0.152822
0.130040
0.1Ï0812
0.094561
0.080805
0.069144
0.059245
0.050830
19
0.137678
0.116107
0.098064
0.082948
0.070265
0.059607
0.050637
0.043077
20
0.124034
0.103667
0.086782
0.072762
0.061100
0.051385
0.043280
0.036506
25
0.073608
0.058823
0.047102
0.037790
0.030378
0.024465
0.019740
0.015957
30
0.043683
0.033378
0.025565
0.019627
0.015103
0.011648
0.009004
0.006975
35
0.025924
0.018940
0.013876
0.010194
0.007509
0.005546
0.004107
0.003049
40
0.015384
0.010747
0.007531
0.005294
0.003733
0.002640
0.001873
0.001333
50
0.005418
0.003460
0.002219
0.001428
0.000923
0.000599
0.000390
0.000255
Present value interest factor of €1 per period at i% tor n periods, PVIF (i,n).
Period
21%
22%
23%
24%
25%
30%
35%
40%
––––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
1
0.826446
0.819672
0.813008
0.806452
0.800000
0.769231
0.740741
0.714286
2
0.683013
0.671862
0.660982
0.650364
0.640000
0.591716
0.548697
0.510204
3
0.564474
0.550707
0.537384
0.524487
0.512000
0.455166
0.406442
0.364431
4
0.466507
0.451399
0.436897
0.422974
0.409600
0.350128
0.301068
0.260308
5
0.385543
0.369999
0.355201
0.341108
0.327680
0.269329
0.223014
0.185934
6
0.318631
0.303278
0.288781
0.275087
0.262144
0.207176
0.165195
0.132810
7
0.263331
0.248589
0.234782
0.221844
0.209715
0.159366
0.122367
0.094865
8
0.217629
0.203761
0.190879
0.178907
0.167772
0.122589
0.090642
0.067760
9
0.179859
0.167017
0.155187
0.144280
0.134218
0.094300
0.067142
0.048400
10
0.148644
0.136899
0.126168
0.116354
0.107374
0.072538
0.049735
0.034572
11
0.122846
0.112213
0.102576
0.093834
0.085899
0.055799
0.036841
0.024694
12
0.101526
0.091978
0.083395
0.075673
0.068719
0.042922
0.027289
0.017639
13
0.083905
0.075391
0.067801
0.061026
0.054976
0.033017
0.020214
0.012599
14
0.069343
0.061796
0.055122
0.049215
0.043980
0.025398
0.014974
0.008999
15
0.057309
0.050653
0.044815
0.039689
0.035184
0.019537
0.011092
0.006428
16
0.047362
0.041519
0.036435
0.032008
0.028147
0.015028
0.008216
0.004591
17
0.039143
0.034032
0.029622
0.025813
0.022518
0.011560
0.006086
0.003280
18
0.032349
0.027895
0.024083
0.020817
0.018014
0.008892
0.004508
0.002343
19
0.026735
0.022865
0.019580
0.016788
0.014412
0.006840
0.003339
0.001673
20
0.022095
0.018741
0.015918
0.013538
0.011529
0.005262
0.002474
0.001195
25
0.008519
0.006934
0.005654
0.004618
0.003778
0.001417
0.000552
0.000222
30
0.003284
0.002566
0.002008
0.001575
0.001238
0.000382
0.000123
0.000041
35
0.001266
0.000949
0.000713
0.000537
0.000406
0.000103
0.000027
0.000008
40
0.000488
0.000351
0.000253
0.000183
0.000133
0.000028
0.000006
0.000001
50
0.000073
0.000048
0.000032
0.000021
0.000014
0.000002
0.000000
0.000000

Appendix 367
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
19%
20%
Period
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
0.840336
0.833333
1
0.706165
0.694444
2
0.593416
0.578704
3
0.498669
0.482253
4
0.419049
0.401878
5
0.352142
0.334898
6
0.295918
0.279082
7
0.248671
0.232568
8
0.208967
0.193807
9
0.175602
0.161506
10
0.147565
0.134588
11
0.124004
0.112157
12
0.104205
0.093464
13
0.087567
0.077887
14
0.073586
0.064905
15
0.061837
0.054088
16
0.051964
0.045073
17
0.043667
0.037561
18
0.036695
0.031301
19
0.030836
0.026084
20
0.012922
0.010483
25
0.005415
0.004213
30
0.002269
0.001693
35
0.000951
0.000680
40
0.000167
0.000110
50
45%
50%
Period
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
0.689655
0.666667
1
0.475624
0.444444
2
0.328017
0.296296
3
0.226218
0.197531
4
0.156013
0.131687
5
0.107595
0.087791
6
0.074203
0.058528
7
0.051175
0.039018
8
0.035293
0.026012
9
0.024340
0.017342
10
0.016786
0.011561
11
0.011577
0.007707
12
0.007984
0.005138
13
0.005506
0.003425
14
0.003797
0.002284
15
0.002619
0.001522
16
0.001806
0.001015
17
0.001246
0.000677
18
0.000859
0.000451
19
0.000592
0.000301
20
0.000092
0.000040
25
0.000014
0.000005
30
0.000002
0.000001
35
0.000000
0.000000
40
0.000000
0.000000
50

368 Appendix
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Present value interest factor of €1 per period at i% tor n periods, PVIF (i,n).
Period
21%
22%
23%
24%
25%
30%
35%
40%
––––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
1
0.826446
0.819672
0.813008
0.806452
0.800000
0.769231
0.740741
0.714286
2
0.683013
0.671862
0.660982
0.650364
0.640000
0.591716
0.548697
0.510204
3
0.564474
0.550707
0.537384
0.524487
0.512000
0.455166
0.406442
0.364431
4
0.466507
0.451399
0.436897
0.422974
0.409600
0.350128
0.301068
0.260308
5
0.385543
0.369999
0.355201
0.341108
0.327680
0.269329
0.223014
0.185934
6
0.318631
0.303278
0.288781
0.275087
0.262144
0.207176
0.165195
0.132810
7
0.263331
0.248589
0.234782
0.221844
0.209715
0.159366
0.122367
0.094865
8
0.217629
0.203761
0.190879
0.178907
0.167772
0.122589
0.090642
0.067760
9
0.179859
0.167017
0.155187
0.144280
0.134218
0.094300
0.067142
0.048400
10
0.148644
0.136899
0.126168
0.116354
0.107374
0.072538
0.049735
0.034572
11
0.122846
0.112213
0.102576
0.093834
0.085899
0.055799
0.036841
0.024694
12
0.101526
0.091978
0.083395
0.075673
0.068719
0.042922
0.027289
0.017639
13
0.083905
0.075391
0.067801
0.061026
0.054976
0.033017
0.020214
0.012599
14
0.069343
0.061796
0.055122
0.049215
0.043980
0.025398
0.014974
0.008999
15
0.057309
0.050653
0.044815
0.039689
0.035184
0.019537
0.011092
0.006428
16
0.047362
0.041519
0.036435
0.032008
0.028147
0.015028
0.008216
0.004591
17
0.039143
0.034032
0.029622
0.025813
0.022518
0.011560
0.006086
0.003280
18
0.032349
0.027895
0.024083
0.020817
0.018014
0.008892
0.004508
0.002343
19
0.026735
0.022865
0.019580
0.016788
0.014412
0.006840
0.003339
0.001673
20
0.022095
0.018741
0.015918
0.013538
0.011529
0.005262
0.002474
0.001195
25
0.008519
0.006934
0.005654
0.004618
0.003778
0.001417
0.000552
0.000222
30
0.003284
0.002566
0.002008
0.001575
0.001238
0.000382
0.000123
0.000041
35
0.001266
0.000949
0.000713
0.000537
0.000406
0.000103
0.000027
0.000008
40
0.000488
0.000351
0.000253
0.000183
0.000133
0.000028
0.000006
0.000001
50
0.000073
0.000048
0.000032
0.000021
0.000014
0.000002
0.000000
0.000000
Present value interest factor of an (ordinary) annuity of €1 per period at i% forn periods, PVIFA (i.n).
Period
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
––––––––
1
0.990099
0.980392
0.970874
0.961538
0.952381
0.943396
0.934579
0.925926
2
1.970395
1.941561
1.913470
1.886095
1.859410
1.833393
1.808018
1.783265
3
2.940985
2.883883
2.828611
2.775091
2.723248
2.673012
2.624316
2.577097
4
3.901966
3.807729
3.717098
3.629895
3.545951
3.465106
3.387211
3.312127
5
4.853431
4.713460
4.579707
4.451822
4.329477
4.212364
4,100197
3.992710
6
5.795476
5.601431
5.417191
5.242137
5.075692
4.917324
4.766540
4.622880
7
6.728195
6.471991
6.230283
6.002055
5.786373
5.582381
5.389289
5.206370
8
7.651678
7.325481
7.019692
6.732745
6.463213
6.209794
5.971299
5.746639
9
8.566018
8.162237
7,786109
7.435332
7.107822
6.801692
6.515232
6.246888
10
9.471305
8.982585
8.530203
8.110896
7.721735
7.360087
7.023582
6.710081
11
10.367628
9.786848
9.252624
8.760477
8.306414
7.886875
7.498674
7.138964
12
11.255077
10.575341
9.954004
9.385074
8.863252
8.383844
7.942686
7.536078
13
12.133740
11.348374
10.634955
9.985648
9.393573
8.852683
8.357651
7.903776
14
13.003703
12.106249
11.296073
10.563123
9.898641
9.294984
8.745468
8.244237
15
13.865053
12.849264
11.937935
11.118387
10.379658
9.712249
9.107914
8.559479
16
14.717874
13.577709
12.561102
11.652296
10.837770
10.105895
9.446649
8.851369
17
15.562251
14.291872
13.166118
12.165669
11.274066
10.477260
9.763223
9.121638
18
16.398269
14.992031
13.753513
12.659297
11.689587
10.827603
10.059087
9.371887
19
17.226008
15.678462
14.323799
13.133939
12.085321
11.158116
10.335595
9.603599
20
18.045553
16.351433
14.877475
13.590326
12.462210
11.469921
10.594014
9.818147
25
22.023156
19.523456
17.413148
15.622080
14.093945
12.783356
11.653583
10.674776
30
25.807708
22.396456
19.600441
17,292033
15.372451
13.764831
12.409041
11.257783
35
29.408580
24.998619
21.487220
18.664613
16.374194
14.498246
12.947672
11.654568
40
32.834686
27.355479
23.114772
19.792774
17.159086
15.046297
13.331709
11.924613
50
39.196118
31.423606
25.729764
21.482185
18.255925
15.761861
13.800746
12.233485

Appendix 369
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
45%
50%
Period
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
0.689655
0.666667
1
0.475624
0.444444
2
0.328017
0.296296
3
0.226218
0.197531
4
0.156013
0.131687
5
0.107595
0.087791
6
0.074203
0.058528
7
0.051175
0.039018
8
0.035293
0.026012
9
0.024340
0.017342
10
0.016786
0.011561
11
0.011577
0.007707
12
0.007984
0.005138
13
0.005506
0.003425
14
0.003797
0.002284
15
0.002619
0.001522
16
0.001806
0.001015
17
0.001246
0.000677
18
0.000859
0.000451
19
0.000592
0.000301
20
0.000092
0.000040
25
0.000014
0.000005
30
0.000002
0.000001
35
0.000000
0.000000
40
0.000000
0.000000
50
9%
10%
Period
––––––––
–––––––
–––––––
0.917431
0.909091
1
1.759111
1.735537
2
2.531295
2.486852
3
3.239720
3.169865
4
3.889651
3.790787
5
4.485919
4.355261
6
5.032953
4.868419
7
5.534819
5.334926
8
5.995247
5.759024
9
6.417658
6.144567
10
6.805191
6.495061
11
7.160725
6.813692
12
7.486904
7.103356
13
7.786150
7.366687
14
8.060688
7.606080
15
8.312558
7.823709
16
8.543631
8.021553
17
8.755625
8.201412
18
8.950115
8.364920
19
9.128546
8.513564
20
9.822580
9.077040
25
10.273654
9.426914
30
10.566821
9.644159
35
10.757360
9.779051
40
10.961683
9.914814
50

370 Appendix
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
Present value interest factor of an (ordinary) annuity of €1 per period at i% for n periods, PVIFA (i,n).
Period
11%
12%
13%
14%
15%
16%
17%
18%
––––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
1
0.900901
0.892857
0.884956
0.877193
0.869565
0.862069
0.854701
0.847458
2
1.712523
1.690051
1.668102
1.646661
1.625709
1.605232
1.585214
1.565642
3
2.443715
2.401831
2.361153
2.321632
2.283225
2.245890
2.209585
2.174273
4
3.102446
3.037349
2.974471
2.913712
2.854978
2.798181
2.743235
2.690062
5
3.695897
3.604776
3.517231
3.433081
3.352155
3.274294
3.199346
3.127171
6
4.230538
4.111407
3.997550
3.888668
3.784483
3.684736
3.589185
3.497603
7
4.712196
4.563757
4.422610
4.288305
4.160420
4.038565
3.922380
3.811528
8
5.146123
4.967640
4.798770
4.638864
4.487322
4.343591
4.207163
4.077566
9
5.537048
5.328250
5.131655
4.946372
4.771584
4.606544
4.450566
4.303022
10
5.889232
5.650223
5.426243
5.216116
5.018769
4.833227
4.658604
4.494086
11
6.206515
5.937699
5.686941
5.452733
5.233712
5.028644
4.836413
4.656005
12
6.492356
6.194374
5.917647
5.660292
5.420619
5.197107
4.988387
4.793225
13
6.749870
6.423548
6.121812
5.842362
5.583147
5.342334
5.118280
4.909513
14
6.981865
6.628168
6.302488
6.002072
5.724476
5.467529
5.229299
5.008062
15
7.190870
6.810864
6.462379
6.142168
5.847370
5.575456
5.324187
5.091578
16
7.379162
6.973986
6.603875
6.265060
5.954235
5.668497
5.405288
5.162354
17
7.548794
7.119630
6.729093
6.372859
6.047161
5.748704
5.474605
5.222334
18
7.701617
7.249670
6.839905
6.467420
6.127966
5.817848
5.533851
5.273164
19
7.839294
7.365777
6.937969
6.550369
6.198231
5.877455
5.584488
5.316241
20
7.963328
7.469444
7.024752
6.623131
6.259331
5.928841
5.627767
5.352746
25
8.421745
7.843139
7.329985
6.872927
6.464149
6.097092
5.766234
5.466906
30
8.693793
8.055184
7.495653
7.002664
6.565980
6.177198
5.829390
5.516806
35
8.855240
8.175504
7.585572
7.070045
6.616607
6.215338
5.858196
5.538618
40
8.951051
8.243777
7.634376
7.105041
6.641778
6.233497
5.871335
5.548152
50
9.041653
8.304498
7.675242
7.132656
6.660515
6.246259
5.880061
5.554141
Present value interest factor of an (ordinary) annuity of €1 per period at i% for n periods, PVIFA (i,n).
Period
21%
22%
23%
24%
25%
30%
35%
40%
––––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
1
0.826446
0.819672
0.813008
0.806452
0.800000
0.769231
0.740741
0.714286
2
1.509460
1.491535
1.473990
1.456816
1.440000
1.360947
1.289438
1.224490
3
2.073934
2.042241
2.011374
1.981303
1.952000
1.816113
1.695880
1.588921
4
2.540441
2.493641
2.448272
2.404277
2.361600
2.166241
1.996948
1.849229
5
2.925984
2.863640
2.803473
2.745384
2.689280
2.435570
2.219961
2.035164
6
3.244615
3.166918
3.092254
3.020471
2.951424
2.642746
2.385157
2.167974
7
3.507946
3.415506
3.327036
3.242316
3.161139
2.802112
2.507523
2.262839
8
3.725576
3.619268
3.517916
3.421222
3.328911
2.924702
2.598165
2.330599
9
3.905434
3.786285
3.673102
3.565502
3.463129
3.019001
2.665308
2.378999
10
4.054078
3.923184
3.799270
3.681856
3.570503
3.091539
2.715043
2.413571
11
4.176924
4.035397
3.901846
3.775691
3.656403
3.147338
2.751884
2.438265
12
4.278450
4.127375
3.985240
3.851363
3.725122
3.190260
2.779173
2.455904
13
4.362355
4.202766
4.053041
3.912390
3.780098
3.223277
2.799387
2.468503
14
4.431698
4.264562
4.108163
3.961605
3.824078
3.248675
2.814361
2.477502
15
4.489007
4.315215
4.152978
4.001294
3.859263
3.268211
2.825453
2.483930
16
4.536369
4.356734
4.189413
4.033302
3.887410
3.283239
2.833669
2.488521
17
4.575512
4.390765
4.2Ï9035
4.059114
3.909928
3.294800
2.839755
2.491801
18
4.607861
4.418660
4.243118
4.079931
3.927942
3.303692
2.844263
2.494144
19
4.634596
4.441525
4.262698
4.096718
3.942354
3.310532
2.847602
2.495817
20
4.656691
4.460266
4.278616
4.110257
3.953883
3.315794
2.850076
2.497012
25
4.721340
4.513935
4.323243
4.147425
3.984888
3.328609
2.855567
2.499444
30
4.746265
4.533792
4.339094
4.160103
3.995048
3.332061
2.856791
2.499897
35
4.755875
4.541140
4.344724
4.164428
3.998377
3.332991
2.857064
2.499981
40
4.759580
4.543858
4.346724
4.165903
3.999468
3.333241
2.857125
2.499996
50
4.761559
4.545236
4.347687
4.166578
3.999943
3.333327
2.857142
2.500000

Appendix 371
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
19%
20%
Period
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
0.840336
0.833333
1
1.546501
1.527778
2
2.139917
2.106481
3
2.638586
2.588735
4
3.057635
2.990612
5
3.409777
3.325510
6
3.705695
3.604592
7
3.954366
3.837160
8
4.163332
4.030967
9
4.338935
4.192472
10
4.486500
4.327060
11
4.610504
4.439217
12
4.714709
4.532681
13
4.802277
4.610567
14
4.875863
4.675473
15
4.937700
4.729561
16
4.989664
4.774634
17
5.033331
4.812195
18
5.070026
4.843496
19
5.100862
4.869580
20
5.195148
4.947587
25
5.234658
4.978936
30
5.251215
4.991535
35
5.258153
4.996598
40
5.262279
4.999451
50
45%
50%
Period
–––––––
–––––––
–––––––
0.689655
0.666667
1
1.165279
1.111111
2
1.493296
1.407407
3
1.719515
1.604938
4
1.875527
1.736626
5
1.983122
1.824417
6
2.057326
1.882945
7
2.108500
1.921963
8
2.143793
1.947975
9
2.168133
1.965317
10
2.184920
1.976878
11
2.196496
1.984585
12
2.204480
1.989724
13
2.209986
1.993149
14
2.213784
1.995433
15
2.216403
1.996955
16
2.218209
1.997970
17
2.219454
1.998647
18
2.220313
1.999098
19
2.220906
1.999399
20
2.222017
1.999921
25
2.222190
1.999990
30
2.222217
1.999999
35
2.222221
2.000000
40
2.222222
2.000000
50

About the author
Michael N. Chibili is a Hospitality Management Accounting Senior lecturer
at the Stenden Hotel Management School – Stenden University of Applied
Sciences. He holds a BSc and an MSc in Economics from the University of
Yaoundé and also an MA in International Service Management from CHN-
London Metropolitan University.
372
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Picture credits
We are grateful to the Stenden University Hotel, Leeuwarden, the
Netherlands for the permission to reproduce all the copyrighted
pictures found at the beginning of each chapter.
373
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

374
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
ABC Process 171
absolute change 105
absolute difference 105
acceptance-or-rejection 
decisions 314
account (or horizontal) format 46
accounting 16
accounting controls 253
accounting conventions 71, 72
accounting information 16
accounting principles 18
accounting rate of return 318
accounting standard boards 89
accounts classification 60
accounts payable 41, 152
accounts payable ageing 
schedule 158
accounts receivable 37, 74, 152
accounts receivable ageing
schedule 155
accounts receivable 
management 155
accounts receivable turnover 
121, 155
accrued expenses 41
accruals convention 72
accumulated depreciation 38, 76
accumulated interest 321
accumulated other
comprehensive income 
(loss) 46
acid test ratio 120
acquisition cost 38
activity ratios 131
activity-based budgeting
approach 297
additional paid-in capital 45
adjusted bank balance 267
administration internal control
proposals 265
administrative and general
expenses 65
administrative controls 253
advance deposits 42
after-tax cash flows 344
after-tax cash outflow 346
airport hotels 26
allocation bases 173
allowance for bad debts 74
allowance for doubtful 
accounts 74
allowances 74
American Institute of Certified
Public Accountants 252
amortization 76
annual depreciation charge 75
annual depreciation expense 346
annuity 325, 341
application of the Hubbart
formula 204
approaches to forecasting 276
approaches to pricing 202
arc formula 198
arc method 198
asset turnover 132
asset use efficiency 138
assets 36, 257
assumptions 238, 343
attributing variances 300
audit trails 256
available rooms 133
average accounts payable 154
average accounts receivable 153
average beverage inventory 132
average collection period 
121, 155
average daily rate (ADR) 134
average food inventory 131
average food service cheque 135
average inventory 153
average investment 319
average occupancy per room 133
average occupied rooms 208
average rate of return 319
average rate ratio 231
average room rate 134
average shares outstanding 128
back of house internal control
proposals 263
BAD CQ 306
bad debts 74
BAD PQ 302
balance sheet 35, 36, 86, 101
bank accounts 152
bank reconciliation 267
bank statement 267
bankruptcy 40
base period or date 107
base selling price 223
base-year analysis 107
basic accounting system 17
basic rule of thumb 88
bed-and-breakfast inns 27
beginning inventory 64
beverage cost percentage 135
beverage inventory turnover 
ratio 131
blacklisting 158
book value 319
bottom up approach 203
boutique hotels 22, 27
break-even time (BET) 336
breakeven analysis 239
breakeven level of occupancy 241
breakeven point 239
breakfast effect 244
budget 292
budget committee 299
budget preparation process 299
budget process 292
bulk purchases 39
business activities 63
business entities 50
business entity principle 18
business resource 149
capital budgeting decisions 314
capital budgets 298
capital investment 313
capital investment decisions 313
capital stock 45
capital structures 129
capital-rationing decisions 314
carrying cost 157
cash 36, 82, 151
cash budgets 298
cash conversion cycle (CCC) 152
Index

Register 375
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
cash cows 228
cash cycle 150
cash discounts 159
cash equivalents 82
cash expenses 345
cash flow budget 298
cash flow statement 83
cash flows 82
cash inflows 85, 314
cash management 151
cash on cash return 128
cash outflows 85, 314
cash revenue 345
cash surrender value of life
insurance 39
cash transactions 254
casino hotels 26
category A items 221
category B items 221
causal forecasting methods 281
causes 302
cave hotels 22
ceteris paribus 340
changes in working capital 88
charitable organizations 57
classification of ratios 119
collection of cash 152
commitments and 
contingencies 43
common depreciation 
methods 75
common size analysis 108
common size income 
statement 110
communication 293
comparative analysis 105
comparative balance sheets using
base year analysis 109
comperativa balance 
sheets 106
competitive intangibles 39
competitive method 202
complements 201
complimentary food 64
complimentary occupancy
percentage 133
complimentary rooms 133
compound interest 320
compounding 321
concept of value 224
conference hotels 25, 26
conservatism principle 20
consistency principle 19
contribution margin 210, 225,
228, 238
contribution margin pricing
method 217
contribution margin profit and
loss account statement 61
contribution margin ratio 239
contributions 44
control 134, 293
controllable and non-controllable
costs 168
coordination 293
corporations 45
cost allocation 172
cost cause 306
cost centres 172
cost drivers 170, 297
cost management 166
cost objects 170
cost of capital 332, 335
cost of goods sold 64
cost of sales 64
cost principle 18
cost-volume-profit analysis 
(CVP) 237
costs 166
costs of goods consumed 64
coverage 119
credit sales 74
creditors 118, 151
creditworthy 155
cross elasticity of demand 201
current assets 36
current liabilities 40
current liabilities 
management 157
current maturities of long-term
debt 42
current ratio 120
customer profitability 
analysis 171
CVP analysis 238
cyclical pattern 275
days inventory outstanding 
152, 153
days payable outstanding 
152, 154
days sales outstanding 152, 153
debt 43
debt service coverage ratio 124
debt to equity ratio 123
debtors 151
decimal 119
declared dividends 129
declining balance method of
depreciation 76
deferred charges 39
deferred income taxes (current)
37, 42
deferred income taxes (non-
current) 39, 43
deficits 45
delivery charges 77
delphi method 277
demand 199
demand curve 198
demand forecasting 230
demand schedule 197
denominator 108, 118
department budgets 298
departmental income or loss 65
dependent variable 185, 186
depreciation 38, 88, 319
depreciation and amortization 75
destination hotel 22
detective controls 253
determining the mark-up
multiplier 216
differential room pricing 207
direct cost 167
direct method 86, 174
direct method of cost allocation
176
direct tracing 170
disbursement of cash 152
discount grid 210
discount rate 322, 332, 340
discounted cash flow (DCF)
methods 332
discounting 322
discounts 77, 210
discretionary cost 168
distribution channels 230
dividend pay-out ratio 130
dividend yield 130
dividend-price ratio 130
dividends per share 129
division of duties 256
dogs 228
double occupancy 133, 208
double rooms 245
doubtful accounts 74

due to/from owner, management
company, or related 
party 37, 41
DuPont analysis 138
earnings before interest, taxes,
depreciation and amortization
(EBITDA) 66
earnings before interests and
taxes (EBIT) 66
earnings per share 126
EBIT 124
EBITDA 124
EBITDA margin ratio 127
EBITDA per available room 127
econometric 283
econometric models 281
economic conditions 333
economic order quantity 
(EOQ) 157
economic order quantity 
model 157
effective interest rate 159
effective monitoring 255
effects of seasonality 209
elastic demand 199
elements of internal control 254
embezzlement 253
employee turnover 254
ending book value 76
ending inventory 64
equation 282
equation of the straight line 186
equity multiplier 139
equity statement 50
equivalent occupancy (EO) 210
evaluation 293
exchange rate risk, inflation 
risk 335
expense variance 301, 305
expense variance analysis 307
expenses 59
expert judgment 277
exponential smoothing 280
expression of ratios 119
extended-stay hotels 26
external users 17
factor tables 323
fair market value 37
favourable variance 300
finance 315
financial accounting 17
financial discounts 77
financial leverage 139
financial leverage multiplier 139
financial manager 335
financial ratio 100, 118
financial risk 139
financial statement 
analysis 100
financial statements 17, 100
financial variables 117
financing activities 39, 85
fixed asset turnover 132
fixed assets 38
fixed cost 166, 167, 240
fixed or static budgeting 
approach 294
flexible budgeting approach 294
food and beverage department
statement 104
food cost percentage 135, 215
food inventory turnover 
ratio 131
food service seat turnover 134
forecasting 273, 274
forecasts 273
formats of balance sheets 46
formula method 174
franchise costs 40
fraud 253
free cash flow 128
front of house internal control
proposals 259
full disclosure principle 19
full-service properties 25
fully allocated income 
statement 177, 180
future amount 322
future values 323
gains 59
Gantt charts 292
general partner 44
generally accepted accounting
principles (GAAP) 18
goals 16
going concern principle 19
goods available for sale 64
graphs 184
gross operating profit (GOP) 66
gross operating profit margin
ratio 125
gross operating profit per
available room (GOPPAR) 126
gross operating ratio 125
gross return on assets 124
guesthouses 27
high price method 202
high season 209
high/low two-point 
method 182
highest price method 213
historical data 274
historical data patterns 273, 275
holding cost 157
horizontal analysis 105
hotel chains 27
Hubbart formula 203
hurdle rate 340
icehotel 23
identical yield percentage 231
identifiable activity 297
income before non-operating
income and expenses
(IBNOIE) 66
income before non-operating
income and expenses margin
ratio 127
income before non-operating
income and expenses per
available room 127
income before taxes (IBT) 66
income elasticity of 
demand 201
income statement 58, 86, 102
income taxes payable 42
incremental accounting 
income 318
incremental budgeting 
approach 295
incremental cash inflow 345
incremental expense 345
independent variable 185, 186
index approach 107
indices 109
indirect cost 167
indirect expenses 172
indirect method 87
industrial averages 117
inelastic demand 199
inflation 107
inflows 82, 151
376 Register
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

Register 377
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv
information 16
information and
telecommunications systems
expenses 65
ingredients mark-up pricing 217
ingredients mark-up pricing
method 214
intangible assets 39
intercept 186
interest 320
interest rates 333
internal control 252
internal control proposals 259
internal rate of return (IRR)
method 340
internal rate of return
interpolation 340
internal users 17
International Accounting
Standards Board (IASB) 20
international conditions 333
International Financial Reporting
Standards (IFRS) 20
interpolation 340
intuitive method 202
intuitive price method 213
inventory 37, 73, 151, 152, 254
inventory holding period 132
inventory management 156
inventory value 37
investing activities 85
investment centre 173
investment policy 137
investment project 332, 334
investments 38
investors 118
joint cost 167
kaizen budgeting approach 295
key performance indicators 
(KPIs) 297
labour cost percentage 135
labour-intensive 221
legal intangibles 39
levels of authority 251
levels of inventory 156
leverage 122
leverage or gearing ratios 122
liability 40
limitations 238
limited liability companies 44
limited partners 44
limited-service hotels 25
linear relationship 238
lines of communication 251
liquidate 151
liquidation 19
liquidity 83
liquidity problems 81
liquidity ratios 120
listed companies 21
long term debt to total
capitalization ratio 123
long term goals 313
long term liabilities 42
long-range planning 292
loss leader method 213
losses 59
low season 209
MABA 173
management accounting 17
management accounting 
process 21
management leadership 254
management of financial 
risk 137
management tool 274
mandatory vacations 257
margin of safety 242
marginal cost 211
mark-up method 202
mark-up multiplier 214
mark-up with accompaniment
costs 216
mark-up with accompaniment
costs method 217
market capitalization 128
market conditions 333
market research 277
market risk 334
market segmentation 230
market value 336
market-to-book ratio 129
marketable securities 36
master budgets 299
matching convention 72, 76
matching principle 20, 83
materiality principle 20
mean absolute deviation 283
menu 225
menu engineering 225
menu engineering 
worksheet 226, 228
menu mix percentage 229
mix of sales 136
monetary unit principle 19
mortgage notes, other notes, and
similar liabilities 42
multiple allocation base 
approach 173
multiple compounding 321
multiple occupancy percentage
133, 231
multipliers 223
mutually exclusive 
projects 348
naïve method 278
nature of the hospitality 
industry 22
nature of the product 199
net cash flow from financing
activities 89, 92
net cash flow from investing
activities 88, 92
net cash flow from operating
activities 86, 91
net cash flows 82
net cash inflows 316
net cash savings 316
net income 59, 66
net income to sales revenue 
ratio 125
net investment outflows 316
net loss 59, 66
net present value (NPV) 
method 337
net profit 66
net realizable value 73
net return on assets 125
net sales to working capital 
ratio 121
net working capital 88
non cash activities 85
non-cash expenses 346
non-current receivables 38
non-operating income and
expenses 66
notes payable 41
notes receivable 37
number of times interest earned
ratio 123
numerator 118

objective pricing methods 213
objectives 16, 21, 118
objectives of budgeting 293
objectivity principle 19
obligations 83
obligations under capital 
leases 42
occupancy 208
opening book value 76
operating activities 58, 85
operating budget 291
operating cash flow ratio 120
operating cash flows to total
liabilities ratio 124
operating centres 61
operating cycle 150, 273
operating decisions 313
operating efficiency 138
operating efficiency ratio 125
operating equipment 37, 39
operating ratios 134
operational planning 292
operations budgets 298
operations managers 284
opportunity cost 168, 333
optimal order quantity 157
ordering costs 157
organization chart 251
other current liabilities 42
other departmental expenses 65
other expenses 65
other long-term liabilities 43
outflows 82, 151
outstanding shares 45, 128
overhead costs 173
owners’ equity 43
package 243
paid occupancy percentage 133
par or stated value 45
partnerships 44
past performances 100
pay-out ratio 130
payback method 316
payroll and related expenses 65
per unit basis 119
percentage 109, 119
percentage approach 107
perfect elasticity 197
perfect inelasticity 196
performance 61
performance checks 258
performance review 136
performance review process 136
performance standards 258
periodic inventory system 73
perpetual inventory system 73
planning 292, 293
plough horses 228
political risk 335
popularity 225
post-income tax analysis 246
potential average double rate 231
potential average rate 231
potential average single rate 231
pre-income tax analysis 246
pre-tax cash flows 344
preferred shares 126
prepaid expenses 37
present amount 322
present value 322
preventive controls 253
price cause 304
price cutting method 202
price discrimination 229
price elastic segments 230
price elasticity of demand 196
price inelastic segments 230
price-to-book ratio 129
price-to-earnings valuation ratio
126
price-to-equity ratio 129
price-to-sales ratio 129
pricing 196
pricing food and beverage
products 212
pricing rooms 203
pricing theory 195
prime ingredient mark-up 217
prime-ingredient mark-up
method 215
principal 321
principles of internal control 254
procedure manuals 255
process of discounting 322
product life-cycle analogy 277
product loyalty 199
profit and loss statement 58
profit centre 173
profit factor 229
profit margin 125
profitability 58
profitability ratios 124
profitable projects 335
profits 83
project planning 292
project risk 334
projects 314
property and operations
maintenance expenses 65
property, plant and equipment
(PP & E) 38
proportion of income 199
provisions 74
puzzles 228
qualitative forecasting 
methods 277
quantitative forecasting 
methods 277
quantity 196
quantity cause 304, 306
quick ratio 120
rack rate 210, 211
random variations 275
rate spread 231
ratio 118
ratio analysis 118
ratio pricing method 218
realization convention 72
realization principle 20
reasonable price method 213
receivables 37
recognition convention 72
recoverable amounts 74
regression analysis 186, 281, 282
regression coefficient 186
relative change 105
relative difference 105
relative elasticity 197
relative inelasticity 197
relative room size approach 205
relevant and non-relevant 
costs 168
relevant cash flow risk 333
report (vertical) format 46
reserves 66
resort hotels 26
resource costs 170
resource inputs 152
responsibility 251, 256
responsibility accounting 172
responsibility centres 172
responsiveness 196
restricted cash 36, 40
378 Register
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

retained earnings 45, 50, 66
return on assets (ROA) 138
return on equity (ROE) 138
return on owners’ equity 125
returns of goods 76
revenue management 229
revenue multiple 129
revenue per share ratio 128
revenue variance 301, 303
revenue variance analysis 305
revenues 58, 63
risk 74, 333
risk-adjusted discount rate 335
room rate achievement 
factor 231
room rate discounting 210
rooming and boarding houses 27
rule of a thousand approach 203
rule of thumb method 202
RV parks and campgrounds 27
SABA 173
safety margin 242
sales and marketing expenses 65
sales multiple 129
sales per share 128, 129
sales revenue centre 172
sales revenue per available
customer (REVPAC) 135
sales revenue per available room
(REVPAR) 134
salvage value 38, 75, 76
scatter diagram 185
seasonal pattern 275
seasonality 203
segregation of duties 256
semi-fixed and semi-variable 
costs 167
separating mixed-costs 181
sequential allocation 179
sequential allocation 
proportions 179
service delivery 196
shareholders’ equity 45
shares outstanding 128
short term gains 313
short term investments 36
short term obligations 120
simple interest 320
simple linear regression 
model 186
simple mark-up 214
simple moving averages 278
simple prime costs method 219
simulation modelling 281
single allocation base 
approach 173
single and double rates 207
single rooms 245
single service 
analysis 240
smoothing constant 280
sole proprietorships 43
solvency 83
solvency ratio 122
specific prime costs 
method 221
stakeholders 17, 118
stand-alone risk 334
standard 17, 118
standard cost 166
standard food cost 219
stars 226
statement of cash flow 81, 103,
151
statement of comprehensive
income 58
statement of earnings 58
statement of financial position 35
statement of income 58
statement of members’ 
equity 51
statement of operations 58
statement of Owners’ Equity 51
statement of partners’ equity 51
statement of retained earnings
50, 86, 104
statistic 231
statistical 283
step method 174
step method of cost allocation
178
stock (inventory) 72
stock market index 107
stockholders’ equity 45
straight line equation 187
straight line or linear method of
depreciation 75
strategic budgets 298
strategic planning 292
subjective pricing methods 213
substitutes 199, 201
summary operating statement 
61, 62
sunk cost 168
supply-side analysis 239
table of future value factors for a
single amount 324
table of future value factors for an
annuity 325
table of present value factors for a
single amount 327
table of present value factors for
an annuity 330
tax implications 344
tax shield 347
taxes 333
time factor 200
time period principle 19
time series forecasting 
methods 278
total REVPAR 134
total risk 334
trade discounts 77
transfers 64
treasury stock 45
tree-house hotels 22
trend pattern 275
trial and error method 202
trial and error technique 340
turnover 63, 119
type of organization 43
types of budgets 298
types of costs 166
unallocated income 
statement 175
uncertainty 333
undistributed operating 
expenses 65
unfavourable variances 300
uniform system of accounts 60
Uniform System of Accounts for
the Lodging Industry (USALI)
20, 60
uniformity 20
unit elasticity 197
unpaid sales invoices 74
unprofitable projects 335
use of the product 200
utility expenses 66
value 213
variable budgeting approach 294
variable cost 166, 167, 240
Register 379
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

variance 166, 300
variance analysis 300
vertical analysis 108
weighted average cost of capital
(WACC) 335
weighted moving averages 279
withdrawals 44
working capital 42, 150
working capital cycle 150
working capital management 
82, 150
working capital turnover 
ratio 121
yield 231
yield management 229
yield statistic 231
youth hostels 27
zero-base budgeting 
approach 296
380 Register
© Noordhoff Uitgevers bv

