 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 The Purple Prince Of Oz – Oz 26
  
 L. Frank Baum
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
                by RUTH PLUMLY THOMPSON

  
 Dear Boys and Girls:
                I hope you like this gay Oz adventure. Tell me if you do!
 It all happened about the time the June Bug came out of storage,
 and just about the time next year's snow balls are ripe,
 I'll be writing you another story.
                Oz Always,
                                RUTH PLUMLY THOMPSON
  
 This book is cheerfully and affectionately dedicated to
                Oliver Cromwell Curtis,
 in less serious moments, my Big Brother Tom. Well there is nothing
 serious about Oz, so cheerio, Tom and many merry wishes!
  
  
 LIST OF CHAPTERS
  
 1             SourGrapes
 2             A Strange Story
 3             The Mist Tree
 4             InFollenshyForest
 5             TheRiver Road
 6             Torpedora, the Glorious
 7             Stair Way.
 8             Nandywog, the Little Giant
 9             The Guide Post Man

 10           Regalia
 11           In the Castle of the Red Jinn
 12           The Grand Advizier Advises
 13           The Red Jinn's Looking Glasses
 14           King, King, Double King!
 15           Escape from Double Up
 16           Meanwhile, in Pumperdink
 17           Ozwoz the Wonderful
 18           The Elegant Elephant Uses His Head
 19           More Mysteries
 20           "The Purple Prince Has Earned His Crown!"
  
  
 CHAPTER 1
  
 Sour Grapes
  
 "WHO is this boy?" wheezed the King of Pumperdink
 fretfully. "What has he done?
 Speak up, General, can't you see I have a headache?"
 Groaning a little, for he had eaten twenty pickled
 eggs for breakfast and found them highly indigestible,
 Pompus stared petulantly at the shabby boy who
 had just been dragged into his presence. "Who are
 You?" he demanded, pointing his fat finger crossly

 at the culprit.
                "A runaway!" panted the Royal Gardener, shaking
 his rake.
                "A thief!" added General Quakes grimly. "He has
 eaten all the grapes on your Majesty's favorite grape
 vine.
                "Ugh!" winced the King, for the very thought of
 eating anything made him feel terribly terrible!
                "Tell his Highness why you stole the grapes,"
 ordered the general, giving the prisoner a little prod.
                "Because I was hungry," answered the boy, jerking
 away from his two captors and staring calmly
 at the King.
                "Hungry?" Pompus, who was really extremely
 soft-hearted, looked distressed. "Dear, dear, that
 is too bad! Well, how did you find them?"
                "Sour," answered the prisoner shortly. "Very
 sour."
                "Sour? My imperial Pumperdinkian purple grapes
 sour? Dip him! Dip him in the well! Take him
 away!" shouted Pompus, annoyed and insulted.
                "What's all this noise?" murmured a sleepy voice,
 and Kabumpo, the Elegant Elephant, who had been
 enjoying his morning nap, thrust his huge head
 through the curtain in back of the King's throne.
 "Why all this excitement so early in the day?"

                "This miserable little runaway has eaten the
 King's best grapes," explained General Quakes, rattling
 his sword dangerously.
                "Not only that. He says they are sour!" frowned
 Pompus, blowing out his cheeks and rolling his eyes
 indignantly around at the Elegant Elephant.
                "Sour grapes! Ho, ho! Kerumph!" rumbled
 Kabumpo, coming all the way out. "Told you so
 right to your face? Well, there's courage for you.
 What's your name, young one?"
                "Randy," answered the prisoner, glancing curiously
 up at the gorgeously caparisoned elephant.
                "Randy what?" yawned Kabumpo.
                "Just Randy." Thrusting both hands in his
 pockets, the boy, who was about ten with black hair
 and eyes, looked composedly at his captors.
                "Well, I'll Randy him," fumed Pompus, clasping
 his hands on his stomach. "Dip him three times and
 return him to his family at once!"
                "Where are you from?" roared General Quakes,
 seizing Randy's arm. But at this, Randy closed his
 mouth tight and refused to speak; and though the
 gardener on one side and the general on the other
 Continued to shake and question, not a word could
 they get out of him.

                "I saw him sneaking down the mountains
 last evening," insisted the gardener testily. "He
 must live in the mountains. Where do you belong
 you little grape eater, you?"
                "Stop!" trumpeted Kabumpo indignantly, as Randy
 was jerked first by one arm and then the other. "Do
 you want to pull the boy in two? I, myself, will take
 this lad for an attendant. Spezzle is old and anxious
 to retire, so let me have this boy, your Majesty, and
 I promise he shall never bother you again. Will you
 come with me and do exactly as I say?" asked the
 Elegant Elephant, squinting down his trunk at the
 shabby little Gilliken. Randy looked dubiously up
 into Kabumpo's snapping little eyes, but detecting
 an unmistakable wink, thankfully nodded his head.
                "Then take him away at once Take him away!"
 ordered Pompus, clapping both hands to his aching
 middle. "Can't you see I'm suffering? Go away, all
 of you!"
                "How about the dipping?" sniffed the garden,
 who felt that the prisoner was getting off far too
 easily.
                "I'll attend to that" answered the Elegant Elephant
 haughtily, and picking Randy up in his trunk
 he tossed him lightly to his shoulder and stalked
 with great dignity from the purple throne room.

                Now Pumperdink, as many of you already know,
 is an old-fashioned Oz Kingdom way up in the northern
 part of the Gilliken Country, its royal family
 being one of the oldest and most interesting In Oz.
 Pompus, the King, rules over his subjects with great
 ease and cleverness. All who obey the laws are
 rewarded; all who break the laws are promptly
 dipped in the royal well. As the well water it purple
 and dyes offenders as thoroughly and effectively as
 we dye Easter Eggs, and as the dye sticks for almost
 two weeks, the Pumperdinkians are very careful not
 to break the laws, so that revolutions or uprisings
 are practically unknown in that pleasant and peaceful
 valley. It is not often that Pompus loses his
 temper, either-only when he eats pickled eggs. Usually
 he is the kindest and most considerate of monarchs.
 Indeed, Pompus and Pozy Pink, his Queen,
 are famed far and wide for their cheerfulness and
 generosity.
                As for Pompadore, the King's son, and his Princess,
 Peg Amy, and their little daughter Pajonia
 they make life in the purple castle so delightfully
 interesting and jolly that I can think of no happier
 place to live or visit. No wonder Kabumpo prefers
 Pumperdink to any other kingdom in the realm. And

 speaking of Kabumpo I had better explain at once
 that the Elegant Elephant was given to Pompus
 simply Oz ages ago by a famous Blue Emperor. And
 Kabumpo has shown himself so wise and sagacious
 has lent such style and elegance to the Court that
 he has been made a member of the royal family with
 the rank of Prince and Chancellor.
                The King confers with Kabumpo on every occasion
 and matter of importance and would not think of
 undertaking a journey or war without first consulting
 his Elegant Elephant. Which, of course, only
 proves that Kabumpo is no ordinary pachyderm. No
 Kabumpo is the largest elephant in Oz and in that
 strange and exciting country where animals can talk
 as well and sometimes better than their masters, It
 Is no small honor to be the greatest animal of all.
 Kabumpo sees and does things in a big way and
 if he is a bit haughty and proud with lesser folk,
 who can blame him? His heart, when you get right
 down to it, is in exactly the right place and beats
 warmly and loyally for his King and country. It was
 this same big heart that prompted the Elegant Elephant
 to come to the aid of the mountain boy, and he
 had no intention at all of dipping Randy in the purple
 well. Once back in his huge and comfortable
 apartment on the first floor of the palace, Kabumpo

 gave him food, new clothes and a long lecture on
 court etiquette. But the lecture was so mixed with
 jokes and funny stories that Randy did not mind it
 at all and by evening was beginning to feel perfectly
 at ease and at home in the grand and sumptuous
 quarters of the Elegant Elephant of Oz.
                "As good a place as any to begin," he sighed,
 snuggling comfortably down in the soft bed Kabumpo
 had ordered the palace servants to place in the
 enormous dressing room. "As good a place as any.
 Ho, hum, I wonder how long it will take me!"
  
 CHAPTER 2
  
 A Strange Story
  
 THE Elegant Elephant was dressing for dinner.
 Kabumpo always dressed for dinner, wearing
 his costliest jewels and most elaborately embroidered
 robes of state as became a member of the royalest
 family in Oz. As he surveyed himself calmly and
 leisurely in the glass, Kabumpo was turning over
 in his mind some stories that might amuse little
 Princess Pajonia and keep her quiet and happy during
 the long tedious dinner hour.

                "I'll tell her the tale of the pink goat," decided the
 Elegant Elephant, taking up a small mirror in his
 trunk and examining himself critically from all sides.
 "Just pull that robe a bit to the right, Randy, and
 see that the buckle is caught, will you?" Randy,
 perched on a tall ladder beside Kabumpo, gave a
 little sniff of impatience, but carefully straightened
 the velvet robe, fastened the jeweled buckle and
 then, resting his elbows on his knees, stared gloomily
 into the long mirror "That's it," approved Kabumpo,
 paying no attention to Randy's sulky expression.
 "You grow handier every day, my boy. Why, soon
 you'll be the handiest attendant I ever have had."
 Randy said nothing,, but sniffed again, this time
 quite audibly.
                "Now what's the matter?" grunted Kabumpo, looking
 at him sharply. "Many a lad would think it an
 honor to wait upon the Elegant Elephant of Oz.
 Have you not a fine bed, new clothes and all you
 want to eat? Haven't I taken you riding when no
 one was about and allowed you to play marbles with
 my best earrings? And who was it pray, who saved
 you from being sent home in disgrace? Who made
 a place for you in the King's household so you could
 see something of high life? And now you sit there
 and sniff at me. Hem! Ho! Kerumph!" Snorting

 with displeasure, Kabumpo glared at Randy, and
 Randy without explanation or apology glared back.
 But for all his independence and sauciness, there was
 something extremely likeable about this little Gilliken
 and though he showed no proper deference or
 respect for Kabumpo's rank and position, the Elegant
 Elephant already felt an unaccountable liking
 and affection for him. Still, it was unthinkable that
 any one fortunate enough to associate with an elephant
 as important and grand as himself should be
 discontented or unhappy. Kabumpo just couldn't
 understand it.
                "You ought to be ashamed of yourself," he grumbled,
 shaking his trunk sternly at his little attendant.
 "What's the matter with you, anyway?"
                "Oh, nothing," sighed Randy, running nimbly down
 the ladder. "Nothing's the matter. That's just it.
 Nothing! Nothing ever happens here." Folding his
 arms Randy looked scornfully out over the quiet and
 serene gardens of the castle.
                "Nothing ever happens here!" exclaimed Kabumpo,
 coming round with one majestic sweep. "How do you
 know nothing happens? You've been here only
 a week. Let me tell you, my lad, things have happened
 in Pumperdink that would make your ears

 flap and your chin quiver. Things that would curl
 up your knees and your nose, young one!"
                "Really!" Randy tried to speak indifferently but
 could not keep the interest out of his voice; Kabumpo,
 pulling an enormous gold watch from a pocket in
 his robe and seeing that there was still half an hour
 before dinner, demanded mysteriously:
                "Have you ever heard of scroll magic?"
                Randy slowly shook his head.
                "Ha, I thought not. Well, Randy, if it had not
 been for scroll magic, Prince Pompadore would never
 have married, Princess Peg Amy would still be a
 wooden doll and I should never have visited the
 Emerald City of Oz. It began on just such a day
 as this," confessed the Elegant Elephant, looking
 uneasily out of the window, "just such a day as this.
 Pompa's birthday it was, too, and when we blew out
 the candles on the birthday cake, the cake itself
 exploded and knocked us all about. And when we
 picked ourselves up, there was this scroll saying that
 if Prince Pompadore did not marry a proper princess
 in a proper span of time, Pumperdink would
 disappear forever, and even longer, from the Gilliken
 Country of Oz. Think of that my boy!"
                Without much enthusiasm Randy thought of that
 and Kabumpo, warming to his tale, hurried on:

 Well after the first shock of the scroll the King
 and the Prime Pumper decided to marry Pompa to
 Paleero, who happens to be the only princess around
 here."
                "That old witch we saw gathering faggots yesterday?"
 gasped Randy in a shocked voice. "Why, she's
 as old as Stone Mountain!"
                "Older!" rasped Kabumpo, shaking his head angrily
 at the mere memory of the thing. "And, you
 know, the King and Pumper were so set on saving
 the Kingdom at once that I had to run off with Pompa
 to rescue him from the awful old creature."
                "Well, what happened then?" asked Randy, edging
 closer and beginning to play with the fringe on
 Kabumpo's robe.
                Pl-enty!," rumbled the Elegant Elephant, shifting
 from one foot to the other. "Pompa and I traveling
 all over Oz to find a proper princess and not
 only found her and saved Pumperdink from disappearing
 but rescued Ozma and her courtiers from
 a giant as well." The Elegant Elephant tried to look
 modest as he made this statement, but he did not
 succeed very well and, as Randy was now all ears,
 he told with great earnestness and enjoyment the
 whole story of Peg Amy's enchantment and Prince

 Pompadore's strange adventures and marriage.
                "It all began when an old wizard named Glegg
 fell in love with the young and beautiful Princess of
 Sun Top Mountain," explained Kabumpo, with a
 huge sigh. "Consulting his book of the future, Glegg
 discovered that the princess was to marry Prince
 Pompadore of Pumperdink. To prevent this he sent
 the threatening scroll, hoping to frighten Pompa
 into a marriage with some other princess. See?"
 Randy nodded quickly. "But when Glegg asked the
 princess to marry him, of course she refused, and
 in a fit of anger he turned her into a little tree in
 Ozma's garden. Believing she would tire of this
 enchantment and finally consent to marry him, Glegg
 hid his box of magic in a cave under Ozma's castle
 and set himself to wait for the princess to change
 her mind. But what happened?" Kabumpo lifted his
 trunk scornfully. "Cap'n Bill, an old sailor who lives
 in the Emerald City, wishing to surprise Trot, a little
 mortal girl who lives with Ozma, cut down the tree
 and carved a wooden doll from the wood. Trot, never
 knowing her doll had been a princess, called her Peg
 Amy and dressed her and loved her and carried her
 every place she went. Then, Ruggedo, the old
 Gnome King, who had been banished from his own
 dominions, took refuge in Glegg's cave, found his

 box of mixed magic and almost destroyed the Emerald City."
                "But what about the wooden doll?" begged Randy,
 Trying to piece all these strange incidents together.
                "Tut, tut! I'm coming to that," puffed Kabumpo,
 glancing hurriedly at his watch. "Ruggedo stole
 the doll, my boy, and took her to his cave. He wanted
 somebody to scold and shake. He had already hired
 a rabbit, named Wag, to wait upon him but Wag
 would not allow the Gnome King even to box his
 ears, so Ruggedo shook and scolded Peg to his
 heart's content, pretending she was Kaliko, his old
 steward. Fortunately Peg could not feel and Wag,
 the rabbit, took as good care of her as he could.
 Now, soon after stealing Peg, Ruggedo found Glegg's
 box of magic containing Spike's hair strengthener,
 expanding fluid, reanimating rays, some trick tea,
 and many other powerful salves and appliances.
 Wishing to be as strong as possible, Ruggedo poured
 the hair strengthener on his head. It instantly
 turned his hair into long iron spikes. Then, wishing
 to try the expanding fluid, he poured a little on Wag,
 the rabbit while he was asleep, and on the wooden
 doll. Immediately they grew as large as you are and
 when he tried the reanimating rays on Peg she came
 to life and chased Rug all over the cavern."

                "Well, good for her!" exclaimed Randy. "Did she
 catch him?"
                "No," admitted Kabumpo ruefully, "for Ruggedo,
 afraid Peg would pay him back for all the shakings,
 poured all the rest of the expanding fluid over himself.
 First he expanded east and west till he filled
 the whole cavern and next he shot up as tall as a
 giant, bursting through the top of the cave. Then,
 with Ozma's castle caught on the spikes of his head
 like a crown, the Gnome King stepped out of the
 cave, tramped off to Ev and sat down on a mountain.
 and here's where we come in," announced Kabumpo
 impressively. "I had about decided that Ozma was
 the proper princess for Pompa to marry, and right
 after Ruggedo disappeared with the castle, we arrived
 in the Emerald City. Almost immediately we
 met Wag and Peg. They had escaped from the cave
 and with Glegg's box of mixed magic were on their
 way to find the Gnome King, who they felt sure
 meant to destroy Ozma and her courtiers. We naturally
 determined to go with them and though the
 wooden doll did not know she was a princess and
 we did not know it either, we liked her at once and
 grew fonder of her all the time. Well-" Kabumpo,
 taking another look at his watch, hurriedly continued
 the story, "-after some breath-taking adventures

 we finally reached Ev and with the help of
 Glegg's magic, forced Ruggedo to march back to
 the Emerald City. Once there, he resumed his natural
 size and shape; the castle was restored to its
 foundations and the Gnome King himself was banished
 to a lonely island in the Nonestic Ocean. But
 Ozma refused to marry Prince Pompadore and when
 we asked Glegg's question box who was the proper
 princess it told us to go to Sun Top Mountain. So,
 weary and discouraged though we were, we traveled
 on to Sun Top Mountain, taking Wag and Peg Amy
 along. When we reached the castle, the princess, of
 course, was not there, but no sooner had Peg Amy
 crossed the threshold, than the enchantment of
 Glegg was broken, and she became her own charming
 self. As she and Pompadore were very much in
 love they were married on the spot. Then we all returned
 to Pumperdink and have been here ever
 since; little Princess Pajonia was born four years
 ago last February. Is it all clear now?"
                "About as clear as custard," sniffed Randy. "And
 has nothing happened since, sir?"
                "Well, nothing so exciting as all that" admitted
 Kabumpo slowly, "but one never can tell, one never
 can tell when something will happen again." The

 Elegant Elephant was extremely pleased to have
 Randy address him as "sir." It was the first time
 the boy had done so.
                "He'll do!" chuckled Kabumpo delightedly, under
 his breath. "He'll do! How would you like to go
 to dinner with me?" he added aloud, and before
 Randy could answer, tossed him lightly to his shoulder.
 "Now for haysake," he cautioned gruffly, "for
 haysake, speak when you are spoken to and try to
 remember you are in the presence and on the back
 of Royalty." Randy, seated comfortably on Kabumpo's
 broad back, smothered his chuckles in the
 elegant Elephant's velvet robe and Kabumpo billowed
 slowly and majestically down the gold-paved
 hallway to the royal banquet hall of the King.
  
 CHAPTER 3
  
 The Mist Tree
 Now Randy had not seen the royal family of
 Pumperdink since he had been caught by
 General Quakes and dragged into the throne room,
 and as Kabumpo swept grandly into the great dining
 hall the boy felt extremely nervous and uneasy.
 He was not sure that the King would be pleased to
 see him again, so he made himself as small as possible

 and peered inquisitively and anxiously over the
 Elegant Elephant's left ear.
 "Oyez! Oyez! Way for the Elegant Elephant of Oz,
 Three bows and three bumps for Kabumpo!"
 cried the Prime Pumper of the Realm, pounding
 three times on the floor with his golden staff. At
 this, all the courtiers bowed their heads three times
 and tapped three times on the table with their
 knives. The royal family did not bow but nodded
 graciously as the Elegant Elephant took his place
 behind the King's chair. The baby princess clapped
 her hands with glee and Pompa immediately leaned
 over to whisper to Kabumpo a joke he had just heard
 from the gardener. The long table twinkled with
 candles in golden holders and glittered with gold and
 silver dishes. Twenty footmen in white wigs and
 purple satin uniforms served a succession of savory
 viands to the brilliantly clad and royal company and
 no one noticed Randy at all.
 Everything, in fact, was so carefree and jolly that
 he stopped worrying and began to enjoy himself.
 It was hard to believe that the lovely Princess of
 Pumperdink had once been a wooden doll, and regarding
 her solemnly Randy tried to imagine how
 she must have looked and felt during that strange

 enchantment. The Queen of Pumperdink was lovely,
 too, and seemed scarcely old enough to have a son
 as tall as Pompadore. The Prince, on his part, looked
 exactly as Randy wished to look himself when he
 was grown, and after a long approving scrutiny-
 during which he decided to be as nearly like him as
 possible, to marry a princess as lovely as Peg Amy
 and have a little daughter as pretty as Pajonia-
 he turned his attention to the other members of the
 King's family and household.
                Pompus, very fat and gorgeous in pearl-studded
 velvet, was seated at the head of the table. Beside
 him was a thin, sly-looking fellow whom he addressed
 as Kettywig. Randy was just wondering who he
 might be when Kabumpo, who had been telling
 Pajonia a story, called out in his booming voice:
                "Well, Brother Kettywig, how are you enjoying
 your stay in our castle and kingdom?"
                "'Brother'!" gasped Kettywig, throwing down his
 napkin and turning angrily to the King. "Are you
 going to sit there and allow that great beast to call
 me 'brother'?"
                "Oh, bosh and bother, now, what's the difference?'
 muttered Pompus, popping a whole biscuit into his
 mouth. "You are my brother, aren't you? Well
 Kabumpo wants to make you feel at home. It's just

 his little joking way, you know."
                "Little joking way!" sputtered Kettywig. "There's
 nothing little about the creature but his wits. Make
 me feel at home, indeed! How could I feel at home
 in a country where an elephant calls me 'brother'?"
 Choking with indignation, Kettywig seized a goblet
 of water and swallowed it down at one gulp.
                "You wouldn't feel at home anywhere but a pickle
 factory," sniffed the Elegant Elephant, taking a
 platter of hot chicken from a footman and calmly
 passing it back to Randy. "Or in a mustard mine!"
 he finished scornfully. "Hah!" Randy almost held
 his breath at such audacity, but the King, after a
 wink at his favorite, went quietly on with his dinner,
 leaving Kettywig to recover himself as best he could.
 The royal orchestra had meanwhile struck up a lively
 tune so that further conversation was impossible
 and Randy, making short work of the chicken and
 candied fruit Kabumpo passed him from time to
 time, settled back with a little sigh of content. And
 when, a few moments later, a page ran in to announce
 that a traveling magician was without and
 desired to entertain the company, Randy's interest
 and satisfaction knew no bounds.
                "And what is he without, pray?" inquired

 Kabumpo, as the King thoughtfully rubbed his chin.
                "He says he is without a peer, sir," stuttered the
 page, casting uneasy glances over his shoulder.
                "How can a magician without a peer appear?"
 demanded Kabumpo argumentatively.
                "What nonsense!" roared Pompus setting down
 his tumbler. "Tell the fellow to come in, Pantleg. I,
 for one, would like to see a magician without a peer
 appear." Hearing Pompus' command and without
 waiting to be announced, the magician, with a long,
 lightning-like slide, shot into the banquet hall, coming
 to a neat stop beside the King's chair.
                "Nishibis, the Wiz-ard!" piped Pantleg, jumping
 behind a pillar. As Nishibis bowed deeply right and
 left, Randy stood up to get a better look at the fellow.
 He was thin, shriveled up and ugly, his face almost
 hidden by dark spectacles and a peaked cap. Over
 his shoulder he carried a blue bag of tricks, and his
 voice when he spoke was high and irritating.
                "Now, where have I heard that voice before?"
 thought Randy, as Nishibis drew a yellow scarf from
 his sack and with strange mumbles and screeches
 began twirling it around his head. At the third twirl,
 the scarf became a small dragon. Spreading its
 wings it flew straight for little Princess Pajonia, and
 as she drew back in alarm it melted into a small

 yellow kitten that nestled cozily in her arms.
                "Bravo! Bravo!" cried Kettywig, and even Kabumpo
 looked pleased and curious. Next the magician
 pulled a bundle of twigs from the bag. Taking
 a candle from the table he set them afire and tossed
 them high in the air. A pleasant blue smoke floated
 through the banquet hall and presently the spirals
 formed into a tall blue mist tree that hung in the
 air directly before the King.
                "A magic flower for his Majesty and his Majesty's
 family," announced Nishibis. And sure enough, five
 fiery red roses were blooming on the wizard's tree.
                "You have forgotten me!" snorted Kabumpo indignantly.
 "Is your magic not strong enough to tell
 you that I, too, am a member of the King's family?"
                "A rose for an elephant! Ha, ha!" jeered Kettywig.
 "Make it a cabbage, my good wizard." While
 Kabumpo glared and Pompus looked embarrassed,
 Nishibis shrugged his shoulders.
                "My magic grows roses only for Royalty," he explained
 insolently. "And if your Highnesses will
 pluck these flowers, a great good fortune will befall."
                "Probably scorch our fingers," observed Prince
 Pompadore, who did not care much for magic, having
 had some disagreeable experiences with it.

                "Oh, come on, let's pick them," begged Peg Amy
 eagerly, and as the King and Queen were equally
 curious to know what would happen, they all leaned
 forward and each picked a rose, even little Princess
 Pajonia. As the five stems snapped, there were five
 sharp explosions and Randy, leaping to his feet, saw
 the mist tree dissolving into a thick black cloud. But
 of the King and his family he saw nothing. They
 had vanished with the wizard's roses, and confronted
 by five empty chairs, the courtiers of Pumperdink
 gasped with fright and consternation.
                "A great good fortune has befallen. Ha, ha!
 Ha, ha!" croaked the magician, and whirling round
 and round he swung his blue bag over his head.
                "Good fortune? Good fortune? For whom?"
 screeched Kabumpo, lashing his trunk back and
 forth and swaying like a ship in a storm.
                "For Kettywig!" shouted Nishibis, pointing to
 Pompus' brother, who had risen and was facing the
 company with great composure. "Kettywig is next
 in succession. Ketty is KING! The King is dead,
 long live the King!"
                "Nothing of the kind!" trumpeted Kabumpo. "The
 King has only disappeared. Bring him back at once,
 you miserable, meddling, magic-working monster!
 Treason! Treeson-mist treeson!" boomed the Elegant

 Elephant at the top of his trunk. At his mighty
 cries, General Quakes and the royal guards burst
 through the doorway, all the courtiers jumped to
 their feet and a scene of the utmost confusion ensued.
 Only Kettywig remained calm. As the guards, moving
 forward none too willingly, attempted to seize
 the wizard, Kettywig spoke:
                "Stop!" commanded the King's brother, in a commanding
 voice. "I am now your ruler. From now
 on you take orders from me. Understand?"
                "Oyez! Oyez! I hereby pronounce Kettywig King
 of Pumperdink," quavered the Prime Pumper in a
 feeble voice.
                "Oyez! Oyez, you would say that to save your silly
 neck." Snatching the old statesman into the air
 Kabumpo shook him violently to and fro. "How dare
 you call this pitiful plotter King?" Turning to the
 cowering courtiers he roared in a loud voice: "Rise
 up! Rise up, and force these impostors to restore
 our rightful rulers!"
                "The first one who touches me shall vanish!"
 warned Nishibis, showing his yellow teeth and scowling
 so horribly that the guards fell back in horror;
 and when Kabumpo himself lunged forward, Randy
 tugged him frantically by the ear.

                "Be careful! Be careful!" begged the little boy in
 an earnest voice. "If you disappear, who is to help
 the King?"
                "Remove that elephant!" commanded Kettywig,
 pounding on the table with his fist. "Remove him,
 dip him, put him in irons!"
                "I'll attend to him," hissed the wizard, and as
 the guards made a half-hearted motion toward their
 old friend, Kabumpo, Nishibis snatched a second
 bundle of twigs from his sack and lighting them
 hurled the blazing circlet straight at the Elegant
 Elephant's head. But he had not counted on Randy.
 Leaning forward the little Gilliken neatly caught the
 blazing bundle and before they could take effect
 hurled them straight back. Now Randy had aimed
 at Nishibis, but in the extreme hurry and excitement
 of the moment he overshot his mark and the
 hissing, crackling bundle fell straight upon the head
 of Pumper, who melted away before their eyes, leaving
 nothing but his gold staff and spectacles. Yes,
 the King's chief adviser was now as gone as the
 King of Pumperdink himself.
                Before the company recovered from the shock,
 before the guards could take another step, the Elegant
 Elephant threw up his trunk and with a bellow
 of rage that blew out all the candles charged furiously

 from the banquet hall, never stopping till he
 reached his own apartment. The guardsmen, urged
 into action by dishes, cups, plates and spoons flung
 by Kettywig, were not far behind and as Kabumpo
 rushed into his own quarters Randy heard the door
 slam and two iron bolts slip into place. Next all the
 shutters were banged to from the outside and heavy
 feet pounded up and down the passageways.
                "Well !" panted the Elegant Elephant, leaning
 wearily against the wall, "I suppose now, my boy,
 you are satisfied. Something has happened, something
 has happened at last. Ugh! Ahhh! Why didn't
 I disappear and go out with the people I care for
 instead of staying here with these frightened fools
 and cowards?"
                "Don't you like me at all?" asked Randy in a small
 voice. Kabumpo, suddenly recollecting Randy's
 bravery, cleared his throat apologetically.
                "Of course I like you," he answered gruffly. "I
 like you a lot. Didn't you save me from vanishing?
 But what good will it do?" he gulped in the next
 breath. "My whole family has been wiped out and
 the throne stolen by a couple of plotting rascals.
 What can I do against magic?"
                "Well, you did something before," Randy reminded

 him quickly. "You saved the whole kingdom from
 disappearing.
                "But last time we were only threatened. This time
 everybody has actually vanished."
                "You haven't," persisted Randy, shuddering a little
 as a loud scream echoed along the corridor.
                "That's so!" mused Kabumpo thoughtfully.
 "That's so.!" His eyes began to twinkle and snap
 with excitement. "I'm still here and I'll fool them
 yet. I did something before and I'll do it again.
 We'll get out of the country at once, find some magic
 and return, and then let King Kettywig see who is
 strongest!"
                "But we're locked in," whispered Randy anxiously.
 "Are we?" Sniffing scornfully, Kabumpo lifted
 Randy to the floor and began to make hasty preparations
 for departure. Into a small leather bag he
 put the largest and most valuable of his jewels and
 donned his darkest and sturdiest robe. Giving Randy
 a small jeweled sword that had once been Prince
 Pompa's, he bade him lie down and get a little rest.
 Randy buckled on the sword but was far too excited
 to sleep. The castle was growing quieter and as the
 great clock in the tower tolled one, Kabumpo touched
 Randy on the shoulder. The boy wondered how
 they would get out without waking the guards, but

 he did not wonder long. Kabumpo, after a few
 whispered instructions, lifted Randy up to the glass
 transom over the door. While the Elegant Elephant
 held him by the heels he cleverly slipped back the
 bolts. Then, without a sound and without encountering
 a single guard, Kabumpo trod softly down the
 golden hallways and slipped out through a side door
 of the castle.
  
 CHAPTER 4
  
 In Foliensby Forest
  
 The night was dark and moonless and Kabumpo
 sped like a flying cloud through the silent city
 and sleeping villages of Pumperdink. Then, leaving
 the King's Highway, he turned east into the tangled
 forest domain of Faleero, the old and ugly princess
 whom Pompa had so nearly been forced to marry.
 In the center of the forest the Elegant Elephant
 stopped, and wrapping Randy in an old robe he had
 brought along for the purpose urged him to sleep
 until morning.
                "No one will look for us here," yawned Kabumpo,
 leaning wearily against a giant oak, and before the

 boy had time to answer he was asleep and snoring
 so tremendously that leaves fell in perfect showers
 upon Randy's upturned face and a family of squirrels
 in the hollow trunk fled for their lives. For nearly
 an hour the boy lay thinking of the strange happenings
 in Pumperdink. He wondered curiously
 how it felt to disappear and where he had heard the
 magician's voice before. While he was trying to remember
 he, too, fell asleep and dreamed he was
 flying on a yellow dragon to the Emerald City of Oz.
 A great rustle and splash wakened him next morning,
 and rolling out of Kabumpo's old robe he saw
 the Elegant Elephant vigorously bathing in a shallow
 forest stream. The sun was shining somewhere
 up above, but the trees were so close together that
 only a pale green light came flickering down into
 the forest.
                "Want a shower?" inquired Kabumpo cheerfully,
 and as Randy joined him he sent a spray of water
 high into the air.
                "No thank you, sir." Shivering a little, Randy,
 who was no fonder of washing than most boys,
 dashed a little water on the tip of his nose and dipping
 his fingers into the icy water hastily wiped them
 on his handkerchief.
                "Now, don't call me 'sir'," blustered Kabumpo, giving

 himself a shake that sent water spraying in
 every direction. "We're just comrades from now on,
 my boy, comrades in misfortune. Anyone brave
 enough to catch a wizard's bundle of tricks, needn't
 call anyone 'sir.' Hah !" Expelling his breath in a
 great whistle, Kabumpo beamed on Randy, and
 Randy, blushing with pleasure at such praise, beamed
 back.
                "Do you really think I am brave?" asked the boy.
 Kabumpo nodded vigorously. "But why do you
 ask me that?" he went on conversationally. "Do you
 especially want to be brave?"
                "It's awfully important to be brave," answered
 Randy, brushing back his thick hair. "Don't you
 think so, Kabumpo ?"
                "Well," mused Kabumpo, rubbing himself briskly
 with a bunch of leaves, "if you are an important
 person you ought to be brave, but if you're not, I
 can't see that it makes much difference. But I do
 think," the Elegant Elephant stopped rubbing and
 looked sharply at Randy, "I do think you should tell
 me a bit more about yourself, and I am not at all
 sure you should accompany me on this journey. No
 telling what may happen. And after all it is not
 your affair, but mine, to save the Kingdom of

 Pumperdink."
                "Oh, don't say that," begged Randy, throwing his
 arm around Kabumpo's trunk. "You helped me.
 Now let me help you. Please! Please!"
                "But what about your family?" demanded Kabumpo.
  "You really should go home, you know."
                "Not yet!. Not yet!" pleaded the boy, tightening
 his hold on the Elegant Elephant's trunk. "I want to
 see all of Oz before I do that."
                "M-mmm!" mumbled the Elegant Elephant, beginning
 to weaken. "Well, it will do you no harm to
 see a little of the country, but it's my guess you are
 no common mountain boy, used to goats and goatherds.
 You have too much style for that." Randy
 grinned a little at this, and, as Kabumpo had finished
 drying himself, he climbed into a tree and helped
 him adjust his grey velvet traveling cloak. Then, as
 they were both by this time terribly hollow, they
 began to look around for something to eat. The Elegant
 Elephant breakfasted quite comfortably on several
 barrels of leaves, but Randy had to satisfy himself
 with a cake of chocolate Kabumpo had slipped
 into his pocket the night before.
                "Where are we going first?" inquired the boy as
 Kabumpo, having eaten all the leaves he could hold,
 lifted him carefully aloft.

                "I-don't--know-," admitted Kabumpo, picking
 his way cleverly between the tall trees. "I thought
 of going straight to the Emerald City and appealing
 to Ozma and the Wizard of Oz for help. The practice
 of magic, as you know, is forbidden in Oz, and
 Ozma would not only punish this meddling magician
 but force him to restore the King and his family at
 once. On the other trunk," the Elegant Elephant
 cleared his throat self consciously, "I'd much rather
 rescue the royal family myself."
                "Oh, so should I!" agreed Randy, with an understanding
 nod. "But how are we going to do it?"
                "Search me!" Kabumpo flapped his ears, crushing
 twigs and branches wrathfully under his feet. "I
 never liked Kettywig from the moment he set foot
 in the palace. He must have planned to steal Pompus'
 throne from the very beginning, and s-a-y how I
 wish you'd caught that villain with his own magic,
 though putting Pumper out of the way was a big
 help. The very idea of him calling Kettywig 'King'
 just to save his own silly neck. The very idea!"
 "I wonder what he's doing now," called Randy,
 lying flat on Kabumpo's back to escape the scratching
 of the overhanging twigs and branches.
                "Pretending to be King," sniffed the Elegant Elephant,

 lifting his trunk with huge scorn. "He's just
 a pretender pretending to his business. Hah! Wait
 till I get my trunk on the fellow!" Increasing his
 pace, Kabumpo went crashing through the underbrush,
 too angry for further speech, and presently
 they came to an irregular clearing in the forest. At
 the furthest end stood a small, mean-looking hut.
                "Who lives here?" inquired Randy, sitting up curiously
 as Kabumpo came to a sudden stop.
                "Faleero!" answered Kabumpo, speaking quietly
 out of the corner of his mouth. "The Fairy Princess
 of Follenshy Forest. Shall we drop in and pay our
 respects, my boy?"
                "Not unless you want to," chuckled Randy, for the
 last time they had seen Faleero she had not only tried
 to hit them with a bundle of nettles, but had
 screeched so loud and fearsomely that the Elegant
 Elephant had taken to his heels.
                "Well," snickered Kabumpo, "I, myself, have no
 desire to see her hideous old Highness, but if she is
 out, we might find some food in the royal hovel. Anyway
 let's have a look." In spite of his great size
 Kabumpo could move without a sound, and stepping
 softly to the back window, he and Randy peered in.
                "Why, there's Nishibis!" shuddered Randy, grasping
 his sword.

                "Sh-hh!" warned Kabumpo, pressing closer to
 the window. It was strange enough to find the rascally
 magician in Faleero's hut, but as the two looked
 anxiously through the glass an even stranger thing
 happened. Snatching off his peaked hat and spectacles
 and clapping his bony hands together, Nishibis
 gave three piercing screeches. Immediately three
 bent old crones hobbled briskly into the room. The
 first took the wizard's cloak, the second pulled off
 the wizard's beard, the third tossed his blue bag
 into the corner, and the wizard, no longer a wizard
 but a wizened and ancient old lady, began to hop,
 skip and prance in crazy circles, yelling at the top of
 her cracked and disagreeable voice:
  
 "Drink to my happiness, drink, oh, drink,
 For I'm to be Queen of Pumperdink!
 Dance to my happiness, dance and jig;
 Faleero shall marry King Kettywig !"
  
                "Faleero!" gulped Kabumpo, clapping his trunk
 to his forehead as the four old witches continued to
 dance and caper about in the firelight.
                "No wonder I knew that wizard's voice," exclaimed
 Randy. "Remember the day she chased us, Kabumpo?

 Why, she just pretended to be a magician!"
                "But she certainly knows her magic! Great
 Grump! Just look at the old fury! She and Kettywig
 must have planned this from the very first. Well,
 I wish him joy of his bargain. What a queen! What
 a king! What a mix-up!"
                "Who are those other old women?" queried Randy,
 pressing his nose against the glass.
                "Ladies in waiting to her Majesty," answered
 Kabumpo, with a little sniff.
                "They look as if they had been waiting a long
 time," said Randy, lowering his head cautiously.
 "Are we going in?"
                "Not in, on," said Kabumpo grimly, "on and on
 and-on, till we're entirely out of this mischievous
 forest. No use tackling Faleero without any magic,"
 and swinging noiselessly away from the Royal Hut
 Kabumpo plunged again into the deep and impenetrable forest.
                "Faleero's been furious ever since Pompa married
 Peg Amy," confided the Elegant Elephant, shouldering
 his way through a dense tangle of vines and
 underbrush. "But I never thought she would do us
 any actual harm. I tell you, my boy, it's a dangerous
 thing to offend a fairy, especially an old fairy."
                "She doesn't seem much like a fairy to me," sighed
 Randy, settling himself comfortably between the

 Elegant Elephant's ears. "But then, I suppose there
 are bad fairies as well as good ones." Kabumpo
 mournfully agreed that there were. Then, lifting
 his trunk, he suddenly came to a complete standstill.
                "Someone's coming," he announced uneasily.
 Randy could not hear a sound and was about to tell
 Kabumpo he must surely be mistaken, when a tall
 weird figure in a dark cloak sprang out of the gloom.
                "Sooth! Sooth! Sooth!" cried the stranger, in a
 loud and challenging voice. "Sooth! Sooth! Sooth!"
                "Why do you cry 'sooth'?" rumbled the Elegant
 Elephant irritably.
                "Because I am a soothsayer," stated the fellow,
 extending both arms. "Sooth! Sooth! Sooth !"
                "Oh, bother such stuff and nonsense!" exclaimed
 Kabumpo, swaying irritably to and fro. "If you have
 anything to soothsay, for Grump's sake say it! We
 are in a hurry, a great hurry!"
                "An elephant is always great, whether he hurries
 or not," replied the soothsayer soothingly. "And just
 permit me to observe that there is no door a golden
 key will not open."
                "But there isn't any door around here," objected
                leaning over to look more closely at the soothsayer.
 Kabumpo, however, seemed to understand

 perfectly what was wanted and was already fumbling
 with his trunk in the pocket of his robe.
                "Here," he said, not ungraciously, holding out to
 the soothsayer a huge and gleaming pearl. "Unlock
 the doors of your soothsaying mind and tell us something
 really useful."
                "Ah !" smiled the stranger, greedily pocketing the
 jewel. "You drop pearls of wisdom when you speak.
 Then harken and hear ye:
                "A person of high rank and extreme importance
 is traveling toward the Emerald City of Oz."
                "Everyone around here knows me," muttered Kabumpo,
 in a pleased aside to Randy. "Everybody!"
                "I was not referring to your royal self," sniffed
 the soothsayer, who had overheard Kabumpo's
 whisper. With a provoking wink at Randy he folded
 his arms and began to back away into the forest,
 and before the Elegant Elephant had recovered from
 his shock and displeasure, he spoke again.
                "In the castle of the Red Jinn you will find what
 you seek. He, alone, can help you." As Kabumpo
 and Randy stared at him in utter amazement he
 disappeared between the trees but after a short
 silence his mocking voice came floating back to them:
                "Step by step one goes a long way."
                "Oooh! I wonder how long a way it is?" breathed

 Randy, looking at the spot where the soothsayer had
 been. "Oh, Kabumpo, do you suppose the King and
 his family are really in the castle of the Red Jinn?
 Then all we have to do is find the Red Jinn."
                "But we don't even know where he is," blustered
 the Elegant Elephant, forgetting that he had been
 insulted. "Still, if he's a Red Jinn-." Kabumpo began
 to move swiftly in the direction the soothsayer
 had taken. "If he's a Red Jinn his castle must
 be in the Quadling Country, for that is the reddest
 Kingdom in Oz. Everything is red there, even the
 bluest books." Trumpeting with pleasure at his own
 cleverness, Kabumpo flung forward at such a pace
 that Randy had all he could do to stay aboard and
 no breath at all to ask questions.
                "'Step by step,' did he say?" Kabumpo bellowed
 gleefully. "Well, here we go step by stepping!"
  
 CHAPTER 5
  
 The River Road
  
                THOUGH Randy had no breath to speak, he was
 doing a heap of thinking as Kabumpo rushed
 recklessly through Follensby Forest. Like all the

 other boys in the wonderful Kingdom of Oz he had
 studied his geozify and hoztry, as they call geography
 and history in that merry and magical country. He
 knew that Oz was ruled by Ozma, a lovely girl fairy
 in the famous Emerald City. And although he had
 never visited the capital himself, he knew that it was
 in the exact center of the Kingdom just where the
 four triangular countries of the realm met. The
 northernmost country of Oz, where Randy lived, was
 the Gilliken or purple country, the western dominions
 of Oz were the Blue Lands of the Munchkins. To the
 east lay the yellow Winkie Kingdom and to the
 south the red lands of the Quadlings. All these countries
 have their own rulers but all four sovereigns
 are subject to Ozma, who is the Supreme Ruler of
 them all. As Pumperdink was in the north central
 part of the Gilliken Country, Randy realized that
 they must travel south to reach the Quadling Country
 and in that gay red Kingdom search for the castle
 of the Red Jinn.
                It was all very exciting and mysterious, and Randy
 heartily hoped 'they would pass through the Emerald
 City on their way south and see the Scarecrow, the
 Tin Woodman and some of the other famous
 celebrities at Ozma's court. Perhaps they would visit
 the palace of Glinda, the Good Sorceress of the South

 and ruler of the Quadlings. Glinda would surely
 know something of the Red Jinn. The very sound
 of a Red Jinn fascinated Randy, and just as he was
 picturing to himself how a Jinn might look, Kabumpo
 gave a little extra spurt of speed that carried them
 entirely out of the dismal forest. For a moment the
 sunshine made them both blink, but as they grew
 more accustomed to the brightness they saw that
 they were still in the land of the Gillikens. The fields
 were tinged with purple, purple flags and violets
 clustered around the roots of the trees and grape
 arbors and plum orchards were everywhere.
                Panting a little from his tiring run, Kabumpo
 moved along more slowly, looking to the right and
 left for familiar landmarks. There were no towns
 or villages in sight, but on the other side of a small
 hill three roads branched off in different directions.
                "Now, which road?" pondered the Elegant Elephant,
 swaying uncertainly from side to side. "Which
 road would be best?" As he did not have his specs
 and as the signs were too low for him to read anyway,
 he snatched the first sign out by the roots
 and held it up for Randy to read.
                "This way to the river," read Randy promptly.
 Throwing down the first sign Kabumpo stepped over

 to the next road and jerked up the second.
                "That way to the river," read Randy in some surprise,
 and when Kabumpo had torn up the third
 sign they both felt rather provoked.
                "The other way to the river," stated the third sign
 contrarily.
                "Well, who wants to go to the river?" grumbled
 the Elegant Elephant discontentedly. "Still," he
 flapped his ears thoughtfully, "rivers usually go some
 place and it will be something to drink and wash in."
                "Yes," agreed Randy not very enthusiastically,
 "but which way shall we go, Kabumpo, this way,
 that way, or the other way?" Kabumpo squinted
 uncertainly at the three roads. Then, as they all
 went in a more or less southerly direction, he tossed
 up Randy's sword to decide the matter.
                "Point for 'this way,' hilt for 'that way,' and blade
 for 'the other'," announced Kabumpo, flinging the
 jeweled weapon high into the air. The sword embedded
 itself point down in the exact center of "this
 way so, restoring it to Randy, the Elegant Elephant
 started cautiously down the first road. There
 was nothing remarkable about "this way," but after
 the dark, tangled forest, it seemed very pleasant
 and interesting to the two travelers. Talking of one
 thing and another, but mostly of the unexpected happenings

 in Pumperdink, they proceeded comfortably
 enough, Randy standing up now and then to pluck
 a plum from the trees that lined the roadway, or to
 look for signs of a castle or cottage where they might
 stop for lunch. About noon they came to a sign large
 enough for even Kabumpo to read. "RIVER ROAD"
 said the sign in splashy purple letters.
                "Pshaw! We knew that already," sniffed Kabumpo.
 "And it's about time we got to this river, if you ask me."
                Randy said nothing, but looking out over Kabumpo's
 ears he noticed that the road had widened
 considerably. It seemed to the Gilliken boy that the
 road bed was moving and churning about, but thinking
 it was the reflection of the sun on the gleaming
 purple sands, he said nothing, and with a weary
 sigh Kabumpo resignedly pushed forward. But
 scarcely had he gone six steps before he had sunk
 to his shoulders in the River Road and next instant
 the road in a great wave rose and rolled completely
 over them. Gasping and choking Randy clutched
 Kabumpo's jeweled collar. As he did so Kabumpo
 got his head up.
                "The river!" coughed the Elegant Elephant, wrathfully
 spurting out the barrel of water he had swallowed.
 "Not a road at all! It's a river road." And

 so it was, a tumbling rushing torrent of purple water
 that swept the great elephant along as if he had
 been a match stick. No matter how hard he tried
 to swim toward the shore he was immediately carried
 out into the center and about all he could do
 was to keep his own head and Randy's above water.
 Every time Kabumpo tried to talk, gallons of river
 rushed down his throat, so he finally gave up the
 attempt. He had already swallowed several small
 fish and when he thought what the river was doing
 to his robes and what a figure he would cut when he
 got out, he groaned with dismay and wretchedness.
                "Oh, why didn't we go 'that way'-or 'the other
 way'-any way but 'this way'?" choked the poor elephant,
 struggling grimly with the treacherous current
 that rolled him about like a log. Randy, as wet
 and miserable as Kabumpo, hung on desperately,
 bracing himself against the frequent duckings and
 wondering how much more he could stand. Just as he
 had decided things were as bad as they could possibly
 be, they grew terribly worse. Warned by a thunderous
 roar that there were rapids ahead, but unable
 to stop or help themselves, Randy and Kabumpo
 went hurling over a tremendous waterfall, down,
 down, down, till there actually seemed no end to the
 drop. How the boy kept his hold on Kabumpo's

 collar I cannot imagine, nor could he have told you
 himself, but when, bruised, battered and half drowning,
 he opened his eyes, he and the Elegant Elephant
 were still together. Kabumpo, puffing and blowing
 like a porpoise, was desperately fighting the treacherous river.
                But now it was a fight in the dark, for the river had
 plunged underground and was carrying them
 through hollow and echoing caverns of rock and
 crystal. If you have ever been in a scenic railway
 and shot suddenly into its black, cavernous recesses,
 you can, in a small way, imagine how Randy felt.
 Only you would have to multiply that feeling by a
 thousand, for while scenic railways are sure to end,
 the Elegant Elephant and his drenched little rider
 had no idea. at all where the underground river was
 taking them, or whether they would ever see daylight
 again. Indeed, they were so breathless and shaken
 by their tumble down the waterfall that they hardly
 noticed that the current had grown calmer, and
 Kabumpo rolled along for almost a mile before he
 realized that with a little effort he could easily reach
 the shore.
                Then, too, as their eyes grew more accustomed to
 the dim darkness of the under-earth, they could see
 that it was not absolutely black, but a misty grey.

 Overhead pointed stalactites of crystal and basalt
 thrust their dangerous spikes downward. Each side
 of the river was lined with the same sharp crystal
 rocks. Kabumpo, splashing toward the right bank,
 looked worriedly for a place where he could land
 without puncturing himself. At last he sighted a
 stretch of smooth black rock almost level with the
 river and with a huge grunt hoisted himself up and
 out of the mischievous stream.
                "Something to drink and wash in," shuddered
 Kabumpo, giving himself a cautious shake so as
 not to unseat Randy. "I was never so sick of water,
 inside and out, in my life. I feel like a sponge and
 an aquarium. Er-rah! A fine place this is! We
 might just as well have disappeared with the King.
 Br-rah !"
                "I'm c-c-cold," shivered Randy, sliding down Kabumpo's
 trunk and trying to squeeze the water out of his clothes.
                "Me too!" grunted the Elegant Elephant, trying
 to beat himself in the chest with his trunk, "and if
 my tusks weren't so far apart they'd chatter, and I'm
 hungry enough to eat monkey meat."
                "Elephants don't eat meat." Randy had to grin at
 Kabumpo's savage expression.
                "No, they don't eat meat and they hate monkeys,
 but I'm so starved that if I saw a monkey, I'd eat

 it like that!" Snapping his trunk, Kabumpo began
 to run around in a circle, with Randy right behind
 him.
                After the tenth round they felt a little better and
 began to examine the strange cavern. The rock on
 which they had landed was the only safe place for
 Kabumpo to tread, for as far as they could see in
 both directions the river was edged with the sharp
 and needle-pointed crystals. At the back of the rock
 a sheer wall of metal rose to the top of the long,
 dim passageway. Tiptoeing over to this wall, Randy
 gave it an experimental tap with his knuckles and
 found to his surprise that the wall was quite hot.
 He called Kabumpo and they both pressed against
 it as hard as they could in an endeavor to get warm
 and dry. In fact, the Elegant Elephant pressed so
 hard that the wall, with a great grind and creak,
 swayed inward, and before you could say Ozmopotamus
 Randy and Kabumpo tumbled over on the
 other side.
                It must have been a door!" exclaimed Randy,
 jumping up as fast as he could. Kabumpo was lying
 on his back, his four feet sticking up in the air,
 grunting and sputtering with disgust.
                "Doornation!" raged the Elegant Elephant, lurching

 to his feet. As he did so, the metal door swung
 back into place and they found themselves shut up
 in a huge, iron-walled chamber. In the center of
 the rock floor a fire fountain threw sprays of sparks
 into the air and to the two cold and shivering adventurers
 the warmth seemed perfectly delicious.
                "Wherever do you suppose we are, Kabumpo?"
 whispered Randy, looking fearfully around the great,
 grim, empty room.
                "Ask me again in five minutes," wheezed the Elegant
 Elephant, making for the fire fountain with
 long energetic strides. I'm going to get warm and
 dry. Then maybe I can think of something. At any
 rate, it's better in here than outside."
                Randy wasn't so sure, but following Kabumpo's
 example he began drying himself at the fire fountain.
 They were both so busy turning round and round
 that neither noticed the opening of fifty round doors
 in the iron wall. And next instant with a roar that
 sounded like the explosion of fifty guns, the in-
 habitants of the cavern hurled themselves at the
 intruders. Snatching Randy up in his trunk, Kabumpo,
 trembling in every leg, saw fifty projectiles
 shaped like torpedoes coming straight at them.
                Turning sideways and holding Randy so as to
 protect him by his own huge body Kabumpo shuddered

 and closed his eyes. He could almost feel the
 horrid missiles piercing his elegant hide. This, then,
 was the end. Who now would rescue the royal family
 of Pumperdink or save the unhappy kingdom from
 the misrule of Faleero and Kettywig? This and a
 hundred other gloomy thoughts flashed through the
 Elegant Elephant's mind as he awaited destruction.
 He was astonished at the time it was taking the torpedoes
 to reach and riddle him. Finally, unable to
 bear the suspense any longer, he opened one eye
 and glanced wildly over his shoulder.
  
 CHAPTER 6
  
 Torpedora, the Glorious
  
                IN a neat and precise row, fifty torpedoes stood
 upright before him. Not merely torpedoes, but
 torpedomen and women. They had strong, smooth
 iron-clad bodies with no legs or feet, but their fire
 arms were held close to their cylindrical sides, and
 their heads ended in sharp, dangerous-looking points.
 Their black and shining faces were neither cruel nor
 ferocious, and taking heart, Kabumpo set Randy
 down beside him. As he did so, the torpedo in the

 center of the line hopped out.
                "Speak!" commanded this curious being in a succession
 of explosions and sulphurous sputters.
 "Speak and explain yourselves before we simply
 explode with laughter,"
                "Don't explode!" begged the Elegant Elephant,
 backing away hastily. "Don't explode and I'll explain
 everything."
                "Do you-explode often?" asked Randy, as Kabumpo
 cast about in his mind for a good way to
 begin his explanations.
                "Only once," hissed the torpedoman at the end of
 the line, looking at the boy meaningfully; and the
 Elegant Elephant, fearing that Randy's youth and
 inexperience might get them into serious trouble,
 hurriedly took the conversation into his own trunk.
                "Whom have I the honor of addressing?" he began
 importantly with a gracious nod toward the line of
 torpedoes.
                "Torpedora the Glorious of Torpedo Town!"
 shouted the iron men so lustily that their breath
 filled the cave with smoke and sulphur.
                "Ah-hhh!: choked Kabumpo, tears pouring down
 both cheeks from the acrid smoke. He could just
 make out the iron petticoat and crown that distinguished
 Torpedora from her subjects. "We hereby

 salute your Torpedojesty!" He raised his trunk impressively,
 for the Elegant Elephant had had great
 experience with royal personages. "We salute your
 Torpedojesty and crave the kind indulgence of your
 attention and the hospitality of your court."
                "Have we any of those," rasped Torpedora to the
 torpedoman just behind her. She looked so worried
 that Randy had all he could do to keep from laughing.
                "No, but we have a splendid assortment of torpedoughnuts,"
 answered the fellow, popping out his eyes at the Queen.
                "Dodo, fetch the torpedoughnuts!" commanded
 her Majesty, smiling pleasantly at the Elegant Elephant.
 As Randy and Kabumpo watched curiously
 for these strange refreshments to appear, a small
 door in the west wall flew open and out shot Torpedodo,
 as quaint a bird as I've ever had the pleasure
 of describing. He, too, was torpedo-shaped, but
 smaller than the other inhabitants of Torpedo Town.
 Instead of fire arms, he had fire wings and claws
 and in one of these he carried an iron basket full
 of red hot iron rings, glowing like horseshoes that
 have just left the furnace. These he sulkily offered
 to the visitors, and when Kabumpo and the boy
 jumped away from him in real alarm, he dropped the
 basket on the floor and began shooting round and

 round examining the two from every angle.
                "Pray eat!" directed the Queen, graciously extending
 her fire arms. "You will find our doughnuts very
 strengthening." Randy looked desperately at the
 Elegant Elephant, but Kabumpo seemed equal to any
 emergency.
                "We only eat at night, your Highness," murmured
 Kabumpo apologetically. "If we were to partake of
 food in the daytime we would be utterly destroyed.
 It is the way we are made," he finished, with a sly
 look at Randy. The Queen seemed unconvinced, but
 without giving her time to argue the matter, Kabumpo
 plunged into a lively account of their adventures.
 He had just got to the disappearance of the
 royal family, when Torpedora interrupted him with
 an imperious gesture.
                "Stop!" cried her Majesty in a threatening voice.
 "Where is this Pumperdink? Have you ever heard
 of such a kingdom, Dodo?"
                "No, no! Absolutely no, no!" screeched the Dodo,
 in a raucous croak. "There is no such place, your
 Highness!" Settling himself in an iron swing just
 above the Queen's head, he began to swing himself
 vigorously back and forth, emitting such villainous
 screams and screeches that Kabumpo could not make
 himself heard at all.

                "Just leave out Pumperdink and go on from
 there sniffed the Queen, as Dodo finally left off
 screeching.
                "If I leave out Pumperdink there's use going
 on at all," snapped Kabumpo, who had been rumbling
 like a volcano during Dodo's ear-splitting racket
                "Then why go on?" inquired Torpedora, showing
 a double row of small black teeth as she smiled
 sweetly at Kabumpo. "Stories make me so very tired
 and sleepy, especially stories that are not true. Ah,
 I have it!" The Queen clapped her hands gleefully.
 "I'll keep you for riddles. Every day we will guess
 who you are and how you came here. It ought to
 last for days and days and then-" her Majesty
 gave Kabumpo a second dazzling smile "-and then
 we'll riddle you through and through and sweep you
 into the fire fountain."
                "Well, won't that be nice?" Randy edged closer to
 Kabumpo and looked with positive aversion at the
 iron Queen.
                "It's no use talking to these idiots," snorted the
 Elegant Elephant temperishly. "I shan't open my
 mouth again." He gave a furious sniff, however, as
 the Queen, with a stiff little bow, excused herself.
                "It's high time I was torpedozing," yawned her

 Highness in a bored voice, and signaling wearily to
 her subjects she shot majestically into the air. Followed
 by the whole fifty and Torpedodo, she circled
 around the iron chamber and then with fifty-one
 little clicks they disappeared into the small metal
 compartments in the wall.
                "Well, what," gulped the Elegant Elephant, sitting
 down with a thump, "what do you think of that?
 Never have I been treated with such cast-iron impertinence,
 never-in my whole elephant life."
                "We'd better go while they are asleep," breathed
 agreed Kabumpo, hot-footing it quickly after Randy.
 "If we stay here we'll be riddled, and a nice thing that would be."
                "And I used to like riddles," sighed Randy pensively.
 "But liking riddles and being riddled are not
 the same thing at all. How do you open this door,
 anyway?"
                "Another riddle," panted Kabumpo, hurling himself
 at the heavy structure. But push and thump as
 he would the door refused to budge. As he paused
 to rest and mop his forehead, Torpedodo whizzed
 suddenly from his hole in the wall.
                "That door only opens once in every hundred
 years," jeered Dodo vindictively. "Ha, ha! You'll
 have to wait a while!" And returning like a flash to
 his iron aperture he went in and slammed the door,

 leaving Kabumpo and Randy too discouraged and
 exhausted even to speak. The air, which had seemed
 pleasantly warm when they were wet and shivering,
 was now so hot and crackling that they could hardly
 breathe and the terrible heat, added to their hunger,
 made it imperative for them to escape as soon as
 possible.
                "I can't stand-much-more-of-this!" panted
 Kabumpo, flapping his ears unhappily. "And say, I'd
 give my best suspenders for just one peanut."
                "Maybe there's another door," suggested Randy,
 but before they had gone halfway around the great
 room a storm came up, or rather down, and they
 were a hundred times more uncomfortable than before.
 Each rain drop was a torpedo that exploded
 spitefully when it struck the ground. After three
 had set fire to Randy's hair and another had burned
 a hole in his coat, Kabumpo made the boy lie down
 and then stood carefully over him. Thus Randy was
 protected but the poor elephant was peppered with
 the stinging missiles and had to blow and beat himself
 constantly with his trunk to put out the tiny
 fires that the torpedoes started in his cloak. And
 when at last the storm abated his velvet robe was
 little more than a blackened mass of holes held together

 by tiny threads of silk.
                "Oh, well," sighed Kabumpo resignedly, as Randy
 rolled out and looked at him in shocked silence, "I've
 always wanted a smoking jacket and now I've got
 one."
                Randy jumped to his feet and gave the big elephant
 a quick hug. "Kabumpo," marvelled the
 boy softly, "you're grand! I don't see how you can
 joke when you're all singed and scorched and we're
 both liable to be riddled."
                "Humph!" sniffed Kabumpo grimly. "I'm too old
 to cry, so I may as well laugh. Now for that door.
 Ha!" Rubbing the cinders from his eyes, the Elegant
 Elephant marched determinedly along the north wall,
 feeling every inch of the way with his trunk. In
 the very center he came to a small iron ring.
                "This may set off an alarm or blow us to bits,"
 grumbled the Elegant Elephant, "but anything's better than this."
 "Let me pull it" begged Randy, who wished to
 take his share of the danger and felt that so far
 Kabumpo had borne the brunt of their hardships.
 "Let me pull it." And before Kabumpo could interfere
 he gave the iron ring a furious tug. A loud
 bell sounded in the west wall and as the two prisoners
 anxiously waited for something to happen, Dodo
 burst from his cell again and hurled himself downward.

 "What do you want? Who told you to ring my
 bell? Don't you know I must obey the bell ringer, no
 matter who he is?"
                "Oh, Kabumpo, did you hear that?" squealed
 Randy, beginning to hop up and down with excitement.
 "Show us the way out of here," he trumpeted
 fiercely. "quick before I wring your neck."
 Dodo gave a frightened squeak at this terrible threat,
 and motioning for them to follow flew straight to the
 north wall and tapped twice on the panel with his
 fire claw. Without a sound it slid aside and without
 stopping to thank the rude creature or say good-bye
 to Torpedo Town, Kabumpo rushed through the
 opening.
                "Be careful," warned Randy, who was riding perilously
 between the Elegant Elephant's ears. "Remember the river!"
                "I'd like to drink a gallon of river right now,"
 puffed Kabumpo, fairly panting with thirst and
 exhaustion. "Why, I'd even jump in it."
                But there was no river on the other side of Torpedo
 Town, only a long, dim tunnel that seemed to
 slant gradually upward. But the air was cool and
 with a profound sigh of relief, Kabumpo began to
 climb the slight incline. They had gone possibly half
 a mile when they came to a turn in the tunnel and

 found themselves facing an immense grey curtain.
 It billowed in and out and they could distinctly hear
 voices and footsteps on the other side. On the curtain
 itself, after some difficulty, they made out ten words.
 THIS IS STAIR WAY.
 STEP UP AND STATE YOUR BUSINESS.
                "Well, that's fair enough," mumbled Kabumpo,
 after squinting thoughtfully at these instructions.
 So, parting the curtains with his trunk, he called in
 a loud voice:
                "Way for the Elegant Elephant of Oz and Randy,
 the Gilliken, who seek the castle of the Red Jinn!
 Way for the Elegant Elephant of Oz!" Then, forgetting
 to step up, he fell forward on his knees,
 throwing Randy over his head.
  
 CHAPTER 7
  
 Stair Way
  
 THERE was a short silence as Randy and Kabumpo
 fell through the curtain. Randy, the first
 to regain his feet saw an immense flight of irregular
 steps straggling upward. Each step was as low and
 flat and broad as a city street. Crooked little stone
 houses were built on the edges of each step and

 a line of crooked and stooped people with eyes as
 large as plums turned to stare at the travelers. As
 Kabumpo and Randy stood uncertainly at the bottom
 of Stair Way a hoarse voice came booming down
 to them:
                "Welcome to Stair Way! Come up! Keep moving!
 Look where you're going! Go where you're looking!"
                "It's the King," fluttered a little Stare on the lowest
 tread. "Come, my stepchildren. Come to your
 stepmother. Keep moving, keep moving. Do as his
 Majesty commands." At this, all the Stares, who
 had stopped to gaze at the newcomers, began to move
 upward, but over their shoulders they stared without
 winking at Kabumpo and Randy. It made the boy
 feel positively creepy, but the Elegant Elephant, with
 an indifferent shrug, cautiously started up the
 crowded steps.
                "We have to go up anyway," muttered Kabumpo,
 to show that it was not the King's orders that influenced
 him. "Have you no children of your own,
 madam?" he inquired loftily of the crooked little
 Stare Lady who was anxiously shepherding a stoop
 shouldered boy and girl out of his path.
                "We're all step-relations here," explained the little
 woman, rolling her huge purple eyes around at Kabumpo.

 "Stepmothers, stepfathers, stepsisters, stepbrothers,
 stepchildren, step-"
                "Step lively," shouted the King's voice again from
 the top of the stair, and old and young, little and
 big, began to crowd and push in an endeavor to reach
 the top.
                "It's a shame!" breathed Randy indignantly.
 "Must you keep doing this all the time?"
                "What else is there to do?" asked the little stepmother
 who had first addressed them. "What else
 could one do in Stair Way but go up and down?
 That's why we're here, to step and stare, to stare
 and step. It's beautiful!" she finished earnestly.
                "Step by step one goes a long way," said Kabumpo
 under his breath. "Ha, ha! But not for me."
 We look you up, we look you down,
 For that is the rule in our beautiful town;
 Mid first we walk up and then we walk dawn,
 And keep moving all day; it's the way In our town !"
 chanted the Stares, opening their eyes still wider
 and wider.
                "How perfectly awful!" yawned Kabumpo, who
 was by this time so tired and hungry he could hardly
 keep his feet. "Well, why do you have houses if you
 keep moving up and down this way?"
                "Oh, just to step in and out of," beamed the stepmother.

 "What do other people do with houses?"
  "Not much more than that, nowadays," admitted
 the Elegant Elephant. "Say, are we almost at the
 top?"
                "Do you not see the castles?" exclaimed a step-
 uncle, raising his arm importantly. Randy, holding
 Kabumpo's ear, stood up to have a look, but all
 he discovered were two enormous stepladders, one on
 each side of the top step of Stair Way Town. A bent
 and crooked King with a scepter that looked like a
 banister rail was scurrying up one ladder and a
 stooped and savage-looking Queen was backing awkwardly
 down the other.
                "King Kumup and Queen Godown," whispered the
 little stepmother, who was walking sedately beside
 Kabumpo.
                "And do they really run up and down those ladders
 all day?" gasped Randy, watching the two sovereigns
 intently.
                "Been doing it for years," boasted the step-uncle
 who was on the other side of the Elegant Elephant.
 But he had time for no more, for just then Kabumpo
 reached the top step and the Queen, jumping off her
 ladder and flashing her great purple eyes in a royal
 and dangerous fashion, bawled imperiously:

                "Go down!" With frightened little bows the Stares
 turned and started obediently downward.
                "Go down!" shouted her Majesty, again pointing
 a furious finger at Kabumpo. "I said GO DOWN
                "I heard you," observed the Elegant Elephant
 calmly regarding the crooked little Queen, "but, unfortunately,
 I have other plans." Kabumpo swung his trunk unconcernedly.
                "Other plans!" raged the Queen, opening her purple
 eyes so wide that Randy thought they would roll
 down her cheeks, while the King, who had reached
 the top of the ladder, brandished his scepter menacingly.
 "It's against the law to stop on the stairs," roared
 the King indignantly. "Move on! Move on, or we'll
 take steps against you. Whoever stops on the stair
 is liable to be kicked down the whole flight!"
                "Now I shouldn't try that," advised Kabumpo, with
 an amused wink around at Randy. Then, as the
 Queen actually gave him a feeble push and the King
 in his anger and excitement fell all the way down
 the ladder and landed on his head, the Elegant Elephant
 dodged between the sputtering sovereigns and
 plunged through the grey curtains just behind the
 step-castles.
 "Im-agine spending your life on the stairs," exclaimed
 Randy, looking curiously over his shoulder.
 But Kabumpo had neither the time nor the inclination

 to look back. Hurrying along the earthy
 passageway in which he now found himself he looked
 eagerly ahead for some signs of an outlet that would
 take them back to upper and outer Oz.
                "I never cared for these underground peoples and
 places," sniffed Kabumpo, pounding determinedly
 along the empty passageway. "I hope to goodness
 we've not gone too far out of our way. Looks like a
 mine," he decided, not very enthusiastically.
                "Well, I wonder whose mine it is," called Randy
 trying to see around the corner of the long corridor.
                "Mine!" laughed a silvery voice, and down from
 a ledge just above their heads floated a little grey
 elfin lady wearing a filigreed silver crown on her long
 silver hair, a spun silver dress, and tiny silver slippers.
                "Well, I'm certainly glad it is yours," said Kabumpo,
 glancing thoughtfully down at the pretty
 little creature. "Are you an elf or a fairy, my dear?"
                "My name is Delva!" answered the small silver
 lady, booking fearlessly up at the huge elephant. "I
 am Queen of the Delves and this is my silver mine.
 Will you stay here and help us delve, dig, and bore
 for silver?"
                "Not if we can help it," muttered Kabumpo under
 his breath. But Delva, without waiting for his consent,

 clapped her small hands sharply. Instantly the
 passageway swarmed with delves. On their heads
 they wore silver helmets with long pointed spikes and
 on their hands, like gauntlets, they had spiked silver
 claws. As Randy stared doubtfully at these strange
 little men, Delva stamped her foot and immediately
 the whole band hurled themselves at the walls of
 the tunnel, burrowing with their heads and scratching
 with their claws till they had vanished like so
 many moles.
                "You see how easy it is," smiled Delva, powdering
 her nose energetically with a small box of silver
 powder. "Just come with me and I'll have, our silver-
 smith fit you out with gloves and helmets."
                "But we can't stay here," began Randy, as Delva
 skipped gaily ahead of Kabumpo. 'We're saving a
 King and Queen and we have to find the Red Jinn,
 don't we Kabumpo?"
 "Yes," said the Elegant Elephant stiffly. "Besides,
 mining would bore us to death."
 "Bore you to death!" Delva stopped short and
 tapped her silver slipper angrily on the silver-flagged
 flooring. "Why, that's an idea! That's just what I'll
 do. You refuse to work? Very well, then, you shall
 be bored to death by my army of Delves."
 Raising a silver whistle to her ups, and looking not

 nearly so pretty as she had looked before, Delva blew
 three shrill blasts. But Kabumpo was weary of the
 strange manners and behavior of these underground
 rulers and without waiting for the whistle to take
 effect, he seized Delva in his trunk, set her unceremoniously
 on a high rock above his head and went
 thumping like an express train down the winding
 corridor of the silver mine. Soon they heard hundreds
 of tiny footsteps pattering behind them and
 as Kabumpo came to the end of the corridor and
 plunged headlong into the small room at the end, the
 first of the Silver Queen's army came shouting into
 view. Slamming the door of the tiny compartment,
 which was quite dark and stifling, Kabumpo felt
 angrily around for a stick or some other weapon, but
 Randy gave a startled scream.
                "We're moving!" cried Randy delightedly. "Oh,
 Kabumpo-it's an elevator and you must have
 started it when you shut the door."
                "Good luck at last," panted Kabumpo, as they shot
 dizzily upward. "And about time, too." And it really
 was good luck this time, for when the elevator did
 stop and they cautiously opened the door, they found
 themselves on top of the world again looking out
 over the pleasant fields, valleys and woods of the

 Gillikens. And better still, over the tree tops just
 ahead rose the turrets and spires of an imposing
 castle. The sun was sinking behind the purple hills,
 the birds were twittering happily in the lacy branches
 of the tulip trees and never had the sky seemed more
 bright or beautiful. Stepping from the elevator,
 which at once shot down to the bottom of the shaft,
 Kabumpo started on a run for the castle.
                "Hah, now we shall soon be with people who understand
 and appreciate us," puffed the Elegant Elephant
 thankfully, "people of our own rank and station!"
                Forgetting that Randy was only a poor mountain
 boy, and that he himself in his scorched and tattered
 cloak presented anything but a royal appearance,
 Kabumpo rushed confidently through the castle garden
 and thumped loudly on the castle door.
                "Wait!" whispered Randy, his teeth beginning to
 chatter a little from fright and weariness. "There's
 something very odd about this castle. Have you
 noticed the size of the door, and look, all the windows
 are at the top." As Kabumpo drew back to see for
 himself, the door, which was in truth thirty feet
 high and thirty feet across, slowly creaked open and
 a giant stood looking curiously down at them. Randy
 was too stunned to speak and Kabumpo too weary
 to run and as they stood silently regarding him, the

 giant burst into a hearty roar.
                "Welcome! Welcome!" Leaning down he shook
 Kabumpo's trunk as if it had been a pump handle.
 "Welcome to the Castle of Nandywog, and you are
 just in time for dinner, too."
                "Whose?" asked Randy in a faint voice, for he had
 read some extremely disturbing facts about giants.
 "Why, MINE!" beamed the giant gaily, and leaning
 over he picked up Kabumpo as if he had been a
 toy dog and carried him boisterously into the castle.
  
 CHAPTER 8
  
                Nandywog, the Little Giant
  
 KABUMPO had never felt so small and insignificant
 in his whole life and when the giant
 set him on the floor his legs wobbled so strangely
 that he had to lean against a three-legged stool for
 support.
                "Oh," shivered the boy anxiously to himself. "Oh
 I hope I am going to be brave!" Grasping his
 jeweled sword firmly by the handle he waited desperately
 for the giant's next move. But Nandywog, now
 that they were inside his castle, seemed perfectly

 satisfied, and stretching himself full length upon the
 floor so he could better observe his small visitors, he
 regarded them long and seriously.
                "Was it a fire or an explosion?" he asked finally,
 fixing his great eyes curiously on Kabumpo's
 scorched and tattered cloak.
                "A little of both," admitted Kabumpo in a relieved
 voice, for the giant's question was so frank and
 friendly that it filled the Elegant Elephant with new
 hope and confidence. "We fell in a river, were carried
 underground to Torpedo Town, got caught in
 a torpedo storm, escaped through Stair Way and a
 silver mine and coming to your castle hoped we
 might obtain rest and refreshment before continuing
 our journey."
                "And so you shall! So you shall!" promised Nandywog
 heartily. "I can see you are both brave and
 interesting. You neither run nor scream when you
 see a giant. You are the only people in all Oz who
 have treated me as a fellow being. Even my own
 subjects jump like rabbits when I approach. Nobody
 will talk to me, or visit me. I believe I am the loneliest
 person in this whole country." Nandywog sighed
 gustily and rolling over on his back stared up at the
 ceiling. "Being a giant is awful-awful! Especially
 when you are a little giant," he finished gloomily.

                "Oh-are you a little giant?" asked Randy in surprise,
 for Nandywog seemed simply enormous to him.
                "The littlest giant in Oz," answered Nandy. "When
 I grew no taller than twenty feet, my own people
 flung me off Big Top Mountain. The giants will have
 nothing to do with me because I am too small and
 the Ozites will have nothing to do with me because I
 am too big. Terrible, isn't it?"
                Kabumpo thought it best to agree and shook his
 head sympathetically. "So," continued Nandywog
 mournfully, "I traveled all over Oz till I came to this
 valley and the Tripedalians were so frightened they
  did everything I told them to do. So I told them to
 build me this castle and they did, and now they bring
 me everything I need or ask for, but although I am
 as kind and considerate as I can be they are still
 afraid and my life is hard and lonely.
                "And who are these Tripedalians?" inquired Kabumpo,
 hoping the giant would soon stop talking
 and offer them something to eat. "I never even heard
 of them." Nandywog, instead of answering, leaned
 over and pulled the bell rope beside the door. So
 quickly that it made Randy jump, a fat little servitor
 appeared in the doorway. He was about the same
 size as the boy himself but there the similarity

 ceased, for the giant's servant was round and ruddy
 and his plump body was supported by three sturdy
 legs and feet. He kept hopping from one foot to the
 other in a way that made Randy exceedingly uneasy.
                "Did you ring, sir?" he quavered in a scared voice.
 "Certainly," rumbled the giant gruffly. "Can't you
 see we have visitors? Serve the dinner at once, Kojo.
 Er-er-what would you like to have?" he inquired,
 turning his head toward the Elegant Elephant.
                "Oh, just bring me a hundred pounds of hay, ten
 quarts of crushed vegetables, ten quarts of oats and
 barley and a barrel of peanuts," ordered Kabumpo
 calmly. Kojo's mouth fell open, but the giant seemed
 to find nothing strange about the elephant's dinner.
                "How about the boy?" he asked politely.
                "Oh, I'll take whatever you have," decided Randy
 quickly, and Kojo, after an indignant glance at Kabumpo,
 went hippety-hopping out of the room.
                "Do they all have three legs?" asked Randy, sliding
 down Kabumpo's trunk and seating himself comfortably
 on the floor beside Nandywog, or rather beside Nandywog's
 nose. The giant nodded and smiled kindly at the boy.
 "Tri-pedals, three feet," he explained gravely.
 Every one has three legs and feet, excepting me-
 the cows, the mice and even the chickens!"
                "Why, so have the tables and chairs!" exclaimed

 Randy in astonishment. And this was perfectly true.
 Every chair, table, chest, stand and stool had three
 legs and as Kabumpo and Nandywog began conversing
 learnedly about the three-legged inhabitants
 of the valley, Randy stepped around the giant's hall
 examining everything with lively interest and curiosity.
 The windows high above his head were set
 at just the proper height for Nandywog and all the
 furnishings were giant size, too. But small doors
 had been cut in the large doors for the giant's servants
 and slanting runways led up to the tables, side
 boards, cupboards and book shelves.
                It was fun to watch the Tripedalians setting the
 table, bustling importantly up the broad runway with
 the giant's huge knives, forks, spoons and tremendous
 saucers and plates. They put a small table
 and chair for Randy upon the giant's table itself and
 piled Kabumpo's hay, vegetables and peanuts in a
 great flat flower dish in the center. Then Kojo, who
 seemed to be in charge, climbed a ladder and struck
 the huge dinner gong hanging on the wall.
                Chuckling and rubbing his hands together, Nandywog
 invited his guests into the dining hall. Kabumpo
 he lifted ceremoniously to the center of the table,
 but Randy, not wishing to repeat the breath-taking

 sensation of his first lift, ran up the slanting board
 used by the servants and cheerfully seated himself
 at the small table beside the giant's tumbler. There,
 with scarcely concealed eagerness, the boy waited for
 the feast to begin.
                Three roast oxen and two roast pigs, each borne
 by four Tripedalians, were served first and Nandywog
 cut small slices from each for his young visitor.
 Then, staggering up the board with dishes as big
 as bath tubs, ten more Tripedalian footmen served
 the giant with vegetables, salad and a tasty pudding.
 Never had Randy been so famished and never had
 food tasted more delicious. The giant kept filling
 and refilling his plate till he could not swallow another
 morsel. Kabumpo, forgetting his rank and
 royalty, stowed away all the provisions the Tripedalians
 had brought him and loudly trumpeted for
 more hay. This made the giant laugh so heartily
 that he nearly blew Randy into the pudding dish and
 soon they were all rocking with mirth and merriment
 and, in spite of their difference in weight and stature,
 joking together like old friends at a birthday party.
 Even the servants hippety-hopping about began to
 look less scared and nervous.
                "Do stay, stay a long time," begged Nandywog,
 beaming down at his small visitors. "Stay with me

 always and you shall live like kings in my castle.
 Why, I haven't been so happy since I was a boy on
 Big Top Mountain."
                Kabumpo, assured by now of Nandywog's friendliness,
 thought it time to tell him the whole cause and
 purpose of their journey. The little giant was tremendously
 interested in the curious story and promised
 to do all he could to help them. Tripedalia, he
 explained, was on the edge of the Gilliken Country
 and scarcely a day's journey from the Emerald City,
 and going into the library the obliging fellow looked
 through all his maps and history books for some
 information concerning the Red Jinn. But he could
 find no reference at all to this strange wizard. Still,
 he, like Kabumpo, felt that his castle must be in the
 Quadling Country of Oz.
                "Why not come with us?" asked Randy, who was
 walking composedly up and down the giant's
 shoulder. He had taken a great fancy to Nandywog.
 "Please do come!"
                "I would only get you in trouble," sighed the giant,
 shaking his head sorrowfully. "Everywhere I go,
 people immediately take me for an enemy and though
 they can do me no serious harm, it is distinctly unpleasant
 to have a fire hose turned on one from the

 roof, or an army of soldiers shooting at my shins.
 No, here I am known and safe. Here I will stay.
 But when you have rescued the King and Royal
 Family of Pumperdink you must come back to visit
 me, for you are the only friends I have in all this
 great land of Oz."
                Kabumpo was not sure he could be spared but
 Randy earnestly promised to return and after toasting
 themselves a while at the giant's fire the two
 begged leave to retire for the night. Randy, in a
 three legged bed as big as a house, slept soundly
 and well, while Kabumpo, who seldom lay down,
 dozed fitfully beside the window. The giant's housekeeper,
 while they rested, made Kabumpo a new
 robe from two of Nandy's best silk handkerchiefs,
 so that he looked quite his old and elegant self when
 they made ready to depart. There seemed no end
 to Nandywog's thoughtfulness and after a hearty
 breakfast, and carrying with them a still heartier
 lunch, the travelers again turned their faces toward
 the south. It was with real regret that they said
 good-bye to the little giant and Nandywog stood in
 the door of his castle and waved and waved till they
 were out of sight.
                Now Tripedalia is a small, three-cornered country
 with three-cornered cottages, three-cornered fields,

 parks and flower beds. The three-legged people
 hopping briskly about their three-legged business
 nodded pleasantly to Randy and Kabumpo as they
 passed, and to see the three-legged sheep and cows
 quietly grazing in the pastures made the boy laugh
 outright with interest and amusement.
                "We'll always remember this as one of the good
 places, won't we Kabumpo?" Randy sighed and
 looked dreamily back at the giant's castle.
                "We must take the good with the bad," answered
 the Elegant Elephant philosophically. "Traveling is
 that way, my boy." Kabumpo had not enjoyed the
 giant as thoroughly as Randy. He was used to being
 the biggest person present and Nandywog made him
 feel ridiculously small and unimportant. He was far
 more comfortable nodding condescendingly to the
 fat and amiable little Tripedalians and stepping
 hugely and majestically down their narrow streets
 and lanes. Tripedalia was not large and in an hour
 they had come to the end of the pleasant valley, and
 waving his trunk graciously to a three-legged farmer
 plowing with his three-legged horse, Kabumpo
 stepped through the narrow pass between two hills
 at the valley's end.
                "This should bring us out right on the edge of the

 Emerald City," predicted Randy eagerly. "Hello-
 but what's this?"
                "A couple of dummies probably," muttered the
 Elegant Elephant, surveying two rotund little
 guardsmen who blocked the way at the other end
 of the pass. "Move aside there!" he called haughtily.
 But the guards, who seemed really to be dummies,
 neither moved nor spoke. If they had not rolled
 their eyes so drolly, Randy would have thought they
 were just figures set up to frighten off intruders.
                "Why, they're rubber!" he gasped, after a long,
 curious inspection. "Just look at them, Kabumpo!"
 This Kabumpo proceeded to do and after a short,
 contemptuous sniff he again ordered the guards to
 move out of his way.
                "Who are you, fellows?" he inquired irritably, and
 as neither guardsman moved nor spoke, he gave the
 first a sharp poke in the chest with his trunk.
                "Squee!" yelled the guard, bouncing into the air
 with a broad grin.
                "Gee!" squealed the other, as Kabumpo thumped
 him as hard as he had thumped his comrade. Then
 both rubber men bowed politely and waved their
 arms for the Elegant Elephant to follow them.
                "Were you squeaking to me?" puffed Kabumpo,
 swaying angrily from side to side. The guards

 nodded and snorting with indignation the Elegant
 Elephant thudded after them.
                "They must be Squee Gees," whispered Randy.
 "Oh, look, it's a revolution! Or a war!" Following
 the guards, Kabumpo had walked directly into the
 public square of a comical Rubber City. Rubber
 blocks paved the streets so that the Elegant Elephant
 bounced high into the air at every step. Rubber
 trees lined the avenues and rubber houses in neat
 rows faced the visitors. Birds, shaped like barnyard
 hens, bounced from tree to tree whistling every time
 they struck against a branch.
                "Fowl ball!" grunted Kabumpo, as one of the birds
 hit him between the eyes, and not wishing to bounce
 about himself, he stopped perfectly still and waited
 to see what would happen. All the inhabitants were
 bouncing wildly by this time. Not only that, they
 were thumping each other vigorously in the chest,
 at each punch emitting sharp, excited cries and
 speeches.
                Almost deafened by the uproar but feeling terribly
 amused nevertheless, Randy, like Kabumpo, waited
 curiously for the Squee Gees to address them.
  
  

 CHAPTER 9
  
 The Guide Post Man
  
 WHY, they're just like Pajonia's rubber dolls,"
 muttered Kabumpo at last. He had been
 watching the Squee Gees very closely for several
 minutes. "They can't squeak unless you squeeze
 them. Look! To speak they have to punch each
 other. It's not a battle at all, just a conversation.
 They are talking about us. Ho! Ha! Kerumph! And
 they don't like us at all. How far is this city from
 the capital of Oz?" trumpeted Kabumpo, snatching
 a Squee Gee baker up in his trunk.
                "Three hundred bounds and two bounces,"
 squeaked the baker, one word to each hug the Elegant
 Elephant gave him. "Exqueeze me, please."
                "Certainly!" roared Kabumpo, dropping the baker
 so hard that he bounced over a rubber tree. "I vote
 we go," he added in an undertone to Randy. "In a
 minute they'll start punching us and then there'll be
 a regular game of ball."
                "I'd like to have something to remind me of the
 place," said Randy, who could scarcely take his eyes
 off the bouncing, bounding, boisterous Squee Gees.
                "All right but be quick about it," advised Kabumpo.

 "How about some of those rubber flowers?"
                "Just what I was thinking." Sliding to the ground,
 Randy seized a rubber rose in both hands. The stem,
 instead of breaking, stretched and stretched, and as
 the boy gave it an especially hard tug it snapped off
 and gave him a stinging blow on the nose. His action
 seemed to infuriate the Squee Gees. Bouncing up
 to him they began squeezing and thumping him on
 the chest till he was positively breathless. Kabumpo
 could not help laughing when the rose hit Randy,
 but seeing that matters were now really serious, he
 pushed the rubber men right and left and lifting
 Randy in his trunk charged headfirst through the
 crowd. Each time Kabumpo touched the rubber paving
 blocks he went twenty feet upward and twenty
 feet forward so that in less than ten springs and a
 bounce he was entirely out of bounds and out of
 Squee Gee Ville. Indeed, the last bounce carried
 them over the city wall and landed them, terribly
 tossed about and breathless, in the middle of a hay
 field.
                "Grapes and grandywogs!" exploded Kabumpo
 crossly, feeling himself all over with his trunk. "For
 two straws I'd go back and puncture the whole population.
 Why didn't we think of that before? Well,

 here's lunch, anyway, and high time for it, too."
 Randy's nose was still red and swollen, but he could
 not help grinning as the Elegant Elephant made savage
 lunges at a huge stack of hay. He himself had
 a big box of sandwiches the giant had ordered put
 up for him and unstrapping the box from his shoulders
 he too began to eat, thinking as he did so of all
 the curious experiences he had had since leaving
 Pumperdink.
                "I wonder if that soothsayer told the truth," he
 observed presently. "Do you suppose this Red Jinn
 can really restore the King and the others?"
                "I really do!" answered the Elegant Elephant with
 conviction. "And instead of wasting time at the
 capital telling our story to Ozma and the Wizard of
 Oz, we'll just skirt the Emerald City and push right
 on to the Quadling country. Have you noticed any-
 thing special about this field of hay, my boy?" Randy
 nodded, for his mouth was full of chicken. Then with
 a hasty swallow he waved toward the fences.
                "Green!" he cried triumphantly. "So we are out of
 the Gilliken country and the Quadling country must
 be somewhere just below. I wish I could see Ozma
 and the Scarecrow and the Cowardly Lion," he added,
 a bit wistfully.
                "Plenty of time for that when we've saved Pumperdink," answered Kabumpo sternly. "After

we have
 rescued Pompus and his family, you and I will travel
 all over Oz," he promised grandly. "Nothing to keep
 us home, you know."
                Randy smiled a little at this, but saying nothing
 he straightened the Elegant Elephant's robe and
 settled himself cozily in back of Kabumpo's left ear.
                "Suppose the Red Jinn does not live in the Quadling
 country after all," he said quietly, as Kabumpo
 started diagonally across the hay field.
                "What are you trying to do? Spoil my lunch?"
 Flapping his huge ears like sails, Kabumpo quickened
 his pace and brushing aside the green fence
 with one push of his trunk swung confidently out
 on a broad and prosperous looking highway. In
 the distance they could see the gleaming turrets
 of Ozma's castle and Randy could not help thinking
 it would save them both time and trouble to stop
 and ask Ozma the exact location of the Red Jinn's
 palace. But Kabumpo, without turning his head once
 in the direction of the Emerald City, hustled down
 the highway and in an hour they passed under the
 crimson arch leading into the Red Lands of Oz.
                "Well, here we are!" announced the Elegant Elephant cheerfully. "Here we are!" The arch
stood on the crest of a hill, and spreading invitingly out before them were the red plains and valleys, the
 small towns and stately castles of the Quadlings.

                "This Jinn may live in any one of those castles!"
 exclaimed Kabumpo, waving his trunk impressively
 from left to right. There were five castles in plain
 view and very much excited and encouraged he
 started down the hill. A narrow footpath led through
 a small red wood at the bottom and anxious to
 reach the first castle as soon as possible the Elegant
 Elephant broke into a run. Emerging from the
 wood he almost collided with a sturdy guide post
 standing at a fork in the roads.
                "What does it say?" asked Randy, as Kabumpo,
 grumbling a little, backed off.
                "Never heard a guide post say anything and this
 one doesn't even point," answered Kabumpo impatiently.
 "What good is it anyway?"
                "Why, it has a face painted on its knob," cried
 Randy. "Maybe the directions are on the back."
                Walking stiffly around the post the Elegant Elephant
 pricked up his ears at what he saw.
 THIS GUIDE POST MAN WILL DIRECT OR TAKE YOU
 ANYWHERE, stated a small sign on the Post Man's
 back.
                "Is he alive?" Sliding quickly to the ground
 Randy squinted up at the jolly looking Post Man.
 "Great Gillikens, did you see that wink?" Kabumpo
 certainly did and as it did not seem at all respectful

 for a wooden post to wink at an Elegant Elephant,
 Kabumpo shook his trunk severely.
                "Kindly direct us to the castle of the Red Jinn,"
 he ordered haughtily. At this the Post Man merely
 closed one painted eye and yawned terrifically.
                "Maybe he's deaf," volunteered Randy, as the
 Guide Post Man opened his eye and looked thought-
 fully off into space. "Why, of course he's deaf! Deaf
 as a post. He is a post, you know."
                "He's a fraud!" raged Kabumpo, lurching for-
 ward angrily. "What does he mean, standing there
 like a stick and yawning in my face and not lifting
 a finger to help us?"
                "Wait!" begged Randy, as Kabumpo raised his
 trunk threateningly. "There may be some more
 directions. Oh, there are!"
                Walking sulkily after Randy, Kabumpo saw a
 small box like a letter box attached to the Post Man's
 back.
                POST ENQUIRIES HERE, directed a notice on the box.
                "Got a pencil?" Feeling in his own pocket, Randy
 found one himself before Kabumpo had time to look,
 and tearing a sheet from a small memorandum book
 he scribbled hastily: "Where is the castle of the Red
 Jinn?" Dropping the paper in the box Randy and

 Kabumpo hurried to the other side and stared expectantly
 into the Post Man's face. What happened
 was quite upsetting, especially to Randy. The Guide
 Post Man's two wooden arms, which had been tightly
 pressed to his sides, now flew up violently. One
 knocked Randy over like a ten pin and the other hit
 Kabumpo a fearful blow on the trunk.
                "Oh-ouch!" roared the Elegant Elephant, stamping
 one foot and then the other. "Such manners!
 If I were the King of this country I'd chop off your
 knob and burn you for firewood. I'd tear you down
 and root you up and smash you into splinters!"
                "What's the use of shouting like that when he
 can't even hear you?" Rubbing his head, Randy
 picked himself up and looked rather angrily at the
 Post Man himself.
                "Why, he's trying to point the way to the Jinn's
 castle. We were too close to him, that's all!" he
 exclaimed suddenly. "See, he has both arms pointed
 northwest!"
                "But we just came from the north," answered
 Kabumpo, with an exasperated snort. "Didn't I tell
 you the Red Jinn's castle was in the south?"
                "Yes, but that doesn't make it in the south," persisted
 Randy calmly. "It may not be in Oz at all!"
                "Not in Oz at all I Great Grump, are you crazy?

 Have we come all this distance to take our orders
 from a stupid blockhead like this? Pay no attention
 to the wooden pest. Come on, he has wasted enough
 of our time already." Glaring at the Post Man, who
 winked first one eye and then the other, Kabumpo
 turned on his heel and began moving slowly down
 the road. But Randy was not so sure the Post Man
 was wrong. Walking quickly around he carefully
 reread the sign on the fellow's back: THIS GUIDE
 POST MAN WILL DIRECT OR TAKE YOU ANYWHERE.
                "I wonder if he really would," pondered the boy
 thoughtfully, and first making sure that Kabumpo
 was not looking he took out his pencil and wrote:
 "Please take us to the castle of the Red Jinn, at
 once!" Underlining "at once," he stuffed the paper
 into the Post Man's box and feeling rather frightened
 ran after the Elegant Elephant. As he reached
 him, there was a great whirl and swish and his hand
 was gripped firmly by the wooden fingers of the
 Post Man. At the same moment Kabumpo's trunk
 was unceremoniously seized by the Guide Post Man's
 other hand and up like roman candles shot the three
 before Kabumpo even knew what was happening to
 him. Over the Emerald City and on they flashed, till
 Randy lost all sense of time, space and distance.

  
 CHAPTER 10
  
 Regalia
  
 IN the far northwestern corner of the Gilliken
 country lies Regalia, a proud, pompous and regal
 little kingdom, high in the purple mountains of Oz.
 Its rulers, born to the purple, so to speak, have come
 down in straight succession for more than a thousand
 years and its castle, with amethyst windows and
 spires, is one of the most splendid sights in the country.
 The Regalians, though of a somewhat proud
 and haughty bearing, are really kind and merry at
 heart-much given to feasting, celebrations and gay
 processions.
                But on this particular bright May morning an unwonted
 gloom hung over the mountainside. All the
 silver curtains in the castle were drawn and the
 courtiers, whispering uneasily among themselves,
 tiptoed up and down the silent corridors. Outside,
 the purple and regally clad mountaineers and villagers
 gathered in anxious groups and knots, and
 glancing up at the castle on the mountain top from
 time to time, shook their heads mournfully. The
 Royal Flag of Regalia was not flying from the tower,

 for the Royal Ruler of all the Regalians was absent
 from the castle and none knew when he would return
 -or whether he would return at all.
                In the throne room, gazing intently at a great
 amethyst ball placed before him on a golden table,
 sat Hoochafoo, uncle of the absent ruler. Tugging
 anxiously at his purple beard he would look up now
 and then to cast worried glances at the door and
 windows. Hoochafoo, though not noted for his wit
 or wisdom, though dubbed by his mischievous compatriots
 Hoochafoo, the Foolish, was nevertheless a
 gentle and amiable old nobleman. But the responsibility
 of ruling Regalia weighed heavily upon his
 spirits, and anxiety over his Royal nephew made him
 still more nervous and unhappy.
                "This suspense is killing me!" groaned the poor
 fellow, and running across the room he pulled the
 bell cord violently. "Summon the Wise Man, at
 once!" he directed the page who appeared to answer
 the bell. "At once!" And thrusting his long hands
 into the pockets of his splendid coat, Hoochafoo began
 pacing up and down the room at such a rate
 that he often met himself in the middle before he
 reached the end and when the old Wise Man did
 appear he almost knocked him over.

                "Prunes and pretzels!" sputtered the sage,
 straightening his peaked cap. "What now? Your
 Highness knows this is my day for reflecting. How
 can I think of ways and means, I mean means and
 ways, bosh and bother what do I mean?"
                "Sit down," begged Hoochafoo, flinging himself
 disconsolately upon the throne. "Sit down, you must
 stay with me. Ah, Chalulu, Chalulu, what shall I
 do, do?"
                "Do nothing," answered the Wise Man, lowering
 himself crossly into a gold rocker. "There is nothing
 you can do, as I have told you a dozen times a day,
 nothing to do but wait until the conditions of the
 test have been fulfilled and the prince has proved his
 prowess, whatever that is," finished the Wise Man,
 with a furious sniff.
                "Yes, but he may be in great danger," wailed
 Hoochafoo, clasping and unclasping his hands, "facing
 unknown and savage monsters-lying exhausted
 at the bottom of some deep ravine. We must do
 something, I tell you. Call out the guard, search
 the forest! Do something, do you hear?"
                "I hear," answered Chalulu sourly, "but I can do
 nothing. It is the law and written in the Royal Book
 of Regalia that the prince of the realm must go forth
 alone and unaided and prove himself worthy of the

 crown. Alone! Since the King, your brother, has
 chosen to retire from the throne and pursue the life
 of a hermit in the mountains, the prince must take
 His place. But why fret and worry this way? Have
 not all our former princes successfully passed the
 test? Has not our present prince shown himself
 brave and resourceful? Calm yourself, I beg. Go
 catch fish-catch cold-fall down the mountain," he
 suggested helpfully.
                "But eight days, and not one word from him"
 moaned Hoochafoo, scarcely hearing the words of
 the Wise Man. "Not once has the amethyst ball
 flashed fire. Not one of the conditions of the test
 has been accomplished. Just read them again," he
 commanded, leaning his head wearily back against
 the throne and closing his eyes. Grumbling with
 annoyance, Chalulu unrolled and read a long scroll:
                "Upon the passing, abdication or retirement of the
 King of Regalia, the prince of the realm shall go
 forth alone and without knowing the contents of this
 scroll fulfill all of its conditions.
 "One: The prince must make three true friends.
 "Two: He must faithfully serve a strange King.
 "Three: He must save a Queen.
 "Four: He must prove his bravery in battle.

 "Five: He must overcome a monster.
 "Six: He must disenchant a princess.
 "Seven: He must receive from a wizard some
 magic treasure.
                "As each test is successfully met the amethyst ball
 in the throne room will flash fire."
                "Awful!" muttered Hoochafoo, as Chalulu finished
 reading and rolled up the scroll. "Ridiculous! How
 can one small prince do all that? Or even half of
 that? How-how? Why, he has done it! Look!
 Look! The ball has flashed fire! He has actually
 accomplished one of the feats. The prince is safe!
 Ring the bells! Call the guards! Declare a holiday
 at once! The prince is safe and alive and everything
 will be punjanoobias." The Wise Man, as
 Hoochafoo dashed hilariously to and fro, ringing
 bells, throwing up windows and pulling back the curtains,
 hurried anxiously after him.
                "Remember, he has only passed one of the tests,"
 wheezed Chalulu warningly. "There are still six
 more ahead of him."
                "Six more? Six more fiddlesticks! If he has accomplished
 one, he will accomplish all. Don't you realize
 that this means the prince is safe and well? Stay
 here, you old skin and bones. Watch that ball while
 I go and break the good tidings to our countrymen!"

                Rushing out on the balcony Hoochafoo flung up his
 arms and called out the happy news at the top of
 his lungs. And soon the cheers and joyous shouts
 of the Regalians rang from peak to peak so that the
 goats stopped their grazing and pricking up their
 ears turned their heads curiously toward the castle
 on the purple mountain top.
  
 CHAPTER 11
  
 In the Castle of the Red Jinn
  
 ALTHOUGH their dash through the air seemed
 hours long to Randy and Kabumpo, just ten
 minutes after they left the Quadling Country of Oz,
 they had zipped over the Deadly Desert and come
 crashing down in Ev. Before them stretched a green
 and glassy sea and on the edge of the sea rose a
 scintillating red glass palace. Without waiting for
 them to rest or recover their breath, the Guide Post
 Man, who seemed to have the strength of an army,
 dragged them to the palace, up its hundred glittering
 glass steps, through the doors and straight into the
 throne room. As soon as they had reached the
 throne, the Post Man dropped Randy's hand and

 Kabumpo's trunk as suddenly as he had seized them,
 and leaning wearily against a red glass pillar, closed
 his eyes.
                "Such manners!" raged the Elegant Elephant,
 pressing his trunk to his head, which was still spinning
 giddily from the dizzy spin through the air.
 "Such manners!"
 "Well, at least he brought us here!" panted Randy,
 pulling down his coat and smoothing back his pompadore.
 "I told him to take us to the castle of the
 Red Jinn and here we are. This must be his palace,
 Kabumpo. Everything is red!" The floors of the
 throne room were of smooth, transparent red glass;
 curtains of strung red rubies twinkled pleasantly at
 the windows and doors, and the tables, chairs and
 other furnishings were of shining crimson lacquer.
 A pleasant pink incense hung in the air and leading
 to the throne was a double row of enormous red
 vases. A smaller vase occupied the throne itself and
 giving the Elegant Elephant a nudge Randy whispered
 excitedly, "Look, look, there's the Red Jinn
 himself."
                "I see nothing but a big red jug," wheezed Kabumpo,
 trying to focus his eyes on the throne. His
 head was still going round like a top.
                "Sh---hh, not so loud! If we want him to help us

 we'll have to be careful!
                "It's the Red Jinn, I tell you! Don't you see his
 arms and legs?" But flying had put the Elegant
 Elephant in a terrible temper and dragging his cloak
 straight he muttered crossly:
                "Help us! Why shouldn't he help us? I guess our
 castle's as good as this, and I'm sure I'm as important
 as he is! Hum, humph, ha!"
                "Har! Har! Har!" Kabumpo and Randy exchanged
 startled glances, for the muffled laughter
 had come from the middle of the red vase. Then
 up went the lid and out popped the round rosy face
 of an exceedingly fat and jolly old gentleman. The
 lid of the vase sat gaily on the back of his head like
 a cap and except for his red glass eyes, he looked
 quite kind, good-natured and grandfatherly. While
 Randy was trying to think of something polite to
 say, the old gentleman started the conversation himself
 by crying in a cheery voice:
                "Came by post, didn't you?" He paused to look
 curiously at the Guide Post Man who opened one
 eye, grinned and waved both arms at the Jinn. "Post
 haste, ho, ho!" chuckled the little wizard delightedly.
 "How long are you going to stay? I see you have
 brought a trunk." Pursing his lips and leaning over

 so far that he almost fell out of his jug, the Red
 Jinn stared mischievously at Kabumpo and then
 turned to wink at Randy.
                "How could I come without my trunk?" hissed Kabumpo
 angrily. "It's part of me and you well know
 it !"
                "You wouldn't part with it I suppose?" asked the
 Jinn solemnly. Kabumpo was too outraged to
 answer, so the Jinn went on quite cheerfully. "Then
 keep it by all means, my dear old Wackajamia for;
  
 "It belongs to you and it's long enough
 To hold a barrel of tea or snuff,
 And if you took one sniff of snuff
 You'd sneeze your head off, like enough."
  
 "You're talking through your lid," stormed Kabumpo,
 his small eyes beginning to bulge dangerously.
 "I am the Elegant Elephant of Oz and
 Pumperdink, Prince and Regent in the House of
 Pompus the Great and-"
                "Who cares? Who cares? Har, har! Who cares?"
 Folding his hands calmly over the vase encasing his
 bulging body, the Red Jinn blinked his eyes sleepily.
 "Do you know any new jokes, stories or riddles?
 Come, make yourselves agreeable and try to act like

 visitors."
                "Oh, please," interrupted Randy, afraid that the
 Jinn's jokes and Kabumpo's temper would ruin
 everything. "We have come to ask your help-!"
                "Help? Help! Hel-lup!" shouted the Jinn, banging
 on his jar with a red umbrella he had picked up from
 the arm of the throne. "Help!" At his loud cries, in
 from every direction poured huge black slaves in red
 trousers and turbans. "Well," yawned the Jinn in a
 bored voice, "here's the help, nearly all that I have.
 Ask them whatever you wish!" Waving his arms
 carelessly toward his men, he retired within himself
 and closed the lid. The slaves, after touching their
 noses once to the floor, looked expectantly toward
 the travelers, but Kabumpo, snorting with disgust,
 was already waddling furiously toward the door.
                "Let's go," he muttered thunderously. "Let us
 leave this miserable palace at once. I've never been
 so insulted in my life. Help! Help, indeed!"
                "But, Kabumpo!" cried Randy, tugging at the Elegant
 Elephant's robe. "Remember, this Jinn is the
 only one who can help us disenchant the King.
 You're not going to spoil everything, are you?"
                "Spoil everything?" snapped Kabumpo, flapping
 his ears indignantly. "Do you expect me to stand

 here and make a fool of myself to amuse that old
 potted goose, yonder?"
                "He's only in fun," explained Randy, speaking low
 so the Jinn could not hear. "Come on back and let's
 try again." Feeling in his heart that Randy was
 right, Kabumpo sniffed three times to show his contempt,
 then turned round and walked stiffly back to
 the throne. The slaves, receiving no orders or directions
 of any kind, had melted out of sight, the Post
 Man was sound asleep against the red pillar and
 there was no sound at all in the great, glittering
 room. The ruby-handled umbrella still lay on the
 arm of the throne and taking it in his hand, Randy
 tapped gently on the Jinn's jar. So quickly that the
 boy almost toppled over backwards the Jinn thrust
 up his head.
                "My mercy me!" puffed the little old fellow merrily.
 "You still here?"
                "Yes!" answered Randy quickly, and before the
 Jinn had time to make any more jokes. "We wanted
 to tell you a story, sir.
                "What kind of a story?" Without stopping to explain,
 while Kabumpo shifted sulkily from one foot
 to the other, Randy began at once a recital of all
 that had happened in Pumperdink and how Faleero
 and Kettywig had plotted to steal Pompus' throne.

 When he came to the part where Faleero, disguised
 as a traveling magician, had persuaded the royal
 family to pick the fire roses from the mist tree and
 how they had instantly vanished from view, the Jinn
 bounced up and spun round three times on his left
 heel.
                "Red magic! I know how she did that" he exclaimed
 triumphantly. "And I am the only wizard
 in the north who can restore their Majesties."
                "That's just what the soothsayer told us, that's just
 why we came to you." Quickly finishing up the story
 of their travels through Oz and their flight to Ev
 with the Post Man, Randy stepped closer and looked
 right into the Jinn's face. "You will help us, won't
 you?" he asked coaxingly.
                "Help us and you shall have all of these jewels, my
 good fellow," added Kabumpo condescendingly.
 Feeling in his pocket, he pulled out a plump bag and
 held it haughtily up in his trunk. The Jinn, who had
 been on the point of answering Randy, looked in
 astonishment at the little bag. An expression of
 anger and disgust crossed his ruddy face and snatching
 up his red umbrella he waved it three times
 round his head. As Randy gasped and Kabumpo
 stepped back, fifty blacks came racing into the throne

 room. Each bore a great basket of blazing rubies.
 These they set down before their master and grinning
 wickedly at Kabumpo retired like shadows
 through the curtains. The Jinn, without another look
 at the Elegant Elephant or the little Gilliken sank
 out of sight.
                "Now you've done it! Now you've done it and
 ruined everything! Great Gillikens, he has more
 jewels than we've seen in the whole of our lives!
 Whatever made you do that, Kabumpo? Whatever
 shall we do now?" Randy flung himself disconsolately
 on a red lacquered sofa.
                "Do what you like. I'm through!" Looking very
 huge and haughty, but feeling very small and foolish,
 Kabumpo started to leave the Jinn's palace. As
 the Elegant Elephant went swishing through the
 tinkling red curtains, Randy rose and stood uncertainly
 before the owner of the palace. Did he dare
 speak to him again? While he was still trying to
 decide, the Guide Post Man suddenly awoke and in
 one tremendous leap covered the distance between
 the red pillar and the throne. Raising his wooden
 arms, he brought them down so hard on the Jinn's
 jar that the Jinn almost rolled off his spun glass
 cushions. Seizing the arm of the throne to save
 himself, the little wizard stuck out his head and

 rolled his eyes savagely from side to side. As they
 lit upon the Post Man, that strange individual took
 off his knob, bowed politely and waving first one arm
 and then the other, whizzed out of an open window.
                "I guess he wanted to say good-bye," ventured
 Randy in an embarrassed voice.
                "And good riddance, too," grumbled the Jinn
 crossly. "Has that elephant gone?"
                "I-I don't think so," answered Randy uncomfortably.
 "You see, we thought you might change your
 mind about helping us."
                "Help you? Why should I help you?" demanded
 the Jinn in a red peppery voice. "Give me one good
 reason if you can."
                "There really isn't any reason," admitted Randy,
 shaking his head ruefully. "But you are the only
 one wise, skillful and powerful enough to do it and
 I thought you might like the fun of trying."
                "It would be fun," mused the Jinn, half to himself
 and half to Randy. "I haven't been anywhere for
 a hundred years. Where is this Pumperdinky kingdom
 anyway and what relation are you to its unhappy sovereigns?"
 "None at all," Randy told him frankly. "But I
 was in the castle when all this happened and as
 I'm fond of mysteries and like Kabumpo, I thought

 it would be a fine adventure to help restore the royal
 family to the throne."
 "But that elephant is perfectly preposterous!"
 exploded the Jinn indignantly. "Offering me a peanut
 bag full of jewels. Me, the real and only Red
 Jinn in all Ev, possessor of fifty ruby mines and all
 the science and secrets of red magic and art!"
 "Oh, he didn't mean to offend you, I'm sure,"
 explained Randy anxiously. "He's grand, really, when
 he's not showing off. You'll like him a lot when
 you know him better."
                "Well, I like you a lot now," smiled the Jinn,
 twinkling his glass eyes at the boy. "And I believe
 I'll help you, too. Shake hands on it, Randy. That's
 what you call yourself, is it not? And to my friends
 my name is Jinnicky,
                "He's the one and only Jinnicky and very awfully finicky
                About his friends, his jewels, his tea;
                So try 'to please him, boy, or he
                Will seal you in a ginger jar and toss you in the sea,
                Har, har!
                How har, har, horrid that would be, so let's forget it.
                Where's my tea?"
 The last line Jinnicky roared so loud that the very
 curtains trembled and before Randy could blink, a
 small Servitor, bearing a silver tea tray flashed down

 before the throne. Handing Randy one cup and the
 Jinn another, he set down the tray and retired as
 quickly as he had appeared. Perched on the edge
 of a red chair, Randy sipped the steaming liquid,
 recalling rather uneasily the verses about the ginger
 jar. He was worried about Kabumpo, too. But the
 Red Jinn, chattering away of Pumperdink and the
 art of restoring the vanished ones, seemed to have
 forgotten everything unpleasant and was so jolly,
 and bubbling over with good humor that Randy began
 to feel gay and light-hearted himself.
                "When will we start?" he asked eagerly. "Now?"
                "Now, or never!" beamed Jinnicky, setting down
 his tea cup and bouncing off the throne. "Where is
 that big gom of an elephant, anyway?"
  
 CHAPTER 12
  
 The Grand Advizier Advises
  
 THEY found Kabumpo under a ginger tree in
 the garden and when Jinnicky clapped him
 briskly on the trunk and told him he had decided
 to help him, the Elegant Elephant was so embarrassed
 that he could do nothing but grunt and

 splutter. Taking these dubious sounds for appreciation
 and thanks, the Jinn announced that they were
 leaving for Pumperdink at once, and motioning for
 Kabumpo to follow pattered determinedly back to
 the palace.
                "There are always three things to decide about a
 journey," panted Jinnicky, dropping down on his
 cushions and clasping his hands round his shiny
 middle. "Where to go, what to take and how to
 travel. The first we know, the second we shall leave
 to my Grand Advizier, the third we must decide for
 ourselves. Now then, my lads, how shall we travel
 to Pumperdink?"
                "Where's the Post Man?" demanded Kabumpo,
 looking around sharply. He had not enjoyed the
 dash through the air with their singular guide, but
 he had rather counted on going back the same way.
 "Where is that surly offspring of a tree stump?"
                "Gone," answered Jinnicky, calmly rocking back
 and forth. "So we cannot go by post. My magic
 jinrikisha might carry Randy and me but it would
 never hold an elephant, so we cannot go by
 jinrikisha."
                "I should not care to ride in a jinrikisha anyway,"
 sniffed Kabumpo loftily. "I've never ridden in such
 a contrivance, and I don't intend to begin now."

                "Then it looks as though we would have to go
 afoot," mused Jinnicky, taking off his lid and scratching
 his red head reflectively. "Mercy me!" He looked
 ruefully at his small, fat slippered feet and sighed.
                "Oh, you can ride on my back, I suppose," remarked
 Kabumpo carelessly. He had no great liking
 for the saucy little Jinn, but felt he must put up
 with some inconveniences if he was to get him to
 Pumperdink and save the kingdom from Kettywig.
 "Of course, if you fall off and jar yourself, you cannot
 hold me responsible," he added in a severe tone.
 "And if that does happen," thought Kabumpo spitefully
 to himself, "I shall just take his magic and
 disenchant their Majesties without his help."
                Randy looked distressed at Kabumpo's rude speech,
 but the Jinn, who loved a joke, even on himself,
 laughed uproariously.
                "You cannot jar a fellow who is already jarred,"
 puffed Jinnicky, wiping the tears of merriment from
 his fat cheeks. "I've been jarred all my life and
 never been broken yet" The Jinn winked a glass
 eye at Kabumpo, and the Elegant Elephant was so
 upset to have the Jinn read his thoughts that he immediately
 lapsed into an uneasy silence.
                "But how about the Deadly Desert?" asked Randy,

 sitting down on the steps of Jinnicky's throne and
 looking up eagerly into his face.
                "Oh-that!" Jinnicky snapped his fingers unconcernedly.
 "Wait till we come to it, my boy." Taking
 up his red umbrella he pounded vigorously on the
 arm of his ruby throne. In answer to this strange
 summons, a tall, turbaned and exceedingly dignified
 gentleman stalked into his presence. He was tastefully
 dressed in red, had a neat pointed nose, a neat
 pointed beard and the toes of his neat pointed shoes
 curled nearly up to his knees. With folded arms he
 approached the throne, and nodding in a careless
 fashion to the Jinn stood waiting for him to speak.
 This Jinnicky did at once by explaining cheerfully:
                "Alibabble, these are my friends from Oz-Kabumpo
 and Randy. I leave you to guess which name
 belongs to which." Alibabble, raising one eyebrow,
 glanced quickly from the Elegant Elephant to the
 little Gilliken and with a haughty and supercilious
 nod turned back to his master.
                "You sent for me?" he observed in an annoyed
 voice.
                "Yes, I'm going on a journey. Kindly make the
 necessary preparations." Jinnicky rubbed his hands
 gleefully together.
                "Well, first, I advise you to have a hair cut," said

 Alibabble, in a firm voice.
                "A hair cut!" shrieked the Jinn angrily. "You're
 always telling me to have my hair cut. I'll cut your
 salary for this. No wonder I want to get away.
 Hair cut! Hair cut! I hear nothing else from morning
 till night. Barber! Barber!" Jinnicky sprang
 to his feet, his glass eyes rolling savagely. And
 when the barber, attired in the same red costume as
 Alibabble, arrived, breathless from his hurry, the
 Jinn waved sternly at the Grand Advizier.
                "Cut his hair and just take off the head with it,"
 he commanded temperishly. As the barber drew a
 long gleaming scimitar from his sash, Randy jumped
 up in horror and even Kabumpo gave a grunt of
 protest. Alibabble, however, seemed perfectly calm.
 Seating himself in a red chair, be began slowly Unwinding
 his turban, disclosing a crop of shortly
 clipped red hair. As the barber raised his scimitar
 the Red Jinn seemed to think of something.
                "Never mind about his head," he mumbled disagreeably,
 "I might need it later." Randy could not
 help thinking Alibabble might need it himself, but
 the Grand Advizier, without a change of expression,
 sat quietly smoking a cheroot while the barber
 shaved off what was left of his short locks.

                "Well, now that we've had our hair cut" smiled
 Jinnicky maliciously, "let us proceed with the rest
 of the preparations.
                "Are you going to take Addie?" inquired Alibabble,
 picking up a small basket from a red stand.
                "I don't-know-" murmured the Jinn, rubbing
 his chin as he deliberated. "Do you think there'll be
 much adding to do, Randy?"
                "Adding!" exclaimed the boy, as the Grand Ad-
 vizier took the top off the basket. "Oh, If don't think
 so, sir. Do you, Kabumpo?"
                "How should I know?" sniffed the Elegant Elephant,
 swinging his trunk indifferently. Then his
 eyes popped out in real astonishment, as a small
 snake that had been coiled in the basket rose up
 on its tail and lazily surveyed him.
                "Then she can help us now," decided the Jinn,
 settling back contentedly, "and add up all the articles
 we need for the journey. She's my hissing
 adder," he confided pridefully to Randy. "No sum
 is too difficult for her, either."
                The Grand Advizier addressed the adder in a dignified
 tone. "Let me see, now. We'll need the green
 jug, the blue vase, the red jar, the black pitcher, the
 purple incense, the yellow incense, the pink incense,
 the blue bottle, the green bottle, the grey bottle, the

 red bottle, the green flower pot, your red glasses,
 the silver dinner bell and your old umbrella."
                As the Grand Advizier counted off each item, Addie
 gave a hiss and made a puncture on a sheet of paper
 suspended from the handle of the basket with her
 sharp tongue. Randy was so interested watching the
 hissing adder at work that he paid no attention at
 all to what Alibabble was saying. But Kabumpo,
 putting his great ears inquisitively forward began
 to seethe and bubble with resentment and indignation.
                "Pots! Bottles, jugs and flower pots! Does he
 take us for peddlers?" fumed Kabumpo fiercely in
 Randy's ear. "Great grump! I'll look like a pack
 horse.
                "I-how about some food?" he called, belligerently
 raising his trunk.
                "There will be food," announced Alibabble composedly,
 "but not your kind of food, my friend. I
 fear you will have to forage for your provisions."
                "Forage?" trumpeted Kabumpo, with an out-
 raged snort. "What forage?"
  
 "Bar, har! You must forage for elephant porridge,
 For cabbage and turnips and round nuts,
 For the grasses and hay you will need every day,

 For the tree leaves and tea leaves and ground nuts!"
  
  
 chanted Jinnicky, leaning over to take the paper
 from Addie. The hissing adder had placed a line of
 dots under her list and punctured out with her
 tongue the figure fifteen. While the Jinn examined
 this figure with wrinkled brows and Kabumpo rumbled
 angrily under his breath, Alibabble shut Addie
 up in the basket, snatched the paper from Jinnicky
 and was gone. In exactly five minutes by the Jinn's
 red glass clock, two of the Jinn's tallest slaves appeared
 carrying the fifteen bottles, jugs, pots and
 vases. A third little black walked behind them and
 handing Jinnicky a silver bell, a pair of red glasses
 and a note, promptly took to his heels. The Jinn
 gave the bell and spectacles to Randy and pursing
 up his lips opened the note.
                "I earnestly advise your Majesty to have a hair
 cut before starting on this journey." It was signed
 "Alibabble," and Randy, who had read the message
 surreptitiously over Jinnicky's shoulder, skipped
 quickly down the steps.
                "Hair cut! Hair cut! There he goes again!" fumed
 the Red Jinn fretfully. "Do you really think my hair
 is too long?" Randy measured the distance between

 himself and the door and then spoke up boldly:
                "It is a little long, your Highness."
                "It's long enough to plait and tie with ribbons,"
 grunted Kabumpo, snatching Randy down the last
 step of the throne as Jinnicky began to call for the
 barber. But this time, when the barber appeared,
 he actually let the fellow cut his hair, groaning
 terribly as each lock fell under the shears and looking
 so reproachfully at Randy that the boy felt quite
 guilty and uncomfortable. But at last the disagreeable
 operation was over and Jinnicky, jumping to
 his feet, summoned three of his favorite servitors.
 These handy fellows quickly rigged up a cushioned
 seat for the Jinn on Kabumpo's back with a neat
 rope ladder to help him up and down. The bottles
 and jugs were stowed in two wicker baskets and
 slung over the Elegant Elephant's shoulders. Then
 Randy mounted to his favorite place back of Kabumpo's
 left ear, the Jinn ran up the rope ladder
 and fell breathlessly among the cushions of his seat
 and Kabumpo, lifting his trunk, gave such a trumpet
 that a double line of courtiers drawn up to wish
 Jinnicky farewell tumbled over like ten pins. Then
 the Elegant Elephant charged like a hurricane out
 of the red glass palace. Jinnicky's subjects, clad in

 towering turbans and loose red trousers, waved
 cheerfully as they swept through the glittering
 streets of the red city, and the red glass guns in the
 fortress fired a salute of twenty glass cannon balls
 as they passed through the sparkling city gates.
                "They seem to think a lot of you," called Randy,
 when he could make himself heard.
                "Doubtless! Doubtless," answered Jinnicky, with
 a little sniff of satisfaction. "People grow terribly
 fond of you when they find you are about to depart."
                "But who'll rule the country without you?" asked
 Randy, looking over his shoulder at the Jinn.
                "Alibabble, I dare say, and well enough, too.
 Mercy me! I'll be glad to be rid of the fellow for
 a while. He's always telling me something I already
 know."
                "As you know so much, possibly you can tell me
 the shortest route to Oz," puffed Kabumpo, looking
 impatiently around at Jinnicky.
                "To tell the truth, I know very little about roads,"
 confessed Jinnicky. "Traveling swiftly through the
 air in my magic jinrikisha I see very few of them.
 However, I believe the road we are on now leads
 directly to the Deadly Desert."
                "So you travel very fast in that magic jinrikisha?"
 murmured Kabumpo, in a tone Randy did not quite

 like. "Very fast. Ha! Well, how's this?" The Jinn,
 as you can well imagine, made no answer. All he
 could do was hold on to the arms of his wicker seat,
 blink, groan and gasp and whisper magic words and
 incantations for his safety and protection. Randy,
 with both hands twisted securely in the Elegant Elephant's
 collar, blew out and waved like a banner.
 Traveling at top speed on an elephant is like riding
 a stormy sea in a small boat. And how far or how
 long they tore through the wild rocky country of
 Ev, neither Randy nor the Red Jinn could have told
 you. Even the Elegant Elephant himself did not
 know, but soon the hot, stinging scent of burning
 sand made him slow down and peering through a
 thin fringe of trees ahead he came to a sudden and
 unceremonious stop.
                "Well, here's your desert," he announced carelessly.
 "And now that we are here, what are you
 going to do about it?" The Jinn, who had withdrawn
 into his jar like a turtle into its shell, popped up his
 head and looked cautiously about.
                "Why, it is the desert," said Jinnicky, sniffing the
 sulphurous air fastidiously. "Mercy me.!" Randy
 thought it quite sporting of the Jinn to say nothing of
 the awful shaking he had endured. lie, himself, was

 stiff and sore and extremely provoked at Kabumpo.
                "Have you any magic in those baskets that will
 help us to cross the desert?" he asked anxiously.
                "No!" answered the Jinn frankly. "I haven't. But
 I'll probably think of something before long."
                "Before long?" squealed Kabumpo indignantly.
 "Do you realize that the King, Queen, Prince arid
 Princesses of Pumperdink are in dire and awful danger
 and need your help at once?"
                "Keep your skin on! Keep your skin on!" advised
 Jinnicky calmly. "Vanishing is neither dangerous
 nor awful. On the contrary it is quite pleasant and
 restful. You ought to try it some time. So just have
 patience and something will turn up to help us cross
 this desert. Just see if it doesn't." Folding his hands
 the Jinn settled back contentedly against his cushions.
 Even Randy began to feel a little annoyed at
 this. The idea of waiting on the edge of the desert
 for something to turn up seemed utterly foolish and
 ridiculous to him. As for Kabumpo, he was so put
 out that he snatched up a small tree by the roots
 and swallowed it whole.
                "Something will come along soon," repeated
 Jinnicky, blinking his red glass eyes sleepily. "Look
 -something's coming up now!" He turned a fat
 pink finger toward the sky which was turning a

 leaden and thunderous grey.
                "A storm!" gasped Kabumpo, staring worriedly
 at the darkening clouds. "A storm's coming up.
 Great grump, what good will that do?"
  
 CHAPTER 13
  
 The Red Jinn's Looking Glasses
  
 A LONG, threatening rumble of thunder sent
 the Elegant Elephant on a quick rush for
 cover, but there was in all that dreary waste land,
 not a tree, rock or shack of any kind to shelter them.
 Jinnicky, after a second look at the sky, handed his
 umbrella to Randy and ducked into his jar; and just
 in time, too, for the rain fell in torrents and the
 wind rose to such a gale that Kabumpo swayed
 like a ship in a storm and Randy found it impossible
 to put up the red umbrella. There was a great deal
 to be said for Jinnicky's jar, for he had not only
 drawn in his head, but his arms and legs as well, and
 was perfectly dry and secure while Kabumpo and
 Randy shivered with wet and discomfort. Looking
 at him enviously, the boy wondered how it would feel
 to be so strangely and magically constructed. The

 wind howled fearfully, Kabumpo's ears flapped like
 sails in the blast and conversation of any kind was
 simply impossible.
                "If that Post Man had not gone off we might have
 been in Pumperdink by this time," thought Randy
 sadly, "and now, dear knows whether we shall ever
 get there." But the storm, as quickly as it had risen,
 passed. The sky turned grey, then pink and though
 it was still raining the sun came out and a rainbow
 burst suddenly through the clouds.
                "Oh, look!" called Randy, pointing to the vivid
 arch of light. But Kabumpo, paying no attention
 to the rainbow, shook himself so vigorously that the
 Jinn rattled in his jar and all the jugs and vases
 jingled noisily together.
                "Very pretty, no doubt," sniffed Kabumpo shortly,
 "but this is no time to look for rainbows, my boy.
 Our clothes are ruined, you'll probably catch pneumonia
 and how are we to cross this grumpy desert?
 A fine help this Jinn's been! I'll bet he just came for
 the ride."
                "Sh-hh!" warned Randy anxiously. "Don't you
 remember, he can hear through his lid. Oh, look!
 Look! Do look, Kabumpo, the rainbow's coming
 right down to the edge of the rocks and there's a girl
 or a fairy dancing on the rim."

                "Why, it's Polychrome!" exclaimed Kabumpo, his
 interest aroused at last. "It's the rainbow's daughter.
 She has often visited in Oz. Polly! Polly, my
 dear, come on down and let's have a look at you."
                "I told you something would turn up," observed
 Jinnicky, popping out his head. "Next time, maybe,
 you'll believe me." Randy was much too interested
 in the little sky fairy to pay any attention to Jinnicky.
 Though she seemed to be a maid of mist and light,
 Polychrome was at the same time as real and as
 lovely as the loveliest of Oz maidens. Dancing down
 the rainbow, she jumped off the end, skipped lightly
 across the rocks and seated herself cozily in the
 bend of the Elegant Elephant's trunk.
                "Hello, Kabumpo, aren't you a long way from
 home?" she asked affectionately.
                "A very long way," admitted the Elegant Elephant
 glumly. "But it's a long, long story, my dear!"
                "Just like your nose," laughed Polly mischievously.
 "Well, I like long noses and stories and-travelers."
 She smiled gaily up at Randy and the Red Jinn as
 Kabumpo pompously introduced them, and in less
 time than it has taken me to write one page of this
 story, Kabumpo had explained the whole reason and
 purpose of their journey.

                "And the sooner we reach Pumperdink, the sooner
 the Red Jinn can restore the royal family," put in
 Randy, as Kabumpo paused for breath. "But we cannot
 cross this desert, so here we are!"
                "Why, that's easy!" Polly jumped to the ground
 with a little laugh. "I'll just lend you my rainbow.
 See-!" She stretched her arms up gleefully. "It
 arches all the way across and all you have to do is
 follow ~
                "But I'm too heavy! I'd fall through-or off, or
 puncture it," objected Kabumpo nervously.
                "Or get rainbow-legged," chuckled the Red Jinn,
 who had been quiet as long as he could manage.
 "The plain truth is, you're afraid. Why not admit
 it?"
                "Ha!" raged Kabumpo, and with a furious glance
 at Jinnicky stamped after Polychrome, who had
 already stepped up on the bow and was beckoning
 for them to follow.
                Randy, it must be confessed, shared Kabumpo's
 misgivings, and as they approached the misty and
 fragile arch he shivered with something besides cold
 and dampness. They would certainly fall through,
 fall on the deadly desert and vanish as utterly as
 the King of Pumperdink. But Polychrome and the
 Red Jinn seemed so gay and indifferent that the

 mountain boy resolved to perish manfully, and as
 Kabumpo stepped up on the rainbow, he began to
 whistle an old Gilliken jig.
                The rainbow slanted gradually at the start and as
 Kabumpo cautiously started upward, his feet seemed
 scarcely to touch the iridescent path of light. But
 for all its transparency, the rainbow proved sturdy
 as steel. It was like crossing the desert on some
 unreal and airy bridge, and with Polychrome dancing
 ahead Kabumpo quickly and safely reached the
 center. Here Polly bade them an affectionate farewell
 and regretfully Randy waved good-bye to the
 little sky fairy. Going down was more difficult than
 going up and though the Elegant Elephant held back
 and braced his legs as best he could, he found himself
 running faster and faster. So fast, in fact, did
 he run that everything grew blurred and when he
 came to the end of the rainbow he plunged off and
 ran for half a mile before he could stop himself.
                "Very neat," approved Jinnicky, straightening his
 lid, which had fallen over one ear. "And this, I
 suppose, is the famous Winkie country of Oz!"
                "Tell me something I don't already know," grunted
 Kabumpo, still panting from his dash down the
 rainbow. "Of course it's the Winkie country. Isn't

 everything yellow?"
  
 "Everything excepting you,
 And you, old El, seem rather blue,
  
 though I don't see why," said Jinnicky, with a wink
 at Randy. "That rainbow was a very pleasant solution
 of a very unpleasant difficulty."
                "I wish Polychrome had come with us," sighed
 Randy. "Do you know her very well, Kabumpo?"
                "As well as anyone ever knows a fairy," answered
 Kabumpo, squinting up at the sky, where the rain-
 bow was just melting out of sight. "But now," he
 concluded briskly, "we must find the shortest route
 to Pumperdink. Let-me-see!" Kabumpo flapped
 his big ears and blinked across the valley.
                "Since you know so much about the Winkie country,
 that surely will not be difficult," teased Jinnicky,
 folding his hands complacently.
                "Oh, dear!" thought Randy, as Kabumpo glared
 over his shoulder at the little Jinn, "I do wish they'd
 stop snapping at each other this way. They're both
 so nice separately. Why can't they be nice together?"
 To save the Elegant Elephant's honor and reputation,
 he began to peer around anxiously for signs
 of a road or highway. But as far as he could see

 there were nothing but plains, hills and forests. Not
 a road, nor a house, nor even a castle! As Kabumpo
 swayed uncertainly from left to right, Jinnicky
 leaned forward and touched Randy on the shoulder.
                "Just hand me my red glasses, will you?" he muttered
 hurriedly. Randy had put the Jinn's silver bell
 and glasses in his pocket and now, without thinking
 much about it, he handed Jinnicky his specs. Clapping
 them on his nose, Jinnicky clambered down the
 rope ladder and began hurrying as fast as his fat
 little feet would carry him toward a deep and dangerous looking forest.
                "Stop! What are you doing? Where are you
 going?" roared Kabumpo, lunging angrily after him.
 Much as the Red Jinn annoyed him, he did not
 intend to let him get away at this stage of the journey.
 "Come back! Come back!" he trumpeted
 loudly. "Do you want to ruin your shoes?" he puffed,
 as he caught up with the strange little figure.
                "No, not especially," answered the Jinn, squinting
 over his shoulder at the Elegant Elephant. "I'm
 looking for the road to Pumperdink and this is the
 only way to find it."
                "How do you expect to find the road when you
 know nothing of this part of the country?" inquired
 Kabumpo sarcastically.

                "I expect to find it with the help of these looking
 glasses," announced Jinnicky, tapping his red specs
 proudly. "They will look for anything I ask them to
 look for. See?" And elevating his little red nose,
 the Jinn ran determinedly on into the forest.
                "M-mm! They must be magic glasses," breathed
 Randy, leaning forward eagerly.
                "Well, all I say is-if he has to walk all the way
 to Pumperdink, he'll never get there and neither will
 we." Kabumpo spoke with conviction. "Look, he's
 tired already. Look at the old goose, will you?"
 Randy had to agree that Kabumpo was right, for
 Jinnicky had taken off his glasses and was leaning
 against a yellow oak fanning himself with his lid.
                "Maybe he'll lend them to me," whispered Randy,
 as Kabumpo stopped beside the oak.
                "What good will that do?" sighed the Elegant Elephant.
 "You can't walk much faster than he can.
 I am the one who should wear them."
                "What's that?" asked Jinnicky, replacing his lid
 and glancing wearily up at Kabumpo.
                "I said I was the one who should wear the looking
 glasses," repeated Kabumpo calmly. "I can travel
 twenty times as fast as you can and at this rate we'll
 never get anywhere."
                "Just what I was thinking," sniffed Jinnicky, much

 to Randy's surprise, for he always expected an argument
 when Kabumpo and the Jinn got into a conversation.
                "But they won't fit," exclaimed Randy.
                "My looking glasses will fit anyone, even an elephant,"
 boasted Jinnicky, and before Kabumpo could
 change his mind or make any more remarks, he
 flung the red spectacles at his head. Instead of
 smashing to bits they sailed over the Elegant Elephant's
 great ears and settled quietly on his trunk,
 and unless you have ever seen an elephant wearing
 red looking glasses you have no idea how comical
 Kabumpo looked.
                "Get aboard! Hurry up!" he wheezed excitedly,
 speaking out of the corner of his mouth. "They're
 beginning to tug me along like a magnet. Up with
 you! Quick, or you'll be left behind. Great grump,
 wherever am I going?" Jinnicky had just time to
 seize the first rung of the rope ladder before Kabumpo
 started running like the wind through the
 yellow forest. Grasping Jinnicky's hand, Randy
 helped him to his seat and soon they were speeding
 along so swiftly that the trees flashed by like telegraph
 poles when you ride in an express train. On
 the other side of the forest, the looking glasses had
 a little difficulty deciding which way to go; consequently

 the speed of the Elegant Elephant slackened
 down to a more comfortable pace.
                "Whew!" whistled Randy, rubbing his eye with
 one hand and hanging on tight with the other. Then,
 glancing ahead, he gave a terrible start. A monster
 twice as large as Kabumpo, with a rhinoceros' head
 and a dragon's body, stood gnashing its tusks directly
 in their path.
                "Stop!" quavered Jinnicky, waving his umbrella
 wildly.
                "Stop!" begged Randy tugging at Kabumpo's ear.
 But Kabumpo, if he heard them, gave no heed, quickening
 his pace, if anything, so that it seemed to poor
 Randy that they were rushing right into the jaws of
 destruction, as, indeed they were. Clasping his small
 sword desperately, he was wondering what in Oz to
 do when Jinnicky, muttering and spluttering,
 crawled hurriedly past him and snatched the red
 looking glasses off Kabumpo's trunk. No sooner had
 he done so than Kabumpo stopped just in time to
 keep from impaling himself with the monster's horn,
 but not in time for Randy. The jolt of their sudden
 halt sent the boy flying into the air. With his sword
 clasped in both hands, he described a perfect arc and
 came crashing down on the horrible creature's neck.
 There was a cough, choke and gurgle-Randy had

 just presence of mind enough to pull out his sword
 and jump aside when the monster rolled over on its
 back and lay still.
                "Bravo! Bravo!" shrilled Jinnicky, waving his umbrella,
 while Kabumpo's eyes popped out with pride
 and admiration. "You have saved all our lives, my
 lad, and overcome the most formidable combinoceros
 I've ever had the misfortune to meet or lay eyes on!"
 Fairly tumbling down the ladder, the Red Jinn
 clasped Randy to his jar, showering him with praises
 and congratulations.
                "Are you all right?" demanded Kabumpo anxiously,
 when Jinnicky finally let him go. "Great grump,
 what kind of rinkety-rank looking glasses are those?
 Couldn't stop till you dragged them off. They're dangerous,
 frightfully dangerous, that's what they are!"
 Jinnicky nodded soberly.
                "That's why I didn't wear them when we first
 started," he explained quickly. "They would have
 rushed us right onto the Deadly Desert. One must
 wear my red looking glasses with very great care - very great care."
                "I'm not sure I wish to wear them at all," shuddered
 Kabumpo, walking stiffly around the fallen
 monster. "Look at that horn! The King shall hear
 of this, my boy. You shall have twelve new suits

 and a velvet cloak when we reach Pumperdink."
                Randy, who had destroyed the combinoceros more
 by good luck than good swordsmanship, tried to explain
 how he had fallen with his sword pointed downward
 on the animal's neck. But neither Jinnicky nor
 Kabumpo would listen to him, so he finally gave up
 and basked as any boy would in their expressions
 of pride and approval.
                "How long will it lie here?" he asked, curiously
 touching the great beast with his foot. In any country
 but Oz, the monster would have been utterly dead
 and done for, but in Oz, there is no death. People
 and animals can be overcome for a time but not
 forever, so Randy felt a little uneasy.
                "Well, I hope it does not recover in my lifetime,"
 chuckled Jinnicky, climbing back to his comfortable
 seat "and to be on the safe side, let us depart, get
 hence, and go forward!"
                "The only safe side of that creature is the other
 side," rumbled Kabumpo distastefully. "The further
 we are from something worse, the nearer we are to
 something better."
                "Har, har, har!" laughed Jinnicky, and when Kabumpo
 had put three hills and a little wood between
 them and the combinoceros, he called out cheerfully:
                "How about dinner? The sun's going down and

 while we can still find our mouths we'd better eat."
                "But what shall we eat?" asked Randy, looking
 rather resentfully at the baskets of jugs and bottles
 that could so well have carried sandwiches and fruit.
                "Just hand me my silver bell," directed the Jinn,
 with a broad wink. "Hand me the bell and all will be
 well !" Pulling the bell from his pocket, Randy passed
 it back to Jinnicky, and Jinnicky, with a mischievous
 smile, rang it three times.
  
 CHAPTER 14
  
 King, King, Double King!
  
 THE silvery note of the dinner bell had barely
 sounded before a small, turbaned slave flashed
 down from nowhere and set a well ordered dinner
 tray on the arm of Jinnicky's seat. Smiling amiably,
 he vanished but reappeared almost instantly, for the
 Red Jinn had rung the bell again. This time the
 little fellow brought a dinner for Randy and setting
 the tray carefully between Kabumpo's ears vanished
 away before the boy had time to thank him.
                "Fall to," directed Jinnicky, as Randy stared in a
 dazed fashion at the appetizing array.

                "Well, how about me?" shrilled Kabumpo, looking
 indignantly over his shoulder. "Am I to stand here
 and twiddle my trunk while you gorge yourselves on
 magic viands? What am I to eat and when?" Instead
 of answering, Jinnicky picked up his tray and
 motioning for Randy to follow backed carefully down
 the ladder. Then, placing his dinner on a flat rock,
 he turned and handed Kabumpo the looking glasses.
                "Just put these on and go look for an elephant
 dinner," he advised jovially. "But be careful, terribly,
 dreadfully careful!" Remember the cornbinoceros!"
 The Elegant Elephant swayed doubtfully
 to and fro and then, as he really was starving,
 he clapped on the red specs and disappeared at a
 gallop.
                "Now we can dine in quiet and peace," murmured
 Jinnicky, seating himself picnic fashion on the
 ground. "A handy thing, my magic dinner bell, eh,
 my lad?" Randy nodded, his mouth too full of roast
 duck to speak.
                "I did have two of these dinner bells," went on
 Jinnicky, between rapid bites of biscuit, "but one
 was stolen and fell into the hands of a countryman
 of yours-Jack Pumpkinhead, I think he called himself."
                "The Pumpkinhead who lives near the Emerald
 City?" asked Randy, in surprise. Jinnicky nodded

 his head vigorously. "The very same. Finding him-
 self in some dire difficulty, this Jack fellow rang the
 bell, seized Ginger's hand when he appeared with
 the dinner tray and came back with him to my
 palace. So you see, you are not the only people who
 have appealed to me for help."
                "Did you help Jack?" inquired Randy, with an interested
 little sniff.
                "Yes," admitted the Jinn, slowly sipping his tea,
 "I saved three of his comrades from a magic sack,
 though I did not hear how it all turned out till a year
 later. That meddling little Wizard of Oz mixed his
 magic with mine and completely spoiled the affair
 for me."
                "Well, I hope nobody meddles with your magic this
 time," sighed Randy, popping a large strawberry
 into his mouth and crunching it up with great relish.
                "Kabumpo has all my magic at the present
 moment," mused Jinnicky a bit thoughtfully.
                "Say, I hope nothing happens to Kabumpo!" Suddenly remembering that the Elegant Elephant
wore
 the red looking glasses, Randy looked anxiously over
 at the Jinn. "Your specs may get him in trouble!"
                "But he's not looking for trouble," observed
 Jinnicky calmly, "he's looking for dinner. Shall I
 ring for more duck, my boy?" Randy shook his head,

 for he could not possibly have eaten another bite.
 As he jumped up to look around for Kabumpo both
 trays and dishes vanished into thin air and the Red
 Jinn, leaning back against a turnip tree, closed his
 eyes and began to hum an old Ev ballad. Randy had
 not gone more than a dozen steps nor the Jinn
 reached more than the second stanza before Kabumpo
 hove hilariously into view. Hay was sticking
 to him everywhere and he had evidently dined with
 more gusto than elegance. The looking glasses had
 led him directly to a farmer's granary and after
 eating several buckets of oats, bran and corn he
 had finished off with a stack of hay and almost pleasantly
 he took off the red spectacles and returned
 them to the Jinn.
                "Did you see any cities or towns ahead?" asked
 Randy, picking the strands of hay off Kabumpo's
 jeweled collar and headpiece. "Did you find anything
 besides oats and beans?"
                "There's a city on the other side of that second
 hill," announced Kabumpo importantly. "And if we
 hurry we might reach it before dark." So Jinnicky
 joyfully climbed into his high seat on Kabumpo's
 back, Randy ran up his trunk and off they started
 at the Elegant Elephant's best pace, reaching the

 top of the hill in almost no time. On top of the second
 hill they saw a shining yellow city. The houses
 were of smooth yellow stone with golden roofs.
 Splendid twin castles with golden spires stood above
 the cluster of cottages and shops, and the last rays
 of the setting sun touched the castle towers and
 golden roofs with such a dazzling light that it seemed
 almost as if the city were afire. Blinking approval,
 for he loved all grandeur, Kabumpo started energetically
 toward the second hill and had got about
 half way up, when a great band of musicians
 marched through the city gates and came down to
 meet them, playing such a lively air that it was all
 the Elegant Elephant could do to keep from dancing.
                "They quite evidently take us for people of importance,"
 said Jinnicky, setting his lid at a more
 stylish angle and dusting off his jar with a red silk
 handkerchief.
                "And quite right, too," answered Kabumpo, tossing
 his head proudly. "We are people of great importance."
                "To ourselves!" chuckled Jinnicky, to Randy's
 great amusement. "And this night I shall treat them
 to my most elegant snores." Kabumpo, pretending
 not to hear the Jinn's last remark, lifted his trunk
 in a grand salute as the leader of the golden band
 halted directly in their path. The musicians carried

 simply tremendous horns and flutes and wore striking
 uniforms and caps of white and yellow. That
 was the last thing Randy remembered. For, lifting
 his baton, the bandmaster gave a signal to his men,
 and with such a blare of trumpets that the Jinn's red
 hair stood straight on end carrying his lid up with
 it, the horns shot out fifteen feet (for they were of
 a trick and sliding variety) and knocked the travelers
 perfectly senseless-at least two of them.
                One horn hit the Elegant Elephant such a blow between
 the eyes that he nearly fell to his knees; another
 shot between his ears and rolled Randy to the
 ground. Jinnicky, because he was farthest back, escaped. Snatching at the left hand basket, he pulled
 out a blue bottle and then drew in his head, arms
 and legs, so that when the rude and boisterous bandsmen approached to drag their captives into the city,
 the Red Jinn appeared to be nothing but a huge red
 jar. Thinking the jar must contain some mysterious
 treasure or jewels, the musicians lifted it carefully
 from Kabumpo's back and dispatched it by two drummers
 into the town. Randy had struck his head
 against a stone and lay perfectly senseless in the
 road. Tossing him carelessly into Jinnicky's seat the
 bandsmen tied a rope around Kabumpo's trunk and
 began to pull and drag him up the hill. Had the
 Elegant Elephant not been dazed and half blinded

 by the trumpet blow, he might have resisted, but
 scarcely knowing what he was doing or where he
 was going, he plodded dully after his captors. As the
 procession passed through the city gates, Randy
 came to, and rubbing his eyes looked dizzily around
 him. And well he might for the yellow city and its
 strange inhabitants were almost too ridiculous to
 believe.
                "Am I seeing double, or what?" mumbled the boy,
 shaking his head, which still throbbed from the terrible fall.
                "Double Up, and not What!" snapped the leader of
 tie yellow band grimly. "This is Double Up, the famous
 city of the Doublemen." And doubling up his
 fists the bandmaster seemed daring Randy to dispute
 the matter. Randy, however, was too startled
 to speak again, for the bandmaster, his fellow musicians
 and all the people in Double Up, were twofaced.
 Imagine! They had no backs at all, so that
 no matter how they turned they were always facing
 him. It was dreadfully confusing when a Doubleman
 spoke, for both his faces talked at once and what
 one said the other contradicted, so there was no
 sense at all to the conversation.
                "Knock the boy off the elephant!" shouted the
 bandmaster, with one face. "Take him to the King,"
 advised the other, at which all the rest of the Doubles

 joined in and made such a racket that Randy could
 not discover what was to be done with him. He
 looked around anxiously for Jinnicky and seeing no
 sign of him tried to reach one of the Jinn's baskets.
 But as his fingers touched the handle the top jars
 and jugs cried out shrilly: "Master! Master!" and
 Randy, quivering with astonishment, drew back his
 hand. Fortunately the Doubles were making such
 a noise they did not hear the weird cries.
                Crouching down among the cushions, wondering
 what in Oz had come over Kabumpo, who was moving
 along like a creature in a dream, Randy waited
 tensely for something to happen. As he had not
 been knocked off, he concluded they were taking him
 to the King, and in this he was right, for they were
 now passing along a broad avenue lined with a double
 row of yellow pear trees toward the tidy twin castles.
 Everything in Double Up was double, the houses
 were double, the windows and doors in the houses
 were double, the double-faced citizens walked stiffly
 in pairs and by the time Randy reached the double
 gates of the castle he was seeing everything double
 and was so giddy that he made no resistance whatever
 when he was rudely jerked off Kabumpo's back.
 But he did give a little scream of indignation as the

 Elegant Elephant was pushed, banged and driven
 through another double gateway. Why didn't
 Kabumpo turn around and trample on them? Randy
 himself, hustled roughly through the double doors
 of the castle, just could not understand it. Only the
 bandmaster accompanied him to the big double
 throne room. The Double King was sitting on his
 throne eating a pear, or rather two pears, and the
 bandmaster bowed first to one side of the King and
 then to the other. As he did so the King gave Randy
 a couple of mean looks.
                "So you captured them?" muttered his Majesty's
 first face. "That elephant will be good for log rolling,"
 observed his Majesty's second face. "I wonder
 to whom he belongs?"
                "King, King, Double Ring, they'll never get him
 back again," chortled the bandmaster with one
 mouth. "The boy will make a good boot black,"
 sneered the other. "This is his impairious Highness
 King Too Too the Second, King, King, and Double
 King. Bow to your new sovereign." Jerking Randy
 by the arm and seeing that he was not going to bow,
 the bandmaster gave him a blow that sent him
 sprawling at the Double King's feet. It was all like
 some horrible nightmare and when Randy jumped
 up in a fury and threw himself upon his two-faced

 Majesty, he was soon overpowered by a Double Up
 guard and shaken into silence.
                "Bring him to the dining hall while we dine, but
 give him nothing," commanded the Double King,
 with one mouth while he finished both pears with
 the other. "After dinner, we will break open that red
 jug." At these awful words and knowing they referred to Jinnicky, Randy pricked up his ears and
 as the Double King, followed by a double line of
 Double Courtiers, began to move slowly toward the
 dining hall, Randy tried desperately to think of some
 way to help himself and his luckless companions.
 The dining hall was long and elegant, with two beautifully set tables in the exact center. And Randy
 soon discovered why this was. Standing in a corner,
 watched over by the surly guard, the boy could not
 help feeling interested in the Double King's dinner.
 It took a long time, for the Doubles, having two
 mouths to feed, had to eat twice as much as an ordinary person. So, to begin with, they seated
themselves at the first table and ate noisily and heartily;
 then, turning around, they seated themselves at the
 second table and gave the other side of their faces
 a chance.
                "It must be pretty expensive to be a Double," reflected Randy, "and a great nuisance, too." On
the
 whole he was glad he had only one face to wash,
 though eyes in the back of one's head would be
 handy things at times. Thanks to the magic dinner

 he had eaten with Jinnicky he was not bothered at
 all by the Double King's double feast. But he was
 tired of standing and felt a real relief when the King
 at last finished and started back to the throne room.
                "Perhaps," thought Randy, as he was pulled along
 roughly by the Double Guard, "perhaps I'll think of
 some way to save Jinnicky when the time comes."
 But alas, he was to have no such opportunity. For
 no sooner had the King-King reached his throne than
 he cried out in a couple of very fierce voices.
                "Take that boy to the dungeon and if he gives any
 trouble just chop off his head! Chop off his head!"
                "Twice?" inquired the guard out of the corner of
 one of his mouths.
                "Once!" shrieked the King at the top of both of
 his voices.
                "But your Highness said once twice and twice once
 are twice," argued the guard stubbornly. Randy was
 so mixed up by this time that he could think of nothing
 to do or say at all and while the Doubles laughed
 and roared spitefully he was ignominiously dragged
 from the Double King's presence. The dungeon to
 which Randy was taken was exceedingly dark and
 dismal and as the double doors clanged shut and the
 double bolts shot into place, his heart sank to the
 bottom of his boots. How ever could he get out or

 find a way to help Jinnicky and Kabumpo. Two candles
 burned in a double candlestick on the rickety
 table, and flinging himself sadly on a heap of straw
 in the corner of the dungeon, Randy lay looking at
 their wavering flames, trying to plan some way to
 escape. But he was so worn out and weary from
 all the adventures and curious experiences of the day
 that, in spite of his discomfort and terrible anxiety,
 he soon fell into an uneasy and troubled slumber.
  
  
 CHAPTER 15
  
 Escape from Double Up
  
 ALIGHT touch on the arm wakened Randy. The
 candles had burned out and it was quite dark
 in the dungeon.
                "It's morning," whispered a cautious voice. "Come,
 take my hand and we'll soon be away from these
 double dealing dodos."
                "Why, Jinnicky!" gasped the boy. "How did you
 ever find me? How can it be morning when it's so
 dark, and how are we to get past the guards?"
                "Hold on to me and you'll soon see," chuckled

 Jinnicky in his jolly voice, and seizing Randy's arm
 hurried him out of the dungeon up a long flight of
 steps and finally into the great double kitchen of
 Too Too's castle. The light made Randy blink and
 dropping into the double cook's chair he took a long,
 deep breath. Sure enough, it was morning, and the
 fresh May breeze coming in through the double windows
 seemed perfectly delicious after the stifling
 air below. With a big sigh of relief Randy noted that
 Jinnicky's jar was not broken. Indeed, the Red Jinn
 looked shinier, saucier and more mischievous than
 ever.
                "What happened?" begged Randy, as Jinnicky took
 off his red looking glasses and slipped them into his
 wide sleeve.
                "Come and see, my mercy me!" With scarcely
 concealed merriment the little Jinn pattered toward
 Too Too's throne room. But even before they reached
 that spacious and elegant apartment, Randy saw the
 Double King's retainers doubled up in every direction,
 on the stairs, along the corridors and in every
 room and corner. Apparently they were fast asleep,
 and stepping softly, so as not to waken them, Randy
 hurried after Jinnicky. Not till he had seated himself
 on Too Too's throne did the Red Jinn reveal what
 had really taken place. Here, with his feet resting

 comfortably on the Double King's prostrate form,
 with fallen Doubles lying in heaps and mounds
 around them, Jinnicky began his story. The King
 and his subjects had passed nearly the whole night
 celebrating their victory over the travelers. Shut up
 in his jar Jinnicky had listened to long double
 speeches, double duets and the thunderous banging
 and tooting of the Doublemen's band. Toward morning
 Too Too, wearying of the clamor, decided to investigate
 the contents of the red jug.
                "And then," murmured Jinnicky, leaning back
 with half closed eyes, "then I knew my turn had
 come. At the first touch on my lid I stuck up my
 head and so frightened Too Too that he fell over
 backwards, or rather frontwards, for he has, as you
 know, no back at all, and while his courtiers and musicians
 gaped with amazement I flung the contents
 of my blue bottle high into the air calling:
  
 'Joonicky, Jonicky, Jornicky Junnicky I
 Incense, blue incense, subdue everyoneicky.'"
  
  
                "And it did, didn't it?" marveled Randy.
                "Well, it certainly made them more sensible,"

 agreed Jinnicky, looking around the throne room
 with quiet satisfaction. "Some people, my boy, are
 only sensible when they are insensible and while my
 blue incense still keeps them so, let us depart and
 shake the dust of this double dealing city from our
 doublets."
                "But I don't see why you did not throw the incense
 when we first met them?" puzzled Randy, thinking
 of his uncomfortable night in the dungeon.
                "Blue incense only works after three o'clock in the
 morning," answered Jinnicky mysteriously. "That's
 why I had to wait, but as soon as it did take effect
 I put on my looking glasses and started to hunt you.
 It took me a long time to unbar that dungeon, but
 here you are and here I am. I suppose they did away
 with our fat friend?" he finished inquiringly.
                Jinnicky tried to keep his voice indifferent and
 casual when he referred to Kabumpo, but Randy,
 with a little smile, saw the worried frown on his
 round little face.
                "I believe he likes Kabumpo as much as I do,"
 thought Randy, with a little sniff of satisfaction, and
 he quickly told the Jinn how the Elegant Elephant
 had been driven into the courtyard of the castle.
                "Well," said Jinnicky, putting on his red glasses
 again, "in that case we might as well look around

 for the old gaboscis. He has all my magic, you
 know."
                Rolling off the throne Jinnicky stepped carelessly
 over Too Too and, followed by Randy, marched resolutely
 from the yellow castle. The looking glasses
 led them to the meanest and smallest end of the
 courtyard. There they finally found Kabumpo,
 penned up in a log enclosure. Soon after he had been
 shut up the Elegant Elephant had recovered from the
 trumpet blow and had thumped and bumped against
 the logs till he was black and blue and trumpeted
 till he was too hoarse to make another sound. Then,
 like Randy in his dungeon, he had given up and fallen
 into a heavy slumber. When the Red Jinn and the
 mountain boy reached the enclosure he was already
 awake and banging and pushing furiously against
 the logs. Calling to him reassuringly, Randy after
 some difficulty, unbarred the door and the next minute
 the three adventurers were reunited.
                Kabumpo had a huge lump between his eyes and
 the robe made from Nandywog's silk handkerchiefs
 was frayed and torn beyond recognition. He listened
 in a lofty and bored silence while the Red Jinn explained
 how he had overcome their enemies, thanked
 him gruffly for his trouble and suggested that they

 leave for other parts at once. This suited Randy and
 Jinnicky exactly and climbing thankfully aloft they
 begged him to start at once. So as not to waste any
 time Kabumpo put on the looking glasses and directing
 them to take him to Pumperdink, left the city
 of Double Up at a double quick pace, trumpeting
 with scorn as he swung through the double gates of
 the hateful city. Jinnicky, after peeping into both
 wicker baskets to make sure all his jugs and bottles
 were safe, settled back contentedly among his cushions.
                "The thing to do," he concluded cheerfully, "is to
 profit by our mistakes. Now take that welcome band.
 That was quite an idea and took us completely by
 surprise. I'd expect horns on a wild animal to be
 dangerous, but horns in a band, never. We looked
 for music and instead received blows. Altogether a
 noteworthy victory for the enemy, which we might
 sum up by saying: 'Lively blows were struck by the
 enemy and as the invaders could not beat their band
 they were forthwith taken and dragged into the city.'
  
 "For who'd expect a sliding flute
 To up and rap you on the snoot?"
  
                Jinnicky looked so comical chanting his ridiculous
 verses that Randy burst out laughing, but Kabumpo

 was still mad.
                "Stop it! Stop it," he shouted violently, "or I'll
 take off these glasses and not go another step." The
 lump on his forehead was the only reminder he
 wanted of their wretched encounter with the double
 band. He could not yet understand how the fellows
 had got the best of him and the poor figure he had
 cut in the affair made him feel perfectly savage.
                "Notwithstanding and nevertheless," continued
 Jinnicky in a low voice to Randy, "I've a mind to
 equip my army with shooting horns, disguise them
 as musicians and outwit all my enemies."
                "Have you any of that blue incense left?" asked
 Randy, after agreeing that Jinnicky's idea might be
 a good thing. The incense seemed a handy weapon
 on a journey as perilous as this.
                "Plenty," smiled the Red Jinn, nodding his head
 gaily. "In those baskets, my lad, I believe I have a
 cure for any emergency."
                "Do you have anything to keep you from talking
 all the time?" snapped Kabumpo disagreeably.
                "Even that! Even that, my dear El!" Imperturbed,
 Jinnicky drew out his silver bell and rang
 it briskly three times. "Nothing like food for keeping
 a body from talking," he observed slyly, as the

 turbaned slave set down appetizing trays before him
 and Randy. "Bacon, eggs, waffles and honey. My
 mercy me! What a treat!"
                "Shut up!" rumbled Kabumpo, pounding sullenly
 down the hill. And while Randy and Jinnicky break-
 fasted heartily from the magic trays, the Elegant
 Elephant snatched savage bites from the trees and
 bushes. But as the morning wore on Kabumpo's ill
 temper wore off. They had soon reached the foot
 of the hill and following the tug of the Jinn's glasses
 the Elegant Elephant was making his way through
 a small, pleasant wood. The trees were just far
 enough apart for comfort and the air was so fragrant
 and delicious that Kabumpo began to forget
 his unpleasant experiences in Double Up.
                "We should reach the Gilliken Country any minute
 now," he called back to Randy. "There's the
 Winkie River just ahead and that will bring us quite
 near the border."
                "Say, won't Kettywig be surprised when we march
 into the castle?" exulted Randy, standing up to get
 a glimpse of the river. "And won't Faleero be furious?
 Are you sure you can restore the King and the
 others, Jinnicky?"
                "Reasonably so, reasonably so," murmured the
 Red Jinn, shaking his head like a little china mandarin,

 and he proceeded to give Randy a lively lecture
 on red magic, its causes and principal effects.
 While they were talking Kabumpo had stepped out
 of the wood and seeing a broad, tumbling river before
 them, Jinnicky hurriedly crawled past randy
 and snatched the looking glasses off Kabumpo's
 trunk.
                "No use swimming so early in the day," smiled
 Jinnicky, holding on to Kabumpo's ear to steady
 himself.
                "That's so!" puffed Kabumpo, coming to a stop on
 the brink of the river. "I expect those specs would
 have pulled me in, ears over hind quarters. But if
 I don't swim, how are we to get across?" Jinnicky,
 handing the looking glasses to Randy, began rummaging
 in the left hand wicker basket. Bringing up
 a green flower pot containing a small plant, he flung
 it carelessly over Kabumpo's head. The flower pot,
 striking on a stone, broke into a hundred fragments
 and while Kabumpo and Randy looked on in amazement
 a tremendous green spruce sprang up, growing
 like a magic bean stalk before their eyes. Randy
 was wondering what good a tree would do them,
 when the spruce, as if cut down by a mighty and
 invisible ax, fell crashing across the stream.

                "There you are! There you are!" Snapping his
 fingers joyfully Randy crawled back to his seat and
 Kabumpo, with a snort of approval, stepped out on
 the trunk. In spite of his huge size and great weight,
 Kabumpo was sure-footed and fearless and without
 mishap or misstep crossed the river safely on the
 magic bridge.
                "A tree-mendously successful idea," chuckled the
 Jinn, handing Kabumpo the red looking glasses:
 "The river's behind us, the broad plain before;
 To-morrow will find us at Pumperdink's door."
                "What else have you in those baskets?" asked
 Randy curiously.
                "Well, here's a cooky jar that's always full and a
 water pitcher that's never empty," answered Jinnicky,
 diving into the right hand basket, "so let us
 refresh ourselves. How about a cooky, El? How
 about a cooky?" Jinnicky wagged his finger roguishly
 at Kabumpo, who was looking over his shoulder
 to see what the Jinn had taken out of his baskets.
                "One cooky is about as much good to an elephant
 as one bullet to an army," sniffed Kabumpo scornfully.
                "But wait-" laughed the Jinn, and hurrying out
 on Kabumpo's head, he tilted the cooky jar so that
 a perfect cascade of crisp, toothsome wafers poured
 down the elephant's trunk. Now if there was one

 thing Kabumpo liked better than peanuts it was
 cookies and while he tossed down dozen after dozen,
 Jinnicky and Randy refreshed themselves from the
 black pitcher and ate a heap of the cookies themselves.
 Kabumpo, after downing two hundred and
 fifty, quenched his thirst in the Winkie River, adjusted
 the red looking glasses and once more turned
 his face toward the west. To tell the truth, he was
 homesick for a sight of the castle and his own quiet
 and comfortable quarters. He missed his white
 marble bath and his hundred and ten robes and
 cloaks of silk and velvet. Traveling was all very well,
 but for the present, Kabumpo had had quite enough
 of it. So the Red Jinn's looking glasses, fast as they
 drew him along, could not go too fast for the Elegant
 Elephant. And when, about three o'clock, he stepped
 from the yellow country into the purple dominions of
 the Gillikens, he gave a long low whistle of relief and
 satisfaction.
  
 CHAPTER 16
  
 Meanwhile, in Pumperdink
  
 NOW, while Kabumpo and Randy had been traveling

 rapidly in three directions to help them,
 the Pumperdinkians, under the rule of Faleero and
 Kettywig were having a blue and dismal time of it.
 Soon after the wedding, which had been celebrated
 with great haste and magnificence, Faleero's vindictive
 and spiteful nature began to assert itself. Too
 old, stiff and crotchety to enjoy any fun or pleasure
 herself, she immediately passed laws against all
 kinds of amusement. No singing, music or dancing
 was permitted in Pumperdink. Games were strictly
 forbidden; even the children's hoops, marbles and
 balls were confiscated by the guards and two small
 boys caught flying kites in the courtyard were dipped
 three times in the purple well.
                Everybody was dipped sooner or later and the
 chains operating the huge well bucket clanked dismally
 all day long. Grandfathers and uncles who
 craved a little relaxation had to retire to their cellars
 for a quiet game of checkers or chess. Everything
 was against the law and the law was against
 everything. Any one caught laughing on the King's
 Highway was thrown into prison for a week and with
 sad, dolorous faces the usually gay and carefree citizens
 tip-toed cautiously about their business. Kettywig,
 who had meant to rule the kingdom himself and
 lead a life of ease and jollity, bitterly regretted his

 bargain with the wicked old fairy. Faleero would
 allow him to have nothing to say about affairs of
 state and bullied, scolded and cuffed him from morning
 till night. She took away his pipe and fed him
 on oatmeal and weak tea, her own favorite diet, and
 when Kettywig timidly suggested that they have
 roast beef and ice cream on Wednesdays, she flew
 into a passion and had him locked securely in the
 tower.
                Faleero had never really cared for Kettywig and
 with him so conveniently put out of the way she proceeded
 to govern Pumperdink as she pleased. Closely
 attended by her three ancient ladies in waiting,
 she stamped furiously about the palace giving her ill-
 natured commands and terrifying courtiers and servants
 alike. No one dared to defy the false Queen,
 for on her first day in the palace she had turned the
 cook to a cocoanut and had him baked in a pie. Fearful
 of her temper and her magic, the poor Pumperdinkians
 kept out of Faleero's way whenever possible
 and longed heartily for the old happy days under
 King Pompus and Queen Pozy Pink.
                The disappearance of the Elegant Elephant was the
 only ray of cheer in all those gloomy times. Each
 loyal subject of the old King felt that Kabumpo had

 gone for help and would some day return to save
 them. Every night the guardsmen gathered in a distant
 corner of the royal gardens and tried to devise
 some way to seize and subdue their terrible Queen.
 But at the slightest sign of insurrection Faleero re-
 sorted to magic and after four of the guards had
 been turned to stone, the others sadly gave up the
 attempt.
                All but General Quakes. Indignation and fury
 burned in his tempery but honest breast and one
 night, after all his comrades had retired, he put on
 his best uniform, buckled on his largest sword and
 marched determinedly out of the city. Taking much
 the same direction Kabumpo had traveled, he set his
 face toward the Emerald City, determined to seek
 and obtain aid from Ozma herself. By some good
 fortune he skirted the River Road that had carried
 the Elegant Elephant so far out of his way and
 without any serious mishaps or encounters, reached
 the capital in safety-but only to discover that Ozma,
 the Wizard of Oz and the most famous and important
 of her advisers had gone to the castle of Glinda
 the Good Sorceress, who was celebrating her hundredth
 anniversary as Ruler of the South. And while
 the servants in the castle and the citizens themselves
 showed General Quakes every courtesy and listened

 with great sympathy to his story of the disasters in
 Pumperdink, they could do nothing at all to help him.
                So there was nothing for the General to do but
 march on to the south. He was dreadfully tired and
 footsore, but it took more than that to discourage
 this doughty patriot and after resting one night in
 Ozma's palace, he borrowed a tremendous pair of
 boots from the Soldier with Green Whiskers-his
 own being perfectly worn out-and set boldly out
 for Glinda's Red Castle.
  
 CHAPTER 17
  
 Ozwoz the Wonderful
  
 ONCE he had crossed into his own country,
 Kabumpo cheered up tremendously. Had he
 not successfully carried out his plans for saving the
 kingdom? On his back rode the famous Red Jinn
 of Ev, whose magic was ten times more powerful
 than the magic of Faleero. Before another day
 passed, Pumperdink would be restored to its rightful
 rulers and he, the Elegant Elephant of Oz, fittingly
 rewarded for his enterprise and bravery in
 bringing about the disenchantment of its sovereigns.

 He would put in a few good words for Randy, too,
 for surely the boy had proved himself on this journey.
 He would engage another attendant and Randy
 should henceforth be his friend and companion, free
 to go and come as he wished. Looking back at the
 handsome young mountaineer, Kabumpo gave him an
 affectionate wink and breaking into an old Gilliken
 ballad, sung, it must be confessed, through his trunk,
 swung cheerfully along the purple highway.
                Jinnicky had retired into his jar for his afternoon
 nap, and Randy, resting comfortably against Jinnicky's
 wicker seat, was speculating upon the further
 contents of the wizard's baskets. He was not paying
 much attention to the scenery and when Kabumpo,
 with a snort of displeasure, suddenly snatched off
 Jinnicky's red looking glasses, Randy leaped anxiously
 to his feet to see what had happened. Nothing,
 he discovered, had happened yet, but from what
 he saw, something was about to happen, something
 highly unpleasant and disastrous. The highway, cutting
 through a small wood, had come out and quite
 suddenly ended on the edge of a broad plain. Marching
 in level rows across the plain came an army of
 stiff and enormous soldiers each standing twice as
 high as an ordinary Oz man.
                "Jinnicky! Jinnicky! Wake up!" Pounding on

 Jinnicky's jar with the handle of his sword, Randy
 looked wildly over his shoulder. Kabumpo, thrusting
 the looking glasses in his pocket snatched up a
 tree by the roots and trumpeting like a steamboat
 whistle, prepared to defend himself. Wakened by
 Randy's taps and Kabumpo's furious snorting, Jinnicky
 stuck up his head. His sleepy eyes snapped
 wide open at sight of the advancing foe.
                "My mercy me!" puffed the little Jinn, bounding
 out of his seat and grabbing the handle of his left
 hand basket. "Another war? So soon? These military
 receptions are making me nervous, preserve us."
 Fumbling in the basket as he talked, Jinnicky
 dragged out his blue bottle, and though there was
 still quite a distance between, uncorked the incense
 and hurled it into the midst of the marching men.
 "Lucky this works in the daytime," he panted, catching
 hold of Randy to steady himself.
                "But it isn't!" shrilled Randy, clutching Jinnicky
 firmly around the waist. "They're still coming, they're
 aiming their guns. Great Gillikens, they're going to
 fire!" Dropping on his stomach, Randy pulled Jinnicky
 down beside him, and rolling over and over
 till he could reach his right hand basket, the Red
 Jinn pulled out a large blue vase and tossed it high

 into the air. The soldiers, squinting sternly along
 their gun barrels, were now so close that Randy
 could count the wooden buttons on their uniforms.
 But just as the guns with a thousand deafening
 bangs went off, the blue vase, expanding to enormous
 dimensions, swooped down over Kabumpo and his
 companions, covering and enclosing them completely.
 Bullets pattered like hail stones on the sides of
 their strange refuge and peering through the milky
 blue glass, Randy saw the soldiers charging in waves
 and columns and piling up in heaps around the base.
                "How long will this jug hold together?" wheezed
 Kabumpo, pressing his trunk against the sides. "You
 know, there's something extremely funny about this
 army, fellows, something strange, odd, not to say
 peculiar."
                "I agree with you," muttered Jinnicky, wiping off
 his red face with a bright silk handkerchief. "They
 are not real soldiers, or my blue incense would have
 rendered them insensible. A fortunate thing I had
 my expanding vase along. Otherwise we should have
 been shot and trampled to blotting paper."
                "Not before I'd mowed down a few rows," sniffed
 the Elegant Elephant a bit resentfully. "What was
 the big hurry anyway?"
                "You can't argue with bullets, my dear El." Jinnicky

 spoke kindly but firmly. "And here we will
 stay till they disperse, retreat and march back where
 they came from.
                "They're beginning to move off now," volunteered
 Randy, who had slid to the ground and was looking
 intently through the glass. "All but the ones who
 have fallen."
                "Well, why don't they pick themselves up?" scoffed
 Kabumpo. "Nobody shot them."
                "Because-they are wood!" announced Randy,
 after a long, incredulous stare. "I can see them
 quite plainly now and they're nothing but wooden
 soldiers, Kabumpo."
                "Well, wouldn't that curl your hair?" Pressing
 closer to the side of the vase, Kabumpo snapped his
 little eyes inquisitively at the retreating army and
 their fallen comrades heaped around the base of the
 curious stronghold.
                "My mercy me!" puffed Jinnicky, taking out a
 small red note book and making excited entries and
 notes. "My mercy me! A mechanical army, as I live!
 I'm getting lots of ideas on this journey, lads, and a
 mechanical army is the best of them all. Conquer
 your enemies without loss or inconvenience and when
 the troopers wear out their coats and uniforms, just

 give them a coat and trousers of paint. Clever, that.
 Eh, Randy?"
                "Wonder who owns them," mused the boy, rubbing
 his sleeve against the glass so he could see better.
 "Look, here comes somebody now!" Stepping briskly
 across the plain was a tall, exceedingly fine looking
 fellow in a dashing, wide-brimmed hat and long,
 sweeping cape. As he came nearer he seemed very
 much shocked and surprised at the enormous vase
 and its occupants. At a safe distance he viewed it
 from all sides.
                "Heave up this jug and I'll shake some sense into
 the impudent rascal," rumbled Kabumpo, beginning
 to swing his trunk angrily. But Jinnicky had a better
 plan. Climbing down the ladder he broke a large
 hole in the vase with his red umbrella. Tying a
 white handkerchief to the end of the umbrella, he
 thrust it through the opening and waited with
 scarcely concealed impatience for the enemy to approach.
 This the enemy did quite cheerfully, tramping
 unconcernedly over his fallen soldiers. For a
 long minute the stranger and the Red Jinn regarded
 one another but the stranger was the first to speak.
                "I am Ozwoz, the Wonderful," he announced in a
 pompous voice. "Who are you?"
                "I am the Red Jinn of Ev," answered Jinnicky,

 with dignity.
                "Im-agine!" drawled Ozwoz, stepping back to
 have a better look.
  
 "Imagine away, if you must, but take care;
 A Jinn who's insulted is dangerous. Beware!"
  
  
                "Well, thanks for warning me," yawned Ozwoz,
 pushing back his plumed hat in a bored fashion. "I
 intended to have my army destroy you utterly, but
 since they have failed, let's forget it and talk about
 something else.
                "Your manners are atrocious, sir!" Kabumpo, unable
 to contain himself any longer, glared at the
 cloaked figure. "How dare you try to annihilate innocent travelers?"
                "Oh, are you innocent travelers?" Ozwoz glanced
 curiously through the side of the vase at Kabumpo
 and Randy, and Randy, crowding close to the Red
 Jinn, spoke up boldly.
                "Are you a wizard?" he asked sternly. "If you are,
 you're breaking the law and you well know it. The
 practice of magic is forbidden in Ox."
                "Aha-but I am a wozard!" answered Ozwoz, with
 a superior smile, "And nothing has been said about

 wozardry in the laws of the country. But come, let
 us cease this useless chatter. Since I have failed
 to capture you, let me captivate you. As a host you
 will find me amusing and gay and since night draws
 on, perhaps you will honor me with your company in
 my castle.
                "Don't do it," warned Kabumpo in a hoarse whisper.
 "I wouldn't trust him as far as I could fling a
 ton of gold bricks." Jinnicky, rubbing his chin
 thoughtfully, considered the wozard's invitation.
                "Oh, come on, let's go," begged Randy, who was
 burning up with curiosity to know how Ozwoz operated
 his mechanical army. "I don't believe he'll
 try any more tricks. Besides, Jinnicky has plenty
 of magic himself." Ozwoz had walked off a few paces
 and stood gazing indifferently at the skyline while
 the three travelers made up their minds. When
 Jinnicky, after a little argument with Kabumpo,
 called out that they would be pleased to accept his
 kind invitation, the wozard nodded amiably. Taking
 out a small metal instrument, he clicked it seven
 times. Instantly the soldiers who had fallen rose up
 and at another set of signals from the wozard, faced
 about and started to march stiffly toward a small
 park ahead. Unhurriedly Ozwoz stalked behind them.
 Then Jinnicky, tapping the vase with his umbrella,

 dissolved the glass into smoke. He and Randy
 mounted the elephant and Kabumpo, very stiff and
 disapproving, followed the wozard to his Castle.
                It was a small, cozy castle set in the center of a
 neat park. Beside the castle stood a huge wooden
 armory and into this the wooden soldiers solemnly
 marched themselves. Their comrades were already
 in and ranged in rigid rows in the huge barracks.
 Taking their proper places in the ranks the newcomers,
 after marking time for a few seconds, ceased
 all motion and Ozwoz calmly locked them up for the
 night. There were two thousand of the wooden warriors
 and Jinnicky could scarcely conceal his envy.
                Ozwoz, now that he had given up all idea of destroying
 them, proved extremely likeable and friendly
 and did everything in his power to amuse them.
 While the wozard and Jinnicky discussed magic and
 sorcery, Kabumpo and Randy had a swim in the
 private pool of the palace. Then, greatly refreshed
 and as hungry as bears, they joined the two necromancers
 in the spacious dining hall. The wozard's
 servants were noiseless and invisible and served the
 dinner with such skill and dispatch that Kabumpo
 could not help feeling a grudging admiration for
 their master. They had thoughtfully supplied him

 with crushed raw vegetables and hay and he enjoyed
 his dinner quite as much as Randy and Jinnicky enjoyed
 the roast chicken and candied vegetables,
 strawberries and Ozade. Altogether it was a gay
 and memorable evening.
                After dinner Jinnicky did some magic transformations.
 These Ozwoz followed with some amazing
 tricks of his own and finally, after much arguing and
 coaxing, agreed to trade one of his wooden soldiers
 for the cooky jar that never was empty. When the
 great fellow, in answer to the wozard's summons,
 tramped stolidly into their presence, Randy could
 hardly contain himself. Ozwoz carefully explained
 how he worked. All his troopers, he told them, were
 named John and numbered from one to two thousand.
                "Then I hope you have given us a low number,"
 laughed Jinnicky, "for how would it be to call 'Forward
 march, John One Thousand Nine Hundred and
 Ninety-Nine?'" Ozwoz smiled at this and confessed
 that the soldier's name was John-one or Johnwan.
 The name, Randy decided, suited him very well.
 Johnwan's face was round and pleasant with a small
 brown painted moustache. His uniform was purple
 and white with twenty wooden buttons on the trousers
 and coat. A tall shako hat of white fur and
 real purple leather boots lent him dignity and importance.

 He carried his rifle, a magic, self-loading
 and cleaning affair, with careless assurance and
 grace and at a double click from the wozard, smartly
 saluted his new owners. Johnwan could obey seven
 commands. At one click of the starter he marched
 forward, at two, he faced about and marched in the
 opposite direction. At three, Johnwan halted, at four
 he fired off his gun, at five, he seized the enemy in
 his arms and held him till wanted. At six, he dropped
 his captive and at seven picked himself up if he had
 fallen. Even Kabumpo felt that the Red Jinn had
 made a good trade. He longed for the moment when
 he would march into Pumperdink with the giant
 wooden soldier tramping beside him.
                The swim and excellent supper had put the Elegant
 Elephant in a high good humor and before long
 he was telling Ozwoz the whole curious story of their
 adventures, for by this time they had entirely forgiven
 and almost forgotten the wozard's attempt to destroy
 them. Ozwoz was deeply interested in the
 King's enchantment and after referring to his maps
 told Kabumpo they were but three hills and a forest
 from their goal.
                After Jinnicky had sung a number of songs at his
 own request, after Kabumpo had rendered a few selections

 on the wozard's gold harp and Randy had
 showed Ozwoz the Gilliken clod and hop, they all retired and slept soundly and well till morning. Then,
 having eaten a hearty breakfast they bade Ozwoz
 a regretful farewell and in good spirits set out for
 Pumperdink. For a long time the wozard watched
 them marching across the purple plain. Then, as he
 had some new magic experiments to perfect, and
 wished to practice using his new cooky jar, he went
 into his castle and closed the door.
  
 CHAPTER 18
  
 The Elegant Elephant Uses His Head
  
 SO as not to waste any time, or take any wrong
 turnings, Kabumpo had again donned the Jinn 's
 red looking glasses. Jinnicky rode high and comfortably
 on his wicker seat; Randy, perched on Kabumpo's
 head held the metal controller that guided
 the action of Johnwan the soldier. Johnwan marched
 precisely and well, stepping so high that he seldom
 tripped and as he never talked back, argued or made
 foolish suggestions, he was an excellent addition to
 the party. Indeed, the Red Jinn was so delighted
 with Johnwan that he planned to build a wooden
 army of his own when he returned to Ev.

                "Then you may have Johnwan for a bodyguard,"
 he promised generously, "but first I must use him
 for a model."
                "Well, he certainly is a model soldier," chuckled
 Kabumpo, staring approvingly at the huge wooden
 figure tramping along just ahead of him. "He may
 be mighty useful when we reach Pumperdink."
                "By the way, have you planned any course of action
 when we do reach there?" inquired Jinnicky,
 noting with satisfaction that they had put one hill
 behind them. "Before I restore the Royal Family I
 must find the vanishing point, in other words, the
 exact spot on which each of them disappeared. My
 famous yellow incense will then do the rest, but we
 must be careful not to fall into Faleero's clutches or
 get ourselves captured or enchanted."
                "Is the blue incense all gone?" asked Randy, looking
 rather worried.
                "Every grain," answered Jinnicky, "and it's too
 bad, for that would have overcome Faleero and the
 whole population and given us plenty of time to
 work out our magic. My mercy me! How these hill
 roads do joggle one. There goes Johnwan over a
 tree stump." Randy hastily clicked the controller,
 brought the wooden soldier to his feet and headed

 him in the right direction, as Kabumpo thoughtfully
 mounted the second hill. He was not sure himself
 just what he would do when they reached Pumperdink.
 Perhaps if they rushed pell mell into the royal
 city and took Faleero by surprise, Jinnicky could
 work his magic before the old fury had time to try
 any witchwork, so, when Jinnicky asked him again
 what he planned to do, he merely flapped his great
 ears and informed him solemnly that he intended to
 use his head.
                "Very good," approved Jinnicky, clasping his
 hands over his middle. "Use your head by all means.
 It's big enough to serve all four of us. In fact I
 never saw a more long-headed creature in my life:
  
 "Long-headed, bee, hee!
 And three hearty ho, ho's !
 It's three yards from his eyes
 To the tip of his nose."
  
                "This is no time for joking," said Kabumpo, looking
 back severely at Jinnicky. "Besides, people in
 glass houses shouldn't throw stones."
                "That's so," agreed the Jinn quite amiably. "Are
 you referring to my glass palace or my jar?"
                "Oh, look!" put in Randy, anxious to change the

 subject before his two best friends got into a serious
 quarrel. "We can see the towers of Pumperdink's
 castle from here. Only one hill and a forest to go
 now!" Taking off the looking glasses long enough
 to assure himself that the towers showing above the
 tree tops were really those of the King's palace,
 Kabumpo with a long sigh of satisfaction clapped
 them on again and headed recklessly down the hill.
 The rest of the journey took barely an hour. The
 forest was the most difficult, for Johnwan kept bumping
 into trees. Randy found that if he walked beside
 the wooden warrior he could guide him easily
 around them, though he had to run to keep up with
 Johnwan's long strides. But fortunately the forest
 was small and when at last they stepped out they
 found themselves on the King's Highway that led
 directly into Pumperdink. It was a little after noon,
 and Randy rather nervously wished Kabumpo and
 Johnwan were not so big and conspicuous.
                "Maybe we'd better wait till night," suggested the
 boy, mounting Jinnicky's ladder and seating himself
 on Kabumpo's head. But Kabumpo shook his head.
                "The people of Pumperdink will know I have come
 to help them," he stated calmly. "When they get a
 glimpse of Johnwan and our friend yonder," Kabumpo

 swung his trunk carelessly in Jinnicky's direction,
 "they will fall in behind us and by the time
 we reach the palace we'll have a regular army of
 rebellion."
                Kabumpo was right. No sooner had they entered
 the gates of the city than the Pumperdinkians gathered
 around them in huge crowds, and throwing fear
 and discretion to the winds, shouted their welcome
 at the top of their voices. Those in their houses, looking
 out to see what the commotion was about, hastily
 joined the others and seizing sticks, brooms, spades
 and umbrellas, ran joyfully after Kabumpo and
 Johnwan. Most of them were a dark purple from
 frequent dippings in the royal well, but Kabumpo
 and Randy, Johnwan and Jinnicky put new courage
 and confidence into Pompus' downtrodden and sorely
 abused subjects. Yelling threats and defiance they
 proceeded boldly to the palace. The guards, brandishing
 their pikes, fell in step with Johnwan and
 by the time Faleero, followed by her three old ladies
 in waiting, heard the deafening uproar and rushed
 out to see what was the matter, the rebels were already
 mounting the steps of the imperial palace.
 Faleero, astonished by the unexpected appearance
 of Kabumpo and the giant soldier and the extreme
 suddenness of the uprising, gave a howl of anger and

 in high, indignant screeches ordered the crowd to
 disperse.
                Randy, closely watching Johnwan mount the steps,
 made ready to halt the giant soldier the minute they
 reached the top. But as Johnwan, closely followed by
 Kabumpo, stepped up on the broad flagged terrace
 before the palace door, Faleero flung up her arms
 and hissed three shrill magic incantations. Kabumpo,
 in the act of snatching the old fury, was
 halted so abruptly that he turned a complete somersault,
 hurling Randy and Jinnicky to the ground.
 Randy, shocked by the fall and without intending
 in the least to do so, clicked Johnwan's controller five
 times and the wozard's wooden soldier, whom magic
 could not stop or injure, obeying the order to seize
 the enemy, grasped Faleero in his wooden arms,
 marched straight through the front door of the palace
 and out of the back, on and on, tramping steadily
 and calmly through the park, the fields beyond and
 finally disappearing over a purple hilltop.
 As soon as Johnwan had seized Faleero the whole
 company, which had been halted by her magic, found
 themselves able to move again. Kabumpo, who was
 quite ridiculously standing on his head, quickly assumed
 a more usual and dignified position. Randy,

 not realizing that he had given Johnwan the signal
 to seize the enemy, now jumped up and ran wildly
 after him.
                "Stop! Come back! Johnwan! Johnwan!" he
 called frantically. But Johnwan was already far
 away and could neither hear nor obey him. Suddenly
 remembering the metal controller, Randy rushed
 back to look for it. But when he was flung from
 Kabumpo's back it had rolled out of his hand and
 though he searched and searched he could find no
 trace of it. The Pumperdinkians, overjoyed at the
 disappearance of the evil old Queen were hugging
 one another, dancing jigs and in vociferous shouts
 and songs expressing their satisfaction and approval.
 Jinnicky, who had landed flat on his nose in the palace
 doorway, now rolled over and as Randy came
 hurrying breathlessly toward him pulled himself up
 by the gold door jamb.
                "My mercy me!" he spluttered, looking reproach-
 fully at Kabumpo. "I'm cracked, jarred and positively
 jellied. You told me you intended to use
 your head, old Gaboscis, but I never expected you to
 stand on it. My mercy me! Travel is very broadening,
 very broadening indeed!" He rubbed his nose
 tenderly, for it had suffered a complete flattening.
 "Where is that old woman and what happened?"

                "Johnwan has her!" panted Randy. "And he's
 marching on and on and dear knows where to. I've
 lost the metal signal and we'll never see him again."
                "You must have given him the command to seize
 the enemy when you fell," wheezed Kabumpo,
 straightening his jeweled headpiece. "And a grumpy
 good thing, too."
                "But who's to stop Johnwan and what will become
 of him?" wailed Randy, staring disconsolately at the
 Jinn. "Will he just march on till he falls into the
 sea or is burned up on the Deadly Desert?"
                "I suppose so," sighed Jinnicky, taking off his lid
 and scratching his red head sorrowfully, "and it's
 a mean shame, for now I shall have no mechanical
 army. But never mind. He has served us faithfully
 and well in carrying off Faleero, for remember,
 wherever he goes, she goes too. Do speak to your
 countrymen, El, old fellow. Tell them if they return
 quietly to their homes I will restore their rightful
 sovereigns as soon or sooner than possible." This
 Kabumpo was only too glad to do, and with repeated
 bows to the Red Jinn and resounding cheers
 the crowd began to move off, and, much relieved, the
 rescue party hurried into the palace. The servants
 and courtiers had seen Faleero carried off by the

 giant soldier and knowing they had nothing to fear
 gave Kabumpo and his friends a rousing welcome
 and did everything they could to help with the disenchantment.
 Going immediately to the royal dining
 hall, Kabumpo had footmen place chairs in the exact
 places where the King, Queen, Prince Pompa, Princess
 Peg Amy and the little Princess had sat at the
 ill-fated dinner. Finding the exact spot on which the
 Prime Pumper had stood was more difficult. But as
 Kabumpo remarked to Randy, the old goose had so
 little wit and was of so little importance, it would
 be no great matter if he stayed out of sight forever.
                The Red Jinn had now taken out his bottle of yellow
 incense and after sprinkling a few grains on
 each chair and the approximate spot where Pumper
 had stood, began whirling round and round like a
 top, mumbling an indistinguishable jargon of magic
 words and sentences. Randy was so interested that
 he almost forgot to breathe and Kabumpo, his ears
 fairly quivering with suspense and excitement, kept
 his eyes glued on the empty chairs. The servants
 and courtiers had been sent from the room, but
 through the curtains and cracks in the doors they
 peered with eager interest and curiosity. After
 whirling for three full minutes, Jinnicky came to a
 standstill, calling in a loud imperious voice:

                "I do now command you to reappear, most Royal
 Rulers and Imperial Family of Pumperdink. Reappear,
 do you hear!" Taking off his lid, Jinnicky
 stared intently at the golden chairs. But to his furious
 consternation, to Randy's and Kabumpo's deep
 disappointment, nothing happened at all. After staring
 at the chairs so hard that their eyes began to
 water, the three friends looked anxiously at one
 another.
                "Great Grump! Is your powder wet? Have you
 forgotten your magic, or what?" choked Kabumpo,
 almost ready to cry with vexation.
                "Neither!" Jinnicky flopped disconsolately down
 on the King's footstool. "They have not vanished,
 after all They have been transformed."
                "Transformed?" exploded Kabumpo wrathfully.
 "Well, untransform them!"
                "But first we must discover to what they have been
 changed," said Jinnicky, a bit stiffly. "Say, where's
 that other rascal? Fetch in that false King. Where's
 Kettywig?" Running to the kitchen door, Jinnicky
 banged it open so violently that the cook and four
 footmen who were taking turns at the keyhole fell
 headlong into the room.
                "Yes! Yes! Yes! Yes!" mumbled the servants,

 bouncing up like balls and disappearing in four different
 directions. But when Kettywig was brought
 from the tower he could tell them nothing. In piteous
 tones he explained how he had been half starved
 and locked up by the wicked old fairy. Faleero had
 planned everything and he knew nothing at all about
 magic or transformations, and heartily wished himself
 back in his quiet village.
                "Humph I" sniffed Jinnicky contemptuously. "A
 fine looking ruler you are, with all those bumps and
 scratches. Take away this hand-decorated King, and
 when we settle more important matters we'll deal
 with him as he deserves." Randy felt a little sorry
 for the forlorn and hungry looking fellow. He felt
 that Kettywig had already been punished enough,
 but thinking it best not to interfere, he said nothing.
 There were, as Jinnicky had said, so many more
 important matters to be cleared up. He sighed as he
 thought of Johnwan tramping on and on through
 deserts and over mountains. Even now his handsome
 soldier might be crumpled up at the bottom of some
 gorge or ravine or stuck in the mud of some deep
 mountain lake. Johnwan was to have belonged to
 him some day and he hated to have him broken or
 destroyed. So he sighed again as he looked inquiringly
 at Kabumpo and Jinnicky.

                The Jinn had taken down both wicker baskets and
 was rummaging first in one and then in the other.
 He had just brought out a tube-like red bottle when
 the castle bell pealed noisily. Randy, rushing after
 the footman who opened the door, saw six people
 standing on the step. A dark-haired Princess wearing
 a tall, emerald-studded crown, a little girl, a
 fellow with a pumpkin head, a funny, bald-headed
 old gentleman, a scarecrow and General Quakes.
                "Why, it's Ozma!" gulped Kabumpo, who was right
 in back of Randy, "and the Wizard of Oz! Dorothy,
 my dear, how are you? And the Scarecrow, as I
 live! Now everything will be fine! Jinnicky,
 Jinnick-y! Here's the Wizard!" While Kabumpo in
 flowery phrases and with wide gestures continued
 to welcome the celebrities, Randy dashed back to
 the Red Jinn. He found Jinnicky sitting glumly on
 the King's footstool.
                "Now everything's ruined," he groaned, rolling his
 glass eyes tragically at the boy. "Why does that
 meddling Wizard have to come fooling around just
 as I'm beginning to get my magic working? Now
 he'll take all the credit and I might just as well have
 stayed at home." Randy could not help sympathizing
 with him. He, too, would have liked to see

 Jinnicky restore Pumperdink's sovereigns without
 any help. Suddenly a splendid idea popped into his
 head.
                "Come on!" he whispered mysteriously. "Come on,
 before they see us." Taking a wicker basket in each
 hand he ran out into the kitchen, through the kitchen
 door and on into the castle garden, the little Jinn
 pattering inquiringly behind him.
  
 CHAPTER 19
  
 More Mysteries
  
 GENERAL QUAKES, as you have probably
 guessed, had finally reached Glinda's palace in
 the Quadling country. Pouring out the story of
 Pumperdink's misfortune he begged Ozma to return
 with him and save his unhappy country from
 Faleero. This Ozma had immediately agreed to do,
 bringing Dorothy, the Wizard of Oz, the Scarecrow,
 and Jack Pumpkinhead along. They had come on
 one of the Wizard's wishing pills, and being wished
 a place is much, much simpler than traveling by the
 usual methods. Indeed, five minutes after General
 Quakes had arrived at Glinda's, Ozma and her councilors
 were standing on the steps of Pompus' purple

 palace.
                Dorothy, a little mortal girl from Kansas who
 lives with Ozma in the Emerald City and who has
 been in several adventures with Kabumpo, begged
 him to lead them at once to the scene of the disappearance.
 The Scarecrow, that amiable, straw-stuffed
 gentleman, knew him too, and while Kabumpo
 had a sly habit of snatching wisps of straw
 from his person, he was, notwithstanding, quite fond
 of the elegant old pachyderm. As they all hurried
 along the corridor, Kabumpo told them of his journey
 to the Red Jinn's castle and of the soothsayer's
 prediction that only the Red Jinn could help restore
 the vanished ones. Then he explained how Johnwan
 had carried off Faleero and all that had happened
 after their arrival in Pumperdink.
 "Then we're too late," exclaimed the little Wizard,
 looking terribly annoyed. "If this Red Jinn is as
 powerful as you say, he has probably solved the
 whole mystery by this time." Wagging his head sadly
 Kabumpo described the failure of Jinnicky's yellow
 incense, at which the Wizard cheered up immediately.
 If he succeeded where the Red Jinn had
 failed, it would be a real feather in his cap. Feeling
 that his reputation as Wizard of Oz was at stake,

 he almost trod on Kabumpo's heels in his anxiety
 to reach the scene of action. Transformations were
 right in his line and he felt sure that in his famous
 black bag there was magic enough to undo all of
 Faleero's spells and enchantments. Ozma was a fairy,
 herself, so quite confidently they entered the dining
 hall of the castle to restore King Pompus to his
 throne. Kabumpo was surprised not to find Randy
 and the Red Jinn, and apologetically explained that
 they must have stepped out for a minute. Dorothy
 and Ozma were eager to meet the famous little wizard
 of Ev for Jack Pumpkinhead had given them glowing
 descriptions of the Red Jinn's red glass palace,
 and his magic dinner bell was now one of the important
 treasures of Oz. But the Wizard of Oz was
 secretly delighted. In the absence of Jinnicky he
 hoped to restore the royal family himself. Opening
 his black bag he began carefully laying out his magic
 powders, bottles and instruments.
                Meanwhile, Jinnicky and Randy had reached the
 end of the garden and leaning breathlessly against
 the hedge, Randy disclosed his plan.
                "All you have to do is to put on your looking
 glasses and ask them to take us to the King," whispered the boy. "Whatever made us forget?"
                "My mercy me! The very thing! The very thing!"
 Kabumpo had returned Jinnicky's specs soon after

 Faleero had been carried off by Johnwan. Taking
 them from his sleeve the Red Jinn put them on and
 started to run as fast as his little legs would carry
 him through Pompus' private park. Randy, seeing a
 small donkey tied to a tree and thinking the glasses
 might take them a long way, untied the small creature
 and ran after Jinnicky. Fortunately the donkey
 was strong and gentle and helping the little
 Jinn to his back, Randy mounted up behind. With
 a resigned sigh Jinnicky transferred his glasses to
 the donkey's nose and away went the little animal
 at break-neck speed straight into Follensby Forest.
 With his arms clasped around the donkey's neck, expecting
 to fly over its ears any minute, Jinnicky
 blinked, groaned and shuddered while Randy,
 weighed down by the wicker baskets, had all he
 could do to keep his seat. Both had imagined the
 victims of Faleero's magic would be quite near the
 castle and noted with growing alarm that the donkey
 was carrying them deeper and deeper into Follensby
 Forest.
                When, after an hour or so, he pushed his way
 through a cluster of vines and bushes, galloped across
 a small clearing and straight into Faleero's shabby
 hut, Randy gave a scream of surprise. Trotting over

 to the fireplace, the donkey lifted his head, brayed
 six times and came to a complete standstill. Then
 closing his eyes and dropping one hip he seemed to
 lose all interest in the affair. The fireplace was simply
 enormous, taking up the whole side of the cabin
 and making the little room look smaller even than
 it was. Recovering his specs, Jinnicky slid to the
 floor and poked his head inquiringly up the chimney.
                "Do you suppose they are up there?" he puffed, as
 Randy jumped down and set the wicker baskets on
 a chair. The windows were so small and dirty that
 it was quite dim and dark inside the hut. It smelled
 musty and damp, and shivering a little, Randy began
 to look around. Jinnicky was tapping the bricks
 about the fireplace, examining the clock and broken
 vases on the mantel, picking up the fire tongs, shovel
 and hearth broom-for any of these objects might
 easily be the King and his family.
                "If I just had a bit more light," he murmured discontentedly,
 "I might be able to see what I am about.
 Are there any lamps or candles around, my boy?"
 Randy, with the same idea in mind, had searched
 both rooms on the first floor and now, feeling his way
 up the rickety steps, he looked carefully in the two
 rooms above. But there was not a candle, match or
 lamp to be found.

                "How about lighting a fire?" he proposed, coming
 back to the hearth where Jinnicky was squinting
 earnestly at the iron fender. "Only we have no
 matches," he added ruefully.
                "Pooh, I can easily start a fire with my red incense.
 Fetch the red bottle, Randy, and be quick, be quick,
 or the Wizard of Oz will be stealing a march on us
 and working his magic before I have a chance to try
 mine." The fire was all ready to start and pushing
 the donkey out of the way, Randy, following Jinnicky's
 instructions, sprinkled the red incense over
 the kindling and logs and snapped his fingers four
 times. The paper and kindling caught at once and
 as Randy seized the poker to adjust the logs better,
 an ear-piercing scream went up the chimney. Dropping
 the poker, Randy fell against Jinnicky, and
 small wonder! The end of the first log to catch fire
 was changing to a face, the frightened face of Pumper,
 the King's Prime Minister! As Randy and the
 Jinn looked on in horror, the King's head crackled
 merrily from the end of the second log, and his royal
 feet, ensconced in purple boots, beat a wild tattoo on
 the log underneath.
                "Oh! Oh! Oh!" shrieked Randy, hopping from one
 foot to the other. "They'll be burned up. Jinnicky,

 Jinnicky! What'll we do? Where's some water?
 Wait, I'll go for some water!" But Jinnicky, seizing
 Randy by both wrists held him fast.
                "They're not burning," spluttered the Red Jinn
 breathlessly. "Be still! Stay here! If you put out
 that fire they'll have to stay part logs and part people
 forever. The only way to restore people who have
 been turned to wood is to burn the wood."
                "But this is awful!" choked the Gilliken boy, trying
 his best to pull away. And awful indeed it was
 to see the half logs and half people crackling and
 blazing away in Faleero's grate. Pumper had stopped
 screaming and the others, making no sound at all,
 stared with solemn eyes through the flames at the
 two figures on the hearth.
                "How long will it take?" gasped Randy. "Oh,
 Jinnicky, can't you hurry it up a little? I can't bear
 it!" Jinnicky did not answer but dropped Randy's
 wrists and opening his eyes, which for the moment
 he had shut tight, Randy saw King Pompus gravely
 helping the Queen over the fender; Prince Pompadore
 and Peg Amy with the baby princess in her
 arms came next, and last of all, Pumper, looking
 terribly frightened and ill at ease. They were still
 smoking but seemed perfectly comfortable.
                "How can I ever thank you?" wheezed the King,

 seizing the Red Jinn by both shoulders and embracing
 him heartily.
                "Thank him!" cried Jinnicky, waving his arm at
 Randy. "He started the fire, so he is really responsible for your disenchantment."
                "Why, it's the little grape eater!" exclaimed
 Pompus, turning to Randy in honest surprise. "Well,
 well, and well! Give me your hand, young one."
                "Oh, do tell us what happened!" begged the Queen.
 "I remember nothing since picking the fire rose, but
 I am sure some great misfortune has befallen."
                "I told you not to pick those flowers," muttered
 Prince Pompadore, shaking the ashes out of his
 pockets. "I'll wager that traveling magician was at
 the bottom of the whole business."
                "Where's Kabumpo? I want to hear the rest of
 the story about the pink goat," wailed Pajonia, blinking
 sleepily over her mother's shoulder.
                "There's more than one story to be told, my child,"
 sniffed Jinnicky, rolling his red glass eyes solemnly
 from one to the other. "And if your Highnesses will
 be seated, I will endeavor to tell you all, or a small
 part of all that has happened."
                So, regardless of dust and grime, the royal family
 of Pumperdink sat down on the wooden benches beside
 the still smoldering fire and Jinnicky proceeded

 to tell them of Faleero's wickedness and Kettywig's treachery.
                "And you came all the way from Ev to help us,"
 mused Peg Amy, smiling at the rosy little Jinn.
 "What ever can we do to repay you? Why, you and
 Randy and Kabumpo have saved the whole kingdom."
                "Don't forget Johnwan," piped up Randy. "Oh say,
 Jinnicky, I've just thought of something. Lend me
 your looking glasses, quick!" Without waiting for
 Jinnicky to say yes, Randy pulled the specs from the
 Red Jinn's nose and ran hurriedly out of the cabin.
 "My mercy me! Stop him! Stop him!" cried Jinnicky,
 running round in a frenzied circle. "The
 boy's gone after that great wooden soldier and will
 be lost destroyed or stolen. Oh! Oh! Oh! He's
 the best and only boy friend I have ever had." But
 by the time they reached the door Randy had disappeared.
 Pretending to search for him further,
 Pumper, who was heartily ashamed of himself and
 anxious to escape before the King got round to his
 case, slipped into the forest running as fast and as
 far as he could. Where he went, I have no idea. I
 only know he was never heard of or seen in Pumperdink
 again, and as Kabumpo often remarked to
 Pompus, a grumpy good thing it was, too!
                Without noticing the disappearance of the Prime
 Pumper, the King and his family and the Red Jinn

 decided to return to the palace. Placing Queen Pozy,
 Princess Peg Amy and Pajonia on the donkey, the
 King and Prince Pompadore and Jinnicky set out on
 foot through the forest. The King led the donkey;
 Prince Pompadore and Jinnicky walked together,
 Pompa carrying the heavy wicker baskets, and so
 happy were they all to be released from the wicked
 enchantments that they scarcely noticed the inconveniences
 of walking. But it took a long, long time
 and it was almost night when they finally reached the castle.
 Lights blazed from every window and while the
 Wizard feverishly tried one spell after another, the
 servants were preparing a great feast to celebrate
 their Majesties' return. Kabumpo had assured them
 that the Wizard of Oz would produce the royal family
 in time for dinner, and when the chief footman saw
 them wearily mounting the castle steps he gave a
 loud cheer for the Wizard and forgetting his dignity
 -also his decorum-hugged the Kings kissed the
 donkey and dashed into the palace to break the wonderful
 news to the others. So, as the little procession
 moved toward the throne room, Ozma and her councilors
 rushed out of the dining hall, and followed by
 the courtiers and servants, completely surrounded
 the little party.

                "Three cheers for the Wizard of Oz!" they shouted
 hysterically. "Three cheers for the Wizard!"
                "Wizard!" cried Jinnicky indignantly. "The Wizard
 had nothing to do with it. 'Twas Randy, this
 honest mountain lad, who turned the trick and released
 their Royal Highnesses!"
                "Ah, but you all have helped us," put in Queen
 Pozy, tactfully sliding off the donkey and holding
 both hands out to the Sovereign of all Oz.
                "We never, never, never can thank you enough!
 And if it had not been for Kabumpo, where would
 we have been by now?" The Elegant Elephant looked
 pleased but self-conscious and after the whole family
 had shaken his trunk and the little princess had
 blown him three kisses, he suddenly missed Randy.
                "Where's the boy?" he asked, and picking Jinnicky
 up in his trunk he stared anxiously into his eyes.
 "Speak up! Speak up, can't you?"
                "How am I to speak any other way?" grinned the
 little Jinn, making swimming motions in the air.
 "Put me down, El, there's a good fellow."
                "But what happened?" asked Dorothy.
                "Yes, how did a young lad, unpracticed in magic,
 succeed where all our art failed?" demanded the
 Wizard of Oz in a peppery voice.
                "Chance! Pure chance," murmured Jinnicky,

 winking a red glass eye at the Wizard. "Your magic
 is not very swift, my dear Wiz, not so swift as I was
 led to suppose."
                "Now! Now!" put in the Scarecrow, wagging his
 crooked finger at the Jinn. "Green magic may not
 be as swift as red magic, but it's far prettier!"
                "Where's Randy?" roared Kabumpo, giving Jinnicky
 an impatient shake.
                "Gone off with my magic glasses to find the wooden
 soldier," announced Jinnicky ruefully. "My mercy
 me, Eli, we'll have to go after him at once! If your
 Highnesses will excuse us-" Jinnicky took off his
 lid and bowed as well as he could in his precarious
 position. The King, not to be outdone, took off his
 crown and while Kabumpo, still holding Jinnicky in
 his trunk, simply dashed out of the throne room,
 Prince Pompadore explained to his curious listeners
 all that had happened in Faleero's hut.
                "Where shall we look first?" demanded Kabumpo,
 plunging down the steps of the castle two at a time.
 "Great Grump, what's this?" A huge figure, so covered
 with mud and water weeds as to be entirely
 indistinguishable, stepped stiffly across the courtyard.
 Beside him trudged the Gilliken boy whistling cheerily
 and unconcernedly.

 "Randy! Randy, my boy, how did you get back
 so soon?"
 "Back?" called Randy in surprise. "Why, I never
 went away." Clicking the instrument that controlled
 Johnwan, he brought the muddy warrior to a neat
 halt before his two comrades. "I just put on Jinnicky's
 specs and asked them to find Johnwan's signal,"
 explained Randy eagerly. "I ran away from
 Faleero's hut and the looking glasses brought me
 right to this terrace, and pressed in the gold dust
 between the flags I discovered the controller."
                "Then what?" asked Jinnicky.
 "Why, then," continued Randy, In a matter of fact
 voice, "thinking Johnwan might have fallen, I gave
 him the signal to rise, face about and march home.
 And you see it worked, for here he is!"
                "Very good!" approved Jinnicky. "Get a hose!"
                "That won't be necessary," rumbled Kabumpo. Setting
 Jinnicky on the ground he waddled over to the
 fountain, filled his trunk with water and gave Johnwan
 several complete and cleansing showers. Soon
 all the mud was washed away, and the wooden soldier,
 a bit worse for wear and tear and with the unconscious
 Faleero still under his arm, emerged.
 "Well, I hope this will be a lesson to her," muttered
 Jinnicky severely. "'I'll bet Johnwan has

 walked on the bottom of a dozen lakes."
 "But what shall we do with her now?" demanded
 Randy worriedly. "She may come to any minute."
 "Oh, let the King decide," sniffed the Red Jinn
 airily. "We've done our share and I'm hungry!"
  
 CHAPTER 20
  
 "The Purple Prince Has Earned His Crown!"
  
 JOHNWAN, in spite of his washed out appearance,
 caused a real sensation when he stalked into the
 throne room with Faleero, who had recovered her
 senses, screaming and kicking under his arm. Ozma,
 always quick to think and act, immediately touched
 her magic belt and before the old fairy could cause
 further mischief or unhappiness turned her to a
 raven. Croaking with fright and anger Faleero flew
 out of the window and that was the last anyone ever
 saw or heard of the Princess of Follensby Forest.
 The three old ladies in waiting had already fled back
 to the hut in the clearing. Kettywig, after a stern
 lecture, had been sent home, and so, in complete possession
 of his crown, his kingdom, his family and his
 castle, Pompus proudly led his distinguished guests

 and rescuers into dinner.
                The cook who had been turned into a cocoanut pie
 -which, fortunately, nobody had eaten-had been
 restored by Ozma to his proper shape; also the four
 guardsmen, so that all was as before and everyone
 was happy and content.
                Now there have been many feasts and celebrations
 in the palace of Pumperdink, but the feast celebrating
 the restoration of the lost sovereigns surpassed
 them all. The chefs had truly outdone themselves and
 the jolly red face of Jinnicky, who was seated between
 the prince and princess, shone with enjoyment
 and satisfaction. Beside the King at the head of the
 table sat Ozma of Oz and Randy. On either side of
 the Queen, at the foot, sat The Wizard of Oz and
 Dorothy. The Scarecrow was next to Princess Pajonia
 and she crowed with delight at his droll tricks
 and stories. Johnwan stood stiffly at attention behind
 Randy's chair and Kabumpo, after swallowing
 three bales of hay and a dozen buckets of peanuts,
 ambled round the table laughing and joking with
 everyone.
 The King and his courtiers could not hear enough
 of the strange adventures of Randy, the Elegant Elephant
 and the Red Jinn, and all over and in great
 detail Kabumpo told the entire story. The. Scarecrow

 was highly interested in the Guide Post Man and
 meant to hunt him up at his first opportunity. Ozma
 was curious to learn all about the Double King, while
 Nandywog, the little giant, pleased Dorothy best of
 all. The Wizard, after noting in his green memorandum
 book the exact location of Torpedo Town, got
 into a lively argument with Jinnicky about red magic.
                They had quite forgotten their professional jealousies
 and while each realized that without Jinnicky's
 looking glasses little could have been done,
 as Randy had actually brought about the release of
 the Royal Family, neither felt that he had triumphed
 over the other, and in consequence they were fast becoming
 friends. Indeed, by ice cream and cake time,
 there was such a feeling of good fellowship and
 jollity that the very candles seemed to jig in their
 holders. Even the solemn-faced footmen forgot their
 pomposity and importance and joined boisterously in
 the singing of Pumperdink's National Air.
                After the last note had died away, Pompus rose
 with as much dignity as his happiness and weight
 would permit and offered Randy a permanent home
 in the palace with the title of Younger Prince of the
 Realm. At this the cheering was deafening, Kabumpo
 trumpeting his approval above all the rest.

 But before Randy could accept Jinnicky bounced to
 his feet and declared that Randy was to return with
 him. He intended to make him his sole heir, sharer
 of his magic formulas and ruler after him in his
 mighty dominions in Ev. Ozma and Dorothy smiled
 sympathetically and the whole company in breathless
 interest waited for the mountain boy to make his
 choice. But he never did, for as he stood up and
 bowed first to the King and then to Jinnicky, there
 came a loud and sudden crash and in through the
 shattered glass of the long window behind the King
 shot two thin and excited old gentlemen. The first
 wore a tall, pointed cap and a long cloak covered
 with stars and moons. The second was dressed in
 purple satin knee breeches and doublet with a fine
 three-cornered hat. He carried a velvet cushion on
 which there blazed a tall and splendid crown of
 amethyst. The royal diners and celebrities were too
 astonished to move or speak, but the gentleman in
 the three-cornered hat promptly saved them that
 trouble. Skipping over to Randy, he called out in a
 high, trembling voice:
                "The Prince of the Purple Mountain has earned his
 crown and won his Kingdom! Randywell, Handywell,
 Brandenburg Bompadoo, I hereby crown you
 King of Regalia and all the Regalians! Long live

 King Randy!" Placing the crown on Randy's head,
 Hoochafoo, for it was Hoochafoo, as you have guessed
 all along, embraced his nephew so heartily that the
 crown fell off and rolled under the table.
                "A King!" coughed Kabumpo, falling against a
 pillar. "And to think he once fastened my collars.
 Great Grump! I said he was no common mountain
 boy." While the company recovered from their surprise
 and amazement as best they could, a footman
 hastily restored Randy's crown, and Jinnicky, bounding
 out of his chair, was the first to congratulate the
 new ruler.
                "I liked you from the very first," declared the
 Red Jinn, clapping Randy on the back and then embracing him affectionately. "And remember, if you
 ever tire of your own kingdom you can always have
 half of mine!"
                "And mine!" boomed Pompus heartily.
                "And mine," echoed little Princess Pajonia, waving
 her golden spoon.
                "But tell us, how did you come here?" begged
 Ozma, turning curiously to the wise man. "And tell
 us how Randy happened to be disguised and why he
 came to Pumperdink in the first place?"
                "We came by the magic of the amethyst ball,"
 answered Chalulu impressively. "In Regalia, a kingdom

 of which your Highness may have heard, it is
 the law that when the King shall disappear, retire
 or cease to rule, his son shall go forth on a journey
 of adventure and alone and without help prove his
 fitness to receive the crown. Without knowing the
 conditions of this scroll," Chalulu raised the long
 parchment roll in one hand, "the Prince must fulfill
 all its tests. When this is done, the amethyst ball
 in the palace transports me, the oldest wise man
 and the oldest member of the King's family, to the
 exact spot where he happens to be. Each time his
 Highness fulfilled a condition of the test, the ball
 flashed fire. Seven flashes told us he had successfully
 passed them all and the eighth flash brought
 us to this strange imperial palace." Chalulu bowed
 to King Pompus, then to Queen Pozy and then to
 all of the others. "And here we are happy to find
 our young King in a distinguished company of
 friends and celebrities."
 "Oh, yes!" Randy assured him quickly. "I shall
 hate to leave here, uncle."
                "What were those conditions you were talking
 about?" asked Kabumpo, in a muffled voice to hide
 his grief at losing Randy. The very thought of the
 separation made the poor elephant choke and sputter.
                "Well," sniffed the wise man, who enjoyed being

 the center of attention. "Suppose I read them."
                A chair was brought for Uncle Hoochafoo and
 while all the others resumed their seats, the wise
 man read the conditions from the royal scroll of
 Regalia. Randy was perhaps the most interested
 listener, for though he knew he must prove himself
 in seven ways, he had not known the nature of the
 tests he must pass at all.
                "The prince," began Chalulu, looking benevolently
 at Randy over his specs, "must first make three true
 friends."
 "Kabumpo was the first," said the boy, putting
 his arm around the Elegant Elephant's trunk, for
 Kabumpo had come to stand right beside him. "And
 I suppose Nandywog was the second. Jinnicky certainly
 was the third, but now I have hundreds!" He
 glanced proudly down the long table and with smiles,
 nods and approving cheers the gay company assured
 him that he had.
                "Second, the prince must serve a strange King,"
 announced Chalulu, when at last the cheering had
 died away.
                "I was the King, but I am a strange King no
 longer. You certainly served me, my boy, served
 me right!" Placing his hand on Randy's shoulder,

 Pompus beamed at Regalia's newly crowned sovereign.
                "Third, he must save a Queen," continued the
 wise man in a calm voice.
                "I was the Queen." Waving her silk handkerchief,
 Pozy nodded happily at her rescuer.
                "Fourth, the prince must prove his bravery in
 battle," read Chahulu without looking up.
                "Pooh, he proved his bravery dozens and dozens
 of times," trumpeted Kabumpo proudly, "but the
 first and best was when he caught that bundle of
 blazing twigs and threw them back at Faleero."
                "Fifth, ahem-fifth !" Chalulu cleared his throat
 and waited a few minutes for silence, "fifth, the
 prince must overcome a fabulous monster."
                "Well, he did that, too," cried Jinnicky. "Upon the
 combinoceros he fell and saved himself and us!"
 "Sixth, the prince must disenchant a princess,"
 continued Chalulu imperturbably.
 "He did more than that," Peg Amy assured them,
 holding little princess Pajonia high in her arms.
 "He disenchanted two princesses and a prince, so
 three cheers for Randywell, Handywell, Brandenburg
 Bompadoo!"
                "And lastly," finished the wise man, as Randy,
 overcome by embarrassment, got behind Kabumpo,
 "lastly, he must receive from a wizard some important

 magic treasure."
                "Oh, that's Johnwan!" exclaimed Randy coming
 out eagerly. "Look, Uncle Hoochafoo, this great
 wooden soldier is mine. Jinnicky gave him to me and
 as soon as he copies him for his own army, he's coming
 to Regalia to be my bodyguard."
                "Dear, dear, dear!" murmured Uncle Hoochafoo,
 drawing out his monocle and eyeing Johnwan dubiously.
 "Is this a magic treasure?"
 "Of course! Of course!" Clicking Johnwan's control,
 Randy made him face about, march and salute
 and even the wise man had to admit the points and
 excellence of the wooden warrior. By the time the
 excitement following the crowning of Randy and
 the reading of the scroll had died down, by the time
 the wise man and Hoochafoo had been told the story
 of the new King's adventures, the clock in the great
 tower had tolled two, and in spite of their interest
 and thankfulness the company began to yawn and
 blink with weariness. Pompus begged all his royal
 visitors to spend not only the night but a week in
 his palace. Ozma, however, had important matters
 to settle in the Emerald City next day and after expressing
 her happiness and delight at the satisfactory
 way everything had turned out she left on a

 fast wish with Dorothy, the Wizard, Jack and the
 Scarecrow. Randy would dearly have loved to stay,
 but his uncle and the wise man, feeling that the
 formal coronation must take place at once, insisted
 that they must leave immediately for Regalia.
                "My mercy me!" sniffed Jinnicky, shaking hands
 and then clasping the boy King to his shiny bosom.
                "How ever am I to get along without you? Will you
 come to see the old man soon and often?"
                "I certainly will," promised Randy, pressing Jinnicky's
 plump hand. Then, to keep from breaking
 down, he pointed a mischievous finger at Jinnicky's
 head. "Why, Jinnicky," he murmured in a scandalized
 voice, "you need a hair cut!"
                "Ha, had Hee, hee! That's what Alibabble will
 be telling me," blubbered the Red Jinn, pretending
 to laugh so hard that he cried, but really crying
 so hard he couldn't laugh. Kabumpo felt even worse,
 for he had known Randy longer. Not trusting himself
 to speak the boy gave Kabumpo a huge hug.
 Then, lifting one of the Elegant Elephant's enormous
 ears he whispered hurriedly:
                "Never mind, as soon as I'm crowned I'll run away
 and come back. As-" But before he could finish,
 Chalulu, who was terribly weary, touched the amethyst
 ball he had under his arm and seizing Randy

 by one hand and the purple-bearded uncle by the
 other, flashed out of sight and Pumperdink.
                "Well, sniff, sniff!" The Red Jinn sobbed unashamedly,
 leaning against Kabumpo. "He's gone,
 and all our good times with him! My mercy me! I'd
 set my heart on taking him home with me!"
                "Never you mind," wheezed Kabumpo, patting Jinnicky
 hard on the back with his trunk. "There's no
 law against visiting. And if your Highness will, and
 can spare me, I've a notion to spend three months
 of every year in Regalia with Randywell, Handywell,
 Brandenburg Bompadoo I"
                "Hear! Hear!" chuckled Pompus indulgently.
 'Well, under the circumstances, old fellow, we shall
 have to allow it."
                Why, I could do that, too," declared Jinnicky, beginning
 to cheer up a little. "My mercy me, we'll
 go together! Of course," went on Jinnicky, with a
 wink at King Pompus, "he's the kind of animal who
 calls an orange a citrus fruit and a porch a piazza,
 but I'm kind of fond of the big begonia anyway."
 The Red Jinn, amid roars of laughter, shook his
 head several times to prove this statement.
                "You're not such a bad little fellow yourself!"
 boomed Kabumpo, taking off Jinnicky's lid and setting

 it back slightly askew.
                "Thanks!" Jinnicky smiled with real pleasure.
 "I'll be back for you in a month and a day. A month
 and a day, remember! Then off we'll go to Regalia
 and take Johnwan to Randy. Good-bye! Good-bye
 everyone! I've had a magnificus time here." Hanging
 his baskets on Johnwan's arm, the Red Jinn
 rang his silver dinner bell, and when the little slave
 appeared with his tray, Jinnicky seized his hand and
 grasping the wooden soldier by the coat tails vanished
 away to Ev, leaving not even a ripple in the
 air behind him.
                "Great gooseberries! These disappearances are
 making me positively giddy," gulped the King, staring
 ruefully at all the empty chairs. "How Quiet it
 will seem in the palace without that Jinn. Ho, hum!
 What a day! What a day! And it's already to-morrow
 and after I've had a nap I'll have to think of
 some fitting way to reward Randy and this Red
 Jinn for their trouble."
                "You, my dear General," Pompus turned to General
 Quakes, who was yawning in a well-bred fashion
 behind his hand, "you shall be Prime Minister as
 well as commander of my army and have Pumper's
 place and salary besides, for I do not believe we ever
 will see that old rascal again." General Quakes

 bowed to show his appreciation and as Kabumpo, on
 his way to bed, affectionately touched the King on
 the shoulder, Pompus seized his old friend and adviser
 firmly by the trunk.
                "What shall we do for you?" he asked eagerly.
                "I promise, Kabumpo, you shall have anything your
 heart desires!" Kabumpo nodded absently, for now
 that Randy was gone he could think of nothing he
 wanted. Calling drowsy good-nights and good wishes
 the royal family and courtiers and servants went
 yawning to bed to dream of magic transformations,
 strange journeys and monsters. But Kabumpo had
 the best dream of all. With Randy and the little
 Red Jinn on his back, with Johnwan marching sturdily
 before, Kabumpo dreamed he was climbing the
 purple mountains of Regalia.
 And when Kabumpo's dream does come true-
 when the Elegant Elephant and Jinnicky really go
 to visit Randy in Regalia-that, my dears, will be
 another book and another story!
  
 The End

