 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 The Scalawagons Of Oz – Oz 35
  
 L. Frank Baum
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 CHAPTER 1
  
 In the Wizard's Workroom
  

 IN the Emerald City of Oz stands Ozma's palace. In
 a high tower of the palace is a workshop. Here the
 Wizard of Oz, a great magician, makes the tools for
 his magic. His helper is Number Nine, a bright blue--
 faced boy from the land of the Munchkins.
 The sun was already up, sparkling on the many
 gems and precious stones of theEmeraldCity, when
 Number Nine came up the palace stairs. The large
 emeralds set in the walls and towers of the city made
 a soft green glow.
                Number Nine began to pant as he climbed the pal-
 ace stairs to the highest tower. Reaching the top, he
 paused for breath. A voice came at him:
                "Three minutes, four-and-a-half seconds late!"
 Number Nine turned to see who was scolding him.
 It was a tall clock that stood in the hallway.
                "You'll have to be more prompt!" the Clock went
 on, pointing its hands at Number Nine. "You're al-
 ways late, and it's got to stop1"
                "Why don't you stop?" Number Nine said good-
 naturedly.
                "What good would I be if I stopped?" answered
 the Clock crossly.
 Number Nine said, "You can't alarm me. You aren't
 an alarm clock!"
 T            he boy started toward the door of the Wizard's

 workroom. But the Clock thumped after him, remain-
 ing at his heels and continuing its scolding.
                "Three minutes, four-and-a-half seconds! The Wiz-
 ard won't stand for it!"
                Number Nine was already taking off his coat and
 rolling up his sleeves. He tried to slip through the
 workroom door, but the angry clock pushed at him.
                "Get out of my way," cried the boy. "I have work
 to do."
                "Not until you promise to be like me--right up to
 the minute!"
                "Instead of talking, you should be ticking," Num-
 ber Nine said. Then he quickly opened the workroom
 door and shut it in the clock's face.
 Inside, the boy saw the Wizard quietly at work.
 The room was filled with apparatus, magical tools,
 vials, and other paraphernalia. In the center stood
 one of the Wizard's most important inventions. It
 was a large teletable, equipped with a compound ga-
 zabo, goggle-optics, and a trumpet eye. With this
 machine, one could see and hear to any part of the
 Land of Oz, and the stars beyond. It was very useful
 in locating missing things and people.
                "Good morning," the Wizard said. He was a short,
 round man with a bald head and a remarkable twin-

 kle in his eye.
                "I'm a little late," Number Nine apologized. "But
 I couldn't get my blue mule to walk fast"
                The Wizard chuckled. "Still riding that slowpoke?"
                "He's a good mule," Number Nine said. "But the
 trouble is, he stops to talk to everyone on the way."
                "A regular blue freak, eh?" said the Wizard.
 Just then the clock's face appeared at the open
 transom above the door.
                "Three minutes, four-and-a-half seconds late!"
                "Go away!" Number Nine called. "What makes you
 so cranky?"
                "I'm wound with a crank," the clock answered
 proudly. "A tick-lish business, too."
                Tired of talking with the clock, the boy turned back
 to the Wizard. But the little man no longer there.
 He had vanished quietly through the window.
                "Get to work," advised the clock. "I'll stay here
 and oversee you."
                "Why don't you just overlook me?" said Number
 Nine, as he began to work.
 First he took a broom and swept the floor. There
 was a litter of star-and-diamond dust left from one
 of the Wizard's experiments. As the boy worked, a
 shiny wastebasket jumped out of the corner and fol-
 lowed him around. From time to time it lay on its

 side to allow Number Nine to sweep the dust into it.
 In a few minutes the floor was clean.
                The wastebasket returned to its corner and Num-
 ber Nine took up a dust cloth. He went to the tele-
 table and carefully dusted the fine gear wheels and
 levers, the dials, and the wonderful trumpet eye. When
 one placed his ear to it, one could see far-off. And
 by putting one's eye to it, one could hear far-off. He
 dusted and polished the swinging telescope mirrors.
 He tightened the silencer caps on the loud-speaker
 tanks, so no noise could leak out.
                All this time the clock watched the worker. But
 Number Nine was doing his work faithfully. At last
 the clock yawned loudly, slid down from the door,
 and marched back to its corner.
                Just then Number Nine noticed an ozmic ray ly-
 ing on the teletable. It was a short line of light not
 coming from anywhere. "I'll take this home for my
 thirteen sisters and brothers to play with," Number
 Nine said, reaching for the ray. But it jumped from
 his hand. At the same time the trumpet eye began
 to buzz.
                Dropping everything, the boy placed his ear to the
 trumpet and watched the screen of the teletable. An
 image appeared there. It became clearer. He saw a

 high, carrot-shaped mountain. The top appeared cov-
 ered with a red glass dome. Everything around was
 red, so Number Nine knew that he was looking at
 the land of the Quadlings, to the south of Oz. Mov-
 ing the lever, he brought the image close. Now he
 could see inside the red glass dome. There was the
 Wizard, talking to Tik-Tok, a copper mechanical man.
 Tik-Tok seemed pleased, for there was a bright smile
 on his copper face.
                Number Nine didn't want to listen to other peo-
 ple's conversation. He was just lowering the lever to
 shut out the image, when he saw something peculiar
 on the screen. He heard his own name mentioned.
 "Number Nine won't be late to work any more,"
 the Wizard was saying. "For he won't have to ride
 his blue mule. This new invention of mine will put
 all mules out of work."
                As Number Nine tuned out this scene, he could not
 believe his trumpet eye.
                The Wizard's newest invention was the strangest
 thing he had ever seen.
  
 CHAPTER 2
  
 The Scalawagons of Oz
  

 THEY'RE better than blue mules, don't you think?"
 the Wizard went on to Tik-Tok, as the two stood
 under the glass dome of the Carrot Mountain.
                "Bet-ter-and-more-beau-ti-ful," tocked the mechan-
 ical man. There was joy in his voice.
                The two were standing in a large room. All around
 them stood brightly colored little motor cars.
                "Yes," said the Wizard, "these scalawagons can do
 more than blue mules. Just think, there'll be a free
 taxi for everyone in Oz!"
                "And-those-with-spiked-wheels-will-be-trac-tors-
 for-the-farm-ers," said Tik-Tok.
                "What's more," went on the Wizard, rubbing his
 hands with satisfaction, "when you extend their run-
 ning boards to the breeze, you have excellent glid-
 ers!"
                "Mar-vel-ous," ticked the copper man.
                "But that isn't all," the Wizard continued, opening
 the door of one of the scalawagons. "Look here."
 Tik-Tok bent to see what the Wizard was pointing
 at. "With this rubber foam on the inside, they'll be
 comfortable on rough roads. They're absolutely un-
 breakable. And their motors are no bigger than
 goose eggs."
                "Con-grat-u-la-tions!"

                The Wizard's eyes were sparkling. "Look at this
 center button. Just push it, and out comes LUNCH!
 Think of it! People will go on picnics in lunch wag-
 ons!"
                "Re-mark-able!"
                The little Wizard was beaming so hard that his
 bald head glistened. "I've explained how to pound
 sense into them. Then they'll know enough to obey
 traffic rules. And they won't need garages, for they'll
 understand how to keep out of danger."
                "In-deed!"
                "Tik-Tok, I appoint you Superintendent of this
 Scalawagon Factory. For with your mechanical brain,
 you understand such things."
                "I-am-proud-of-my-re-spon-Si-bil-i-ty," Tik-Tok
 said, lifting his metal chest.
                "Promptly at six o'clock tomorrow, our gracious
 Queen Ozma, will see our surprise," said the Wizard
 happily.
                "This~will-please-her-bet-ter-than-all-your-for-mer-
 in-ven-tions."
                "It was really Number Nine who gave me the idea,
 though he-doesn't know it. That slow blue mule of
 his-"
                "Look-out!" warned Tik-Tok.
                The Wizard looked up in time to see a dark, bird-

 shaped object winging around his head.
                "It's nothing to get in a flutter about," he said
 quietly. "Only a peli-can trying to fill the tank with
 motor-fluid."
                As he spoke, the peli-can swooped down and thrust
 its straight beak into a scalawagon's tank. As the tank
 filled, the scalawagon reared up on its hind wheels,
 its engine spitting.
                "You're getting it too full," the Wizard said to the
 peli-can; whereupon the creature flew back to its
 shelf.
                "Great-bolts-and-riv-ets!" exclaimed the mechani-
 cal man.
                "Now you know how the tanks are filled," said the
 Wizard. He pointed to a large drum in the corner.
 "But let me warn you: NEVER TOUGH THE FLAB-
 BER-GAS!"
                "Why?" asked the mechanical man.
                But there was no answer.
                The Wizard had vanished.
  
 CHAPTER 3
  
 Tik-Tok Sets to Work
  

 NOW, let me see," said Tik-Tok to himself. "What-
 sign-is-there-that-I-am-Sup-er-in-tend-ent-of-
 this-Scalawagon-Factory? Hm-that's-what-I-need: a-
 sign."
                                He looked around, every little wheel in him click-
 ing with excitement. Near the desk he found painting
 materials---a brush, some colors, and a drawing board.
 With green paint he lettered a sign:
  
                                TIK-TOK,
                                MANAGER-IN-CHIEF
  
                "I-guess-that's-on-the-right-tack," he said, as he
 hung it on the factory door. Then, remembering what
 the Wizard had told him, he made a second sign:
  
                                HANDS OFF-DON'T TOUCH
  
                He placed this sign near the drum filled with the
 dangerous flabber-gas.
                "I~don't-know-just-what-can-hap-pen-and-I'm-not-
 go-ing-to-find-out," he said, backing away from the
 drum.
                Meanwhile, more scalawagons came rolling out
 from a door marked PRODUCTION ROOM at the
 side of the factory. The floor was soon covered with

 the small new cars. Tik-Tok stepped quickly to the
 door and closed it.
                From behind the closed door there came a clanking
 noise like that of crumpling fenders.
                "Oh-my-oh-my-they're-pil-ing-up-in-side," c r i e d
 Tik-Tok.
                He looked around and saw a lever sticking through
 the wall of the Production Room. Hurriedly he pushed
 down the lever. The clanking and crashing stopped.
                Tik-Tok nodded with satisfaction. "My-fine-mech-
 an-i-cal-brain-is-work-ing-well-this-morn-ing."
 28
                The scalawagons filled the floor space and shone in
 a variety of colors. They were very much alike. Built
 into their tops were small turrets, with hinged lids.
                Tik-Tok touched the nearest scalawagon and tried
 to open its lids. But they could not be moved. Then
 Tik-Tok went to a chest and took out a hammer. It
 was made of rubber. He tapped gently on the turret
 of the scalawagon, murmuring,
                "I've-got-to-knock-some-sense-in-to-your-head."
                The result was surprising. The scalawagon's lids
 swung open, revealing a pair of large, straight-for-
 ward looking eyes. The eyes were filled with sense
 and good humor.

                Tik-Tok pounded the turrets of the other scalawag-
 ons, until all lids were open, and hundreds of scala-
 wagon eyes were fixed on him. Some gave the copper
 man a friendly wink. Tik-Tok could not return the
 wink, for his own lids were riveted in place.
                "I-want-you-all-to-feel-wel-come-here," Tik - Tok
 ticked quickly. His inner machinery was running at
 high speed with his excitement. Every cog and wheel
 inside him was strained to the limit. But he did not
 notice this.
                "There's-a-dull-look-ing-one," he said. Going to a
 scalawagon, he gave it a smart blow with his hammer.
 Immediately the scalawagon brightened.
                There was no doubt that the Wizard had chosen the
 best person in Oz as manager. Everything about Tik-
 Tok was mechanical, even his inclinations. And he
 was a tireless worker. With one hand he lifted a scala-
 wagon and placed it on a scale. "Twenty-five-pounds,"
 he said to himself. Replacing it, he went on:
                "No-won-der-the-Wiz-ard-is-won-der-ful.-He's-al-
 ways-per-form-ing-won-ders."
                He saw a scalawagon looking sleepy, and going to
 it, smacked it so hard that it fell on its side. When
 he righted it, he saw a look of amazement in its large
 blue eyes.
                "Kind-ly-come-to-your-senses," said Tik-Tok.

 With his rubber hammer under his arm, Tik-Tok
 went about examining the cars. With a tap here and
 a smack there, he got them all in condition. At last
 he was satisfied, and started to tell them so. But the
 strain of the work was telling on his copper consti-
 tution. His machinery was running more and more
 slowly.
 Grasping his rubber hammer, Tik-Tok placed his
 feet firmly on the floor and leaned against the open
 door. The door was close to the edge of the steep car-
 rot-shaped mountain.
                He tried to speak, but after a few faint clicks he
 became rigid.
                He had worked too hard and was completely run-
 down.
  
 CHAPTER 4
  
 In Lolly-Pop Village
  
 WHILE Tik-Tok stood helpless, the day brightened
 about Carrot Mountain and the land of Oz that
 spread all around. To the north, through the bright air,
 the Emerald City glittered in green splendor. Beyond
 lay the purple land of the Gillikans. To the east, in a

 yellow glow, was the land of the Winkies. To the
 west, a blue haze revealed the Munchkin country.
 And all around them, spread like a red quilt, the land
 of the Quadlings. In these countries, people and
 things were all of one color-purple, yellow, blue, or
 red.
                Close by the base of Carrot Mountain ran a red
 road. On this road was the castle of Glinda, the fair
 sorceress who ruled the Quadlings. The road ended
 in a curious little village. It was on this village that
 Tik-Tok's eyes were fixed. His last thought, before
 his machinery had ceased, had been: "If-only-some-
 one-there-could-help!"
                The village had only six houses, and a sign-post
 which read:
                                                THE LOLLY-POPS
                Just as the new day was brightening, the doors of
 all the houses burst open, and six little Lollies pushed
 their six Pops out into the street. The Lollies were
 no older than five years, with pink, chubby hands and
 sweet faces. Their Pops were lazy old fellows, who
 stood in the middle of the road, leaning together. No
 one thought of looking up at Carrot Mountain. Even
 if they had, they would not have been able to see Tik-
 Tok.
                One Lolly, a determined tot, stood in the doorway

 with her hands on her hips, calling,
                "Go along now, Pop. With the wash to be done,
 you can't sit on my washtub any longer!"
                "Aw, now, Minty," said the old fellow, "1et me just
 loll along in my own way! If only you weren't so pep-
 pery, but sweet, like your cousin Scotchy."
                "That butter-ball! Pooh. At least I'm not a sour-
 face, like my lemon-flavored cousin. Or always black
 in the face, like Choco."
                Pop shook his head and began to shuffle down the
 road. When he got to the sign-post, he was joined
 by the other Pops, who had been pushed out of their
 houses by their industrious daughters. The six lazy
 old fellows leaned against each other, remaining Si-
 lent. They knew that their talk had no flavor.
                Meanwhile, the Lollies got busy with their house-
 work. Minty, who seemed the most industrious Lolly
 in the village, took a bucket and started up the road.
 The five other Lollies came out of their houses, each
 with a bucket on her head, and followed Minty.
                They came to a broad red brook, shaded by red
 pine trees. From out of the brook came a lively, low
 music. The Lollies knelt and dipped their buckets.
 No water, but a host of tiny water fairies floated into
 the buckets. As the Lollies lifted their filled buckets

 and started back, the water fairies put their bright
 little heads over the edges and smiled delightedly at
 getting a ride.
                Little Minty was the first to reach home. She went
 directly into the living room. There she lowered her
 bucket, and with a swish, spread the water fairies all
 over the room. They rippled across the rug and into
 every corner. As they leaped to their feet, they gath-
 ered every speck of dust and dirt.
                Then the fairies started for the door. Their faces
 and arms were covered with grey and pink dust
 streaks. As they reached the doorway, Minty held her
 bucket down and caught every one of them. Next she
 went to the kitchen, where she again tumbled the
 fairies over the floor. Again they set to work gather-
 ing up the dust and dirt. When they were ready to
 hop back into the bucket, they seemed made of mud.
                'I can't get any more cleaning from such soiled lit-
 tle fairies," Minty said. "Back to the brook you go!"
                Carrying the bucketful of fairies, Minty returned
 to the brook. The shade was pleasant under the red
 trees, and the red water sang delightfully.
                Gently, Minty stooped and lowered the bucket, let-
 ting the fairies escape. They slipped into the water
 and quickly washed themselves clean. No sooner were
 they clean, than they began to scramble back into the

 bucket. They were ready to do more work. But Minty
 had had enough of housework. She shooed the fairies
 back into the brook, overturned her bucket, and sat
 on it. She was careful to keep her feet out of the
 water, for she did not care to dissolve.
                Just then a pompous red bull-frog came strutting
 along the opposite bank-- He was singing at the bot-
 tom of his deep voice. A gold watch-chain swung from
 his pocket, and this seemed to make him feel impor-
 tant
                Abruptly, the bull-frog's song ended. His legs shot
 into the air. He tumbled backward, and disappeared
 beneath the water. Red bubbles rose to the surface.
 Then came mischievous laughter, and two boy kelpies
 slid through the brook and scampered behind the wa-
 terfall. Their small, horse-like bodies were well out of
 sight when the bull-frog came up.
                "Who's trifling with my dignity?" said the frog.
 He began to strut once more, but when he discov-
 ered that his gold watch-chain was gone, he became
 exceedingly angry. He drew himself up to his full
 height and shook his fist at the waterfall. In reply
 he heard only the laughter of the kelpies and the
 singing of the brook. Then the frog became discour-
 aged. He stuck his head into the sand and left his

 feet sticking straight up.
                By this time, the other Lollies had finished their
 housework and came trooping to the brook. Empty-
 ing their buckets of water fairies, they sat down like
 Minty in the cool red shade. The singing of the brook
 was like a concert, and the Lollies enjoyed listening.
 The water fairies joined in the singing. The music
 was so lively that the bull-frog pulled his head out of
 the sand. His sadness was forgotten, and he began
 to croak in his deep bass voice.
                "I wish I could stay here all day," sighed Minty.
 "But there's supper to make. Pop would starve if I
 didn't remind him to eat."
                Saying this, she got to her feet The other Lollies
 followed her example. They went marching down the
 road to their houses. In a few minutes smoke was curl-
 ing from every chimney. Delicious odors filled the
 air. When the meals were ready, each Lolly went to
 the village sign-post to fetch her Pop. The lazy old
 creatures had not stirred from their positions all day.
 Some had had their legs melted a little in the noon-
 day sun. They stuck fast to the road, and their daugh-
 ters had to push them hard to get them going.
                "Come on, Pop," urged Minty. "Why do you lean
 on me as if I were a cane? You must hurry. I know
 what you need-a hurri-cane!"

                Lolly's Pop spoke sadly, "I'm not pop-ular any more.
 Why was I made licorice? It blackens my thoughts."
                "Never mind, daddy," said Lolly. "You're not licked
 yet."
                                The six Lollies, pushing their Pops, reached home
 and sat down to their meals. The village was quiet
 in the red light of sunset. No one was in sight.
                                Suddenly there came a startling scream.
                                "BELL-SNICKLE!"
                                The alarm brought every front door open. Six lit-
 tle Lollies ran up the road, swinging hot spoons.
                                "BELL-SNICKLE, BELL-SNICKLE!" the warning
 voice kept screeching.
                                At the end of the street was a large bluish-green
 object, flat as a buckwheat cake, and rolling along
 on its edge like a cartwheel. Bells were fastened to
 its ears, and as it rolled, the bells tinkled.
                                "Surround him!" shouted Minty.
                                The Lollies tried to make a circle, hitting out with
 their spoons. But the Bell-snickle was too fast for the
 little Lollies. One girl threw her spoon at him. It
 struck the Snickle full in the center, and he fell over
 with a grunt But at once he was up, on edge, and
 running faster than ever. He snatched up the spoon
 and threw it back at the Lolly. A shower of hot spoons

 came at him, but he caught them all and threw them
 back.
                                As the missiles came sailing back, the Lollies turned
 and ran for their lives. They did not stop running
 until they were safe in their houses. Then the Bell-
 snickle threw the last spoon through a second-story
 window, and went rolling on his way.
                Squeezing through a crack in a high fence, he took
 the short cut past the singing brook and continued
 onward. He rolled from one clump of bushes to the
 next, past huge red rocks, and toward the foot of Car-
 rot Mountain.
                As he rolled, the Snickle's bells were heard in Lolly-
 Pop Village. As long as this sound hung in the air,
 no one dared come out of doors.
                Meanwhile the Snickle kept talking furiously to
 himself.
                "They almost found me out! But they didn't. They
 never will. I'm a Mystery. I intend to remain a Mys-
 tery!"
                He reached the Carrot Mountain and began rolling
 up it, still talking to himself.
                "I've never had my picture in the newspaper, or on
 a postcard. Or in any picture book. And I NEVER
 WILL! I'm a Mystery, I am!"
                As he mounted the mountain, his progress was

 slower. He was no longer rolling, but climbing. There
 was no path. A tangle of vines grew part-way up the
 steep Carrot Mountain. He hung on with his curly
 fingers and toes. Rocks and precipices made his ascent
 harder, but the Snickle clung like a postage stamp.
                Sometimes he had to hang by the hook of his nose
 in a crack in the cliff until his feet had found a hold.
 Darkness came on, and the top of the mountain was
 still far up. But the determined Bell-snickle kept
 climbing, up to the red glass dome on the summit.
  
 CHAPTER 5
  
 The Snickle Snoops
  
 IT was daybreak when the Bell-snickle reached the
 red glass dome on top of Carrot Mountain. His all-
 night climb had tired him, but as soon as he saw the
 Scalawagon Factory, he forgot to be tired and became
 a mass of curiosity. His slanty eyes saw on the back
 door of the factory a sign:
                                                
                                                KEEP OUT
  
 Of course this made the Snickle want to get in. But

 from the rear the red glass dome looked tightly closed.
 Wriggling his twisty fingers, he found a window sash
 that was not locked. He pushed it up a quarter of
 an inch. This was enough for the Snickle to slip
 through, sideways. When his flat body was inside,
 he lay on the floor with his ears stretched out, listen-
 ing.
                Not a sound. The Snickle's ears strained so hard
 that they grew longer. But all was quiet. Still alert,
 he crouched under one of the many shiny scalawagons
 that covered the floor. No matter what happened, he
 HAD to know what was going on.
 Darting from car to car, the Snickle came to the
 other side of the factory.
                "This place is a mystery, and I won't have anything
 a mystery but ME!" the Snickle said under his breath.
 For all his snooping, the inquisitive Bell-snickle
 could learn nothing. Everything was silent. Even the
 bells on his own ears were silent. At last the Snickle
 became angry, and gave a tremendous roar. The win-
 dows rattled, then it was quiet again.
                The Snickle gave another roar, and another, keep-
 ing it up until the place seemed filled with thunder.
 Still nothing happened.
                Then the Snickle began a moaning noise, so hideous,
 that the peli-cans became alarmed. Unfolding their

 wings, they flew wildly around the room.
                "Aha!" cried the Snickle. "I thought so. Trying to
 discover my mystery, aren't you! Out of here, every
 one of you!"
                Throwing open the back door, the Snickle tried to
 shoo the peli-cans out of the building. They flew back
 and hid, out of reach.
                Then the Snickle REALLY began to snoop. He
 snooped so thoroughly that no corner was left un-
 explored.
                And finally he found something that stopped him
 -Tik-Tok, the copper manager.
 Tik-Tok was standing motionless, as he had been
 when he ran down. He was in the doorway, danger-
 ously near the edge of the precipice. Snickle watched
 cautiously, to see what the copper man would do. See-
 ing him remain motionless, the Snickle began to roll
 closer.
                First he quacked like a duck, then he grunted like
 a pig. But the copper figure did not move or pay the
 slightest attention.
 Closer and closer snooped the Snickle.
                "Another mystery!" he said angrily. "And I won't
 have any mystery but ME."
 Then the Snickle let out an ear-splitting screech.

 He was trying to frighten Tik-Tok, as he had fright-
 ened the peli-cans. But still the copper figure did not
 move.
                Overcoming his caution, Snick rolled up close to the
 copper man.
                "Wake up, there!" he shouted, and smacked a cop-
 per leg with one of his ears.
                Tik-Tok moved slightly. The dead machinery with-
 in him whirred and again stopped. He was quite run
 down. Until somebody wound him up, he would never
 speak or move again. But the Snickle did not know
 this. He thought Tik-Tok was being stubborn, and
 growing angrier, he smacked the other copper leg.
 Crash! Tik-Tok fell to the floor. The Snickle pushed
 him with an ear, and Tik-Tok bounced off the cliff,
 and fell down the mountainside.
                It was a fearfully long drop. Tik-Tok did not stop
 falling until he hit the red road. Then he began to
 roll toward the village of the Lolly-Pops. He rolled
 right up to Minty's house.
                "That will wake up the stubborn fellow," said the
 Snickle, as he leaned watching. "And give those Lol-
 lies something to worry about, too."
                Then the Snickle turned his attention to the factory.
 There was nobody else about.
                "I guess I'm Manager here now," he said with sat-

 isfaction.
                He set about tearing down all Tik-Tok's signs and
 hurling them over the mountain. Then he tried every
 button and lever. But nothing happened.
                Going up to a scalawagon, the Snickle looked into
 the startled eyes.
                "Stop looking at me. I want to remain a Mystery!"
 growled the Bell-snickle.
                The scalawagon gently shut its eyes.
 Bell-snickle noticed a small metal cap on the top
 of the turret. He read aloud, "FOR PELI-CAN MO-
 TOR FLUID".
                "Let's see what this is all about," he said, unscrew-
 ing the cap. All he discovered was a small, empty
 tank.
                "Must find something to fill it," he said.
                He went snooping all around, looking on the high
 shelves and in all the tool chests. At last he found
 something that made him grunt with satisfaction.
                It was the drum filled with the dangeorus flabber-
 gas.
                "Ugh! What oily stuff. But maybe it will make
 those little cars go," the meddler said to himself.
                He proceeded to fill the tanks of several scala-
 wagons. while doing so, he accidentally smeared him-

 self with the oily flabber-gas. By the time the last car
 was filled, the Snickle felt queer inside.
                The scalawagons became restless. One by one, they
 reared up and pranced like frightened horses.
                The Bell-snickle paid no attention, but went on
 with his work. The confusion grew worse. A couple
 of scalawagons near the open door suddenly leaped
 out, and went sailing around the mountain. Then
 others spread their running boards like wings and
 floated out of the factory.
                SCRUNCH! Red glass began falling about the
 Snickle's head. Two scalawagons had collided in mid-
 air and broken through the glass dome. The remain-
 ing scalawagons were thrown into a panic. Their
 wide open eyes were filled with terror. Besides, the
 gas seemed to be flabbergasting them, for they began
 to rear and plunge and run in circles. They became
 entangled with each other, and many a fender crashed
 and threw the cars into more disorder.
                The Bell-snickle was knocked flat. The scalawagons
 ran over him, rolling him flatter. They soaked him
 full of flabber-gas
                Finally, the sense that Tik-Tok had pounded into
 the scalawagons seemed to work. They ceased their
 wild running around and made straight for the door.
 Spreading their running boards like huge wings, the

 cars sailed away from Carrot Mountain.
                The unconscious Snickle lay on the floor of the de-
 serted factory. when his senses came back, he strug-
 gled to get up. The flabber-gas had begun to work
 in him, and when he tore himself from the floor and
 stood on edge once more, he was no longer flat like
 a buckwheat cake.
                The Snickle had begun to swell and broaden like a
 giant balloon!
                "Hey, hey," he cried, beating his sides. He tried in
 vain to keep himself from growing fatter. He was
 more flabbergasted than the scalawagons.
                Suddenly Bell-snickle began to rise, like a balloon.
 "Hey, hey, where am I going?" he shouted. But
 there was no one to hear him.
                Through the door he sailed, out into the air, kick-
 ing and reaching for something to hold on to. There
 was nothing but a cloud that scurried out of his way.
 Across the sky went the Snickle, swelling bigger.
                "Help! I think I'm going to burst!" he wailed.
                Soon the Snickle was out of sight. Now a restless
 pushing and scraping came from the high shelves
 where the peli-cans were hiding. Moving uneasily,
 some left their roosts and sailed slowly around.
                They missed the scalawagons and felt nervous in

 the deserted factory. Soon, with one accord, they
 swooped out of the door. They flew in the direction
 that the scalawagons had flown, to the outer border
 of Oz toward the Sandy Waste.
                Now, beyond this Sandy Waste was a land inhabited
 by a tribe of wicked creatures known as Mifkits. If
 the scalawagons crossed this Sandy Waste, they would
 surely fall into the power of the Mifkits. And so would
 the foolish peli-cans, flying desperately after the scala-
 wagons.
                A wind was blowing behind the flock of peli-cans,
 speeding them onward. In no time at all they were
 far from Carrot Mountain. Looking down, they could
 see no more of their own colorful, safe country of Oz.
 They saw only a burning waste, with ugly shapes of
 darkness. The peli-cans were frightened, but they
 felt that they must find the scalawagons. On and on
 they flew, over the great desert.
                They saw a mass of colored objects below them, and
 descending, came upon the fly-away scalawagons.
                The scalawagons were no longer using the sense
 that Tik-Tok had knocked into them. They were the
 most confused auto cars that ever were. Higgledy-
 piggledy, tumbling and bumping and turning somer-
 saults in the air, they descended closer to the desert
 sands.

                The peli-cans tried to fly under the scalawagons
 and shoo them back toward Oz. But the scalawagons
 were larger and more numerous, and their whirlwind
 flight could not be altered.
                Suddenly a scalawagon fell among some rocks, and
 turned over on its back. Before it could rise again,
 a brown, misshapen Mifkit had jumped out of hiding,
 climbed into the car and was carried on to the desert
 when the scalawagon wriggled back on its wheels.
                From all the rocks other Mifkits were watching
 and waiting.
                The peli-cans did their best to reverse the flight of
 the scalawagons. But nothing could stop the bewil-
 dered, dizzy cars. Each second they seemed about to
 fall into the greedy hands of the Mifkits.
  
 CHAPTER 6
  
 Glinda Makes a Discovery
  
 NOT very far from Carrot Mountain the Wizard
 was at the red palace of Glinda the Good. Glinda,
 the kind ruler of the Quadlings, had invited four hun-
 dred and twenty-seven visitors to be present when
 the Wizard was to present a secret surprise. No one,

 not even Glinda, knew what this surprise would be.
                The Wizard smiled happily, saying, "My duty to
 my fellow-Ozzians is to send them on their way re-
 joicing."
                But be did not tell them how he would "send them
 on their way." No one dreamed of the brightly col-
 ored little scalawagons.
                Glinda's red lawn was gay. The trees' low branches
 held a variety of refreshments. Many children were
 helping themselves to fruit and cake and red cocoa.
                The plates and goblets were of red gold inlaid with
 rubies. The dishes were carved with a red G for Glinda,
 or a red 0 for Ozma, queen of Oz for it was a red-
 letter day.
                The variously colored clothing of the guests made
 a pleasing rainbow on the lawn. The blue Munchkins
 wore tinkling bells in their caps. The Gillikans' purple
 costumes were soft to the eyes. The Winkies' yellows
 could be seen from afar.
                Among the guests were a Munchkin farmer and
 thirteen of his children. They were known by numbers
 instead of names, and had all reached the stop-grow-
 ing age of ten. Number Nine was not present. He
 was still in the Wizard's workroom, not having been
 given the day off.
                Glinda stood in a flowing ruby gown, welcoming

 the guests. Ozma sat in a seat of honor, smiling and
 returning everyone's greeting.
                Many of the beloved characters of Oz were here--
 the Scarecrow, the Tin Woodman, Captain Salt, Dor-
 othy of Kansas, and Jenny Jump. Jenny Jump, whom
 Ozma had made a duchess, was proudly wearing her
 coronet. Jenny was the official stylist of Oz. Nearly
 everyone was dressed in clothes from her magic turn-
 style.
                The people from the four lands and the Emerald City
 greeted one another joyously. Many had wonderful
 adventures to relate.
                Jack Pumpkinhead, a boy made of sticks, with a
 carved pumpkin head, was standing near Scraps, a
 patchwork girl.
                "Now, Scraps, remember your company manners.
 Don't turn any somersaults!" he cautioned.
                At the word somersaults, Scraps gave a shout of
 glee and turned three cartwheels across the lawn.
 Jack Pumpkinhead looked mortified. Several bystand-
 ers comforted him by saying,
                "Never mind, Jack. You can't expect that cotton
 girl to be anything but a tomboy."
                A clanking noise diverted everyone's attention. Sir
 Hokus, the knight, came striding over.

                "Oz bodkins!" exclaimed Sfr Hokus, "I'm bound for
 adventure. If I had but a mount!"
                "Mount!" exclaimed a wooden Sawhorse, galloping
 on its short, stiff legs.
                "Adventure!" cried Jenny Jump, swinging her new
 handbag excitedly. "I could take some adventure,
 too."
                Scraps came tumbling back. Landing in the center
 of the group, she chanted:
 "Time is short--so have some fun,
 Take it on the hop, skip, run!"
 Turning a double somersault, she bounded away, and
 collided with the ferocious-faced pirate, Captain Salt.
                "Anchors and oars!" roared the pirate. "You're a
 bit too lively, miss.
                But Scraps, laughing and tumbling, was out of ear-
 shot.
                "Next to adventure, I love a surprise," said Jenny
 Jump. "I can hardly wait to hear what the Wizard
 has to tell us."
                "We are to make the announcement," the Scare-
 crow said, putting his arm around his friend, the Tin
 Woodman.
                "How can you? You don't know any more than
 the rest of us," said Jenny.
                "Well, we are to announce the announcement," the

 Tin Woodman explained.
                The Scarecrow added with dignity, "I am to pro-
 nounce the announcing of the announcement."
                "Gracious sakes, it's too complicated for me," cried
 Dorothy's Aunt Em, holding up her hands, her eyes
 laughing through their spectacles. "Henry, can you
 make anything of it?" She turned to her husband.
                Uncle Henry, who once had been a Kansas farmer,
 rubbed his chin thoughtfully, and said slowly,
                "I reckon we'll soon be enlightened. For the Wiz-
 ard is signalling at us now."
                They all turned to see the jovial little Wizard wav-
 ing hard at them.
                "Come on," said Jenny, bounding forward. "I must
 hear what it's all about."
                As Jenny and her friends drew near to the Wiz-
 ard, the rest of the guests stopped eating and talking.
                The Wizard motioned to the Scarecrow and the Tin
 Woodman. They followed him to the table where Oz-
 ma sat with Princess Dorothy, the smiling Glinda, and
 a host of friends.
                "Now," said the Wizard, "let us begin."
                "Your Majesties and my Friends," began the Scare-
 crow, rising and bowing from his straw-stuffed waist.
 "I have the honor to announce a surprise by our won-

 derful Wizard of Oz! I wish I knew what it is, bu-"
                Suddenly he sat down.
                "But," continued the Tin Woodman, where the
 Scarecrow left off, "my kind heart tells me that the
 Wizard prefer-"
                Then he sat down just as suddenly as the Scarecrow,
 and Jack Pumpkinhead arose, grinning. He was al-
 ways grinning, for his smile was carved into his head.
                "-prefers to make us all happy," continued Jack.
 "And when the Wizard does that, I'm sure we can be
 no happier." He ended in a voice full of feeling.
                "For the land sakes, what are they talking about?"
 asked Aunt Em.
                "Whatever it is, we'll soon know," said Uncle Henry.
 "But first I see that Glinda is going to read the day's
 news in her magic book. When she comes back, the
 Wizard will tell us his surprise."
                All eyes followed Glinda, who had risen and was
 crossing the garden. She leaned over a pedestal where
 lay a great open book. This magic book kept printing
 in itself the latest happenings all over the kingdom.
                The Wizard sat with his hands folded over his round
 stomach, wearing a mysterious smile. The guests
 waited patiently for Glinda's return.
                In the midst of the quiet, the patchwork girl, Scraps,
 came bouncing across the lawn.

 "Surprise won't spoil my appetite,
 Because I never eat a bite!"
 she chanted, and she turned triple somersaults around
 the guests.
                Everyone applauded. Scraps swung herself up to
 the branch of a tree. She began to strip off the meat
 sandwiches that hung there, throwing them down
 into the open jaws of the Cowardly Lion.
                "Why do you take trouble to eat?
                I'd rather be stuffed with cotton than meat!"
 The Cowardly Lion, smiling thankfully at her, con-
 tinued to hold his jaws open. The Hungry Tiger came
 up and crouched beside the Lion. The Tiger's mouth
 was watering.
                "Just throw me a juicy bit of meat," he begged.
 Laughing, Scraps tossed the sandwiches to both
 animals in turn.
                All enjoyed the spectacle, except Jack Pumpkin-
 head. He felt ashamed of Scraps, for he thought she
 was not behaving properly at a party.
                "Come down, Scraps," he begged.
                Suddenly Scraps looked far off and pointed her cot-
 ton finger.
 "Don't get scrappy,
 Glinda's not happy."

  
 At this warning, everyone turned. Glinda was hurry-
 ing back to her guests. A worried look was on her
 face.
                "What has happened?" everyone asked
  
 CHAPTER 7
  
 Can the Scalawagons be Rescued?
  
                Glinda replied anxiously, "I have read bad news in
 my magical book. The Wizard's surprise has disap-
 peared! The magic book says it was scalawagons.
 At Glinda's announcement, everyone was thrown
 into an uproar. The Cowardly Lion rose up and
 roared louder than all the noise.
                "Scalawagons?" the people said in surprise. "What
 are scalawagons?"
                "It doesn't matter," someone answered. "They're
 lost, and our dear Glinda is worried, and that's
 enough."
                "Well, I for one would like a sensible explanation,"
 Aunt Em declared. "Let's ask the Wizard."
                "The Wizard, the Wizard!" everyone began to cry.
 All the party guests looked at the seat where the
 Wizard had been sitting.

                BUT THE WIZARD HAD VANISHED.
                "Now we won't know what scalawagons are until
 he returns," Glinda spoke out to all her guests. "But
 it doesn't matter. We'll wait for him."
                "Couldn't we organize a searching party?" said
 Jenny Jump in a practical tone. "Then we could have
 adventure that would do somebody some good."
                "But how can you search for something if you don't
 know what it is?" the Scarecrow asked.
                He looked excited, as if the word "adventure" ap-
 pealed to him.
                "We'll know the scalawagons when we see them,"
 Jenny said.
                Suddenly the air was filled with the heavy sound
 of weeping. Everyone looked around in surprise.
 There was the Cowardly Lion, crying as if his heart
 would break.
                "What's the matter?" asked Dorothy, putting her
 arm around the beast.
                "The poor scalawagons, whatever they are!" sobbed
 the Cowardly Lion. "I am afraid to think what may
 happen to them! Boo-hoo-hoo I,,
                The Lion wept so hard that all the Munchkin, Win-
 kie, Gillikan, and Quadling babies started crying
 with blue, yellow, purple, and red tears.

                "Here, here, we can't have such goin's on!" said
 Aunt Em. "If you're worried about the scalawagons,
 why don't you do as Jenny Jump says? GO IN
 SEARCH OF THEM!"
                "Not I!" exclaimed the Cowardly Lion, shuddering
 so hard that his tears flew around like a water-spray.
 "I'm afraid!"
                "Never mind," Jenny said soothingly. "You don't
 have to go. I will!"
                "And I'll go with you," the Scarecrow said eagerly.
 "I'll go with my Scarecrow friend," the Tin Wood-
 man spoke up. He stepped over to the Scarecrow and
 put his tin-jointed hand on the other's shoulder.
                The Sawhorse began to paw the ground. "What are
 we waiting for? Hurry, hitch the red wagon to me,
 and let's be off!"
                The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman ran to fetch
 a little old red wagon that stood nearby. In a moment
 they had it hitched to the Sawhorse.
                Jenny jumped into the wagon, and the Scarecrow
 and the Tin Woodman climbed in beside her. A cheer
 went up from the people.
                "Oz Fish!" cried Sir Hokus from the crowd. "If
 anything's to be rescued, let me do it!"
                He came clanking toward the red wagon. Jenny
 said, "Thank you, Sir Hokus, but you are too heavy

 in all your armor. We will go alone."
                "It is true, I am too heavy for the little Sawhorse,"
 Sir Hokus said, and backed away. "Oh, for a noble
 steed!" he sighed.
                Captain Salt, the pirate, shouted, "Give me a ship!
 A stout sailing ship! I'll bring back those scala-
 wagons!"
                "The duchess Jenny and her two companions will
 try to bring the scalawagons to us," Glinda spoke in
 her soft, musical voice. "But first let me look again
 in my magical book. I shall learn the latest news."
                Glinda went again to her great open book and leaned
 across the page. She read all the happenings in the
 kingdom within the past few minutes. Then she re-
 turned and said,
                "The scalawagons were set loose by the mischievous
 Bell-snickle. They are floating over the Sandy Waste.
 It is a great risk to go near this desert."
                Jenny cried eagerly, "I'm not afraid. It will be a
 wonderful adventure!"
                "Very well. But Queen Ozma must let you wear
 her magic belt. Then, at any time you touch it, you
 can wish yourself out of danger."
                At these words, Ozma arose and said in a tone of
 distress,

                "I did not wear my belt today. It is in my palace
 in the Emerald City."
                "Never mind," Jenny said cheerfully. "I have my
 fairy gifts in my handbag." She held up her gay
 handbag. "My fairy godfather provided me with them
 long ago."
                Jenny put her hand into her bag and drew forth
 several objects. They were an eyeglass for one eye,
 a pair of rose-colored gloves that had but eight fin-
 gers, a gold slipper for the left foot, and a pair of
 thistledown ear-muffs.
                "If the danger becomes too great, I can use these,"
 said Jenny calmly. "Don't you worry, people. The
 Scarecrow, the Tin Woodman, and I will be safe
 enough!"
                The Scarecrow then picked up the reins and cried,
 "Go along, Sawhorse!" The Sawhorse jumped for-
 ward. The people raised a cheer as the red wagon
 rolled away.
                The Sawhorse ran briskly, carrying the three ad-
 venturers far into the red hills of the Quadling coun
 try. Though the hills made the traveling more diffi-
 cult, the wooden animal did not slow down.
                "Just what I wanted," Jenny cried in her delight.
 "A real adventure! My last trip was to the Munchkin
 country, on a blue mule. How that mule could run!"

                "Like a blue streak?" suggested the Scarecrow.
 The Sawhorse, who overheard Jenny praising the
 mule, grew quite jealous.
                "Blue streak, eh?" he said to himself. "I'll show
 'em!"
                With that the wooden animal leaped up a steep
 hill, running so hard that the red wagon and its
 occupants were severely jostled.
                "Hey, there, slow down!" shouted the Tin Wood-
 man, trying to make himself heard over the racket
 of the wagon wheels. But the Sawhorse ran all the
 faster.
                The hills became red flying masses to the eyes of
 the adventurers. They clung hard to the sides of the
 wagon, shouting to the Sawhorse to stop.
                "So they think that old blue mule could run, do
 they? I'll show 'em!" He made his legs go faster
 and faster.
                Sometimes he did not touch the earth at all, but
 leaped from hilltop to hilltop.
                "Stop, stop!" commanded the Scarecrow, pulling the
 reins with all his might.
                But the runaway Sawhorse would not stop.
 By this time the Tin Woodman was rattling in every
 joint.

                "I-I've g-got to s-stop and oil my j-j-joints!" he
 gasped. "The wind is d-d-drying them out!"
                But there was no way to stop the jealous little horse.
 He was determined to show Jenny that he could out-
 run any mule in Oz.
                "Oh, my stuffing!" moaned the Scarecrow, hugging
 himself to keep his seams from bursting. "I can't hold
 on to myself much longer!"
                "What shall we do?" Jenny cried. She was bounc-
 ing so hard that she could not open her handbag and
 reach for the fairy gifts.
                Just then a deep voice beside the road cried, "Stop!"
 They turned in time to catch a glimpse of a bright
 red plow horse. But the Sawhorse did not heed this
 warning. On and on he tore, faster than the wind.
                "Stop, stop!" shouted the red-faced farmers along
 the road.
                But the Sawhorse went right on.
                Jenny clenched her teeth and hung on to the wagon.
                "Sawhorse, you're more stubborn than a mule!"
                The Sawhorse heard her, and ran on.
                "You'd better say I'm faster than a mule!" he mut-
 tered.
                Just ahead, Jenny saw a narrow passage through
 the hills. They couldn't dash through a dark-red
 chasm like that. Something dreadful might happen.

 And something was coming toward them! If it got
 in their way, there'd be a terrible collision.
                "Help! Sawhorse, stop!" shrieked Jenny.
 desperate runaway paid no heed.
                The other occupant of the road became plainer. It
 was a farmer driving a wagon filled with bright yel-
 low beets.
                "We're in the land of the Winkies!" exclaimed the
 Scarecrow. "These hills will soon end, and a forest
 will begin. We'll be scratched and torn on the bri-
 ars
 "LOOK OUT!"
                There was a terrific CRASH! The air was filled with
 flying beets. Like yellow hailstones, they shot up in
 the air and fell down on the heads of the adventurers.
                "Ouch! Hey! Stop !" cried Jenny, dodging the big
 yellow missiles. The beets kept thumping on her un-
 protected head. Luckily she ducked her head and es-
 caped the blows of many of the beets.
                "If this doesn't beat everything!" she cried angrily.
 The yellow farmer wailed, "Oh, my new spring
 crop!"
                When the beets had ceased falling, Jenny found her-
 self more angry than hurt.
                The Scarecrow was somewhat out of shape, and the

 Tin Woodman had several dents in his body. But there
 was one good thing-the Sawhorse had been stopped.
                "Now, then, my friend," Jenny said, briskly jump-
 ing down and going around to the head of the Saw-
 horse, "would you mind explaining all this ruckus?"
                The Sawhorse, gazing back at Jenny, said, "Do you
 still think that blue mule can run?"
                "So that's it! Oh, you silly little beast!" Jenny burst
 out laughing and patted the wooden head of the horse.
 "If you weren't a blockhead, you'd never have given
 us such a fright."
                She turned around and saw the Scarecrow and the
 Tin Woodman helping the Winkie farmer pick up his
 scattered beets.
                Suddenly the Woodman stopped, crouched halfway
 to the ground.
                "Help! My joints are completely dry!"
 Jenny sprang to seize the oilcan that Nick always
 carried with him. But the oilcan was gone!
                "It must have fallen out when we were bumping over
 the hills," said Jenny excitedly. "What shall we do."
                "I can't move, and when my jaws get dry, I won't be
 able to talk," the Woodman said sadly.
                Jenny turned to the Winkie farmer. "Can you think
 of anything?"
                "No," said the farmer. "But I will put the tin man

 into the red wagon for you."
                The farmer picked up the Woodman and carried him
 carefully to the wagon.
                "I'm afraid you'll have to remain crouched during
 the rest of the trip. Do you mind very much?" asked
 Jenny.
                The Tin Woodman did not answer. The joints of his
 jaws were already dry.
                "Maybe some rain would help," said Jenny.
 "I hope it doesn't rain!" the Scarecrow said anx-
 iously. "For I am useless when soaked."
                Jenny looked at the sky. It was a speckless yellow.
 "I don't think it will rain," she said.
                There was nothing to do now but gather up the rest
 of the beets. When the farmer was ready to go on his
 way, he warned Jenny and the Scarecrow:
                "You are not far from the Winkie Woods. Watch
 out for a certain neck of the woods. It's a Bottle-neck!"
  
 CHAPTER 8
  
 In the Winkie Woods
  
                JENNY and the Scarecrow looked at each other as
 the Winkie farmer drove off with his load of yellow

 beets.
                "Now what do you suppose he meant?" asked Jenny.
 "There's only one way to find out. Climb into the
 wagon!" advised the Scarecrow.
                The Scarecrow had smoothed and patted himself
 into shape, and soon he felt much better. The Wood-
 man sat motionless, crouched over as he had been
 when he had gone dry.
                "It's all my fault," the repentant Sawhorse said. "If
 I hadn't run away the oil can would not have got lost.
 Let this be a lesson to me!"
                The Sawhorse started at a sensible pace and soon
 the red~wagon was rolling out of the narrow passage.
 As the hills fell behind the travelers, the dark wall of
 a wood rose before them.
                "Whatever a bottle-neck is, I'm ready for it!" said
 Jenny, clutching her handbag with its precious fairy
 gifts.
                "I wonder if it's different from a rubber-neck?"
 mused the Scarecrow.
                "Or a stiff-neck, like the poor Woodman's," said
 Jenny.
                "His isn't as stiff as mine," called out the Sawhorse.
 "I haven't any joints in my neck, and can't turn it at
 all!"
                The wagon entered the forest. The smooth road

 ended, and once more the adventurers began to bump
 and sway.
                At the same time the light grew dimmer, for the
 tall trees were shutting out the yellow sunshine.
                "My, how dark it's getting," said Jenny, drawing
 closer to her friends.
                "Halt!" cried a queer, choked voice.
                The Sawhorse stopped so suddenly that the three oc-
 cupants of the wagon were unceremoniously pitched
 out into the road.
                "Are your necks broken?" asked another queer
 voice.
                Jenny looked up and saw a row of tall, thick-necked
 bottles blocking the path. The leader of these bottles
 marched up to Jenny and repeated his question:
                "Are your necks broken?"
                "No, thank you, they are not!" said Jenny. Then
 she added curiously, "What's the matter with your
 voice? It sounds so choked."
                "It's all bottled up," replied the leader. "That's why
 I was wishing you had broken your neck."
                "Indeed!" Jenny said indignantly. "What has my
 neck to do with your voice?"
                "I'd pour my horse-medicine on you and relieve my
 throat," explained the bottle.

                "Did you say horse-medicine!" exclaimed Jenny.
 "I declare, you do give me a pain in the neck!" Then
 she noticed that the tall bottles had horse-shaped faces.
 "Nobody is going to pour horse-medicine on me!"
                "What about your horse?" asked the leader.
 "Couldn't we break his neck and prove how fine our
 medicine is?"
                "Well, I should say not!" the Sawhorse answered for
 himself.
                Jenny was growing angry. Getting to her feet, she
 shook herself all over and then said with satisfaction,
 "No broken bones. You planted yourselves in our path
 on purpose, didn't you?"
                "Yes," said the leader in a disappointed voice. "Now,
 how about your friends? Didn't they break any bones?"
                The Scarecrow laughed, "The Tin Woodman and I
 haven't any bones! I have seams and he has joints."
                "What a shame," cried another Bottle. "We could
 prove that our medicine mends broken bones."
                "How do we know that?" said Jenny, scornfully.
 "It's written all over us", said another bottle, draw-
 ing near to Jenny.
                Jenny bent down and read:
                                GUARANTEED TO REPAIR BROKEN NECKS IN
 HALF AN HOUR
                "Do you have any way of oiling his dry joints?"

 Jenny asked, pointing to the Tin Woodman, who sat
 motionless and silent in the road.
                The bottles all spoke at once: "Our joint reply is.
 NO!"
                "Then you are of no use to us," said Jenny. "Kindly
 get out of our way."
                "But your horse," insisted the leader, pointing to
 the Sawhorse. "Just let us break his neck!"
                "You'd better leave me alone," growled the Saw-
 horse.
                "See here," said a fat bottle, drawing up to Jenny
 with a menacing look. "We're not going to be cheated.
 If you won't let us break your neck, then make it an
 arm."
                "I will not!" cried Jenny.
                "A leg?"
                "No!"
                "A finger?"
                "No!"
                "Just your little finger," begged the leader. "It will
 heal in half an hour, you know."
                "Absolutely not!" cried Jenny, stamping her foot
 angrily. "I never heard of such bras~r glass! Get
 out of our way!"
                Jenny and the Scarecrow picked up the Tin Wood-

 man and hoisted him into the wagon. Jenny did most
 of the work, for the Scarecrow's muscles were as weak
 as straw. Then Jenny and the Scarecrow jumped into
 the wagon. As Jenny picked up the reins, she said,
                "Come on, Sawhorse!"
                The intelligent creature backed up a few steps and
 then attempted to run around the line of bottles. But
 as the row extended across the path, this was impos-
 sible. There was only one thing for the Sawhorse to
 do--he jumped.
                Crash! One of the bottles had been struck by a wheel
 and lay in splinters.
                "Hurrah!" cried the other bottles in their choked
 voices.
                The Sawhorse ran ahead. Jenny looked back and
 saw the bottles bending over their fallen comrade,
 pouring medicine over him.
                "At last they have someone to experiment on," she
 said.
                The Sawhorse ran on, drawing the wagon and its
 adventurers farther into the woods. It grew alto-
 gether dark, and then suddenly it was bright-yellow
 light. Then, as suddenly, it was dark again.
                "What's the matter with my eyes?" said Jenny.
 "They keep going blind."
                "So do mine," said the Scarecrow. "It's as if I were

 blinking. But I can't blink or wink. My eyes are
 painted open."
                The yellow light flashed on, and then off, on and off.
 "It's not we who are winking, it's the woods!" ex-
 claimed Jenny.
                "Then it's natural," said the Scarecrow. "We are in
 the Winkie Woods."
                "I wish the light would go on and stay on," Jenny
 said. "How can we tell whether it's night or day?"
 Her friend was silent, for he did not know how to
 answer. Then Jenny said, "I'll know when it's night,
 for I'll get sleepy."
                "That's something that never happens to me, you
 know," said the Scarecrow. "Nor to the Tin Woodman,
 though he's past feeling anything now."
                "If only we could find the Scalawagons," said Jenny.
 "They might be helpful to the poor Woodman. And
 as for me, I'm getting hungry."
                "I never get hungry," said the Scarecrow sympa-
 thetically. "Too bad you aren't made of straw, Jenny."
                "I don't see it that way," answered Jenny.
 There was a wink of darkness, in which Jenny could
 see nothing. The Sawhorse stumbled and fell. He
 did not get up, but lay while the woods continued to
 wink on and off. During a light wink Jenny jumped

 down and examined the animal.
                "Your front leg is broken!" she exclaimed.
 "Then you might as well unhitch me from this
 wagon," said the Sawhorse.
                The Scarecrow came to help Jenny unharness the
 horse.
                "What are we going to do?" Jenny said anxiously.
 "Without the Sawhorse we can't get out of these
 woods."
                The Sawhorse picked up the broken leg, and hold-
 ing it in his mouth, trotted back in the direction from
 which they had come.
                "Where are you going?" asked the Scarecrow.
 The Sawhorse dropped his leg long enough to an-
 swer, "Back to those medicine bottles. They are my
 only chance of getting mended."
                Then the Sawhorse picked up his leg, and holding it
 between his wooden jaws, disappeared in two winks.
                "Well, if we aren't in a tight place now!" said Jenny.
 "As tight as a bottleneck," the Scarecrow said.
 "As well as in the dark," added Jenny.
 The two stood dejectedly in the path. At last Jenny
 said, "Use the sharp brains the Wizard gave you,
 Scarecrow, and think of a way out."
                The Scarecrow put his hand to his head and thought
 hard for an instant. Then he looked up, smiling.

                "We have the solution in the bag!" he said.
                "What bag?" asked Jenny.
                "Your handbag!"
                Jenny laughed joyously. "Of course! I nearly for-
 got the fairy gifts."
                Then she opened her bag and brought forth the
 eyeglass and the ear-muffs and handed them to the
 Scarecrow.
                "Put these on and tell me what you see and hear."
 The Scarecrow put on the fairy gifts. But he only
 said, "I see nothing. I hear nothing."
                "What!" exclaimed Jenny. "Won't my gifts help
 anyone but me?"
                Then, replacing the gifts in her bag, Jenny put on
 her magic gloves and her left-footed shoe.
                "Now, then," she said, "we'll see."
                "Only in flashes," said the Scarecrow, between two
 winks of light. "However, there's nothing to worry
 about. All trouble has its conclusion."
                "We must reach this conclusion soon," said Jenny.
 "Help me lift Nick out of the wagon, please."
                They got the helpless Tin Woodman to the ground.
 Jenny took a hand of each of her friends.
                "Hold tightly," she cried. "We will jump to this con-
 clusion!" Jenny jumped on her powerful left foot--and

 went sailing upward, carrying along the Scarecrow
 and the Woodman.
                As they went above the trees, the wind caught them
 and wafted them toward the entrance of the wood.
                A great flash of yellow light winked on, and looking
 down, Jenny saw that she was directly above the
 bottles, who were busily attending to the Sawhorse.
                "Let's go down and see if they've mended him," said
 Jenny. And with that she began to descend.
                The three came safely down to earth, close to the
 bottles. Jenny let go of the Scarecrow and the Wood-
 man and ran to examine the Sawhorse. The wooden
 animal was lying down, and the bottles were dancing
 all around him.
                "Why are you hopping like that?" asked Jenny.
                "Because," buzzed the leader, who was a blue
 bottle, "we must shake ourselves well before using."
                Then suddenly the blue bottle stood on his head
 The medicine came running out of his mouth, over
 the broken leg of the Sawhorse. In a moment the other
 bottles stood themselves on their heads, while their
 blue, green, and black medicine anointed the Saw-
 horse. A variety of smells filled the air.
                Soon the Sawhorse got up and stood
 soundly, on all four legs.
                "There you see," buzzed the blue bottle; "we could

 do the same for you."
                "Thanks," said Jenny. "But I don't feel broken up
 over this."
                "Do you call that gratitude?" shrieked a tiny bottle,
 apparently a bottle baby.
 stiffly, but
                "We must all take our medicine now and then," an-
 other said.
                "And in these Winkie Woods, we all have our dark
 moments," added a third.
                "I know what--let's break the horse's leg and mend
 it all over again," suggested a murky bottle.
                "You're not very bright," said Jenny, impatiently.
 "But I can see through you. Nobody is going to break
 us apart. We're leaving together, right now!"
                She and the Scarecrow put the Tin Woodman on the
 Sawhorse's back. Then the Scarecrow climbed on. As
 Jenny prepared to follow, a fat bottle rushed up.
                "Stop, stop!" cried the bottle. "I insist that you give
 me a trial."
                "Go away, imbecile!" shouted Jenny, stamping her
 foot.
                The next instant she was in the air, high above the
 bottles and the Sawhorse. She had stamped her fairy
 foot, quite forgetting that she wore her magic shoe.

                When the Sawhorse saw Jenny sailing above the
 trees, he gave a frightened snort and began to run.
 Deep in the woods he came upon the red wagon. He
 stopped only long enough to let the Scarecrow hitch the
 wagon behind him, putting the Tin Woodman into it.
 Then the frightened Sawhorse was off and nothing
 could stop him.
  
 CHAPTER 9
  
 A Notable Adventure
  
                WHEN Jenny found herself alone in the air, her
 first thought was to return to her friends. But
 she had jumped in a wink of darkness, and lost her
 direction. When she saw that she could not return to
 the others, she comforted herself by thinking,
                "The Sawhorse will surely take them back to
 Glinda."
                Then Jenny bent her mind on the adventure ahead.
 She was sailing easily, every moment being carried
 farther from the Winkie Wood.
                She was quite tired of that wood and eager to see
 new places. As for being in the air, high above the
 trees, that did not concern her at all. For she had
 often jumped on her fairy foot and sailed into de-

 lightful adventures. She had once sailed all the way
 from the U.S.A. into the land of Oz.
                "Maybe I'd better put on my fairy eye. It helps to
 be farsighted at such a time," she thought. And she
 slipped her hand into her bag and brought out the
 eyeglass.
                As soon as she had fixed the glass to her eye, Jenny
 detected a great many shapes in the distant sky. She
 promptly turned herself in that direction.
                Coming near to the shapes, Jenny discovered them
 to be a host of floating little people, or rather, fairies.
 They were the queerest sight she had ever seen. They
 resembled little old men, for they had long beards that
 came to their feet. And on each one's head was a bell.
 Jenny quickly counted eighty-eight of these bell-
 hatted creatures.
                "That's funny," thought Jenny. "If they wear bells
 where their hats should be, why can't I hear any
 music?"
                Then she remembered her fairy ear-muffs, and tak-
 ing them from her purse, fastened them to her ears.
                In an instant the air was filled with the music of
 bell--large peals, small tinkles, musical chimes, and
 deep gongs.
                "Well, I'll be dog-gong!" Jenny exclaimed in aston-

 ishment.
                The little bell folk had not yet discovered her, for
 they were all floating with their backs to her. They
 stayed together, like a cloud. They seemed to be asleep,
 with their beards tucked between their knees. Next
 moment, however, an alarm rang, waking them all.
 Swinging around, they caught sight of Jenny.
                Instantly a clamor shook the air. All the bells began
 to peal forth at once. The loud fire gongs made a deaf-
 ening racket.
                "See here!" shouted Jenny. "Must you make all
 that noise?"
                Her voice seemed to surprise the bell-people. They
 ceased their ringing, and floated cautiously up to her.
 Then a single bell-man asked in a tinkling voice,
                "What keeps you up? You haven't any beard for a
 sail!"
                "Of course I haven't any beard!" said Jenny indig-
 nantly. "What do you take me for?"
                "We wouldn't take you for anything," the bell
 tinkled politely. "What are you?"
                "A girl! Don't you bells know what girls are?"
                "Do you ring?"
                "Of course not. And I'm not a siren, either. But I
 sing. And I play a piano, too. If you had a piano, I'd
 show you."

                "A piano?" chimed in another bell. "Oh, dear, pianos
 are too heavy to fly."
                "I should say they are," agreed Jenny with a laugh.
 She was beginning to enjoy herself. As for the bell-
 men, they had overcome their shyness and were crowd-
 ing around her. Jenny could see their good-natured
 faces and twinkling eyes.
                "Excuse me for disturbing you," said Jenny. "You
 were all sleeping so peacefully."
                "Oh, that's all right," intoned a deep-voiced bell.
 "But to tell you the truth, we didn't dream of your
 coming."
                "If you sleep all day, when do you ring?"
                "I am a vesper bell," answered a clear, sweet tone.
 "My work begins at twilight."
                "I suppose you wouldn't all care to give a concert
 now?" asked Jenny.
                "If you'll note what we play, we'd be glad to oblige,"
 said the vesper bell. "That's how great composers get
 their music. They listen to us, ringing in their ears,
 and they note the music on paper. Then they in turn
 become noted. And all thanks to us, the Nota-bells."
                "I didn't bring any note-paper with me," Jenny
 apologized.
                The bells drew back and formed a ring around

 Jenny. Then they began to peal forth, in soft, har-
 monious strains. It was the most delightful music
 Jenny had ever heard. When the concert was over,
 she thanked the fairies.
                "That was really a notable experience," she said.
 "But why did you form a ring around me?"
                "So you would not be carried away by our music,"
 they explained.
                "I could listen to you all day," said Jenny. "But I
 am on an important adventure."
                At these words the Nota-bells flew closer to her,
 clamoring, "Adventure? Did you say adventure? Let
 us come with you!"
                One of the bells, that could not ring, but was a little
 dumb bell, looked most imploringly at Jenny. She could
 not resist, and answered,
                "Very well, come along if you wish. I can't bear to
 leave you looking like blue bells. But you must all do
 as I say, and never re-bel! Follow me like a flock of
 sheep."
                "You'll be our bell wether," promised a joyous tone.
 "Lead on!"
                "Do you think I am a-bell?" said Jenny mischiev-
 ously.
                As she spoke, she pushed her fairy foot against the
 air and sent herself forward, into the unknown.

  
 CHAPTER 10
  
 Number Nine chimes In
  
 BACK in the Wizard's workroom, Number Nine was
 tuning the dials of the teletable.
                "Let's see what's lost today," he remarked, getting
 a pencil and paper. "I'll just jot down anything of
 note."
                Number Nine was careful not to tune in to the Scala-
 wagon Factory, for he had heard the Wizard say that
 the Scalawagons were to be a surprise. And like any
 good Munchkin boy, Number Nine knew enough to
 wait and be surprised when the time came.
                The large clock was hanging over the transom of
 the door.
                "Still fiddling with that contraption?" scolded the
 clock.
                "I'm not fiddling," answered Number Nine. "And
 I wish you'd change your tune."
                "It's high time you got to work," complained the
 clock.
                Number Nine glanced up. "The time wouldn't be
 so high if you'd get down off of there," he said. "It's

 time you marched on."
                "I'd rather fly," said the clock. "It gets monotonous,
 always staying in this tower."
                The boy continued to turn the dials. "Maybe I'll
 find something interesting soon. Just give me a few
 minutes."
                "Give you a few minutes!" exclaimed the clock in
 horror. "Do you think I have time to spare? Anyway,
 it's bad to work on borrowed time!"
                But Number Nine did not hear this. He was waving
 his arms wildly.
                "What is it?" asked the clock. "Quick, tell me!"
                "Why, a lot of things are lost today!" cried Number
 One in great excitement He watched the screen of
 the teletable.
                "What? What?" said the clock impatiently.
 "You can see for yourself," said the boy, pointing
 to the screen. Across the screen floated a number of
 objects. They seemed to be in a whirlwind sort of
 flight, yet spinning helplessly in the midst of no-
 where.
                "I can't make it out," said the clock. "What are
 those things, anyway?"
                "The scalawagons! They're lost, and I think they're
 somewhere outside of Oz!"
                "Then they're in the horrible Desert," the clock said,

 catching Number Nine's excitement. "Do something,
 quick! You can't let them fall into the hands of the
 Mifkits."
                "I wish the Wizard were here! I'm not as expert
 with these controls as I ought to be."
                And then as Number Nine fumbled with more dials
 and levers, he tuned out the scalawagons and brought
 another picture to the screen.
                It was Tik-Tok, lying near the Carrot Mountain. He
 was lying in the position that he had fallen into when
 the Bell-snickle had pushed him out.
                "Poor Tik-Tok, he's fallen by the wayside," said
 Number Nine. "And hoz!-what's that?"
                On the screen appeared the troupe of little Lollies,
 with the peppery Minty in the lead. These little girls
 carried brooms, which they began to poke at Tik-Tok.
                "Why doesn't the copper man run away?" asked the
 big clock leaning through the transom. It was leaning
 over so far that it seemed as if it would fall at any
 moment.
                "Tik-Tok can't run," said Number Nine. "He's quite
 run down."
                "Do you mean to say he ran down that mountain?"
                "I can't tell. From the looks of him, he fell down.
 And that is why he's run down. It's time somebody

 rescued him."
                "Will you stop talking of time and leave that to me?"
 shouted the clock in anger.
                "You? Why, what can you do?" said Number Nine.
 "You forget that I am the Wizard's helper, too. He
 turns to me time and time again," said the clock.
                "Fine! Then tell me how we can save Tik-Tok from
 those creatures, who are sticking their brooms into
 him."
                "It doesn't matter about Tik-Tok. He can't feel any-
 thing," said the clock unfeelingly.
                "Maybe you're right."
                "Me? I'm always right! What do you take me for-
 a second-hand clock?"
                "I'll find someone who needs help more than Tik-
 Tok," said Number Nine, tuning the dials of the tele-
 table.
                He found a great many missing things, but he did
 not consider them of enough note to write down. They
 were the usual batch of missing buttons, stray cats,
 and lost sheep.
                "So far, nothing-" began Number Nine, when sud-
 denly music seemed to come from the teletable. "Ah-
 hoz! We've found something!"
                "What chime is it?" asked the startled clock.
 The boy carefully tuned to the right and the left,

 until he had the right focus for his eyes and ears. He
 gave a whistle of astonishment.
                A cloud of little men was floating across the screen.
 The men had long beards, and bells for caps. Music
 was coming from these bells, filling the wizard's work-
 room with clear sound.
                "A lot of lost chords !" said the clock. "Aren't you
 going to record them in your notebook?"
                "Certainly, this is a matter of note," said the boy.
                "What a breezy tune they play," said the clock, lean-
 ing forward so far that he almost tumbled through the
 transom. The clock seemed to enjoy the spectacle of
 the singing bells.
                "They're in high spirits-sky-high," chuckled the
 clock. And with that it leaned so close to Number Nine
 that it lost its balance and fell with a loud BONG!
                For an instant all its machinery whirred, and the
 ticks came fast and unevenly.
                "Do you need any help? Wait-said Number Nine.
                But the clock scrambled to its feet and said with
 dignity, "Time waits for no one! Thank you, I'm quite
 niyself now."
                "Good!" said the boy, turning back to the teletable.
 The clock came up close to him. In that moment, Jenny
 Jump floated into the picture on the screen.

                "Well, well! Is Jenny lost, too?" exclaimed the boy.
 "Now, this calls for action!"
                "What can we do about it?" asked the clock eagerly.
                "Did you say WE?"
                "Certainly," said the clock. "For I'm going with
 you."
                "You're always going! Well, come on."
                The boy and the clock ran to a small door at the side
 of the room. It was quite an ordinary-looking door,
 but the boy spoke to it:
                "Ambassa-door, take us to Jenny!"
                The door suddenly bent down.
                SWISH!
                The Wizard's workroom was empty!
  
 CHAPTER 11
  
 Tik-Tok Is Rescued
  
 HIGH in the sky, Jenny was enjoying the rhythm
 of the Nota-bells. As she flew, leading them, they
 played Oz opera, Munchkin Blues, Quadling quartets,
 and Winkie lullabies. They kept the music up, play-
 ing it as soft as down.
                "This is lovely," thought Jenny. "And now, if only
 we'd find a new adventure."

 Scarcely had she thought this, when a commotion
 sounded at the rear of the bell-men.
                "What's up?" said Jenny, looking around.
                "Something that hasn't any businesss to be up," re-
 plied a deep-voiced bell.
                And then Jenny saw Number Nine struggling in
 the hands of a bell-man, who riad captured him.
                "Let him go! He's a friend of mine," called Jenny.
                "What about this monster?" asked the bell-men,
 ringing about the long hall clock.
                "Kindly leave me alone," said the clock sharply.
 "I'm accustomed to keeping my affairs in my own
 hands."
                "Isn't he rude? Shall we drop him?" called the bells.
                "Spare him," cried Number Nine. "I brought him
 with me."
                "And, pray, what brought you here?" asked Jenny.
 "I knew you were lost and came to rescue you."
 At that all the bells pealed forth in laughter.
 "Now, what are they laughing at?" the boy said
 appealingly.
                "The idea of my being lost," answered Jenny. "I'm
 not lost, only in search of the lost scalawagons or any
 good adventure.
                At that moment two cars dashed furiously beneath

 them across the desert and were soon out of sight.
                "Don't try to follow the scalawagons," Number Nine
 called in alarm. "They are in the Sandy Waste. Res-
 cuing Tik-Tok is much easier."
                "Tik-Tok?" said Jenny in surprise. "Is he in trou-
 ble?"
                "Yes, indeed. He's lying at the foot of Carrot Moun-
 tain with a lot of Lollies popping him on the head."
                "I don't know the way to the Carrot Mountain," said
 Jenny.
                "Neither do I," said Number Nine.
                "We'll take you," said several bells. "It is to the
 south."
                The bells formed a ring around Jenny, Number
 Nine, and the clock. In this circular formation, they
 proceeded southward.
                Looking down, Number Nine soon saw that they
 were flying over the dismal desert. He saw a dark
 spot of agitated objects that might have been the
 scalawagons. But he had no wish to descend.
                "Fly higher," he begged the Nota-bells. The bell-
 men sailed upward, and soon passed over the red glass
 dome of Carrot Mountain.
                "Hm. Something has broken the dome to pieces,"
 observed Number Nine. "I wonder if all is well inside
 the Scalawagon Factory."

                He did not have much time to wonder. At that mo-
 ment the Nota-bells began to descend. They flew down
 very gently, wafting the boy and the girl and the clock
 earthward. When they came to rest, they were on a
 red road outside the village of the Lolly-Pops.
                "Farewell, we cannot remain," called the leader of
 the bells. "Go straight on, and you will come to this
 Tik-Tok."
                "Must you leave us?" Jenny said regretfully. She
 had become fond of the little bell-topped men.
                "We'll meet again," promised the leader with a
 smile. And then he and his band rose up, flew high
 into the sky, and disappeared from view.
                "They might have watched us rescue Tik-Tok," said
 Number Nine.
                "What if they had?" retorted the clock "They had
 no clappers to applaud!"
                "I really don't care for applause. Poor Tik-Tok must
 be saved," said Jenny.
                She hurried forward over the broad red road On
 either side lay the red Quadling country. Red hedges
 bordered the road, covered with red leaves and red
 blossoms. The red clouds drifted slowly overhead in
 the peaceful afternoon.
                "What a lovely day for saving someone," said Jenny.

 "Yes, everything looks rosy," remarked Number
 Nine.
                The clock, stalking beside them, said practically,
 "You ought to be arming yourselves. Those Lollies
 may resist you!"
                "Trust to my fairy gifts," said Jenny with a smile.
 In a few more ticks of the clock, they had arrived
 at the north side of Carrot Mountain. Circling the
 base, they came upon an extraordinary scene. There
 lay a pile of squirming bodies, the whole population
 of Lolly-Pop Village. They were piled on top of each
 other, struggling with something underneath. Jenny
 saw a glint of copper.
                "It's Tik-Tok! He'll be crushed!" cried Jenny,
 springing forward. Number Nine and the clock ran
 after her.
                All she could see of Tik-Tok beneath the struggling
 heap of Lollies were his copper legs. At a little distance
 the lazy old Pops leaned upon one another, looking on.
 Jenny flew at the Lollies and waved her hand with the
 fairy glove. Instantly the Lollies popped aside, ex-
 posing the helpless form of Tik-Tok.
                The clock stepped forward, peering down with in-
 terest. Then it said in disgust,
                "Hm. No wonder he runs down. Hasn't any crank."
 Jenny turned the copper man over on his face. Then

 she proceeded to wind him carefully with a key stick-
 ing under his right arm.
                Suddenly the copper man spoke: "Where-am-I?"
                "Where you landed," said Jenny. "Where did you
 think?"
 "I-can't-think-yet. Please-wind-me-under-my-left
 arm," said Tik-Tok. Jenny did as she was bidden.
                "Now-my-brain-wheels-are-going," said Tik-Tok.
 "If-you-please, wind-the-key-in-my-back."
                As soon as Jenny had done this, the copper man got
 to his feet. "Ah, how-good-it-feels-to-be-in-tick-tock
 con-di-tion! Thank-you- dear-Jennie."
                All this time the Lollies had stood swinging their
 brooms. As the copper man got up, they scampered
 away. But they did not run far. Their curiosity was
 too great. They hid behind a rock and peeped out to
 see what the strangers would do next. The lazy old
 Pops did not move at all.
                Tik-Tok was holding the rubber hammer with which
 he had knocked sense into the scalawagons. At the
 sight of the hammer, Tik-Tok remembered.
                "Oh,-my-poor-scalawagons!" he moaned. "How-
 can-I-manage-with-out-them?"
                "Your scalawagons!" cried Jenny, staring at Tik-
 Tok. "Are you sure your fall didn't crack your brain

 wheels?"
                "Not-at-all," replied Tik-Tok. "The-Wizard-made-
 me-man-a-ger-of-all-the-scal-a-wag-ons. But-they've-
 dis-ap-peared. I-haven't-any-idea-where-to-look-for-
 them."
                "I know where they are," said Number Nine. "In
 the Sandy Waste, beyond Oz."
                "Do-you-suppose-we-can-go-after-them?" said Tik-
 Tok anxiously.
                "I couldn't do that," Number Nine explained. "Be-
 cause I'm not supposed to know the Wizard's surprise."
                "Nonsense!" joined in the clock. "A mere formality.
 I'm sure the Wizard would forgive you if you discov-
 ered his secret."
                "But discovering secrets that are drifting over the
 Sandy Waste is no picnic," said Number Nine. "Sup-
 pose we fell into the clutches of the Mifkits ourselves?"
                Number Nine shuddered as he mentioned the name
 Mifkits. His father, the Munchkin farmer, had often
 told him and his thirteen sisters and brothers of those
 wicked little denizens of the land beyond the desert.
                While they were talking, up crept the old Pops. It
 seemed too much work for them to lean together when
 there was someone else to lean on. So they quietly
 leaned themselves against the Copper man.
                Now, Tik-Tok had a peaceful disposition at all times.

 But these lazy fellows exasperated him. He brushed
 them off, he shooed them, and he sidestepped from
 them. But they returned again and again, attaching
 themselves to him like flies.
                At last Tik-Tok swung his rubber hammer.
                BAM! BAM!
                "That-will-teach-you-to-use-your-own-back-bones,"
 said Tik-Tok.
                "They have sticks where their backbones should be,"
 said Jenny. "Regular sticks-in-the-mud."
                "Well, they'll-have-to-stick-together, and-stop-both-
 ering-me," said Tik-Tok, swinging his hammer.
                "Pop down!" he cried. Instead of each Pop falling
 down, he POPPED UP!
                "Hurrah!" cried Minty, the first Lolly to come from
 behind her rock.
                "Hurrah!" cried all the other little Lollies, jumping
 into sight.
                The old Pops had undergone a complete transforma-
 tion. They now had intelligent expressions on their
 faces, and their bodies straightened up smartly. They
 began to smooth their clothes and slick back their
 hair, until they looked as spruce as their daughters.
                "Pop them some more," cried Minty.
 Jenny said, "You aren't being very respectful to-

 ward your Pops, I'm afraid. You ought to be licked.
 Then you'd grow up."
                "Oh, no, licking makes us grow down!" cried Minty
 in alarm. And another neat little Lolly, with a grape-
 colored face, added,
                "And think of the stickiness."
                "Are you good to eat?" said Jenny. "Oh, dear, and
 I'm so hungry!"
                Her mouth began to water at the sight of so many
 Lollies and Pops. At her words, the whole village pop-
 ulation turned and ran-the old Pops running faster
 than their daughters. Six doors slamed together. The
 inhabitants were safely behind them.
                "Well, I wouldn't have eaten them, anyway," said
 Jenny. "But, oh dear, I am hungry!"
                As if in answer to her words, six doors opened
 slightly-only a crack-and six dishes were set upon
 six stoops. Jenny peered and saw the tiniest plates
 of stew. Each dish was but a mouthful for a real girl,
 but all together the six platefuls made quite a meal.
 Jenny went from one door to another, collecting the
 stew. She offered to share her dinner with Number
 Nine, but the boy declined. He had had a hearty meal
 just before leaving the Wizard's workroom. Luckily,
 Tik-Tok and the Clock never wanted food.
                "There, I feel better," said Jenny, when the last dish

 of stew was gone. "My, those Lollies put a lot of flavor
 into their food."
                "They ought to know something about flavor," said
 Number Nine. "Flavor is their middle name."
                The clock said impatiently, "I'll not give another
 minute to this delay. We must save the scalawagons!"
                "I'm ready," said Jenny. "Let's go!"
                "I'm going," answered the clock. "But I can't get
 anywhere."
                "Neither can I," said Number Nine. "Without the
 Ambassa-door or those Bells, I can't fly through the
 air!"
                "Neither-can-I," said Tik-Tok sadly.
                The three looked at one another in dismay. They
 gazed upward, hoping to catch sight of their friends,
 the Nota-bells. But the sky was perfectly empty, with
 not a sign of anything to help them.
                "I forgot that none of you can leave the ground
 of your own accord," cried Jenny. "And I can't go off
 and leave you. What shall we do?"
                "I don't know," said Number Nine.
                "It looks as if we're anchored here," grumbled the
 clock. "And instead of saving the scalawagons, we'll
 have to be saved ourselves!"
                "Oh, no! I have an idea!" said Jenny.

  
 CHAPTER 12
  
 Sawhorse Starts a Commotion
  
                THE Sawhorse hadn't stopped running. After he
 sprang away from the Medicine Bottles, he ran
 wildly through the Winkie Woods. The little animal
 was terrified, thinking that something would happen
 to Jenny, who had floated above the trees.
                "I must return to Glinda and warn her," called the
 Sawhorse to the Scarecrow.
  The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman bounced with
 in the red wagon, for the Sawhorse was not paying
 attention to the rough spots in the path.
                "That's a good idea," answered the Scarecrow. "But
 couldn't you run more easily, my friend?"
                The wooden animal did not heed the Scarecrow's re-
 quest. His one thought was to get back to Glinda's lawn
 party. The woods, winking all around him, confused
 him. If only he could get free of these blinking trees!
                Around and around ran the Sawhorse, starting up
 every new path. After a long time he was able to see
 a path that led out of the woods. He ran eagerly in
 that direction, thinking it the way to return to Glinda's
 red palace.

                "This is better," sighed the Scarecrow, when the
 wagon was running once more in the open, on a smooth
 broad road.
                The Tin Woodman could say nothing. He sat doubled
 over as if he had a pain. He was silent; his dry jaw
 hinges were motionless. The Scarecrow would have
 liked to converse with his friend, but this was impos-
 sible. And it was impossible to talk to the Sawhorse, for
 that creature was too excited to listen. So the Scare-
 crow sat thinking his own thoughts, while the red
 wagon rolled furiously through the Yellow Winkie
 country.
                "What a shame that Nick, the Woodman, cannot en-
 joy the spectacle of this bright yellow land of which he
 is emperor," thought the Scarecrow. "It would de-
 light his kind heart to know that all is well with his
 people."
                The Scarecrow glanced at Nick, but the Tin Wood-
 man's eyes were on his own feet.
                "If only I had an oilcan," sighed the Scarecrow. "I'd
 soon have him like his old self."
                On and on dashed the Sawhorse, until the Winkie
 country began to fall behind, and a purple haze ap-
 peared on the horizon.
                "Why, there's the land of the Gillikans! The Saw-

 horse has been traveling north instead of south !" the
 Scarecrow thought.
                "Sawhorse you are running in the wrong direction!
 Turn around!" shouted the Scarecrow.
                "Never!" cried the Sawhorse. "I wouldn't return to
 that wood for anything!"
                "Then you must turn to the left. That way, you'll
 reach the Emerald City."
                The wooden animal hesitated, slowing his feet. Then
 he said, "All right, I'll go to the Emerald City. Maybe
 someone there will be able to save Jenny."
                And that was how the Sawhorse, instead of reach-
 mg Glinda's, ran instead up to the gates of the Emer-
 ald City. No visitors were expected at that hour! The
 Guardian of the Gate was talking to the Soldier with
 the Green Whiskers. The Soldier with the Green
 Whiskers had laid aside his military expression, and
 with a happy smile was playing marbles. The Guard-
 ian of the Gate sat keeping score.
                "Leave the city gate open, for Ozma and her party
 should be returning soon," said the Soldier with the
 Green Whiskers.
                "What do you suppose is happening at Glinda's
 now?" asked the Guardian of the Gate.
                "Oh, they have all been told what the Wizard's sur-
 prise is, and are enjoying themselves immensely," re-

 plied the Soldier wisely.
                "Oz, yes," sighed the Guardian. "I wish I had been
 there when the Wizard told what his surprise was."
                "Don't fret, you'll be surprised, too----"
 And then to the Soldier's own surprise, something
 dashed, pell-mell, into him.
                It was a rude attack on his rear flank. The Soldier
 leaped up with a shout.
                "Halt! In the name of the Army of Oz!" he de-
 manded.
                "Yes, halt!" echoed the Guardian of the Gate. "You
 can't come crashing into the city like this!"
                "What WAS it?" eried the Soldier.
                "I don't know. It went past me so fast, I couldn't
 see anything but a red spot before my eyes."
                "At them!" yelled the Soldier with the Green
 Whiskers, seizing his blunderbus and charging away.
                The Guardian looked after the Soldier and thought,
 "I shouldn't have left the gate open, I suppose. But
 now I'll keep it open so the Soldier can drive it right
 out again."
                The Soldier with the Green Whiskers ran down the
 street shouting, "Stop, stop, invader!"
                But the dashing red wagon did not stop. It only ran
 faster, as the Sawhorse bolted through the city.

                "It's taken me such a long time to get here," the
 Sawhorse was thinking. "Goodness knows what's hap-
 pened to Jenny in the meantime. I must get her res-
 cued, and nothing shall stop me!"
                Instead of heeding the commands of the Soldier and
 all the population, the Sawhorse dashed more madly.
 The children playing along the street climbed the trees
 for safety. The trees pulled their lowest branches up
 out of the way. The shoppers quickly vanished within
 the stores. The stores drew in their steps and shut-
 tered their windows. The houses leaned back from the
 walks. Everything got out of the way of the panicky
 Sawhorse.
                "Hold on!" shouted the Scarecrow, pulling on the
 reins.
                And then the Sawhorse came to the Animal Enclo-
 sure. This was a large garden where animals from all
 of Oz were kept for the children to enjoy. The animals
 were usually quiet and contented. Occasionally one
 would try to slip away, but the trumpeting of Kabum-
 po, the elephant, soon brought it back.
                A crowd of children were in the animal garden,
 stroking and talking with the animals, when the Saw-
 horse dashed in. The red wagon shot like a streak of
 fury, the Scarecrow bounced up and down, and the
 Tin Woodman bobbed madly.

                "Save Jenny! Save Jenny!" cried the Sawhorse.
                "Whoa! Stop, I say," shouted the Scarecrow.
                "Stop, invader! Treason! Help!" yelled the Soldier
 with the Green Whiskers, running in the rear.
                The commotion frightened the children and the ani-
 mals. They began to run around in circles. A pair of
 purple donkeys broke their chains and galloped from
 the Animal Enclosure. Kicking up their heels, they
 vanished down the street. A blue giraffe and a yellow
 chimpanzee broke forth, following the donkeys. See-
 ing their comrades free, the other animals strained
 and pulled at their chains, until more had broken loose.
 Helter, Skelter, the pack and kaboodle went rushing
 out of the Animal Enclosure. The people ran tumbling
 out of their way. The stones and fences along the
 streets tried to trip and ensnare the animals, but the
 runaways escaped. Tigers, sheep, dragons mules
 horses, and unicorns went charging toward the gate
 of the Emerald City.
                "In the name of Oz, and all the Ozzians what is
 coming?" cried the Guardian of the Gate, throwing up
 his arms.
                The herd Was thundering toward him.
                "That's not the same thing that came in a few min-
 utes ago," said the Guardian. "Whatever it is, I

 mustn't let it escape."
                The Guardian ran to shut the gate. He succeeded in
 closing it half-way, when the herd swept down on him,
 pushing him aside and rushing out of the city.
                The Sawhorse, meanwhile, was once more running
 through the city streets. At the corner of Strawberry
 Street and Banana Boulevard, a group of children
 were gathered around the free soda fountain. The
 Sawhorse flew into the center of this group, scatter-
 ing the children in all directions. On and on ran the
 excited animal not stopping until it reached Ozma's
 palace.
                Right up the stairs dashed the Sawhorse. The red
 wagon rolled through the main corridor of the palace
 and into Ozma's throne room. There it stopped.
                "Where is everyone?" panted the Sawhorse quite
 out of breath.
                "Don't you remember?" answered the Scarecrow.
 "Everyone's at Glinda's party."
                "That's so," the Sawhorse said regretfully. "How
 silly of me to come here!"
                "You're not expected to have the good sense that I
 have," said the Scarecrow, patting his own head.
                Just then a door at the side of the throne opened
 and two girls came out. One was Jellia Jamb, Ozma's
 personal maid. The other was Betsy Bobbin, who had

 been invited to the palace for the day.
                Betsy was shipwrecked with Hank the Mule long
 years ago. After many strange adventures, Betsy and
 Hank had arrived in Oz, where they were soon made
 to feel at home.
                "Well, look who's here!" cried Jellia, running to the
 Sawhorse to stroke its smooth wooden back.
                Betsy went around to the side of the wagon and
 exclaimed,
                "What ails the Tin Woodman? He looks petrified."
                "Cake's sake!" said Jellia, seeing Nick's condition.
 "I'd say he looks ozzified."
                "He certainly is ozzified," said Betsy. "Is there
 anything we can do, Scarecrow?"
                "Get an oilcan," the Scarecrow said promptly.
 "Oh, dear, I'm so sorry! Only this morning we were
 searching for an oilcan to oil a sewing machine. But
 we couldn't find one anywhere."
                "Of course there must be many oilcans in the tower,
 in the Wizard's workroom. But no one is allowed in
 there," said Jellia.
                "That's right," added Betsy. "Number Nine and a
 big clock flew away from there a while ago."
                "Foiled, instead of oiled!" said the Scraecrow. "Poor
 Nick. He must be getting tired of stooping over like

 that."
                The Scarecrow put his arm around his friend the
 Woodman.
                "Oh, the poor thing!" cried the kind-hearted Jellia,
 bursting into tears. "We must do something! How I
 wish dear Ozma were here. She'd produce an oilcan
 by magic."
                "Then we must go to Ozma," spoke Betsy decidedly.
 "Right straight to Glinda's, where our queen now is."
                "That's right," Jellia said, nodding her head so that
 her tears sprinkled the head of the Scarecrow.
                "Careful, please," warned the Scarecrow. "I'm not
 much of a thinker when my brains get soaked.
                Betsy climbed into the red wagon. "Come on, Jel-
 lia," she said. "We'll all go to Glinda's and see Ozma."
                "I've been wanting to do that all day," confessed
 Jellia, her tears changing to a smile.
                When the two girls were seated in the red wagon,
 the Sawhorse started out of the palace. This time he
 ran sensibly through the streets, not alarming anyone.
                At the gate of the city, they met an obstacle. It
 was the Guardian, who said,
                "Ah hoz, there you are! Stop, villain! What have
 you done with my friend, the Soldier with the Green
 Whiskers? His marbles are waiting for him."
                "I don't know anything about any soldier," the Saw-

 horse said with dignity. "Kindly let me pass."
                "No, indeed. You made the animals run away. The
 Soldier will put you in the Dungeon of Oblivion for
 that!"
                Jellia leaned forward and said coaxingly, "If you
 let us out, we'll find the animals and tell them to come
 back."
                Just then the Soldier with the Green Whiskers came
 running, pointing his blunt musket at the Sawhorse.
                "Stop, in the name of the Army of Oz!" cried the
 Soldier with the Green Whiskers. "You have caused
 a riot, disturbed the peace, and made the animals es-
 cape."
                "What do you mean to do to me?" asked the Saw-
 horse.
                The Soldier appeared to think for some moments.
 Then he said, "I know a fitting punishment. You will
 let me defeat you at a game of marbles."
                "Marbles!" snorted the Sawhorse. "Are you trying
 to insult me? I'll never play marbles as long as I live!"
                "Do you prefer the dungeon?" thundered the Sol-
 dier.
                "I'd prefer that you mind your own business," cried
 the Sawhorse. Then, before anyone could say OZ! he
 dashed away, carrying the red wagon through the city

 gate.
                Down the road he ran, faster than he had ever run
 before. As he ran he thought indignantly,
                "Arrest me, indeed! What had I done? I was only
 trying to save Jenny. JENNY! I ALMOST FORGOT
 HER!"
                And with that, the animal doubled its speed, flying
 so that it scarcely touched the ground.
                It was not long before it overtook the other animals,
 lumbering along the road.
                As the flying Sawhorse came near, the animals shied
 and reared, then broke and ran.
                The entire herd was heading toward the red country
 of the Quadlings. Seeing this, the Scarecrow said with
 satisfaction, "That's fine! We'll soon all be at the pal-
 ace of Glinda the Good."
  
 CHAPTER 13
  
 Save the Scalawagons"
  
 JENNY said cheerfully, "Even if you can't fly
 through the air, I think it can be done."
                "What can be done?" inquired Number Nine.
                "You can fly through the air."
                "You mean, even if we can't?" asked the clock.

 "Yes. We must get away from this Lolly-Pop vil-
 lage, over to the Sandy Waste. That's our best chance
 to rescue the scalawagons," said Jenny.
                "But you haven't explained where our wings are
 coming from," grumbled the clock. There was a look
 of mistrust on its face. It was scowling so fiercely that
 its hands were crossed.
                Jenny said, "Once I jumped in the Winkie Woods
 holding the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman by the
 hand. This time we have more in the party. For we
 can't leave Tik-Tok behind."
                "Oh-no,-please-don't," said Tik-Tok anxiously.
 "Well, I'm sure if anyone is to be left, it can't be I.
 I am much too important," said the clock, drawing it-
 self up and scowling at Tik-Tok.
                Jenny burst out laughing. "Can you reach out one
 of those hands and hold mine? Then give your other
 hand to Tik-Tok. And you, Number Nine, hold my
 other hand."
                The boy and the clock each took hold of one of
 Jenny's hands. And the clock gave its other hand to
 Tik-Tok, who stood swinging his rubber hammer.
                "Now, then, hold on for your life!" exclaimed Jenny
 and she stamped her fairy foot against the ground.
                The next moment all four were sailing upward,

 borne on Jenny's magical foot.
                "Whee-ee-ee!" cried the clock, its wheels whirring
 around dizzily. "Even the ambassa-door wasn't so
 abrupt. This upward movement is quite different from
 the clockwise motion."
                "You'll be a wise clock if you keep silent and just
 hold on," cautioned Number Nine.
                They were traveling so fast that the wind began to
 whistle through the boy's breeches.
                Jenny laughed, "That reminds me of those whistle-
 breeches we made for you last year, when you helped
 me in my style shop."
                "They were supposed to make me hurry," said Num-
 ber Nine, smiling at himself.
                "Well, you're hurrying now," said the clock. "Good-
 ness me! I wish I were standing peacefully in the hall
 of the tower."
                "What good is a clock that stands still?" said Jenny.
 "We aren't any good if we're too fast, either," said
 the clock. "Who ever heard of time flying?"
                "Your hands aren't where they should be, so you're
 speaking quite pointlessly," said Jenny.
                "Furthermore," put in Number Nine, "One can't
 tell time by you. I wonder how far that desert is?"
                "Time will tell," said the clock impertinently.
 Tik-Tok, who had been silent all this while, suddenly

 tocked, "Some-thing-down-be-low !"
                All three looked downward, and saw that they were
 flying over the great Sandy Waste. Dark and forbid-
 ding rocks jutted up from the sand. It was such a sin-
 ister place that Jenny hesitated to descend. She could
 see no sign of the scalawagons, even through her
 magic eyeglass.
                The four kept flying, penetrating farther over the
 dismal region of the desert. All sorts of queer, black
 shapes were below, but whether they were monsters
 or only rocks, Jenny could not tell.
 "My-dear-scal-a-wag-ons. How-are-they-get-ting~a
 long?" said Tik-Tok sadly.
                "There's something!" cried Jenny.
                A cloud of madly flying objects appeared below.
                Tik-Tok began swinging his hammer excitedly.
                "Let-me-at-'em!" he stuttered. "I'll-knock-more-
 sense-in-to-'em!"
                "Are those the scalawagons?" asked Jenny won-
 deringly. "Why, they act like flabbergasted crea-
 tures."
                "They-are," said Tik-T6k. "That's-ex-act-ly-what-
 ails-'em."
                But it seemed as if more than that ailed the scala-
 Wagons. They seemed unable to fly. They were kept

 in the air by the peli-cans, who held them by their tur-
 rets.
                If they fell to the earth, they would be caught by the
 brown swarm of Mifkits. A thousand of the creatures
 were dancing excitedly, waiting for the fall of the
 scalawagons. The poor peli-cans were getting tired,
 but they held on with all their strength.
                The scalawagons had used up the flabbergas in their
 tanks, and their energy was spent. If they hadn't been
 heavier than the peli-cans, those faithful creatures
 would have flown them back to Oz. But they could
 only hover in the same spot, holding their scalawagons
 out of reach of the Mifkits.
                Every minute the peli-cans were growing more tired.
                "Look, they are slowly dropping to the ground!"
 shouted Number Nine.
                "They mustn't," cried Jenny, watching the Mifkits
 and knowing that they meant to get their prey.
                "What can we do!" said the clock.
                "I-can't-man-age-to-think-of-any-thing," said Tik-
 Tok miserably.
                Jenny swooped toward the nearest scalawagon and
 kicked it with her fairy foot. As it passed, Tik-Tok
 struck out with his hammer and gave it a smart click
 on the side. At once it came to its senses and steered
 itself toward Oz. Its eyes shone with gratitude. The

 peli-can on its turret flapped its wings with joy.
                Jenny saw another scalawagon just about to drop,
 and leaping toward it, she kicked it after the first.
 Tik-Tok swatted it into sensibility.
                "Hurrah!" shouted Number Nine. "We're just in
 time." Below, the ugly Mifkits danced with rage. One
 Mifkit jumped so high, that he landed inside a low-
 hanging scalawagon. Jenny did not notice, but kicked
 this scalawagon after the others.
                It was hard work to send all the scalawagons into
 safety. Jenny swooped here and there, working her
 fairy foot with all her might.
                The clock seemed to enjoy swinging through the air
 with Jenny.
                "Swing-time never came into my experience be-
 fore," it said.
                "Jen-ny-is-indeed-won-der-ful," acknowledged Tik-
 Tok with a grin.
                When there were only four scalawagons left, Jenny
 said, "Let's each get into one. It will be pleasant to
 return that way."
                Number Nine, the clock, Tik-Tok, and Jenny each
 climbed into a scalawagon and turned their heads to-
 ward Oz and safety.
                The Mifkits screamed. Then they began tearing

 their clothes and pulling their hair. And finally they
 fell upon each other and clawed and scratched and
 banged one another.
                "Come back! Come back!" they screamed.
 Jenny's scalawagon only hurried faster after the
 others.
  
 CHAPTER 14
  
 The Great Reunion
  
 FLYING directly toward the border of Oz, the
 scalawagons soon used up the power of Jenny's
 kick. They began to slow, leaving it to the peli-cans
 to propel them along.
                                "What's wrong?" worried Jenny. "We're almost
 over the border. They mustn't fail us now!"
                Tik-Tok, flying in the scalawagon beside hers, cried
 out, "They-need-more-peli-can-fluid-in-their-tanks      
                "Then let us land and attend to that," said Jenny.
 In just a short distance, they gained the border. As
 soon as they were safely across, the tired peli-cans
 gave up trying to hold up the scalawagons. They be-
 gan to drop, dangerously near the tiny village of the
 Lolly-Pops.
                The scalawagons, not having eyes underneath them,

 could not see where they were falling.
  
                They crashed to earth, landing in a tangle of wild
 ozberry bushes. Every house in the village was shaken
 by the shock. Several windows broke, and the flower
 pots tumbled off every windowsill. The scalawagons
 lay on their sides with their wheels spinning.
                From out of the small houses rushed the Lollies and
 their Pops. They ran toward the scalawagons, curi-
 ous to see what had struck their village. But they
 stopped at a safe distance.
                "Whew!" said Jenny, climbing out of her scala-
 wagon. She felt a bit dazed, but nothing worse.
                Number Nine jumped nimbly to his feet. He had
 not been hurt. Tik-Tok, having a sound body, was
 well. Only the clock was having trouble. In its ex-
 citement it quickly climbed out of its scalawagon and
 ran down the road.
                "Stop!" commanded Number Nine. "You can't run
 down like that."
                But the clock had disappeared behind a tree.
                Tik-Tok assumed his place among the scalawagons,
 putting them back on their wheels. Lifting his rubber
 hammer with authority, he commanded the peli-cans,
 "Fill-up-the-tanks."

                The peli-cans flew to do as they were bidden. In a
 few minutes every scalawagon was prancing about
 spiritedly, ready to take off again.
                "Just a moment," said Jenny. "We can't go off just
 yet. We must do something about the damage we've
 caused the Lollies."
                Turning to the Lollies, who were lingering just out
 of reach, Jenny called,
                "I'm sorry we broke your windows and flower pots.
 But don't worry. The Wizard will take care of every-
 thing. He's the kindest Wizard that ever wizzed."
                At these words, the Lollies and Pops lost their fear.
 The Pops came forward, leading their tiny daugh-
 ter by the hand.
                "Thank you kindly," said one Pop. "Tell us more
 about this Wizard."
                "You've never heard of the wonderful Wizard of
 Oz!" exclaimed Jenny in astonishment.
                The Pop shook his head, and his daughter shook
 hers.
                "Then I suppose you're one of the backward tribes
 of Oz," said Jenny, giving the Pop a look of pity. "You
 really should know the Wizard. And Ozma, too. She's
 the dearest queen-"
                "That ever queened?" asked the Pop.
                Jenny burst out laughing. "That's one way of put-

 ting it. Now, why don't all you folks get into the
 scalawagons and come along to Glinda's? She'd be
 delighted to have you. You can all meet the Wizard,
 Ozma, and a lot of other interesting folks."
                The Lollies and Pops had listened eagerly to every
 word. Now they looked at each other and asked,
                "Shall we go with her?"
                "How could we get back?"
                "We'll bring you safely back," Jenny promised.
 The Lollies began to dance with excitement. It was
 easy to see that they were eager to take a trip.
                The clock was peeping from behind a tree. Sud-
 denly it struck the half-hour so loudly that everyone
 looked its way.
                "I'm all wound up to go. Why are we still here?"
 demanded the clock.
                "The-scal-a-wag-ons~are-read~y," said Tik-Tok.
                "Climb in, everyone," said Jenny.
                The clock came out from behind the tree, and
 climbed into a car.
                The Lollies, now that they had got over their shy-
 ness, were quick to climb into the scalawagons. As
 they slid into the soft cushions, they smiled with de-
 light. Never before had they known anything so com-
 fortable.

                Tik-Tok waited until the last, making sure that
 every scalawagon had its wits about it. Whenever
 necessary, he gave one a tap with the rubber hammer
 to make it smart.
                At last everyone was ready. Tik-Tok got into the
 leading car. As he raised his copper arm in a signal,
 the procession started.
                Jenny relaxed in the seat, closing her eyes with re-
 lief. "This is simply scrumptious," she murmured.
                Number Nine was too much interested in the car's
 make-up to feel sleepy. He was busy examining every
 button on the dashboard. Suddenly he gave a shout,
 waking Jenny.
                "What's wrong?" asked Jenny, sitting up.
                "Nothing's wrong. Everything's all right," shouted
 the excited boy. "Look!"
                Jenny steered her scalawagon close to his and peered
 over.
                Number Nine had discovered the LUNCH button.
                He pressed it, and a table, set for two, unfolded.
                "Oh, look, Jenny. You must join me."
                "It does look good," admitted Jenny, who felt rather
 hungry.
                "Then why not come into my car," pleaded Number
 Nine, with an unusually warm light in his blue eyes.
                Jenny was fond of the boy, who had formerly helped

 her in her style shop. So she promptly called to the two
 scalawagons to stop while she climbed over beside
 Number Nine.
                The boy and the girl ate their lunch with enjoyment.
 There were a meat pie, delicious muffins, sliced
 bananas, blueberry pudding, and two large glasses
 of milk. When Jenny had eaten half of her blueberry
 pudding, it changed to a strawberry ice.
                "Oh, my," marveled Jenny. "Nobody but the Wiz-
 ard could have invented anything so grand!"
                "I'm surprised he didn't think of it before," said
 Number Nine.
                "Keep on being surprised," said Jenny. "That's
 what you're supposed to be."
                "I'll stay surprised until we reach Glinda's. Then
 everyone will be surprised together," said Number
 Nine.
                The scalawagon parade kept rolling easily along
 the red road. Already the red towers of Glinda's palace
 could be seen.
                Jenny finished eating and opened her handbag.
 "Time to put away my magic gifts." She put back the
 eyeglass, the mittens, the earmuffs, and the left-
 footed shoe. Then she patted her hair.
                "Dear, I hope I don't look all frazzled out!"

                "You look fine to me," said Number Nine admir-
 ingly. "But don't forget your coronet, Duchess
 Jenny!"
                "I almost did forget," said Jenny. When she had
 put on her coronet, she sat up straighter. "There, I
 feel better."
                "You always look pretty, your grace," said the boy,
 addressing her as a duchess ought to be addressed.
 He added mischievously, "As my name is Number
 Nine, I'm lucky to be with you."
                "You're my lucky number," said Jenny, merrily.
 "Well, will you listen to the people at Glinda's shout-
 ing? They've caught sight of the scalawagons."
                The palace grounds seemed to be leaping into the
 air, as the people there jumped up and down in their
 excitement.
                "Hurrah for the Wizard's surprise," shouted every-
 one.
                The scalawagons stopped. Tik-Tok climbed out, his
 body ticking with pride.
                "The-great-wiz-ard-made-one-for-each-of-you," he
 announced.
                "HURRAH!"
                The people kept shouting and jumping in their hap-
 piness.
                The Wizard stood beaming and chuckling and nod-

 ding his head.
                Princess Dorothy borrowed a handkerchief from
 Ozma to weep her tears of joy. Then Ozma borrowed
 it back, as her own eyes filled.
                "Never before have all our subjects been able to
 go anywhere they wished. But with these scala-
 wagons, there will be more traveling all over Oz," said
 Queen Ozma.
                Jenny went up to Glinda. "I have another suprise,"
 said Jenny. "I have brought the Lollies and the Pops.
                "Indeed?" said Glinda with a smile. "Bring them
 to me, dear. They shall receive a royal welcome."
                Jenny went to the scalawagons, where the Lollies
 and their fathers sat quite pop-eyed at all they saw.
                "Come and meet the rulers of Oz," said Jenny. She
 led them through the throng of people toward Glinda's
 chair. Queen Ozma and Princess Dorothy, sitting on
 either side of Glinda, joined in the greetings.
                The Lollies looked with admiration on the three
 girls. Ozma, for all that she was queen, was dressed
 in simple white, with a blazing green OZ on her crown.
 Dorothy was dressed in a short dress and socks, like
 many another girl in the U.S.A., where she had come
 from. And Glinda was robed in shining red, with her
 ruby-tipped wand in her hand.

                "Aren't there any more rulers in Oz?" asked Minty,
 when she had gathered enough courage to speak.
                "Jo-King of the Gillikans is away on a leave of
 absence. The Scarecrow, ruler of the Munchkins, and
 the Tin Woodman, emperor of the Winkies, are also
 absent," Glinda explained.
                Behind Glinda's chair the Cowardly Lion and the
 Hungry Tiger sat in respectful silence. But the
 Hungry Tiger was licking his chops as he gazed on
 the delicious Lollies and Pops.
                "Here," said Jenny, going up to the hungry beast.
 "There is no need for you to be hungry ever again.
 You will have your own scalawagon, equipped with
 everlasting lunch."
                The animal bounded up, crying joyously, "Where
 is it? Lead me to it!"
                He leaped toward the nearest scalawagon, and
 squeezed his huge body inside. In another moment he
 pressed his paw on the LUNCH button and began.
                The Cowardly Lion grinned sheepishly, saying, "I
 was afraid to go near those cars. But I guess they
 won't hurt me."
                He rose and walked with dignity toward a nearby
 scalawagon, and climbed in. The people cheered the
 Lion, who looked proud of his momentary courage.
                "So you did rescue the scalawagons, didn't you?"

 said Glinda, patting Jenny's hair. "We followed your
 progress in my big book of events."
                "Oh, then you must know what became of the Saw-
 horse, the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman," said
 Jenny. "I lost them in the Winkie Woods."
                "They'll be here, never fear," smiled Ozma. "And
 meanwhile, we must thank you, Jenny dear. What
 you did was very brave."
                "It was nothing," said Jenny, blushing. "If it hadn't
 been for my fairy gif-"
                Before Jenny could finish, a fresh excitement was
 heard at the rear of the crowd. Everyone turned, and
 then scattered to shelter, as a host of animals came
 dashing up.
                They were the runaways from the Animal Enclo-
 sure. Still running away from the Sawhorse, they had
 come straight to Glinda's palace. Behind the beasts
 the red wagon could be seen flashing down the Red
 Road.
                Before the people grew really frightened, Ozma
 raised her hand, and at once the animals stopped.
 Looking around with astonished expressions, they
 seemed to be wondering how they had got into such
 an elaborate party with so many good things growing
 on the trees ready to be eaten.

                Then into the confusion came Scraps, the patchwork
 girl, tumbling in a series of cartwheels.
 "I can't believe my ears and eyes,
 Every minute another surprise!"
                "See here," spoke out an old blue mule, "We're a
 long way from home."
                "If you don't get away from me and stop kicking,
 I'll breathe fire down your back," said a small drag-
 onette, edging away from the blue mule.
                "Here, what's all this quarreling?" began a Munch-
 kin farmer. "You animals never should have left
 the Emerald City."
                "Well, don't you think we ever want a day off?"
 grumbled a monkey, looking very cross. Then it saw
 Scraps tumbling on the lawn and ran to tumble be-
 side her.
                "You shall have the day off," spoke Ozma, holding
 up her hand for silence again. "Since you always give
 the people of my land enjoyment, it is only fair that
 you enjoy a day yourselves. So get into the scala-
 wagons. They're quite a treat!"
                The animals ran to the scalawagons and climbed
 in. Kabumpo, the elephant, could not possibly squeeze
 his bulk into one car. The people laughed and shouted
 advice, but Kabumpo used his own head. He stood up
 with his front legs on two cars and his hind legs on

 two others. When he lifted his trunk, a pleased smile
 could be seen on his mouth.
 Now the Sawhorse dashed up, shouting,
 "Save Jenny! Save Jenny!"
 And then his eyes fell on Jenny, standing safe and
 sound before him. His jaw dropped in surprise, and
 he muttered,
                "You are saved."
                "I'm all right," laughed Jenny. "But those poor
 creatures in the wagon!"
                She pointed to the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman.
 They were indeed a sight. The Scarecrow was so
 shaken that his stuffing stuck out in lumps, with
 empty places in the rest of his clothing. His brains
 were sagging all to one side of his head, where his
 mathematical genius was. The rest of his head was
 empty. All he could say was,
                "Nine hundred and ninety-nine miles. Double it and
 subtract ninety-nine miles, and divide by nine. Add
                "Poor Scarecrow," cried Jenny, running to his as-
 sistance. She lifted him up and placed him on the
 ground, shaking him as she did so. As the straw
 settled into place, the old look returned to the Scare-
 crow's face. His intelligence became rounded again.
 Raising his hands, he smoothed himself into shape.

                "Hello, everyone!" he said happily, looking about.
 "Hurrah!" shouted the people, and the Munchkins
 especially, who loved their Scarecrow king.
                Now the Scarecrow was himself again. But the Tin
 Woodman still sat forlornly, bent double, and looking
 at his toes.
                "An oilcan, an oilcan!" cried the Scarecrow.
                The people began to search themselves, going
 through all their pockets and possessions. But no oil-
 can could be produced.
                "I-have-it!" ticked Tik-Tok excitedly. "If-no-oil-
 can,-then-a-peli-can."
                He lifted his finger and pointed at a peli-can
 perched on a scalawagon's turret. Instantly the crea-
 ture flew toward the Tin Woodman. It gave the Wood-
 man a thorough oiling, probing its beak into every
 hinge and joint. Then the people had new cause for
 shouting, especially the Winkies. For they saw their
 emperor, the Tin Woodman, straighten up, take off
 his hat, and bow to all the assemblage.
                "I never felt more upright," he said with a grin.
 "Thank you, my good people, for this great welcome."
                "It's good to hear your voice again," said the Scare-
 crow, with tears of happiness running down his cheeks.
 The two old friends embraced.
                "I could see and hear all the time, but I could do

 nothing," went on the Tin Woodman. "There were
 a few times when I felt pretty anxious here" He
 placed his hand to his breast, indicating the position
 of his heart, which the Wizard had given him long
 ago. "But everything has turned out fine!"
                "HURROZ! HURROZ! HURROZ!" The people
 shouted themselves hoarse. Blue, red, yellow, and
 purple waved wildly on every side.
                Betsy and Jellia Jamb slipped down from the wagon
 and ran to Ozma.
                "This is a happy reunion," said Glinda. "And now
 that we are all together, let us all get into the scala-
 wagons and go for a ride."
  
 CHAPTER 15
  
 The Scalawagon Parade
  
 THE Lollies and their Pops had stood speechless all
 this time. Their eyes and ears were stretched
 wide, and the smiles on their faces told of their delight.
 Everything at Glinda's party was new and wonderful
 to these little folk. Even Minty was silent.
                But when Glinda proposed a ride, Minty found her
 voice and cried out coaxingly,

                "Your Majesty, won't you come and see our village?
 The road is smooth, and we could have a beach party
 at the Singing Brook."
                "A beach party?" spoke up Dorothy. "That sounds
 just elegant!"
                "But what about bathing suits?" asked Aunt Em
 in a practical tone. "We didn't bring any to this lawn
 party!"
                "Bathing suits will be furnished to everyone," put
 in Minty's Pop. Since Tik-Tok had knocked sense into
 Pop's head, he was a changed creature. The laziness
 was gone, and a look of good humor lit up his face.
                "It sounds perfectly grand," exclaimed Queen Ozma.
 Turning to Glinda, she added, "Let's do it!"
                "Of course," said Minty, "we wouldn't bathe our-
 selves. We'd dissolve. But you folks could have a
 glorious swim.
                "Dear Wizard, would you like to make the an-
 nouncement to all the people?" said Glinda. She
 turned to where the Wizard had been standing. But
 there was no one there. Again, the Wizard had quietly
 vanished. Only a moment before he had been talking
 to Number Nine and Tik-Tok.
                "Too bad, I think he would have enjoyed going
 along," said Glinda. "However, he must have impor-
 tant business to attend to."

                Glinda made the announcement herself. The people
 tumbled joyously into the scalawagons. Scraps somer-
 saulted over three scalawagons before she settled into
 the fourth one. Beside her Jack Pumpkinhead sat
 quite dignified, but his carved grin showed his secret
 delight.
                Captain Salt shouted, "Heave to! Anchors away!"
 and stood up in his scalawagon as if he were at the
 prow of a ship.
                Sir Hokus drew his short sword and held it aloft.
 He climbed onto his scalawagon's hood as if it were
 a horse, crying,
                "On to conquest! Whosoever needs succor shall
 have a valiant knight!"
                "Does he mean we're staying out all night?" anx-
 iously inquired the Cowardly Lion.
                Dorothy laughed and patted the Lion's mane, reas-
 suring him.
                Tik-Tok was in the leading scalawagon, and the
 procession was almost ready to go, when it was dis-
 covered that there were not enough scalawagons.
 Even though the people were taking their children
 and their pets in with them, the scalawagons wouldn't
 go around.
                "We can't leave anyone behind. It would make them

 unhappy," said the kind-hearted Tin Woodman.
                But just then a shout told everyone to look to the
 rear. All heads turned. There, from the direction of
 Carrot Mountain, came a procession of shiny, new,
 many-colored scalawagons. In the first scalawagon
 was the Wizard, beaming like a brand-new sun ray.
                "So that's where you were. Up in the workshop
 making more scalawagons to make more people
 happy," said Ozma with a smile.
                "Yes, your highness. Now we can all get on our
 way," said the great Wizard of Oz. "And meanwhile,
 the Production Department is turning out scala-
 wagons for the rest of Oz. I've instructed the cars
 to go their way when they are ready. Soon everybody
 in all the land will be supplied with a conveyance of
 his own."
                "Splendid!" cried Ozma, forgetting that she was a
 queen, and jumping up and down like an excited girl.
                Everybody was now laughing and having a lively
 time. Then Tik-Tok gave the signal, and the proces-
 sion started. The scalawagons rolled onto the broad
 highway leading to the village of the Lolly-Pops.
                They had gone a short way, when something ar-
 rested Ozma's attention. She ordered the scala-
 wagons to stop.
                There by the roadside stood the Sawhorse. He was

 no longer hitched to the red wagon. He stood with
 his head hanging down, like a grazing horse. But of
 course the Sawhorse never grazed. He never ate.
                "Why are you hanging your head like that? Why
 aren't you in the procession with us?" asked Ozma
 kindly.
                "Be carried around in one of those baby carriages?"
 said the Sawhorse, snorting. "No, thanks! They're
 nothing but a lot of gaudy flapdoodle!"
                "Jealous again !" said Jenny angrily. "First you
 were jealous of the blue mule, and now it's the scala-
 wagons."
                "I feel bluer than a mule myself," admitted the Saw-
 horse.
                Hearing this, Scraps tried to cheer up the wooden
 animal.
                "Whatever you think,
                Whatever you do,
                Try to feel pink
                Instead of blue!"
 advised the patchwork girl.
                The Sawhorse looked gratefully at Scraps and said,
 "Thanks. I'd like to take your advice. But with these
 scalawagons, my work in Oz is over. Nobody likes
 to feel useless, you know."

                "So that's it!" said Ozma. "Well, don't fret your-
 self, little Sawhorse. We'll always need you, to carry
 messages to our far-away friends, like Professor Wog-
 glebug over at the College of Learning in the Munch-
 kin country. You shall be our carrier. And Scraps
 will be our dispatch-work girl."
                "Oh, thank you!" cried Scraps, forgetting to rhyme
 her words. Her black button eyes gleamed. "Come
 on, Sawhorse, get in beside me. We must stick to-
 gether."
                "You'll need a messenger's suit," said Jenny. "To-
 morrow, come to my style shop, and get something to
 suit you."
                The Sawhorse felt better now and was willing to
 climb into the scalawagon with Scraps and Jack
 PuInpkinhead.
                Once more the procession rolled onward, skimming
 over lazy cows napping in the road. Everyone settled
 back to enjoy himself. Uncle Henry and Aunt Em
 settled back with happy smiles. But the next instant
 Aunt Em jumped up with a scream, almost falling
 out of the car.
                "What in the name of Oz is the matter?" asked
 Uncle Henry in astonishment.
                Aunt Em was screeching in fright and couldn't an-
 swer.

                "See here, Em. If anything is wrong-"
                "Wrong! Wrong!" cried Aunt Em. "I should say
 there is! I sat on something-a great big tack, or
 worse!"
                She stood clinging to Uncle Henry in terror. Uncle
 Henry looked down at the seat and his eyes opened
 wide.
                "It's not a tack, Em! I never saw a tack gnash its
 teeth!" He reached to pick up the thing, and got his
 hand bitten.
                Uncle Henry, who could whip his weight in wild-
 cats back in Kansas, soon had the snarling thing by
 the neck. "Whatever you are, you'll have to learn
 some manners," he said, giving the Thing a sound
 shaking.
                "Good gracious and sakes alive!" exclaimed Aunt
 Em in horror. "Get that hideous critter out of my
 sight!"
                Uncle Henry pulled off one of his big boots and
 shoved in the head of the Thing.
                "My, what a fright," said Aunt Em, sitting down
 again. "It almost spoiled this lovely ride."
                "I wonder what the Thing-a-ma-jig is?" said Uncle
 Henry. "As soon as we arrive where we're goin', I'll
 ask Ozma."

                "Get rid of it," said Aunt Em. "Or we'll have trouble
 on our hands."
                "Or in my boot," said Uncle Henry. "But don't
 Worry, Em. It's quite safe for the time being."
                "The critter was nastier than a rattlesnake and a
 skunk all rolled into one," said Aunt Em with a
 shudder.
                "You need something to take your mind off it," said
 Uncle Henry. "Here, look at this button marked
 'lunch.' We could both do with a bite of something."
 He looked at the hand that had been bitten and cor-
 rected himself, "I mean we might bite something our-
 selves."
                Aunt Em was examining the lunch button. "Henry!"
 she cried. "This does beat anything I ever saw! Get-
 tin' lunch without even cookin' an egg. What won't
 they think of next?"
                Then Aunt Em pushed the lunch button, saying,
 "Wouldn't it be nice if a turkey dinner came out, with
 cranberries and apple dressing! And pie and coffee
 and sugar-mints, and ice cream."
                The table unfolded itself from the wall of the car,
 and before their eyes were all the dishes Aunt Em
 had wished for.
                "Well, I'll be blowed!" exploded Uncle Henry.
 "Don't say that!" cried Aunt Em. "It reminds me

 of that awful cyclone that blew Dorothy away from
 us, long ago."
                "Well, Dorothy was blown to Oz, and that's how we
 came here, and we're quite happy about it, aren't we?"
 said Uncle Henry.
                "That's so. We're tremendously happy, dear." Aunt
 Em gave Uncle Henry's hand an affectionate squeeze.
 They began to eat their lunch.
                The afternoon was mild, and the fragrance of thou-
 sands of red flowers filled the air. After so many hours
 of excitement, the little Lollies were getting drowsy.
 Long before the parade reached their village, the tiny
 tots were fast asleep. They lay curled in their Pops'
 arms. For now the old fellows were ready to do their
 duty as fathers.
                "Don't wake them," said Glinda, smiling. "Since
 they can't swim, they might as well sleep."
                Soon the scalawagons rolled into the Lolly-Pop vil-
 lage. As the Wizard saw the damage done to the
 houses, he made some passes in the air and the houses
 became as good as new.
                When they passed their own homes, the Pops whis-
 pered goodbye and carried their sleeping Lollies in-
 side.
                The scalawagons rolled on to the red Singing Brook.

 Without a word of direction, they parked themselves
 in perfect order along the bank. The Wizard looked
 well pleased. As for Tik-Tok, the manager, he beamed
 like a polished copper pan.
                The tall clock stood up in one of the rear scala-
 wagons and called,
                "I hope nobody expects me to get into the swim! I
 just came along so you'd have plenty of time."
                "But you must have a good time, too," said Num-
 ber Nine.
                "Swimming is a waste of my time," said the clock.
 It slumped down in its scalawagon, which it was shar-
 ing with a Comfortable Camel.
                "Hump!" said the Camel. "I'll just take a drink
 of that water to keep from getting thirsty for a couple
 of weeks."
                Uncle Henry and Aunt Em had finished their lunch,
 and the table had folded itself back in place. Aunt
 Em sighed thankfully that there were no dishes to be
 washed.
                "Well, then, Henry, now that the folks are con-
 gregated at the swimmin' hole, are you goin' to do
 something about that-that-critter in your boot?"
 she asked.
                "You bet my boots I am," he said instantly. Getting
 up, he helped Aunt Em out of the scalawagon.

                "Come straight to the Wizard. He'll know what to
 do with it," said Aunt Em.
                "That's just what I'm aimin' to do, Em."
                The two walked directly toward the Wizard, who
 was just then descending from his scalawagon. Uncle
 Henry carried the boot out at arm's length. When
 he got near the Wizard, he held the boot toward him,
 saying,
                "There's a whelp of snarlin' meanness inside this
 boot. It was pesterin' Aunt Em a while ago. Be care-
 ful. Warn all the people to keep their distance."
                The Wizard took the boot, held it upside down and
 shook it. Down fell a fiercely scowling little brown
 monster. It hopped up and down in a rage, spitting
 and gnashing its wooden teeth, and then made as if
 to get away.
                "I forbid you to leave!" said the Wizard, holding
 up his powerful hand.
                The little creature instantly cowered there, not mov-
 ing an inch. But the Wizard had not forbidden it to
 scowl, and scowl it did, more frightfully than ever.
                "Balls of brimstone!" said Uncle Henry. "He looks
 as if he'd gobble you up!"
                "What in Oz is it?" asked Em.
 The Wizard smiled quite cheerfully. "It isn't any-

 thing in Oz. Nothing so hideous lives in our fair land.
 It's from over the Sandy Waste beyond our borders.
 Lost, strayed, or stolen, it's a-
 MIFKIT."
                
 CHAPTER 16
  
 The Lost Mifkit
  
                THE people in the surrounding scalawagons
 crowded around the Wizard as they heard him
 pronounce the dreadful name of MIFKIT, who could
 remove his head in a second and throw it at you.
                "Cake's sake!" cried Jellia Jamb, hiding behind
 Ozma and peeping fearfully around her.
  Tik-Tok paled to a light brassy color.
                 "How-did-that-get-in-to-one-of-the-prec-ious-scala
 wag-ons?" he said faintly. "I-was-too-run-down-to-
 pre-vent-it."
 "It's not too surprising," said Jenny Jump. She had
 crowded close to the Wizard and was staring down
 at the Mifkit.
                "When I discovered the scalawagons in the Sandy
 Waste, they were flying low and the Mifkits were
 jumping high. So I suppose this one jumped right into
 one of the scalawagons."

                "And it had to be mine," said Aunt Em ruefully.
                "But then, I'd rather have it happen to me than some-
 body who'd have been scared."
 She looked at Uncle Henry, who was smiling broadly.
                "What are you smiling at, Henry? Are you sug-
 gesting that I was scared?"
                "Oh, not in the least, my dear. Not in the least!"
 He winked at his niece Dorothy.
                "Well, what have we here?" It was Ozma, who had
 just come up. "A Mifkit, I declare! We haven't been
 bothered with them for years."
                "You must do something about this one, your High-
 ness," said the Wizard.
                "Yes, I suppose so," said Ozma. She thought a mo-
 ment. "I must hurry, or our beach party will be
 spoiled," she said.
 Ozma put her hand into her pocket and drew out
 a ring with a large sparkling emerald.
 She looked at the scowling Mifkit. "How would you
 like to be a winder?" she said.
                "I'd rather be a wonder," promptly said the Mifkit.
                "Please answer my question," said Ozma firmly.
                "How would you like to be a winder?"
                "All right, provided I don't wind up too different
 from what I am. I like myself now."

                "Then you are an exception," said Ozma. "But
 you'll like being a winder. She put on her ring.
                "Wait! Are the meals regular?" snarled the Mifkit.
 Ozma ignored this. She pointed the finger with the
 beautiful emerald straight at the top button of the
 Mifkit's jacket.
 "Now you're a winder!"
 The little Mifkit felt himself all over.
                "This isn't so bad," he said.
                "Henceforth you will see that Tik-Tok never runs
 down again," said the Ozma. "The Wizard will explain
 your duties."
                The Mifkit was scratching himself all over. For
 such a transformation as he had just had itches.
                The Wizard said, "Look here, Mifkit. I'll explain
 how to wind Tik-Tok."
 While the Mifkit went on scratching, the Wizard
 Pointed to an engraved copper plate on Tik-Tok's back.
 There was some writing on this plate. The Wizard
 read it aloud:
  
 SMITH & TINKER
 Patent double-action, extra responsive, thought
 creating, perfect talking
 MECHANICAL MAN
 Fitted with our special clockwork

 special attachment.
 THINKS -- SPEAKS -- ACTS -- AND
 DOES EVERYTHING
 DIRECTIONS
  
 For
 THINKING::Wind clockwork man under LEFT
                                 ARM (Marked No.1)
  
 For
 SPEAKING::Wind clockwork man under RIGHT
                               ARM (Marked No.2)
  
 For
 WALKING &
 ACTION ::Wind Clockwork man, middle of
                                BACK (Marked No.3)
  
 GUARANTEE
 This mechanism is guaranteed to work perfectly
 for a Thousand Years.
                The Wizard pointed to the three winding keys.
 "Now, get busy!"
                The Mifkit jumped to Tik-Tok's shoulder and be-
 gan to wind. But Tik-Tok was pretty well wound up

 already, and reaching up, he removed the tiny Mif-
 kit, placing him on the ground.
                The Mifkit jumped straight onto Tik-Tok's head.
 Reaching into Tik-Tok's breast pocket, he pulled forth
 a handkerchief and began to polish Tik-Tok's head
 with great energy.
                "Good-ness-me," said the even-tempered copper
 man. "Must-I-en-dure-all-this?"
                "He is your own personal helper," said the Wizard
 to Tik-Tok. "You'll find him very useful when you
 need him. When you want him to remain quiet, tell
 him so. He must obey you in everything."
                "Be-good-e-nough-to-sit-quiet-ly-on-my-head," corn-
 manded Tik-Tok.
                The Mifkit crossed his legs and sat still on top of
 Tik-Tok's head.
                More scalawagons had been coming up and park-
 ing themselves in a triple row along the bank of
 the Singing Brook. The brook had stopped singing
 when the first scalawagons appeared, but as it got
 Used to the little ears, it resumed its merry song.
                Suddenly one scalawagon came, elickity-click, to-
 ward the bank. Instead of parking itself in an orderly
 manner, it raced up to the water, leaped over the bank,
 and fell in with a loud SPLASH!
                When the car righted itself, there was Captain Salt,

 the pirate, standing at the steering wheel and shout-
 ing,
 "Avast, you land lubbers! Hard aport--and Ahoy!"
 Hundreds of water fairies appeared above the
 water. From behind the waterfall peeped the mis-
 chievous boy kelpies. Then, plop! kelpies and water
 fairies vanished from sight
                The pirate kept sailing his car like a ship, calling,
 "Heave to! Trim to the wind!"
                The animals from the animal enclosure were de-
 lighted. Leaping from their scalawagons, they gal-
 loped toward the water and jumped in. Kabumpo, the
 elephant, stood in the knee-high water, snorting
 through his trunk.
                Ozma, the Wizard, Glinda, Jenny, Dorothy, Betsy,
 and Jellia Jamb walked along looking for a place to
 get some bathing suits.
                "Here is the place, I believe," said Jenny. She
 pointed to a row of large mushrooms growing on the
 bank. From one of the mushrooms hung a sign:
  
  
                                                                BATHING PAVILION
                                                                                                &
                                                                AMUSEMENT PARK

                                                                Hopfrog, Esq.
                                                                Amusement Master
  
                "What a jolly place," said Jenny, hurrying for-
 ward.
                The big mushrooms proved to be little bath houses,
 connected by a trim little walk. Behind the bath houses
 a row of red bath towels were drying on a clothes line.
 Suddenly the important bull frog with the deep voice
 and the gold watch chain appeared. He was strutting
 with the grand air of a showman.
                "Good day, and welcome to my pavilion," he
 croaked. His fingers were playing with the watch
 chain, which the kelpies had once stolen from him,
 but which they had at last returned.
                "Do you want a bath house?" he asked. "Every-
 thing is free. Kindly avail yourselves of the opportu-
 nities at your disposal."
                "Thank you," said Ozma with a gracious smile.
 Inside the bath houses the visitors found bathing
 suits of every size. Soon everyone was ready. Some
 ran down to the water and began to swim. Those
 who could not swim were held up by the water fairies,
 who carried them across to the tune of the Singing
 Brook. The kelpies came out from behind the water-
 fall and amused the visitors by their queer antics.

 Several kelpies began to teach Number Nine how to
 slide down the waterfall.
                Some of the visitors preferred to sit in the reclining
 chairs on the bank. These were the characters who
 would be spoiled by getting a wetting-the Scarecrow,
 Scraps, the Tin Woodman, Jack Pumpkinhead, the
 clock, and Tik-Tok. They were having a splendid time
 listening to the music and laughing at the animals.
 Soon a dainty little lady frog came skipping up. She
 carried a basket, which she held out to them.
                "Anything you'd like? Please help yourselves.
 Everything is free."
                The basket was filled with candy, soda pop, oz cream,
 and bubble gum.
                The Scarecrow answered,
 "Thank you, madam. But as we never eat, we must
 decline."
                The lady frog hopped away. She came to Jenny,
 Glinda, Dorothy, Betsy, and Aunt Em, who were play-
 ing games on the bank. To these people she offered
 her basket. The good things were readily accepted.
                "What a perfect day for the beach," said Jenny,
 looking up. "Only one cloud in the whole sky."
                Aunt Em's gaze followed Jenny's.
 "If that's a cloud, it's acting mighty queer," de-

 clared Aunt Em.
                High in the sky the gigantic cloud seemed to burst
 into a hundred pieces, then come together again.
                Glinda and the others looked upward. "It certainly
 is strange. I can't tell from this distance just what
 it might be," said Glinda.
                "Neither can I," said Dorothy and Betsy.
                "Shall I go to the bath house and get my fairy eye-
 glass?" asked Jenny.
                "There seems no need of that," said Glinda, study-
 ing the sky. "The spot - whatever it is - is coming
 downward!"
                All of them looked intently at the sky. Yes, there
 could be no doubt of it. The mysterious matter was
 certainly heading their way.
  
 CHAPTER 17
  
 Old Acquaintances Return
  
 WE ought to warn Ozma and the Wizard," cried
 Jenny.
                "They are having such a good time, it's a shame
 to disturb them," said Glinda.
                She indicated the Singing Brook, where Ozma and
 the Wizard were watching a game of blind man's buff.

 Captain Salt's eyes were blindfolded, and he was
 Stumbling around, trying to catch Number Nine. But
 he had wandered behind the waterfall and lost his way.
 The kelpies swam behind him, giving him a push.
 Three green monkeys and a dragonette had joined
 in the game. Every time Captain Salt came near the
 dragonette, she squealed and let out a small jet of
 fiery breath, which was quickly quenched in the water.
                "Yes," said Jenny, "they are certainly enjoying
 themselves. Let's not bother them until IT gets here."
                While they stood watching, the cloudy matter came
 closer. It kept separating and uniting again, in a
 peculiar fashion.
                "It isn't a Kansas cyclone," declared Aunt Em.
 "That stays together until it's nipped you. Then, look
 out!"
                "That's right," said Dorothy, nodding. "I remember
 how a cyclone picked up our house, with me and my
 dog Toto inside, and carried us clear to Oz. It seems
 a long time ago."
                "You are still the dear little girl you were then,"
 smiled Glinda. "You aren't any older!"
                "That's because in Oz everyone stops growing at
 the age he'd always like to be," said Dorothy.
                "I think it's a grand system," said Jenny.

 While they talked, the object in the sky was coming
 nearer. Suddenly Aunt Em cried out, "If my old eyes
 don't deceive me, it isn't one big thing. It's a lot of
 little things!"
                "That's right," said Glinda. "And they appear to
 have wings. But not where wings should be. These
 have their wings in front."
 Jenny stared hard. There was something familiar
 about those flying objects. But without her fairy eye-
 glass, she could not be sure.
 The flying fragments came nearer.
                "What strange little people," cried out Betsy.
 Glinda smiled. "Let them come. They are harmless.
 But I'm sure I've never seen them before."
                "I have!" cried Jenny, all at once recognizing the
 creatures. They were little men with bells on their
 heads and long beards that were stretched out on the
 breeze like wings.
                "The Nota-bells !" she cried. "What brings them
 here?"
                "Their beards," replied Aunt Em. "I must say, it's
 the first time I've seen beards used for such a pur-
 pose."
                The Nota-Bells had now flown so close that their
 music could be heard.
                "What lovely chimes," said Betsy. "Reminds me of

 Christmas back in the U.S.A."
                "You'll like the bell-men," said Jenny. They are
 such gentle little men."
                "And little gentlemen, too, I hope," said Aunt Em.
 "I must ask Ozma to come and welcome them," said
 Glinda, slipping away. Meanwhile, the Nota-bells were
 landing. Jenny recognized all eighty-eight of them.
 Their leader now was the vesper bell, who swept her
 a bow and said,
                "We welcome ourselves back to your presence, miss.
 These, I suppose, are also girls?"
                The vesper bell pointed to Dorothy and Betsy.
                "That's right," said Jenny, adding, "And Aunt Em
 is a woman. Come and meet all our friends, including
 animals, hand-made creatures, a Wizard, a sorceress,
 and a queen."
                "Do you mean those water spirits out there?" said
 the bell-man, indicating those who were playing in
 the brook.
                Jenny laughed. "They don't spend all their time
 in the water. Come along, and bring your band with
 you."
                The leader walked with Jenny toward the brook.
 The other bells followed in a group, forming a semi-
 circle around Aunt Em, Betsy and Dorothy. As they

 approached the water, Ozma came forth to greet them.
 She was clad in a bathing suit of green scales, and
 the water dripped off in bits of song.
                "Singing scales," said the bell-leader admiringly.
 "Maybe we could have a duet?"
                "Thank you, I'd like that," replied the gracious
 queen. "But first, you must come and have a swim
 with us."
                "Oh, I couldn't be ringing wet," declined the bell.
 "But perhaps-I know! We'll take the necessary pre-
 cautions."
                So saying, he lifted the bell off his head and buried
 it in the sand. "My, what a weight off my mind," he
 sighed. The other bell-men followed their leader, and
 soon every bell was buried. The eighty-eight heads
 were quite bald from having worn the bells so long.
 The little old men went into the bath houses and came
 out clad in bathing suits of stripes, spots, plaids, and
 checkers.
                Ozma led the way to the water. The little men lifted
 their beards high and waded in.
                In the middle of the brook, Ozma introduced the
 bell-men to the Wizard.
                "This is our wonderful Wizard of Oz. And these are
 the Nota-bells."
                "What part of Oz are you folks from?" asked the

 Wizard genially.
                "We don't know," replied the leader. "We've been
 lost and wandering for so long, we don't even remem-
 ber the name of our tribe."
                The Wizard turned to Ozma "Your Highness can
 enlighten them, surely?"
                "When we return to the Emerald City, I'll look into
 my records," said Ozma. "There are sure to be musical
 records among the rest."
                "You've never showed up in the teletable, or I'd
 have seen you," spoke up Number Nine.
                "Maybe they did before you came to be my helper,"
 the Wizard said. "In that case, they'll be in an old
 notebook of mine.
                "It will be a great relief to find out who we are,"
 said the bell leader.
                "Cakes sake! Don't you remember anything about
 yourselves at all?" asked Jellia Jamb, staring curi-
 ously.
                The bell-man shook his head. "Nothing, except that
 we have a great enemy, who shadows us wherever
 go. We can't draw a free breath on account of him."
                "Shadows you?" said Jenny. "Why, there is a great,
 big shadow all over you right now!"
                This was true. Though the sun was still shining ill

 the red sky, a dark shadow had suddenly fallen over
 the band of bell-men.
                "LOOK OUT!" shrieked one. Instantly all of them
 scampered toward the bank. Leaping out of the water,
 they dug up their bells, and hastily clapped them on
 their heads.
                Ozma and her party looked up, trying to learn what
 was casting the enormous shadow. But nothing was
 to be seen. The air was suddenly heavy, and a bad
 smell had come into it. The music of the brook stopped.
 The water fairies hid deep below the water, and the
 kelpies disappeared behind the waterfall.
                "There is some menace nearby," said the Wizard.
 The animals, too, were acting strangely. All at once
 they quit the water and went loping toward the scala-
 wagons.
                "Look, there!" shrieked the leader of the bell-men.
 He pointed up the brook. Everyone turned. Coming
 from the distance was a huge lumbering Shape, quite
 shapeless. Its great shadow flickered before it, search-
 ing out the bell-men.
                "It smells familiar," said the Wizard. His nostrils
 began to twitch. "I've smelled that smell before."
                "What can it be?" said Ozma. She was extremely
 puzzled.
                The bells began to clang in alarm, and at that in-

 stant Tik-Tok began to tock in agitation. He had a
 feeling that he had met the monster somewhere be-
 fore.
                "It looks like a bloated bladder," said Uncle Henry.
                "Or a big rubber ghost," added Dorothy.
                "1t's a strange apparition," said the Wizard.
                "But what is it really?" asked Ozma.
                "That's just the Mystery!" all exclaimed ill a chorus.
  
 CHAPTER 18
  
 The Rubber Ghost
  
 SWISH~WISH~WISH! sounded the big feet of
 the monster on the water. Its shrill breathing
 sounded like a whistle. The bell-men flew up and cir-
 cled about in the air, ringing the saddest music. They
 would have flown away, but Ozma had made a sign
 for them to stay.
                 Nobody was really frightened while their good
 queen stood by. But all were filled with an uneasy
 wonder. That is, all. but Scraps, who could never be
 anything but gay. On seeing the great shadow that
 was crossing the water, she turned a somersault and
 said,

                "I'm not afraid of anything which is
                In trousers, pants, galligaskins, or breeches!
                I'm protected all over with finest cat-stitches,
                Sewed in by one of our very best witches!"
 Aunt Em said, "I wish that flickering shadow would
 go away!"
                Captain Salt, with cutlass drawn, and Sir Hokus
 the Knight, took their stand on either side of Ozma.
                "Allons!" cried Sir Hokus. "We'll teach thee, knave,
 not to harry defenseless women!"
                "Shiver my timbers!" bellowed Captain Salt. "Let's
 see the color of your courage, villain!"
                The Shape came closer. It was as tall as Ozma's
 highest tower, and it swayed from side to side. It
 was almost upon them, when Ozma raised her hand
 with the emerald ring. The spectre gave a weird wail,
 turned, and ran. It leaped the water in three bounds,
 its flat feet churning the spray, and lumbered clum-
 sily toward the horizon. Then it was gone.
                "Well," said Aunt Em, drawing a deep breath. "I
 hope that is all we shall see of it!"
                Overhead, the bells burst into a peal of glad sound.
 They rang out so loud and clear that everyone caught
 the carnival spirit. Joining hands, they began to
 dance. The merriment was soon-in full swing. They
 frolicked all afternoon, and the strange rubber ghost

 was forgotten. The animals came from the shelter
 of the scalawagons and joined in the games.
                Evening came on and the vesper bell chimed
 sweetly. Number Nine was floating on the water.
 He enjoyed it too much to join in the games. He lay
 on his back staring up at the sky. Suddenly he
 called out,
                "I have a sinking feeling! Isn't that dark GHOST
 coming back again?"
                Scraps looked up and quickly chanted,
                "Bless my stitches and button eyes!
                I think we're having another surprise!"
                Now all the people were looking upward. Hovering
 above them was the huge Shape.
                "Everyone get back to your scalawagons!" ordered
 Ozma. Then in a low voice to Glinda and the Wiz~
 ard, she said, "It would be different if we had brought
 enough magical instruments to capture the creature."
                "Yes, it's quite a nuisance," said the Wizard. "We'll
 have to lure it to the Emerald City. There we can
 deal with it properly."
                The people and the animals were running toward
 the scalawagons. There was no time to change from
 bathing suits. Having found refuge in their scala-
 wagons, all watched to see what would happen.

                The Cowardly Lion was crouching under his scala-
 wagon, too frightened even to roar. Nothing would
 make him come out until the apparition was gone.
 Sir Hokus and Captain Salt began to wave their
 swords at the Shape, but it wasn't in the least
 alarmed.
                The Hungry Tiger had spent most of the after-
 noon in his scalawagon, ordering dishes of meat pie.
 He now looked up and said,
                "If only I were hungry enough to tackle that! But
 for the first time in a long while, I actually feel filled.
 Besides, I don't care for rubber desserts."
                "Hadn't you better point your emerald finger at
 it once more?" the Wizard said to Ozma.
                "Yes, just as soon as it gets too close," said Ozma.
 "If I could touch it, the effect would be sharper. Wait!"
 Jenny heard Ozma ask them to wait, but she was
 too impatient to wait. The creature was coming down.
 In a few minutes it would be on top of their heads!
 Jenny didn't care to have those big flat feet pressing
 on her head!
                "My handbag!" she thought Her handbag had
 never failed her yet. Opening it, she found a small
 pair of scissors that she had carried away from her
 style shop. "Now!"
 As the corner of the monster's foot came within

 reach, Jenny took a snip, making a small hole. Im-
 mediately the foot began to wrinkle, and an unpleas-
 ant odor rushed out of the hole.
                "Whew!" The Wizard held his nose. "Where have
 I smelled that smell before?"
                The odor continued to ooze out of the great ghost.
  
 It became flabbier and flabbier. Suddenly it began
 to howl,
                "Finished! Exposed !"
                "What are you?" called Ozma in her loudest voice.
 "Don't you recognize me?" cried out the rubber
 ghost. "Then there's still a reason for living!"
                Jenny jumped out of her scalawagon and reached
 her scissors toward the ghost's rubber ear. Snip! The
 bad odor rushed out faster than ever.
                "No, no," cried the desperate ghost. "No one must
 see my true shape!" And with that it leaped into
 Jenny's scalawagon and made off!
                For a second Jenny stood looking after her dis-
 appearing scalawagon, too surprised to move. Then
 she whirled around to Ozma.
                "Your Highness, I can't let that creature get away
 with it! May I go after it?"
                Ozma nodded. "I have absolute confidence in you,

 Jenny," she said.
                Jenny quickly got her fairy shoe, gloves, and eye-
 glass out of her bag. "I'd better be prepared for
 anything," she muttered, as she put on all of these.
                "The rest of us will soon return to the Emerald
 City," Ozma said to Jenny. "There I'll watch you in
 my magic picture. If anything goes wrong, I'll help
 you."
                "Thank you, your Highness. That rubber creature
 may get mean!"
                Jenny stamped her fairy foot hard against the
 ground. "Goodbye!" she called, as she went sailing
 through the air.
                She hardly heard the crowd below call back. The
 jump had taken her far out, and now she could see
 miles of red Quadling country.
                Next minute there was water in her eye. She ducked
 under a cloud.
                "That's strange," she thought. "It was such a
 fleecy cloud, I expected to be wool gathering. But,
 nobody is going to pull the wool over my eyes!"
                Spreading her arms, she sailed straight on. She
 could now see her scalawagon, driven at top speed
 by the monster. She made for it, but before she had
 gone far, a thunder-head rose in her path. It was the
 blackest and most threatening cloud she had ever

 seen.
                "You're going the wrong way on a one-way
 storm path!" said the thunder-head.
                "I'm in a hurry, and I can't stop for rules," Jenny
 replied.
                "That's too bad. A cargo of lightning is coming
 this way. I feel sorry for you when you collide with
 it!"
                "Oooh-lightning! I don't want to bump into that,"
 said Jenny.
                "Then you'd better drop out of sight for awhile."
                Jenny decided to take this advice, and lowering her
 arms, she began to drop. Down, down, down, she
 went, until with a soft thud she landed. Looking
 about, she discovered herself in the midst of a vast
 potato field.
                "Dick! Hey, Dick!"
                "What was that?" asked Jenny, jumping around.
                "You're under arrest!" said the voice.
                "Who says so?" she protested.
                "I-Dick Tater," came the reply.
                                Then Jenny saw a large potato man, standing
 against the earth. She had not seen him right away
 because he was the same color as the soil.
                "You - arrest me?" Jenny began to laugh. "I'm

 bigger than you. Why I could mash you!"
                She picked up her foot and put it over Dick Tater's
 head. The frightened man dropped his brave pose
 and shrieked, "Treason!"
                At this an army of potatoes came rushing toward
 Jenny. The sight of his soldiers gave Dick Tater more
 courage. Pointing his knobby finger at Jenny, he
 cried, "Plow her under!"
                "Oh, no, you won't!" said Jenny. "Why, I could
 have you boiled, creamed, fried, and chipped. Do you
 know that?"
                "To the root cellar with her!" screamed the Dick
 Tater, growing dark in the face.
                The army marched up to Jenny, but then stood
 still as if it did not know just how to capture her.
 Jenny burst out laughing.
                But she soon stopped laughing, as she saw what
 was happening. From all sides of the field more
 potatoes were digging their way out of the potato
 trenches and marching toward her. The small pota-
 toes, that could not see well, because they had no
 eyes, rolled on their short, curly feet. From heaps
 at the side of the field, thousands of potatoes came
 running toward her.
                The potato monarch surveyed his forces with pride.
 "I am the greatest Potentato of the Vegetable King-

 dom !" he boasted.
                The potatoes formed a ring around Jenny, piling
 higher and higher, standing on one another's
 shoulders. Soon she saw that if she did not act, she
 would be enclosed in a high wall of solid potatoes.
                "You mustn't detain me any longer," she said. "I
 might lose the rubber ghost who stole my scala-
 Wagon."
                "Hey, Spud!" called the Dick Tater, "you're my
 Chief Executioner. Peel her, and slice her, and fry
 her until brown!"
                "Indeed, you'll do nothing of the kind," said Jenny.
 She was no longer amused.
                Spud, a fat potato in a dusty jacket, reached from
 the wall of potatoes. He tried to catch hold of Jenny,
 but with her fairy mitt she brushed him off.
                "I don't intend to remain here and vegetate," she
 said scornfully. "Break your ranks!"
                "You can't take the starch out of us, no matter
 what you say," retorted Spud. He reached toward
 Jenny and this time fastened his curly fingers in her
 clothes so tightly that she could not brush him off.
                "Nab her!" ordered Spud. Immediately a hundred
 grubby hands seized Jenny.
                "Will you resist now?" said Dick Tater.

                "I could never resist potatoes," said ahe.
                "Give yourself up!"
                "Thanks for the advice. But I'll give you up first,"
 said Jenny.
                She spoke as bravely as she could. But when she
 raised her eyes and saw how high the potatoes had
 piled over her, her heart sank. She was standing in
 the centre of thousands of potatoes.
                "I must rise to the occasion, without further de-
 lay," she thought. "Now-before it's too late."
                Could she do it? She scanned the sky anxiously.
 It looked so far away! There was one hope. She
 pushed her fairy foot hard against the ground.
                "Hurrah! I'm going up!"
                In another minute she was high in the air. A hun-
 dred potatoes, including Spud, were still clinging to
 her.
                "Help! Help!" they cried. Jenny could see terror
 in their eyes.
                She advised, "Let go, and I'll drop you like hot
 potatoes."
                Her former captors were only too glad to obey. Un-
 twisting their hands from her clothes, they fell with
 a thud and a Spud.
  
 CHAPTER 19

  
 The Bells of Ozma's Tower
  
 IT'S growing dark," said Ozma. "We'd better be
 getting home."
                Over the Singing Brook the red evening was set-
 tling. In the distant parts of Oz, evening came in
 deep shades of blue, purple, and yellow. In the Emer-
 ald City, night came on in green splendor.
                "You're right, your Majesty," said the Wizard.
 "Just raise your hand and get your subjects' atten-
 tion."
                Ozma raised the hand with the giant emerald. In-
 stantly she had the attention of the children, and the
 animals, in the water, the creatures on the beach and
 in the air. The water fairies swam to the top of the
 brook to listen. The kelpies sat in a row on the water-
 fall, holding to a rope of spray.
                "Dear subjects," said Ozma in a clear voice. "It's
 time to go home. Some of you should be in bed soon.
 And I must be ready to watch Jenny's progress in my
 magic picture at my palace."
                Though all were reluctant to stop playing, nobody
 would think of disobeying the queen. There was a
 scurry toward the bath houses. Those who had bath-

 ing suits exchanged them for their own clothes. But
 the Nota-bells begged the bull frog to be allowed to
 keep their checked, striped, plaid, and dotted bathing
 suits.
                "They are so much better than the clothes we were
 wearing," said the vesper bell.
                "Keep them," said the deep-voiced frog. "Just take
 them as souvenirs of a happy day."
                The Nota-bells didn't stop to think that they might
 look a bit queer walking about the Emerald City in
 bathing suits. They skipped joyously toward the scala-
 wagons and climbed in with all those who invited
 them.
                The beasts were shaking themselves dry on the
 shore. The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman, Scraps
 and Pumpkinhead, and the Sawhorse and Tik-Tok,
 who never bathed, were already seated in their scala-
 wagons.
                Finally everybody was ready, except Aunt Em, who
 had to dry her long hair.
                "Oh, dear, I hate to keep everybody waiting," said
 the good woman. "And darkness falling so fast, too."
                "Just a moment," said Ozma. Crooking her finger,
 she summoned a pink little dragonette. "Now, Evan-
 geline, listen-" She whispered into its ear, and the
 lady dragonette walked carefully up to Aunt Em.

 Keeping enough distance to prevent sparks from
 falling, the dragonette breathed its hot breath on
 Aunt Em's hair.
                "Why, it's all dry now," said Aunt Em gratefully.
 She wound up her hair and got in beside Uncle Henry.
                The procession was ready, and as Tik-Tok gave the
 signal, the scalawagons began to roll away from the
 brook.
                A chorus of song followed the travelers. In the
 chorus could be heard the high notes of the brook and
 the deep notes of the bull frog. When the procession
 had gone beyond the reach of this sound, the Nota-
 bells struck up a soft tune. They played all the fa-
 vorite melodies of Oz, and the people hummed as they
 rode.
                As night darkened, a soft glow came from each
 scalawagon and shed a radiance over the road. The
 Wizard had mixed this light into the oztex of which
 the cars were made. And the bright eyes of the scala-
 wagons kept a sharp look-out ahead.
                At the parting of the ways, Glinda and her Quad-
 lings turned their scalawagons toward the red palace
 of the sorceress. Ozma's party continued toward the
 Emerald City.
                The Guardian of the Gate had left the gate open,

 intending to wait up for Ozma. But he had fallen
 asleep. Suddenly he awakened to see a host of gleam-
 ing objects advancing through the dark toward him.
 Jumping up, he cried,
                "Help! Moonbeams are coming! The heavens are
 falling! Help !"
                "I think you are a little moonstruck yourself,"
 laughed a friendly voice. It was the Wizard's. The
 Guardian recognized that voice and fell back respect-
 fully.
                "Oh, it's you, great Wizard. I didn't expect any
 magic tricks at this hour!"
                "You shall have a trick of your own," laughed the
 Wizard, making a sign to one of the empty scala-
 wagons. The car rolled up to the Guardian and
 stopped. The eyes blinked in the friendliest way.
                "For me?" cried the astonished Guardian.
                "Certainly. A private car to take you wherever you
 go."
                "But I never go anywhere," said the Guardian.
 "I belong right here."
                Ozma spoke up, "Take the car. When you feel like
 a drive through the country, the Soldier with the
 Green Whiskers will relieve you."
                "Thank you!" cried the Guardian. "I've long
 wanted to visit my cousin Qompa in the Gillikan coun-

 try."
                They left the happy Guardian with his scalawagon
 and proceeded through the city. Soon the houses awak-
 ened out of their sound sleep. At the unusual sight of
 the lighted scalawagons, the houses began to shudder
 and shake. They tried to spring away. Being rooted
 to the spot, they stood quaking with fear. The people
 were tossed from their beds, and babies were jolted
 in their cradles. The soups in the iceboxes spilled;
 the cream whipped in its bottles. The swallows were
 shaken out of the chimneys and went flying about in
 bewilderment.
                Windows were thrust open, and the people looked
 out to see what had given their houses the jitters.
 Seeing the strange stream of light flowing along the
 highway, they caught the panic themselves.
                One weak house was shaken to its foundations and
 almost collapsed like a pack of cards.
                "This won't do," said Ozma. Raising her hand, she
 commanded the houses to stop their shivering. Then
 she spoke in her clear tone, explaining the scala-
 wagons.
                "Each family will receive one for its private use,"
 said Ozma. As she spoke, several scalawagons left
 the main parade and rolled toward the houses.

                With the scalawagons making the street as bright
 as day, and the people fully awakened, it seemed
 that there was a circus in town. The children wanted
 to run down and try their scalawagons right away.
 But Ozma advised everybody to return to bed.
                
                "This has always been a peaceful, law-abiding city.
 It must remain so," she said firmly.
                The people returned to bed. The houses drew their
 blinds and soon were dozing. The swallows returned
 to their chimney nests.
                At the gates of the Animal Enclosure the animals
 turned in.
                "Goodnight, everyone!" they called. "We've had
 a very pleasant day off. Thank you, Ozma!"
                "You're quite welcome. Be sure to have Ojo fasten
 the gate," Ozma called back.
                Ozma's party reached the palace door. "Dorothy,
 please show everyone to a guest room," said Ozma.
 "We'll do no more today."
                With Jellia Jamb, her personal maid, Ozma turned
 into her sleeping chamber. Its lofty walls shone with
 silken hangings, and the great four-poster bed smiled
 invitingly. Jellia helped the queen out of her gar-
 ments and then brushed her bright hair.
                "Oh, hum," said Ozma with a yawn. "I am so sleepy.

 You must be, too. Run along, my dear, and put your-
 self to bed."
                Jellia withdrew, and a knock came on the door.
 Ozma opened it in surprise that anyone should call
 at such an hour.
                Outside the door, filling the hallway, stood Dorothy
 with the eighty-eight Nota-bells. They held their bell-
 caps under their arms, and their eighty-eight bald
 heads glistened.
                "Ozma, I don't know where to put these bell-men,"
 said Dorothy.
                "Is there no bedroom big enough for them?" asked
 Ozma.
                "It isn't that. They say they are outdoor creatures
 and can't spend the night in a house." Dorothy
 yawned. "Excuse me, your Highness, but I am so
 sleepy!"
                Ozma smiled on her little friend. "If they can't
 sleep indoors, perhaps they'd like to try the pasture."
                "I'm afraid that won't do," replied a bell-man. "We
 aren't cowbells, you see. Besides, danger lurks on
 the ground."
                "We prefer to remain high in the air," said an-
 other bell-man.
                "But still we want to be close to your Majesty," said

 a third.
                Ozma nibbled her little finger, thinking hard. Then
 she looked up with a smile. "I know! You can fly up
 to my highest tower and perch there for the night."
                "Fine!" said the first bell-man. "Open the window,
 please."
                Ozma went to a window and opened it wide. The
 eighty-eight Nota-bells clapped their bells onto their
 heads and flew out like a swarm of bees.
                "Goodnight," they called as they flew bye "See you
 in the morning."
 Ozma slept late next morning. As she was having
 her breakfast, the room grew suddenly dark. Look-
 ing up, she saw the windows filled with the Nota-
 bells. They stood perched on the sills, awaiting her     
 permission to enter. They looked quite refreshed.
 Their long beards glistened with dewdrops. The little
 sky tramps, bright and early, had visited the turn-
 style shop and changed their gay colored bathing
 suits for pale green musicians' uniforms.
                "Come in," Ozma called. "I'm almost finished with
 my breakfast. I suppose you have come to find out
 who you are?"
                "Exactly," said the Nota-bells in a chorus. "We're
 tired of not knowing."
                Ozma wiped her lips with her napkin and pushed

 back from the table. "Come this way, please. We will
 look you up."
                She led the troupe of little men into the adjoining
 consulting room. Going to a bookcase, the queen
 pulled out a great, ancient-looking book, bound in
 leather.
                "I shall consult this Book of Magic Tribes," she
 said.
                Spreading the book on a table, Ozma bent over its
 pages. The Nota-bells waited eagerly while she ran
 her finger up one column and down another.
                "Hm," she said, "There are quite a few. I'll read
 aloud:
 "LOST OR STRAYED BANDS FROM BOBOLAND"
                                "CRINKS?                           NO!"
                                "CHUCKERTS?                   NO!"
                                "ELFEONS?                         NO!"
                                "JOLLERICKS?.                  NO!"
                                "SPUNKERS?                      NO!"
                                "GADIXIES?                        NO!"
                                "GIFFERS?                           NO!"
    
 The little men stood joining in like a chorus each
 time Ozma said "NO!"
                "Well, if you aren't any of these, I'll look further,"

 said Ozma, and she turned the page.
                "Here you are!" She gave a little start and pointed
 her finger at the book. "PUCKERTS!" Then she
 read on, "Musical band of whisker-wings. From the
 Sugar Pyramids. Homeless band of Fly-a-ways. Not
 heard of for seven hundred years! Possibly have be-
 come sky-tramps or cloud-rovers."
                "We are jolly tramps all right!" cried several bell-
 men, drawing themselves up proudly.
                "Well," said Ozma kindly, "possibly you have roved
 a lot."
                "This puts us in our proper place," muttered an-
 other member of the band, nodding toward Ozma's
 book.
                Several crowded closer to examine the record.
 Others began to ring with excitement.
                "We're found! At last we're found!"
                "Why, of course !" said one old bewhiskered fellow.
 "I remember the Sugar Pyramid! Home, sweet
 home!"
                "Do you want me to send you back there?" asked
 Ozma. She had closed the book and replaced it, and
 stood dusting her hands.
                "No, no, don't send us to the Sugar Pyramid. It's
 swarming with ants and relatives. We get eaten out
 of house and home," they cried.

                "We want to stay with you, Ozma."
                "If you stay in the Emerald City," said Ozma,
 "you'll have to do some kind of work. Everyone here
 is useful."
                "Work?" they echoed dismally. They exchanged
 worried looks. "It's many centuries since we've
 worked."
                "But you haven't forgotten how," smiled Ozma.
 "You are excellent musicians."
                "Oh, if you call that work!" they said.
                "Of course I do. And I know just how we can use
 you."
                "How? How?"
                "Did you like your place on my tower last night?"
 Ozma asked.
                "Yes, your Majesty."
                "Then I have a high position for all of you."
 Ozma laughed and clapped her hands. As if in an-
 swer to her hand-clapping, the door opened and the
 Wizard came in.
                "You sent for me?" he said.
                "Yes. What do you think of this: the bell-men
 (they are Puckerts) are to live up in the tower and
 furnish my people with music from chime to chime."
                The Wizard nodded. "Excellent, your Majesty. And

 on special occasions, like your birthday."
                Ozma clasped her hands. "I'm glad we've found a
 good use for them."
                "We'll do more," declared one of the bell band.
 "High up above the city, we can see far and wide. If
 danger should approach, we'll ring a warning."
                "Thank you," said Ozma. "Is everything quite corn-
 fortable in the chimes-tower?"
                "Quite. If it please your Majesty, we'll be going
 now," said they. "It's almost noon, and we've our
 work to do."
                The band of whiskers made for the grand stair-
 way and slid down the banisters.
                Ozma and the Wizard exchanged looks of satisfac-
 tion.
                "A good morning's work, Ozma," said the Wizard.
 "As for me, I have done nothing worthwhile as yet."
                Scarcely were the words spoken, when a heavy
 knock came on the door. "Whatever that is," said
 the Wizard hurriedly, "leave it to me. I've simply
 got to accomplish something this morning."
                The door opened and in marched Tik-Tok, with the
 Mifkit sitting on his head. The copper man looked
 distressed.
                Seeing the queen, he rushed up to her and knelt
 on one knee, with his arms spread out in a gesture of

 appeal.
                "I-am-not-un-grate-ful," he began to tock swiftly,
 "'But-by-my-head I-I-don't-need-this-Mif-kit."
                The Mifkit cheerfully took a handkherchief out of
 Tik-Tok's breast pocket and set to polishing his cop-
 per head.
                "There~is~a-lim-it-to-the-polish-that-a-man-needs,"
 said Tik-Tok.
                Ozma looked at the Wizard, as if she meant to let
 him handle this situation.
                "Do you know of anyone else who might need
 Mifkit?" asked the Wizard of Tik-Tok.
                Tik-Tok shook his head gloomily.
                "If nobody wants you," said the Wizard to the Mif-
 kit, motioning to him to get off Tik-Tok's head, "I
 suppose I'd better send you home."
                The Mifkit jumped to the ground and cried, "Please
 don't send me back there! I couldn't bear it."
                "I don't blame you," said the Wizard. "The Sandy
 Waste is a dreadful place. And now that you've had
 a taste of Oz, it will seem all the horrider."
                The Wizard shuddered. "I'll have to think of some-
 thing," he said. The Mifkit stood on one foot and then
 the other, waiting for the Wizard to finish thinking.
                "I have it!" said the Wizard at last. He held up

 his hands and made a few passes in the air. Immedi-
 ately Number Nine walked through the door.
                "Yes, sir?" said the blue Munchkin boy.
 "Come in, my boy," said the Wizard. "Your father
 is a farmer, isn't he?"
                "Yes, he is," said Number Nine.
                "I've heard say that a farmer can always use an
 extra hand. Do you think your father would like
 this Mifkit for a helper?"
                "Can you milk a cow?" asked Number Nine, turn-
 ing to the Mifkit.
                "I could if I had one. Is that the same as winding
 and polishing?" asked the Mifkit.
                Number Nine smiled. "No, it's quite different. I'm
 afraid you'd be a misfit."
                "Please give me a trial!" begged the Mifkit, so pit-
 eously, that Ozma's kind heart was movei
                "We might let him learn," she said. Tik-Tok joined
 in, "He-is-will-ing-e-nough."
                "I don't suppose a cow would mind being milked by
 a misfit Mifkit. And my father would be glad of the
 help," said Number Nine.
                "Then we'll send the Mifkit to your father's," said
 the Wizard. He looked at Ozma, and Ozma put her
 hand to her belt.
                "Go to Number Nine's father in the Munchkin

 country," she spoke out, rubbing her belt.
                Zing! The Mifkit was no longer there.
                "Let's look in my magic picture and see how the
 farmer takes it," said Ozma. With a smile, she hur-
 ried over to the wall. Drawing some curtains aside,
 she revealed a large picture hanging there. It was not
 an ordinary picture, but a living moving picture.
                There stood a Munchkin farmer in blue overalls.
 He stood inside a cow stable. "That's my dad!" cried
 Number Nine. Suddenly a little Mifkit dropped into
 a pile of straw near him.
                "I am your new milker," announced the Mifkit.
 The farmer took a long, careful look at the Mifkit
 He wasted no words.
                "All right! Get the pail and let me see what you
 can do."
                "Everything is going to be fine," laughed Ozma,
 turning from the picture.
                "I'm-so-re-lieved," said Tik-Tok, and bowing po-
 litely, he left the room.
                "Hey-hey-come back to your work!" came a new
 voice in the room. Everyone spun around. There, in
 the transom above the door, appeared the hall clock.
 "Number Nine, I'm tired of your loafing," scolded the
 clock. "I ran down, and I'm quite put out. Are you

 coming up?"
                "Not until we look into that picture again and learn
 where Jenny is," said Number Nine.
                The boy looked pleadingly at the Wizard and Ozma.
 "I've been tuning the teletable all morning, but I
 can't locate her," he said.
                "Then she's not lost," said Ozma reassuringly.
 "Only lost things show up in your teletable. But we
 could easily locate her in the magic picture. I was
 meaning to do it soon."
                Ozma moved toward the picture again.
 "I declare, nobody minds me for a minute," said
 the clock in disgust. Climbing down from the door,
 it went stamping up to its place.
                The door opened and Dorothy came in, with Jellia,
 Betsy, and Trot. The friends had their arms about
 each other. Running up to Ozma, they embraced her
 and bade her and the Wizard good morning.
                "You're just in time to look into the magic picture
 with us," said Ozma, as she kissed the girls in return.
                "We are trying to see Jenny and the rubber ghost."
 "Oh, then we're glad we came!" exclaimed the girls.
                They bent forward, looking eagerly into the pic-
 ture. "What can be happening to Jenny?"
  
 CHAPTER 20

  
 The Moving Forest
  
 IF only I had not let those potatoes detain me!" said
 Jenny to herself.
                Darkness was coming on, and she saw no sign of
 her scalawagon and the rubber ghost. It was useless
 to remain in the air all night. She looked carefullly
 for a sleeping place.
                Soon Jenny saw a forest. "Just the place," she said
 to herself. "The trees will shelter me from the rain
 -if it should rain.
 Rain did not seem likely, however. The storm clouds
 had fallen behind her. The air was very dry, as if it
 had not rained for many days.
                As darkness was settling, Jenny descended. Care-
 fully avoiding the tree tops, she made a safe land-
 ing. Then she walked into the shelter of the forest and
 lay down.
                "I'll take off my fairy gifts and give myself a good
 rest," she thought.
                Removing her eyeglass, mitt, earmuffs, and left-
 footed slipper, Jenny put them carefully into her
 handbag. Then she laid the handbag on the grass be-
 side her. She was very sleepy and tired.

                "What could have happened to that mysterious
 ghost?" thought Jenny. Before she could think of an
 answer, she was fast asleep.
                Several hours passed. Then the trees of the forest
 began to rustle and whisper:
                "No rain! No rain! Why should we go thirsty any
 longer?" whispered one tree.
                "That's right. Why should we?" answered another.
 "I'm going to find a drink. Good-bye," crackled a
 large, old tree, whose leaves were shriveled.
                The old tree tugged at its roots. Its roots were
 thick and gnarled, and slid along the ground When
 it had pulled up its roots, it moved on.
                "Wait, wait!" hissed another tree. It was a young
 tree, with a restless air.
                The old tree would not wait, but glided silently
 away. The young tree hurriedly pulled up its roots
 and glided after it. Seeing them, the other trees be-
 came restless. Soon all were tugging at their roots,
 pulling free, and slipping away. All this motion made
 no more noise than a breeze passing through some
 leaves. Jenny was not wakened. She only sighed and
 slept on.
                "Don't crowd me!" said the old tree. "There's
 plenty of time."
                The old tree moved steadily, and the others stayed

 close behind, until the entire forest had crossed a
 field and came to a river. Into the middle of the
 river waded the trees. They plunged their thirsty
 roots deep into the water.
                In a few minutes the river was dry. But the trees
 felt better. They stood contentedly in the dry river
 bed, going to sleep.
                Jenny slept deeply. Her handbag lay unguarded
 at her side. Now she was no longer hidden by the
 forest, but at the mercy of any prowler who might
 come along. Luckily, the beasts had long ago been
 driven away by the woodchoppers. But there was
 something else prowling over the countryside.
 minute it was drawing closer to Jenny.
                A strange body of light was traveling toward
 Jenny. It gleamed faintly within the darkness.
 and closer it came. At last it stopped near the sleep-
 mg girl.
                "That's strange, said a voice within the
 "There was a forest here. I meant to hide this pesky
 car, so that girl couldn't see it shining and discover
 my whereabouts. But now-where's the forest?"
                The rubber ghost, for it was no other, stopped the
 gleaming scalawagon. Sitting up, it scratched its
 head in perplexity.

                "Another mystery!" grumbled the ghost. "I won't
 stand for it!"
                But the ghost did stand. It stood right up in the
 scalawagon and searched the darkness with its small
 squinting eyes.
                "Nope. Not a tree anywhere. But hoz! What's
 this?"
                Stretching its rubber neck, it discovered the sleep=
 ing figure of Jenny. Then it saw something else--
 Jenny's handbag. The monster began to shake with
 rage.
                "That's the thing she carries her scissors in! Those
 scissors she snipped me with. No wonder I feel so
 weak and flabby, with my insides oozing out."
                Reaching out a rubber hand, the ghost snatched
 Jenny's handbag.
                "She's snippy, and I'm snoopy," it said. It held fast
 to the handbag. Then it decided to move on.
                Silently the scalawagon rolled away. In the light
 of its own oztex fabric, it could see the way on the
 dark field. Soon it drew near the forest of sleeping
 trees.
                "The mystery is solved !" exclaimed the ghost glee-
 fully. "This is the forest I was looking for."
                It steered the scalawagon into hiding among the
 trees. It felt safer now, but to be doubly safe, it

 climbed out of the scalawagon and up the nearest
 tree, carrying Jenny's handbag with it. At the top
 of the tree it found an empty crow's nest. Folding
 its rubber sides, the ghost squeezed into the nest.
                "Safe at last," it sighed. Nothing betrayed its pres-
 ence, except its odor. In another moment the thief
 was sleeping as soundly as Jenny.
                All was silent in the woods now. But toward morn-
 ing the silence became filled with a new uneasy whis-
 pering. It was the old tree, rustling its leaves and
 saying,
                "We're not safe in this river bed. Someone will
 come to get water, and find us. Then they'll run home
 for an ax-I know, I know."
                "He knows, he knows," moaned the young tree,
 almost frightened out of its wits. "I don't want to be
 chopped down. Let's move!"
                "We'll find a plowed field, where we'll be safe," said
 the old tree. And with that it began to draw its roots
 softly over the ground, stepping free of the river bed
 and moving onward.
                The other trees followed their old leader. Pulling
 their roots from the soft ground, they began to glide
 after.
                High in the crow's nest the folded rubber ghost

 stirred. Feeling the nest swaying, it began to grumble
 and groan.
                The trees stopped and listened.
                "Did you hear something?" whispered one tree.
                "Yes-s-s," hissed another.
                The rubber ghost heard them. Sitting up, it gave
 a sudden whistle, like an early bird.
                "It's only a bird," sighed the first tree in relief.
 "Come on."
                "Right," agreed the other. "We can't remain here
 and be chopped into firewood."
                The snooper peeped out and discovered its tree
 moving. Looking all around, it failed to see the scala-
 wagon.
                "It's a trap!" it stormed. It tried to get out of the
 crow's nest. But during the night so much of its dis-
 agreeable-smelling insides had escaped that it was al-
 most numb. "Help !" said the frightened ghost. "I'm
 too deflated to scare anyone now."
                "Come on," called the oldest tree to its mates.
 "We'll find a plowed field soon."
                "What's that? What's that?" chattered the ghost.
 "Plowed field? Who said I wanted a plowed field?
 STOP!"
                But the trees did not stop. For the ghost's small
 voice could scarcely be heard.

                When morning came with its soft purple light of
 a Gillikan day, Jenny sat up abruptly. She looked
 around, and then rubbed her eyes.
                "Am I dreaming? No, I'm quite awake. But what's
 become of the forest?"
                She stared around in amazement. She had fallen
 asleep in the shelter of a hundred trees. But there was
 not a single tree in sight! Only a lot of grass that
 looked as if it had been plowed during the night.
                "I'm losing my wits," said Jenny in bewilderment.
 "Let me put on my fairy gifts." She looked around
 for her handbag and then cried, "Why, my handbag is
 gone, too!"
                Frantically, she searched the ground around her.
 But there was not a trace of the handbag.
                "What shall I do now?" she cried. "Without my
 fairy gifts I can't get far."
                Standing up, Jenny looked into the purple distance.
 She saw stretching purple fields and purple lanes.
                "Not a house in sight," she said, feeling her eyes
 fill with tears. She blinked back the tears as bravely
 as she could. But inside herself she felt frightened.
 She was hungry, and there was no breakfast. With-
 out food to give her strength, she could not walk far.
                "I mustn't despair," she murmured to herself.

 "Something will happen, though I don't know what!"
                The next instant Jenny saw something coming over
 the horizon. Her heart beat hard. Was it friends
 coming to her rescue, or some new kind of danger?
                Jenny stood her ground bravely. She kept her eyes
 fixed on the distant object, until she was able to see
 what it was. Then she gave a cry of surprise.
                "It's a scalawagon!"
                Could it be her own scalawagon with the thieving
 ghost inside? Jenny's heart was beating madly. If
 the monster had the ghost of an idea of drawing near,
 she had nothing with which to capture him.
                Jenny put her hand up to shade her eyes, staring
 hard at the approaching scalawagon. Then another
 scalawagon appeared behind it - and a third and a
 fourth! Who could all those people be? What if they
 passed right by without seeing her? Throwing up her
 arms, she began to wave. The others waved back.
                "They see me!" Jenny cried joyfully.
                The strange scalawagons were coming closer.
 Jenny could make out four figures. They were girls.
                "Dorothy, Jellia, Trot, and Betsy!" cried Jenny, as
 the scalawagons slid to a stop.
                The four girls were smiling delightfully. Jenny
 was so happy to see them that she burst into tears.
                "A few minutes ago I felt all alone and helpless,"

 she explained, smiling through her tears.
                "You needn't have worried," said Dorothy. "Ozma
 was watching over you."
                Betsy went on, "We saw you in Ozma's magic pic-
 ture. When you awoke and found your handbag gone,
 Ozma wanted to fetch you back to the Emerald City."
 "But we begged to be allowed to come here," con-
 tinued Betsy. "My, I haven't had such an adventure
 since I was shipwrecked with Hank the Mule!"
                "Nor I, since I fell into the whirlpool with Captain
 Bill," said Trot. "That was before I came to Oz."
 By this time, Jenny was feeling much better. She
 still wanted to laugh and cry at the same time. But
 most of all she wanted her breakfast.
                It was Jellia who said, "Cake's sake, Jenny. Get
 into my scalawagon. The LUNCH bar is serving
 breakfast at this hour."
                Jenny climbed into Jellia's scalawagon. When she
 pressed the LUNCH button, five delicious breakfasts
 appeared. There was enough for everyone, and Jenny
 handed out glasses of purple milk and bananas to her
 friends.
                While they were eating, Dorothy said, "Ozma and
 the Wizard are still puzzled about that rubber ghost.
 They can't discover what it is because it is traveling

 in disguise."
                "We have Ozma's permission to help you find the
 ghost, and then to deal with it properly," said Trot.
 She held up a pair of scissors. "The Wizard gave us
 each a pair. We can cut-up as much as we like."
                "That ghost won't have a chance," declared Betsy.
 Jenny soon finished her breakfast. Food and friends
 had raised her spirits sky-high.
                "I know we can catch that rubbery fellow!" she
 declared.
                "Certainly! Come on, girls," cried Dorothy gaily.
 They started their scalawagons.
                "Where to?" asked Dorothy.
                "I don't know," said Jenny.
                "Aren't those tracks of some kind?" said Jellia, star-
 mg at the ground, where there were ruts left by the
 trees' roots.
                "Strange tracks, I call them. They cross and dou-
 ble-cross," said Betsy.
                "But all tracks go somewhere," said Trot. "Let's
 follow and see where these take us."
                At first the tracks only confused the girls. They
 steered their scalawagons into the twisting ruts, but
 found themselves traveling in circles.
                "I've never been in such a rut," said Jenny, as they
 returned to their starting place for the tenth time.

                "I think we should stop steering and let our scala-
 wagons lead us," said Dorothy.
                Leaning forward, Dorothy patted her scalawagon
 between its eyes.
                "Help us find the rubber ghost," she coaxed. The
 eyes of the scalawagon blinked twice, and a wise look
 came into them. Then, without a sound, the little
 car was off, its wheels turning in the tracks left by
 the old tree.
                "Follow it!" called Jenny.
                The scalawagons enjoyed running without being
 steered. Their wide-open eyes were shining. In a
 little while they proved their good sense by arriving
 at the river that the forest had drunk dry. There was
 no more water there, and there was no forest. But
 there was something that made Jenny cry out:
                "Why, there's my scalawagon!"
                The scalawagon was standing just where the rub-
 ber ghost had abandoned it. Its eyelids had been
 drooping, but seeing its companions, it began to rear
 and jump.
  
                "Thanks for the lift, Jelila," cried Jenny, getting
 out of Jellia's scalawagon and running to her own.
 Climbing into the seat, she rubbed the control but-

 tons.
                "That nasty ghost didn't damage you," she said
 fondly. "Now, if only I could find my handbag!"
                "You'll find that when you find that thieving
 ghost," said Betsy. "After him, girls!"
                "Which way?" inquired Trot.
                Nobody knew how to answer this question. Then
 Jenny said, "Suppose we let my scalawagon lead? It
 must remember which way the ghost went."
                The others agreed.
                "Now, Scally," said Jenny to her scalawagon,
 "which way did that rubber monster go?"
                The good sense that Tik-Tok had knocked into its
 head now served the scalawagon well. For without
 hesitation, it started off in the direction taken by the
 moving forest.
  
 CHAPTER 21
  
 The Ghost Rides High
  
 ALL night long the trees had moved, dragging
 their roots and sighing softly. They did not find
 a plowed field until daybreak. It was just the kind of
 field they wanted, but when they tried to settle there,
 a farmer appeared and shouted to them to move on.

 Moving forests are common in Gillikan land.
                "I no sooner clear my land of trees, when another
 horde comes," shouted the farmer. He shook his fist
 at the forest "Get along, you drifters!"
                The trees had no course but to go on. As daylight
 grew a brighter purple, another danger appeareid.
 The woodchoppers came with their axes.
 The old tree leader hissed, "Keep a sharp lookout
 on all sides."
 "There's one now!" warned a tree in the rear. The
 trees hurried as if a strong wind were blowing them.
 The woodchopper stopped and shook his head.
 There was no use trying to chop down a tree that
 wouldn't stand still.
                Meanwhile the rubber ghost crouched within the
 crow's nest. It was getting highly impatient. Never
 before had it been imprisoned for a whole night.
 "It's that toe," grumbled the ghost, looking at the
 toe that Jenny's scissors had snipped. "That's where
 it comes rushing out - that sweet-smelling stuff that
 made me a giant."
                The ghost was far from being a giant now. So
 much of the peculiar-smelling stuff had escaped that
 it was quite shriveled. As it shrank, it assumed a
 strange, flat appearance.

                "It's true that I've shrunk, but maybe I can stretch
 again Then I can frighten this forest," the ghost
 thought wickedly.
 Making a mighty effort, for it was nearly ex-
 hausted now, the rubber monster stood upright in
 the nest. Then it began to breathe-and breathe-
 and breathe. It breathed in, but never out. In a little
 while it had breathed so much air that it was swollen
 up again. It was a terrible effort to keep the air in,
 but the ghost was terribly determined. With seven
 more breaths it had swelled to a ferocious size.
                "Now I'll scare those stupid trees into obeying me,"
 it thought.
                Leaning far over the crow's nest, it allowed the air
 to escape in a mighty blast, while it gave out a roar
 like thunder.
                The forest stopped. The young trees began to
 tremble.
                "Thunder!"
                "Lightning!"
                "We'll be struck!" they cried.
                The upper limbs of the trees swayed so hard that
 the ghost was almost tumbled out of the crow's nest.
 The ghost was again breathing in as hard as it
 could. When it was bloated to the size of a great
 bladder, it made another sound like thunder.

                The trees were too frightened to move. This was
 what the cunning ghost had hoped for.
                "OBEY ME!" it thundered."
                Yes, yes," sighed the trees.
                "March straight on to the next crossroad," ordered
 the ghost. "There you will see a cross-eyed house.
 Turn right and keep going until the purple highway
 runs into a green one. Follow the green one to the
 Emerald City. Then I'll give you further orders!"
                All this was delivered in a menacing tone. The trees
 trembled and obeyed. Though they passed plowed fields
 that looked inviting, they dared not stop. Sometimes
 a farmer came out of a purple house and waited to
 make sure that the forest did not settle on his land.
 Herds of purple cattle turned their mild eyes to watch
 the forest move past. The crossroad was several miles
 distant, and the sun was getting strong. The trees
 began to get thirsty once more.
                "Water, water," they began whispering.
                "You'll get plenty of water at the Emerald City,"
 promised the ghost. It continued to talk in its most
 terrifying voice. The trees heard and trembled.
 In the ghost's mind a more wicked scheme was
 forming. It kept mumbling to itself, holding on to
 its big toe to keep its insides from escaping.

                "Why shouldn't I make these stupid trees serve
 me?" it was mumbling. "I'll use them to get my re-
 venge on those people who cut me with scissors. I'LL
 CAPTURE THE WHOLE CITY!"
 The more it thought about this, the better the idea
 seemed.
                "Sure, I'll capture the whole kit and kaboodle, and
 make myself king!" The ghost wriggled with delight
 at this thought, smirking in a most self-satisfied way.
                "And when I'm king," it went on to itself, "I'll
 make a law that no scissors may be used by anyone
 but me!"
                The trees spread out over the entire road, making
 it impossible for anyone to pass in either direction.
 They were a purple, towering mass that moved
 down the road like a landslide. Though the peaceful
 trees did not know it, they looked frightening to chil-
 dren and strangers.
                Suddenly one young tree at the rear plunged leafily
 into the tree ahead.
                "Something is coming!" it hissed.
                "Woodchoppers?" cried the second tree.
                "Worse than woodchoppers! Something on wheels !"
 The rumor spread swiftly among the trees. Looking
 back, they discovered the five pursuing scalawagons.
 "Run for your lives !" called the old tree.

 The trees began to sway and hobble in a panic.
 High in its crow's nest, the ghost was thrashed about
 like a ship in a storm.
                "Hey, hey, what's going on down there?" it wheezed.
 Then it remembered that it must keep its voice ter-
 rible, and filling itself with air, it let out in a loud bel-
 low:
                "KEEP MOVING ONWARD!"
                The trees now lost their heads completely. Fright-
 ened by the speeding scalawagons behind, and by the
 terrible voice above, they rushed on, pell-mell. At the
 crossroads they came to the cross-eyed house. Its
 eyes were crossed from watching both roads at the
 same time.
                "what's the hurry?" complained a small purple
 bird sitting on a post. The post was marked "peanut
 Pike." An arrow pointed to the north, and under the
 arrow were the words: "To Bottle Hill. Take the
 Lumbering Gate."
                The old tree leader took in this sign at a glance,
 and forgetting the ghost's directions, turned off to-
 ward Bottle Hill.
                "NO, NO, NOT THAT WAY!" roared the ghost
                The old tree pulled itself up so hard that several
 limbs snapped off. Then, in bewilderment it went

 limping toward the Emerald City with the whole for-
 est stampeding after it
                "I'm the master, and they're my slaves!" grunted
 the ghost. "Soon all the stupid people in the Emerald
 City will be my slaves, too!"
                Far behind the fleeing forest the five scalawagons
 were racing. The girls had long since caught sight
 of the purple mass of moving trees. It was Jenny who
 cried,
                "Maybe that rubber ghost is hiding among those
 trees!"
                "It certainly looks suspicious, the way they're run-
 ing away from us," said Dorothy.
                "Don't get too close," said Betsy. "They may turn
 and stampede us!"
 "We must wait till they stop," added Trot "And
 hope that won't be too soon. This is real FUN!"
 The five girls agreed that they were having the
 time of their lives. For hours their scalawagons had
 been racing up hill and down dale, over fences and
 bushes and turnstiles.
                At one turnstile, Jenny had said, "When this ad-
 venture is over, I'll be glad to return to my own turn-
 style shop. I'm beginning to miss it."
                "It must be missing you, too, Jenny," said Dorothy.
                "Nobody can manage it as well as you. You run it

 like the duchess that you are."
                Jenny gave Dorothy a pleased smile. "Thank you,
 Dorothy. Spoken like the princess that you are! But
 Number Nine's Sister Six is an able helper. She's
 managing the shop during my absence."
                There was not much chance to talk, for the uneven
 ground separated the racing cars. Purple rabbits,
 cats, and groundhogs scurried into their holes for
 safety. Jenny and Dorothy forgot their dignity as a
 duchess and a princess and squealed in delight like
 Betsy, Trot, and Jellia.
                "Cake's sakes! Wouldn't Ozma like to be here!"
 cried Jellia.
                "I certainly would!" exclaimed the Queen, standing
 before her magic picture in the Emerald City.
                Ozma and the Wizard had been sitting before
 picture since early morning. As Ozma watched the
 chase, she often got so excited that she burst out with
 a spoken remark. Now she jumped to her feet and
 cried, "Shall I help you find that mean little ghost?'
 The Wizard put a restraining hand on the queen's
 shoulder. "Sit down, please, and calm yourself."
                Ozma sat down with a bashful smile. "I was for-
 getting," she said, "that I told the girls they could do
 it all by themselves. The picture is so real, I seem to

 be with them."
                "I know the temptation, your Majesty," said the
 Wizard kindly. "It's so easy for you to remove that
 ghost with a little simple magic. But the girls would
 feel cheated."
                "What do you suppose that ghost really is?" said
 Ozma. "I can't find it in my library records."
                "We'll get its secret just as soon as it's captured,"
 said the Wizard. "Meanwhile, I am enjoying this mov-
 ing picture. Aren't you?"
                "As long as no one is in real danger," said Ozma.
                "Look, the forest is coming into the frame. It's
 getting closer!" said the Wizard.
                Ozma bent forward, studying the picture intently.
                "It won't do," she murmured. "We can't have a
 purple forest in our green city. The color doesn't fit."
                "They ought to know better," said the Wizard.
                "They wouldn't be coming here if they didn't mean
 some foul play."
                "It can't be the trees that are foul," said Ozma,
 shaking her head. "It's that rubber ghost hidden in
 that nest. It's up to no good!"
                "What do you propose to do about it?" asked the
 Wizard.
                Ozma's reply was drowned in the sudden loud
 clanging of warning bells.

                "Listen!" cried the Wizard. "Our bell-men are
 warning us that danger is heading this way!"
  
 CHAPTER 22
  
 The Forest Surrenders
  
 THE clanging of the warning bells was heard out-
 side the city gate. The moving forest heard it,
 and stopping, began to whimper with terror.
                "STOP BLUBBERING! GET FIERCE!" bellowed
 the ghost.
                "Fierce? How could we be fierce? We're gentle by
 nature," said the old tree.
                "Then change your nature," commanded the piti-
 less ghost. It felt more desperate than ever, now that
 its goal was in sight. The towers of the Emerald City
 sparkled in the sunlight. The sight made the ghost
 green with envy. If it could become king of all that!
 The trees stopped, looked back. But that way was
 cut off by the five dashing scalawagons.
                "Trapped !" sighed the oldest tree.
                "Trapped!" the ghost gnashed its rubber gums to-
 gether. "If I come down now, they'll get me. There's
 no way but to go on."

                The ghost was too cowardly to come down and lead
 the trees. It remained safely within its nest and
 called down commands.
                "Capture the Guardian of the Gate! Capture the
 Soldier with the Green Whiskers!"
                The trees trembled, but they crept forward to obey.
                As soon as the warning bells had begun ringing, the
 Guardian had fastened the gate. But the trees
 marched up to the wall and looked over. From out
 of the topmost branches came the loud voice of the
 ghost:
                                "OPEN THE GATE!"
                The old Guardian shouted back, "I'll do nothing of
 the kind. Go back where you belong!"
 The Soldier with the Green whiskers raised a pop-
 gun and began to fire popcorn as fast as he could.
                "Retreat or surrender!" cried the Soldier. His long
 green whiskers stood out in three separate parts. His
 old coat-tails flapped behind him.
                "GET THEM!" ordered the Voice.
                The trees just stood and shook. The popcorn rolled
 off them. Their leaves began to shed. They shook so
 hard that the ghost's next command rattled:
                "FETCH THOSE TWO OLD NODDYHAMMERS!"
                "Those are fightin' words!" sputtered the Soldier
 with the Green Whiskers. He said no more, for just

 then the old tree reached its two longest branches
 over the wall and wrapped them around the Soldier.
 Lifting him high, the tree placed the Soldier outside
 the wall. Then it reached down and picked up the
 Guardian.
                "TURN THE OZZARD UPSIDE DOWN AND
 SHAKE HIM!" ordered the ghost.
                The old tree did as it was bidden. When the Guar-
 dian was upside down, the keys fell out of his pocket.
 Another tree quickly covered the keys with its
 roots.
                "My keys!" begged the Guardian. "Give me my
 keys!"
                "You may have your keys if you promise to open
 the gate," answered the ghost.
                "I'll open the gate if you promise not to enter until
 I've told Ozma of your arrival," said the Guardian.
 The ghost burst into a disagreeable laugh. "Hoz!
 Do you think we've come as guests? Not at all. We've
 come to capture the city!"
                Hearing this, the Soldier with the Green Whiskers
 came closer.
                "You can't do that!" he shouted. "It's against the
 law!"
                "What's that to a desperate outlaw like me?"

 boasted the ghost. "Open the gate at once!"
                "Come down and open it yourself," said the Guar-
 dian.
                This the ghost would not do. For it knew that when
 the trees saw that they had been ordered by a
 shrunken bit of rubber, they might harm it.
                So the ghost stayed within its nest and bellowed
 down, "You, there, you clumsy old tree! Open that
 gate."
                The trees trembled with anger at hearing their
 leader insulted. As for the old tree, it answered sadly,
                "I'd like to obey you, but I can't. My roots weren't
 made to work with keys."
                "Then we'll smash in the gate!" shouted the Ghost.
 "Ready, ADVANCE!"
                The trees drew themselves up and made ready to
 push in the gate. But just as they took the first step,
 the gate opened from within. It swung wide, exposing
 a threatening figure. Seeing it, the trees stood stlll
 and wrung their branches, weeping for mercy.
                The bells, clanging in the bell tower, had aroused
 the city. Crowds were gathered near the city gate,
 waiting for their queen to perform a miracle. And of
 course Ozma did not fail them.
                Turning to the Wizard, Ozma said, "It's time I did
 something."

                "Yes, Your Highness," said the Wizard. "Go
 ahead."
                Ozma put her hand on her magic belt, saying,
 "Nick, appear before the city gate."
                Nick, the Tin Woodman, was at that moment in
 his Winkie palace, where he was Emperor. He had
 invited the Scarecrow to drop his duties as Ruler of
 the Munchkins and spend the week-end with him. The
 two friends were getting ready to enjoy a game of
 squash. They played this with ripe bananas and brick-
 bats. Just as the Scarecrow was batting a banana, he
 looked up to find the Woodman gone.
                "He was probably called on business," thought the
 Scarecrow.
                The Tin Woodman, finding himself flying through
 the air, thoughtfully reached for his ax on his way
 out of the palace yard.
                "This may be an emergency," he thought, firmly
 shouldering his ax.
                In a few seconds he felt himself let down inside the
 gate of the Emerald City. He stood facing the gate
 in surprise, not understanding what was happening.
 The gate swung open of its own accord, and there be-
 fore Nick stood a gigantic purple forest.
                "RUSH IN!" commanded a voice up in a tree.

                "Indeed?" answered the quick-witted Nick. "No-
 body rushes in here without permission from the Guar-
 dian."
                Saying that, the Tin Woodman began to lay about
 him with his ax. He felled the first tree in a couple
 of blows. It came crashing down to the ground.
                "I'M MURDERED!" cried a voice within the fallen
 tangle of leaves.
                A crow's nest lay upside down under the leaves,
 and a shapeless figure was thrashing to get free. Its
 disagreeable odor was rushing out.
                The other trees drew back in fright. At this mo-
 ment the five scalawagons dashed up.
                Jenny's scalawagon recognized the Thing thrash-
 ing under the fallen tree. So did Jenny, by its smell.
                "Stop, scalawagon!" she cried, in a quiet voice.
 "Well done!"
                The four other scalawagons dashed up. "What shall
 we do now?" asked the girls.
                "Keep that Thing surrounded! Don't let it get
 away!" shouted Jenny. Leaping from her car, she
 jumped on the crow's nest.
                "Don't expose me!" came a feeble voice within the
 nest. "Here's your silly old bundle."
                A skinny rubber arm pushed something toward
 Jenny.

                "My precious handbag!" cried Jenny, seizing it.
 Opening it, she took a quick look within and made
 sure that her fairy gifts were safe.
                The crowd on the sidelines cheered and called ad-
 vice.
                "Don't let it go!"
 "Take it to the queen!"
                The rubber ghost was so deflated that it could only
 wheeze: "Treed-freed---speed!"
                "What's the need?" chuckled Jenny. "You're as
 popular as a weed. I'm taking you to the queen."
                Nick, the Woodman, was leaning on his ax and
 gazing at the trembling forest.
                "You don't need to be jittery," he said    "Im
 not going to chop any more of you-unless you're
 carrying concealed ghosts."
                "We're not!" said one tree. "We surrender! All
 we want is a drink of water."
                "Water!" begged the other trees, so piteously, that
 Nick's kind heart was moved.
                "Why didn't you say so?" he replied. "Wait--"
 Turning, Nick spied Kabumpo the Elephant in the
 crowd. Kabumpo had come from the Animal Enclo-
 sure to learn the cause of the excitement.
                "Kabumpo, would you be good enough to lead the

 trees to some water?" said Nick.
                "Sure, Nick," said Kabumpo with a grin and a toss
 of his trunk. "I'll be proud to show them the gorgeous
 Elephant Fountain."
                Turning around, Kabumpo showed the way into
 the city. The trees swept after him. The people ran
 after the trees. when the crowd had vanished, the
 Guardian and the Soldier ran in.
                "I'll go along and keep the peace!" said the Soldier,
 and he hurried off.
                "I'll stay and see that no more invaders trouble us,"
 said the Guardian, locking the gate with the keys that
 he had picked up from the ground.
                "I ought to be returning to my guest," said Nick.
 "Where did you leave him?" asked Dorothy. She re-
 ceived no answer. Turning, she saw that Nick had van-
 ished. Ozma had returned him to the Winkie Palace.
 Jenny had picked up the wriggling Ghost and was
 holding it wrapped within the nest.
                Jellia said, "I'd like to take a good look at the
 pest!"
                "You shall," promised Jenny. "Follow me, girls."
 The girls started their scalawagons and prepared
 to follow Jenny, when a groan came from behind them.
 They stopped and look back.
                "What was that?" asked Betsy.

                There was nothing to be seen, except the broken
 tree lying inside the gate.
                Again the moan came. Trot said in startled voice,
 "why, it's the tree. Poor thing, are you hurt?"
                "No," sighed the tree. "It's not the loss of a limb
 or two. It's being deserted by my friends that hurts."
                And the tree gave such a deep sigh that all its
 leaves rustled.
                "We'll help you up. Then follow us," advised Jenny.
                "Thank you," said the tree, struggling to its roots.
 "I couldn't get up before, because you were in my
 hair."
                "Sorry, but I had to get the ghost," said Jenny.
 "I'm glad you did," said the tree. "I've lost that
 haunted feeling."
                The five scalawagons started, and the tree fol-
 lowed. At the corner, Jenny pointed down Pudding
 Place and told the tree how to reach the Elephant
 Fountain. It turned off, and the girls proceeded to
 Jenny's Style Shop.
  
 CHAPTER 23
  
 Stamping Out Trouble
  

                INSIDE the shop, Sister Six gave Jenny a joyful
 greeting. The little Munchkin girl was curious to
 hear about her boss' adventures. And the customers
 didn't mind waiting to be waited on, while they lis-
 tened, too.
                                Jenny's shop was one of the most popular places
 in the Emerald City. By a simple twist of the turn-
 style, while you went through, you came out dressed
 in the fashion dearest to your heart.
                                The turn-style was a magic one, that Jenny had
 once found among the ruins of a magician's house.
 It was a shiny contraption with four arms and rows
 of buttons marked COLOR, STYLE, SIZE, etc. When
 the proper buttons were pressed, the results were al-
 ways satisfying.
                Jenny let Dorothy, Jellia, Betsy, and Trot do the
 talking, for she was busily engaged with the creature
 in the crow's nest.
                "Now, let's see your true form," said Jenny, put-
 ting the little villain into the turn-style and pressing
 several buttons.
                "No, no, no!" squealed the rubber victim. "Don't
 expose me!"
                "This is for your own good," said Jenny. "Your
 character has been too elastic. From now on, you'll
 amount to something!"

                "I don't want to amount to anything," wailed the
 ghost. "I wanna be a mystery!"
                The ghost limped on its snipped toe as it went
 through the turn-style. When it came out, the crow's
 nest was gone, and a flat, pancake-shaped object
 rolled on its side toward Jenny.
                "Why, bless us!" laughed Jenny. "Haven't I seen
 you somewhere before?"
                The flat creature was very much reduced in size
 and was wearing bells on its ears. A smell like dry
 mustard came from it.
                Jenny peered closely at it Then she burst out
 laughing.
                "why you're no ghost at all! You're nothing but
 the little flabbergasted Bell-snickle!"
                The flat-eyed creature stamped its feet and glared
 at Jenny, but it would not answer.
                "If you're going to keep a dogged silence, there's
 only one thing to do."
                Once more she forced the creature through the
 turn-style. It came out on a leash.
                Jenny picked up the end of the leash. "Now, you
 flat-headed little BELL-SNICKLE, come on!"
                "Exposed! Revealed! No more a mystery!" wailed
 the Bell-snickle, wringing its curly hands.

                "Ozma shall decide what to do with you," said
 Jenny.
                "It doesn't matter what becomes of me," said the
 Bell-snickle. "My toe has been my undoing. There's
 no reason for rubbing along."
                "Ozma will give you a reason," said Dorothy sym-
 pathetically. "Don't take it too hard."
                "I've always had it soft as rubber," said the Bell-
 snickle.
                "You can't go on like that in Oz," spoke up Jellia
 in rather a severe tone. "Here, everyone is expected
 to be something useful."
                "That's right," added Betsy, "you must make your
 mark."
                "Make my mark? Be useful?" wailed the Snickle.
 "Oh, I knew I shouldn't have let myself get caught."
                Dorothy, Betsy, Trot, and Jellia decided to remain
 in the shop and try the latest styles. Jenny went out
 and took the Snickle into her scalawagon.
                "Mind, now, no foolishness," she warned it.
                The Snickle's disagreeable odor filled the air.
 "We've got to do something about that," thought
 Jenny.
                She steered directly toward the Elephant Fountain.
 There the crowd was so great that Jenny had a hard
 time driving through. The trees were dipping their

 roots into the fountain. Many stray people and ani-
 mals loitered about Jenny drove to one of the spouts.
 Pulling the Snickle out of the scalawagon, she got
 him under the water and gave him a good dousing.
 The Snickle set up a roar. Then he whistled. Then he
 grunted like a pig. But the washing did not stop
 until every whiff of the flabbergas was gone.
                "Now you're almost respectable enough to go to
 Ozma's palace," said Jenny. She dragged the Snickle
 back to her scalawagon.
                Just then the voice of Scraps came through the
 crowd:
                "Public traffic jammed up hard
                All along the boo-lee-vard!
                Are you friend or enemee?
                May I ask in poetree?"
 Scraps catapulted in front of Jenny's scalawagon.
 Seeing the Bell-snickle, the patchwork girl stood on
 her head and chanted:
                "Tickle the Snickle
                He's full of woe,
                With a sick kick
                In a sore toe!"
 The crowd was delightei They pressed around the
 scalawagon. The Snickle stood on its flat edge and

 squinted, making ferocious noises and shaking its
 bells. Instead of being frightened, the people were
 amused. They shouted to the Snick to do more.
                When Jenny was able to steer her scalawagon out
 of the crowd, she drove directly to Ozma's palace.
 Arriving there, she dismounted, jerked the Bell-
 snickle to its feet, and ran up the palace stairs.
                Ozma was standing on the balcony, overlooking the
 city. She turned to Jenny with a broad smile.
                "Hello, Duchess. So you brought the little mischief-
 maker. what do you want me to do with it?"
                "Why, I don't know," said Jenny. "I thought it my
 duty to bring it straight to you. For you're the Queen,
 and its fate is in your hands."
                Ozma laughed cheerily. "It's not easy to deal with
 an unpleasant subject" She gave the Snickle a long
 look and then said, "Suppose I left it in your hands,
 Jenny. what would you do?"
                "Why-why, I'd have to think about that, your
 Highness," stuttered Jenny.
                "Well, go ahead and think," said Ozma, whose eyes
 were twinkling. "You've handled the situation so well
 this far, I'm sure you can find the solution."
                Jenny sat down and put her chin in her hands. She
 began to think very hard. The Snickle crouched at
 her feet, quite well-mannered now, for it realized that

 it was in the presence of its queen.
                "I have it!" said Jenny, looking up.
                "Quick work," said Ozma with a nod of approval.
 "What do you propose?"
                "If it please your Highness, I could use it in my
 shop," said Jenny.
                "Good. Then it's to be useful. But how can you use
 it, Jenny dear?"
                "I could put it through the turn-style and make it
 smaller. And then it could make its stamp as a crea-
 ture of mark."
                "I see," said Ozma.
                The Bell-snickle jerked its head up and said, "I
 don't see at all. what're you talking about?"
                "I mean that we could put your rubbering to some
 use," laughed Jenny.
                The Bell-snickle howled, "It's still a mystery! I
 thought I was the last of the mysteries!"
                "That's pure conceit," said Ozma with a gentle re-
 buke. "For there will always be some mysteries in
 Oz.         We need them to keep up the people's interest"
 Jenny said admiringly, "That's what makes you
 such a popular queen, Ozma. You always think of
 ways to keep your people interested."
                "Thank you," said Ozrna. "But maybe we ought

 to enlighten the Bell-snickle a bit further."
                Jenny looked down at the Snickle. "Did you ever
 hear of an important business conducted without a
 Rubber Stamp?" she asked.
                "No, never," replied the Snickle promptly.
 "From now on, my Style Shop will have you for its
 Rubber Stamp."
                The Snickle shuddered. "You mean I have to
 WORK?"
                "Your duties will be simple," said Jenny. "You'll
 do the same little thing over and over again."
                "How simple?" persisted the Snickle, distrustfully.
                "Why, all you'll have to do is fasten a little stamp
 to each costume that comes out of my turnstyle that
 will read: JENNY'S EXCLUSIVE MODEL-- Easy,
 isn't it?"
                "Oh, I don't know," grumbled the Snickle. "I'd be
 giving up my freedom!"
                "You only used your freedom to get into trouble,"
 put in Ozma. "Jenny's idea is good. You are going
 to like your work. And everyone will respect you for
 it."
                "Do you really think so?" said the Snickle, looking
 a little interested.
                "Of course," Ozma assured it.
                The Snickle appeared to think it over. Then it shook

 its head.
                "No, it won't do."
                "What's the matter now?" said Jenny in exaspera-
 tion.
                "Not enough variety. I'm a creature of talent. I've
 always led a spicy life. Spice the job, and I'll take it."
                Jenny looked at Ozma as if to say, "What can you
 do with someone like that?" Ozma's patient smile an-
 swered her.
                "I think you're right," said Ozma to the Bell-
 snickle. "Spice is the variety of life, isn't it?"
                "You bet!" said the Snick.
                "No, I never do. I don't consider it queen-like," said
 Ozma. "But about this variety-I think I can provide
 you with plenty."
                "Kindly explain," said the Snickle haughtily.
                Ozma laughed. "There are a good many things
 going on in Oz that I intend to put a stop to," she
 said. "For instance, my forest scouts report that
 Munchkin seeds have been blown into Quadling coun-
 try, and blue grass is growing among the red. I intend
 to put a stop to that."
                "You should-at once," said the Snickle. "Blue
 grass among the red! It's enough to give one eye-
 strain."

                "Yes, it is," said Ozma. "And then, there's an im-
 pertinent house in Apple Alley that keeps its shutters
 closed all day and open all night. That's got to be
 stopped!"
                "You bet!" said the Snickle.
                "No, never," said the queen. "But if you'll accept
 the position, I'll appoint you my Royal Rubber
 Stopper."
                "Oh, Your Majesty!" exclaimed the Snickle, over-
 come by this honor. "A Rubber Stamp and a Rubber
 Stopper, all in the same day. I don't know what to
 say!"
                "Never mind. Go along with Duchess Jenny now.
 Your troubles are stamped out forever!"
                Jenny rose and bid Ozma good-bye. She led the
 Snickle away, just as a fresh commotion sounded
 within the palace.
  
 CHAPTER 24
  
 Ozma Holds Court
                
                THE commotion came from Ozma's Throne Room.
 Ozma knew it was time to hold court. She left
 the balcony and hurried to a high room decorated in
 crystal and gauze.

                Within the Throne Room stood Ozma's throne,
 carved out of a single huge emerald. On either side
 of it crouched the Cowardly Lion and the Hungry
 Tiger. Aunt Em, who loved to attend Court, sat in
 the rear, knitting a pair of socks for Uncle Henry.
 The Soldier with the Green Whiskers raised his
 trumpet and blew a salute to the Queen. All the
 people waiting there bowed low as Ozma ascended
 her throne. Jellia, dressed in a fresh style, handed Oz-
 ma her crown and sceptre. The Queen pointed the
 sceptre at the Soldier with the Green Whiskers.
                "Call the first case," she said.
                "Your Highness, I can't call 'em, for there are too
 many of 'em. A whole forest," said the Soldier. "But
 I have allowed Kabumpo to represent 'em."
                The Soldier waved his trumpet at Kabumpo the Ele-
 phant. Kabumpo came forward. In that mighty Throne
 Room, he looked small for his size. Ojo, his keeper,
 had dressed him in a robe sewn with gems and had
 polished his skin until it shone.
                "Kabumpo, you look lovely," said Ozma, smiling
 at the Elephant
                "Thank you, your Majesty. You look like a queen,
 yourself," said the Elephant, with a courteous wave
 of his trunk.

                "What's this about a forest?" said Ozma. "Is it
 the same forest that I saw in my magic picture?"
                "Probably," said Kabumpo. "It's a visiting delega-
 tion of trees. But I fear that these will outstay the
 time permitted to visitors. They mean to take root
 here!"
                "That's impossible," said Ozma, drawing her brows
 together seriously. "They're purple, and they'd clash
 with the color scheme of our city."
                "That's what I tried to tell them, your Highness,"
 interposed the Soldier with the Green Whiskers. "But
 they were bound to stay."
                "That's because they haven't any other place to
 be," said Kabumpo quickly. "Please show them
 mercy, Ozma."
                "Of course," said Ozma, smiling her kindliest smile.
                "But I must be fafr. Now, let me think."
                She put her head on her hand and thought. Every-
 one was very quiet.
                "I have it," she said, at last.
                The Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger began
 to applaud by thumping their tails on the floor.
                "Thank you," said Ozma.
 She put her hand on her magic belt, and giving It
 a little rub, said,
                "Foresters of Oz, appear before me."

 There was a sound like wind passing through the
 chamber. The curtains blew inward, and there, stand-
 ing before the throne, was a band of tiny woodsmen.
 They were dressed in waterproof breeches and fire-
 proof vests. They had long green feathers in their
 caps. Their yellow, blue, red, and purple faces showed
 them to be from every country of Oz.
                "Woodsmen, welcome," said Ozma.
                "Greetings, your Majesty," spoke one of the band.
                "How goes your work of putting out forest fires
 started by the breath of careless dragons?"
                "Well, your Majesty."
                "You have no complaint?"
                "Well . . ." The man hesitated.
                "Go on," urged the Queen. "Don't be afraid to
 register any complaint."
                "It's those scalawagons, your Highness. They're
 very willing, and fine for groundwork. But they
 aren't quite what we need in the upper branches of
 our profession. We could see over more territory if
 we were elevated at our posts."
                Ozma smiled happily. "That is why I have sum-
 moned you. I have a band of roving, do-nothing trees.
                They can lead useful lives and help you to higher
 posts. My carpenters will build platforms high in the

 trees. You men can do your scouting from there. Each
 will be responsible for one tree, lead it to water when-
 ever it is thirsty, and hold a monthly reunion."
                "A valuable idea, your Majesty," said the forester,
 giving Ozma a look of admiration.
                Again the Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger
 applauded by thumping their tails on the floor. The
 others in the Throne Room joined in the applause.
 When the applause was over, Aunt Em's voice came
 from the rear,
                "There's just one thing I can't understand. What-
 ever do trees need to hold reunions for?"
                Ozma looked over at Aunt Em. "The trees will
 benefit one another. The Spruce will remind them to
 keep their appearances neat. The Box Elders will
 teach them how to put up a good fight, using the Hem-
 lock. The Sass-afras will learn to hold its tongue. There
 are ever so many reasons why the trees should get to-
 gether like one big family."
                Aunt Em nodded. "I approve of a family tree my-
 self. You're right, Ozma."
                Ozma turned back to the little forest men. "You
 are free to go now. Join the trees at the Elephant
 Fountain. Kabumpo will take you there."
                "Get on my back," invited Kabumpo.
 The band of little men jumped onto Kabumpo's

 back.
 "Comfortable?" asked Ozma.
 "Not quite, Your Majesty," they said.
 Ozma raised her sceptre and beckoned to some-
 thing at the side of the Throne Room. A large ani-
 mal got to its feet and came forward. It was the Com-
 fortable Camel, contentedly chewing its cud.
                "You want me to assist Kabumpo?" said the Camel.
 "If you please." Ozma waited until half the band
 of woodsmen had climbed onto the Camel's back.
 Then, as the two animals started out, she called, "Good-
 bye, and thank you all."
                When the woodsmen were out of sight, Ozma looked
 at the Soldier with the Green Whiskers.
                "I'd like to go down to Jenny's Style Shop and try
 some new clothes."
                "And I'd like to have a game of marbles with the
 Guardian of the Gate," said the Soldier. "But we
 must attend to business first, your Highness."
                Ozma sighed. "You are right. Bring on the next
 case."
                The Soldier with the Green Whiskers went to the
 door and admitted the eighty-eight Nota-bells. The
 bell-men lined up before the throne, dressed in their
 light green uniforms. They they bowed low.

                "You did a fine job of warning the city that the
 forest was moving on us," said Ozma. "I wish to re-
 ward you. Is there anything you gentlemen would
 like?"
                The Vesper Bell spoke up promptly: "We're tired of
 these uniforms. They're not dignified enough for our
 new jobs. You might give us a couple of play suits."
                Ozma answered, "I'll take you over to the Style
 Shop myself. Jenny is sure to think of something
 youthful for you."
                "Hurrah! We'll look like bellboys," shouted the
 Nota-bells.
                "But isn't there something else you'd like? You
 performed a great service to our city, and you de-
 serve more than uniforms," said Ozma.
                Again the Vesper Bell answered promptly: "We
 haven't had anything sweet since we left Sugar
 Mountain in Boboland. My sweet tooth is getting
 quite weak from undernourishment."
                The Vesper Bell-man put his fingers into his mouth
 and pulled out a small white tooth. Every other bell-
 man put his finger into his mouth and took out his
 sweet tooth, holding it up in the air.
                "Oh, you poor things, losing your teeth like that!"
 said a voice within the courtroom crowd. There was
 a sound of weeping. Everyone turned to see the Town

 Crier shedding tears and wringing his hands most
 piteously.
                "There's no need to feel so bad," said the Vesper
 Bell. "Molasses would soon make our teeth stick."
                "Why, then, you shall have molasses. Barrels of
 it!" declared Ozma.
                The little bell-men bowed gratefully, and stepped
 back from the throne.
                A disturbance cut off Ozma's next words. The door
 of the Throne Room opened violently and a voice de-
 manded:
                "I want to see the Queen!"
                "This is not the proper approach," said the Sol-
 dier with the Green Whiskers. "Kindly hold your
 horses."
                "I didn't bring my horses. But I brought this ob-
 streperous Mifkit!"
                It was the Munchkin Farmer, Number Nine's fa-
 ther. He came striding toward the center of the
 room, followed by the small Mifkit. The Mifkit was
 in a greater rage and kept throwing its head at the
 farmer. The head hit the farmer and bounced back
 to the Mifkit's shoulders.
                "Keep your head!" ordered Ozma, "or you might
 lose it."

                At that the Mifkit threw its head at the Queen. But
 before it reached her, Ozma raised her hand. The Mif-
 kit's head stopped in mid-air.
                "I ain't got no body!" cried the head.
                "Mind your grammar," said Ozma severely.
                The head stuck out its tongue. "Soldier with the
 Green Whiskers, hold its tongue," ordered Ozma. The
 Soldier stepped close to the head and seized the out-
 stretched tongue in both hands.
                "Now, then, Farmer, what's wrong?" asked Ozma.
                "It's wrong!" declared the Munchkin Farmer,
 pointing to the headless Mifkit "I ordered it to milk,
 and it milked. But it wouldn't STOP! My cows ran
 away, and they are still running."
                "Your cows must be stopped," said Ozma sympathet-
 ically. "My Royal Rubber Stopper will see to that. Go
 home, Farmer, and never worry again. I'll banish this
 wicked Mifkit."
                The head of the Mifkit appeared to be trying to
 talk. But as the Soldier with the Green Whiskers was
 holding its tongue, it could only make horrible faces.
 Its cheeks filled out, its eyes popped and looked ready
 to fall out of their sockets.
                "Let go its tongue," said Ozma. "We'll hear what
 it has to say."
                When the Mifkit's tongue was free, it sputtered,

                "Gimme my body! You ain't got no right to keep us
 apart!"
                "Such language!" declared Aunt Em in a shocked
 voice. "Why, I declare it's a sin."
                "It's syn-tax shall be promptly levied," said Ozma.
 She pointed her sceptre at the head. "YOU ARE
 BANISHED!" The head disappeared. Then Ozma
 pointed at the body. "GO HEADWAY ALONG!"
                Zipp! The place where the Mifkit had stood was
 empty.
                "I hope both parts arrive at the same time," spoke
 Ozma. "He was an amusing little savage, but there's
 no place for him in Oz."
                "He'll have an interesting story to tell his fellow
 critters in the Sandy Waste," said Aunt Em.
                Aunt Em now folded up her knitting. "Your Maj-
 esty," she spoke in a decided tone of voice. "You have
 had a strenuous session. I move we adjourn to Jenny's
 Style Shop. I haven't anything to wear to the Scala-
 wagon Initiation this afternoon."
                "I am a bit tired," Ozma admitted. She leaned her
 head on her hand wearily. Then she straightened up
 and said brightly, "But a new hat will do wonders for
 me."
                "Court adjourned!" cried the Soldier with the

 Green Whiskers. Raising his trumpet, he blew three
 loud notes. Ozma descended from her throne and led
 the way out of the Throne Room, through the long
 corridor, and down the broad stairs. The people and
 the animals followed her to the street. As they got
 into their waiting scalawagons, Ozma said to the
 Town Crier,
                "Go and cry through the town that a party is to be
 given in honor of the scalawagons at Custard Court
 at three o'clock, when the babies have finished their
 naps. Invite everybody!"
  
 CHAPTER 25
  
 The Great Party
  
 THE Town Crier did his part well. Riding up and
 I down streets in his new scalawagon, he covered
 more territory than he could on foot. So well and plenti-
 fully did he cry that his tears washed all the streets
 fresh for the party.
                In a short while all the people in the Emerald City,
 including the guests, knew of Ozma's party at Cus-
 tard Court. Never had there been such primping and
 dressing. Everyone was determined to look his best.
                Jellia Jamb, Ozma's housekeeper, had seen to the

 preparations at the Court. In spite of the short no-
 tice, everything was in readiness. It required a bit
 of magic to prepare some of the features. The Wiz-
 ard came to assist Jellia, and with a bit of magic here
 and there, wonders were accomplished.
                As soon as the children awoke from their naps, the
 people began streaming toward Custard Court. On
 Strawberry Street and Celery Street the crowds were
 thickest, for these were two short-cuts to the Court.
                In Pudding Place and Banana Boulevard the scala-
 wagons rode in a thick formation. In spite of the
 crowding, everyone was in good humor. And since
 all the traffic was going the same way, there were no
 accidents.
                The houses would dearly have loved to join the pro-
 cession, but it was against the law for them to leave
 their places. They all smiled at the passersby, blink-
 ing their blinds and fluttering their shutters.
                Ozma and her friends were still at Jenny's Style
 Shop. The first to go through the turn-style had been
 the Nota-bells. They were soon turned out in smart
 red jackets and blue trousers, and their bells were
 given a high polish.
                "Aren't we high-toned!" declared one bell-man,
 tossing his head until it rang.

                "You may go on to the party," said Ozma with a 
 smile. "I think you'll find what you want there."
                The Nota-bells needed no second invitation. Skip-
 ping out of the shop, they hopped aboard a scalawagon
 and rode as fast as the crowds permitted. When they
 arrived in the Courtyard, they saw something that
 made them peal with delight.
                The Tin Woodman and the Scarecrow were rolling
 a couple of molasses barrels into the center of the
 courtyard. Nick barely had time to raise his ax and
 remove the head, before the bell-men came flying
 around him like a swarm of bees.
                "Hurry! Hurry!" they cried. They kept circling
 around Nick's head, their spread beards keeping them
 In another minute the barrel was opened and the
 molasses flowed free to all. The excited bell-men
 swarmed down and began greedily to lick the sweet
 stuff. They did not wait for spoons or dishes or nap-
 kins, but used their tongues and fingers, licking away
 for their lives.
                The people stood speechless at this spectacle. Only
 Scraps, the Patchwork Girl, spoke out:
                                "I was never very fussy,
                                Neither was I quite so mussy!"
 which expressed what most of the people were think-
 ing.

                The little men pushed each other and ducked into
 the center of the molasses barrel. Soon their new
 suits were covered with the sticky molasses. They
 picked every drop off and licked their fingers clean.
                A couple of them crawled inside the leaking barrel,
 and when they crawled out, they were sticky from
 whiskers to toes.
                The sight seemed to fascinate Scraps. She chanted,
                                "Pardon me a moment, Misters,
                                There's molasses in your whiskers;
                                I don't mean to criticise,
                                But it's also in your eyes!"
                The bell-men paid no attention to Scraps, but con-
 tinued to push and shove each other, each trying to
 get the most This rough scene made Scraps very
 happy.
                "You don't seem to get enough
                Of this fascinating stuff;
                And when all is said and done,
                I'll admit it must be fun!"
 Scraps did not eat, so she had no use for molasses.
 But she could not resist getting into a fight. The bell-
 men were fighting over the last few drops. With a
 squeal and a jump, Scraps landed in the middle of
 the bell-men. There was a flying mass of patches,

 whiskers, and molasses. The mess provided high en-
 tertainment for the crowd.
                Only Jack Pumpkinhead did not think the sight
 funny. "Scraps, Scraps," he moaned, "when will you
 learn to be a lady?"
                "Did you call for a lady?" inquired a charming
 voice at Jack's elbow. Turning, Jack saw a dainty,
 two-headed dragonette. The dragonette's two faces
 were smiling at Jack, and a soft thread of smoke
 came from each mouth. The dragonette put up its
 paws and elegantly covered its mouths.
                "Hello, Evangeline," said Jack. "I wish Scraps were
 half as polite as you."
                At this minute the crowd parted to make way for
 the scalawagons of Ozma and her party. Dorothy was
 dressed in princess clothes. Jenny was attired like a
 duchess. Aunt Em and Uncle Henry were in their
 Sunday best. Many with new Sunbonnets.
                "Gracious, what's happening?" exclaimed Ozma,
 surveying the flying mass of Whiskers and Scraps.
                "Looks like a free-for-all," said Uncle Henry.
 "Everything is free for all at this party," said Doro-
 thy. "And if the refreshments won't go around, we can
 eat right in our scalawagons."
                "Scraps and the Nota-bells will have to be refreshed
 in another way," said Jenny with a laugh. "Ozma,

 call off that fight and order them to my Style Shop.
 They can get into clean clothes in a jiffy."
                "A good idea," said Ozma. Raising her voice, she
 called, "Scraps, stop your fighting, dear."
                Scraps came out of the flying mess and landed on
 her back, sprawling. She was up in a flash, and somer-
 saulted to Ozma's scalawagon.
                "What can I do for you, Ozma?" she said.
                "Better do something for yourself, Scraps. Go to
 the Style Shop and get yourself a new outfit. And
 help the bell-men through the turn-style. When you
 all look better, come back and see the fun."
                Scraps drew herself up importantly. "I'll see that
 those fellows behave themselves," she said.
                Hearing Ozma's voice, the bell-men stopped fight-
 ing and stood up at attention. They were a sorry
 sight, with their clothes all askew, and their whiskers
 stuck fast in molasses.
                They followed the beckoning Scraps, who took them
 to the Style Shop.
                When Scraps returned from the Style Shop, she was
 so proud of her new outfit that she rode on the roof
 of her scalawagon, so that everyone could see her.
 The bell-men, in neat suits of blue and gold, rode
 soberly beneath her.

                "Now, good people," Ozma said, standing up in her
 Royal scalawagon, "we have some grand entertain-
 ment. I hope it will please you!"
                The people broke into cheers for their beloved
 Queen. Ozma and her party left their scalawagons
 and mounted to the terrace of Custard Court, where
 they might overlook the huge, colorful throng. On
 the terrace, they found Glinda and the Wizard.
                Glinda, looking her loveliest in a long red robe, with
 her long hair flowing over her shoulders, stood up to
 greet Ozma.
                "I want to thank you and the Wizard. The scala-
 wagons have made my people so happy! During the
 day, the children play fire-engine with them, and in
 the evening the old folks go riding in the country."
                The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman now joined
 the royal party. "My people enjoy their scalawagons,
 too," said the Tin Woodman. "This morning I saw a
 Winkie mother tucking her child into one for its forty
 winks."
                "My Munchkins have another use for theirs," put
 in the Scarecrow. "They mail their letters in them.
 It's the fastest service we've ever had."
                "How do they do it?" asked Ozma, looking inter-
 ested.
                "They just put their letter inside the scalawagon

 and tell the car where to deliver it. In no time at all,
 the scalawagon is back-with an answer."
                "Well, if that doesn't beat all!" exclaimed Aunt
 Em.
                "Yes, the scalawagons are a wonderful gift to the
 people," said Glinda. "And as I was saying, I'd like
 to show my appreciation. So--look!"
                The party on the terrace bent to look down into the
 court. There, coming through the crowd, were the
 six Lollies and their Pops. They carried brimming
 buckets of water fairies on their heads. In the center
 of the courtyard they lowered the buckets and spread
 them with a swish. Glinda stood up and raised her
 hands. Instantly a circular brook was flowing there,
 with the water fairies bobbing on the surface.
                The people broke into a pandemonium of delight.
 They danced and shouted like mad.
                "They love it," said Ozma, giving Glinda a smile
 of thanks. "And it certainly adds to the beauty of
 the courtyard."
                When the crowd quieted down, the music of the
 brook could be heard. The people, recognizing a fa-
 miliar waltz, quickly found partners and danced.
 The small children formed a ring around the brook
 and danced, too. Then overhead, came flying the

 eighty-eight bell-men. Joining softly with the music,
 they played the "Waltz of the Bells."
                "My, aren't they all having a grand time!" said Aunt
 Em. "I declare, it makes me feel young enough to
 dance, too!"
                "What are we waiting for?" said Uncle Henry, ris-
 ing and offering Aunt Em his arm. The two went off
 to join the dancers.
                Just then Number Nine came onto the terrace.
 Going up to Jenny, he said, "May I have this dance?"
                Jenny blushed.
                "Go ahead, Jenny," spoke the Wizard. "For I mean
 to ask Ozma for this dance myself."
                The Tin Woodman put his hand over his heart.
 "That gives me courage to ask Glinda's kind per-
 mission for this dance," he said.
                The Scarecrow stepped up to Dorothy and bowed
 low. "Will you honor me, my dear?"
                "Why, I'd love to!" cried Dorothy, jumping to her
 feet. All the girls went down with their partners.
                The scalawagons were delighted at this party given
 in their honor. Rearing up on their hind wheels, they
 cavorted as merrily as the rest.
                Now there wasn't a body who wasn't dancing.
 Never had there been so much laughter and fun with-
 in the Emerald City. The Guardian of the Gate and

 the Soldier with the Green Whiskers looked up from
 their game of marbles inside the city gate. Hearing
 the music, they put their arms on each other's
 shoulders and began to waltz.
                "Happy days!" said the Guardian.
                "What's happy about it?" asked a voice behind the
 Guardian. It was the Town Crier, crying with all his
 might. "They're all so gay, I've nothing to cry about!"
 he complained, and he felt so sorry for himself that
 he cried harder than ever.
                "That's right," said the Guardian. "Just sit down
 and have a good cry. It will make you feel better."
                "I don't want to feel better," said the Crier. "I'm
 happiest when I'm saddest. But I can't keep my feet
 from dancing to that music!"
                Still crying, he went dancing away. He came to
 Custard Court, and stood dancing on the edge of the
 crowd.
                Up on the terrace appeared the tall hall clock from
 the Wizard's tower.
                "Where's that boy?" grumbled the Clock. "He
 ought to be at work. Three and a half days late! Why,
 I've ticked myself black in the face, in all that time!
 I won't tick if he won't work. I'll just stop!"
                The minute the Clock stopped it heard the music of

 the brook and the bells. They were merrily playing
 "The Dance of the Hours." The cranky old clock found
 its feet tapping on the terrace floor.
                "I can't stop dancing!" it cried, tapping its feet
 faster. "This is an outrage! There's work to be done.
 Three and a half days late!"
                Turning, the Clock fled from the terrace, across to
 the palace, and up the stairs to its corner. But even
 there the music could be heard, and the old Clock
 could not restrain its feet.
                "Three and a half--Help!" it cried, as it stood hop-
 ping and tapping to the merry tune.
  
 The End

