 
  
 Lucky Bucky In Oz – Oz 36
  
 L. Frank Baum
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 CHAPTER

  
 1             The Volcanic Bake Shop
 2             The Wooden Whale
 3             The Jones Cousins
 4             TheSchoolofDollfins
 5             The Map
 6             Over the Hump
 7             Beginning a Long Journey 
 8             The Army Resigns 
 9             The CWO Painters' Project
 10           Kaliko in a Rage
 11           King Bucky
 12           Over the Rainbow
 13           Winning Their Way
 14           Tea and Thunderbugs
 15           Slippery Going
 16           In Search of a River
 17           Scarecrow Entertains
 18           The Uncles
 19           Witch Hunt 
 20           TheEmeraldCityat Last
 21           LakeQuad
     
                 
 CHAPTER 1
  

 The Volcanic Bake Shop
  
 CHUG-CHUG, Chug-chug. The engine in the tug
 boat sputtered monotonously.
                Lying in the warm sunshine on the upper deck of
 his uncle's tug boat, Lucky Bucky looked up into the
 sky.
                Somewhere inside the boat the ship's clock struck
 eight bells. It wastwelve o'clock.
                "Time for lunch, almost," he thought drowsily,
 watching the engine strain on the long towing line
 that pulled three barges at a slow speed through up-
 perNew York Bay. The course took them close to the
 huge bronze figure of the Goddess of Liberty.
                The boy looked up reverently into the face of the
 Great Goddess. She seemed to be looking straight at
 him and her eyes held an expression of alarm
 perhaps she was about to speak... when... Bam!!!
 A terrific explosion . . . a sharp hiss of steam and
 Bucky shot up into the air with the speed of a rocket!
 Recovering from his first surprise, the boy looked
 down and saw, far below him, his uncle's tug boat
 with a great hole in the cabin roof on the exact spot
 where he had been lying. He rose higher and higher
 in the air. The tug boat, the Great Goddess of Lib-

 erty and all the familiar landmarks grew smaller
 and smaller. Gradually they faded completely into
 the mist.
                Bucky lost all track of time as he whirled through
 space, wondering what in the world would happen
 next, where he would land-and how. He wasn't ex-
 actly pleased with the unexpected situation in which
 he found himself.
                "That old boiler must have burst," he said to him-
 self, uneasily. "Well, I'll just have to make the best
 of the bust, I guess."
 As he soared beyond the highest clouds, he reso-
 lutely pulled his sweater close around his neck and
 buttoned up his coat tightly. On and on he sped.
                "Everything so far seems okay," he muttered, "no
 bones broken. I guess I really am Luck."
                From behind the last lazy cloud darted a perspiring
 cloud-pusher and a barrel-bird half full of star dust.
                "Ker-swisssh!" sneezed the large, round barrel-
 bird, as it flew close to Bucky. The boy tried to steady
 himself that he might get a better look at the queer
 thing. "Where do you think you're going, Stranger?"
 enquired the inquisitive bird.
                "Maybe you can tell me, for I haven't the slightest
 idea," responded the boy as they all shot forward,
 side by side.

                "Bumps and blithers are ahead," warned the barrel-
 bird. "You had better be careful where you go."
                Now they were skimming over an endless pink
 ocean. Far beyond, rising from the ocean, Bucky no-
 ticed the top of a small, active volcano. He was head-
 ing straight toward it. He tried to check his speed
 but he didn't know how to accomplish this.
                "If I were you-which I am very thankful I am not
 I would keep away from that volcano," ventured
 the bird.
                "Don't bother me now with silly suggestions," re-
 plied Bucky, trying desperately to brace himself
 against what he judged was likely to happen. He
 couldn't stop . . . he didn't even have time to think
 or to act.
                "Here is where Lucky Bucky trusts completely to
 his luck," he muttered and closed his eyes tight. Then,
 right up to his neck, he plunged into a soft mass of
 warm dough. Little bubbles of sour yeast sizzled and
 burst all around him. One quick glance showed Bucky
 that he had landed half-way up the slope of the steep
 volcano. From the crater spurted puffs of fragrant
 steam, pungent with the strong odor of cinnamon.
 "If I'm still alive, I can thank my lucky stars," thought
 the boy as he twisted his head free from the dough.

 He gazed around, holding his breath in amazement.
                He heard a babble of squeaky voices above him:
 "Goodness gracious sakes!!!" exclaimed one fussy
 voice. "Bees, bats and buzzards! What's this?" cried
 another.
                From a ridge above the dough, half a dozen flat
 wooden paddles poked the boy in the back. These pad-
 dles were attached to the ends of very long handles
 and Bucky, who had managed to pull his arms free,
 grabbed one of the blades with his sticky fingers. He
 called out:
                "You fellows be careful up there . . . stop poking
 me...
                A row of angry faces popped up over the upper
 ridge.
                "Leave our Doughminion immediately," the mouths
 yelled madly. Again the paddles prodded the boy more
 savagely. In spite of all attempts to wrench the blade
 from his hands, Bucky held on grimly, for he was very
 strong. The struggle became a tug of war and the
 boy presently felt himself being slowly drawn up, out
 of the sticky mass, and dropped on the ridge. He saw
 immediately that a swarm of furious little cooks were
 pulling desperately on the other end of the paddle.
 They were dressed in long white coats reaching to the
 ground. Each one wore a high cook's cap on his head.

                "Don't mince matters with us!!!" screamed a fussy
 master-baker who was wearing an extra large hat.
                "Dump the dumpling into the ocean! He's too dumb
 to be put into a lamb stew!"
                As the cooks became noisier, the whole volcano be-
 came excited until, at the mention of lamb stew, a
 stream of potatoes, onions and carrots shot out of the
 crater. Cries went up for "Parsnips. . . Carrots..
 Pumpkins and Peanuts . .. Cabbage and Cake.
 Mush and Molasses..." And, sure enough, with each
 order screamed, up from the crater came more and
 more vegetables for the stew, followed at last by a
 large mess of mush and molasses that doused over the
 spotless white aprons of the cooks and made the nar-
 row ridge slippery and dangerous.
                Bucky managed to wrench the paddle from the
 loosened grasp of the bakers, and with it, he poked
 back at them and chased them half way around the
 mountain ledge where they vanished from his sight.
                Coming suddenly upon a row of ovens, Bucky opened
 one. Inside the volcanic oven were fragrant pies just
 turning to a golden brown. Everything about them
 looked delicious. Sliding his paddle inside, as he had
 once seen a baker slip his peel, Bucky gently drew out
 a couple of the pies. His action threw the little cooks

 into a loud cry of protest. Defiantly they swung their
 long scoops and again ordered him to leave their
 Doughmain.
                "What in the mischief ails you fellows?" cried the
 boy, setting his pies on the ground and swinging his
 scoop as several determined bakers prepared to at-
 tack him. He wasn't going to be pushed back into
 that dough without a struggle. He dropped the pad-
 dle and stood facing the cooks, a sizzling hot pie in
 either hand. The bakers stopped. . . whispered to-
 gether, and waited. .
                Bucky took time out to eat one of the pies. But
 before he had finished it, the bakers were consulting
 again in whispers. He watched them from the corner
 of his eye.
                In a flash they charged again, swinging their pad-
 dles dangerously close to his head. With his own
 weapon he fought back against his assailants, tum-
 bling many of them into the soft dough below.
                Though he fought valiantly, the bakers gained
 ground; step by step, they crowded closer. By sheer
 force of numbers they surrounded him. The crack,
 crack of the scoops clashing together could be heard
 far out over the ocean. Bucky received many smart
 wallops that made him see stars. The outcome of the
 fight began to look dark for the boy as the Scrimmage

 rose to its climax.
                Suddenly, without warning, the tide of battle turned
 the racket ceased. A piercing call of alarm rang out.
 "The Pie Rats!!! The Whale!!! Our Doughmain's
 in peril!!!!"
                All eyes were turned toward the sea. Close to shore
 the great head of a huge wooden whale came slowly
 up out of the pink ocean. From beneath the whale's
 gill a small trap-door flew open, and a gang of rough,
 weather-beaten pirates scramhled out. They swarmed
 over the beach and began to climb the steep sides of
 the volcano, all the while brandishing their long cut-
 lasses and huge pistols.
                In their excitement and dread of the pirates, the
 bakers entirely forgot Bucky, who stood looking on
 with amazement. The bakers scurried to a higher
 place on the mountain ridge. Here piles of hard bis-
 cuits were stacked like cannon balls.
                Each little biscuit shooter took a biscuit on his scoop
 and expertly sent it whistling down on the head of an
 invader. Every shot was so well aimed that it found
 its mark.
                Crack! Crack! Smack! went the biscuits accom-
 panied by a chorus of little squeals. A constant stream
 fell on the enemy. Hundreds of hard, dry, slightly

 burned biscuits hummed through the air that day and,
 as the invaders continued the assault, so the biscuit
 shooters increased the bombardment.
                The siege was beginning to fail and the pirates to
 waver, without the capture of even a single cruller,
 when suddenly, as though to end the attack, the crater
 of the volcano belched forth a cloud of black pepper.
 Sneezing and coughing, the invaders turned in utter
 confusion and fled back toward the whale.
                With dignity, the whale slipped away from the shore
 and swam out just beyond the reach of the pirates.
 There, floating calmly on the serene pink ocean, the
 whale paid not the slightest attention to the pleadings
 of the crew he had so quietly left to meet their fate.
 Majestically swishing his tail, the whale moved slowly
 beyond range of any stray biscuits that might pop
 from above.
                From his high position, Bucky had a splendid view
 of the beach, the pirates and the whale. The fun was
 over almost as soon as it had begun. Now the pirates
 were trying wildly to escape, with no retreat left
 them.
                Pies gone---hope gone, and whale gone, the Pie Rats
 threw down their cutlasses and pistols. They hoisted
 a white flag in surrender.
  

 CHAPTER 2
  
 The Wooden Whale
  
 THE volcanic biscuit shooters slid closer to a lower
 ledge, keeping the fierce pirates at a safe distance
 with the aid of their long paddles.
                "Surrender your weapons!" they demanded, "and
 we'll make good doughboys of you all. But remember,
 no tricks. . .
                Bucky was thrilled with the outcome of the game
 and ate another peach pie to celebrate the victory.
 He smiled to himself as the buccaneers delivered up
 their weapons, preparing to turn their attention to
 mixing dough.
                With dexterous scoops the shooters sent cutlasses,
 blunderbusses and all the other weapons far out over
 the ocean to disappear where the water was deepest.
                "Now, hats and boots," commanded the bakers. "Off
 with them quickly or overboard you'll go.
                At this, the pirate captain scowled and refused to
 give up his wide-brimmed hat fringed with heavy gold.
 A hard biscuit peppered him, causing him to change
 his mind, and sullenly he handed over his treasured
 possession, not doing so, however, until the quick ac-

 tion of the paddles had tumbled him into the water.
 As he scrambled back to the shore, he saw his hat flung
 far out to sea.
                For many years the little bakers had been annoyed
 by the raids of these pirates; their pies and buns had
 been plundered. Never before had retaliation been
 possible. But on this eventful day, affairs had turned
 out differently and now the invaders must be fed; there
 was nothing to do but put them to work mixing their
 own dough. To repay the pirates for the loss of their
 fancy clothes, the bakers gave each man a long coat
 and a high hat when he went to work. At last the
 buccaneers were earning an honest living.
                Pleased with their easy triumph, the biscuit shooters
 cheered and waved their long pie pokers and Bucky,
 carried away with his hearty feeling of support in the
 contest, clapped his hands and cheered with them.
                "At-a-boy, Bakers!" he called, for the dousing of the
 pirate captain had filled him with so much amusement
 that he could not restrain his mirth: "Duck him
 again," he shouted.
                He was leaning far over the edge in order to bet-
 ter see the proceedings, without realizing his danger.
 Before he could collect his thoughts, five expert bis-
 cuit shooters had planted their shooters beneath him
 and the snap of their paddles sent him high into the

 air over the pink ocean into which he fell with a dis-
 mal plunk. Sputtering, he rose to the surface and be-
 gan to tread water.
                "I'm beginning to think this place is made up of
 doughnuts!" he gasped, expelling the water from his
 mouth, "what in blazes is the matter with those pie-
 kers that they don't know a friend when they see one!"
                To his surprise, he was answered by a hollow voice
 that seemed to come from the water.
                "I beg your pardon," said the voice. "I didn't catch
 your last remark."
                Bucky turned. Close beside him appeared the large,
 dripping head of a whale, his polished mahogany sides
 glistening like a mirror. Bucky started to swim away
 as fast as the crawl stroke would take him.
                Up again came the great wooden head, this time
 directly in his course. Bucky turned to the right, then
 to the left, the jitters getting him as he tried to dodge
 the monster. But, wherever he shifted, there was the
 great head to block his return to the volcano. It was
 useless to try evasion.
                The sad, hesitating voice continued to speak:
 "Please, now, my young friend, don't be startled at a
 peaceful old fish like me--I know I'm blunt but that
 was the style of architecture when I was built.

 The whole face of the whale stretched in a friendly
 grin.
                Lucky Bucky extended a weary hand and caught
 hold of the highly polished brass deck rail that ran
 around the whale's protruding lower jaw. He hauled
 himself out of the water and sat down on the deck-
 jaw to regain his breath and suddenly he recalled the
 story of Jonah and the Whale!
                "Before we go any further," said the whale in a
 timid voice, "I'd like to ask you one question. Are
 you, by any means, a young pirate?"
                "I certainly am not!!"
                "That's comforting to know," softly whispered the
 whale with a sigh and a spout, "now, may I enquire
 about your Father? Was he a pirate?"
                Bucky stared in amazement, then shook his head
 so violently that drops of water from his hair spotted
 the spotless rail.
                "Definitely NO!"
                Some quality in the old whale gave him a feeling of
 confidence. "And your Grandfather and your Great-
 Grandfather, were they, by any chance, pirates?" the
 gentle quizzing continued.
                "Never!" cried the boy with plenty of spirit. "My
 people were all sea-captains and pilots," he added
 proudly.

                "Pilots?" queried the whale, cocking his head sus-
 piciously. "That word sounds too much like 'pirate'
 for my comfort. You'd better get off, and be quick
 about it." With that, the whale began to sink below
 the surface.
                "Hold on a minute . . . let me explain," pleaded
 Bucky, holding tight to the rail with both hands.
                Lower and lower settled the whale before the boy's
 pleading words made him hesitate.
                "Let me tell you what a pilot really is! He's an
 officer who knows all about channels and deep waters.
 He directs large ships and boats away from danger.
 Please be reasonable, and don't accuse me again of
 being a pirate. It's just too humiliating. . .
                "Well . . . " faltered the whale as he puffed up to
 the surface. "I always try to be reasonable and what
 you say sounds reasonable; pirates are most unrea-
 sonable, don't you think, and you don't sound that
 way."
                "Your pirates are the only ones I ever saw," Bucky
 answered.
                "My Pirates!" roared the whale. "What do you
 mean now by making such an unreasonable remark?"
                "I'm sorry..." said Bueky soberly, "sorry to have
 made such a mistake. I'm a stranger in these parts.

 I came from New York and if..."
                "Yes, yes," drawled the whale disdainfully, pucker-
 mg his forehead with anxiety.
                "New York is a wonderful city," persisted the boy,
 "with . .
                "Yes, yes, yes," interrupted the whale. "You've
 never even noticed my wounded eye; just look at it."
                A large mark under one eye showed Bucky where
 a hard biscuit had struck him and knocked off the
 varnish.
                "And look at those biscuit shooters," continued the
 whale, "driving the pirates to work cleaning up the
 island and polishing the oven doors. It's a snug little
 roost they have there on that volcano. Someone ought
 to write a song about it for me to sing."
                "I wouldn't like to live there," Bucky answered, "and
 we have just as good pies in Chicago or Hacketts-
 town."
                "Stop!" ordered the whale. "Don't start that again
 and worry me with your impossible stories. As I was
 saying, that volcano is the finest floating bakery in
 all the Nonentic Ocean."
                "You mean Atlantic Ocean, don't you?" Bucky cor-
 rected.
                "I mean exactly what I say. Nonentic Ocean, and
 I cannot understand where you get such funny names

 in your head-New York, Chicago, Atlantic Ocean!
 There are no such places in the Land of Oz?"
                "Do you mean to tell me I am in the Land of Oz?"
 Bucky cried.
                "You certainly are."
                "Then I'm lost! How can I get back home?"
                "How should I know? The way you came, I guess..."
                "In Oz!" muttered the boy, woefully. "This is ter-
 rible. Wild pirates and crazy biscuit shooters."
                "You haven't seen half..." suggested the whale
 ominously. "This ocean is filled with pirates."
                "I always thought Oz was a wonderful and friendly
 land," Bucky said in bewilderment.
                "Oh, yes . . . that's true. You are thinking of the
 Emerald City where Ozma lives in her castle, with the
 Wizard to help her. You know the Tin Woodman and
 the Scarecrow. The four gaily colored kingdoms
 around the green capitol are a long way from here."
                "A long way . . repeated the crestfallen boy. ''It
 looks still longer to Chicago or Detroit or-"
                "Don't begin that again, please," said the whale
 in a superior tone of voice. "Never heard of such
 places, and what's more, I don't take much stock in
 what you say. If you are aiming to go anywhere, why,
 in thunderbust, don't you go to the Emerald City.

 There is a city to really talk about. The most mysti-
 cal, magical city in existence, set in the very center of
 creation. It's a whale of a country!"
                "Have you ever been there?" Bucky ventured to ask.
 "What a question!" sputtered the whale in disgust
 and he spouted a stream of water high into the air,
 then subsided with an impatient snort. "Since you
 ask it, I must admit that I've always intended to go,
 but never got around to it. In fact, I've really been
 so busy, with one thing and another... beside all this,
 I don't know how to get there."
                "Do you need a pilot? I'm a good pilot." Bucky's
 voice was eager.
                "The very word gives me the shivers."
                "How do you like the name of Skipper?"
                "I'll take the afternoon off to think it over. I'm tired
 out. Since those pirates captured me, I've had no rest.
 For two years they kept me laughing, day and night.
 What I need is to have a sad spell. You amuse your-
 self while I take a snooze."
                And the whale began to hum a heart-breaking sail-
 or's chanty. He closed his quivering eyes so that Bucky
 could not see the tears that filled them.
  
 CHAPTER 3
  

 The Jones Cousins
  
 IT was evident that the whale did not want to be
 disturbed.
                Bucky stepped quietly to one side, sliding his hand
 along the smooth handrail until he came to a small
 door on one side of the whale's head. He opened this
 door and saw that an old ship's lantern was burning
 beyond the entrance. Hesitating for a moment, he
 peered within.
                "Make up your mind if you are going in," suggested
 the whale without opening his eyes, "and, if you do,
 make yourself at home."
                With this encouragement, Bucky stepped quickly
 through the door, which closed quietly behind him.
                The space was built into a cozy, fair-sized cabin
 with bunks for sleeping. He could see very clearly by
 the light of the lantern that swung from a heavy chain
 fastened in the ceiling. Once again the story of Jonah
 flashed through his mind.
                Compact and convenient as the cabin was, every-
 thing had been left topsy-turvy by the pirate band.
 Blankets and pillows were strewn around. Broken
 dishes and cups littered the floor in careless disorder
 and clattered from side to side with every pitch of the

 floating whale.
                "Only pirates would be so untidy," Bucky thought
 as he stumbled over a rope that had become entangled
 in the wheels of a silver cannon. Everything seemed
 out of its place and this was annoying to the boy who
 had been trained to the strict order of his uncle's tug
 boat. It didn't take him long to make the cabin ship-
 shape; to fold the blankets, pick up the broken rub-
 bish, and collect in one place a great number of inter-
 esting trappings that the pirates had left was the work
 of but a few moments. And while busy with the tidy-
 ing, he had time to explore every interesting corner.
                At the rear of the cabin were a number of doors.
 They looked as if they might lead to closets. He opened
 one and found that it was piled to the ceiling with pies
 that the pirates had stolen. Apple, blueberry, mince
 and pumpkin pies, great stacks of them together with
 cinnamon buns, biscuits and crullers. All were ar-
 ranged in perfect order and wrapped in oil paper to
 keep them fresh.
                Recalling the whale's invitation "to make himself
 at home," Bucky helped himself to a handful of de-
 licious crullers.
                "Can anything beat my luck?" he thought as he bit
 into one.
                Rummaging around in his search for dry clothes, he

 pulled an old, iron-bound sea chest from under the
 table. It was filled with odds and ends, including a
 fine red coat trimmed with gold braid. It was just
 his size.
 Hidden under the clothes were gold trinkets and
 jewels. At the bottom of the chest he found a flat box,
 marked-
 Meddle with us and you
 may EXPLODE T.D.H. AND F
                It was exactly what to expect to find in a pirate's
 chest and the boy's fingers itched to open it. Finally
 his curiosity got the better of him and he lifted the lid.
                Inside were four silver doorknobs marked Tom,
 Dick, Harry and Flummux. Closing the box he re-
 turned it as quickly as he could, covering it carefully
 with the clothing. He shoved the chest back under
 the table.
                "Better leave that alone. It might spoil my luck,"
 Bucky said to himself and turned to other fascinating
 things. Over each bunk was a clock with dials to regu-
 late the length of sleep, from a cat nap of three min-
 utes to a long sleep of three weeks.
                After all he had been through, he felt completely
 worn out, although it was not yet bedtime. He knew
 he could sleep twelve hours at least. "I'll take a

 chance," he said and set the clock, jumped into the
 bunk and was soon fast asleep.
                Exactly twelve hours later he awoke to find himself
 sprawled on the floor, for the bunk had tilted down-
 ward and slipped him out very gently. At first, Bucky
 was slightly dazed, then the events of the day before
 and the peculiar working of the clock all came back
 to him in a flash. He opened the door, just a crack,
 to make sure his memory was right. Then he stepped
 out into the sunshine.
 4             "Happy daybreak!" greeted the whale with a wide
 smile of welcome.
                "Sunshine to you!" answered the boy, "and how is
 your sadness?"
                "Really I can't tell you how a little sadness spunks
 me up. What a relief it is after years of monotonous
 laughing. From now on, I can tell you, I'll feel better
 without those disgraceful pirates crowded inside my
 er-er-cabin! To be stuffed, week after week, with
 ridiculous buccaneers! Indeed, my friend, it is a happy
 day for me to have you here." The whale paused,
 and then continued, giving an embarrassed little
 cough: "By-the-way... we have never been properly
 introduced. Allow me to present myself-my name is
 David. What do you call yourself?"
                "My friends call me Bucky-my last name is Jones

 Bucky Jones, to be exact."
                "Now isn't that the strangest thing?" drawled the
 whale. "My last name is Jones, too. I wonder if we
 are related. Cousins - or, at least, second cousins.
 Bucky and Davy Jones! We should get along swim-
 mingly. Ho! Ho!!"
                "If you are willing to take a passenger, I cannot
 think of anything that would be more fun," said the
 boy, seating himself on the rail and gazing up into the
 whale's honest face.
                "You have come aboard as my friend. My cabin is
 yours. You will be my bosom friend."
                "That's fine! I certainly thank you. I'll try to make
 myself useful."
                "It's a bargain!! Let's get started-and be careful
 that you don't fall overboard," suggested big Davy
 as he flipped himself around and started for the shore
 at a speed that almost took away the boy's breath.
                "Why such a hurry?" faltered Bucky.
                "I want to catch something!"
                "Catch something? What?"
                "The high tide," laughed Davy.
                The pink spray flew high on either side as the whale
 plunged forward, lightly skipping from wave to wave.
                His swift spurt soon brought them in sight of land

 where, to the west, towering cliffs rose straight out of
 the ocean. No beach was to be seen; nothing but
 rough, forbidding rocks. To Bucky it seemed impos-
 sible to find a foothold anywhere on that rock-ribbed
 shore.
                The whale was more familiar with the coast. With-
 out the slightest hesitation he swung himself into a
 hidden opening that the boy had not noticed. With
 just enough room to squeeze through, he squeezed.
                The tide was running in at a great rate! This helped
 them go forward.
                "Hold fast now," warned the whale. "If I get a good
 start, I can do it easily." He doubled his speed and the
 water seethed and boiled under him.
                They were in a small river where the water tumbled
 down a mountain slope with the thunder of a cascade.
 Gaining headway every second, Davy bore through
 the rushing rapids that roared from the heights above.
 With the good management that came from a clear
 head, the great whale splashed and wriggled his way
 up and up until he finally reached the top of the slope.
 He was breathing in gasps but grinning happily.
 Now that the danger was past, the boy rubbed the
 water from his eyes and looked about him. From this
 point, the river continued down hill, but the water
 ran up.

                Leisurely, Davy floated down.
                "Few travelers get through this Up-hill-down-hill
 River. Quite a stunt for an old fellow like me. Don't
 you think so?" asked the whale, well pleased with him-
 self. "All you need is confidence. Just a little con-
 fidence..."
                "And plenty of action," added Bucky.
                "You are quite right. Action-plenty of action-
 that's it precisely; you have the right idea."
                Davy waited to get his breath back before he spoke
 again. "I once pulled a lot of Dollfins up here. They
 still live here. In fact, they have established quite a
 school for themselves. I'd like to have you meet
 them."
                On the down-hill side of the River, Davy swam
 with a lazy stroke, pointing out to his passenger places
 of interest in the distant, rolling hills. He seemed
 proud of the surrounding country but to Bucky it
 looked bleak and desolate.
                "You see the top of the next hill? That is where
 we'll find the Dollfins."
                Again the River began to run up-hill. This was a
 longer stretch and at times it seemed to Bucky as
 though they would never make the grade. But the
 whale did it, and they drifted into the quiet water of

 a large lake.
                "Look, look!" he cried. "There is one of the little
 giddyheads now! She sees me!" and Davy bellowed
 a greeting that echoed among the hills.
  
 CHAPTER 4
  
 The School of Dollfins
  
 IMMEDIATELY, hundreds of little wooden heads
 popped up out of the lake. Eagerly they swam to-
 ward the big, good-natured visitor.
                These pretty, doll-headed figures were something
 like old-fashioned mermaids. They had fish tails, sure
 enough, but every time they moved their wooden arms
 or their necks they squeaked.
                Such a babble and chatter Bucky had never before
 heard as came when the Dollfins clambered over the
 whale's polished back.
                "Meet my friend Bucky Jones," said Davy turning
 one eye toward the boy and the other in the direction
 of the girls. "He's a passenger as well as my friend."
                Turning their wooden heads toward the boy, they
 stared with wide, painted eyes.
                The whale continued to speak: "My friend is a
 stranger in these parts-he's a pilot and an experi-

 enced traveler-and, also, he is a cousin of mine-
 and-"
                "That's enough!" squeaked one of the Dolifins. "So
 many things all in ONE BOY? I can hardly believe it."
                A round-faced Doll took hold of Bucky's hand. A
 little dimple in her fat, painted cheek was something
 she wanted everyone to see. With her round, painted
 eyes close to the boy's nose, she gazed vacantly over
 his head. By the time she had finished shaking his
 hand, Bucky's fingers were numb with cold.
                Although the Dollfins were pleased, they were also
 puzzled. Certainly they were not elated as they
 crowded around the boy.
                "At last," they sighed in a half-hearted way, "you
 have brought us our playmate."
                Hundreds of disappointed eyes glared at the aston-
 ished boy.
                "Well-now-not exactly-" faltered Davy.
                "I guess we'll have to make the best of it," the Doll-
 fins interrupted. Though their manners were not
 cordial, they came a little closer to Bucky. One
 straightened his necktie; another slicked his hair.
 "The first thing we will do is change his name to
 Ducky."
                Gently he eased them away, as politely as possible,

 but one little giddyhead clung to his arms with so much
 enthusiasm he hardly knew what to do. This persistent
 little doll got one cold hand down his back, and with
 the other, she grabbed his hair and held him tight.
                Roughly, Bucky shook her loose and she squeaked:
                "That's no way to play!" Her painted eyes snapped
 saucily as she gave the boy a push and turned angrily
 to the whale: ''He's too rough.
                They all began to cry, in chorus: "Why didn't you
 bring us a girl to play with? This is only a boy-we
 want a girl!"
                The poor whale was so embarrassed his eyes rolled
 uneasily from side to side.
                "Listen to me, my little friends. Quiet, please. My
 cousin Bucky is my pilot. Pilots are forbidden to play
 with dolls when on duty." The whale turned to Bucky.
 "Isn't that the truth?"
                "Those are the facts," the boy answered briefly.
                "Bosh with your facts-we want a playmate, and
 he has to stay here and play with us whether he wants
 to or not," shrilled a fat little Dollfin clapping her
 wooden hands angrily to add force to her words. "Of
 course we prefer a girl but we'll condescend to take
 this boy as a poor substitute."
                "Oh, no, no-" The whale's voice was firm. "I'll find
 a girl for you some other time."

                "That's what you've promised us for years but you
 have not kept your promise."
                "This awful boy will stay right here with us until
 you bring us a nice girl, and that's a fact for you!"
                Bucky had stepped to one side during this argument.
 The whale whispered to him out of the side of his
 mouth: "Get into the cabin quickly and lock the door.
 If they ever get inside, good-bye to everything."
 One step forward and the boy was surrounded by
 chattering dolls trying to pull him into the lake. He
 began to sing: "Old Mother Hubbard-she went to
 the cupboard-" Another step; he kept on singing
 the old song-"When she got there-the cupboard
 was bare!" His hand was on the door, and the dolls
 waited expectantly for him to show them a cupboard.
 But he turned the knob quickly and darted inside,
 slamming the door and finishing the song as he slid
 across the floor, which gave a sudden tilt downward.
 For, with a playful lurch, Davy had washed the Dolifins
 overboard and dived to the bottom of the lake.
 Through the thick sides of the whale, Bucky heard him
 say:
                "Some other trip, I may bring you a girl."
                With each flit of the whale, Bucky slid back and forth
 across the floor.

                "Can all this be real?" he thought, "Or am I dream-
 ing? No, I'm not dreaming. I'm wide awake-" he
 decided when his head struck a heavy mahogany beam.
 "A bit fantastic, maybe, but very real-" He was con-
 vinced of the reality as he clung to the beam, not
 knowing what to expect next.
                By and by the floor became level.
                Davy rose to the surface and lolled happily in the
 bright sunshine. He had left the dolls far behind and
 was making good time as he churned the blue surface
 of the lake into sparkling ripples.
                Through a crack in the door, Bucky made sure that
 the dolls were gone before he ventured on deck.
                "I've seen all kinds of fish but those Dollfins are ex-
 traordinary, aren't they?" he asked, still bewildered.
                "Don't get upset by a little fuss like that. From
 what I've been told there are tougher problems to be
 met than Dollfins before we get to where we are
 going."
                "The question is-where are we going?"
                "No question about it; we are going to Oz."
                "Oz? I thought we were already in OzI"
                "In a way, yes-but mostly no! Of course, you un-
 derstand that we are only on the outside edge. Every-
 thing will be different when we get inside this really
 truly wonderland. I am only a determined old whale,

 I know, but I intend to see all the marvelous things I
 have heard about."
                The boy's expression showed his indecision. "I'd like
 to go along with you," he said, "But I can't make up
 my mind. If it's anything like I've seen so far, I'd
 rather go back home."
                "I'm not forcing you to come," replied the whale.
 "I can put you ashore if you prefer."
                "Don't bother. I'll go with you," Bucky said hurried-
 ly. "You are the only person I've met in this queer
 place who is not queer."
                "I've lived here a long time," the whale responded.
 "Longer than I would like to admit. And you, my dear
 cousin, are the only one I've ever met that I would ask
 to pilot me to Oz."
                The wise old whale at last won his way and an agree-
 ment was reached. The only sure information he could
 offer to his pilot was the general direction. They must
 travel west. From that alone they mapped their course.
                This progress in their plans put the whale in an ex-
 cellent humor.
                Straight ahead were high mountain peaks rising
 directly in their path.
                "Don't give them a thought," the words fairly oozed
 from Davy. "Mountains are nothing for me to cross

 with you to pilot me! Now, cousin, you'd best build up
 your strength. Go right into the cupboard and get
 yourself a big mince pie!"
                Before Bucky had finished eating the juicy pie, there
 came to his ears the sound of a roaring torrent of clear
 green water dashing wildly over the cliffs above him.
  
 CHAPTER 5
  
 The Map
  
 JUST you and I together," chuckled Davy. "We're
 off!! Where no pirates will catch me nor again
 turn me into a wild, floating hotel."
                "Say the word and I'm ready. You'll find me a fairly
 good pilot," crisply replied the boy, taking his place
 by the rail at the front of the deck.
                "It's likely to be cold where we are going. You had
 better get a warmer coat," advised Davy. "I don't feel
 the cold; in fact, I have never felt the slightest shiver
 in my timbers. But you are made of raw meat, even if
 you are my cousin.
                After a quick search of the cabin Bucky returned
 with the pirate's red coat. While looking for it, he had
 accidentally come across a powerful spy-glass. Open-
 ing the coat, he held it with the lining out, close to one

 of the whale's eyes.
                "What do you suppose this is?" he asked.
                They were both puzzled by the coarse stitching
 worked in some kind of pattern; then, as the design
 became clearer, they saw to their great joy that it was
 a roughly sewn map of the Land of Oz. Someone who
 had been to the wonderland had stitched the chart.
                "Jumping Jingo! That's what I've been looking for
 all my life!!" thundered the whale, spinning around
 in circles. "At last, at last, we are on the right track.
 Don't lose that coat, whatever you do. If you lose it,
 we are lost, too."
                Bucky shook his head: "I don't see how I could be
 lost worse than I am, so it doesn't make much differ-
 ence. Let's get started," he said.
                "Righto! Hold tight!! All speed ahead!!! Here we
 go!" Like a streak of lightning, Davy churned toward
 the waterfall. He leaped into it, swimming faster than
 the swirling water fell. Up and up he leaped with
 tremendous effort until he slid over the high brink at
 the top of the highest mountain.
                The summit was covered with ice and snow, and not
 a drop of deep water, but Davy managed to slip easily
 over the frozen crust until they had reached the very
 highest point. From this height a beautiful hill sloped

 gently downward for miles and, as far as they could
 see with the naked eye, it was blanketed with snow.
                Davy's wooden eyes fluttered with delight. Bucky
 was thrilled. Never had either of them seen such a
 dazzling land of snow.
                "What a honey of a hill to coast," said Bucky as he
 studied the scene. "Eight miles, I bet, without a break."
                "Let's have another look at the map in your coat,"
 said Davy.
                Slipping off the garment, Bucky held it before the
 whale who carefully studied every stitch for a long
 time without saying a word. Then:
                "Kinda clumsy work, don't you think?" Bucky
 asked.
                "It's better sewing than I could do," answered
 Davy, quietly examining every detail.
                "You may be able to check-up with this spy-glass,"
 suggested Bucky, extending the glass to its full-length
 and holding it to the whale's eye. "Can you see any-
 thing?"
                "Oh! little Jonesie-my own dear cousin. I can see
 it all!" Davy answered, giving a great gulp.
                Taking his turn at the spy-glass, the boy stood still,
 amazed and entranced at the glittering radiance of
 the City-a gem of sparking green crystal.
                "You are right, Davy, old boy," cried Bucky, slap-

 ping the whale's side. "You win."
                Far below, the edge of the snow mountain melted
 into a dense forest and beyond the dark mass of trees
 a river followed a direct course through brush and
 rough rocks to disappear from their sight. Broken,
 desolate country stretched for many miles and still
 farther away the solid ground became a wide desert
 that seemed to completely surround the land the trav-
 elers were seeking.
                Bucky spread his coat on the deck, looking carefully
 at every stitch in his endeavor to find out just where
 they were. He put his finger on the spot and showed
 it to Davy.
                "See-we have just passed through the Rose King-
 dom and are now in the land of Ev. Straight ahead is
 marked 'The Domain of the Gnome King' and then
 -a deadly desert. That doesn't look so good!"
                "Not thinking of turning back, are you?" Davy de-
 manded.
                "Me? Turn back? Do I look like a pifflepuff? No!
 Let's start!"
                "What on earth has happened?" fumed the whale
 as he humped his back and frantically twisted his body
 only to find himself stuck.
                At the same time the boy could feel that his feet

 were snow bound. Yank and strain as he would, Bucky
 remained firmly held to the spot with icy fingers.
  
 CHAPTER 6
  
 Over the Hump
  
 "MAYBE we have been a little impulsive, to come
 so far away," Davy's voice was anxious as he
 felt cold clutching fingers crawling up his sides, and
 saw them climbing up Bucky's legs.
                Desperately he wrenched himself this way and that,
 giving impotent grunts. In vain they struggled. Both
 were frost bound.
                "No use to flutter, big boy," whined a chilling voice
 from a flurry of snow. "You are now in the power of
 the Zerons. Don't try to tear yourselves apart in that
 absurd manner. Just consider yourselves ice-olated
 forever, both of you."
                Drifts of Zerons piled around them; nipping, pinch-
 ing and biting cold Zerons!
                "Fairly and squarely you've been caught. Stop that
 squirming or we'll freeze you stiff," the Zerons called
 as they stung Bucky.
                "I'll be jiggered if I let a lot of little jiggers like you
 freeze me out of Oz," bellowed the whale.

                "Quiet!" ordered the Zerons in icy tones. "You are
 ice-olated now, you big fish, not jiggered."
                Every moment the adventurers' plight became
 worse. Davy was nearly covered with the frosty little
 snow-men. Bucky felt their cold fingers pinching his
 ears and nose. His arms were stiffening, making him
 powerless to brush off the Zerons.
                Try as they would to break away, they could not
 succeed. Each was equally helpless. The boy cast a
 despairing look at Davy whose big eye winked play-
 fully and whose broad mouth stretched into a wide
 grin. The whale took a deep breath.
                From the top of his head a heavy stream of water
 spouted and fell over the Zerons in a warm shower.
 Instantly every Zeron melted away. With a nervous
 shrug the big whale broke loose, and Bucky was also
 freed. Slowly they began to slide down the side of the
 mountain in the direction of Oz.
                "Boy-Oh boy!" shouted Bucky as their speed in-
 creased by leaps and bounds.
                The gentle, gliding motion was a glorious sensation.
 With never a jolt to break the rhythm, it felt like
 flying through the air. It would be a long slide and
 they kept headed in the direction of the river. Over
 slightly raised humps they cleared the ground and

 landed each time in the drifts below, gaining speed
 with every leap.
                Striking a more elevated ridge, they cleared it and
 came down with a bump. Then another, and another,
 each a little longer. Each time the whale uttered a
 loud "Ooomph" when he landed with a thud twenty
 feet below.
                Their mad rush soon increased to a breakneck speed.
 To slow down or stop was beyond their power. The
 sudden bumps became more violent. Bucky could hear
 the plates smashing and rattling inside the cabin.
                "Oh, for an anchor," he thought, seeing danger
 ahead. "Steer to the right!" he screamed as they ap-
 proached the edge of a high cliff.
                Not a second too soon the bulky whale veered to
 one side, then shot along the dangerous edge to a
 more gradual slope.
                "Let me pilot you," insisted Bucky when he had
 caught his breath after that scare. "Now ease to the
 left; that's enough!"
                He directed as they continued their way safely along
 the foot of the cliff, avoiding many dangerous crashes.
                By going Quiggley-Diggley back and forth, they
 checked their perilous descent yet still went along at
 a good, fast clip. Passing the half-way point, they
 zig-zagged safely from side to side. Under perfect

 control, they skimmed the deep snow, eyes set on the
 river below.
                It took exactly eleven minutes to make the slide
 which covered nearly eight miles.
                One final lurch-a hissing splash-and they were
 safe in the river. The whale breathed a deep sigh of
 relief and held it for a long time.
                "Umph!!" he finally blew it out. "Rough road-
 very rough road. There is nothing like a nice soft
 river under you, I'm finding out."
                "I prefer a nice soft bed-dry and warm," said
 Bucky with a yawn.
                "Suit yourself," replied the whale gaily, "so long
 as you aren't looking for it on the other side of the
 snow mountain. Though it was bumpy in spots, it's
 easier sliding down than climbing back." He rested
 a little on the smooth water. "That mountain must
 be three miles high," Davy continued, turning one
 eye back over their tracks. "Do you see what I see?"
                "If you see giddyheads, I see them too. And they
 are following us!" answered Bucky in despair.
                Sure enough, skiing on their fish-tails came the Doll-
 fins-Evidently the whole school was taking a holiday.
 With shrill peals of laughter they swayed over the
 light snow, leaping high into the air or spilling into

 drifts, but always following the definite trail big Davy
 had left behind.
                Bucky watched their descent with growing alarm
 as he nervously paced the deck.
                "I do not intend to be a plaything for a lot of wooden
 headed dolls!" he exclaimed. "I'd rather risk the burn-
 ing desert! Yes!! Twenty burning deserts! Ahoy!
 Let's be on our way at once."
                Without another word they started down the stream.
 They bumped over hidden rocks, squirmed through
 seething rapids and wriggled themselves across shal-
 low stretches before they floated peacefully at last
 in the quieter bosom of the river that carried them
 into the dense forest. Here they were hidden from
 view.
                "I hope those giddyheads get back to school before
 nine o'clock tomorrow morning," said Davy as he
 settled himself in a little cove, to close his eyes bliss-
 fully and doze off into a snooze after all his exertion
 --leaving Bucky, the pilot, in charge of the expedi-
 tion.
  
  CHAPTER 7
  
 Beginning a Long Journey
  

 FINDING himself alone in command, Bucky decided
 to get under way again and soon discovered a
 simple way to steer the whale. By stepping either to
 the right or to the left, his weight caused the sleeping
 fish to turn in the desired direction.
                He worked out of the cove and into the narrow part
 of the river where he had no trouble navigating. As
 far as he could see there were no boats to dispute
 his right-of-way.
                All he had to do was let the current carry them
 along. The afternoon drifted away. The only sound
 that Bucky heard was the drowsy voice of Davy occa-
 sionally murmuring snatches of sea songs in his sleep.
 Other than that, no excitement came to break the
 monotony of drifting down the dreamy river.
                Then Bucky noticed a large bubble floating toward
 him.
                When it came quite close, it burst; and as it burst,
 it uttered the word "Stop!"
                "Just an empty word," thought the boy and con-
 tinued on his course.
                His serenity was interrupted by the sight of four
 larger bubbles floating straight toward him.
                In quick succession each one exploded, popping with
 a commanding ring, and each uttered a different

 word-"Final-warning-turn-back!"
                "Quite impossible," answered Bucky and let the
 whale drift.
                From somewhere ahead a whole string of bubbles
 quickly appeared, larger and more determined bub-
 bles, bursting with warning and threats.
                "Heave to! Stop! Go no farther! Or else--"
 These sharp, explosive words awoke the whale.
 When he slid open his eyes, he realized that something
 was amiss but he did not allow the disturbance to
 halt him.
                More and more bubbles rose to meet them, popping
 and sputtering sharp commands. Still they kept going
 ahead until they were surrounded on every side and
 finally were completely covered. This dimmed their
 light and shut off all view of the river. They were
 compelled to stop. Both Joneses were speechless with
 surprise while the bubbles piled over them.
                Without any particular reason, Bucky began to
 answer the bubbles and noticed he had started them
 sputtering a lot of trifling talk, using empty words
 that exploded themselves into nothing and out of the
 way.
                Davy, noticing this also, joined with Bucky and gaily
 had his say. This added to the gabble of popping
 words. With every word the boy and the whale ut-

 tered, a bubble answered and left an empty space
 where it had been. The faster they jabbered, the faster
 the empty gabble disappeared. Word for word they
 exploded hundreds of hollow words with all the empty
 talk that came into their heads. This battle of words
 became a din of long-winded jabber without much
 meaning.
                "Bam-Bam~puff-" burst the glib words into
 nothing. Bucky and Davy were gaining ground, using
 so many words that they popped and puffed a clear
 space in front of them. They talked faster, blowing
 up bubbles faster than they came to replace the ones
 already exploded. Presently this continual talk cleared
 the air enough that the journey could be continued.
                "We talked them down all right," said Bucky.
                "Talked them hollow," chuckled Davy.
                Coming again into the open spaces, they noticed
 two bright bubbles following them. Davy slowed down
 to wait. When at last the bubbles had caught up with
 the whale and come close enough so that their voices
 could be heard, they called out.
                "Good-bye!" they puffed and were gone.
                "Good-bye-and bless your hearts-and thank you.
 You are the only sensible words I have heard so far!"
 Davy called back as they started off again at a good

 smart speed.
                "I wonder where all that vacant talk came from,"
 remarked Bucky.
                "Some talkative sorceress, I suppose, who has
 learned to boil her idle conversation in a witch's cal-
 dron and put it on the air for anyone within hearing."
                "Why should anyone do such a useless thing?"
 Bucky wanted to know.
                "How should I know?" the whale answered wearily.
 "You'll find the woods are full of half-cracked-jim-
 cranks. That's the reason the practice of witchcraft
 and sorcery is forbidden by the Rulers of Oz." The
 whale's voice brightened. "I haven't the slightest
 doubt but what we'll meet others before we reach Oz.
 But we can thank your lucky stars that we are on the
 rivers instead of the mountains, for the mountain
 witches are the worst." Davy grinned at his com-
 panion. "Go inside and get another handful of crullers.
 That may cause you to think of Oz where anything
 you desire you can have by just wishing for it."
                "That seems altogether too easy," mused Bucky.
                "Of course, but nobody is going to make you wish
 for anything if you don't want to. You can suit your-
 self. Everyone who gets there stays forever." As he
 spoke, the whale swung around a curve of the river
 away from the bank to avoid the branches of a droop-

 ing willow that brushed the water.
                "It may be a very swell place," admitted the puzzled
 boy, "But you can bet your boots I won't stay for-
 ever-"
                "I'd take that bet if I needed boots. You know, I
 wasn't built to wear such things. Let me tell you,
 Little Jonesie, it's much more difficult to get into Oz
 than it is to get out. Especially an individual of my
 size," the whale answered with a note of misgiving
 in his voice.
                "Never mind, big boy, I'll stay with you to the end
 or die in the attempt."
                "Die? What do you mean? Nobody ever dies in Oz.
 You live forever-"
                Bucky scratched his head and was thoughtful:
 "That's good news! Very good!"
                The trailing boughs from the trees along the shore
 became thicker; wisps of mist and little flickers of
 light shone through the leaves. Strangely enough,
 they had not seen a single dwelling.
                "Kind of a lonely place, don't you think so, Davy?"
                "I've been in much lonelier places than this; many
 and many's the time."
                "What are Oz prisons like?" Bucky asked.
 "Prisons!!!" exclaimed the astonished whale burst-

 ing into a roar. "Please get this straight. In the Em-
 erald City they never heard of a prison. The City is
 ruled by Queen Ozma, the kindest and most thought-
 ful ruler in the world. The great Wizard is her most
 trusted adviser and on special occasions the powerful
 Glinda is ready to help. All they think of is how to
 make everybody happy. You'll see for yourself."
                "Where does this wonderland begin? So far, I
 haven't noticed much kindness in the people I've met;
 except you, of course," said Bucky, trying impatiently
 to free himself from a long willow wand that had
 looped itself around his neck.
                "You must remember," began Davy, "that we are
 now in the wildest wilderness of all Oz and may have
 to overcome a few obstacles. I recall stories the pirates
 used to tell-wild stories-I didn't believe them at the
 time but-" he paused.
                "But what?" questioned Bucky.
                Davy never finished the story, for the shadowy wil-
 lows made a swoop with their long loops across the
 deck. Bucky was too quick for them as he took a firm
 hold on a branch and broke it off.
                On both sides of the river, the willows began to weep
 and wail, swinging out toward them with long, clutch-
 ing arms.
                "Send them to Tickley Bender!!" they shouted, and

 shoved the whale down the stream. From tree to tree
 Davy was propelled with violent pushes. "Wait till
 Tickley get you-Ohoo-Ohooo," wept the willows
 swaying closer to the travelers to give them one last
 violent shove. And the great fish with his lone passen-
 ger was swept out of the woods.
                They came out into a land of dry rocks and low
 bushes.
                The current of the river seemed suddenly to stop
 flowing. Then, just as suddenly, it started again. At
 times they would stand still for a whole minute, then
 shoot forward when a huge wave rushed them.
                The willows had stopped weeping and begun to
 laugh. "Wait till Tickley gets you," they cried. "He'll
 tickle you plenty!"
                "He seems to tickle you more than he does us!"
 yelled Bucky as a parting shot. The wave that carried
 the whale grew higher and higher.
                It rose to such a height that it was ready to break
 and crash into a breaker but instead of doing that,
 the frothy spray formed itself into a head. The water
 was so clear that Davy and Bucky could see fish swim-
 ming and darting about inside of the watery skull.
                "How do you do?" asked Bucky, greeting the odd
 looking creature.

                "How do I do what?" grumbled Tickley.
                "Why-whatever you do do," the boy answered, a
 little confused.
                "Just imagine such a question-how do I do what-
 ever I do do? And why should I tell you what I do do
 -or don't do?"
                "Maybe I shouldn't have asked you in the first
 place," apologized Bucky, still more confused.
                "First place? First place? What's that?"
                "I suppose the head of the river is the first place,"
 answered Bucky impatiently. "We expect to find out."
                "I certainly am the head of the river, and anything
 else you'll never find out. It's none of your affair."
                "Come, come-" joined in the whale, "this do-do talk
 is getting us nowhere."
                "You are perfectly right," gurgled the watery head
 as the water surged through his face and long
 whiskers.
                Several long, liquid fingers appeared out of the
 waves and began to tickle the whale in his ribs. But
 Davy only squirmed a little-not much-because the
 nerves in his wooden boards were not very sensitive.
                Tickley was enraged to see the whale take his tick-
 ling so calmly and he rose higher and higher, lifting
 Davy with him. His face turned into foam with the
 fury of the rising water rushing forward into a seeth-

 ing breaker. The gushing spray carried Davy forward
 with the speed of the wind.
                Bucky locked his arms tightly around the rail -
 "come what will, I'll stick with Davy."
                They began to fall. Down-down into a deep open-
 ing in the earth. The river roared with glee as it dis-
 appeared carrying them both into an underground
 cavern.
 Everything became dark and noisy.
 "Looks like nowhere," snorted Davy Jones.
  
 CHAPTER 8
  
 The Army Resigns
                
 ALONG the broad boulevards of the Emerald City
 and through the smaller streets, the houses were
 awakening.
 Some stretched their tall chimneys like arms or wid-
 ened their front doors to the breaking point in sleepy
 yawns.
 A crisp, green sparkle filled the air; happy people
 hurried along the streets.
 From the west a bright blue Scalawagon turned
 from Banana Boulevard into Pumpkin Place and came

 to a full stop before a quaint building bearing the sign
 OZ CREAM beside the door.
                An eager boy about twelve or thirteen years old
 stepped from the car.
                "You needn't wait for me," he said. "I'll walk to the
 palace."
                The intelligent, expressive eyes of the Scalawagon
 looked from its turret; one of them gave the boy an
 understanding wink. With a disappointed expression
 the Scalawagon moved slowly away. Nothing would
 have pleased it better than to carry this boy all day
 on his rounds.
                As the lad turned briskly toward the house, it drew
 itself up to full height with a welcoming gesture and
 opened its front door as he approached. His blue suit
 and blue shoes indicated that he came from the land
 of the Munchkins.
                The pleasant face of a young girl smiled from inside
 the entrance.
                "Oh, Number Nine, I'm so glad you came," she ex-
 claimed. "I wanted to tell you about Evangeline and
 our two Oz cream containers. The two ten gallon cans
 with the new bottomless supply may not be enough
 to serve all our customers and Evangeline. I was
 hoping you might find some way to get me two more
 cans. I wouldn't have you think we had ever run

 short, but, since Evangeline, with her two mouths,
 drops in, we might not be able to fill orders. We are
 expecting her any moment now. She always comes
 early because she prefers my Oz cream parlor above
 all the others in the City."
                "No one can blame her for that," replied Number
 Nine. "I like it, too. Don't worry your pretty head,
 for I met Evangeline yesterday. She spoke so highly
 of your place I told the Wizard about your possible
 difficulty before we quit work last night. Just to hear
 Evangeline tell how good your cream is has made me
 hungry for some ever since.
                "That's what everyone tells me," beamed the pretty
 shopkeeper. "Wait one moment till I get you some,"
 and the girl bounded back into the shop. Once behind
 the counter she uttered a pleased little shriek: "Glory
 be! Glory be! Now, isn't that just like the Wizard!"
 Where the two cans had been, there were now four.
 Although it was impossible ever to empty a single can
 or even nearly to reach the bottom of it, the Wizard
 had doubled the supply.
                In Oz everything is so abundant that no one ever
 runs short, and never any charge for a single thing.
 Number Nine had been chosen to assist the Wizard
 of Oz in the endless details of City management as

 well as his work in the laboratory. His double duties
 kept him busy all day. No sooner had Number Nine
 begun to eat his cream than the soft voice of Evange-
 line was heard outside and her two monstrous heads
 looked through the window.
                "We just happened to be passing," began the gentle
 voice of the first head, "and we thought we'd drop in
 for a little snack to cool our throats," finished the
 second head. "Thanks to the soothing benefit of your
 cream our coughs have entirely disappeared. If you
 only knew how mortifying it has been to annoy our
 friends by coughing smoke and flame in their faces!
 It's not polite."
                "That's splendid," laughed Number Nine, "but you
 are always polite. In all of Oz, there is no Dragonette
 half as polite as you, so the Wizard has sent you two
 extra tubs of Oz Cream for your own special use. One
 is for Evan and one for Geline. I have never been
 able to tell you apart, so you will have to make your
 own selection of flavor."
                "Horrors!" ejaculated one of the heads. "This may
 lead to a mixup--we don't know which is which either."
 Number Nine made a record of this difficulty in a
 small note-book. But the other head cried out:
                "Bless my claws and scales! Think no more of it
 dismiss the matter-and tell us how we can show our

 gratitude."
                "That is easy. Eat more Oz cream!" smiled Number
 Nine as he rose from the chair before his empty plate.
 At the door he waited until Evangeline had crackled
 and scratched her huge dragon body to one side. She
 was a great pet, humored by everyone in the Emerald
 City for her refined manners and her attention to
 etiquette.
                Before she had time to untangle herself and thank
 the boy again, he was half-way down the street. For
 Number Nine this was a busy day-with animal gar-
 dens to visit, public orchards to look over and bowers
 and snuggeries where free food was provided, to be
 inspected.
                All this he did, then took care that all the emeralds
 were properly polished and the hedges trimmed into
 the likenesses and shapes of the important people of
 the Kingdom.
                When he had finished his work, he found his way
 to the popular style shop. Jennie Jump, the chief sty-
 list of the land, met him at the door. She and Number
 Nine were great pals for they had experienced many
 adventures together.
                "I hear you are having lunch with the Queen today,"
 said Jenny, her voice filled with excitement. "Let me

 see if you are presentable." He turned around and
 around while she made a careful inspection. "No--
 there are wrinkles in your sleeve. Better let me fix
 them."
                In a jiffy she put the boy through her magic turn-
 style and turned him out in a snappy Oz green suit
 with silver buttons.
                "Dressed to the Queen's taste," she laughed and,
 with a pat on the shoulder, she sent him on his way
 to the palace.
                Near the castle gate Number Nine met a crowd of
 amused Ozians who apparently were watching some-
 thing, for at intervals they burst into encouraging
 laughter and gay shouting.
                Scalagawons were dashing up and down the street.
 Groups of noisy youngsters ran in all directions with
 the green-whiskered soldier in hot pursuit. The chil-
 dren hid behind houses until the soldier had passed,
 or climbed into Scalawagons which took them to
 safety. But, with the soldier out of sight, they hurried
 back to the palace wall. Each child held a piece of
 chalk with which he drew pictures of the soldier on
 the smooth surface of the wall.
                This single soldier made up the whole army of Oz;
 he had all the dignity of a commanding general. He
 thought the pictures lacked this dignity. He issued

 his own commands which he himself was compelled
 to obey.
                "Down with treason!" he squealed, rushing hither
 and yon after his tormentors. "Keep the royal peace!
 Suppress this mutiny and rebellion!!" he ordered
 himself.
                The children skeedaddled, shrieking with excite-
 ment.
                "Halt!" roared the army. Nobody halted, so he
 halted himself. "Brats!" he stormed as they all es-
 caped.
                Number Nine watched the disturbance with a
 chuckle. He got his name from being the ninth child
 in a large family, so he knew what fun these young-
 sters were having.
                Smiling broadly, he mounted the grand stairway
 to meet the Wizard and together they passed down the
 long jeweled corridor that led to the Great South Hall.
                With one arm over the boy's shoulder, the Wizard
 escorted him into the presence of the Queen.
                She was seated on the railing of the balcony outside
 the Hall and beckoned the Wizard to join her there.
                She was greatly amused and burst into peals of cheer-
 ful laughter.
                "Look," she called and pointed down.

 Directly below, the army was again charging after
 the scurrying children who managed to slip away by
 the skin of their teeth to safety among the laughing
 spectators, whose hilarious mood added to the fun.
 "I notice our children are annoying my army
 again," the Queen remarked gently with a roguish
 little twinkle in her eye. "Those little harum-scarums
 have been teasing that poor soldier all morning. Such
 skylarking has gone far enough."
                With a gracious gesture, she slid from the rail and
 welcomed her guests to the royal lunch table.
                The meal over, the Queen, the Wizard and Number
 Nine got down to business without any frills. Many
 matters of public importance came up for attention.
 Large green envelopes containing reports floated
 through the air into the Wizard's hand. When each
 case was disposed of, the envelope floated back to the
 filing cabinet in the Hall of Records. The last envelope
 was marked important.
                Opening it, the Wizard puckered his brow and ad-
 justed his spectacles on his nose as he read:
  
                Last official report, Army of Oz
 1St. Wore out twenty-two pair of shoes.
 2nd. Smashed only musket in the Kingdom.
 3rd. Army's amiable temper ruined.

 4th. Not a prisoner taken.
 5th. Army disgusted. And resigns.
  
                "Harummp!" sputtered the little man and his
 glasses fell off. Looking into the distance with eyes
 filled with mild anxiety, he crammed the report back
 into the envelope and it floated away. "Well-
 well-" he drawled, "I don't think we need consider
 the resignation part of it."
                Ozma's eyes twinkled as she ate another candied
 cherry.
                "We understand how our soldier with his green
 whiskers has done a lot of running around, but a few
 army maneuvers can't possibly hurt him. He is only
 doing his duty in preventing those artistic little cubs
 from defacing the walls. It was amusing to watch
 them scamper, and I always dislike spoiling the chil-
 dren's fun." She was thoughtful for a while-then
 turned eagerly to the Wizard: "Why not get all our
 children together and direct their artistic energies to
 something useful. I will have them decorate the entire
 castle wall with their best pictures. Real scenes from
 the glorious history of Oz." The Queen smiled broadly
 at her two companions. "It would keep them out of
 mischief and add to the beauty of the City, to say

 nothing of saving the amiable temper of our army."
                The Wizard was delighted. "Your Gracious Majesty
 always amazes me," he exclaimed, jumping up in sur-
 prise. "You took the words right out of my mouth.
 To decorate the walls!"
                "And you double surprise me," said Number Nine,
 a little shyly. "I was just about to make the same
 suggestion."
                "That being the case, the law is passed unanimous-
 ly!" said the Wizard, pouring himself another glass
 of grape juice. "And the meeting is adjourned."
  
 CHAPTER 9
  
 The CWO Painters' Project
  
 NO sooner had the council come to an end than the
 patter of footsteps was heard in the hall. The
 door to the Council Chamber flew open with a bang
 and Princess Dorothy, Trot, Betsy and Jellia Jam ran
 excitedly into the presence of the youthful Queen.
                "Have you seen the soldier chasing the children?"
 they giggled, all out of breath. "It's almost as good
 as a circus. And he hasn't caught a single one yet"
                "You should see his funny long legs," panted Trot
 "They were simply velocical."

 Number Nine looked at the Wizard and the Wizard
 looked at Ozma. Velocical? They all wondered where
 Trot had picked up such a beautiful word.
                Raising her hand to quiet her impulsive friends,
 Ozma said:
                "Unfortunately you are two minutes late. The whole
 problem has just been settled."
                Princess Dorothy looked surprised: "Well-" she
 began.
                "Well, what?" asked the Wizard a little impatiently.
 Before any explanation could be made, the corridor
 echoed with the rattle of more children's feet. Into
 the Great Hall they rushed crowding the gallery and
 filling a large part of the Hall. Behind them resound-
 ed the grim footsteps of the soldier with the green
 whiskers.
                He stalked into the Hall, stopped before the Queen
 with a determined air and saluted her:
                "Will Your Majesty allow me to deliver all the mon-
 key-shiners of Oz?" he paused. "For being monkey-
 shiners, they should be properly punished." He saluted
 again.
                "You have done well to bring the children here. We
 were wanting them," said the Wizard. He drew one
 little boy toward him and pushed back the touseled

 hair that fell in his eyes. "What's your name?" he
 asked the child. The youngster was so impressed by
 this kindness from the great Wizard that he could
 not speak.
                "Whipper-snapper is a good name for him, if you
 ask me," bellowed the angry soldier.
                "But I didn't ask you," quietly replied the Wizard
 as he led the little fellow to a table and handed him a
 glass of fresh grape juice.
                "If that doesn't beat all!!" sputtered the army.
 Giving aid, comfort and grape juice to prisoners!!"
                He stormed around, stuffing his pockets with fruit
 and cookies from the table, then he stalked out of the
 Hall with his nose in the air.
                "He'll get over his huff in four minutes," said Num-
 ber Nine, glancing at the clock. It was his work to
 investigate and suppress huffs. "It's only a four-min-
 ute huff
                The Queen was speaking: "Now that we are all
 together and just in time to hear of our new project,
 I think our wonderful Wizard has more to tell you."
 Ozma rested her arms on the table and smiled toward
 the great sorcerer.
                "We are thinking of having you paint the history
 of Oz on the castle walls," the Wizard explained.
 "What do you think of the idea?"

                Dorothy's eyes danced: "It's magnificent!" she
 cried.
                "It's the grandest idea I ever heard," chimed in
 Jellia.
                "Splendid!" said the Wizard. "We'll call it the CWO
 Painters' Project. CWO stands for Castle Walls of
 Oz. You children shall do the painting, making a
 lasting record of the important events in the history
 of our great city. Dorothy, you can lay out the pic-
 ture of your adventures. Betsy, Ojo, The Intelligent
 Scarecrow and the Kindhearted Tin Woodman can
 each do theirs. There will be plenty of help for you.
 Then, Kabumpo and Scraps and Tik-Tok, Jack Pump-
 kinhead-my goodness gracious!-and Jennie Jump
 -really, there is hardly any end to the interesting
 stories, and you've plenty of space to work on."
                The plan was received with enthusiasm by all there,
 as well as by those who came hurrying into the Hall
 to learn what was going on. The Hungry Tiger, the
 Cowardly Lion, Sir Hokus, Captain Salt, General Jin-
 ger-and a long line still crowded the corridor.
                "I'm here to explain this" and the cheerful little
 Wizard laid out the details of the project to Princess
 Dorothy, and how it was all to be done. "I know you
 take pride in your City and want to make it more

 beautiful," he said at the close. A thunder of applause
 followed.
                "When do we start?" asked Kabumpo, the huge
 elephant who had been leaning against the throne.
                "We have already started," said the Wizard as he
 wiggled his hand in the air and several large boxes
 floated toward him. "You now observe," he contin-
 ued, opening one of the boxes, "that the first step
 has been taken." He held up a number of paint
 brushes.
                "Quaint looking things !" exclaimed Trot.
                "Yes, yes, my dear," the Wizard answered. "It's a
 novelty. Something new in paint brushes. They are
 designed to supply every color. You only need to
 turn the handles to get the shade of color you need.
 They cannot drip and you never need to dip them into
 a paint pot. I am sure you will find them perfect,"
 he added, passing them around for inspection. "And
 now that everything is settled, I am leaving the magic
 brushes in your hands. Let us see what you can do.
 You begin the big job tomorrow."
                He sat down with a mild feeling of satisfaction
 as the children gathered together in little groups to
 work out their plans.
                Number Nine slipped away and hurried to the Wiz-
 ard's secret Laboratory in the high tower. He set to

 work sweeping the workshop and dusting the deli-
 cate machines. Then he tried a few experiments with
 long distance observations through the Ozmic Ray.
                "Jumping Jupiter!" he exclaimed after the first
 peep through the complicated lens. "Whoo - oo -
 what's all this?"
                The tube crackled; darting sparks snapped out. The
 distant vision of a small volcano floating in a pink
 ocean was projected on the screen. Definitely the
 picture showed trouble of some kind. Little figures
 in white coats moved rapidly over the volcano's sides
 swinging long weapons.
                Out of the ocean appeared the polished sides of an
 odd-looking fish. Number Nine thought it looked like
 a whale made of wood but before he could be sure
 it had dived beneath the pink water
                A small boy was hurled from the volcano into the
 sea.
                "Rough stuff, I'm thinking!" Number Nine mut-
 tered, watching attentively.
                The great head re-appeared-yes, it was a whale.
 It was following the boy, who climbed onto the mouth
 after a vain struggle in the water. The volcano was
 belching vegetables from its crater.
                "Weird goings-on out there somewhere," said Num-

 ber Nine to himself, as he wiped the perspiration
 from his forehead. "This ought to be looked into."
                Late into the night a light in the Wizard's tower
 could be noticed from the streets. Number Nine was
 still watching every move on the wild Nonentic Ocean.
                Early next morning the boy was back at the screen
 and all the time he could spare from his other duties
 he gave to observing the progress of this unusual
 looking monster carrying another boy about on his
 extended jaw.
                Suddenly he stiffened. "Hey there! You can't do
 that!" he yelled into the tattlescope, and without any
 dilly-dally he banged through the astonished Ambas-
 sadoor at the end of the hall. "Take me to the Gnome
 King's Dominion!" he commanded, and disappeared.
                A few minutes later he suddenly reappeared. For
 a time he anxiously studied the tattlescope. Then,
 suddenly remembering the Wizard's instructions, he
 turned from the thrilling scenes on the screen to at-
 tend to his duties outside. Turning to the hall clock,
 he said, "Keep an eye on this tattlescope until I get
 back," and locked the door carefully as he went out.
                It was a glad day for the people of the Emerald
 City, and it would have been so for Number Nine if
 he had not been so anxious about the unknown whale.
                His faithful Scalawagon was waiting at the castle

 steps. And, with a "Cheerio," he hopped into the car,
 pressed a button inside for lunch and began his in-
 spection while he ate.
                Around the entire wall, scaffolds and stepladders
 were erected, over which swarms of children were
 helping to put the last final touches to the paintings
 that were to be finished that afternoon. The entire
 city was doing its utmost to make the presentation
 a success.
                Each artist had been given a whole city block to dec-
 orate and every person and animal, both high and
 low, were working for dear life to have his picture
 finished on time.
                Kabumpo the Elegant Elephant was desperately
 covering vast surfaces, with Ojo sitting on his head
 adding a final touch where it was needed.
                Close by, Tik-Tok, with a brush in each hand and a
 ruler in his teeth, was finishing an elaborate mechan-
 ical drawing of wheels, cogs, pulleys, springs and
 keys. His helper was an elderly man in scraggy
 clothes who measured and corrected the work from
 beginning to end so that all the wheels moved to-
 gether. It was Tik-Tok's own idea.
                The patchwork girl had covered her space with
 patches that looked very much like herself. And on

 each patch she had written a rhyme. To a rubber
 ghost who had been covered with smelly fiabbergas,
 she wrote,
  
 "Persnickety Bellsnickle,
 Once you smelled not worth a nickel.
 Now you're a rubber-out,
 You're even useful here about."
 Across another patch appeared,
  
 "In verse I tell you what I thunk,
 Sometimes it's good, sometimes it's punk."
 She stood before her patches in deep thought, then
 dashed off the following,
  
 "I'm running out of bright idears
 With which to hail our royal peers."
  
                Farther on were adventure pictures and others that
 were funny. The eyes of the Scalawagon danced with
 amusement at all the comical decorations. And Num-
 ber Nine thought they were extraordinary.
                Captain Salt had made a beautiful blue ocean with
 pirate ships that sailed back and fofth, with sea gulls
 darting through the sky.
                General Jinger had cows and horses marching with

 wooden guns over their shoulders. She was seated
 on the Sawhorse about to attack a long row of red,
 white and blue crows sitting on a high fence.
                The Hungry Tiger had filled his space with a close-
 up portrait of himself, and the Cowardly Lion had en-
 tirely forgotten to put himself anywhere in his picture.
 By special invitation Rinkitink had come a long way
 from his kingdom, with a surly old goat, to do their bit.
 Trot and Jellia Jam had made an excellent drawing
 of the castle.
                Sir Hokus Pokus, assisted by Evangeline, the two-
 headed Dragonette, had completed an army of knights
 in armor, on beautiful white horses, charging through
 a field of red roses. All the students from the Woggle-
 bugs' College had come to work on a field of various
 sporting events. Many other noteworthy decorations
 were there, but we haven't the time to speak of them
 all. Number Nine, however, kept notes on every one.
                Two spaces were empty. One for the Tin Woodman,
 the other for the Scarecrow.
                Nearing the spot from which he had started Num-
 ber Nine found Jack Pumpkinhead with a crowd of
 admirers gathered around him. Jack was a slow,
 painstaking creature but his picture was one of the
 best, most life-like and spirited. Standing on the back

 of the Sawhorse he was filling in, and touching up.
 His work was mostly boiling caldrons with sorcerers,
 witches and black cats, and poisoned fumes that
 turned into owls and pink bats.
                Few dreamed that Jack possessed so much talent-
 he didn't know it himself. At the moment Number
 Nine arrived, he was finishing a life-sized portrait of
 an old witch who at one time had caused a lot of trou-
 ble in the Land of Oz. She wore a high pointed hat
 with a wide brim. Around her neck was a crinkley
 white ruff and she had large silver buckles on her
 square-toed shoes.
                                Bending down, Jack asked the Sawhorse, "Can you
 remember the color of the lining in old Mombi's cape?"
                                The old Sawhorse stamped his feet, "Sure, I can
 remember. It was red. I'll never forget that terrible
 hag. She was an old wretch if ever there was one."
                                Jack painted the lining red in the long black cape
 that reached her shoe-tops. The face he painted with
 a long hooked nose and beady black eyes shining with
 a wicked leer. A sharp chin stuck out with a deter-
 mined expression that was true to life.
                                Jack had plenty of reason to remember what this
 famous old witch looked like. For hadn't she held him
 prisoner for seven years? Yes, for seven long years
 she had made him wash dishes and peel potatoes with-

 out one minute's rest. All the time, for Jack never
 needed to sleep or eat
                                "You are right, the old jade did have a cantankerous
 streak," mildly answered Jack, as he finished the last
 brush stroke.
                                Many words of praise for Jack's work came from
 the crowd. "It's excellent-amazing-a speaking like-
 ness" was heard on every side.
                                The expression on the portrait was so real it seemed
 to move slightly. Then the head actually turned and
 old Mombi glared at Jack.
                In a thin cackling voice she ordered him out of the
 way, at the same time freeing herself from the wall
 and expanding into her natural shape.
                Jack looked surprised in his own gentle manner,
 but saw no reason for her spoiling his picture, and
 asked her politely to get back where she belonged.
                At this Mombi pushed him to one side. "Wait until
 you are spoken to," she piped. "My speaking likeness
 will do all the talking from now on." Then she calmly
 stepped out and looked around.
                Another cackle and she whacked her broom over
 Jack's head. "Old jade, am I? Take that, Lunkhead!"
                Then across the Sawhorse she laid another wallop.
 "Terrible old hag, hey? And old wretch?" she added,

 swinging her riding broom.
                The crowd was horrified and fled in every direction.
                Old Mombi's eyes flashed suspiciously. "Am I alone?
 Am I safe?" she asked herself. "I guess I'd better
 hide until I settle a few old debts I have against that
 Queen Ozma. If only I could get my hands on her."
                Her eyes snapped as she sniffed. "I smell strong
 magic," she jabbered, and raised her nose to sniff
 again. Another poke was aimed at Jack Pumpkin-
 head, and she sprang over the castle wall, landing on
 a balcony where she hid among the Queen's favorite
 flowers.
                Then with leaps and bounds she mounted higher and
 higher until she reached the wizard's tower. With
 clawlike fingers she forced open the small window and
 disappeared inside.
                Immediately a warning sounded from the bell tower
 and the bellmen spread an alarm that grew into a
 bedlam that threw the city into an uproar.
                Ozma and the Wizard, who had gone to the Quadling
 Country to bring Glinda for the opening of the wall
 pictures, were expected to come back at any time.
 Number Nine stood glued to the spot. Disaster
 stared him in the face. "Whatever can I say to the
 kind Wizard? If only there were some way to prevent
 further trouble," he shuddered. Everything had hap-

 pened so suddenly he was taken entirely by surprise.
                He felt disgraced. "I know I am not fit to be an as-
 sistant," he accused himself when he saw Mombi climb-
 ing out of the window, carrying the Wizard's black
 bag which held many of his best magical tools.
                "Now everything is sunk," he groaned. "Every-
 thing. I'm sunk for sure, and maybe the whole city."
                The Wizard had mixed just enough magic in Mom-
 bi's paint to keep her flying. But in possession of the
 magic black bag she was now in a position to do untold
 mischief.
                She knew this as she cruised slowly through the air
 with her head almost buried inside the bag examining
 every powerful instrument. Without warning two
 strong young arms caught Mombi in a desperate grip.
 From somewhere in the street below a figure had un-
 expectedly shot up and seized her.
                With his heart in his mouth, Number Nine recog-
 nized his closest friend, Jenny Jump.
                Using all her fairy gifts of eye, fingers, foot and
 her own ability, the girl battled gallantly to gain pos-
 session of the black bag. Old Mombi was fully de-
 termined to keep it herself, clawing and shrieking with
 all her old time fury.
                Swaying in mid-air, with the girl's strong magic

 fingers locked in her hair, Mombi slowly yielded, and
 Jenny wrenched the bag from her grasp and let her
 get away. She flew due east and was soon lost in a
 Yellow blur.
                Meanwhile the royal Scalawagon was speeding up
 from the south, bringing Ozma and her friends for
 the official opening.
                Jenny settled back to earth with her hair askew and
 panting from her exertion, and took the black bag
 into her shop. The Cowardly Lion and Hungry Tiger
 were stationed outside the door. These two watchful
 guardians stood rigid and alert until the royal party
 dashed back to the city. Then everyone breathed
 easier with old Mombi out of sight.
                Meanwhile, though only a painted image of her
 former self, the desperate old mischief-maker made
 a beeline for the wastelands of the Winkie Wilderness.
 Here in the lonely mountain passes, so wild and hidden,
 bandit sorcerers and weird witches work their magic
 under cover. They have lived there for years waiting
 to ambush any wanderer.
                This wilderness was the first place old Mombi re-
 membered where she could find a hiding place. Yet the
 refuge was no refuge at all. Only by several desperate
 encounters did she manage to escape being forced
 into slavery by wizards and witches just as cruel as

 old Mombi and even more powerful. Move on she
 must.
                Out and away she flew, across the yellow sands
 until she came to the Deadly Desert. Here she let out
 a screech, closed her eyes, and leaped the whole dis-
 tance across the dangerous waste. Knowing she would
 be pursued, she was still driven to find a hiding place.
 Flying low over the bleak, empty land of the King-
 dom of the Gnomes, she saw the sparkle of the water
 on Tickley Bender's head as it rose up seething over
 a helpless wooden whale. Without hesitating, she
 swooped down close to the whale.
                "Do I see a door in that silly old fish?" she mumbled
 to herself. "Yes, I think I do!" She dashed toward it
 with the speed of the wind, slipped inside the cabin,
 and slammed the door. Safe inside, she stealthily
 peered around, poking into every corner. Finding the
 place empty she crawled under a low bunk and lay
 flat on the floor.
                With one wicked eye she could see every part of the
 cabin without being discovered. Then-her heart
 stood still----everything began to sink-down-down
 -down-
  
 CHAPTER 10

  
 Kaliko in a Rage
  
 T ICKLEY BENDER saw old Mombi fly into the
 whale just as he dropped the Jones cousins into
 the underground cavern that led to nowhere, and he
 laughed and laughed.
                The huge whale drew his lower deck in close and set
 his jaw. Bucky held fast to the rail as they went,
 licketty-split, into complete darkness.
                The course of the river turned and twisted. Often
 Davy scraped his sides on the tunnel walls but soon
 learned to avoid the tight places at the sharp turns.
 Occasional flashes from Davy's eyes lit the tunnel,
 but only for a moment. Beating their way the best
 they could they managed to steer clear of disaster.
 The rush of the subterranean river gradually sub-
 sided and Bucky's confidence returned. Finally the
 water found its level and the roar died down. A faint
 glow from far ahead slowly grew bright enough to
 show high arches of beautiful carved stone between
 long stretches of carefully built masonry.
                "Looks as if somebody lived down here," whispered
 Bucky as the light grew bright enough to show them
 where they were going.
                "What's all this?" Davy sputtered, as they ap-

 proached a broad lake where a warning sign was
 carved in the rock. It read:
 NO PLACE FOR FISH, CHICKENS,
 Children or Ex-Kings.
 Kaliko King of the Gnomes.
                "It's too late now to pay any attention to that," said
 Bucky, as they barged swiftly past the warning into
 the quiet lake.
                All around the lake were built galleries of colored
 stone. Immense cut rubies and diamonds with other
 precious stones were set in such a manner that they
 reflected beams of light from the farthest corner to
 the high, vaulted roof.
                The clang of a hundred hammers could be heard
 where twisted little workmen were to be seen, beating
 metals into various beautiful forms.
                At sight of the newcomers the liftle gray men
 stopped their work and stared in amazement. Only
 for a moment did they pause, then darted through
 the galleries, spreading the alarm. Throughout the
 whole underground kingdom excitement spread. The
 Gnomes hurried back to their smoking forges and the
 ring of little hammers against anvils began again;
 with lightning speed they were forging long chains.
 From the edge of the lake, the Gnomes threw these

 chains around the whale until they had him so en-
 tangled he could not break away.
                "Of all the star-spangled nerve!" yelled Bucky.
 "What in blazes do you fellows think you are doing?"
                "Fishing!" answered a hairy little Gnome. The
 other Gnomes were convulsed with mocking laughter.
                From an upper gallery one powerful Gnome suc-
 ceeded in looping a line around the whale's tail and
 pulled it tighter with a double hitch. With a shout of
 glee a company of bow-legged Gnomes soon had the
 whale hauled out of the water. They dragged him by
 the tail into a brightly lighted cavern.
                "We'll take him to King Kaliko," they shouted.
                "Blithers and blisters! What next?" thought Bucky
 as he vainly tried to free himself from the strong
 golden chains that bound him to the whale.
                Meanwhile, more wiry gray Gnomes had come up
 from underground mines carrying pickaxes and
 shovels.
                "Take him to the King!" they yelled, joining the
 procession.
                The King sat on his ruby throne munching a sand-
 stone sandwich.
                "Now what?" he groaned in a tired voice. "Get out!"
                A hairy old Gnome stepped forward and bowed low.
 "We have caught a fish for Your Majesty," he said.

 "Will you have it fried for supper? Or baked?"
                "Don't bother me," complained the little King. "I
 don't care what you do with the bung-eyed monster.
 Eat him yourselves," he grumbled, lolling flat on his
 back and swinging a skinny leg over the ruby throne.
                "I prefer this cup of hot quicksilver," he whimpered
 as he gulped the sizzling hot liquid and smacked his
 lips with satisfaction. "Now I feel better," he sighed,
 sitting up straight and casting a suspicious glare at
 the captives.
                Sliding timidly down from his high throne he
 stepped gingerly around the chained prisoners. On
 hands and knees, he crept close to the whale, looking
 slyly beneath the huge body, and he began to tremble.
                "Are you alone?" he stuttered, his round eyes star-
 ing in alarm.
                "I won't tell you-you should have questioned us
 before you chained us up," Bucky answered quickly.
                "You haven't, by any chance, met a mean old fel-
 low named Ruggedo hanging around outside?" the
 King asked.
                "No!" replied the boy.
                "Are you sure?"
                "Positive!"
                "Then why in bluster and blazes do you come both-

 ering me?" snapped Kaliko, peevishly.
                "You don't think, for one moment, we wanted to
 come to this awful place. Do you?"
                At this remark of Bucky's, Kaliko flew into a rage.
 "So that's what you think of my priceless posses-
 sions," he screamed, staggered by the boy's frankness.
                "That's not half of what I think !"
                "Of all the cool insults to the richest kingdom in
 the world," raved Kaliko, thinking of the untold
 treasures he had stored in his caves.
                "It's a fine kingdom to get chained up and dragged
 around in. I don't think you are half-civilized!" Bucky
 retorted.
                Kaliko turned to his head digger: 'Quiggeroc, take
 this big toad-fish out of my sight, and put that boy to
 work in your deepest mine," said the King taking a
 step toward Bucky and swinging his jeweled sceptre
 threateningly.
                At the same moment a clear voice filled the cavern:
 "Be very careful, Kaliko!"
                At the distinct command the King stopped and
 listened. The voice continued: "To the boy and the
 whale, Welcome to Oz. The Gnomes cannot hurt you.
 This is Number Nine speaking!"
  
 CHAPTER 11

  
 King Bucky
  
 KAL.IKO stood still, his face filled with an expres-
 sion of doubt and indecision. Recovering quickly
 from his surprise, he came closer to his prisoners.
 "Don't try any Hoodle Doodle tricks with me," he
 said sharply. "If you think you can trick a Gnome you
 are just making yourselves ridiculous." He aimed a
 Rockety-socket blow straight at Bucky's head, with
 his sceptre.
                The sceptre was snatched from his grasp by an un-
 seen hand and Kaliko was thrown flat on his back.
 He lay quiet for a moment, then raised his head just
 enough to order the whale dragged out of his sight
 Led by Quiggeroc, the front line of Gnomes ad-
 vanced in a body, only to be stopped by an invisible
 wall that rose several feet away from the prisoners.
 The rush of Gnomes from the rear stumbled over
 those ahead, piling up in a wriggling mass of the little
 men before the barrier, while from inside the wall the
 clink of breaking chains falling from the whale added
 to the racket
                Then out of the confusion appeared a boy about the
 same age as Bucky. He turned to the stubborn Gnome

 Ring, pointing his finger at him. "I am here to warn
 you. I don't want any harm to come to these strangers.
 See that you do as you are told." He smiled at Davy
 and Bucky and was gone as quickly as he had come.
                Almost as astonished as Kaliko were Bucky and
 Davy but they managed to keep their wits about them.
 And with this sudden turn of events the boy became
 alert, springing toward the King of the Gnomes with
 his fists clenched.
                No longer a beaten prisoner, Bucky grabbed the
 little King by the shoulders and spun him around.
 In the scuffle the King's ruby crown fell to the ground.
 Bucky picked it up and set it on his own head.
                "Help!" shrieked Kaliko.
                Quiggeroc made a feeble attempt, at the beginning
 of the scrimmage, to assist his monarch but was un-
 able to get within ten feet of the struggling pair.
 Bucky, feeling more powerful now that the situation
 had changed, decided to take the bull by the horns.
 The crown on his head filled him with courage. He
 was ready for anything.
                "See here, you Kaliko King!" he snapped, with little
 respect for the uncrowned King. "I'm King here now
 and I intend to teach you better manners!"
                Kaliko bit and scratched at the boy without harming
 him, and Bucky held him tightly. For a boy of twelve

 he was exceptionally strong and he handled the fero-
 cious little Gnome exactly as he should have been
 handled.
                Pulling the ruby crown down tighter on his head,
 he turned to Quiggeroc who was bouncing nervously
 on the ends of his toes with the horde of Gnomes
 bouncing behind him.
                "Back to the mines!" yelled the boy.
                Many of the Gnomes turned and marched back to-
 ward the underground caverns. Quiggeroc, still on his
 toes, stared with a crafty stare.
                From the tail of his eye, Bucky saw Kaliko crawl
 out of reach, leap to his feet and run toward the great
 ruby throne. Trembling with terror, he rummaged
 through his pockets until he found a small ruby key.
                In a twinkling he slipped it into a key-hole on the side
 of the throne. The throne swung open in two halves.
 Kaliko darted into a hollow space inside and it closed
 together with a snap.
                Tempestuous as the last few minutes had been,
 Bucky felt even surer of himself than before. The
 voice of Number Nine had filled him with courage; the
 crown on his head made him feel like a King when
 the miners had obeyed his first command. With the
 unruly little King safely locked up, Bucky felt safe

 from his attacks. But of Quiggeroc he was not so sure
 --he would bear watching.
                He turned to the whale who was impatiently swing-
 ing his tail from side to side.
                "So far, so good," he said in an off-hand manner,
 patting the crown down tighter on his head.
                The gentle whale turned his round eyes sadly to
 the boy. "I must say-of all the extraordinary be-
 havior - and surprising conduct - the folks around
 here beat the pirates-"
                "Please now, hold onto yourself," pleaded Bucky.
 "You warned me not to be surprised at anything in
 the Land of Oz, so I'm not the least surprised at this.
 There was a time when I thought the worst had come
 to the worst. Now, it appears that the best has come
 to the best and I am King of the Gnomes."
                "Yip, Yip for King Bucky Jones!" trumpeted the
 whale, starting to thrash himself across the jeweled
 floor toward the lake.
                King Bucky jumped aboard and stood erect by the
 rail as they passed through groups of sulky Gnomes
 who offered no resistance.
                "It's plain to be seen," remarked Bucky, "that who-
 ever wears this ruby crown is King. I may be King
 but I feel like a fish out of water in this awful hole."
                "So do I," complained the whale, "for I am a fish

 out of water - and I don't intend to stay out any
 longer."
                He strained his big frame, and creakily dragged
 himself along corridors lined by walls of beaten gold.
 On every side Gnomes surrounded them in sullen
 silence, obeying the boy's commands only because he
 wore the crown.
                With a sigh of relief the whale eased himself into
 the waters of the lake. They explored every side,
 looking for a way of escape, but the only possible way
 was through a large flood-gate and that was closed.
                "Open the flood-gate," ordered Bucky.
                Not a Gnome budged.
                "Stop pussyfooting! Open the gate!" This time
 Bucky roared. Still, no Gnome obeyed.
                Bucky searched his mind for a solution of this diffi-
 culty. Like a flash, he remembered the first day he
 had spent with the whale and his search of the cabin.
 He had found the pirates' chest and in that chest
 were the four explosive door-knobs. Quickly he ran
 to the cabin and returned with them hidden under
 his coat.
                "For the last time, Quiggeroc-Open it up before
 I blow it up!"
                One stubborn Gnome handed Quigg a large dia-

 mond, urging him to throw it.
                Without waiting longer, Bucky fired a door-knob
 at the gate. To his astonishment, there was no ex-
 plosion. But what was more effective, a great blast
 of wind ripped loose the hinges of the barrier.
 At the same moment, the horde of Gnomes let fly
 a shower of emeralds, diamonds and sapphires that
 fell clattering on the deck of the whale. Some weighed
 two pounds and were as large as baseballs. One after
 another, the boy threw the door-knobs and the flood-
 gates were blown wide apart by the released wind;
 they fell open with a crash sending the spray high.
 The wind of a tornado now whistled across the lake.
 Quiggeroc was blown clear back to the cavern en-
 trance, a large emerald still in his hand.
                Before he had a chance to throw this stone, Lucky
 Bucky slipped the ruby crown from his head and let
 it fly at the old Gnome. The powerful wind penetrated
 the caverns, filling them with a dismal howling and
 those Gnomes who had not sought shelter in the gal-
 leries were sent spinning into the water.
 Not until the last Gnome was swept away did the
 violent wind die down. Bucky could see three queer
 creatures flying clumsily overhead.
                Their heads were shaped like bellows with strong,
 nozzle-shaped beaks. Long legs dangled from their

 bird-like bodies as they darted aimlessly around.
                "Come back here," Bucky called, noticing their in-
 decisive movements.
                Much to his relief, the birds fluttered down, one at
 a time, and came to rest on the rail beside him. The
 first one puffed:
                "I'm Tom." The second, "I'm Dick," and gave a
 nod. The third announced: "I'm Harry, at your serv-
 ice," and took his place beside the others.
                Then, they all looked around and asked: "Where
 is the Flummux?"
                "Do you mean this one?" asked Bucky, for he was
 still holding the fourth door-knob in his hand. "You
 were all door-knobs before I set you free."
                "I'm not surprised at that," Tom
 why don't you set her free, too?"
                "I'll be glad to," Bucky told them and dropped the
 knob on the deck.
                A report like a bursting automobile tire sounded
 and Bucky was almost thrown from the deck when a
 fourth, smaller creature appeared with quite a flutter.
                "Hello, everybody!" she called when she saw Tom,
 Dick and Harry sitting on the rail. Turning to Bucky
 she announced: "These brothers of mine call me Flum-
 mux because I am a kid sister. You know how broth-

 ers are. My nature is like the breath of spring-a
 very gentle Zephyr. You may think I am weather
 vain until you know me better. Who are you?" she
 asked, suddenly staring at the whale, who was draw-
 mg a deep breath.
                "Oh, I am Bucky Jones, and this is my favorite
 cousin, Davy Jones," replied the boy turning to his
 friend.
                The whale gave her a smile.
                The girl continued: "We Gabooches always stand
 together. I really mean, we always blow together.
 And when we get our wind up, we make the dust fly."
                "So I noticed! It was ripping of you to open the
 flood-gate for-"
                "Glad to do it," she interrupted, "but where are
 we? And why are we here? I don't like this place but
 I do like you and your big cousin."
 "Thanks," replied Bucky. "If you all would like to
 join our crew, we could help each other to escape from
 this tough little kingdom."
 "Since you have thrown away your crown and King
 Kaliko is safely locked inside his throne, I think we
 had better be moving along," suggested Davy.
                "Squee to gnomes. I'm not afraid of them as long
 as I have my breath and strength enough to blow it,"
 said Dick the Gabooch.

                "You leave them to me," said the little Gabooch girl
 breezily as she swooped down on some Gnomes that
 were creeping up with more diamonds in their hands.
                Swish, swash, swooch, she blew them around and
 returned to her perch beside her brothers.
                Flapping her wings, she looked up at the whale with
 a self-important twitter: "Satisfactory?" she asked.
 "Exceedingly so-quite superior-indeed, you de-
 serve all the supreme words of praise that I cannot
 think of at this moment, to save my soul!" responded
 the good-natured whale.
                "Hardly anything remarkable-just so so," said the
 little Gabooch in a soft tone that showed a growing
 affection for Davy.
                "Your brothers certainly got us out of a fix," ex-
 plained Bucky, "and, as we don't like this place any
 better than you do, I think we had better be moving
 out while we have the chance."
  
 CHAPTER 12
  
 Over the Rainbow
  
                HOLD tight, all of you," warned Davy impatiently,
 and spun himself around toward the broken

 flood-gate. Over it he plunged blindly into a gloom,
 the end of which none of them could even guess.
                The Gabooches crowded closer to Bucky who hugged
 the hand-rail with determination.
                Their way turned and twisted as before. Now and
 then Davy scraped along the sides of rock. He mum-
 bled unhappily at having his beautiful coat of enamel
 scarred.
                But having begun the journey, they must keep go-
 ing so they crashed along with the current. Pres-
 ently they were swirling 'round and 'round like a
 bubble in a whirlpool, evidently staying in one place;
 and for hours this traveling in long, monotonous cir-
 les continued.
                When they were nearly desperate, from somewhere
 in the darkness a clear voice spoke out: "Turn to the
 left! This is Number Nine speaking. Always turn
 left. Turn now!"
                Promptly following the advice, Davy struck out
 blindly and after a momentary shudder while falling
 through dark space, they regained their composure
 and knew that the guiding voice had led them in the
 right direction.
                The waters became calm and a faint sparkle of light
 appeared. Not long after this, they swung out into
 fresh air.

                As far as the eye could see, stretched a land of
 dreary rocks and sand. Neither dwellings nor animals
 were to be seen or heard; not even the chirp of the
 early bird, for it was early morning.
                "We must have spent the night in that underground
 kingdom of gold and diamonds, where they eat sand-
 stone sandwiches and drink molten metal," said Bucky
 as he scooped a drink from the river. "Suffering Sea
 Serpents!" he cried and spat the water out. A look
 of disgust broke over his face. "I'm a burnt biscuit
 if old Tickley Bender isn't in that water yet. I can
 taste him. The water tickled my tongue."
                The whale's honest eyes took on a cautious expres-
 sion at the mention of old Tickley.
                "I know everything turns out all right in Oz but I
 would rather not be in the same river with him," whis-
 pered Davy as he started in a hurry down the narrow
 waterway.
                As they continued, the river grew narrower and
 shallower, with the rocks scraping beneath them, but
 Davy kept on until he found that the entire river had
 fizzled away into thin air and they were stranded in
 a desert waste.
                The Gabooches looked with sympathy at the boy
 who had set them free. "Looks as if someone had

 stolen the river," said Tom.
                "And it looks like the end of us, too," answered
 Bucky, trying to be cheerful. "I do wish we had picked
 an orange grove or a strawberry patch."
                "Of course, of course," said Tom, "no one would pick
 such a place as this to end in."
                "Be quiet! all of you. And let me hear no more talk
 about ending, here or anywhere else," said the whale
 rather sharply. "I want you all to understand that
 we are going to the Emerald City if we have to move
 but an inch at a time," and he yanked himself around
 the rocks with determined jerks.
                For hours they jogged through the blistering sun,
 urged forward by the resolute purpose that Davy
 always kept fixed in his wooden head.
                "We may stumble and even flop a little, but we will
 get to the Emerald City," he repeated over and over.
 Sometimes Bucky walked ahead, removing stones
 to clear the path. Over many miles they staggered,
 and at the end of the day found that they had cov-
 ered a considerable distance. Still the way ahead
 seemed endless.
                Luckily neither Davy nor the Gabooches required
 food. Bucky ate a couple of juicy peach pies and felt
 better. They rested that night under the stars.
 Early next morning the restless whale was awake

 and on his way again. He expected to go farther than
 he had the day before because fewer rocks bothered
 him and the way sloped slightly down hill.
                Coming to level ground they noticed, for the first
 time, that all about them were strewn many bones.
 With a yell, one of the bones jumped up: "Klickity
 Yi-Yi-Klick-Klick-" he shouted and all the bones
 awoke.
 They rattled and shook themselves, staring at the
 whale out of cold bone eyes. Shrill gusts of crackling
 mirth filled the air as they danced about with absurd
 motions to show their fantastic amusement. Every
 awkward jump brought them closer to the travelers.
                "One side! One side!" called Bucky stepping out
 with the intention of pushing them away if they
 blocked his path.
                Quickly he changed his mind when one of the crea-
 tures stood up to shake his hand and with his bent
 elbow, the bone jabbed Bucky in the ribs. The boy
 doubled up and rolled on the ground. Before he could
 get to his feet another elbow nudged him, giving him
 another sharp shock, like a shooting cramp.
                "Stop it!" Bueky howled as he tumbled about in the
 sand.
                Other bones hopped up to give him more jabs with

 the butt ends of their joints, and with every touch he
 got a slight electric thrill that gave him a most un-
 pleasant feeling.
                "Are you bones trying to be funny?" gasped the
 squirming boy.
                "Of course we are. We're the funniest bones in all
 the world. You don't need to tell us that!"
                "I think you're crazy!" sputtered Bucky.
                "Sure, we're often called Crazy bones too," they
 rattled as they danced around. "Crazy bones! Funny
 bones!" they cheered.
                Then turning their attention to Davy, they jabbed
 and poked him from every side. Even through his
 thick bulk the whale felt little cricks and stitches that
 made him wiggle. These visible shivers only made
 matters worse, for the clownish bones left Bucky to
 give all their annoyances to Davy. While hundreds
 of little electric darts stung the whale, Bucky regained
 his place of safety on deck.
                Davy moved briskly over the sandy stretch trying
 to outstrip them, but the nimble bones followed at an
 amazing pace, prodding and twittering at him as they
 followed.
                Each little electric touch they administered in-
 creased the flight of the whale until he was moving at
 a very rapid speed due to this borrowed electric power.

 In this manner they continued the chase until the
 crazy bones, having used up all their shocks, fell flat
 on the sand, completely exhausted.
                The plucky whale staggered on alone until he came
 to the edge of the dangerous desert. Hot waves of
 burning sand dashed up on the shore, as breakers do
 in the sea.
                Here the whale stopped short--and his heart sank.
 Instead of the cool waters of an ocean, he was faced
 with rolling waves of scorching sand. The heat was
 so great that the whale was forced to turn back.
 Behind a little sand dune the Gabooches were flying
 lazily, acting as guides. They fluttered to earth, slap-
 ping their wings noisily against their small bodies to
 attract Davy's attention. The whale immediately
 turned in that direction, and when he and Bucky
 reached the spot they found the Gabooches guarding
 an exquisite little girl sitting on a rock.
                Tom, Dick and Harry had their dangerous nozzles
 pointed at the child, who was laughing. The sound
 was like the tinkle of bells.
                The Flummux was angrily scolding her brothers.
 "Don't you dare touch that beautiful creature! Some-
 times you are so stupid."
                "Let them raise all the wind they want to; it won't

 bother me," said the beautiful creature with peals of
 silvery laughter.
                At that moment Davy arrived and the little fairy
 danced through the air and landed on the rail beside
 Bucky.
                "Whatever brought you here? Are you lost?" she
 asked.
                "I'm beginning to think so," he answered ruefully.
                "Don't worry, little sailor boy. I'm lost, too----I often
 get lost, but my father always finds me and takes me
 home. Who are you? I don't remember seeing you
 before."
                "My friend and I," said Bucky, including the whale
 with a gesture, "are on our way to the Emerald City.
 I'm not sure we are on the right road."
                Interrupted by the sound of tinkling glass, he
 stopped speaking to listen. The air was filled with
 seven mysterious pillars of solid light that settled deep
 into the sand beside them, and in the pillars were each
 color of the rainbow. The little fairy flew among
 them, arranging them in place. The air was cooler
 and cleaner now, as the fairy danced around the whale.
 Floating gracefully back, she sat down on Davy's
 head.
                "Don't you know me?" she asked in surprise. "My
 name is Polychrome! My sisters and I are the rain-

 bow."
                With delicate care and a dainty motion, she caught
 up the gauzy folds of her dress and flew off again to
 oversee the forming of the great arch. The curving
 rays from the rainbow fixed themselves more firmly
 in the sand as many sisters of Polychrome began to
 dance down the arc of the bow in the gayest spirits.
 These beautiful rainbow fairies dipped lightly to the
 sand bringing hope and confidence to the bewildered
 travelers.
                Polychrome and Bucky were pleading with the
 whale who kept shaking his head as though in doubt.
                "No, no!" he was saying, "You go ahead. Leave
 me here. I'll find a way to follow later."
                "We'll do nothing of the sort. I would never think
 of leaving you here. If you stay, I'll stay!" replied the
 boy. "And, another thing-I'm the pilot and you are
 the first vessel I ever heard of that refused to go where
 the pilot directed-"
                "I'm sure you can do it," insisted Polychrome.
 ''Please -
                "Well, it wouldn't hurt to try," the whale conceded.
                "If you won't try, remember I stay right here with
 you," said Bucky.
                "See here, now-if that's the way you feel, of course

 I'll try," replied the whale.
                "Splendid!" cheered Polychrome.
                "Now, I am going to pilot you up that rainbow if
 it's the last thing I do," said Bucky, as he helped to
 lift Davy's head against the pillar of light. "Now-
 up with you-everybody lend a hand!"
                                The great whale began to rise until he was standing
 straight up on his tail.
                                All the daughters of the rainbow helped.
                                Tom, Dick, Harry and even little Flummux blew a
 gale strong enough to turn the trick.
                                Davy began to move-slowly at first-then, with
 everyone straining for all he was worth, the whale
 started to rise.
                                Higher and higher he slid; then faster-until they
 had him well on the upward way. They could see the
 desert, far below, dimming as they rose. The other
 end of the bow was lost in the distance.
                                All hands continued to push so no time should be
 lost. Using every ounce of strength, they pushed their
 dangerous undertaking forward until Davy was mov-
 mg at a surprising clip, up the long rays of color.
                                The sun had begun to sink into the evening before
 they reached the top of the curve. And the girls, who
 were not accustomed to such hard work, began to
 show signs of weariness.

                                "Let's all take a little rest to get back our breath,"
 suggested Bucky when he noticed how worn out the
 girls were. They stopped pushing.
                Davy began to slip backward. But they caught him
 in time and with renewed vigor they resumed the
 drive-striving to reach the top. If they had let him
 slip, there is no telling what might have become of
 him.
                But they were more careful now. They were all
 joyous when they reached the level stretch of the top
 of the arc. From that point the going was easier for
 the bow curved down hill.
                "Before we go any farther," said Davy. "I want to
 try to thank you for all you have done for me!"
                "We would never have left such a kind whale and
 such a nice sailor boy in that awful place," replied
 Polychrome, and all her sisters agreed.
                Then, on the edge of the rainbow, they sat down in
 a beam of brilliant color. Without warning, the bow
 began to bend. The weight of the whale made it sag
 in the middle. Ever so little at first, then more and
 more, it dipped until it reached the breaking point.
 Already the four Gabooches were underneath Davy;
 blowing their most powerful gales, they just managed
 to hold him from dropping any farther but not an inch

 could they lift him no matter how long-winded they
 blew. They could barely hold him-Something must
 be done quickly-
                Luckily a bunch of cloud-pushers who kept the
 clouds moving in the sky were returning from work
 at the end of the day. They obligingly lent a hand and
 soon had the whale back on the level beams of light.
                The track ahead ran downward, the curve growing
 steeper the farther it bent. The descent seemed down-
 right dangerous but so eager was Davy to cross the
 desert that he started off immediately down the slight
 decline. Gaining speed at an alarming rate, he soon
 found it wise to consider slowing down.
                "Take it Ozzy, Mr. Jones, take it Ozzy," warned the
 Flummux, who had all she could do to keep up with
 him.
                The daylight was fading and the big wooden whale
 knew that the rainbow would grow weaker and van-
 ish completely with the setting of the sun.
                At the present speed he was bound to smash. He
 figured out that there was little choice left to him,
 and he dug his tail hard into the rainbow. This acted
 as a dragging anchor to break his speed. It was the
 best he could do. He let everything take its course.
                The pressure of his tail did help a little but not
 enough to do more than keep his head pointing

 forward.
                Then, dropping straight downward, he landed with
 a crashing swoosh on the surface of a small lake that
 fortunately was spread out at the foot of the rainbow.
                The mighty splash over, Davy settled himself com-
 fortably in the cool water with dancing, golden rip-
 ples all around him. With a look of joyous satisfac-
 tion, he turned to Lucky Bucky and smiled.
                "We are at last in Oz--the real Oz--I can hardly
 believe it!" he breathed.
                Bucky, who had been very much shaken up in the
 crash, turned anxiously to his cousin:
                "You had an awful fall, Davy. How are your tim-
 bers? I do hope they are not shivered!"
                "I don't care now if every timber in my framework
 is shivered to bits," replied the whale, with a look of
 rapture on his broad, friendly face. "At last I am in
 Oz-Real Oz-nothing else matters."
                And the sun went down on the happiest whale in
 all creation.
                Around them the air was so quiet it passed through
 the trees without disturbing the leaves. It was a land
 of enchantment. The rainbow itself had dissolved in
 the twilight but from high overhead, the sweet voices
 of the rainbow's daughters called:

                "Good-night, big whale-good-night, little sailor
 boy. We hope you reach the Emerald City safely.
 Good-night! Good-night!"
  
 CHAPTER 13
  
 Winning Their Way
  
 BUCKY lay flat on the grass for a long-needed sleep.
 The Gabooches, who never closed an eye, perched
 on the rail like sentinels keeping guard.
                Sun-up, next morning, found them all eager to be
 on their way. A hurried glance at the lining of the
 pirate's coat showed them exactly where they were
 in the yellow land of the Winkies.
                The water in the little lake into which they had
 splashed the night before was like liquid gold. It
 flowed into a prim little river.
                This stream ran through a stiff as starch country
 with here and there a house set on the top of a hill.
                It was not a wide river-just wide enough for Davy
 to swim through without touching either side. The
 banks were well kept and straight as a ruler, without
 the slightest hint of a curve. When the river turned,
 it turned in an exact right angle.
                Placed close to the edge was a severe looking sign

 painted with yellow letters:
                                NO CONNECTION WITH ANY OTHER RIVER
                                                Fishing Drinking
                                                Bathing and Boating
                                                FORBIDDEN BY LAW
                                                No bridges or tides allowed
                                               Drowning on Thesdays only
                                                DO NOT CROSS ME.
  
                Proceeding at an even speed, the whale was so filled
 with good-feeling that he paid no attention to the
 sign.
                "What a whale of a place!" he kept repeating as
 they passed long lines of formal trees leading up to
 stiff, orderly houses.
                Never before had Bucky seen such odd landscapes.
 Looking at the scenery, he forgot to keep an eye on
 Davy's course. So, it happened that he suddenly found
 himself surrounded by a patch of high, waving cat-
 tails. They were tough and lashed angrily across the
 deck at Bucky, who caught one, and yanked it by the
 roots from the water and dropped it on the river bank.
                "Meow-" complained the root and stretched itself
 into a lazy old cat that licked itself dry before it spoke
 to Bucky. "Go on, finish the job. They usually do,"

 it purred, "and please be quick about it."
                Bucky pulled up two more cats and dropped them
 beside the first one. He continued to pull cat-tails
 until his arms ached, placing them side by side along
 the grassy bank.
                In this way he cleared a passage and hardly had
 Davy slipped through before all the cats jumped back
 into the river, leaving only their waving tails showing.
                The very last cat glared at them. She seemed an-
 noyed.
                "Some people ought to learn to leave other people
 alone," she remarked as she dived into the water and
 disappeared.
                Bucky was perplexed by this but the Flummux re-
 turned the cat's stare and was about to answer her,
 but hesitated so long that the cat was gone.
                "Do you want to know what I think?" she whispered
 to Bucky. "I think those cat-tails are people under en-
 chantment-put there by some wicked witch-That's
 what I think!"
                The river flowed along, straight and self-satisfied.
 Bucky was thinking hard.
                "Do you believe this witch stuff?" he asked the
 Flummux.
                "Why shouldn't I believe it? Why shouldn't you
 believe it? Weren't we shut up in door-knobs?"

                Bucky scratched his head: "There is something in
 what you say. And I'm not so sure you are a Flummux
 either," he said.
                "I hope you are right," replied the little Gabooch as
 she vigorously polished her brass nozzle with a cos-
 metic made from brass polish that she had found in the
 cabin.
                With elaborate care, she also polished her brothers'
 nozzles until they sparkled.
                "Perk up, boys," she said. "I want you to look your
 best in case we meet some important people. It isn't
 every girl who has such handsome brothers as you
 are!" The Flummux twittered cheerfully as she
 hopped back into the cabin to replace the brass-
 cosmetic.
                The whale quivered along blissfully. "What good
 fortune I have with so much to see-such a Lucky
 pilot-such a loyal crew. Was ever a big, homely
 whale so favored with finer friends-"
                "Now, my great big cousin,-" began Bucky giving
 a friendly pat to Davy's blunt nose, "just suppose we
 were caught in this river and transformed into cat-
 tails. What then? I'm not used to magic or enchant-
 ments."
                The whale was quick to respond: "As I told you be-

 fore, don't worry about such things. Queen Ozma and
 the Wizard attend to all such problems when it be-
 comes necessary."
                "That may be all very true but I will feel safer
 when we are out of this river."
                The whale whipped up speed, then put on all the
 brakes suddenly, and he was none too soon. For this
 river, like the other, had stopped abruptly.
                Looking ahead they saw a patch of lawn with a
 high stone wall beyond. Hanging there was another
 sign marked:
  
 GLAD TO SEE YOU GO
  
                "I'm glad, too," said Bucky, "if we haven't come to
 another standstill."
                Impatiently springing ashore to examine the wall,
 he found a wide iron gate and opened it. Stepping
 through, he looked about cautiously when he heard
 the sound of excited voices. He was relieved to see
 another river not far away.
                Beckoning Davy to follow, he turned toward a rest-
 less gathering of people standing beside another large
 sign. The lettering on this one was quite different.
  
                                Only      Real River in a 100 miles

                                                Everybody Welcome
                                                                Prize Winners
                                                                Champions
                                                                Lucky Shots
                                                                King Pins
                                                Especially Welcome
                                                Ability Skill and Chance
                                Sports Games and Amusements
                                                WELCOME TO ALL
  
                "Can you beat that?" exclaimed Davy in surprise,
 sticking his head through the gate.
                An eager little man with a most hospitable manner
 came up to meet them and explain the situation. He
 drew a mark across the sand at the river shore.
 "You'll have to beat every game if you expect to
 pass," he told them. "Start from scratch," he directed,
 indicating the mark.
                "You certainly are a gay community," remarked
 the agreeable whale as he lumbered up to scratch.
 From there he could see that many games were in
 progress.
                "And-might I add-quite a sociable one."
 As Davy and his crew went down toward the river,
 a team of over-sized grasshoppers met them. They

 were dressed in gaudy Scotch kilts with long ribbons
 fluttering from their caps.
                Some of them were taller than Bucky and he hesi-
 tated when they crowded around him. But their
 gracious manners put him at ease.
                "Would you care to play a game of hop-scotch? The
 fun is just beginning!"
                Bucky soon found that he was no match for the
 hop-scotchers, but Tom, Dick and Harry entered the
 competition eagerly. They won. The party then passed
 on down the river where, on both banks and in the
 stream itself, every known game was being played.
                Right and left, they were challenged by enormous
 frogs to a game of leap-frog. The Flummux was bash-
 ful at first but her brothers coaxed her to try and she
 did. And, what's more, she won.
                With each winning, they were allowed to proceed.
 In this manner, they won their way, little by little,
 down the river.
                A cricket team of tall green crickets challenged
 them to come up the creek and play, but this they
 were forced to decline because they did not have
 enough players to make up an opposing team.
                A stray deck of playing cards climbed aboard Davy's
 deck, pleading with him to try a game of solitaire.
                "Really I'm not a game-fish," explained the whale,

 "But I'll try my luck
                He almost won, but-didn't----
 "Sorry, old blubber," said the cards, gathering
 themselves together, "You're game anyhow!"
                At the second try, he did win and they all moved
 up a peg. Before they left, the cards gave an exhibi-
 tion of fancy shuffling that was astonishing.
                There were plenty of side-shows. It was just like a
 county fair. Courts for tennis and pools for water
 sports dotted the course. Grandstands stood in the
 background and boardwalks wandered from place to
 place wherever large crowds needed them, or when
 a champion was playing.
                So much was going on that Bucky concluded they
 never would get to the Emerald City if they had to
 play every game. The Gabooches were having the time
 of their lives, winning one contest after another. In
 quick games of chance, Bucky always came out ahead,
 being so Lucky. Davy, by far the best swiminer, beat
 all the champions in the water sports.
                They noticed that the games were more difficult
 and the players more expert, as they advanced, and
 they tried to avoid these experts wherever possible.
                A team of Crows who were champion crow-kay
 players insisted the strangers should kindly stop and

 be beaten.
                As there was no way to avoid this challenge without
 being rude, Bucky spent a whole half-hour playing
 crow-kay with white crows. He won by the small mar-
 gin of one stroke.
                Davy's fine feats at swimming were greeted with
 cheers from all sides. At every turn, bids, dares and
 challenges were called: "Win or. lose! Try your luck!
 Winner takes all!" until Davy's head ached from the
 friendly racket. Patiently he sloshed along, trying to
 avoid the delays of so much merrymaking. To every
 bid to play, he turned a deaf ear. At last they had
 passed through the River of the lively gameland.
  
 CHAPTER 14
  
 Tea and Thunderbugs
  
 THE way ahead looked clear. But just as they
 reached a turn in the river, out of nowhere came
 the word: "Check!" spoken like a sharp challenge.
                "Go on! Go on! Don't pay any attention to him!"
 said Bucky. Davy increased speed in an effort to get
 out of sight around the bend. It wasn't long before
 the order was repeated, this time more emphatically:
                "Check! Check! DoubleCheck!"

                They were forced to stop. A large checker-board
 spread itself entirely across the river and strutting
 Over the board came a fat, pompous teapot. He began
 to set the black and red checkers in the proper squares,
 and not until he had them placed did he turn to the
 angry whale.
                Then turning around he laughed through his spout:
                "Back up and slow down," he ordered. "Or do you
 wish to back down and give up? If so, you are prison-
 ers of King Jack Pott."
                "Never!!" cried Bucky and Davy in a combined
 breath.
                "Never!!" repeated the Gabooches, one after the
 other.
                With one spring Bucky leaped onto the checker-
 board.
                "We are ready!" he announced. "Now, make your
 first move. Here is mine!" and he shoved one huge
 black checker from the square where it rested to the
 next one.
                The game was started.
                King Pott strutted across the board to make his
 move, but he stopped to ask:
                "How do you like my looks? Did you ever see a
 better looking Jack Pott than I am? Such beautiful

 lines; such delicate china! And what would you like
 me to be filled with? Coffee, tea or chocolate?"
                "I'll take tea," said the boy, patiently waiting for the
 Jack Pott to make his move. "We are in a hurry to
 be on our way."
                "Now, my friend, having tea is a leisurely perform-
 ance. Do you take lemon or cream?" asked King Jack
 and he began to boil up inside with more interest in
 serving tea than in playing a game of checkers.
                "If it's all the same to you, I prefer iced tea."
                "Oh, very well," replied the King to Bucky with an
 impatient toss of his spout, noticeably cooling off
 while he made his next move in the game. "I suppose
 you came from somewhere, didn't you?"
                "Yes, indeed," answered the boy, jumping two of
 the King's checkers, which he handed over to the
 Flummux. "Yes, siree! we came from somewhere and
 we are on our way to somewhere else!"
                "Why bother your head with going anywhere else?
 Why not remain here with me?"
                "Because we are in a hurry to go somewhere else."
                "Rather strange goings-on, I should say," replied
 King Jack, winning three of Bucky's men. "Have you
 ever stopped to think that I may have entirely different
 plans for you?"
                "Indeed," responded Bucky, taking two more of the

 King's checkers. The Flummux picked these up and
 carried them quickly into the cabin, where she hid
 them carefully, inside the whale.
                "When I win this game, my plan is to have you re-
 main just where you are," the King answered with de-
 termination. "All day long you will play game after
 game of checkers with me. Then, all night your friends
 must play. Won't that be the jolliest, grandest life
 from now on?" added Jack as he moved a red checker
 into Bucky's king line. "King! King! Double King!!"
 he shrilled through his spout.
                "Okay, crown him," said the boy quietly to the Flum-
 mux who darted into the cabin and came back bearing
 a red cherry pie. With this, she crowned Jack Pott's
 king. All the on-lookers were so intent upon watching
 the game that no one noticed this little trick.
                "Please, Mr. Bucky," she said in a pleading whisper,
 "please do be careful and win." She brought out an-
 other pie to crown the other king for Jack. "It would
 be an awful life with nothing to do but play checkers
 from morning till night."
                The game became intense, nip and tuck, with every-
 one so interested that no one noticed a band of creep-
 ing Thunderbugs coming close to the checker board.
                These bugs were about a foot high and against their

 folded brown wings, their breasts glowed with a soft
 light. Their short black legs, upon which they could
 stand upright, ended in red-hot toes.
                Still unnoticed they crept closer and closer until they
 came within reach of the pies that crowned Jack Pott's
 kings.
                In a wink, they snatched all the pies and made off
 with them.
                Then Bucky's kings jumped all of Jack's checkers
 and won the game in two minutes.
                King Jack Pott was furious. The water in his teapot
 boiled over and spattered hotly across the board.
 Never before had he been beaten at his own game of
 checkers. His sputtering hid the stealthy second ap-
 proach of the Thunderbugs as they returned for more
 pies.
                From every direction they came in great numbers,
 all pleading for more pies. Their appealing voices held
 a sincere craving that Bucky was quick to understand,
 but the Gabooches began to blow away the new ar-
 rivals.
                This action enraged the Thunderbugs. In an instant
 their soft glow had changed into a crackling fury of
 heat and fire as they rushed forward in a blast of
 thunder.
                King Jack Pott became so hysterical that he sneezed

 out most of his tea into the air and took to his heels,
 running swiftly over the hill, with his spout rolling
 from side to side and his lid jumping up and down
 under pressure of his steam.
                The checker board fell apart into separate blocks
 and, taking to their spindling legs, they followed their
 King.
                The steady blowing of the Gabooches so excited the
 Thunderbugs that their already fury-filled bodies be-
 came roaring furnaces. Noting this, the four wind-
 makers blew up into a gale which tumbled the bugs
 about through the grass in a deafening tempest.
                During all this excitement, the whale remained his
 usual calm self. His sleepy eyes were half closed. But
 when the flaming bugs rolled too close for safety, he
 used his only weapon of defense and spouted a huge
 stream of water over the fiery bugs, thoroughly
 drenching them all.
                Every spark of fury that the strong wind had stirred
 up was extinguished. Only a little puff of black smoke
 curled up here and there and all the thunder died
 away. A couple of faint sputters; then every Thunder-
 bug settled down quietly in the grass, so completely
 squelched that hardly one of them opened his eyes.
                "What in thunder is the matter with you hot-headed

 creatures?" demanded Davy.
                One timid voice answered: "Pie!"
                "Pie?" repeated the puzzled whale.
                "Yes, pie," the little voice squeaked. "Any kind of
 pie. . . Few people realize how we hunger for pie.
 how we spend most of our lives hunting for good rasp-
 berry pie. We can smell a pie for miles. We can smell
 pies now. We have hoped and hoped to some day have
 as much pie as we can eat. . . with a piece of cheese,
 if we can get it; but it's perfectly all right without it,
 if we just have pie!" The leading Thunderbug came
 out of his hiding place in the grass and perched on
 the deck-rail, his great eyes filled with a sorrowful
 longing.
                "For pity's sake!" cried Bucky. "I feel sorry for you
 fellows." He looked about and on every side saw hun-
 gry eyes and heard pleading voices plaintively beg-
 ging for pies. So Bucky hurried to the cupboard inside
 the cabin and returned with his arms filled with all
 kinds of pies.
                With an old cutlass, he cut them into quarters and
 passed the pieces around. Each Thunderbug thanked
 Bucky when he received his share and beamed grate-
 fully over a second helping.
                Lowering his voice from the sharp squeal to a
 throaty pitch one very polite bug explained: "I must

 apologize for the rude way we acted," he said, "Frank-
 ly, we are not the frightful fellows old Jack Teapott
 might lead you to think." As he spoke, his soft glow
 returned. "We are only plain fire-flies . . . simple
 lightning bugs if you like, but we do object to being
 shoved and pushed around. And what makes us red-
 hot is to be blown around. That's worse!"
                "Could anyone blame you?" asked Bucky. "I'm sure
 I don't.. . and as for pies. . . you can have all you
 want..." The happy expression on their hungry faces
 Was answer enough. "We have plenty and more than
 plenty to satisfy you all," the boy promised as he re-
 turned to the cabin for the third supply.
                Tom, Dick and Harry let off a warning squawk and
 flew upward from their perch on the rail.
                Wham-smack, back came the Teapott from over the
 hill, bringing with him a tall policeman. Jack was still
 boiling over, with tears and a runny spout, but his
 lid had settled down.
                "Hold these vagrants!" he ordered the policeman.
 "They are a menace... Officer, do your duty!"
                The policeman was a thin safety pin with a large
 copper badge pinned to his front. His legs were made
 of hairpins, and he managed to move about on them
 with extraordinary agility.

                "Consider yourselves pinched," remarked the pin in
 a sleepy voice but looking directly at Bucky.
                "That's only one pin's opinion," answered the boy,
 leaning over the rail and smiling. "Don't you think
 you are Ozuming a little?"
                "Not at .... not at all... it's my duty to guard
 the safety of the community. The High Royal Jack
 Pott tells me you are vagrants and must be perma-
 nently pinned down. Consequently, you are pinched."
                "I'm warning you not to attempt anything like that.
 If you do, we may rip ourselves loose and you'll have a
 lot of rips to look after!" Bucky spoke with a slow
 determination.
                "Perhaps you are right. I'm only pointing out what
 the King commands you to do!" said the copper, rat-
 tling his copper badge and releasing his own safety
 catch. The sharp point of it snapped out straight, like
 the blade of a sword. The policeman stepped forward.
                "I see the point of your jabber now," smiled Bucky,
 "But don't try to badger us with a copper's badge!"
                "Obey me before I fill you full of pin holes, like
 this. . ." the policeman swished the safety pin as he
 rushed forward and sank the pin-point into the wooden
 nose of the whale.
                "Just cool off a little before pushing your point too
 far," advised the boy.

                "Your silly talk makes me so tired," said the pin,
 trying to pull his point out of the board. "I'm tired of
 listening to you and tired of looking at you."
                Bucky spoke with vigor: "That's exactly what I've
 been trying to tell you. . . you are very tired. .. oh,
 so tired that you need a long rest. Don't bother to
 arrest us... you take a rest yourself. Lie quietly down
 and go to sleep. Give yourself a long rest."
                The pin fastened his safety catch: "Promise to be
 very quiet and wait while I am a-resting myself," he
 said rather hesitantly.
                King Teapott burst into a rage: "You pinhead
 snoozer !" he cried. "Why let them put such notions
 into your bent pinhead!"
                "Don't ask me such crack-pot questions," snapped
 the policeman, wearily, folding himself up and sinking
 into a comfortable spot where immediately he fell
 asleep.
                Without another word, the whale began to swim,
 and they left the King fuming and sputtering on the
 bank.
                "Ahoy, old chum," whispered Bucky. "I'm glad that
 copper didn't get his hairpins in my hair. Our sugges-
 tion knocked him off his pins. Okay, Okay!"
                "If your suggestion hadn't, our wind would have,"

 valiantly announced the Flummux. She stopped when
 she recalled that the Thunderbugs might be offended
 at this thought and she burst into the only tune she
 knew, making up the words as she went along:
  
                                "The zip of the breeze
                                That blew from the North
                                Only made the whale sneeze
                                And so forth, and so forth..."
  
                "Excuse me, young lady, that's quite enough of
 that," dryly remarked Davy as he plowed steadily
 ahead.
                Evening fell. A low whirring of wings surrounded
 them, bringing a thousand little lights to guide Davy
 on his course. They were the grateful Thunderbugs
 returning, filled with the hope of another treat of
 more pie.
  
 CHAPTER 15
  
 Slippery Going
  
 THEIR appeal sounded too much like hungry boys
 I begging for bread, so Bucky brought out many
 pies to satisfy them for a while at least.

                The course of the river now led them into a dense
 forest, but as they drifted along, the growth of trees
 was interrupted at intervals by gaps and gorges where
 the bare stone walls of towering mountains crowded
 them on either side.
                The whale was completely covered by the giant
 lightning bugs. Inside the cupboard, Bucky examined
 the supply of pies. Never had he seen so many pies
 stacked up, one on another, doing nothing. All so per-
 feetly baked, so crisp and fragrant----no wonder the
 hungry Thunderbugs came back for more.
                With both arms loaded, Bucky returned to the deck.
 At sight of the generous meal in store for them, the
 fire-flies turned on their brightest lights. Because of
 this brilliance Davy was able to churn ahead through
 the darkness without the slightest hesitation. At first
 he had no suspicion of danger, but at one turn he
 noticed a group of outlaw sorcerers and their helpers
 gathered in some kind of confab. This made him nerv-
 oils, and his shivering threw many of the Thunderbugs
 into the water. They scrambled back again, and Davy
 made no explanation of his terror, not wanting to
 spoil their feasting on his deck where Bucky and the
 Gabooches were handing out pie after pie.
                All through the night, while the bugs ate joyously,

 the big-hearted whale often quivered with alarm,
 scared almost out of his seven senses by the hobgoblin
 fingers that darted from the deep shadows made by
 the overhanging trees. Of all imaginable places for
 travelers to come to harm, this river was the most
 dangerous, for here mountain sorcerers and maraud-
 ing witches hid behind the rocks waiting for their
 victims. Time after time that night a powerful and
 wicked witch was about to seize them, then hesitated
 -and drew back. Before she could muster up enough
 courage to try again, the huge fire-fish had passed
 her hide-out
                The appearance of the wooden whale was indeed
 terrifying as he sped down the dark, sinister river at
 breakneck speed, his whole form a mass of brilliant,
 blinding light. Except for this, the bands of meddle-
 some outlaws who lived on either side of the stream
 would have been quick to stop the adventurers and
 force them into slavery but, even when the ravines
 were so narrow that it took all of Davy's ability to
 pass over the foul rifts and tumbling falls, the hostile
 bands drew back in fear.
                Davy alone realized the creepy hidden danger; he
 alone saw the inquisitive glaring eyes of the huge
 prowling spy-ders waiting in their cobwebs of mys-
 tery. He saw long, protruding noses capped by metal

 hooks get ready to strike and then draw back quickly
 when the flaming light almost blinded the creature.
 Many of them were so filled with terror that all they
 could do was to slink away to their caldrons and ovens.
                Through all this dangerous and terrifying night,
 never once was Davy molested and never did he reveal,
 either by word or look, the anxieties he went through
 during the dark hours.
                The breaking of day found the Gabooches still feed-
 ing the Thunderbugs although most of the cupboards
 were empty now. Even the crumpets were gone; not
 even the hole in a doughnut remained.
                Of course this gave them more closet space and also
 reduced the weight of the cargo, so Bucky encouraged
 the bright bugs to eat all the pies that they could hold.
                "Make a clean job of it; clear up every one. It gives
 us twice the cabin space and Davy sits much lighter on
 the water," he said.
                The sky was filled with a glow of gold. In the distance,
 vast fields of yellow corn could be seen. A quick ex-
 amination of the map in the lining of the pirate's coat
 showed them that they were deep in the land of the
 Winkies.
                "Thank goodness we are out of those merciless
 woods," chirped the Flummux.

                "Couldn't you and your brothers blow down a
 witch?" asked Davy, teasingly.
                "Never had a good chance," she answered, blithely,
 "but I would gladly try, any day."
                Davy didn't say a word, but he skimmed lightly over
 the river, putting every ounce of his strength toward
 hastening the day when they would reach the safety
 and happiness awaiting them in the Emerald City.
                Every impatient snap of his tail sent them humming
 along. Presently he had reached his utmost speed and
 everyone aboard was thrilled to travel so fast, then-
 slap-bang-more trouble.
                Same old trick---no water in the river. Though the
 water was gone, Davy continued to slide along the
 river bed at the same terrific speed. Strangely enough,
 he kept on sliding.
                With the first shock, all the Thunderbugs flew away,
 some carrying pies under their arms.
                Davy was becoming accustomed to these sudden
 changes and always tried to make the best of them.
 But this time, he was naturally puzzled for instead of
 slowing up as he had always done before, now he was
 going faster and faster. He slipped from side to side,
 often nearly turning over and it takes a lot of speed
 to turn a whale over. Determination was written
 plainly on his broad face as he rocked and rolled over

 a surface as smooth as glass and as oily as the ocean
 before a storm. Darting down slippery rolling gulleys,
 Davy tottered and teetered over long stretches of
 space. The slightest turn unbalanced him, so rapid
 was the pace, but each time he managed to settle back
 on a level keel.
                Bucky, speechless with surprise when the first
 stretch hurled them along, had all he could do to keep
 from being thrown off the deck. Recovering his breath
 at last, he gasped out the one word: "Soap!"
                At the moment of his discovery, they were bounding
 through a slazy ravine, shut in on either side by steep
 cliffs of soap stone. The odor was strong and irritat-
 ing, especially that of dog soap and laundry soap. The
 toilet soap was not quite so disagreeable. Splashing
 through pools of soft soap, they became coated from
 head to foot with the slimy white substance.
 "Oh, for a nice river to wash away this stuff . .
 wailed Bucky, trying to wipe the soap from his eyes.
 "I wonder where we can find one? We need it badly."
                "Don't ask me?" replied Davy, using every way
 within his power to check his mad rush. "All I know is
 that we're in Slippery Dick's land. It's plainly marked
 on the map!!"
                Sure enough. They knew the map was correct when

 they bumped into a sign which read:
  
                                                GREASED RACE TRACK
                                                               Keep Off
  
                Beside the post stood Dick himself holding a stop-
 watch in his hand and giving it all of his attention.
                "You did it, by heliotrope!! You broke the record."
 A broad grin spread across his roughly modelled
 soap face. He was elated and seemed about to break
 into a lather of suds.
                "Get into the stable and dry off," Dick called out to
 the whale as he himself marched stiffly up a path that
 ran between rows of soap flowers to a castle made of
 various colors of Castile soap.
                Davy was making vain efforts to climb over a hill
 so that they might continue their journey. But he
 found it so slippery that he failed hopelessly every
 time he made an attempt.
                "Oh, for a river!" cried Bucky again.
 "Please, Mr. Jones, let us find one for you," volun-
 teered the Flummux and, with her brothers, she flew
 off toward the west where distant yellow hills were
 visible beyond the pathless waste.
                Bucky looked uneasily around the hollow valley of
 waste where they were trapped.

                "It's plain to be seen that we must not linger here
 very long," he said. "You may not know it, Davy, but
 I have heard that soap is sometimes made of whale
 oil."
                "Oh, Bosh, Tosh and Blather," exclaimed Davy.
 "And I hear that some people use the stuff for every-
 day purposes. Just imagine me using it. It is ridicu-
 bus. Let's talk about something else."
                "Perhaps we had better talk about the weather,"
 said the boy looking up at the sky where snow clouds
 were gathering.
                Soon a fluffy fall of white began to settle lightly
 about them. Within ten minutes it had developed into
 a young blizzard and a feathery powdered downfall
 had blotted out the sky.
                It piled over them in drifts. Strangly enough, it
 was not cold. Scraping up a handful, Bucky smelled it:
                "Well, I'll be scrunched if it isn't Talcum powder!"
 he exclaimed.
                Davy sniffed... The warm blizzard piled still higher
 and seemed to fall heaviest on the very spot where
 they stood. It came in such masses and so suddenly
 that they scarcely knew where to turn before they
 were blanketed so deeply as to be helpless. By slow
 degrees they were being buried under a fragrant and

 unlimited mass of Talcum.
                "What next?" sputtered Bucky, taking a hurried
 look into the sky. Not a sign of the returning Ga-
 booches. "What's the use," he thought, but changed
 his tune the minute he remembered how close they
 were to the Emerald City where real trouble never
 comes.
                Also, he knew that he had his good luck to fall back
 on. It usually pulled him out of serious places. And
 this storm was getting to be serious.
                "Do you think we will be smothered?" asked Bucky,
 struggling toward the cabin door.
                "Smothered my Grandmother!" snorted the whale
 in a muffled voice as an extra heavy fall of fluff poured
 itself over his head. Bucky fought his way into the
 cabin.
                Once inside, he could breathe freely. He lighted the
 lamp and opened a cupboard door, for he was begin-
 ning to feel hungry. Not one single pie had been left!
                "I hope those Wind Birds find a river before we are
 goners," he said to himself as he jumped into a bunk
 without noticing the bright, wicked eye of old Mombi
 glaring up at him from her hiding place.
  
 CHAPTER 16
  

 In Search of a River
  
 WHILE Bucky slept the Gabooches were flying
 high and low, scouring the country for miles
 around in search of a river.
                Wherever they looked stood endless fields of corn.
 Mile after mile they explored, but at every turn they
 met only disappointment.
                After hours of fruitless search, they espied a tall
 tower standing away off against the horizon.
                Without a moment's delay they made all haste in
 the direction of the tower. If there were no river near,
 at least they could find out where the nearest river
 was. Upon approaching the tower, they found that it
 was built in the shape of an enormous ear of corn.
 It certainly was inhabited for there were windows and
 a front door with a rickety little doorstep.
                "Surely somebody is home, for smoke is coming out
 of the chimney," said the Flummux as she dropped
 down quietly in the garden and ran around to the
 front door.
                As she passed an open window she heard voices
 inside the room. She knocked softly on the door and
 waited.
                She didn't have long to wait before the door swung

 open so suddenly that it fell off its hinges and lay on
 the floor inside.
                "Come right in," invited the cheerful voice of a per-
 son whose unusual appearance rather startled the
 Flummux. She hesitated a fraction of a second, then
 stepped inside without taking her eyes off the man
 whose smile soon put her at ease.
                His head was made of a sack of meal with features
 painted on it, giving a fascinating expression to his
 face. His voice and manner were full of kindly wel-
 come. A soft crackling sound like the ends of bits of
 straw rubbing together came with each move that he
 ....... And. . "Bless my soul!" thought the little
 Gabooch when she saw that he really was stuffed with
 straw.
                Another man was sitting on a bag of corn, a man
 made entirely of tin. He, too, had a cordial smile on
 his face as he turned toward the girl and put aside
 an oil can which he was using to oil his joints.
                The straw man bowed with great dignity.
                "Could anything be nicer than a visit from a bright
 young person on such a bright mornimg?" he asked
 as he pushed the straw back into place on his left side
 where it had been bulging out between the buttons
 of his faded blue coat.
                He looked for all the world like a scarecrow, loosely

 jointed in a baggy suit of clothes held together with
 bits of rope and string. Indeed he was a scarecrow
 but with the manners of an emperor.
                In fact, he was both an Emperor and a Scarecrow.
 Though somewhat a little out of the ordinary, his
 friend the Tinman had every mark of a highly polished
 gentleman.
                With a winning smile, the Scarecrow tilted his head
 to one side: "Now then . . ." he began and waited for
 the Flummux to speak.
                "Thanks... oh, thanks a lot. I dropped in to find
 out if you can direct me to the nearest river," wheezed
 the girl, working her bellows in nervous jerks.
                The Tinman dropped his oil can in amazement and
 stared. The Scarecrow shuddered as he spoke:
                "As near as I can gather from what you say, I sup-
 pose. . . at least, I suspect, you want to take a bath!
 Now, don't misunderstand me, you really do not look
 as if you needed a bath. So let's forget about a river.
 They are such awful nuisances, don't you think so,
 Nick?'' he added, turning to his friend.
                For answer, the friend shuddered again with a great
 rattle.
                The Scarecrow continued: "We have had so much
 trouble with rivers in the past, we asked the Great Wiz-

 ard of Oz to remove them from our Kingdoms." He
 placed his hand affectionately on the Tinman's shoul-
 der. "Remember what trouble we had when the Land
 of the Winkies was filled with so many rivers? Day
 after day we were troubled with rivers and the witches
 and Jinkijinks that used to pull us into the water.
                "One day you were lying helpless with your precious
 joints rusting in the bed of some river and I searched
 until I found you. The next day it would be I who was
 lying soggy and helpless in a dismal depth from which
 you saved me and kindly carried me home on your
 back. It took three days to dry me out and make an
 Emperor of me again. Long days of dampness and
 sorrow."
                At this point, the tender-hearted Flummux began
 to sniffle and to slap her wings. "What shall we do?
 What shall we do?" she kept repeating, "after big Mr.
 Jones and little Mr. Jones have been so kind to us...
 oh, stop and consider them... I cannot let them perish
 ... Something must be done... Something..."
                "My dear young friend," softly interrupted the Tin-
 man. "Say no more; your words grieve me more than
 my tender heart can stand. Perhaps a way can be
 found to save these friends who are in danger. My
 friend and I are rulers of this land. I have only a
 heart of gold. He has the superior brain. Together

 we surely will find a way out."
                The Scarecrow pressed his brains into shape with
 his clumsy hands. His eyes took on an intent look.
                "Just a moment!" he began, "I seem to remember
 now. . . there used to be a river that flowed close to
 the back of the house...
                "You're right. I remember that river," added the
 Tinman eagerly. "It was a beautiful river in a way,
 but it caused us no end of trouble. So, we had the
 authorities remove them all except a few that were
 left far outside. But they have limited permits and
 are allowed to flow only short distances."
                The Flummux said cautiously, lest she interrupt the
 line of thought: "That accounts for the sudden ending
 of these rivers!"
                "It most certainly does . . ." replied the Tinman.
                "Now that I come to think of it," the Scarecrow
 continued, dreamily. "The Wizard rolled it up and
 put our river under the back cellar door, didn't he?"
                "What a brain you have! What a memory!!" ex-
 claimed the Tinman clasping the Scarecrow's hand.
                They all hurried to the rear of the corn castle, and
 when they lifted the cellar door, sure enough, there
 lay a beautiful river, all rolled up and ready for use.
                "Just as good as the day it was put there," said the

 kindhearted Tinman. "My friend has not only the
 most obliging nature but a helping hand as well."
                "Lovely! Lovely! Lovely!" whistled the Flum-
 mux through her brass nozzle. "Now everything will
 be perfectly lovely!"
                "I am quite sure we can lend you our river just long
 enough to relieve your friends in distress." The Scare-
 crow made this offer with a gracious wave of his cotton
 hand. "Bring it back when you are through with it and
 put it under the door."
                "Thanks for all your kindness. Now the big whale
 and Mr. Bucky will get safely to the Emerald City,"
 said the Flummux and, being very polite, she at-
 tempted to curtsy.
                "The what!" screamed the Scarecrow and the Tin-
 man together, in great alarm. "We can't permit a big
 whale in the Emerald City. There's no place for such
 an enormous fish. Will he want the rivers back again?
 Where will he stay if he doesn't have a river? What
 will Ozma think of such a calamity?"
                "That really doesn't matter," replied the excited
 girl as she and her three brothers streaked back to
 Bucky and Davy in Soap Hollow, with the borrowed
 river following close at their heels.
                Both Nick Chopper and the Scarecrow sank down
 on bags of corn. They looked worried but said nothing.

 There was nothing to be said.
  
 CHAPTER 17
  
 Scarecrow Entertains
  
 AS far as the Gabooches could see, a dreary blanket
 of snow covered the valley where they had left
 their friends. But almost immediately they discovered
 a decided hump on the spot from which they had taken
 off. It had the definite shape of a whale.
                                Blowing their heaviest blasts of wind they cleared
 away the drifts of white fluff, disclosing the large in-
 telligent eye of Davy. It gave them an encouraging
 wink as they continued to dig with their heaviest gale
 and in a short time they had freed the buried whale,
 who came out fit as a fiddle and ready to start.
                Next a path to the river was cleared by the blasts
 of the four delighted Gabooches and the adventurers
 were on their way, with a clear run ahead to the corn-
 castle the Tin Emperor had built for the Scarecrow.
                The lookout located the tall residence of the famous
 friends and not long after that, it loomed majesti-
 cally before them. It was evident to Davy that he was
 approaching friendly territory and his hopes revived

 when the guiding Gabooches stopped him under the
 shadow of the imposing building.
                With a loud clatter the front door was pushed open.
 Out rushed the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman to
 welcome them and see what sort of visitors were at
 their door.
                There was no need to introduce these two good fel-
 lows to the whale. He knew them. The fame of these
 celebrated characters had spread to the far corners of
 the land. To really see them with his own eyes and
 hear them speak filled Davy with awe. The wonder
 of it all so impressed the great kind fish that he could
 not find words with which to answer when the Scare-
 crow stumbled in the doorway and would have fallen
 if the Tinman had not caught him in time.
                Still smiling the Strawman regained his feet and
 spoke cordially:
                "It is always an honor to welcome new friends. As
 spokesman for the Tin Woodman here, my friend and
 the Emperor of this fair land of Winkies I offer warm
 hospitality. So, feel that you are among friends." He
 turned to include his tin companion: "You will agree
 that strangers are always welcome here, even the
 strangest."
                Davy tried again to answer, but his feelings choked
 his words and he could only gulp: "C-C-Come aboard."

                "Certainly, certainly," replied the two popular he-
 roes in concert. Assisted by Tom, Dick and Harry
 they came aboard to examine the strange craft.
                The Ilummux spoke up: "I have been telling Mr.
 Davy how perfectly lovely you were to lend us your
 river. Just fancy poor Mr. Davy having to squirm his
 way across that long distance."
                Davy also thanked them for their welcome and the
 loan of the river: "Come inside and see our comfort-
 able cabin," he added as the Flummux opened the door.
                The two celebrities wandered into the interior of
 the whale, eager and pleased with this new experience
 and interested in all the handy appliances that were
 provided in Davy's interior.
                The sound of voices and the daylight shining
 through the open door roused the sleeping Bucky.
 With a start, he sat up in bed and rubbed his eyes.
 Two astonishing faces were smiling at him. They held
 friendly expressions so he said: "Good-morning," as
 he slid to the floor.
                "All Oz mornings are good mornings," heartily re-
 plied Nickchopper as he examined the wooden beams
 that supported the framework of the whale. "Quite a
 snug place you have here," he remarked.
                "It certainly is," added the Scarecrow. "We must

 ask Ozma and all the good folks in the Emerald City
 to call on you to see your attractive home."
                "Do you really think they would come here to visit
 us?" Bucky asked in an awed whisper.
                "Leave it to me," responded the Strawman with a
 grand gesture. "I will attend to all the details. With
 a good lunch and a cool breeze thrown in, I know they
 would enjoy it."
                Having examined every nook and cranny of the
 cabin, but not looking carefully under the bunk, where
 old Mombi crouched without making a sound, far out
 of sight, the visitors returned to the deck and Bucky
 passed his hand affectionately over Davy's wooden
 nose which was scratched and discolored by the soap.
 The whale turned his eyes downward on his guests,
 then, overcoming his bashfulness, he inquired:
                "How far is the Emerald City from here?"
                "Nick and I have walked it in two days. I suppose
 the young lady could fly there in sixteen minutes,"
 answered the Scarecrow, turning to the Flummux.
 "But just how long it would take to .....swim........
 that's another question I cannot answer... as I have
 never learned to swim. It all depends on how fast a
 swimmer you are."
                "Davy is the fastest swimmer I ever saw," said
 Bucky with pride as he reached up and wiped the soap

 from the whale's eyes. "He's a champion swimmer
 and what he has been through in the last few days
 shows he can stand the racket." And Bucky told
 briefly of their adventures.
                The Tin Woodman and the Strawman were first
 thrilled and then alarmed by the tale. But, with the
 final escape of the adventurers to the corncastle and
 safety, they all breathed more freely.
                "I wish I had time to tell you of some of our ad-
 ventures," said the Scarecrow. "I know that you are
 anxious to run along but before you go, I would like
 you to come inside and see the castle Nick built for
 me to use while visiting him if you've a few minutes
 to spare. From the top of the tower there is a mag-
 nificent view. You can see the Emerald City very
 plainly."
                The invitation was readily accepted and Bucky
 climbed twenty flights of stairs to the lookout. Indeed,
 the view was magnificent.
                To the west the bright green domes of Ozma's palace
 glistened in the afternoon sun.
                "Ahoy, Davy!" he called to the whale below. "We
 ought to get there tomorrow !"
                Standing between the Scarecrow and the Tin Wood-
 man, Bucky had pointed out to him the purple lands

 of the Gillikins to the north and the Quadlings' red
 lands to the south. Far in the distance, beyond the
 Emerald City, lay the blue lands of the Munchkins,
 where the Scarecrow was Emperor. Every detail of
 this information was shouted down to the whale.
                Bucky was now convinced that the splendors of the
 great Land of Oz were true and not fantastic tales.
 Every good thing about the land was related patri-
 otically by the Emperor of the Winkies and his com-
 panion. The great corncastle in which they lived was
 proof enough that the whole life of the city of Ozma
 and her possessions was managed with generosity and
 understanding.
                "This castle of Nick's is a place any emperor should
 be proud of. Don't you think so?" asked the Scare-
 crow.
                "Proud indeed!" agreed Bucky.
                "Some day I must show you through the tin towers
 of my metal palace," the Tin Woodman suggested.
                Resting on the bosom of the river, Davy's content-
 ment was changing into a restlessness to be off. The
 wind birds were darting about impatiently, encircling
 the tower where they could cast sidelong glances at
 Bucky and then retreating toward the whale. They
 were too polite to be outspoken to Bucky but he got
 the hint they were trying to give him. He turned with

 his hosts and left the platform of the tower to descend
 the stairs.
                Suddenly the Tinman leaped into the air: "Be care-
 ful, old chum!" he warned, but he spoke too late.
                Catching his foot in a coil of wire, the Scarecrow
 slipped on the top step and plunged headlong down
 twelve flights of stairs.
                Bucky hurried down after him, expecting to find the
 hapless Emperor mashed into nothing or torn into
 shreds. Instead he came upon him smiling and patting
 his head again into shape.
                "I hope you didn't hurt yourself with that awful
 fall," cried Bucky solicitously.
                "What do you mean? Awful fall? I always come
 down stairs that way. It saves time and it's lots of fun.
 Try it some day."
                Whatever Bucky thought he kept to himself as he
 helped the Emperor to his feet and waited until Nick-
 chopper descended the stairs. They went out together
 to the wooden whale.
                "I do hope you will excuse my battered and splat-
 tered appearance," said Davy. "I forgot to mention
 it before."
                "Don't give it a thought," replied the Scarecrow
 cheerfully, for he himself was covered with dust. "The

 Wizard will fix you up in jig time. He'll give you a
 whole new polish, may even change your color. In
 fact, he could make you even smaller-say about four
 or five inches long. You could live comfortably in a
 glass bowl on the Queen's dining-table."
                "To live in a glass bowl is not exactly what I had
 expected," said Davy with a stiff nod of his ponderous
 head. "Even the thought of such a fate shivers all my
 timbers. I could never think of it--never!"
                The Tinman saw instantly that a mistake had been
 made. He spoke quickly. "Don't worry about such a
 thing happening," he said. "I know that the Wizard
 would never meddle with anyone's appearance with-
 out first getting his consent. Put yourself entirely at
 ease and remember that you are among good friends
 in Oz."
                "Everything grows more wonderful as we come
 closer," Davy answered. "Some of the things are still
 unbelievable. Many of the people outside are not such
 good fellows as you two are."
                The Scarecrow, anxious to make up for his error,
 joined in the conversation: "That's too bad," he re-
 marked. "As near as I can gather you've had a hard
 time making the trip, but the end is worth all the trials.
 We, too, had difficulties with the outlaws. Now we
 know where they are so we avoid their wild haunts."

                "Thanks to our lucky stars and a good crew we have
 come through with only a few scratches and smears,
 and these can be repaired," the whale said cheerfully.
                "With a little magic, the authorities in the city will
 polish you up in no time," the Tin Woodman replied.
 "I wouldn't be surprised if they could fix you up better
 than you were before. They will make a new whale
 of you. Now, don't worry, for you have better things
 to look forward to."
                "All my life I have been looking forward to this
 visit to Oz," Davy said eagerly. "We have come a long
 way by land and river. Many of your rivers were not
 so friendly. Perhaps I had expected too much from
 them. But all that's passed and I am indeed happy to
 have come as far as we are."
                "Since we are speaking of rivers-" interrupted the
 Scarecrow. "I will repeat what I have already told
 your flying friends... This kingdom was once overrun
 with mischievous rivers, so we had them removed.
 You may wonder why, when they are such convenient
 things. They didn't know how to behave themselves.
 They brought troublesome witches from the moun-
 tains, and these nuisances became so frisky that we
 couldn't walk through our own kingdom without be-
 ing pushed or dragged into the water. Can you imag-

 ine such a state of affairs?"
                The Flummux was indignant: "If I had been here
 I would have fixed them for you," she cried.
                "That's very loyal of you," replied the Scarecrow,
 "But I appealed to the Wizard. I recall his very words
 as he rolled back the rivers. 'Humgumption!' was
 what he said. Since then we have had no trouble. Now,
 wasn't that a splendid thing for him to do? No one
 is so wise nor powerful as the Wizard. He is simply
 wonderful and can always find the way out of a bad
 situation. 'Old pal,' he said to me, 'some day you may
 need a little river, and what do you say to my leaving
 one rolled up with a rubber band to hold it together,
 and you keep it under the cellar door.' I ask you, Mr.
 Jones, was ever a friend so thoughtful? There it lay
 until we needed it for you!"
 "I'll say it was thoughtful," said Bucky.
                "I do hope my river behaves itself properly," added
 the Emperor of the Munchkins.
                "I've never had any confidence in rivers," the Tin-
 man remarked. "You might allow me to suggest that
 you put the river back and get the Wizard to make
 you a set of strong tin wheels."
                He had spoken direct to the whale and Davy's reply
 was just a look of disapproval. Noticing this disap-
 pointment, Nickchopper added: "Now that I come to

 think of it, that isn't a practicable idea for many of
 the streets in the city are so narrow, and I doubt if
 you could even get through the castle gate."
                "Had you thought of Lake Quad, Nicky?" asked the
 Scarecrow. "That's only two miles south of the city.
 It's large and just the place to run the river into."
 "Excellent! Your fine brain is working well today
 I don't see how you do it; it's remarkable," said
 the Tin Woodman.
 "Oh, so-so. . ." carelessly remarked the Scarecrow
 pushing his brains into place before he put his hat on
 his head.
                As he lifted his hat to put it on, it zinged out of his
 hands with a humming sound.
                Again came the hum and one of the Gabooches was
 jerked overboard.
                "Robbers! Witches!" warned Nick, springing to his
 feet and swinging his sharp axe. There came a sharper
 zing and the Tinman cut through a long extended rub-
 ber band that recoiled with a snap and lay on the
 ground beside the cellar door.
                "Now tell me what did you go and do that for?"
 wailed the sad voice of the rubber band. "You have
 taken all the snap out of me-with all my bounce and
 stretch gone-what shall I do when you bring the river

 back? With my gumption gone, I will not be able to
 hold the river together!"
                "It's entirely your own fault, trying to act like a
 robber band. Thought it would be snappy, didn't you!"
 cried the Tinman. "You ought to be ashamed! You'll
 never do it again!"
                Bucky listened in bewilderment to this amazing con-
 versation. "Will the wonders never cease?" he asked
 himself.
                The Tinman took the Scarecrow to one side.
                "It's just as we expected," announced the Strawman
 returning to the group. "The river is not to be trusted.
 We would never forgive ourselves if anything hap-
 pened to you fine fellows while sailing on our river."
                "We have sailed worse rivers than this one and Davy
 lived through the racket," said Bucky with a great
 show of confidence.
                "I'm afraid he couldn't weather this one," the Scare-
 crow replied, "unless we go along to protect you."
                This suggestion met with instant approval. Two
 comfortable beach chairs were hauled from the cabin
 and placed on the flat part of the head of the wooden
 whale for the comfort of the distinguished passengers.
                Cushions and footstools were provided. Nicky and
 the Strawman settled themselves to tell tales of their
 own adventures. Their listeners grouped themselves

 about, fascinated by the narrative.
                Davy swished his tail and speeded up a little and the
 next lap of the journey was begun.
                Quite unexpectedly, they found themselves entering
 a well-cared-for stretch of lawn. On it was set a neat
 sign bearing the notice
  
 WISE ACRES
 COUNTRY CLUB
  
 CHAPTER 18
  
 The Uncles
                THERE was nothing out of the ordinary about the
  place except its neatness. A long, low clubhouse
 faced the river. As the whale came abreast of the build-
 ing a hundred or more comfortably fat club men hur-
 ried down to the river-edge in great excitement.
                "What in the name of all green grass do you mean
 by running a sloppy river through our grounds?" de-
 manded one very stout fellow.
                "It's the shortest and most convenient way home,"
 condescended the Scarecrow, without the slightest
 hesitation.
                "So?" snapped the clubman.

                "So what?" asked the Emperor, not in the least dis-
 turbed.
                "So you think you can run a cock-eyed river through
 our Kingdom of Uncles without permission, do you?"
                "Yes . . . once in a while," calmly responded the
 Scarecrow.
                "Then you will find yourself answerable to Uncle
 Bill--that's me--Chairman of the Club."
                "Have a chair then," and the Scarecrow threw his
 deck chair to Uncle Bill who sat down pointing one
 fat finger at the Emperor demanding:
                "Are you an Uncle?"
                Without waiting for a reply he pointed another fat
 finger at the Tinman and repeated the question.
                "That is the first rule of the Club," chirped up an-
 other fat man. "I'm Uncle George."
                "Pleased to meet you, Uncle George."
                "Ask any member here. . . Uncle Jim, Uncle Joe,
 Uncle Charlie or Uncle Bob. Ask any of them...
                At this moment a very dignified uncle walked
 across the lawn. He was tall, not fat like the others,
 and had a tuft of whiskers on the end of his chin.
                "Here's the president of the club. Ask him. He'll
 tell you where you get off. How about it, Uncle Sam?"
                "Calm down," said Sam in a quiet tone of voice as
 he looked at the many angry members. "Don't be

 uneasy."
                While the others argued, the Tin Woodman arose.
 Giving a slight tilt to his head, he bowed: "Since you
 have asked me, I will answer Yes, I am an uncle.
 I had six nieces, years ago. They all married Tin-
 smiths. I am your Uncle Nick, if that will ease the
 situation." The uncles applauded to a man.
                "What about the others?" insisted Uncle Fred. "That
 boy, for instance. He's no uncle... throw him out."
                Bucky stepped forward: "I know I am no uncle," he
 said. "I'm only a nephew-but-That's my Own
 Uncle right there!!" raising his voice, he insisted:
 "I'd know him anywhere!" and he ran toward Uncle
 Sam with his hands outstretched.
                "He is quite right," soothed Uncle Sam, putting an
 arm around the shoulders of the boy.
                Bucky held tightly to the hand of the distinguished
 man and looked up into his face.
                "I knew you were my Uncle Sam as soon as I saw
 you. And am I glad to see you! Oh, boy, Oh, boy...!"
                The other uncles insisted that the Scarecrow be
 thrown out. Uncle Pete started to take hold of him.
                "Stand back," commanded the Scarecrow springing
 up.
                Loosening the buttons of his coat he thrust his hand

 inside the stuffing of crisp straw that gave shape to
 his body and drew out a hidden golden crown.
                This he placed on his head. His painted eyes flashed
 as he began to speak:
                "As a rule, uncles are an intelligent lot. I hope you
 use your intelligence, and, as Emperor of the Land
 of the Munchkins, I command all uncles to use the
 sense that goes with that intelligence." Having
 spoken his brief message, he sat down.
                "For the land's sake, why didn't you tell us that
 sooner," exclaimed Uncle Ed and Uncle Dick hurrying
 forward to shake the Emperor's hand. "We have heard
 such great things of you and we've always wanted to
 meet you. Come up to our clubhouse as our honored
 guests. You and all your party..."
                "That's very kind of you, my dear Sir, I am sure,
 but at the moment, it can't be done. We are on our
 way to the Emerald City with our friends, who are
 strangers here."
                "On your way to the Emerald City," they all yelled
 together. "Come on now, Emperor, be a good sport.
 We need a vacation." They coaxed, crowding aboard
 the deck. "Take us along with you, please. We have
 never been to the Great Metropolis !"
                "You will have to ask the whale, as he must carry
 you and have all that extra work to do!" replied the

 Scarecrow.
                "Make yourselves at home has always been my mot-
 to," promptly responded the hospitable whale. "Get
 aboard; we have no time to waste." Extending his
 lower jaw to its fullest length, Davy made more room
 on the deck for his guests.
                "To be sure-no time to waste," they agreed and in
 two minutes all the uncles were comfortably packed
 on board the good whale, Davy, who was skimming
 along expectantly toward the great green Capital.
                The jolly uncles covered every foot of space and
 proved themselves delightful guests. Their jokes, rid-
 dles and funny stories amused the whale and the Ga-
 booches. The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman, who
 were both enjoying the trip immensely, were treated
 with the greatest respect.
                Most of Bucky's interest was directed toward his
 Uncle Sam. After he had found a deck chair for his
 hero, he sat down beside the old gentleman with the
 goatee and listened to him talk while the whale forged
 ahead along the smooth river through endless fields
 of corn.
                Poor Davy strained every nerve under the excess
 burden. Resolutely he labored to keep up the pace
 throughout the long afternoon. There was still a long

 pull, with many miles to go, but he did not waver.
 Wearing a look of determination on his wooden face,
 he bravely carried the additional weight. But, in spite
 of his courage, these hours of double duty began to
 tell on the whale's enormous vitality. Considering the
 past days of rough voyaging, the strain of crashing
 through dark, rocky caverns, and the long stretches
 of burning sand over which Davy had dragged his
 weary planks, it was little wonder that he was nearly
 worn out. Beside the journey, the crash from the arc
 of the rainbow had been a terrific jolt that left wide
 cracks and dangerous openings between his timbers.
 So, when at last, late in the afternoon, he slid into Lake
 Quad and into deep water, he could do little more than
 let himself drift.
                Little by little the water first seeped, then gushed,
 through the openings and lay inside. He tried to spout
 it out, but that exertion was more than he could put
 forth.
                He made a frantic effort to turn back to the shallow
 river, or to reach the shore but the attempt came too
 late. Bellowing a warning cry to his passengers, he
 gave one great exhausted sob and began to sink in
 the midst of a swirling foam.
                Overboard went more than a hundred uncles, mak-
 ing a tremendous splash. Davy Jones disappeared.

 Being all good swimmers, the Uncles managed to
 reach land. Uncle Sam swam close to Bucky. Between
 them they held the Scarecrow high above the water
 and succeeded in landing him on shore with only one
 boot damp, which really was remarkable considering
 the nervous state the Emperor was in. Uncle Harry
 and Uncle Joe, who were both strong swimmers, floated
 the Tin Woodman to safety between them. As every
 uncle reached the beach, he stretched out to dry.
                Wearily the wooden whale let himself sink to the
 bottom of the lake, breathing out tired bubbles. "With
 just a few minutes rest, I'll be myself again," he mur-
 mured and closed his eyes.
                But he opened them immediately when, from be-
 neath him, he heard a fretful female voice scolding.
                "Of all the unearthly flippity-flops! Why can't you
 be careful and look where you are going? Isn't the
 lake big enough for you? You don't need to plump
 yourself on top of my head. And don't make excuses!"
                The injured creature was an enormous cat-fish. She
 looked exactly like a cat, had eight legs and called
 herself an octopuss.
                "Can't a respectable Octopuss take a cat-nap any
 more without having her nine lives endangered?" she
 continued to complain.

                Eyes blazing, she attacked the whale with her eight
 paws, pummeling him for all she was worth.
                "I'll show you-" she spat.
                Good-natured Davy let her pummel. He swayed first
 to one side and then to the other under her blows, each
 of which pushed him shoreward. Over his face spread
 a broad grin as he recalled how the funny bones had
 helped him over the waste land.
                Coming face to face with the angry cat, he re-
 marked:
                "You're quite a pushy cat, aren't you?"
                This made her still angrier and she continued to beat
 him harder, fortunately always pushing him toward
 the shore.
                "That will be sufficient," he gurgled as he felt his
 planks scrape on the shallow bottom. "Many thanks,"
 he politely added as he quickly left her and stuck his
 head up out of the water.
                Shouts of welcome greeted him when he emerged
 to join the delighted uncles and modestly take his place
 beside them on the warm, dry sand.
                "I see you got rid of the soap," said Uncle Sam with
 a laugh. He and the Tin Woodman were examining
 the open seams in Davy's sides.
                "Turn over and drain the water out," suggested
 Nickchopper as he measured the damage with his tin

 fingers. "I'll close every leak and make you watertight
 in jig time," he promised.
                At once he began to split a board into long slivers
 with his axe. While examining, with patient thorough-
 ness, every plank outside and in, the Tin Man was
 startled almost out of his wits to see the half-drowned,
 soggy figure of an old witch crawl across the cabin
 floor, with her eyes full of fight and fury.
                Her bony hands clutched at him as he stumbled out
 of the door, and old Mombi was out almost as quick
 as he was. One after another, the astonished uncles
 were bowled over and knocked flat by the sudden as-
 sault of the old troublemaker.
                The Flummux was the first to take in the situation.
 "A witch! A witch!!" she screamed. "Just what I've
 been looking for," and flew straight for Mombi's head,
 blowing her fiercest blast. She was soon joined by her
 three brothers. All the uncles cheered when they saw
 the disagreeable old hag tumbled around in the air
 before she streaked off with the Gabooches after her.
                Fear lent wings to the old fury as she darted beyond
 the reach of the slow-flying Wind Birds. And she did
 not stop until she reached the farthest limits of the
 Land of Oz. Here, over the broad Nonentic Ocean she
 wandered until her eye caught sight of a small volcano,

 and she zoomed down toward it.
  
 CHAPTER 19
  
 Witch Hunt
  
 MEANWHILE, in the Emerald City, Jenny Jump's
 style shop on Strawberry Street immediately
 became the center of interest after her victory in the
 sky. And by the time Ozma's royal Scalawagon ar-
 rived at Jennie's door, the neighboring streets were
 filled with anxious friends.
                In a few brief words the story of Jennie's amazing
 triumph over old Mombi, and the recovery of the
 precious Black Bag, was told to the rulers.
                Ozma drew her pale green silk gown tight over her
 magic belt as she thrilled with interest in the tale.
 Glinda, in a red velvet dress with black trimming, drew
 herself up to her full height and added her words of
 praise to those of the Queen. The Wizard was de-
 lighted with the result of Jennie's dog-fight and ex-
 pressed his thanks for the rescue of his bag. Handing
 the bag to Number Nine, he said:
                "My boy, take this back to the Laboratory, please,
 and hide it behind the Ambassadoor. It was through
 my own carelessness that it ever got away."

                The boy rose from the sidewalk into the air and dis-
 appeared, arriving almost instantly at the dormer win-
 dow in the tower, inside of which stood the dignified
 Ambassadoor.
                All apparent danger was now averted and the Royal
 Party turned and walked briskly to the castle wall,
 followed by a happy band of attendants, sightseers
 and visitors from every part of the Queen's vast
 Kingdom.
                Although the scaffolds had been removed, many
 children were still working at their portrayal of the
 history of the Land of Oz. The air seemed to be filled
 with an undercurrent of excitement, as though some-
 thing were amiss.
                Dorothy, who was managing the exhibition, met the
 Royal Party half-way down Strawberry Street. An
 anxious frown darkened her fair, young face, usually
 so smiling.
                "Please stop!" she cried. "Don't go any farther.
 Old Trickolas Om has escaped from my picture and
 he won't go back. Also; three other witches have es-
 caped beside Old Mombi. We don't know how to get
 them back. It makes me feel creepy to have Old Mombi
 flying around." The rulers listened in silence as Doro-
 thy continued: "Old Trickolas has been trying to get

 Kabumpo's painted elephant off the wall so that he
 can start a revolution. But the painting won't budge
 because it has all the loyalty of good old Kabumpo
 himself."
                The Wizard wiped great beads of perspiration from
 his brow.
                "It is quite evident I have mixed too much magic
 with the paint; the matter looks serious." He spoke
 reflectively, then made a sudden motion through the
 air with his hand.
                Instantly the crowded streets were deserted. Not a
 person was to be seen anywhere. Glinda, Ozma and the
 Wizard alone remained. They came close together and
 moved quickly forward, talking in low tones.
                Next to Old Mombi, Trickolas Om had once been
 their greatest menace, disturbing the peace and quiet
 of the nation by transforming innocent people into
 lost keys and door-knobs, for he knew a few low tricks
 and was a practical joker as well.
                The Wizard knew all of these tricks and was not dis-
 turbed by them when he saw Old Trickolas sauntering
 along the empty street, for had not the Wizard him-
 self whisked the people to safety? The three great
 magicians awaited the approach of the tricky joker.
                "Watch your P's and Q's," warned the Wizard as
 Old Om came face to face with him.

                "Will you lend me your handkerchief?" was the
 trickster's first laughing remark.
                The Wizard handed him a large one made of green
 silk.
                "Now watch this trick closely," said Old Om. "I take
 it and shake it and you see the wave in it."
                Sure enough, a great, green wave surged out of the
 handkerchief.
                Old Trickolas dived into the wave, expecting to es-
 cape by swimming away, but he landed on his head.
                "Harrumph!" snorted the Wizard in disgust.
 "What's so funny about that? I'm afraid you were
 not watching your P's and Q's, Professor-your wave
 had no water in it. I'll wager you forgot your Pints
 and Quarts."
                And before the joker could regain his wicked wits,
 Ozma had sent him back to his place on the wall with
 the aid of her magic belt. She gave directions to Jack
 Pumpkinhead to paint strong chains around his
 ankles.
                "That leaves us with four witches running wild,"
 said Glinda, the red sorceress from whom no witch had
 ever escaped.
                The vacant spaces in the pictures showed just who
 these missing witches were. Aunt Geranium, Little

 Blue Schoola and Plush were gone. And, of course,
 old Mombi, too.
                Glinda continued to speak after a careful examina-
 tion of the wall.
                "Schoola is a blue munchkin, causing plenty of trou-
 ble by breaking shoestrings. A silly thing to do, but
 there are several witches who do silly things. Aunt
 Geranium is invisible as long as a bird is singing.
 Around my castle I have so many birds that at least
 one and sometimes two sing all day long, so none of us
 ever sees her if she is about.
                "While she is invisible, however, she pops a geran-
 ium bud on a Quadling's nose. Quite harmless, you
 might think, but a nuisance. I used to remove as many
 as fifty in a week. It was a bother, sometimes.
                "Number three witch is Plush - not so harmless nor
 so easy to catch if she has a broom. Today she hasn't
 got one. I've already set up protection barriers around
 the city. The houses have all been notified to keep
 their kitchen doors locked and all brooms hidden.
 Chimneys are on the alert to strike all witches down."
                As she finished speaking the great sorceress smiled
 at her Queen. "What next?" she asked.
                "Next, we have to catch them, don't we?" suggested
 Ozma.
                Glinda laughed and pointed up Lemon Lane: "See

 for yourself, my dear. Old Schoola and Aunt Geran-
 ium are coming back. I knew they would."
                "It's no use," cackled Old Schoola, with a glance at
 the shoelaces of the rulers. "Aunt Geranium gives up
 too. We are both here even if you can't see her at this
 minute while that dratted bird keeps squawking. More
 than half the time when I'm with her, I'm talking to
 nothing at all."
                "Come on, Girls," said Glinda gently to the two
 witches. "Go back quietly to your proper places."
 Meekly enough they climbed back.
                'Hi-ho-hum .. ." mused the Wizard much amused
 at Glinda's simple method of catching witches.
                "It's all in knowing how that makes it seem so sim-
 ple, my dear Wizard," smiled Glinda.
                Ozma danced a few fancy steps, exclaiming: "I just
 caught Plush! I placed a broom in a chimney and just
 before she grabbed it, I whizzed her back to her
 picture."
                "You two make quick work of these witches,"
 chuckled the Wizard.
                With another flourish of his hand he brought back
 the surging crowd of people that, a few minutes be-
 fore, he had caused to vanish for their own protection.
 City dwellers, Visitors, Animals, everyone was there.

                "I'm convinced, I did mix too much magic in that
 paint," faltered the little Wizard as he scrutinized Ka-
 bumpo's picture. For the painted elephant had eaten
 the painted hay from the picture for as far around
 him as he could reach with his trunk, leaving a great
 blank space on the wall. To remedy this, the Wizard
 readjusted the paint brushes and Ojo and Kabumpo
 repaired the scene. In many of the pictures the char-
 acters were talking quietly to one another. Others
 were quarreling. An exceptionally good portrait of
 Ozma waved its hand to the real Ozma as she passed
 by.
                Another unexpected situation upset the Wizard.
 Few events in his eventful life equalled his surprise
 when twenty-two important looking Painted Wizards
 of Oz came briskly around the corner. Each one car-
 ried a black bag of magic and each imagined that he
 was the very important person.
                Respectfully the crowd moved aside to let them pass.
 With their heads held high, they marched up to the
 real Wizard and stood before him, striking imposing
 attitudes.
                "The top of the morning to you, me and us!" the
 twenty-two voices announced in chorus.
                The Wizard stared, a little confused by being con-
 fronted by so many duplicates of himself. Ozma and

 Glinda smiled at the odd turn of affairs and stepped
 aside to let their friend manage himself.
                Fortunately not one of the painted wizards resented
 any other painted wizard. They had no memory of
 anything that had happened before they were painted.
 They looked so exactly alike and their voices and ac-
 tions were so similar that it was impossible to tell
 which was the real one with any certainty.
                "Sour molasses!" mumbled the Wizard to himself,
 trying to figure out a plan to reduce twenty-three of
 him to a single one and how to get them back to their
 right places without borrowing Ozma's belt. "Come
 along, all of us," he called when he had made up his
 mind. "We will take a look at the new pictures." And
 off they went.
                From then on it was not difficult to get each straying
 wizard to point out the picture from which he had wan-
 dered. And, simpler still, with a few kind words, to
 persuade him to return to his proper place, then paste
 him back tightly without an argument. A few per-
 suasive words from the wise old Wizard were all that
 was needed to achieve harmony between them. But
 he was very careful to see that the painted wizards
 were securely fastened to the wall.
                "You managed yourself splendidly, you darling old

 Wizard," said the little Queen as they finished the in-
 spection with no more interruption.
                Every child, from the youngest who had helped only
 a little to the principal character artists, received three
 medals apiece, one from Ozma, another from Glinda
 and still another from the Wizard. Following the
 granting of these, everyone in the Emerald City re-
 ceived a present from a large assortment that Ka-
 bumpo carried on his back.
                With the inspection over, the crowd broke up. Peo-
 ple in small groups wandered back to their homes, and
 Ozma, with a party of her most intimate girl friends,
 retired to the Queen's private apartments.
                The Wizard wandered into the royal kitchen to get
 a slice of pepper cheese from the royal refrigerator.
 He had been so busy that he had entirely forgotten to
 eat his lunch.
                The kitchen was empty since all the cooks and palace
 servants had gone out to see the pictures. With a thick
 slice of cheese on special green bread, he sat down at
 a carved crystal table to enjoy his repast in quiet and
 peace.
                From a far closet came a faint rattle, then through
 the open door, an array of brooms stepped forward,
 old brooms and very old broom--whisk and brush
 brooms-forming themselves into a row. One sturdy

 broom advanced and addressed their great sorcerer.
                "Listen, Kind Sir," she began, giving a stiff-backed
 curtsy. "Could you spare the time to listen to a com-
 mittee of honest working brooms?
                "We represent hard labor and we ask your help to
 keep witches from riding us' to destruction. I have
 been hag-ridden until I am but a wreck of my former
 self. Look at me! I'm a pitiful sight, I know, and my
 usefulness as a broom has been practically destroyed."
                "There must be something that can be done," said
 the Wizard with kindness.
                The broom took a deep breath and began again:
 "We are never ones for asking favors from anyone
 but, after I was stolen from a comfortable home by
 old Curly Ah-Ha-Do just to be taken into a mountain
 wilderness and abandoned, I made up my mind I would
 bring the case before the authorities.
                "It took me two years to find my way home. Don't
 you think, Kind Sir, that something ought to be done
 about it? I'm not the only one, indeed I'm not. Now,
 see for yourself. . ." she paused, then called: "Come
 up here, Po! Don't be afraid. Show the gentleman
 your cracked back." An old, broken broom hobbled
 out from the line. "See her! From being hag-ridden
 so much by the Thimble Witch. This witch not only

 rode her but broke her back on a Munchkin farmer's
 head and then left her beside the road to perish.
                "We were all good brooms once, new, and willing
 to work hard. Now, when we are old and broken,
 we are stuck away in corners or behind dark stable
 doors. It's all wrong!"
                The Wizard took a bite of cheese before he an-
 swered. Then, with a smile, he placed his hat on the
 floor and asked the broom if she could jump over it.
                Over she went, landing safely. Spiff! And she was
 a new broom. Poor old Po was the next to hop over
 and she, too, became a new broom. One at a time the
 old brooms followed, leaping the hat, and a long line
 of new brooms ran scampering out of the back door,
 happy and young again, all eager to be gone from the
 castle before the servants returned. Once on the
 street, they scattered in many directions, each hurry-
 ing to her old home, to slip into the closet, ready for
 duty.
                Finding himself alone, the Wizard finished his bread
 and cheese, then darting through the kitchen window,
 he sailed through the air to his high tower.
                On entering the laboratory he found the hall clock
 stretched out fiat on the floor. Number Nine was bend-
 ing over it, trying his best to restore its life. Every
 spark of life seemed to have left it-not a wheel

 moved-nor could the boy get any response when he
 tried to restore the tick. He was so depressed by his
 failure to revive the clock that he did not raise his head
 when he heard the Wizard approaching.
                "Our good old clock is done for-completely knocked
 out," was all he could say.
                "Quite impossible," said the Wizard briefly, but his
 face carried an anxious frown.
                "I've done everything to bring him back to life; I'm
 afraid it's too late. Old Mombi got him. Why should
 she murder an innocent old clock?" remonstrated the
 boy, his voice full of sobs.
                "Hoity-toity, tut-tut-tut-" urgently soothed the lit-
 tle man, rummaging through his pocket until he found
 a peppermint shaker. "It's nothing serious. She may
 have shattered his hopes for a little while; that's all it
 is. Peppermint ought to revive the clock. If you would
 only smile, my boy, that would help a lot." As he spoke
 the Wizard was dusting the face of the clock with
 green peppermint star-dust.
                In a few seconds a slight whirring began inside the
 clock; the hands trembled and very faintly came the
 sound of the clapper touching the bell softly in an at-
 tempt to tell them the hour.
                Flustered with excitement, Number Nine lifted the

 clock to its feet and let it lean heavily against him.
                "What happened?" the boy asked eagerly.
                The clock did not answer at once; when it did, it
 said:
                "Wait until I'm wound, set and regulated. Remem-
 ber that I have very sensitive works." As the Wizard
 turned the crank that started the pendulum, the hands
 wavered for an instant at the figures nine and three;
 then, still a little wobbly, they jerked themselves to
 ten and two. The Wizard nodded his head.
                "As long as you can smile like that, old friend, you'll
 never be knocked out," he said, returning the clock's
 smile. "Now I'd like to see you smile, too," he added,
 turning toward Number Nine.
                "How can I smile, Sir, when I have bungled my job?"
                "You've not bungled as long as you can smile," and
 the happy-go-lucky Wizard burst into a magical laugh,
 the clock struck loudly, and Number Nine couldn't
 resist a broad grin.
                With the Wizard and his assistant seated on a bench,
 the clock told how he had been watching the whale on
 the screen of the tattlescope and saw him sink in the
 waters of Lake Quad and how the Scarecrow and the
 Tin Woodman were washed overboard with a great
 number of other passengers.
                "I had no time to leave the laboratory and warn you

 when I was struck in the back and thrown to the floor
 with such force that all my delicate wheels were jig-
 gled loose. I did, however, have a moment to notice
 the figure of a witch who stared into the screen, then
 laughed wildly . . . but, after that I remember
 nothing."
                "Well done," announced the Wizard. "You'll find
 yourself keeping good time in a day or two. Be a little
 slow about it. I'll take care of the other matter." He
 hurried over to Number Nine. "Anything else of im-
 portance?" he asked.
                "Yes. Plenty of excitement beyond the Winkie
 country. For the last four days I have seen this mon-
 strous whale coming into our land. He is bringing
 with him a young boy who was thrown from a volcano
 that..."
                "A volcano? Where?" cried the Wizard, jumping
 from the bench in consternation.
                "In the pink Nonentic Ocean. And there have been
 disturbances ever since. You can look for yourself,"
 said Number Nine adjusting the tattlescope for his
 master.
                "See if you can find my book of magic charms, while
 I look..." said the Wizard seating himself before the
 tattlescope.

                Number Nine rooted through the black bag. No
 book of magic charms was there; Mombi had probably
 taken it. The Wizard was not alarmed at the news
 because, by a secret method known only to himself,
 he had changed the charms in the stolen book so that
 they worked exactly the opposite way from the way
 they were written. For the moment, the Wizard put
 the loss out of his mind.
                Across the screen he saw the distant volcano come
 into view. There were the little bakers, mixing dough
 and making their pies and doughnuts. Their work was
 interrupted by a black figure that sailed out of the
 sky and settled down on the crater.
                "That's Mombi! Ozma and Glinda must be told of
 this without delay! Good-bye!"
                Just as suddenly as the Wizard vanished from the
 laboratory he appeared before the Queen. Together
 they turned the pages of the royal book of records.
 Without a doubt, Number Nine's report was correct
 in every detail.
                In the Queen's magic picture behind the throne, they
 saw the same volcanic island with the little bakers
 shooting biscuits at Mombi's head as they drove her
 farther and farther up the steep slope of the volcano.
 Then, with a final yell of derision, the old witch dis-
 appeared inside the smoking crater.

                There was but one thing for Ozma and her council-
 lors to do, and they did it without wasting time.
                The Wizard with his black bag, Ozma with her magic
 belt and Glinda with her wishing cap were presently
 seated in a special scalawagon gliding swiftly to the
 distant Nonentic Ocean. The day was clear and every
 mountain top to be seen clearly as they sailed with the
 speed of the wind.
                "Seems like old times," laughed Ozma. "It's been
 a long time since we hunted witches together. I rather
 like it."
                Even the scalawagon beamed with the spirit of ad-
 venture as Glinda pointed out the secret lands of sev-
 eral well-known sorcerers. Over short rivers and
 across pathless wastes of land they soared until they
 reached the pink ocean.
                "Whatever you do, be careful," warned Ozma, as
 they approached the volcano in a spiral dive and
 dropped safely into the crater's mouth.
                Inside the depths, the voice of old Mombi was heard
 giving forth muffled shrieks.
                Climbing to the top of the crater's rim, the biscuit
 shooters leaned over the edge so that they might look
 down and see what on earth was happening.
  

 CHAPTER 20
  
 The Emerald City at Last
  
                LONG before the Scarecrow had his boot in shape
 again, the Uncles were thoroughly dry and "ready
 to put to sea." Nickchopper, completely oiled in every
 joint, was urging Davy to take to the water in order
 to see that no leak was left to sink him again.
                So everyone piled aboard and Davy started to cruise
 lazily around the lake. With the hearty approval of
 Bucky, the passengers elected the Scarecrow as skip
 per for he was familiar with the neighborhood. The
 Tinman crawled around inside the cabin looking for
 leaks, but there were none.
                The Scarecrow stood on the deck, surrounded by a
 hundred admiring uncles, trying to answer all the en-
 thusiastic questions they fired at him about the places
 of interest he was pointing out. So wearing was this
 effort upon his good nature that his brains began to
 sag. Between questions he took time to try to push
 them back into place, but the uncles, usually so consid-
 erate, failed in their excitement to notice his predica-
 ment. Finally the effort proved too exhausting and the
 Scarecrow was forced to turn the navigating over to
 Bucky.

                Uppermost in the minds of Bucky and the uncles
 was the thought of reaching the famous Emerald City.
 And the wooden heart of Davy beat in tune with this
 desire. A mile or two to the north arose the splendor
 of the great city with its domes and minarets gleaming
 under the sunlight. Davy turned his head toward the
 north shore.
                The whale's mind was made up. He knew that he
 could wiggle himself overland from the lake shore to
 the city gate. But the uncles would not listen to such
 a plan: "We will help you all the way," they promised.
 Already several of them had taken off their coats in
 preparation for the long push.
                Following the natural course of the lake, the whale
 swam close to the shore, expecting to run aground.
 Try as he would, he never seemed to reach the beach,
 yet the castle drew closer and closer. Before anyone
 realized it, they were near enough to see watchmen
 running around the top of the upper parapet. They
 could even make out the details of the brightly colored
 pictures on the city walls.
                They were heading straight for this wall! Davy kept
 on sailing.
                "Turn to the right!" yelled Bucky, stamping his
 right foot as hard as he could

                The Scarecrow raised his aching head to see what
 the excitement was about and staggered to his feet
                "Stop! Stop!!" he screamed in agony. "This is sim-
 ply awful!" he moaned, wildly tearing straw from his
 stuffed bosom.
                So thrilled was the whale by the excitement of the
 moment that he did not hear the order, nor feel
 Bucky's stamping foot, and he continued to push on
 his way around the castle wall.
                Overcome by despair, with loose straw dangling
 from every opening of his clothes, the Scarecrow fell
 backward, clutching the empty air with his cotton
 fingers.
                Hearing the commotion on deck, the Tin Woodman
 dashed out of the cabin just in time to see his comrade
 totter. With a bound, he hurried to catch him before
 he hit the deck. But by the time Nick reached the
 Scarecrow it was too late to save him and both old
 friends tumbled over the wooden side of Davy and
 were lost to view.
                The whale, covered with happy uncles, continued on
 his way gaily, encircling the wall. It took them ex-
 actly seven minutes by the great clock in the north
 tower to complete the trip. Not until they had gone
 all the way around, did the voyagers discover that they
 had brought the borrowed river with them.

                And not until the whale came face to face with the
 Emperor and the Woodchopper sitting on the river
 at the exact spot where they had fallen overboard, did
 his facial expression change from pure dellght to one
 of chagrin.
                With all the fantastic run of luck they had had, it
 was almost beyond belief that it should end in such a
 tragedy with the loss of the two good friends who had
 befriended him so gallantly. Davy hurried to the res-
 cue as the uncles made ready to lift the two un-
 fortunates from the river. The whale, conscience
 stricken and filled with remorse, tried to make his voice
 heard above the tumult, but it was impossible for by
 now the city had joined in the clamor. A general alarm
 bellowed and roared, far and wide. Since it was the
 second alarm of the day--a most unheard of state of
 affair--the people came running to the walls. They
 were prepared to repel any invasion; the bellmen
 pealed and the houses leaned backward in terror, pre-
 pared to strike, and strike hard.
                The whale slowed down, gliding over the surface
 of the river toward the lost friends. Bucky, wishing
 ardently to save them, jumped overboard and received
 the greatest shock that he had yet met with in Qz.
 Instead of splashing into water, he bounced over a

 yielding surface and slid to the place where the two
 celebrated favorites were sitting on the top of the
 river, calm and unconcerned. The Tinman, when he
 noticed the look of amazement on the boy's face,
 burst into a tinny laugh.
                "An unlooked for twist in things!" he cried. "Our
 luck has proved itself. A most favorable situation for
 my dear old chum and me. Why, bless my bolts and
 rivets, this water is dry and harmless. It's so light we
 could not sink, even if we wanted to. The Wizard
 always does give us such surprises."
                By this time, the river was filled with uncles slipping
 and sliding over the tough surface. Some ventured to
 step ashore but they were met by such a violent attack
 that they quickly retreated to the river. The Guardian
 of the Gate, swinging a heavy key and the soldier with
 the green whiskers, poking a broken blundergun at
 them, drove the uncles back, while the town crier
 added a dismal note of warning to all the other dis-
 tressing sounds.
                After several vain attempts to get the Scarecrow up
 on his feet, they formed a double line and pushed him
 to shore in a sitting position.
                The battered whale and the spruce uncles were in a
 pretty pickle. Had the beautiful city suddenly gone
 mad? It certainly seemed so, with the Town Crier run-

 ning back and forth, bawling at the top of his voice
 and wringing his hands.
                Bucky helped the Scarecrow push his loose straw
 back into his body, button up his coat, and restore his
 head to its proper shape. This assistance completely
 revived him and he got to his feet with all the grand
 manners of an Emperor.
                When the Guardian identified this distinguished per-
 sonage, he stopped short and summoned his two com-
 panions to his side. Together they stood at attention,
 saluting the Emperor of the Munchkins with all
 deference due his high position.
                At the same moment Number Nine arrived at the
 Scarecrow's side. He had relegated to the tall clock
 the duty of closely following the flight of the Royal
 Scalawagon over the Nonentic Ocean and come to find
 out what the hullabaloo was all about, for, during an
 absence of the Wizard, Number Nine always assumed
 certain duties that carried with them a certain amount
 of influence. He immediately quieted the alarm, and
 this checked the excitement which had been spreading
 dangerously.
                From inside the castle, Royal Visitors and perma-
 nent residents hurried to the edge of the wall, until it
 was crowded with Kings, Queens, Princes, Animals,

 Pretty Girls and Rulers of small countries from far
 and wide.
                Princess Dorothy with her group of close friends,
 ventured down the broad stairway to the level of the
 river and were introduced to all the uncles with whom
 they immediately became very popular.
                Led by the Scarecrow, the Tinwoodman with Trot,
 Betsy, Jellia and Princess Dorothy, followed closely
 by the hundred uncles, all mounted the emerald stair-
 way to the top of the wall. The uncles met many old
 friends and distant relatives among the Kings and
 Queens as they strayed through the elaborate corri-
 dors and great halls of the castle.
                Lucky Bucky had remained quietly with Davy. He
 felt a little shabby in his old clothes that were much
 the worse for wear. His pirate's coat looked frayed and
 dilapidated beside the fine clothes he saw all around
 him.
                His old pal, the whale, was not changed. The same
 quiet twinkle shone in his eye. Bucky laughed up at
 him fondly:
                "You lucky old whopper, you made the grade," he
 said, "here we are at last, right in the center of every-
 thing," and he gave the whale a friendly smack on the
 nose.
                He turned when he heard his name called. The same

 boy who had helped them in the Gnome King's cavern
 stepped onto the deck and waved his hand.
                "I certainly am pleased to meet you fellows again,"
 he said as he shook Bucky's hand. "Sorry I didn't have
 more time to stay before. But you are here now, and
 I want you to feel welcome."
                "And I want to thank you," replied Bucky, "for your
 help when we were among those stubborn Gnomes."
                "I have been watching you for a long time. Both of
 you fine fellows deserve a lot of credit for what you
 have accomplished." Turning to the whale, Number
 Nine laid his two hands on either side of the battered
 face and looked into the honest eyes, asking: "Can
 you spare Lucky Bucky for a few minutes? I . .
                "Certainly, my boy, certainly..."
                Number Nine almost dragged Bucky up Strawberry
 Street in his haste, talking a blue streak until they
 reached Jennie's Style Shop. But, before they opened
 the door, the little Flummux swooped down out of the
 sky and stood before them, her manner one of defiance.
                "Take your hands off Mr. Jones," she snapped in a
 most unladylike tone of voice and, before Number
 Nine could recover from his surprise, she let him have
 a perfectly aimed blast of wind that sent him head
 over heels across the lawn. The three brothers had

 grouped themselves around Bucky with angry nozzles
 pointed toward Number Nine as he scrambled to his
 feet. Tom, the biggest Gabooch, spoke up:
                "We may be plain ordinary Flap Doodles but we
 always protect our friends when we see them taken
 to prison. We have been on guard ever since they ar-
 rived here and will protect them to the last snort!"
                "It's all for the best," laughed Number Nine. "There
 is no prison-and certainly no ill feeling toward such
 loyal friends as you have proven yourselves to be."
 He brushed himself off. "Come, see for yourselves..."
 He opened the door and ushered them into the shop.
 The place was empty. Jenny and her assistants had
 gone to the castle to see the magic new river that en-
 circled the wall.
                Number Nine had no time to waste waiting for her.
 He quickly adjusted several push-buttons on a highly
 glazed turnstyle that stood in the center of the room
 and asked Lucky Bucky to pass through, which he did.
                "There you are! How do you like yourself now?" he
 asked, leading the other boy to a mirror. Bucky was so
 pleased he could not speak. He was now dressed in the
 finest suit of clothes he had ever worn.
                The Flummux was not so speechless: "Now see what
 you can do for me." She coaxed her prettiest.
                Number Nine readjusted the buttons and allowed

 the funny little Gabooch to pass through the style.
                Even the assistant wizard was astonished when she
 reappeared; one of the loveliest little girls he had ever
 seen.
                Tom, Dick and Harry nearly wrecked the turnstyle
 in their wild rush to be put through.
                "Patience, my friends, one at a time," warned Num-
 ber Nine, as three transformed young men came out
 and lifted their little sister in the air with many words
 of heartfelt thanks to their deliverer.
 "Mr. Bucky," called the little sister. "Now what do
 you say? Isn't there plenty of magic in Oz? We were
 real people all the time instead of being just creatures,
 and please don't let me hear anyone call me the 'Flum-
 mux'; I'm Little Sister," she added as they hurried
 back to the whale.
                Davy's face was blank as they came aboard. They
 were all so changed he didn't know them in their fine
 clothes. Bucky laid his head against his cousin's
 scarred cheek.
                "Old chum of mine," he said. "I see we need to be
 introduced all over again. Tom, Dick, Harry and Little
 Sister. We haven't changed. It's only our new clothes."
                "A whale of a place," whispered Davy, his voice sub-
 dued with awe. He cast his eyes to the top of the wall

 above him from which Princess Dorothy leaned, call-
 mg to them to come up.
                The sunny, smiling uncles ran down the emerald
 stairway, carrying a long rope which they attached to
 Davy's body. Then, with everybody pulling he slid up
 the steps without any mishap. The uncles, carried
 away by their whole hearted welcome, never stopped
 pulling until they had the astonished Davy inside the
 castle. They took him right into the throne room.
                Number Nine, Lucky Bucky, Tom, Dick, Harry and
 Little Sister were still clinging to Davy's deck when
 he came to a stop.
                Eager to be friendly, Number Nine introduced them
 all to everybody. And the uncles, who by now had
 been all around, took Little Sister into their care and
 found her to be as quick-witted as she was attractive.
 Dorothy and Trot entertained the three big brothers.
 Suitable apartments were found for them all at the
 end of the crystal corridor.
                Bucky decided that he would stay in the whale's
 cabin. "Davy is kind of bashful and timid," he ex-
 plained to Number Nine.
                "Will it make him feel more comfortable if I stay
 there too?" asked Number Nine. "May I? I've always
 wanted to sleep in a ship's bunk."
                Davy was delighted with the opportunity to welcome

 such a delightful fellow inside when that same fellow
 had made him feel so welcome outside.
                After the livened servants of the castle had served
 an elaborate supper, Number Nine introduced Jenny
 Jump to Bucky and Davy, then excused himself. He
 hurried back to the laboratory to find out what the
 clock had seen during the time he had been away.
  
 CHAPTER 21
  
 Lake Quad
  
 EXACTLY what took place inside the crater hap-
 pened so quickly, it is impossible to tell. Power-
 ful magic, no doubt. Those three rulers made quick
 work of any danger. This was evident when they
 arose from the dark interior of the volcano in such
 a short time.
                                On reaching the outer air they circled twice around
 the crater, then settled comfortably on a pink wave,
 leaving old Mombi inside to screech to her heart's con-
 tent.
                                Scarcely had they landed on the ocean than a low
 grinding sound was heard inside the volcano, and it
 slowly started to shrink-- From the highest peak to

 its base it diminished in size, without splitting or fall-
 ing apart.
                The little bakers were dumbfounded by the sudden
 disturbance that seemed to drop out of the sky. Never
 had one of them supposed such ruin could have hap-
 pened to their solid little volcano. Slowly but surely
 it was crumbling to destruction under their feet.
                As the volcano contracted the bakers huddled
 closer together until there was not enough room to
 hold them all. As the mountain dwindled the baker's
 caps swelled until they were inflated to the size of
 balloons that lifted them off their feet and carried
 them into the air.
                So surprised were they at their swelling headpieces
 they clung desperately together for mutual protec-
 tion, and clasping hands they formed a long chain
 that swayed ip the breeze while their cherished dough-
 main melted away.
                By then, the volcano was reduced to seven feet at
 the base, with Mombi's scowling head sticking out of
 the crater. The old witch had not been reduced in
 size and filled the whole interior of the volcano. It
 was a tight fit. So tight she could not move about.
 This made her angrier than ever and increased her
 scolding.
                "Blast your spectacles," she cackled, every time she

 managed to turn her head far enough to glare at the
 Wizard.
                Other weak maledictions and incantations she
 hurled at Ozma and Glinda when she noticed them
 making passes that lifted the volcano out of the water
 and started it floating toward the Emerald City.
                Rising smoothly and happily up from the ocean the
 royal party started for home. The volcano followed
 the swift gliding scalawagon at a lively speed, with
 all the biscuit shooters tagging along after them in
 an endless string.
                Glinda took a final look at the little bakers, to make
 sure their balloons were working properly, then re-
 moved her wishing cap.
                She folded it over and over until it was small enough
 to slip into a tiny button she wore on her sleeve, and
 turned to the Wizard with a questioning smile.
                Without waiting for her to speak the nimble witted
 sorcerer answered, "Yes, yes, - I know, you are
 wondering what I could want with a dusty smoky old
 volcano?"
                "Exactly."
                "We need it for an ornament."
                "An ornament?" repeated Ozma, very much puz-
 zled. "You do have the strangest notions sometimes,

 you adorable old magic maker."
                "Kindly have patience until I carry out a few no-
 tions I have for this baby volcano," and he chuckled.
 "It might be our best contribution to the city's new
 decoration. Sitting in the middle of Lake Quad it
 would look decoratooting."
                "What earthly use will it be?" insisted Ozma.
                "I might as well tell you," replied the practical Wiz-
 ard. "During the day the Doughboys can use the vol-
 canic ovens to make their delicious pies and doughnuts
 without being tormented with thieving pirates. At
 night we will have fireworks and special illuminations
 that everyone will enjoy."
                "As usual, your ideas are splendid, and I am sure
 such a gift will be something we'll all be proud of."
                Slackening their speed, as they swooped toward the
 Emerald City, they splashed through a dark cloud
 with the volcano close at their heels. Somehow the
 bakers became confused in the mist and floated
 around in straggling disorder until they heard the
 witch's scolding voice and found their way out.
                From the crater's mouth Mombi still croaked, "Blast
 your suspender buttons, shoe laces, belts and buckles.
 Yah! Bust everything, Yah yah yah!"
                Ozma was becoming annoyed, "If you expect to put
 that sour old witch back into Jack Pumpkinhead's

 picture, my dear Councillor, I hope you will find some
 way to curb her loose tongue. We sometimes are-"
 Here she hesitated a moment, then stopped short and
 stared.
                "What's this, what's this?" exclaimed the Wizard
 with a low surprised whistle. "Now isn't that the
 luckiest break? Just what I have been hoping for-a
 place to drop the volcano into while we take old Mombi
 out"
                Looking down, they were all puzzled at a mysterious
 new river flowing close to the castle wall.
                "Please do something to keep that witch quiet, and
 do it quickly," pleaded Ozma, as they splashed into the
 strange river beside the emerald steps.
                "If it's quick action you want, you certainly shall
 have it," said the little Wizard obligingly. At that
 same instant Jack appeared with his magic paint
 brush, and Mombi was transferred to the wall where
 she struggled to break away until Jack had painted
 all her edges tight
                She sputtered with disgust and ground her teeth.
 "Tutty tutty," soothed the Wiaard, turning to the
 Pumpkinhead. "Now see if you can paint out all that
 ill-humor, and make her a little more pleasant."
                "I won't be pleasant, you old humbug," she snarled.

 Without saying a word Jack did what he was told
 and with a few direct brush strokes painted a bright
 sunny smile over her face. It was all done in an in-
 stant.
                "There will be no need to chain her," Glinda as-
 sured them, coming forward. "An angelic expression
 such as Jack has painted clearly shows an amiable
 disposition," and the Red Sorceress held up a magic
 mirror for Mombi to see herself.
                "Look at me! I'm simply irresistible," crooned the
 transformed old girl. "What a gorgeous creature I
 am, she whispered, and begged to have the mirror
 left where she could always see herself.
                "My dearest Glinda, you certainly know how to
 handle witches," said Ozma, as they mounted the steps
 and entered the castle, leaving the Wizard with the
 volcano and all the bakers who were dropping around
 in amazement.
                In the sapphire corridor Glinda and the Queen
 passed eleven well fed uncles. And as they approached
 the emerald throne room they met four more, dressed
 in sport clothes and having the time of their lives.
                Inside the grand throne room were many more
 strangers gathered around an enormous wooden
 whale. He was entertaining them with sailors' tales
 and sea chanties which he sang in a deep bass voice.

                Upon their entrance a respectful silence fell, and
 the Queen mounted the throne. The Hungry Tiger and
 the Cowardly Lion took their places on either side of
 the throne with the Elegant Elephant in the rear.
                With a friendly gesture of welcome the popular
 little Queen turned to Davy. "Please continue your
 singing, Mr. Whale; you have a really appealing
 voice.
                So Davy sang all his songs over again, with a few
 extra pirate ditties that brought roars of applause
 ringing through the vaulted hall.
                Kabumpo felt neglected behind the throne and
 sneezed so loud and so often he finally spoiled Davy's
 singing. Princess Dorothy, who had just heard of the
 Queen's return, ran in sparkling with excitement to
 report to her Majesty all the stirring incidents that
 had happened during her absence.
                "Such an eventful day!" she panted, snuggling
 close beside the Queen on the throne as she presented
 Little Sister and her three brothers, Tom, Dick, and
 Harry, who didn't want it known that they were once
 door knobs.
                Then, uncle after uncle was introduced. Every one
 had a joke or a cheerful word.
                Ozma acknowledged each new subject with a cordial

 bow. Then they all strolled away onto the high ter-
 raced gardens, leaving Davy and Number Nine alone.
                "Now is my chance to slip back into the river where
 I belong," said the whale, and he slid along the halls
 and corridors, then down the grand stairway into the
 magical river where hundreds of Ozians were now
 skating.
                These happy people were used to odd visitors and,
 after the first inspection of the whale, accepted him
 and the river without any more curiosity.
                Lucky Bucky, who had been walking around the
 city arm in arm with the Tinman and Scarecrow, met
 Davy as he started out. They all climbed aboard. The
 crowd cheered as he got under way to reach Lake
 Quad before dark.
                They were joined in their cheering by the Queen's
 party leaning from the high balconies in the castle
 where they had been enjoying the fragrance of the
 flowers and the delicious fruit that hung in clusters
 from the rare fruit trees.
                The Sky in the south suddenly became illuminated
 with a brilliant light. Colored flares blazed; darts and
 rockets burst in the air in a lavish display of fireworks.
 Ozma caught her breath, "My goodness gracious,
 that was quick work."
                The Wizard had kept his promise. The volcano was

 restored to its former size, with all the little biscuit
 shooters returned to their precious ovens.
                On the whale, Number Nine was impatient to make
 his report to the Wizard; he felt responsible for the
 river that had forced its way into the city, although
 he had not invited it. There was no way of getting
 around the fact it was a little out of the ordinary.
 Even in Oz, rivers with dry water that you can't sink
 in are not common. He enjoyed this one himself; but
 how, in the name of mischief, to get rid of it, he didn't
 know.
                Upon entering the lake, he was greatly relieved to
 see the Wizard himself sitting on a lonely rock direct-
 ing the fireworks.
                "Ahoy! your excellency!" hailed Number Nine,
 "I've been looking for you all afternoon. I'd like you
 to meet some new friends," and Davy sailed close to
 the rock and the busy Wizard was safely landed on
 board.
                With the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman adding
 their eloquent approval, Number Nine delivered a
 short report of the eventful trip of Lucky Bucky and
 his huge companion, which he had been observing for
 days. He complimented them on their valor and cour-
 age during the many undertakings that finally

 brought them to the Emerald City. In the incredible
 exploit of passing through the "clutch" in the witches'
 mountains, at night, they had taken chances no Ozian
 would have risked.
                The Scarecrow's eyes rolled around in his funny
 face and his fidgety cotton fingers opened and closed
 nervously, as the sparks fell around him. Seeing his
 tense expression, the Wizard called, "Put your mind
 at ease about the sparks; I have removed all the fire
 from them," and he picked up a handful as proof.
                He then turned to Davy, with a genial chirp, "You
 spry old Whopper, you certainly have livened things
 up around here!"
                "I greatly appreciate your good opinion," answered
 Davy in a humble voice, "but a tub-headed wobble-
 tailed old Flunkus like me-Oh, what use am I, among
 all the grand people around here?"
                "USE?" exploded the Wizard in amazement. "You
 are the very person I have been looking all over for-
 both you and your river. You can solve a most difficult
 problem for me, if you only will."
                "All you have to do is let me know what's bothering
 you, and if a blockhead can help you, I wilL"
                "You see, it's this way. The new bakers are baking
 pies and buns, doughnuts and cookies, and all sorts of
 good things. Early each morning you might deliver

 them to the city. This makes you a person of consid-
 erable importance, as you can readily understand."
                "A little job like that? Why, that's nothing at all.
 And-" wistfully Davy asked, "Is it a permanent
 job?"
                "From now on-Forever," the great man assured
 him.
                Davy was dazed with so much good luck and started
 to stutter his thanks when, just in time to relieve his
 embarrassment, there came a call from a group of
 friends on shore. "YOO HOO !" and all hands turned
 to answer the call.
                Assembled on the beach were many ladies of dis-
 tinction, escorted by all the uncles, and as the space
 was limited, only ladies were asked aboard-Queens,
 Duchesses, Countesses and high ranking girls from
 Ozma's court.
                Ozma and Glinda were given the place of honor on
 Davy's head, and they stayed until the display was
 ended. Then, with many thanks for the popular enter-
 tainment the Wizard had provided, they all returned
 merrily to the city.
                After the ladies had left, the Wizard turned to
 Davy,- "Have you a spare bunk in your cabin for
 me to sleep tonight?"

 "What a question to ask! I most certainly have.
 To have such distinguished guests aboard is so far
 beyond my fondest hopes that they exceed all my hum-
 ble expectation," said Davy, getting his words into
 shape.
                "I'm glad that's settled," said the Queen's advisor
 as they drifted slowly around the volcano where they
 could hear the biscuit shooters, high up on the slopes
 rattling their pans, slamming the oven doors and sing-
 ing-
                                Oz high
                                Oz low
                                Thump and kneed the dough
                                To keep awake
                                We'll bake a cake
                                In our old volcano
  
                Floating dreamily, they sniffed the fragrant odor
 of a thousand pies and all manner of luscious pastry
 that was wafted down the mountain by the breeze.
                The big whale whispered to Bucky, in a tremulous
 voice, "Do you notice any difference in my appear-
 ance?"
                "Now that you mention it, I think I do," and the
 boy passed his hand lightly over Davy's planks in the
 dark. "I'll bet Queen Ozma put a magic touch to your

 battered old boards and restored the enamel. Oh boy,
 what a perfect polish."
                "By the way, Cousin Bucky," inquired the wooden
 whale, "What did you do with that old red coat when
 you got all these fine new clothes?"
                "I clean forget!"
                "If that coat is lost, our map is gone. How will we
 ever find our way out of Oz?"
                "Do you think we will need it sometime?"
                "I won't. The new job I have will keep me here for-
 ever."
                "Perhaps I could get a job helping you."
                "Then you like the place enough to stay here al-
 ways?"
                "Yes, I'm sure I do."
  
 The End

