 
  
  
  
  
  
 TheWonderCityOf Oz – Oz 34
  
 L. Frank Baum
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 CHAPTER 1
  
 How Jenny Lost the Pepper-Cheese
  
 JENNY JUMP jumped. She was so surprised, she

 jumped halfway across the kitchen. She had never
 seen such a sight, never in the whole state of New
 Jersey!
                A tiny man was stealing pepper-cheese out of the
 cheese box! He was standing right on the table, and he
 was no taller than the cheese box.
                Jenny became very angry because she was to have
 that pepper-cheese for supper.
                "Don't do that," she cried.
                The little man turned, and Jenny was startled again.
 The man was a Leprechaun! She knew right away he
 was one of the Irish fairy folk because he had bushy
 red whiskers, a green coat, and an old hat with a white
 owl's feather stuck in it. The red whiskers were as
 bushy as a porcupine. He held the whole pepper-
 cheese against him, and it was almost as big as he was.
                The little man looked at Jenny, and she stared back,
 remembering that a Leprechaun can't get away as
 long as you keep your eyes fixed on him but if you as
 much as blink, he'll get away. A Leprechaun will
 grant you any wish while your eyes have him in your
 power.
                Jenny stared and stared, until her eyes began to
 hurt. She dared not blink, for if she did the Lepre-
 chaun would be free to run away, and she would not
 get her wish. Jenny thought hard and fast, trying to

 decide what she wanted. Most of all, she wanted the
 pepper-cheese for supper.
                "Drop the pepper-cheese," she ordered. The cheese
 fell to the table.
                Jenny's eyes hurt more and more from looking so
 hard, but she would not blink until she had made the
 Leprechaun give her everything she wanted.
                "Make me into a fairy," she said, staring at him.
 The strangest things began to happen. Her toes on
 one foot began to tingle and want to dance. First one
 finger felt that it was tinkling like a silver bell, then
 another finger, and then another. Both of her ears
 were full of wonderful music, and she could hear the
 chairs talking to each other. One eye changed and
 saw everything with new and more beautiful colors.
 Even the old kitchen wall became as bright as a rain-
 bow. She felt like the song of an oriole, and the mur-
 muring of leaves. She felt as if everything were
 beautiful and happy. She knew that she was being
 turned into a real fairy.
                Then a terrible thing happened: Jenny's left eye,
 the one that wasn't a fairy eye, blinked.
                Instantly the Leprechaun ran across the table and
 leaped to the window.
                "Stop, stop !" Jenny screamed.

                The Leprechaun stood on the window sill, but he did
 not lift his eyes to Jenny's face.
                "Shure, and what d'ye want?" he asked with his
 Irish brogue. His voice was as gruff as an old bull
 frog's.
                "Make me into a full fairy. I'm half girl and half
 fairy now. Only one eye is a fairy eye, and one foot;
 eight of my fingers are fairy fingers, and both of my
 ears. But I want to be all fairy."
                "I'll not be doin' it. 'Twill only get ye into trouble,"
 the Leprechaun said roughly.
                Jenny became so angry, she jumped. She jumped
 so high that she was headed right for the ceiling. She
 would have jumped clear through it, if she had not
 thrown up her hands and stopped herself. When she
 dropped down to the floor she was so surprised and
 pleased that she forgot to be angry.
                "Did you see that?" she asked.
                The Leprechaun did not answer, but turned to go.
 Jenny was sorry that she had been cross with him.
                "Do you have to go so soon?" she said politely.
 "If you'll stay, you may have all the cheese you want
 -if you only take a little piece."
                The Leprechaun jumped back to the table. He
 stuffed such a big piece of pepper-cheese into his
 mouth that his cheeks bulged wider than his shoul-

 ders. With his mouth full he said, "What may your
 name be?"
                "Jenny Jump," she said.
                "How old be ye, Jenny?"
                "Fifteen," she snapped, growing angry all over
 again. She didn't like the way he kept tearing off
 bits of pepper-cheese, while her share grew smaller.
                "Now, me own name is a long one, for shure." He
 puffed out his chest. "Siko Pompus it is. And it's
 857 years old I am!"
                "Don't eat any more," Jenny commanded. Siko
 Pompus kept eating and eating.
                "My, aren't ye the spitfire, now," he said.
                When Jenny tried to answer, instead of words,
 she was spitting fire. A spark fell on the Lepre-
 chaun's bushy 'red beard. The beard began to flame
 and smoke, and to Jenny's astonishment, it grew
 longer and longer as it burned.
                Siko Pompus jumped up and down and screeched,
 "Git some water git some water! It's a-growin'
 so long, I shan't be able to carry it around."
                The red beard grew and grew while it smoked
 and flamed, until it half filled the kitchen. Jenny
 could no longer see Siko Pompus behind the big,
 red, burning beard.

                "Be throwin' water on it!" Siko Pompus shouted.
 Jenny felt so sorry for the little fellow that she
 forgot to be angry. She ran for a bucket of water
 and splashed it over his beard. The fire went out,
 and the beard lay all over the kitchen floor, like an
 old hair mattress.
                "More water, more water," Siko Pompus cried.
 Jenny fetched a second bucket and threw it over
 the beard. The beard began to shrink. It shrank
 a little way, then stopped.
                "More water, more water," Siko Pompus kept
 ordering. Jenny had to fetch so many buckets that
 her arms ached. And each time the beard shrank a
 little way.
                When the beard was back to its own size, Siko
 Pompus said gruffly, "Next time ye'll be thinkin'
 twice, before losin' your temper."
                Jenny was too tired to be angry again. The little
 man was not through giving advice.
                "Remember, Jenny Jump, that it's half fairy ye
 are now. Ye must not be selfish, vain, and fiery
 tempered. Now, I'll be takin' another piece of cheese
 and go. But I'll come back, sometime!"
                "Just a small piece," Jenny said, watching him
 closely.
                There was hardly any of the cheese left. The

 Leprechaun picked up the whole piece, jumped to
 the window, and sat in the tree outside.
                At that, Jenny was so furious, she stamped her
 fairy foot and bounced right out of the window!
                She stood surprised. "Well, I never took such a
 jump before," she said. "I'll try it again."
                She stamped her foot, sailed over the house and
 came down on the other side.
                "Leaping Leprechauns!" she said. Looking far
 off, she saw the mountain that had stood between
 her and the rest of the world all her life.
                "I wonder if I could jump over that?" she said.
 "First I'll have to dress more warmly." Running into
 the house, she put on a hat and a cape. Then she
 ran out again. She bounced on her fairy foot, and
 next minute she was up, sailing over the pine trees
 on top of the mountain. She dropped to the other
 side.
                "Such wonderful things never happened to me in
 all my lonesome life. I wonder how far I can really
 jump?"
                As she said this, she stamped hard with her fairy
 foot, and the next instant she shot up and away
 through the air.
                Jenny sailed for four days, wondering all the time

 if she would ever land. Just afternoonon the fourth
 day, she looked down and saw a new country. One
 section of it was yellow, one blue, one purple, and
 another red. And right in the center there was a
 green sparkling patch.
                "That looks like a land of enchantment," she said.
 "I can see it with my magic eye, but not with my
 ordinary one. I wish I were down there."
                She felt herself beginning to drop.
  
 CHAPTER 2
  
 The Speck in the Magic Picture
  
 O ZMA was in her dressing room in the palace
 in theEmeraldCityof the enchanted Land of
 Oz of which she is queen. She was being dressed
 by her chief maid-in-waiting, Jellia Jamb. The fair
 young ruler was wearing her most beautiful clothes.
 It was her birthday, and there was to be a parade
 in her honor.
                Outside the palace, all the strange people and
 stranger creatures of Oz had gathered. They stood
 cheering for their Queen and for the parade. Every-
 body in Oz loves parades. The people had come from
 the four states of Oz. The Munchkins came from

 the western blue country, the Gillikins, from the
 northern purple country, the Winkies, from the
 eastern yellow country, and the Quadlings, from
 the land to the south that was bright red.
                The people were colored the same as their coun-
 try, and all their clothes and pets and belongings
 were that color, too. It was easy to tell those who
 lived in the Emerald City, for they were green.
                Ozma was very happy because all was well in her
 land, and her subjects were contented and pros-
 perous.
                "I hope trouble will never come to our fair land,"
 she said to her two friends who were watching her
 get ready. These two girls were Glinda the Good,
 a kindly, red-haired sorceress who ruled in the
 South; and Princess Dorothy, who had blown to
 Oz from Kansas on a cyclone many years ago.
                Jellia Jamb, who stood by with her mouth full
 of golden needles and silver thread, started to an-
 swer without taking the needles out of her mouth.
                "As long as you are Queen, there will be no"
                That was all she was able to say. For as her lips
 and tongue moved, they worked the needles and
 thread in and out and sewed her lips tightly together.
                Ozma turned to her maid. "What were you going

 to say, Jellia?"
                Jellia tried to answer, but the words couldn't get
 out of her mouth. They just kept piling up inside
 her cheeks. The maid got very excited. She did not
 feel any pain, of course, for the needles and thread
 were those she had used to make Ozma's dress, and
 therefore they were enchanted. But when her mouth
 became full of words, Jellia grew more excited.
 The more excited she became, the more she talked.
 And the more she talked, the fuller her mouth
 became.
                She was so frightened that she began to scream.
 And when the scream came into her mouth, her head
 became so full of sound that it lifted her right off
 the floor like a balloon.
                Dorothy ran and pulled the maid down, saying,
 "Help her, dear Ozma. Cut the thread that holds
 her lips together."
                Ozma shook her head. "The silver thread is
 magical, and will not break until I have a new birth-
 day dress made. Don't talk any more, Jellia, or
 your head will get so big, it will explode."
                Dorothy put two heavy emerald book-ends from
 the Queen's table on the maid's feet to hold her
 down.
                Ozma said, "I can't undo the magic of the silver

 thread and the golden needles. But I can open one
 of your ears, so that the words can get out. You
 will have to talk through that ear until my new
 birthday dress is made."
                Jellia nodded. Ozma closed her eyes, put one of
 her hands over Jellia's ear, and said a few magical
 words. Immediately there was a rush of words and
 screams from her ear. The force of them was so
 strong that it pulled out the curtains and blew over
 two trees outside.
                The blue Munchkins, the purple Gillikins, the yel-
 low Winkies, and the red Quadlings around the
 palace danced and shouted, for they thought magic
 was being performed for them.
                Jellia's cheeks snapped together like a rubber band.
 She no longer needed to be weighted down.
                "For cake's sake!" she said out of her ear, "I
 never had such a fright. It's going to be awfully
 hard to chew chicken bones with my ear."
                Ozma smiled. "I'll enchant you so you won't be
 hungry until your lips are free again," she said,
 putting her arm around her little maid. "Now we
 must hurry with my dressing, for soon it will be time
 for the parade."
                "Yes, dear Ozma," Jellia said out of her ear.

                The dress of silver and gold was drawn about
 Ozma, and emerald bracelets were put around her
 wrist. The emerald crown that held the magic name
 of OZ was placed on her head.
                "You are very beautiful," Glinda the Good said
 admiringly.
                There were still a few minutes before the parade.
 "I will look at the magic picture to see what is
 happening in all my countries," Ozma said.
                Ozma went to the wall and drew a heavy cord
 there. Some thick velvet curtains drew apart, and
 a magic picture was revealed. This picture showed
 everything that was happening in the Land of Oz.
 Ozma smiled as she saw a peaceful country scene,
 for this meant that there was peace and happiness
 everywhere in her kingdom.
                Suddenly the smile went from Ozma's face, and
 she leaned closer to the picture. Something was
 wrong. She looked and looked. There was a far-
 away speck in the picture, and the longer she looked,
 the bigger it got. Finally it was no longer a speck,
 but a girl. In her magic way, Ozma could see where
 she came from but she could not tell who she was.
                "A girl from U.S.A. is on her way to Oz. I wonder
 who she can be?" said Ozma, "She must have magic
 powers to get through the barrier surrounding Oz.

 Dorothy, come here, please."
                Dorothy stepped up to the picture and looked at
 it.            She saw the girl sailing through the air, coming
 straight toward the peaceful land of Oz.
                "We will have another friend," she exclaimed.
 "She is a girl like me, only a few years older."
                "I hope she is as dear and kind as you," said
 Ozma. "Do you know her?"
                Dorothy stared hard into the picture and shook
 her head.
                "I never saw her before. But maybe Aunt Em
 and Uncle Henry will know. They lived longer in
 the States 'cause they were born first. Shall I get
 them?"
                "Yes, fetch them."
                Dorothy went out and soon came back, followed
 by her Aunt Em and Uncle Henry.
                "Do you know that girl who is sailing through the
 air?" Ozma asked.
                Aunt Em and Uncle Henry looked into the picture.
                "I never saw that girl before," Aunt Em said. "I
 hope she's not bringing trouble."
                Uncle Henry stared and stared. "You know who
 that might be?" he said. "'Pears to me she looks
 something like Nancy Dew Hickman who used to

 live on the farm next to ours in Kansas. Only Nancy
 Dew had black hair, and this girl's hair is red. And
 Nancy Dew had brown eyes, and this girl's eyes are
 green. And Nancy Dew had a sweet smile, but this
 girl looks as cross as a hen whose eggs have been
 stolen from her nest."
                "Land sakes!" Aunt Em exclaimed. "How can you
 say they look alike, then? And anyway, Nancy Dew
 must be grown up by now. Maybe the Wizard knows
 who she is. He traveled all over the U.S.A. when
 he was a plain magician. He knows a lot of people."
                There was a knock at the door. "Come in," said
 Ozma.
                The Wizard of Oz entered. He was a short, round
 man, with a ruddy face, a brisk manner, and a twinkle
 in his eye.
                "I was trying out my latest invention, the tele-
 table, just now, and heard you talking about me.
 So I came right down, without stopping to put on a
 disguise," said the Wizard.
                "I'm glad you hurried," said Ozma, "for some-
 thing unusual is happening. Will you look at the
 magic picture and tell me whether you know that
 girl?"
                The Wizard stepped up and looked hard at the
 speck.

                "I don't know who she is, but she is coming right
 here," he said. "I calculate she will land at twenty-
 two minutes after two, P.M."
                "Why, that is the exact time I am to ascend my
 carriage in the parade," said Ozma.
                "So it is," replied the Wizard. He kept staring
 into the picture. "Trouble ahead, fair Ruler. I can
 smell trouble 4,000 miles away. And I'm smelling it
 now. That girl who is coming has a terrible temper."
                "Dear me," Aunt Em said, "I know that kind of
 people. Just looking at 'em causes a commotion."
                The Wizard went toward the door. "If I am not
 wanted here any longer, I shall return to my labora-
 tory and continue my experiments."
                "Wait, please," said Ozma. "I need your advice.
 What shall I do to keep trouble from Oz?"
                "Turn that girl back and send her to the U.S.A."
 The Wizard sneezed and blew his nose, for the smell
 of trouble was in his head.
                "I had better do that," Ozma said.
                But Princess Dorothy asked eagerly, "Please,
 Ozma, can't she come? It would be fun for us to
 have another friend."
                Glinda the Good added, "Yes, why not let her
 come? There's no harm she can do that your magic

 can't undo."
                "I won't deny anyone's wish on my birthday,"
 said Ozma, smiling. "I'll let her come and hope she
 won't make too much trouble."
                Uncle Henry smiled. "A good spanking before
 every meal would teach her to behave."
                "Spankings are old-fashioned," Aunt Em put in.
 "What I say about mean folks is, let them get into
 all the trouble they can until they learn that making
 trouble isn't any fun."
                Ozma stood thinking. Finally she said, "I think
 you are right, Aunt Em."
                Jellia Jamb thought it was time for her to give
 some advice. She began to talk out of her ear,
 "Trouble has started already. It started with me-"
 She began to weep sugary tears.
                As the tears hit the floor they hardened to crystal
 candies. Jellia Jamb could not stop weeping. The
 sugar tears poured until the floor was piled high
 with candy.
                Ozma summoned another maid-in-waiting and
 asked her to wade in and shovel up the candy The
 maid pushed the candy out of the window. The
 people outside caught it and laughed and shouted,
 for there was nothing tastier in all Oz than tear-
 drop candy.

                "Now, then," said Ozma, "on to the parade. We'll
 know what to do about the girl from the U.S.A. when
 she gets here."
  
 CHAPTER 3
  
 Ozma's Birthday Parade
  
 FROM the balcony of the palace, Ozma looked down
 on the people below. On either side of her stood
 Glinda and Dorothy. From Strawberry Street to
 Banana Boulevard, the loyal subjects were thickly
 crowded. Their red, purple, yellow, and blue faces
 looked like blossoms in a flower bed.
                "What a lovely sight," said Ozma, lifting her hand.
 She felt so happy that she forgot the girl who was
 coming from the U.S.A.
  
                At the far end of Banana Boulevard she could
 see the old Soldier with the Green Whiskers playing
 emerald marbles with a blue Munchkin boy.
                "I hate to spoil their game," Ozma said, "but the
 parade must begin."
                She put her hand to her magic belt and thought,
 "Wantowin Battles, appear at my side."

                Instantly the old Soldier stood beside her. "The
 Army reports for duty, your majesty." He saluted.
                "Blow your trumpet," Queen Ozma ordered.
                 The Soldier, who was the whole army of Oz,
 lifted his trumpet and blew four loud notes:
 TA-RA-TA-TA!
                A thousand flags went up. The parade began to
 form.
                First came Kabumpo the Elephant, on roller
 skates. His robe was made of bells and played a
 tune as he moved. With the tip of his trunk he
 twirled a gold drum major's stick.
                Next came a dragon, holding his fiery breath in
 an ozbestoz box so he wouldn't burn anyone.
                Behind the dragon marched red Quadling cats,
 yellow Winkie cows, purple Gillikin dogs, and blue
 Munchkin horses. Then came china bulls, unicorns,
 saddled sea-horses, and other queer creatures of Oz.
                After the animals came the people of the four
 countries of Oz. The Winkies, with yellow banners
 flying, were led by the Tin Woodman, their emperor.
 Then came Glinda the Good's people, the red Quad-
 lings. After them, the purple Gillikins. Lastly, the
 blue Munchkins marched behind their king, the
 Scarecrow.
                Before any more of the parade came past Ozma,

 she saw something go up in the air.
                "What is happening - more trouble?" she ex-
 Iclaimed.
                Dorothy smiled and said, "Don't worry, Ozma.
 You're going to like this."
                Ozma looked again and saw that it was the dragon
 riding to the tops of the skyscrapers and into the
 oz-one. There he stopped, opened the ozbestoz box,
 and freed his fiery breath. Then he wrote in letters
 of smoke across the sky:
 HAPPY BIRTHDAY, DEAR OZMA
  
                There was a thunderclap of applause from the
 people. Ozma smiled in delight. The dragon caught
 his breath safely into the box and turned back to
 earth.
                The parade moved on. Ozma said to the Soldier
 with the Green Whiskers, "It is time for me to get
 into my carriage."
                "Yes, your majesty."
                He raised his trumpet to his lips-TA-RA-TA-TA!
 From behind the large soda fountain that bubbled
 in the center of the city (where anyone could help
 himself to sodas when he felt like it) came Ozma's
 carriage. It blazed with emeralds and other gems

 and was pulled by the Cowardly Lion and the Hungry
 Tiger. The coachman was Tik Tok, who was all
 wound up for the occasion.
                Before the carriage reached the palace stairs, the
 Sawhorse came dashing up. Tik Tok looked down
 from the carriage.
                "Well-well," he began tocking, "you-got-here-just-
 in-time. Now-if-I-ran-down-I-would-not-be-going."
                Ozma looked at her watch and saw that it was
 two twenty-one, P.M.
                "Come, Dorothy and Glinda, sit beside me in the
 carriage."
                They went down the balcony stairs. The people
 shouted and waved their flags.
                It was two twenty-one and a half, P.M. Ozma
 stopped. She had just remembered that the Wizard
 had said the girl from the U.S.A. would arrive at two
 twenty-two. That was just a half-minute from now.
                Ozma looked up to the sky. There, dropping out
 of the blue, was the girl. She was headed right for
 the carriage.
  
 CHAPTER 4
  
 Jenny Becomes a Heroine
  

                JENNY JUMP was falling fast. Below her she
 could see thousands of differently colored people
 and a palace with many spires. If she weren't care
 ful, she'd catch on one of the spires. She had to find
 a soft spot on which to land.
  Suddenly she saw it. There, right in the middle
 of the crowd, was a gorgeous carriage with a soft
 green pillow seat.
                "That's just right!" she said and pointed her
 fairy fingers toward it.
                Plop I Jenny hit the pillow and came to a stop
 for the first time in four days.
                "Leaping Leprechauns!" she exclaimed. "Where
 am I?" The air was full of cheers and waving
 banners.
                "Well, how did all these people know I was com-
 ing?" Jenny thought. The cheering stopped short.
 The people, seeing a stranger in their Queen's car-
 riage, began to buzz excitedly.
                "That's not the Queen! Who is she? What does
 she want?"
                There was a rush of yellow, blue, purple, and red
 people toward the carriage. All the strange creatures
 and fantastic animals crowded around Jenny. The
 old Soldier leaped up and shook a trumpet in her

 face.
                "Surrender to the Army of Oz !"
                Jenny was too frightened to be angry. She began
 to cry.
                "I thought all this celebration was for me," she
 said.
                The more she cried, the braver the Army became.
                "You'll be locked in the dungeon of oblivion for
 this," he said sternly. Jenny thought it must be all
 over for her. The Army seized her arm.
                "This is the end of me," thought Jenny. But just
 then she heard a voice speaking softly, yet so clearly,
 that it could be heard through all the city.
                "My good Army! Is this the way to treat a visi-
 tor?"
                The Soldier dropped Jenny's arm. Jenny looked
 out. There, close to the carriage, stood the loveliest
 girl she had ever seen.
                "I am sorry, my dear, that you were frightened.
 My Army thought you were taking my carriage."
                "I'll get out," Jenny said, very thankful that
 nothing was going to happen to her.
                "Oh, no. You must stay and ride with me and
 my friends. This is the Land of Oz, and you are
 my guest."
                Ozma turned and beckoned to Dorothy and Glinda

 the Good. As the two girls stepped up, Ozma ex-
 plained, "Dorothy came from the U.S.A., just like
 you."
                "I am so glad you are here," Dorothy said.
 "And this girl with the glorious red hair is Glinda,
 the good sorceress who rules one of my countries."
                Jenny was growing happier every minute. "I am
 half-fairy. Could I rule one of your countries?"
 Ozma smiled. "Just at present there are no vacan-
 cies. But my maid, Jellia Jamb, will let you fill out
 an application. And remember, dear, if you know
 any magic, it is against the law to use it on anyone
 but yourself. Only Glinda and I and the Wizard
 may practice magic on others."
                The seat of the carriage was wide enough for all
 four girls. The Army blew a fresh blast on his
 trumpet: TA-RA-TA-TA! This was a signal for the
 people to cheer Ozma again. They cheered and
 cheered, and became so excited that they threw their
 hats in the air. They threw them so high that they
 never came down again.
                The Munchkin boy who had been playing emerald
 marbles with the Army forgot that his hat was tied
 under his chin. He threw his hat so hard that he
 went sailing up with it. In a few minutes, he was out

 of sight.
                "Man overboard!" yelled the Army.
                "Oh, we must get him back!" exclaimed Princess
 Dorothy.
                "I'll get him," said Jenny Jump. She stood up and
 stamped her fairy foot and bounded straight up.
 Passing the palace spires, she came to the tops of
 the skyscrapers. These were busily scraping the sky
 clean of all the hats.
                The boy was still on his way up. Jenny gave her
 fairy foot an extra kick, caught him by the heel,
 and began to drop.
                She dropped into the carriage, and the Munchkin
 boy tumbled into her lap.
                The Army sighed with relief. "What a broad
 escape!" he said.
                The people waved their flags and cheered again,
 and this time their cheers were for Jenny.
                "Why," thought Jenny, "they are cheering me
 just as if I were their queen." And she felt proud
 of herself.
                Ozma said graciously, "You did a very brave thing,
 dear, and we all thank you. I see that in your case
 the practicing of a little magic now and then will
 have to be excused. What is your name?"
                "Jenny Jump," the girl said, giving the boy a

 push to remind him that he wasn't to sit in her lap
 all day. He turned to Jenny as he climbed out, "My
 name is Number Nine. Your humble servant." His
 eyes were full of a warm blue light.
                The parade moved toward the city gate. The Guard-
 ian of the Gate bowed low as Ozma's carriage passed.
 Outside the city wall, the paraders mounted the new
 ozealator, a moving road, and seated themselves on
 comfortable chairs.
                The road had been invented by Mr. Oz Q. Later, a
 clever Quadling. The Wizard had thought of it first,
 but had left the making of it to Later.
                The road slid southward into the Quadling country.
 Here everything was red. Jenny looked around in
 astonishment. She had never seen fields of red corn,
 red carrots, red cucumbers; or red cows, red rivers,
 and red haystacks.
                At the end of the Quadling country, the ozcalator
 stopped and Glinda the Good with all her people,
 got off.
                "Goodbye, and happy birthday," Glinda called, and
 her people waved as the ozcalator moved on.
                It turned to the East. Jenny found herself riding
 through the land of the Winkies, where everything
 was yellow. There were many trees bearing yellow

 Plums, and there were yellow grapes, watermelons,
 and blackberries. The fruit trees bowed in greeting
 to the Queen, and shook fruit into the people's laps.
                After awhile the Winkies left the ozcalator and
 followed their Tin Woodman emperor back to their
 homes.
                At the boundary of the Gillikin country, the ozca-
 lator jarred to a stop with a shrieking of brakes.
 Everyone stretched his neck to see what was the
 matter, but only the giraffes could see.
                A purple-speckled giraffe bent his head back to
 Ozma and said, "The bridge over Cream River is
 out. The river doesn't know when the bridge will
 be in. We may have to wait all day."
                "We can't hold up the parade," said Ozma. "Ask
 Cream River to churn."
                The giraffe gave her message to the river, and the
 river began to churn, until the banks were piled with
 lumps of butter.
                "Spread the butter," ordered Ozma. Two sword-
 fishes left their aquarium seats to obey. Using their
 sword noses, they spread the butter smoothly over
 the river and made a new bridge. Ozma thanked
 them, and the ozcalator slid easily over the butter
 bridge, into the purple land of the Gillikins.
                Jenny breathed the purple air with delight.

                "I'd like to live in Oz forever!" she exclaimed.
                "You may do so," answered Ozma. "Stay on as
 my subject."
                "I'd rather be a Queen than a subject," Jenny said,
 thinking how wonderful it would be to live in a
 palace and have serving maids and a private army.
                "When is the next election for the Rulership?" she
 asked.
                "Queens aren't elected, you know," Dorothy said.
 "They inherit their thrones, and remain in them as
 long as they like."
                "What!" exclaimed Jenny in surprise. "Don't the
 people have votes?"
                Dorothy shook her head. "This isn't the U.S.A.
 Everything is different in Oz."
                "This is very interesting," said Ozma. "What is
 a vote?"
                "A piece of paper with an X on it," Jenny ex-
 plained, proud that she could teach Ozma something.
                "There, you see?" Dorothy exclaimed triumphantly.
 "We couldn't have votes in Oz because X stands for
 the unknown, and everyone knows that Ozma would
 be elected."
                Ozma laughed in her silvery voice. "Thank you,
 Dorothy dear. But this election idea pleases me very

 much. It might amuse my people to hold an election."
                "But we can't have an election without someone
 to run against you," Dorothy objected.
                Ozma turned to Jenny. "Would you, as a personal
 favor to me, run against me? Then our election is
 sure to be a success."
                Jenny was delighted. "I certainly will. But I warn
 you, I shall try to get all the votes and become
 Ruler."
                "If my people would rather have you, then you
 should be their Ruler," Ozma said. "But let us not
 discuss it any more now."
                At this point the ozcalator stopped to let off the
 Gillikins. When it started again, Jenny looked
 around and saw that they were in the blue land of
 the Munchkins. Small round houses were set in neat
 lawns of blue grass with many forget-me-nots. The
 country looked so pretty that Jenny wanted to stay
 in it awhile.
                Just then she heard a voice beside the carriage
 say, "Jenny, won't you come to my house for sup-
 per?"
                Looking down, she saw Number Nine. His invita-
 tion had come just in time. She might have supper
 at his house and sleep there, too.
                The ozcalator stopped to let the Munchkins off.

 Jenny thanked Ozma for all her kindness.
                "When you are in the Emerald City, come and
 see me at the palace," Ozma invited. "Later on, I
 shall announce the election."
                Jenny and Number Nine marched with the Munch-
 kins after their Scarecrow king off the ozcalator.
 They turned to wave to Ozma, and after the ozca-
 lator had disappeared over a blue mountain, Number
 Nine said, "Follow me."
                Jenny followed him.
  
 CHAPTER 5
  
 The Voice That Lost His Man
  
                NUMBER NINE led Jenny toward a round, blue
 Munchkin house.
                "This is where I live," he said, opening the door
 wide. "Munchkin houses have only one room. But
 my mother and father and thirteen sisters and
 brothers are never crowded."
 It seemed to Jenny that the room became a little
 larger as she stepped in. She saw the table set for
 supper and the family all seated around it.
                "Welcome," the father said. She could tell he

 was a farmer.
                "This is Jenny Jump, from the U.S.A.," said Num-
 ber Nine, as he brought a chair for Jenny.
                Jenny was introduced to the mother and all the
 children-Number One, Number Two, Number Three,
 and so on, down to Number Fourteen, who was the
 baby. She had not yet come to the stop-growing age,
 which in this family. was ten for the girls and
 twelve for the boys.
                Jenny started to eat. The food was delicious. There
 was blue cottage cheese, blue bread, blue grapefruit
 juice, and blue chocolate cake. And there were
 glasses of blue milk.
                During the meal, nobody said anything. Jenny
 thought this very strange. She ate until she could
 not hold another blue bite. Then she turned to the
 farmer and asked, "May I sleep here tonight?"
                The farmer raised his fork and said sternly, "Save
 all questions for the question hour."
                When the meal was over, the dishes done, and the
 floor swept, the father said, "The question hour has
 come. Make your formation, children."
                Jenny looked on as the fourteen children seated
 themselves on the floor in the form of a question
 mark.
                "You may be the dot," the farmer said to Jenny

 Jenny, very puzzled, sat down at the bottom of the
 question mark.
                Then the' farmer explained, "In most homes, the
 children ask questions all the time. This disturbed
 their parents and wastes a lot of time. Munchkin
 children save their questions all day and ask them
 all at one time, after supper.
                "We will begin with you, Jenny."
                There were so many questions she wanted to ask,
 that she did not know where to begin. She paused
 and finally asked, "How many questions may I ask?"
                "One," said the farmer. "Next, please."
 He turned his eyes away. Jenny's turn was over.
 Number Nine raised his hand, and his father nodded
 at him.
                "Do you know What?" asked Number Nine.
                "I used to. But he moved to the Emerald City a
 year ago," answered the father. "Who's next?"
 All the children raised their hands. The father
 nodded at Number Eleven.
                "What's the difference?" asked Number Eleven.
 This was a hard one, and the father scratched his
 foot thoughtfully.
                "It is what is left after taking one thing away from
 another," he said finally, and hurried on to the next

 question.
                When he had been asked, "Did you ever?" and
 "How goes it?" and "What's up?" the baby began
 to shriek.
                The Munchkin mother ran and picked it up.
 "There, there, my fourteeny one," she soothed. But
 the baby kept shrieking.
                "Something has frightened her," the woman said
 to her husband. "See if someone is at the door."
                Jenny was sitting nearest the door. "I'll open it,"
 she said. She got up, reached for the handle, an
 pulled the door open.
                A Voice said, "Is the Man here?"
                Jenny looked out in every direction, but said
 nothing.
                Number Nine looked out, too.
                "I've been looking for him since the last cold spell,'
 the Voice said. It was a tired, sad voice.
                "But who are you?" Jenny asked, for she could see
 no one.
                "I am the Voice That Lost His Man. May I come
 in? I'm very tired of wandering."
                "I suppose so," said Jenny, opening the door wider.
 Two seconds later the Voice said from inside,
 across the room, "Thank you. This is so comfort-
 able." Jenny turned quickly.

                "Where are you? I can't see you," she said.
                "Right here, by the fireplace. The evening was
 getting chilly, you know."
                The Munchkin family were staring toward the
 place from where the Voice came.
                "Will you have some supper?" the mother asked.
 "No, thank you. It's not I, but my Man who gets
 hungry. Oh, how I wish I could find him!"
                "Where did he go?" asked the farmer.
                "If I knew that, wouldn't I go after him?" asked
 the Voice sharply. Then it sighed.
                "He never should have gone fishing in a draft. All
 he caught was a Cold! Ugh! A nasty creature was
 that Cold. Slimy and watery as an oyster without a
 shell. Do you know what that nasty Cold did?"
                "What did it do?" Jenny asked curiously.
                The Voice rose to an angry shriek.
                "It crept into my Man's throat and filled it so full
 that I was pushed out. When I fell out, the moon
 Went behind a cloud and it got too dark to see any-
 thing. I tried to follow my Man, hoping for a chance
 to slip back into his throat. But it was too dark. So
 I lost him."
                The Voice began to sob, and that started Baby
 Fourteen sobbing.

                "Never mind," said the mother to the Voice,
 "we'll all go to bed now. Perhaps when you have
 rested, your eyes will be better."
                "My what?" asked the horrified Voice.
 "Excuse me. I mean, you'll find your master.
 "Thank you, ma'am." Jenny guessed that the
 Voice belonged to a polite person.
                "I'll be going soon. I don't need a long rest. My
 Man is a singer, and I am trained to go on for hours."
                "Oh, won't you sing something for the children
 the mother asked. "A lullaby?"
                "I know all lullabies of Oz. which would you like?"
 "The Munchkin Blues would be lovely."
 "Ahem!" There was a silence. Then a soothing
 lullaby came out of the corner:
 "The blue Munchkin babies are nodding their blue
 heads,
 And their eyelids are closing fast;
 Oh, soon they'll be tucked in their little blue
 beds,
 For dreamland to take them at last."
                The Voice sang through seventeen verses and then
 said happily, "I feel much better. Thank you for
 asking me to sing. It is like old times. Pray, don't
 stay up on my account. Just leave a window open,
 and I'll slip out during the night. I must try to find

 my dear Master."
                By this time the fourteen children and Jenny were
 fast asleep.
  
 CHAPTER 6
  
 The Magic Turn-Style
  
                IN THE morning Jenny awoke refreshed and ate a
 hearty breakfast of blue oatmeal with blue cream.
 She thanked the farmer and said goodbye to all the
 family.
                As she was going down the lane, she heard Num-
 ber Nine shouting after her, "Wait for me, Jenny!
 I'm coming with you."
                She was glad to have his company, for she had
 grown very fond of the blue boy. They walked
 through blue fields toward the main highway which
 led to the Emerald City. Jenny might have jumped
 on her fairy foot and got there sooner, but she had
 to let the boy keep up with her. Besides, she was in
 no hurry to leave this pleasant land with its blue
 meadows and distant blue hills.
                As they were passing the ruins of an old building,
 she stopped. With her fairy eye she could see that

 this was not just a plain old ruin, but something more
 important.
                "Why are you stopping?" asked Number Nine.
                "Come, we are going to explore," said Jenny.
                But Number Nine hung. back. "Better stay away
 from that," he said. "That is where a magician used
 to practice forbidden magic. One day his house blew
 up, and he was blown to Kingdom Come."
                Jenny's curiosity became all the greater. "Come
 on," she said.
                But Number Nine wouldn't budge. Jenny's anger
 began to grow. This was the first time she had been
 angry in Oz.
                "Do as I tell you! Didn't you say, after I saved
 You from the sky, that you were my humble ser-
 vant?"
                Number Nine had never seen anyone angry be-
 fore. He stammered, "All right, Jenny. Whatever
 you say."
                Jenny led the way toward the ruin. As she came
 near, she saw many old rusted tools, broken copper
 pots, and parts of chains half hidden in the grass.
 The chimney of the house and part of a high wall
 were still standing. In this wall was a rickety old
 turnstile. The turnstile served as the gate into
 what was once the house.

                "Come on, we're going through that stile," said
 Jenny, and started forward.
                Number Nine was too frightened to obey. Jenny
 kept on. When she touched the turnstile, it wobbled
 and almost fell apart. Jenny bent forward to see
 how safe it was to turn it, and as she did so, her hat
 fell through the stile.
                "Leaping Leprechauns!" said Jenny, staring at her
 hat that lay on the other side of the stile.
                Before falling through the turnstile, it had been
 a battered old hat without any decoration. Now it
 was lovely and new, with a soft blue feather curling
 around the brim.
                "Now, what have I done to deserve a feather in
 my cap?" she asked. "It was the turn-style that did
 it.            It really does turn styles."
                She studied the turn-style that had once belonged
 to the Munchkin magician. She couldn't see anything
 magical about its rusty frame.
                "But it changed my hat. What will happen if I
 go through it?" she thought. "I won't know until
 I've tried."
                Saying this, Jenny pushed herself through the
 turn-style
                "Leaping Leprechauns!" She stared down at her-

 self in amazement. This time her hat was a pointed
 One with little bells around the brim. Her tattered
 grey cape had become bright blue and new. Her
 shoes had new shining buckles and turned-up toes.
 Her old dress had disappeared, and she was wearing
 an entire blue Munchkin costume.
                "Number Nine, Number Nine," she called excitedly,
 "do you like my new style?"
                The boy came closer. "Why, you're beautiful,
 Jenny. How did you do it?"
                "This is a magic turn-style," Jenny said. "I be-
 lieve it will make my fortune. Run home and fetch
 a wheelbarrow!"
                "You don't want that old piece of junk!" said
 Number Nine.
                Jenny grew angry again. "Do as you're told," she
 ordered. "Remember, you are my humble servant."
                Number Nine ran off, and Jenny began to take
 the turn-style apart. It was hard work, but Jenny's
 fairy fingers were strong. When she had taken the
 turn-style to pieces, the boy returned with a wheel-
 barrow.
                Jenny loaded the turn-style pieces on the wheel-
 barrow and ordered Number Nine to trundle it.
 When he grew tired, she put her fairy fingers to it
 and helped push.

                "I don't know what you want this junk for," Num-
 ber Nine grumbled.
                "I am going to open a Style Shop in the Emerald
 City. I always wanted to be my own boss. And you
 shall be my office boy!" said Jenny.
                She walked more swiftly. "Hurry, hurry!" she
 exclaimed. "My fortune is waiting for me."
  
 CHAPTER 7
  
 The House with the Strawberry Roof
  
                IT WAS high noon when Jenny and Number Nine,
  trundling the wheelbarrow, approached the great
 wall of the Emerald City. This wall was built of
 priceless emeralds, cut and polished. When the sun-
 light struck them, they reflected a soft green light.
 Above the wall was the tower from which the
 Guardian of the Gate watched all who came and
 went As Jenny and Number Nine drew near, the
 old Guardian came down to welcome them.
                "Hail and greeting, little lady!" He bowed low
 to Jenny. "Welcome to the Wonder City of Oz, ruled
 over by the most gracious fairy, Queen Ozma,
 supreme Ruler of the North, East, South, and West.

 Sovereign of all the kings, emperors, and princesses
 in the land. Resister of evil forces--"
                The Guardian would have gone on, but Jenny
 broke in, "Please, sir, I'm in a hurry. And there is
 something I want to ask you."
                The Guardian straightened up, then bowed again.
 "Gracious visitor from the U.S.A., the humble Gate
 Keeper of the Emerald City begs to inform you that
 it is his duty, privilege, and pleasure to serve your
 smallest wish. And--"
                "Where can I find a house to live in?" Jenny in-
 terrupted.
                The Guardian of the Gate put his hand into his
 pocket, saying, "I have the complete list of all vacant
 houses" But his hand came out of his pocket
 empty. He searched all his other pockets and then
 sighed, "Ahz, yes, I forgot. I gave it to the Soldier
 with the Green Whiskers to cut paper dolls."
                "I want a house. How am I to get it?" asked Jenny.
 "Nothing could be easier," the Guardian smiled at
 her. "Just walk up and down the streets and look
 until you find an empty house that wants you."
 Jenny thanked the Guardian and gave Number
 Nine a poke to hurry him along. They left the gate
 behind them and went deeper into the city. Jenny
 looked around her in delight. She saw many parks

 with statues in marble and sapphire, trees with de-
 licious fruit hanging from the branches, and cool
 fountains that gave off a fragrance.
                The streets were alive with visitors from the four
 countries of Oz, dressed in red, yellow, purple, and
 blue costumes.
                At the corner they turned right and came to a
 row of houses. It was easy to tell the empty houses
 by their vacant expressions. The faces of some of
 the houses were not friendly to Jenny. Finally, de-
 ciding to try one anyway, she said to Number Nine,
 "Wait here. I'm going to try this house." She
 pointed to a green cottage.
                She went up the stairs and put her hand on the
 knob. The door refused to open. The hinges stiffened
 themselves. The windows clamped themselves tight.
 The doorbell would not ring. The gable of the house
 frowned.
                Jenny backed away. This house certainly did not
 want her. They went on, crossing Pudding Place,
 Celery Street, and Doughnut Drive. On the corner
 of Strawberry Street and Banana Boulevard, which
 was the busiest part of town, Jenny saw a house with
 a roof made of strawberries. It had a vacant smile
 on its face, but its window eyes glistened warmly.

 So Jenny went toward it.
                As she approached the door, the key sprang off the
 nail and into her hand. The door opened at her first
 touch.
                "I'll always feel welcome here," she said as she
 stepped inside. She looked around the large front
 room with approval.
                "Just the place for a Style Shop," she thought. "I
 can live upstairs."
                The walls were papered in a sunny silver, and the
 floors were green. Every nook was cozy with furni-
 ture. There were sitting chairs, sleeping sofas, and
 staring mirrors. The cupboards were full of cheerful
 china. There was nothing lacking. All she needed
 to do was to set up her turn-style and she'd be ready
 for business.
                A moon-shaped clock hung on the front room wall.
 Jenny looked at it.
                "It's time I moved in," she said. She hurried out
 of the house and beckoned to Number Nine.
                "Bring in the turn-style. From now on, you are the
 office boy, and I am your boss, as well as my own."
                "Yes, Boss," the boy said meekly, and began to
 carry the rusty parts of the turn-style into the house.
                Jenny and Number Nine put the turn-style to-
 gether and set it up in the middle of the front room.

 As soon as the last bolt had been put in place, and
 the turn-style stood all in one piece, the rust on it
 vanished. It shone with blue and yellow enamel, in
 the most modern design.
                Now Jenny saw that its four arms, extending like
 the spokes of a wheel, were marked SIZE, COLOR,
 MATERIAL, STYLE. Along each arm was a row
 of buttons marked with various colors, materials,
 sizes, and styles.
                Jenny touched the walls with her fairy fingers and
 rows of shelves appeared. Then she named the things
 she needed and the shelves became loaded with bolts
 of cloth of every color and material. A counter,
 equipped with wrapping paper, appeared at one end
 of the shop.
                Jenny jumped with delight. She had a real Style
 Shop.
                But the office boy was fast asleep. Jenny grew
 angry. She jerked him out of his seat.
                "Where are you going to live?" she asked him.
 The office boy yawned. "Ah-hum. With my
 Uncle, I suppose. He is an emerald cutter and has
 a shop on Pudding Place."
                The boy fell asleep on his feet. Such laziness would
 never do. Jenny pulled him around and ordered him

 to make a sign for the shop--the biggest sign there
 ever was in Oz.
  
 JENNY JUMP
 STYLIST
  
                Number Nine shuffled out sleepily and returned a
 couple of hours later with some painting materials.
 He was cheerier now, for he had stopped and helped
 himself to six pineapple ozcream sodas and three
 banana nut sundaes at the public soda fountain. He
 was whistling loudly and tunelessly.
                All the time that he worked at the sign, he kept
 whistling. His hands moved so slowly that Jenny lost
 her patience. Going to the shelf, she took down a bolt
 of cloth. With her fairy fingers she traced on it,
 and several yards cut themselves off.
                There were no scissors, needle, or thread in the
 shop. Jenny did not need any. With her fairy fingers
 she outlined the design of a pair of breeches The
 cloth cut itself into that design. Then she ran her
 fairy fingers along the edges, and the cloth joined
 itself into seams.
                Just before the seams were closed, Jenny reached
 into the air and caught a handful of the loud notes
 that the boy was whistling. She fastened the notes

 into the seams of the breeches.
                "Through the style you go," she ordered her office
 boy. He jumped up willingly, pleased with the idea
 of owning a new pair of trousers.
                No sooner had he gone through the turn-style, than
 he found himself clothed in the breeches that Jenny
 had just made. They extended around him like a
 balloon, with wide green stripes running down the
 outside seams. In these seams were fastened four
 shrill whistles-the same sounds he had just been
 whistling.
                "Thanks, Boss. Now I think I'll sit down and rest
 awhile," said the boy.
                "Just try resting during working hours," said
 Jenny.
                When Number Nine lowered himself into his chair,
 the breeches whistled shrilly. The boy jumped up,
 slapping at the breeches. They went on whistling.
 He clapped his hands over two of the whistles, but
 the other two whistles only shrieked louder.
                Jenny nodded with satisfaction. "Those whistle-
 breeches will remind you not to loaf. Now, hustle
 out and get yourself a drum and drum up some
 business."
                Number Nine hung his head and started up the

 street. Whenever he stopped, the breeches whistled
 loudly. When he hurried, the breeches were less
 noisy.
                So he hurried!
  
 CHAPTER 8
  
 The Professor Ponders
  
 PROFESSOR WOGGLEBUG, T.E., was passing out
 arithmetic pills to his class in the College of
 Art and Athletic Perfection. The college was situ-
 ated in the blue Munchkin country, and the arith-
 metic pills made the scholars bluer than ever.
                "Come, now," the Professor scolded, "I invented
 these pills to make arithmetic painless."
                He pointed his antennae, which grew like two long
 hairs out of his forehead, at his pupils.
 The Professor was an extraordinary bug who had
 once escaped from under a magnifying glass. He
 had forever kept his magnified condition, and was
 many times bigger than an ordinary bug. Because
 he had learned a great deal while living under the
 fireplace in a schoolroom, he had given himself the
 degree of T.E., or Thoroughly Educated.
 The Professor was reaching into a bottle of history

 pills.
                "WHOA!" sounded outside the window. There was
 a clattering of hooves on the college steps.
 The Professor hastily distributed alphabet blocks
                "Mind your P's and Q's while I examine the cause
 of this unseemly disturbance," he said in his dignified
 voice.
                Just then through the door clattered the Saw-
 horse of Oz carrying Jack Pumpkinhead, who had
 a note in his hand.
                The scholars stood up to give the college yell of
 welcome:
                "Nix, nox
                Wear your sox;
                Take a pill
                When your brain is still.
                Punpkinhead, Pumpkinhead-Rah! Rah! Rah!"
 Jack nodded and grinned back at all of them.
                "Good morning, Jack Pumpkinhead," said the Pro-
 fessor when the cheer was ended. "Is that note for
 me?"
                Jack Pumpkinhead kept on smiling. He did not
 stop smiling, for the smile was carved in his head.
                "Yes. Queen Ozma sent it to you."
                The Professor took the note, and while he was

 reading it, a scholar held out some leaves from a
 book for the Sawhorse to eat. But the wooden animal
 refused, "No, thank you. I'm never hungry."
                The Professor finished the note and said to the
 class, "I must go immediately to the Royal Palace.
 My enlightenment is needed on a matter in which
 Queen Ozma is in the dark. Take a dose of history
 pills, and then you are free to use the athletic equip-
 ment."
                He pointed to a fat little girl with blue pigtails.
 "You, Alma Mater, will report any backsliding."
 The Professor gathered up his papers, his spec-
 tacles, and his cane, and mounted the Sawhorse
 behind Jack Pumpkinhead.
                "Giddyup!" ordered Jack, and the Sawhorse gal-
 loped out.
                They reached the palace, and the Sawhorse dashed
 directly through the halls to Ozma's throne room.
 The walls of this room were of gold, with silver
 panels, inlaid with precious emeralds, rubies, and
 diamonds. The floor was a soft emerald green, and
 the throne was a solid carved emerald.
 On the throne sat Queen Ozma, clothed in shining
 white, with the green OZ crown as her only orna-
 ment. At her feet crouched two magnificent beast--
 the Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger. And close

 to her throne were her friends, Princess Dorothy, the
 Scarecrow, King of the Munchkins, the Tin Wood wood-
 man, Emperor of the Winkies, and Glinda the Good
 Sorceress, Ruler of the Quadlings.
 As the Professor climbed down, the Sawhorse and
 Jack Pumpkinhead departed.
                "Greetings, Professor Wogglebug," Ozma said. "I
 have summoned you and all the rulers of the coun-
 tries of Oz. I need your advice about an election
 be held in Oz. The only ruler who cannot be present
 is JoKing of the Gillikins."
                The Professor put on his spectacles and his most
 important expression.
                "Hum, hum," he said wisely.
 Ozma went on, "I have been Queen of Oz a long
 time. It is only fair to let the people decide whether
 they want me to continue. Therefore I am holding
 an election."
                The Wogglebug interrupted. "Your Majesty, ac-
 cording to my latest dictionary, there is no such
 word. What you undoubtedly mean to hold is an
 ozlection."
                The Tin Woodman and the Scarecrow got to their
 feet.
                "We stand corrected," they said together.

 Ozma continued, "I have invited Jenny Jump to
 run against me. And now you must help me plan the
 other details of this ozlection."
                "Ahem, humph!" The Wogglebug again brought
 attention to himself. "This will be the most im-
 portant event of Your Majesty's reign. Only those
 of man age should vote. I shall be glad to man-age
 the ozlection for you."
                "Very well, you be my ozlection man-ager," Ozma
 said. "But the children must be allowed to vote, also,
 or they'll feel bad. They could have little votes."
 Dorothy got up from her chair and moved closer to
 the Cowardly Lion. She began curling his mane as
 she listened.
                "What shall we use for votes?" Ozma said, look-
 ing around at everyone.
 "Umbrellas," said the Scarecrow. "They'd keep us
 safe from an unwelcome reign."
                "No," objected the Professor, "some people have
 more than one umbrella, and a person can have
 only one vote."
                "Well, I'll have to think harder," said the Scare-
 crow, and turned his face to the wall. He thought so
 hard that the straw bulged out of his head.
                "Noses," the Tin Woodman said. "They're easy to
 count."

                Glinda the Good smiled at the Tin Woodman. "We
 who are made out of flesh cannot take off our noses
 like you, Nick Chopper," she said.
                The Hungry Tiger looked up, licked his chops, and
 said, "A pile of meat noses might fill me up for once.
 But my conscience would not let me spoil the ozlec-
 tion by eating the votes. So I'd be obliged to remain
 hungry," he ended sadly.
                "Couldn't we use wisdom teeth?" asked Princess
 Dorothy. "They would prevent us from making a
 foolish choice."
                "No, no!" cried the Professor. "Some people's teeth
 are false, and this is to be an honest ozlection." He
 thought so hard that his antennae wriggled. Then
 he said, "We want the people to throw their SOLES
 into the matter, and to use their RIGHTS. There-
 fore I conclude that each person's RIGHT SHOE
 shall be his vote."
                "Excellent, Professor Wogglebug," said Ozma,
 beaming. "Then it's settled. Tomorrow the Town
 Crier will cry the ozlection through the Emerald City
 and all the countries of Oz."
                "This is the greatest event that ever ozcurred in
 our land," said the Professor solemnly.
                Glinda the Good began to unlace her right shoe.

 "Ozma, I want to cast my vote for you right now."
 Saying this, Glinda placed her dainty red shoe be-
 side the throne. Dorothy, the Scarecrow, and the Tin
 Woodman took off their right shoes and placed them
 beside Glinda's.
                "Let me warn you," the Professor said suddenly,
 "that living in the Sandy Waste outside Oz is a spe-
 cies of spineless sponges known as Heelers. They
 feed chiefly on votes. When these creatures learn of
 the ozlection, they may try to break into the Emerald
 City and carry off the votes."
                "Jack Pumpkinhead shall keep the votes safe in
 the ozoplane in which he lives. And the Sawhorse,
 who never sleeps, shall help Jack to guard the votes,"
 declared Ozma.
 The Wogglebug bowed before Ozma and backed
 his way to the door.
                "If there is no further need of my talents, I shall
 return to my college. I must write a book about the
 reign of Ozma the Great up to the ozlection. For
 afterward, we don't know who our Ruler will be!"
  
 CHAPTER 9
  
 Whistlebreeches Scraps
  

 NEW STYLES, fresh styles, styles for every
 taste!"
                Number Nine came down Celery Street shouting
 at the top of his voice.
                "Visit Jenny Jump's Style Shop. Hot styles, cool
 styles, styles for all the family and the pets!"
                The office boy was working well. He had been
 working since early this morning, and it was time
 he had a rest. If he returned to his Uncle's house
 without letting Jenny see him, he might take a long,
 sweet nap.
                His Uncle's business of emerald cutting was dull,
 for there was no place left in all the city to put a
 single emerald. So his Uncle spent his time walking
 about the city and admiring the emeralds he had al-
 ready cut. The house would be empty, and Number
 Nine thought he could enjoy his sleep undisturbed.
 He had forgotten that his whistlebreeches wouldn't
 let him sleep.
                "Ho hum!" he yawned, turning into Pudding Place,
 where his Uncle's house stood. As soon as his steps
 slowed, the breeches began to whistle. The slower he
 went, the louder they whistled. By the time he
 reached his Uncle's house, the breeches sounded like
 the fire injins' sirens.

                Just as Number Nine turned in at the gate, some-
 one caught him by the shoulder and swung him
 around. Number Nine saw the Town Crier, a sad-
 looking, red-nosed man. Tears were dripping off the
 end of the Crier's long nose and splashing on his
 vest. His shoulders were shaking with his sobs.
                "Stop that noise! You're interfering with an officer
 of the law," he shouted. "Whistlebreeches, can't you
 be quiet so I can do my crying in peace? I have an
 important message from Ozma to cry to the people."
                "My name isn't Whistlebreeches, you old tear
 jerker!" the boy said rudely. His pants were going
 full blast.
                The Crier's voice rose to a wail. "Stop it, I say.
 For 811 years, no one in Oz has made more noise
 than I. I'll be blowed if I'll let your silly whistle-
 breeches make more noise now!"
                He started to whimper, but found it hard work.
                "I'm expected to work from eight in the morning
 until seven at night. I'm not going to lose my job
 for any clap-trap pair of pants. You don't seem to
 understand that you are ruining my business."
                Now the Crier's tears came so fast they formed
 a pool around his feet. The whistlebreeches were
 going like mad, and a crowd of people had gathered
 around. The Town Crier, seeing what a large audi-

 ence he had, couldn't blubber a blub. His face broke
 into a broad smile. Then, realizing what a mistake he
 had made, he burst into a hard fit of sobbing.
                "Hear ye, hear ye!" he moaned and wailed. "Her-
 boo-hoo-ho~Majesty, Ozma---oh, ahz, woe is me--
 announces an ozlection. Get out and give your right
 shoe for the one who shall rule for the next thou-
 sand years! Ahzme! Oh, my!"
 A river of tears was flowing away from the Town
 Crier. Never before had he wept so well. He had to
 make up for the forbidden smile.
                The Town Crier and the whistlebreeches were mak-
 ing such a racket that Number Nine knew it was
 hopeless to take a nap. It was better to return to
 Jenny's Style Shop and steal a few winks when Jenny
 wasn't looking.
                The Crier kept crying, and the boy shouted even
 louder.
                "Fresh styles! Cool styles!" As he hurried along,
 the breeches grew quiet.
                Number Nine drew close to the wall of the Public
 Gardens. In one section of the gardens grew living
 flowers. In another, the animal-plants were kept
 chained within an enclosure.
                The care of these gardens was one of the great

 pleasures of the city people. Many of them gave
 their entire lives to it. Travelers from distant parts
 of Oz came here to get seeds or slips of the flowers
 and baby animal-plants, which they carried away to
 plant in their own gardens. The goose-berries were
 popular with these travelers. Mountaineers carried
 away dandy-lions and tiger-lilies. But nobody wanted
 the pretty skunk-cabbage.
                "It would be a lot of fun to walk on top of the
 wall, instead of in the crowded street," thought Num-
 ber Nine. A vine was growing on the wall. The boy
 seized the vine and began climbing. His breeches
 whistled in protest.
                "This is better," he said, as he reached the top
 and looked down into the living flower garden.
                Here the dew-berries kept the other plants moist,
 and the umbrella plants kept them shaded. Toad
 stools offered rest to drooping violets. Maiden fern
 smiled and chatted with her friends, the daisies, the
 roses, and the lilac. The spy-rea peeped through the
 sham-rocks and reported everything it saw. The blue
 bells made a soft music that kept the gardeners
 dozing.
                This garden was peaceful and enchanted compared
 with the noisy plot where the animal-plants were
 kept. Number Nine got more fun out of watching the

 animal-plants. He walked along the wall until he
 could see these strange creatures.
                He could see the tiger-lilies pulling at their flower
 chains, and he heard the snap-dragons snapping at
 the cow-slips, who paid no attention, but went on
 grazing. The goose-berries were honking and hissing.
 The bull-rushes were charging at the horse-radishes,
 and the dandy-lions, having beautified themselves
 with cocks-combs, were strutting before the pussy-
 willows. Dogtooth violets and larkspur were fighting
 a bloody battle.
 When the animal-plants heard the whistlebreeches
 they roared, shrieked, and spat in anger. Number
 Nine, fearing that they would snap their chains
 and come at him, began to run.
                "Whistlebreeches, Whistlebreeches,
                Runs as though he had the itches!"
 Number Nine stopped and looked around. "who
 said that?" he demanded.
                "I was the one to shout it,
                What'll you do about it?"
                The boy looked up. A tree grew beside the wall,
 and out of the branches peeped Scraps, the Patch-
 work Girl. Her shoebutton eyes were gleaming
 merrily, and her red velvet tongue stuck out at

 the boy.
                "Want to fight?
                I say, all right!"
 she taunted.
                Number Nine did not feel like fighting Scraps. He
 knew what a good boxer she was. He drew himself
 up with dignity and said, "I'm a business man. I
 must get back to work."
                The breeches gave a loud blast. Number Nine
 slid down the vine. He watched Scraps to see what
 she would do. Scraps dropped from the tree to the
 wall. She found a shadow and began boxing with it.
                "Oh, oh," said Number Nine, "she'll come after
 me next."
                He turned and began running.
                "What makes him run away from me?
                Perhaps he doubts my sanity!"
 chanted Scraps from above. Turning a few cart-
 wheels on the high wall, she leaped lightly to the
 ground and was after the boy, shouting gayly at him,
                "He flies like a thistle,
                Hey, gimme a whistle!"
                Number Nine could see her somersaulting after
 him. Jenny's Style Shop now seemed the safest place
 in Oz. He ran harder, dodging the crowd, bumping
 into baby carriages, and starting the dogs chasing

 after him. But Scraps kept tumbling close behind
 him. Her many-colored patches of silk, velvet, ging-
 ham, and calico flashed like a pinwheel.
                "Whistlebreeches, stay and play,
                You can work another day!"
 she called after him.
                Whistlebreeches came running around the corner
 of Strawberry Street and dashed into the shelter of
 Jenny's Style Shop.
                "Whew!" he exclaimed, wiping his face with his
 sleeve. "I finally got away from that patchwork
 tomboy!"
                "Look out! Here she comes!" called Jenny.
                Number Nine jumped just in time. Scraps came
 tumbling into the shop, and somersaulted right
 through the turn-style!
 When the Patchwork Girl arose, she looked at her-
 self in surprise. The turn-style had dressed her in
 an eight-year-old boy's bathing suit! Scaps threw
 out her arms to Jenny and wailed,
                "Please take this horrid suit away,
                And hang it on a rack;
                Your office boy I'll not delay,
                If you'll give my patches back."
                Number Nine felt sorry for the Patchwork Girl.

                "Scraps can't go out in this bathing suit," he said
 to Jenny. "Everyone will laugh at her. Please give
 her back her patches."
                But Jenny said in a peppery tone, "This wouldn't
 have happened, Whistlebreeches, if you had been
 minding my business!"
                Poor Scraps clutched the door with her cotton
 fingers and closed her button eyes and moaned. Her
 costume was too much even for her own sense of
 humor. Not one second did she waste, but shot out
 of the door even faster than she had entered. She
 headed straight for Jack Pumpkinhed's ozoplane.
  
 Chapter 10
  
 The Battle of the Houses
  
 NO SOONER has the town crier's wails gone
 over the first doorsteps of the Emerald City,
 than the news of the ozlection was passed from
 house to house.
                The people in the streets and in the houses ran
 about talking exitedly.
                "Isn't Ozma going to be Queen any more?"
                "Who is this Jenny Jump?"
                "Why, she's just an upstart!

                The questions flew back and forth like swallows,
 and finally nested in the chimneys. The houses
 dropped their eaves, listening, and then caught the
 excitement themselves. Their gables puckered into
 frowns, their windows showed their panes, and their
 sills curled like snarling lips.
                It made the houses angry to think that Ozma
 might not be Queen after the ozlection.
 But there was one house on Strawberry Street that
 was smiling with delight. That was Jenny's house.
 Proudly tilting its cupola, it fluttered its window
 shades at the other houses, as if to say, "My tenant
 may some day be Queen!"
                This made the other houses so angry that they
 would have shouted, if there hadn't been a law for-
 bidding them to do so.
                "Crack!" The house next door had slammed its
 chimney down on Jenny's house.
 Promptly, Jenny's house caught up its stoop and
 hurled it at the other's attic.
 The shingles on the roof of the first house bristled
 Bending over, it hurled its lightning rod, like a spear,
 through the roof of Jenny's house, which shuddered
 and pulled out the spear.
                The other houses on the street began to bounce

 up and down on their foundations, eager to get into
 the fight.
 Then a house far down the street threw a piano.
 All the people went scampering into the cellars.
 They knew enough to stay out of sight when the
 houses were quarreling.
                Jenny's house threw the piano back and pulled up
 a tree and pounded the house next door. Water
 pipes, sinks, garden statues, and flower pots rained
 on Jenny's house. Jenny's house fought back furi-
 ously and bravely.
                Inside the shop, the walls were swaying, the ceil-
 ing was cracking, the floor was pitching like a boat
 in a storm, and the turn-style was whirling around
 like a windmill.
                "What is happening?" Jenny exclaimed.
 Number Nine was running around the shop look-
 ing for a place to hide.
                "The houses are fighting! Hide yourself, quick!"
 the boy cried. Number Nine crawled under the
 counter, but Jenny ran fearlessly to the door.
 Going out was impossible. The air was filled with
 flying rafters, beams, bricks, and glass.
                "My shop will be in ruins!" Jenny exclaimed, and
 her temper began to grow hot. "Stop it! Stop it!"
 she shrieked at the houses. But they paid no atten-

 tion to her.
                "Come out, Number Nine, and help me stop this
 fight!"
 But the office boy refused to show his head.
                "I'll get you!" she said, and dashing to the counter
 she pulled him out by the seat of his whistlebreeches.
 The house shook violently again. A slab of plaster
 crashed down. The turn-style whirled more furi-
 ously than ever.
                "Go out and order those houses to stop fighting!"
 Jenny commanded.
 She shoved Number Nine out the door. Instead
 of obeying, the boy ducked under her arm and ran
 back into the shop. He went so fast, he was pitched
 straight into the turn-style that kept whirling around.
 Around and around went the office boy, caught in
 the arms of the turn-style. His clothes changed from
 whistlebreeches to overalls, to evening gown, to play
 suit, to zebra skin, to clown suit.
                "Help, help!" he shouted. But Jenny was too busy
 and too angry to help him now. She wasn't afraid of
 houses, or anything else.
 She ran out into the street. Whang! A bathtub
 sailed over her head.
 Squash! A brick fell in front of her..

                "Ouch!" A doorknob hit her foot.
 Jenny's temper went up. She got hotter and hotter
 with anger. She had not been so angry since the
 Leprechaun had stolen her pepper-cheese.
                "Stop it! Stop it!" she screamed. With every word
 she was spitting fire, fast and far. The house at
 which she was screaming caught fire. In a minute,
 flames were running up the steps and into the house.
 The people came leaping out of the cellars.
                "Fire! Fire! Fire!" they shouted.
 Down the street came clanging the fire injins,
 drawing a long green hose. They turned the hose
 into the burning house and put out the flames.
                Fortunately somebody had notified the Town Crier.
 He took up a collection of handkerchiefs and then
 went seriously to work. He moaned and sobbed,
 shrieked and howled, while he mopped at the tears
 that ran down his face. He didn't miss a single
 groan.
                Once he stopped and began to weep all over again
 in a different key, wringing his hands.
                The houses fought less and less furiously. Finally
 a soft forbidden sob came from one of them and
 then a half-smothered whimper. There was a deep
 sighand then the piles of broken buildings began to
 pull themselves together bit by bit. Each one picked

 his own parts out of the litter. They set back their
 chimneys, straightened their railings and fences,
 stood     up their stoops, and returned every last brick
 and flower-pot to its place. At last the street looked
 as neat and pretty as ever.
                A crowd gathered curiously before the Style Shop,
 to stare at the girl who was running against Ozma
 in the ozlection and had caused the houses to grow
 so angry. Jenny didn't know why they were looking
 at her.
                She returned to her shop. There was Number
 Nine, still whirling on the turn-style. Jenny pressed
 some buttons and stopped it. The boy stood up,
 clothed once more in his whistlebreeches.
                "There is a crowd outside. Hurry, and take out
 some of the latest styles and hang them on the trees
 for the people to see," Jenny ordered briskly. "We
 can't miss such a good chance for a Grand Opening."
  
 CHAPTER 11
  
 Casts Her Vote
  
 THE FIRST person to step into the shop was
 Jellia Jamb, Ozma's maid-in-waiting.

                "I have a message for you from Queen Ozma,"
 Jellia said. Her words were coming out of her ear.
 "The ozlection has started, and right shoes are to
 be the votes."
                Jenny was so startled to hear Jellia talking out
 of her ear, that she hardly paid attention to what
 Jellia was saying.
                "You poor dear, what has sealed your lips?" Jenny
 exclaimed.
                "They are sewed with magic thread and cannot be
 undone until Ozma's new birthday dress of cob-
 webs is finished." Jellia's ear spoke sadly. "That
 won't be until next year. The spiders are weaving
 the thread for it now."
                Number Nine came forward curiously. "How can
 you tell your earaches from your toothaches?" he
 asked.
                Jenny waved him aside.
                "Nonsense! what an old-fashioned idea. You don't
 have to wait until next year," said Jenny to Jellia.
 "Just bring me Ozma's last birthday dress, and we'll
 see what can be done."
                Jellia's eyes opened wide. "Do you think you can
 undo the magic threads?" she asked disbelievingly.
                "I don't know," said Jenny, "but I can try. Hurry
 along."

                Jellia departed and was back in a few minutes,
 carrying the silver and gold birthday dress that Ozma
 had worn in the parade. Jenny carried the dress to
 the turn-style and laid it across the spokes. She
 pressed a dozen different buttons and spun the style.
                Flash! The silver and gold dress was gone, and in
 its place was a most delightful dream-dress of cob-
 webs and bubbles.
                "Oh-h-h!" exclaimed Jellia. "Isn't it a beauty!"
 Quickly she put her hand to her mouth with a cry
 of delight.
                "Cake's sake! It worked! I'm talking through my
 mouth!"
                Jenny came close to examine Jellia's lips. The
 turn-style had truly freed Jellia from the enchant-
 ment. There was not a trace of the silver thread or
 golden needles in the maid's mouth.
                "What is that wonderful machine?" asked Jellia,
 going close to the turn-style.
                Jenny stepped before the turn-style. ''Never mind,''
 she said. "You may take Ozma's new birthday dress
 to her. I hope she likes it. Give her my thanks for
 the news of the ozlection."
                "How can I repay you for what you have done?"
 Jellia asked.

                "You can leave your vote," said Jenny promptly.
 Jellia looked unwilling, but she slipped off her shoe
 and hurried away.
                "There! I have my first vote," said Jenny tri-
 umphantly. She looked at the office boy. "And yours
 can be the second. Off with your shoe!"
                "First you must do me a favor," said Number Nine.
 "Give me the day off."
                "I cannot spare you on the day of the Grand Open-
 ing. But you shall have tomorrow," Jenny promised.
                Number Nine took off his right shoe and placed
 it beside Jellia's in the corner. Then three women
 came into the shop-a tall red Quadling, a short
 purple Gillikin, and a fat yellow Winkie.
                "What are these new styles?" they asked. "We
 have never had new styles in Oz before. when clothes
 wear out, we make others just like them."
                "That's a great pity, ladies," said Jenny in her best
 sales manner. "Clothes make the man, but man
 doesn't have to make his clothes. Step through the
 magic turn-style. A new hair-set is given with each
 costume today."
                The first to go through the turn-style was the tall
 red Quadling.
                "I've always wanted a sea-spray dress," she said.
 Jenny pressed some buttons, and zoom! The lady

 came out dressed in a dazzling dress made of sea-
 spray. Her hair, that had been pinned in a thick red
 biscuit, was bobbed and bent in the latest style.
                "My, oh, my!" squealed the Winkle and the Gilli-
 kin. "Make us look like that!"
                Jenny put them through the turn-style, and in a
 few minutes the tall red woman, the short purple one,
 and the fat yellow one were standing side by side
 before the mirror. They were dressed in three differ-
 ent styles of beautiful sea-spray dresses.
                "We'll run out and be the first ones to show the
 latest style!"
                The tall lady, the short one, and the fat one started
 from the shop.
                "Wait!" said Jenny. "Your votes, please. For each
 dress, a shoe should be left."
                The three stopped long enough to take off their
 shoes, and then they departed.
                After them a constant stream of women, men, and
 children came pouring into the Style Shop. Every-
 one who went out told a friend about the magical
 turn-style, and people from all over the city kept
 coming to be re-styled.
                Each time, Jenny said, "In return for a style, a
 shoe should be left."

                The turn-style was kept busily whirling. The votes
 kept piling up until there were so many that Number
 Nine had to move them to the basement.
                Jenny was happier than she had ever been in her
 life. She was the most important person in the
 Emerald City today. And, if the votes kept coming so
 fast, Miss Jenny Jump might be the next Ruler
 of Oz!
                At the end of the day, when the shop was closed,
 Jenny and the office boy went down to the basement
 with a lighted candle to count the votes.
                when Jenny had counted to 621, she suddenly
 cried out, "Whistlebreeches, we've made a terrible
 mistake! All these shoes are left shoes. We don't
 have the right ones! They can't count as votes."
                "I knew it all the time," the boy said. "You kept
 telling the people that the shoe must be left."
                "Why didn't you correct me?" said Jenny angrily.
 "I didn't dare, Boss. I'm afraid of your temper."
 The the office boy ran for his life, for Jenny
 began throwing 621 shoes after him.
  
 CHAPTER 12
  
 Jack Pumpkinhead's Concert
  

 IT WAS early evening in the Emerald City. At the
 palace, Queen Ozma and Princess Dorothy were
 getting ready for the concert.
                Dorothy came out of her private rooms and went
 into Ozma's dressing room.
                "All ready so soon?" asked Ozma, turning with a
 smile.
                "I hurried as fast as I could," said Dorothy. "I
 am so eager to hear Jack Pumpkinhead's Glee Club
 and Orchestra. Aunt Em and Uncle Henry are wait-
 ing for us on the palace stairs."
                Dorothy looked at Ozma's gown. Then she said,
 "Isn't that a new dress, Ozma dear? I've never seen
 it before."
                Ozma was wearing a green and purple dress of
 spun glass. With every move, it glittered as if moon-
 light had been woven into it.
                "Jellia and I visited Jenny Jump's new Style Shop
 this afternoon," she said. "Jenny imagined this dress
 for me. I like it very much. I am glad that I allowed
 Jenny to use her mild form of magic."
                Ozma smoothed her skirt. Jellia fastened the last
 button on the gown. Then she stepped back and
 looked at Ozma, holding her head on one side.
                The three girls went out. When they reached the

 palace stairs, they were joined by Aunt Em and
 Uncle Henry. All five proceeded to Ozma's waiting
 carriage. The Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger
 were harnessed to this green carriage with golden
 wheels. The Cowardly Lion was wearing a white satin
 ribbon in his mane, and the Hungry Tiger had a
 black satin bow around his tail. Tik Tok, the coach-
 man, shone with a new copper polish.
                Clusters of red, yellow, purple, and blue people
 were coming along the street toward the palace.
 These were some of the visitors who had come in
 from the four countries of Oz. They had come into
 town to attend Jack Pumpkinhead's concert, and
 to vote in the ozlection.
                As each group reached the palace, they untied their
 right shoes and cast them into a large moving van
 standing near the palace stairs. Kabumpo the Ele-
 phant was harnessed to this van. The van and Ka-
 bumpo were gaily decorated with green and gold
 streamers. Kabumpo looked a little tired. Today he
 had pulled twenty-two loads of Ozma's votes from
 the palace to Jack Pumpkinhead's ozoplane.
                Professor Wogglebug came along the street, carry-
 ing a book under his arm and swinging an empty
 gallon can. When he came to Ozma's carriage, he
 stopped and swept off his hat in a bow.

                "Good evening, Professor," said Ozma.
                "Pardon me for differing with you but it's not a
 good evening at all," said the Wogglebug.
                "Looks like a good evening to me," Uncle Henry
 spoke up. "Fine corn-growing weather, in Kansas."
                Aunt Em nudged Uncle Henry. "Henry! You know
 better than to correct a professor. You forgot, this
 isn't Kansas."
                The Professor bowed to Aunt Em. "I take you to
 be a sensible woman, madam, who understands the
 dignity of the learned professions."
                Aunt Em straightened her hat and smiled proudly.
 Ozma said, "Won't you get into the carriage and
 come to the concert with us, Professor?"
                "Hum, humph! Would love to, but can't." He held
 up the empty gallon can. "I am on my way to a gas
 station to get this filled with midnight oil. Then I
 shall go to the Ivory Tower in the library to con-
 tinue my research on the Heelers. You remember I
 told you they feed on votes and may try to rob us.
 This afternoon I discovered some startling new in-
 formation in a book I wrote last week. If Your
 Majesty will permit me, I shall read from page one
 million and six."
                Without waiting for an answer, the Professor put

 down the can and opened his book. He leafed through
 a million and five pages and then began to read.
                "The Heeler is such a mean animal, that he is
 hated by his own shadow. Whenever it gets a chance,
 the shadow bites, kicks, or pulls the Heeler's tail.
 Consequently the Heeler is afraid of his own shadow.
 Therefore he comes out only in the dark, when his
 shadow won't be following him. On moonless nights,
 Heelers attack. BEWARE OF THE HEELERS!"
 The Professor shut his book with a snap. "To-
 night there will be no moon. And the Heelers are so
 slippery that I fear they may slip through the barrier
 around Oz. Therefore, Your Majesty, it is NOT a
 good evening! I advise you to return to the palace
 and lock all the doors. The Heeler is a slippery
 sneak and no magic has the slightest effect on him!"
                Ozma said, "But poor Jack Pumpkinhead would be
 too disappointed if we didn't come to his concert. It
 has been a dull week for him, staying in his ozoplane
 to guard the votes. To pass the time, he trained the
 shoes to perform as a Glee Club and Orchestra. To-
 night he is giving his first concert."
                "Be warned, Your Majesty!" The Wogglebug stood
 on the tips of his toes, and his antennae quivered.
                Tik Tok turned around. "It-is-getting-late," he
 tocked.

                "Good night, Professor! Don't forget your can of
 midnight-oil," said Ozma.
                Tik Tok flapped the reins over the backs of the
 Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger, but the Cow-
 ardly Lion refused to move. He was crouching with
 his tail over his eyes.
                "I am afraid," said the Cowardly Lion. "I am
 terribly afraid of the Heelers. If I should see one, I'd
 faint!"
                "If we blindfold you, you won't see anything to be
 afraid of," suggested Dorothy.
                She got down from the carriage and tied her hand-
 kerchief across his eyes.
                "That's better," said the Cowardly Lion.
                "Can these Heelers be eaten?" the Hungry Tiger
 wanted to know.
                Ozma replied, "The Professor once said that they
 are only sponges."
                "Ugh! I would rather go hungry," said the Tiger.
 The team trotted off, drawing the carriage. Soon
 they arrived at a large pumpkin field at the edge of
 the city, where the concert was to be held. It was
 to be an open-air concert. In the soft green twilight,
 the people could be seen sitting on hundreds of
 pumpkins that grew in the field. Beside each person

 sat a cat, held by a leash. The cats had been brought
 because they could see in the dark and were to lead
 their masters home after the concert.
                In one corner of the pumpkin field stood Jack
 Pumpkinhead's ozoplane. It was being used as the
 stage for the concert. This ozoplane was last year's
 model. It had been invented and built by the Wizard
 of Oz, who gave it to Ozma. When the new year's
 model was made, the old ozoplane was given to Jack
 Pumpkinhead.
                The shoes were gathered in a half-circle near the
 ozoplane. The Sawhorse stood patiently near the
 door of the ozoplane, guarding the rest of the shoes
 inside. The musical shoes were tuning up for the
 concert. Jack Pumpkinhead stood before them, hold-
 ing a soundproof bag filled with their squeaks and
 broken chords. As any last-minute squeak came from
 a shoe, Jack caught it and stuffed it into the bag.
                When Ozma, Dorothy, Jellia, Aunt Em, and Uncle
 Henry had seated themselves on pumpkins in the
 front row, Jack Pumpkinhead waved a golden-rod
 and announced, "The first number by our Orchestra
 and Glee Club is Shoeman's Sonata. I hope you will
 not find our work slip-shod."
                From the shoe horns came the opening notes. The
 shoe strings soon joined in, strumming solefully.

 Then the Glee Club waggled their tongues and began
 to sing. As the first number ended, applause broke
 out over the pumpkin field.
                Next was Shoebert's Serenade. Then a riding boot
 Played a solo, "A-hunting We Will Go." The Glee
 Club offered "0 Dem Golden Slippers," and it was
 so well liked that the audience clapped and whistled.
 Out in the pumpkin field it was growing so dark
 that the colors of the people could no longer be seen.
 The hundreds of cat eyes glowed like emeralds.
                Ozma bent toward Dorothy and whispered, "It's
 getting so dark, I can't help thinking of the Pro-
 fessor's warning."
                Just then a terrific screaming came from the oppo-
 site end of the city. The audience jumped up and
 began to run about in fright.
                "what is happening in the city?" they cried.
                "Run, everyone!" called Ozma. "It's the Heelers.
 They've broken through the city gate!"
  
 CHAPTER 13
  
 Beware of the Heelers!"
  
 WHILE Ozma and hundreds of her people were

 at the concert, the Guardian of the Gate was
 dozing in his tower above the city wall. It had been
 a busy day. Many people in the city had not cast
 their votes. They would wait until the last day. But
 those who lived outside the city had wanted to vote
 early, lest they lose their chance. Their right shoes
 Were piled in the ozoplane, guarded by the Sawhorse.
 Most of the city people still had both shoes.
 The old Guardian was tired. "No more voters will
 come this late," he said to himself, "so I think I'll
 take a little snooze."
 He closed his eyes and promptly fell asleep.
 At this very hour, from the Shifting Sands beyond
 the Munchkin country, was coming a procession of
 slinking creatures. They were the Heelers! They
 had got wind of the ozlection. Right shoes, they had
 heard, would be votes. There would be plenty of
 votes for their greedy snouts.
 As soon as it was dark, they had set out for the
 Emerald City. Already they had crossed the Munch-
 kin country, where, pushing their ugly Snouts
 through every window, they searched for the
 shoes. Those Munchkins who were not at the con-
 cert were asleep in their beds, and did not hear
 soft movements of the thieves.
 Onward toward the Emerald City the procession

 was creeping. It was so dark that there were
 shadows, and the Heelers felt brave. Nevertheless
 they walked with a cringing stoop. They walked on
 their heels, with their toes sticking up and their
 snouts feeling along the ground. Their snouts had
 funnel openings for sucking in votes, on which these
 monsters lived. The heels of their four feet were so
 run over that their legs were bowed. Their eyes were
 oily and shifting. Their bodies were shapeless and
 sodden sponges, with short tails. They were color-
 less, except for their leader, who had a green back.
 The rest of the Heelers kept after this green back,
 as if it were a magnet, drawing them.
 When the Heelers reached the gate of the Emerald
 City, their leader ordered a dozen of them to form
 a living ladder against the wall. This was done by
 one Heeler getting on the shoulders of another, a
 third standing on the second, a fourth standing on
 him, and so on, until the top of the wall was reached.
 The highest Heeler climbed onto the wall, and,
 dragging himself on his worn-down heels, he came to
 the tower. The Guardian of the Gate was peacefully
 snoring. The Heeler poked his wet snout through
 the window of the tower. He wriggled it along the
 floor until he found the Guardian's right foot. Fast-

 ening down the funnel end of his snout, he sucked:
 SHLUSH! SHLUSH! The shoe slid off the Guard-
 ian's foot and into the Heeler's stomach. The
 Guardian kept on snoring!
 Then the Heeler slunk down the tower steps inside
 the city and opened the gate for the others. There
 Was a rush of dark shapes into the Emerald City.
 Their bodies slithered along every street, and their
 snouts poked into every open window, sucking in the
 shoes. The houses had been sleeping quietly. They
 awakened, drew back in disgust, and slammed their
 windows shut; but it was too late. The Heelers had
 already stolen the votes!
                Sir Hokus, the armor-clad knight of Oz, had left
 the concert early and he was being led home by his
 cat. He was taking a short cut through Pancake
 Park, when suddenly he saw something move before
 him. The cat arched its back and began to spit.
 Then the terrified animal broke its leash and sprang
 up a tree. Sir Hokus reached for his sword and
 cried out, "Oz bodkins! Who goes there? Friend
 or foe?"
                The shape at which he had shouted moved closer.
 Sir Hokus could hear a slobbery breathing in
 grass around his feet. The good knight struck out
 with his sword.

                "Have at you!" he cried. "Are you a dragon
 'Tis a long time since I've fought one!"
                Slash, slash, went his sword through the air.
 Suddenly Sir Hokus went sprawling on his back
 5omething funnel4ike had knocked him over.
                "Help! Ho!" cried the knight, as he felt the funnel
 close around his right foot and begin to suck at it.
 He felt the rivets that held the iron shoe to his armor
 begin to break. "The Heelers! The Heelers!" he
 cried.
                From every side the cry was taken up. "The
 Heelers! The Heelers!" screamed the people, running
 to find safety where they could.
                The Heelers sprang at them, knocking them down
 and sucking off their right shoes! No one was really
 hurt, but everyone was frightened. The air was
 filled with screams, barking, babies' cries, and the
 hoggish SHLUSH! SHLUSH! of wet snouts.
                People, running in the darkness, bumped together
 and fell, rolling in the street. When they picked
 themselves up, they were unharmed, except for
 the loss of one shoe. But they kept running and
 screaming.
                In Pancake Park, the Heeler that had attacked
 Sir Hokus was coughing and choking on the knight's

 iron shoe. It had caught in his throat, where it
 rasped like a file. Sir Hokus got to his feet shouting,
 "I'll pinion thee beneath my blade!"
                He thrust his sword at the choking shape, but the
 Heeler slithered away in the darkness. Sir Hokus
 hopped after him, in his one shoe.
 Down on Strawberry Street, Jenny and Whistle-
 breeches were just finishing counting the day's votes
 in the basement.
 "If we hurry, we can get to the concert before
 it is over," Jenny was saying to Whistlebreeches.
 "Ho, hum!" yawned the office boy. "This over-
 time work is wearing me out. Music hath charms,
 but give me my sleep. Ho, hah, hum!" He yawned
 and stretched his arms.
 Jenny stopped counting and held up her head.
 "Do you hear some screaming?" she said.
 The sleepy boy jumped up, instantly wide awake.
 "I certainly do! Something terrible is happening.
 Let's hide in the coal bin!"
                "Who's afraid?" asked Jenny, starting up the
 basement stairs. "I'm going out and see what's
 the--YEEOW! WHAT'S THAT?"
                A dozen Heelers were sliding down the stairs.
 Number Nine jumped into the coal bin and covered
 himself with coal.

                "Get out of here!" Jenny yelled. A long snout was
 reaching for her right foot. She gave the snout a
 kick, but her right foot was caught. Jenny pulled
 and pulled. "Let go!" she screamed. But her foot
 was held fast in the snout. When at last she pulled
 it free, the shoe was gone.
                The Heelers rushed past her and with disgusting
 grunts and snorts fell to eating the pile of votes.
 SHLUSH! SHLUSH! SHLUSH!
                "I must go and warn Ozma," thought Jenny.
 Stealing around the busy Heelers, she ran up the
 stairs and out to the street. It was completely dark,
 and hundreds of shapes seemed to be rolling around
 her. Several Heelers sniffed at her shoeless right
 foot and slunk away. Jenny ran, pushing her way
 through the crowd, toward the pumpkin field, where
 she knew Ozma was.
                The Heelers had now eaten all the right shoes in
 the city and were poking their snouts in all the cor-
 ners and vacant lots. They were coming closer to
 the pumpkin field. Jenny was running as hard as
 she could, but it seemed that she would never get
 there. Then she remembered her fairy foot.
                "Leaping Leprechauns! I can be there in a
 bounce!" She stopped running and stamped down

 on her fairy foot, and went sailing through the dark-
 ness, right into the pumpkin field.
                She came down close to Ozma, just in time to hear
 the Queen say, "Dorothy, Jellia, Aunt Em, and Uncle
 Henry, jump into the carriage, quickly! We must
 dash back and ask Professor Wogglebug how to
 handle the Heelers, since our magic will have no
 Ieffect on them."
                "Your Highness, it's too late!" Jenny cried. "The
 Heelers are right on the edge of the pumpkin field
 now!"
                "Mercy sakes! What shall we do?" exclaimed
 Aunt Em.
                The people around Ozma were crying, "Save us!
 Save us, gracious Queen!" And the clatter of
 Sawhorse's hooves could be heard as the wooden
 animal began galloping around in excitement an
 calling, "Help! Thieves!"
                Ozma was close to tears. "If only there were some
 light," she said. "Then the Heelers' shadows would
 come out. The professor said that Heelers are afraid
 of their shadows."
                From the far edge of the pumpkin field a few
 screams came.
                "They are already attacking the audience!" cried
 Dorothy. "Quick, Ozma, think of something!"

                "I shall command the Cowardly Lion to roar. That
 ought to hold them off for a few minutes," Ozma
 said. Stepping forward to where the carriage stood,
 Ozma placed her hand on the head of the blindfolded
 Cowardly Lion.
                "Dear friend, roar as you have never roared
 before!"
                "What's the matter?" asked the Cowardly Lion,
 beginning to shake with fear.
                "Don't worry. Just roar as loudly as you can."
 The Cowardly Lion opened his mouth and gave a
 tremendous roar. It was heard in the farthest cor-
 Ilers of the city. The cries and screams stopped.
                Ozma turned to Jenny. "Could you jump to the
 palace gardens?"
                "Oh, yes," said Jenny.
                "Then you can save us," said Ozma. "Jump to the
 gardens, wake the firefly fairies, and tell them to
 light up the whole city as brightly as in the after-
 noon, when the shadows are long."
                With a bounce of her magic foot, Jenny was off.
 The Cowardly Lion kept roaring, but the screams
 had begun again. The cunning Heelers had seen that
 no harm came from these roars.
                "Can't you roar louder?" Ozma said to the Cow-

 ardly Lion.
                "Are you sure there's nothing wrong?" asked the
 Cowardly Lion. "If I thought there was danger close
 by, I would faint!"
                "Don't think of danger. Just roar as loudly as you
 can," replied Ozma.
                "Oh, look! There, by the palace!" exclaimed Jellia.
 Everyone looked upward. Far off, a path of light
 was rising from the ground and streaming over the
 city. The air became bright with the lanterns of a
 million trillion firefly fairies. There was a constant
 stream coming from the palace garden. The river
 of light came toward the pumpkin field. The field
 became as bright as dawn.
                In the new light, Ozma, Dorothy, and the rest saw
 the horde of Heelers stop in their hunt and look be-
 hind them. Their shadows were growing! The
 Heelers began to shiver and whine with fright. The
 firefly fairies kept flying about, lighting up the air,
 and the shadows kept growing larger and larger.
 Soon they were larger than the Heelers! Then the
 shadows flung themselves upon the Heelers, biting
 them, yanking their tails, chewing their ears and
 snouts. The Heelers bellowed with pain and fright.
 They turned and went racing toward the city gate.
 Their shadows, in hot pursuit, drove them forward

 and through the gate.
                Not a single Heeler was left in the Emerald City!
 Then through the air came Jenny, returning to
 the pumpkin patch.
                "Well done!" cried Ozma, putting her arms around
 Jenny.
                Jenny smiled with pleasure at this embrace, and
 then suddenly she began to weep.
                "They ate up all my votes!"
                "Never mind," said Ozma. "Professor Wogglebug
 will think of some other way to vote. Shoes won't
 count after this. I'll let Jack Pumpkinhead keep my
 votes for his Glee Club."
                Jenny felt better. She smiled. "That's good of you,
 Ozma. You have enough votes now to win this oz-
 lection."
                "Oh, no," said Ozma. "If I won now, the ozlection
 would be ended. And the people are enjoying it so
 much!"
                The shoes that had run in fright and hidden in the
 ozoplane now came out and gathered up their pieces
 and instruments. The Sawhorse once more stationed
 itself near the ozoplane door. From all parts of the
 pumpkin field, the audience were leading their cats
 homeward. Jack Pumpkinhead took a bow before

 the empty seats.
                Ozma said, "Jenny, you must ride home with us
 in the carriage."
                Jenny and the royal party got into the carriage,
 and Tik Tok drove them to the palace. When all
 dismounted, Dorothy took her handkerchief from the
 eyes of the Cowardly Lion.
                "Now," she said, "we want to thank you for your
 brave deed."
                "What brave deed?" asked the Cowardly Lion in
 surprise.
                "Your splendid roars frightened back the Heelers,
 who were ready to jump upon us."
                "What! Were the Heelers there all the time I was
 roaring?"
                "Right next to us!" said Dorothy.
                There was a thud. The Cowardly Lion had fainted!
                Now the firefly fairies were returning to the palace
 gardens. The city was darkening once more. As the
 last person went through the city gate, the old Guard-
 ian awoke, looked out on the Land of Oz, and said
 to himself, "My, what a peaceful night this has
 been!"
  
 CHAPTER 14
  

 An Unexpected Visitor
  
                NUMBER NINE'S Uncle, the emerald cutter,
 was sitting before his window and admiring
 an emerald that he had cut four months ago. There
 was nothing more for him to do. He had inlaid
 every walk and gatepost in the city with emeralds.
 Since there was no more work, he sat around and
 got very lazy.
                He no longer even prepared the meals, and Num-
 ber Nine was late for work many mornings because
 he had to fix breakfast for himself and his uncle.
 This morning, Number Nine stood before the stove,
 turning the pecan pancakes. His eyes were half
 open, and he was yawning as he worked. Finally
 he said, "Breakfast--ready!"
                He brought the coffee pot to the table and began
 pouring his Uncle's coffee. Only water came from
 the pot.
                "You forgot to put in the coffee grounds," his
 Uncle said. "But it's too much bother to do that.
 We'll just drink hot water this morning."
                At last Number Nine started for Jenny's Style
 Shop. "Goodbye, Uncle!" He was already twenty
 minutes late. His breeches had begun to whistle. He

 would have to run all the way, or Jenny's temper
 would boil.
                "If only Jenny were younger," thought Number
 Nine, "she would think more about playing and less
 about working."
                As he was walking up Pudding Place, he saw a
 street magician pulling rabbits out of his hat. Num-
 ber Nine stopped. The magician was a dapper little
 man with ruddy cheeks and twinkling eyes. He wore
 a high checkered silk hat. When he saw Number
 Nine, he pulled a fruit cake out of his hat, broke it
 in two, and offered half to the boy, saying, "Just
 a little magic snack between friends. What do you
 say?" As he spoke, the magician examined the boy's
 whistlebreeches. "These breeches of yours look like
 real hand-made magic. I ought to know. I'm a bit
 of an expert in that line, myself!"
                "I don't know much about magic," answered Num-
 ber Nine. "But I can take you to my Boss. She
 knows a lot. I can't see how she does it. She is from
 New Jersey, U.S.A."
                "Well, well, well! New Jersey, eh? My, my!
 U.S.A.!" exclaimed the magician. "Not long ago I
 smelled some trouble coming from New Jersey. I'd
 like to meet your Boss, and get just such a pair of
 whistlebreeches as yours-for mornings, you under-

 stand. In fact, for such a morning as this. Come
 along!"
                Off they went, toward the Style Shop. The boy was
 thankful that his breeches simmered down while they
 walked, for he noticed that many people bowed low
 to his new friend.
                Meanwhile, in the Style Shop, Jenny was pacing
 back and forth. She was dressed in a shining peach
 colored creation she had designed herself. "That
 boy! An hour late!" she exclaimed in a huff. She
 glanced at the moon-faced clock. The clock was
 friendly to the office boy and always did its best to
 help him escape Jenny's temper.
                When Jenny looked away, the clock began pushing
 its hands backward, until it had gone back to the
 time when Number Nine was due to arrive each
 morning.
                Jenny set to work making more display styles to
 hang on the trees outside. She unrolled a bolt of
 sunset cloth and ran her fairy finger over it this
 way and that, watching the material fall apart in
 the pattern of an evening gown. As she was work-
 ing, she looked up at the clock and said, "Well, how
 late is he now?"
                It was an hour earlier than it had been before!

 "What !" exclaimed Jenny to the clock. "Are you
 trying to cover up that lazy boy's lateness again?
 I've been put out enough! Now you are going to be
 Put out!"
                Jenny pointed her finger toward the door.
                "Get down from that wall. Go and run somewhere
 else!"
                The kindly clock slid off the wall and marched out
 of the door. It stopped long enough for its gong to
 Sound a loud BONG! Then it crossed the street to
 the bakery, climbed up a wall there, and hung it-
 self on a friendly nail. It then set its hands to the
 correct time and continued to tick away as if nothing
 had happened.
                Into the Style Shop trotted Number Nine, with the
 magician behind him. Snatching a dust cloth, the
 boy began to whistle and work, keeping his face
 turned away from Jenny's angry eyes.
 The magician began poking around the shop, ex-
 amining everything. Jenny looked away from the
 office boy and watched to see what this little man
 would do. He was too inquisitive for her liking.
 "I am busy," she said snappishly. "If you don't
 want any new styles, please don't take up my time."
                                The magician spun around on his toe. "Ho, ho,
 what a temper!" he said. "I've come for some whistlebreeches."

                He pointed to Number Nine's.
 "Like those."
                 "We're out of that pattern. It's last week's style.
 We don't make them any more," Jenny said crossly.
                 "My, my, isn't that too bad! I guess I'll have to
 make a pair for myself!" With this, the mysteious
 little man slipped past Jenny, made a few magic
 passes in the air before the turn-style, and walked
 calmly into it.
                Jenny's face got redder and redder. She was al-
 most boiling with anger. The boy watched his Boss
 and edged closer and closer to the door. When the
 little man came through the turn-style, sure enough,
 he had on a pair of loud whistlebreeches. But his
 had improvements. This pair had eight notes in-
 stead of four, and cute little shut-off stops like
 mufflers on each whistle.
                "A later model," the little man said quietly to
 Jenny, as he took Number Nine by the arm. "I want
 to have a talk with your office boy. I'll send him
 back in a little while."
                Saying this, the magician led Number Nine out
 of the shop and up the street toward the palace.
 As they walked, the two pairs of whistlebreeches
 played a harmonious tune. This greatly amused the

 magician.
                "Rather an interesting Boss you have. If her face
 weren't so cross, it would be nice looking."
                "Yes," said the boy. "And if she were younger,
 she would think more of playing and less of work-
 ing."
                "Do you want her to be your age--about twelve?'
 asked the magician.
                Number Nine said eagerly, "Yes, indeed!"
                "Well, I'll see what can be done about it when I
 have the time. Leave everything to me! Goodbye."
                They had reached the grand entrance of the
 palace. "Goodbye," said Whistlebreeches, and he
 turned back toward the Style Shop.
                The little man entered the palace and ran nimbly
 up the first flight of stairs. Then he stopped, made a
 few passes in the air, and next moment he was
 standing in the middle of his own laboratory at the
 top of the palace.
                "Now, let me see. Jenny has a godfather, and I
 think he should be summoned at a time like this."
                Going to a table, the little man laid down his high
 checkered hat and picked up a piece of paper and a
 pencil. On the paper he wrote in large letters:
 SIKO POMPUS
 Then he made more magic passes in the air over the

 paper.
                "Now, I shall call the roll," he said, and he pro-
 ceeded to roll up the paper. Holding it to his mouth,
 he called through it, "Hi, Siko Pompus!"
                "Present!" answered a voice.
                Standing in the open window was the Leprechaun.
 his blue eyes danced merrily, and his bushy beard
 shone red. "Hello, Wizard, I heard ye callin'."
                He thrust his foot and a hairy hand downward and
 leaped lightly to the ground. Then he stood, even
 smaller than a gnome, but quick and good natured.
                "Hello, Siko," the Wizard greeted him gladly. "I
 called you because I want to talk to you about Jenny
 Jump, your godchild."
                "Oh, shure !" said the Leprechaun in his Irish
 brogue. "'Twas her I gave fairy eyes and fingers,
 and ears and a foot. For she let me have all her
 pepper-cheese. But I know it's disgracin' me she is."
 The tiny man shook his head and sighed. "Her
 temper, now, is a wonder! To tell ye the real truth,
 she got beyond me control!"
                "How would it be," asked the Wizard, "if I turned
 her age back a few years, and made her about
 eleven?"
                "Go ahead! It's a good thing to do. Shure, an'

 she'll lose her fairy gifts, though, for I hadn't given
 'em to her when she was eleven. She'll be better off
 without 'em. I'll keep 'em and give 'em back to her
 when she's afther learnin' to hold in her temper,"
 said the Leprechaun.
                "All right, Siko. Now she is too nasty tempered
 to be even a part-fairy."
                "Shure, an' it's right ye are, Wizard," said Siko
 Pompus. "Will that be all you'll be wantin' today?"
                "Yes. And now I have much to do," said the
 Wizard. "Come again, sometime!"
                "That I will. Goodbye to ye!" The Leprechaun
 jumped to the window and, leaping into the air,
 vanished.
  
 CHAPTER 15
  
 The Ozoplane Soars
  
 WELL, Jenny, aren't you ever going to give me
 a day off, as you promised in return for my
 vote?" Number Nine asked Jenny.
                "I don't see why I should," said Jenny crossly
 "The votes no longer count."
                "Nevertheless," argued the boy, "you must keep
 your promise. I want to take the day off and go

 gold-fishing."
                "Oh, very well! Since I promised, I suppose I
 shall have to let you go," said Jenny. The boy
 skipped happily out of the Style Shop. When he was
 gone, Jenny said, "I think it's time Ozma declared
 another way to vote. If we are going to have an
 ozlection, there is no need to waste time."
                Since she was alone in the shop, she decided to
 make herself a new dress. She went to the turn-
 style, studied the buttons with care, and slowly
 pressed several. When she went through, she came
 out wearing a dahlia print with long, slender petals.
                "I wonder if it's becoming," thought Jenny, and
 she stepped up to a mirror. When she saw herself,
 she gave an exclamation of surprise.
                "Is the mirror playing tricks on me, like that
 clock? Or is it my imagination? For I certainly look
 younger!"
                She ran to another mirror, and then to a third.
 Every mirror showed her the same younger-looking
 girl. She studied herself for a long time. The
 freckles were coming back to her face, her cheeks
 were growing rounder, and her dress, that would
 have fitted perfectly before the Wizard's visit, was
 now two sizes too big.

                "I must make myself another dress," she thought,
 and went to the turn-style. "I think I'll make it a
 cool dress, and go find Whistlebreeches and spend
 the afternoon fishing with him. I don't feel too old
 for that, now."
                Jenny went through the turn-style and came out
 dressed in a dress of silver fish scales. In her hand
 was a rod and reel.
                Someone was coming through the door. "Oh, dear
 a customer, just when I feel that pleasure comes be-
 fore business," thought Jenny.
                A red Quadling man, square bodied, with a box
 shaped head and box-shaped hands and feet, came
 up to Jenny. His square shoes were covered with
 bright red mud, and he was spattered all over with
 red smears. As he walked, he left square tracks of
 mud on Jenny's clean floor.
                "I am a Boxer," he began. "I am looking for a
 job. Do you need any help?"
                "You have come to the wrong place," said Jenny
 huffily. "This is no gymnasium! And anyway, who
 would hire you, looking like a mud-lark? Better get
 yourself some new clothes."
                Jenny took the Boxer's square red arm and pulled
 him toward the turn-style. He giggled as he stepped
 through it. He giggled even more when he saw

 himself wrapped in a slick, dazzling suit of cello-
 phane. Each of his box parts was neatly wrapped.
 The Boxer stepped up to the mirror.
                "Say," he said, "I look flashy enough to put on a
 public boxing match. Do you know where I can get
 someone to fight me? I fight very squarely."
                "A boxing match? Better find someone made of
 match boxes. The only boxer I know is Scraps, and
 she's made of patches," said Jenny.
                "Where can I find her?"
                "She is usually over in the pumpkin patch with
 Jack Pumpkinhead. I was just going to the river
 That is beyond the pumpkin patch. You may walk
 along with me."
                The Boxer backed slowly from the mirror. "I
 guess nobody could call me a mud-lark now, eh?" he
 said, admiring himself as long as Jenny's patience
 held out.
                Jenny said, "There won't be anything left of that
 beautiful suit when Scraps pitches into you! Now,
 come along."
                She hurried out to Strawberry Street, the Quad-
 ling Boxer walking beside her. They crossed Banana
 Boulevard and passed the Great Crystal Banquet
 Hall. A sign in the window read:

 HEAD WAITER WANTED
                "There's a job!" the Boxer said eagerly. He
 stopped, looked down at his cellophane suit, and
 added, "Did you say that Scraps girl would spoil my
 new clothes?"
                "She'll punch them full of holes!" said Jenny.
                "Then goodbye!" said the Boxer. "A cellophane
 suit will get me the job of Head Waiter in the Crystal
 Banquet Hall."
                The Boxer giggled and pranced lightly into the
 banquet hall. Jenny went on. Before she came to
 the river, she had to cross the pumpkin patch. As
 she came near to Jack Pumpkinhead's ozoplane, she
 saw that it had been decorated with pumpkins. She
 could hear voices singing in the ozoplane.
                "Maybe Number Nine stopped to hear the Shoe
 Glee Club," she thought. "I'll look in."
                She put her fishing rod against the ozoplane.
 Then, without hesitating, Jenny marched up to the
 door, opened it, and stepped inside. The singing
 Stopped. At first everything seemed dark. Jenny
 realized that she no longer had her fairy eye for
 she could not see clearly in the half-darkness of the
 ozoPlane. Then she heard a voice,
 "A grinner, a smiler,
 Here's the turn-styler!"

                A figure sprang out of the darkness. "Put up your
 fists !" it challenged. At the same moment, Jenny
 felt a soft punch in her eye.
 "Round one,
 You're done!"
 Then the soft punches began to fall all over Jenny's
 body.
                "Stop tickling me," said Jenny, beginning to laugh.
 "Jenny gets fussed
 When a little mussed !"
 the voice went on, as cotton hands kept tapping
 her.
                "Must you do that?" laughed Jenny. Her eyes
 were growing used to the darkness. She could now
 see Scraps dancing around and throwing out her
 fists. Jenny gave the patchwork girl a push that
 sent her across the ozoplane. She was as light as a
 feather pillow.
                "I'm sorry, but I had to do that," Jenny apologized.
 "When I'm scrappy,
 I'm happy,"
 replied Scraps and she kept slamming and punching
 wildly in all directions.
                "I'm happy, too," said Jenny. "Really, it's ozton-
 ishing how much fun this is. You are like a punching

 bag." She reached and pulled a handful of yarn
 from Scrap's head. "A living punching bag, with
 fringe!" Jenny laughed.
                This made Scraps come back at her with a fury
 of blows. Then her long cotton fingers caught
 around Jenny's neck and would not let go. At this
 point, a door opened, letting in more light. Jack
 PuInpkinhead's face grinned at Jenny and Scraps.
                Scraps tightened her fingers on Jenny's neck, and
 Jenny's anger flared up. She caught Scraps and
 shook her until the stitches in her side opened and
 Some padding fell over the floor.
                "I just had to knock the stuffing out of you," said
 Jenny.
                Scraps sagged a little and
 stuck out her red velvet tongue.
 "Time out for repairs,
 I must mend my tears,"
 she panted. She picked up a handful of cotton bat-
 ting and pushed it into herself. Then she patted
 herself into shape. Jack Pumpkinhead came for-
 ward.
                "Scraps, will you introduce me to your lady
 friend?" he said.
 "The 'fraidy cat?
 No lady, that!

 Who makes me mend,
 Is not a friend,"
 said Scraps, fastening herself together with pins.
 "Now, Scraps, that's no way to talk," Jack Pump-
 kinhead said, turning his triangular eyes to Jenny.
                "I am Jenny Jump, the new stylist," she said.
                "Welcome to my house," said Jack Pumpkinhead.
 "I'll show you my Glee Club." During the boxing
 match, the shoes had scattered all over the ozoplane.
 Jack Pumpkinhead gathered them into rows, talk-
 ing to Jenny.
                "Poor, downtrodden soles," he said. "I am trying
 to break them into a noteworthy life. This fellow
 here," Jack held up a broad-toed shoe, "sings with a
 brogue."
                When the shoes were in order, Jack Pumpkinhead
 said, "Would you like to hear some music?"
                "I don't have much time," said Jenny. "I am on
 my way to fish. But I should like to take a few
 minutes to explore the ozoplane."
                "I'd be delighted to show it to you." Jack Pump-
 kinhead sounded pleased. He gave Jenny a light pat
 on the head.
                Jenny followed him into the engine room. It was
 filled with all sorts of machinery and pipes.

                "I've started to build a pipe organ," Jack Pump-
 kinhead explained. "But I can put all the parts back
 into the engine whenever I want to."
                "Can you really?" exclaimed Jenny. "Why, you are
 bright! Let me see you do it."
                At this praise, Jack Pumpkinhead quickly began
 to re-assemble the engine. Jenny watched it taking
 shape under his hands. At last he said, bolting a
 lever in place, "There it is! I like levers better than
 buttons, don't you?"
                He backed away. Jenny caught hold of the lever
 and pulled it down.
                "What's this for?" she asked.
                "Don't touch that!" he yelled. "It's the starter!"
 At that moment, the crackling thunder of the en-
 gine ripped the air. The old ozoplane soared up into
 the sky!
 CHAPTER 16
  
  
 Shoes Desert a Soaring Ship
 NOW, WHAT did I tell you?" pleaded Jack.
 "Flying is more fun than fishing!" said
 Jenny and sat down in the pilot's seat. Taking the
 control lever in her hand, she guided the ozoplane
 in a wide circle above the pumpkin field.

                The shoes seemed nervous and hopped up to look
 out of the window. They lolled their tongues in fear,
 and their eyelets blinked when they saw how far
 away the Land of Oz now was. They swarmed around
 Jenny, and she shooed them away.
                "What's up? What's up?" they asked excitedly.
 "We are!" she said and sent the plane soaring
 even higher.
                Scraps was walking around with her hand to her
 ripped side, singing,
 "Let's find a first-aid station,
 Where I can have my operation.
 Don't let it fall, don't let it tip,
 Till I find a way to stop this ship."
 She began turning every valve that she could get
 her cotton fingers on, trying to stop the ozoplane.
 But the engine kept on as powerfully as ever.
                "It's disgusting how well this engine works!" said
 Jack Pumpkinhead.
                Scraps turned a wheel. The ozoplane went into
 a tail-spin.
                There was a lot of activity going on around it.
 The cloud pushers and the sky sweepers were hard
 at work. The sky sweepers had feather brooms
 growing where their hands should be. They worked

 in a long line, stooping as they brushed the trash
 from the sky. This trash was mostly star dust,
 thunder scum, and loose links of chain lightning.
                "Hey, there!" Jack Pumpkinhead cried, as he was
 pitched against the ceiling and then tossed against
 the wall, where his coat caught on a hook. He was
 left hanging there. He became so excited, he lost his
 head. The ship lurched again, and the head went
 sailing out of the window!
                "Catch me!" cried the Head, as the wind carried
 it away. It struck a little cloud and bounced to an-
 other and went rolling down a field of sky.
                "Look where you are going!" cried a voice. It
 came from a cloud pusher, which looked like a wind-
 bag shaped like a man. It was almost transparent.
                "No wonder I didn't see you. I was looking right
 through you!" said the Pumpkin Head.
                The sweepers were hurrying toward Jack's Head.
 The Head tried to roll out of their way, but it was
 not fast enough. A feather-broom hand sent Jack's
 head rolling into a pile of sky trash. The whole pile
 was pushed onto a dump star. Jack's Head lay
 smothering in the dust.
                "Oh, it feels like pepper in my eyes," said the
 Head. "I've got to get out of here!"
                When the sky sweepers had passed on, Jack's

 Head carefully rolled out of the pile and kept rolling
 along a point of the dump star, until it came to the
 end. There it hung itself over the end.
                Far below it, squads of skyscrapers were busily
 clearing up the weather. They kept scraping rain,
 hail, and dirty mist into piles beyond the horizon.
 The Pumpkin Head kept turning on the star point,
 looking for some sign of the ozoplane.
                "There is something!" it said, seeing a black
 particle, no bigger than a marble, high above itself.
                The particle grew bigger. It seemed to be floating
 aimlessly to the left and to the right, yet drawing
 nearer. At last the Pumpkin Head saw that it was
 covered with pumpkins. It was its own house, the
 ozoplane.
                "I hope no one has carved another pumpkin head
 for Jack. I am still as good as new," thought the
 Head.
                The ozoplane came on, and sailed directly over the
 Pumpkin Head. The Head could see Scraps and
 Jenny looking out of the window. The plane slowly
 described a circle, while an anchor, fastened to a
 long mooring line, plunged down. The anchor hit
 the heap of sky rubbish and sank into it, making
 the ozoplane fast to the dump star.

                "Hurrah!" shouted the Pumpkin Head. "I'm
 saved."
                Down the mooring line slid Scraps. Clinging to the
 line, she reached over and unhooked Jack's Head
 from the star point. Then, holding it under her
 arm, she worked herself up the line and into the
 cabin of the plane. As soon as Scraps was safely
 back with the Head, Jenny unhooked Jack's wooden
 body from the wall and fastened the Head onto it.
                "Thank my lucky dump star, I'm all in one piece,"
 exclaimed Jack. His Pumpkin Head looked around.
                "Thanks for saving me, Scraps. It's good to be
 back. You're all looking fine. Jenny, I believe you
 are younger than when I left."
                "I am younger," said Jenny, looking down at her
 dress. Again it was a size too large for her. "We'll
 have to go back to the Emerald City soon, so I can
 turn myself out another style."
                Jenny sat down at the controls while Jack Pump-
 kinhead hauled up the mooring line; The ozoplane
 roared ahead. Scraps held her hand to her side.
                "There's a stitch in my side
                That I can't abide.
                I don't know when
                I can scrap again."
 Scraps looked at Jenny and stuck out her red velvet

 tongue. But Jenny was looking at a book.
                "The skyscape looks different," Jenny said. "I'm
 afraid we're lost."
                Jack Pumpkinhead rushed anxiously to the win-
 dow and looked out. The air was no longer clear
 and blue, but brown and thick, with a slightly sweet
 smell.
                "We must have crossed the horizon," said Jack.
 "We certainly are lost! Dog-gone!"
                When the shoes heard this, they broke into a sole-
 ful lament, "Where, oh, where, has my little dog
 gone?"
                "Where, oh, where can we be?" continued Jenny.
 As the shoes finished their song, they jumped
 despairingly to the window of the speeding plane
 and leaped out.
                "It's a bad sign," Jack Pumpkinhead said, "when
 shoes desert a soaring air-ship."
                Through the window, Jenny could see a large
 brown mountain directly in front of her. The plane
 was heading right for it, and there was nothing she
 could do to stop it.
                Jack grabbed hold of his head. "I won't lose this
 again, no matter what happens," he said.
                The ozoplane plunged down. Down, down, down,

 through the brown air it fell.
                "Look out, everyone !" cried Jenny. "We're going
 to crash!"
  
 CHAPTER 17
  
 The Attack of the Chocolate Soldiers
  
 CRASH! SPLASH! The ozoplane had landed in a
 field of soft brown mush. The mush was splat
 tered up through the windows, spotting Jenny's
 dress.
                 "I smell chocolate," she said.
  She looked down at her dress and picked off one
 of the spots. She smelled it and then tasted it.
                "It is chocolate! Where on Oz can we be?"
                "We must have crashed into a chocolate star," said
 Jack Pumpkinhead. He straightened his head which
 had been jarred sidewise in the crash.
                "It looks like fudge," said Jenny. "And it smells
 and tastes like it, too."
                Jack answered, "Scraps and I have never tasted
 or smelled anything, and never intend to. We go
 entirely by looks. Let's go out and look things over."
                The three climbed out of the ozoplane. As soon
 as Jenny's feet touched the surface, she began to

 sink into the chocolate bog. She saw Jack sinking,
 too. Scraps remained on top, for she weighed only
 nine pounds.
                Jenny looked around. They were in a valley of
 cream chocolate, surrounded by towering cliffs of
 hard chocolate with white sugar tops.
                "We are trapped," said Jenny. "What could be
 sweeter?"
                Just then she heard, PLOP, PLOP! Something
 hard was raining out of the sky into the brown ooze.
                "Why, Jack, it's the shoes! Our plane fell faster
 than they!" exclaimed Jenny.
                Scraps darted here and there over the chocolate!
 gathering up the members of Jack's Glee Club.
                "It's plain to be seen'
                You're no longer clean,"
 said Scraps, as she tossed the shoes into the ozoplane.
 The shoes at once began polishing themselves.
                Jenny had sunk deeper. "It's lucky I have grown
 younger," she thought, "or I'd be so heavy I'd go
 in over my head."
                "A dry moon or a dusty star would be better than
 this sickening stuff," sniffed Jack, with a glitter in
 the hollow of his eye.
                "I agree," said Jenny. "Chocolate is all right in

 small amounts. But this is too much of a good
 thing!"
                Far off, Jenny saw something moving down from
 the sugary tops of the mountains. Some creatures
 were coming with alarming speed. They leaped over
 piles of broken chocolate and came racing into the
 valley.
                "Now we're in hot chocolate!" said Jenny. "As
 I smell it, those are giant chocolate soldiers!"
                She began to struggle to get out of the slush, but
 she was held fast.
                "My fairy foot no longer has any power!" she said
 in dismay.
                The chocolate army loomed around them, so close
 now that Jenny could see how the soldiers were
 made. They all looked alike, as if they had been
 taken from the same mold. Each had a bulge on the
 left of his nose, and a wiggly line running down
 his side. Their feet could not be seen, for they were
 sliding under the surface of the mush. "Why, they
 look de-feeted already!" Jenny said.
                They all moved together. They all acted as one
 man. 'When one head turned, all heads turned.
 When one spoke, all spoke together,
                "Halt! Aim! Fire!" The soldiers stopped and
 raised their chocolate guns. Ping! Ping! Ping!

 Chocolate drops began spattering the three pris-
 oners.
                Jack Pumpkinhead, wiping the chocolate out of
 his eyes, said, "What are they so all-fired mad
 about?"
                Jenny was trying hard to keep her temper down,
 but in spite of herself it was rising.
                "They're making a mess of things!" she said.
                Scraps was the only one who was delighted with
 the battle. She was so excited that she forgot to
 rhyme. She crouched and then leaped up, throwing
 herself and swinging her fists at the nearest choco-
 late soldier, who had been firing at Jenny.
 "Monkey face!" she cried at him. She pushed him.
 He toppled sidewise, throwing his neighbor off bal-
 ance. He in turn bumped over the next, and he the
 next, until all the soldiers were lying in the choco-
 late mud.
                With a great effort, the first soldier righted him-
 self, and, as he came up, the rest also rose.
                The first soldier fired at Scraps and then knocked
 her down with the butt of his gun. Scraps was
 gripped in the chocolate bog, held by her knee and
 elbow. Jenny tried to pull herself out of the mire
 and help Scraps. But the ooze held her fast. Jack

 Pumpkinhead was sinking deeper all the time.
                The soldiers ordered themselves, "Cease firing!
 Advance!" They shouldered their guns and marched
 up to Jenny, Scraps, and Jack Pumpkinhead. They
 raised their hands and all pointed to the ozoplane.
                "No trespassing!" they all said together.
                "Is that why you are so black in the face? We
 meant no harm," said Jenny.
                The hands all swung as one hand, pointing at her:
 "No parking on this star!"
                "We had engine trouble," said Jenny.
                "Get out! The kit and kaboodle of you!" choruse
 the soldiers.
                "We can't, you thick-heads! The plane is stuck
 fast."
                "You are under arrest!" spoke the soldiers. And
 then they ordered themselves, "Throw them in
 prison !"
                They all marched closer and pulled Scraps, Jenny,
 and Jack Pumpkinhead out of the soft chocolate.
                "Forward march!" said the soldiers together and
 dragged their prisoners across the valley.
                When they reached the higher chocolate soil, the
 footing became firmer. The prisoners could walk by
 themselves. But the guard kept in close formation
 around them.

                Jack, Scraps, and Jenny kept near each other.
 Jack took Jenny's hand and patted it. His deep eyes
 showed his anxiety.
                "This is a pretty kettle of fudge," he spoke sadly.
 "If I could eat, I'd make a meal of all these soldiers."
                "There are too many of them for me to eat,"
 Jenny replied. "I'd get indigestion eating just a leg
 of one of those giants."
                Scraps kept sticking out her velvet tongue at the
 soldiers. Her shoebutton eyes glinted. She kept
 daring them to box with her, but the soldiers ignored
 her, except to push her with a gun butt when she
 got too wild.
                "I suppose their prison is made of bitter choco-
 late," said Jenny. "It will be bitter for me if they
 keep me locked up here. I won't be able to get any
 votes and I'll lose the ozlection."
                From below, in the valley, came a sad song. It
 was the shoes, singing in the ozoplane.
                "How canst thou leave us?
                How canst thou from us part?"
 The prisoners and the soldiers climbed up the
 chocolate cliffs to the top of a sugar-coated peak.
 Here was a large encampment. The barracks were
 made of chocolate blocks, roofed with sugar frost-

 ing. The three prisoners were marched into a tent
 where a moody-looking chocolate General sat on a
 large chocolate cake.
                There wasn't enough room in the tent for all the
 soldiers. Since none of them would go in without
 the others, they all waited outside. Jenny, Jack, and
 Scraps were pushed into the tent. They stopped
 before the giant chocolate General.
                "Please let us go," said Jenny. "We meant no
 harm."
                The chocolate General frowned darkly. "Your fly-
 ing machine has spoiled a valley of good chocolate
 sauce. It was to have made me a thousand soldiers
 that I need for my attack on Oz."
                "What !" exclaimed Jenny. "Are you going to at-
 tack Oz?"
                "Certainly. The hour of the attack is set. To-
 morrow my soldiers, dressed in tinfoil armor, will
 ride a silver cloud to the very gate of the Emerald
 City!"
                "Oh, oh," cried Jenny, "someone must warn Ozma."
                The General started up wrathfully. "No one is
 going to warn Ozma! The three of you will be
 thrown behind chocolate bars for the rest of your
 lives?"
                Jack Pumpkinhead, Scraps, and Jenny exchanged

 looks of dismay. Jack cried out, "The rest of our
 lives? Why, the people of Oz live forever !"
                "Then you shall be my captives forever! HA! HA!
 HA !" laughed the General. He called to the soldiers
 outside.
                "Put the Pumpkinhead and the Rags Creature in
 one prison, and that real girl in a prison by herself.
 Guard them well !"
                The three prisoners went unhappily from the tent.
 Outside, the soldiers led them off to the prisons.
  
 CHAPTER 18
  
 Number Nine Runs the Shop
  
 MEANWHILE, back in the Emerald City, the
 house on Strawberry Street waited for Jenny
 to return. But all that night it was empty. Wish-
 ing to surprise Jenny when she returned, it set about
 preparing breakfast. The forks, knives, and plates
 set themselves on the table. The ladle battered some
 oriole eggs and strawberry juice in a bowl and
 thickened it with rose flour. The 'waffle iron con-
 nected itself, and when it was warm the mixing
 bowl poured its batter onto it. When the waffle was

 finished, it turned itself out onto a plate, and the
 plate slipped into the oven, keeping warm until
 Jenny's return.
                Then the kitchen swept itself with the broom, and
 the sink set about cleaning the pans. Reaching into
 the garden, the house picked a nosegay of dewy
 morning flowers and set it in a vase on the table.
                It was the most inviting breakfast scene. But no
 Jenny appeared to enjoy it. Instead, coming up the
 stairs of the shop was Number Nine. He was earlier
 than usual, for he was lonely for Jenny. Yesterday
 he had missed his Boss while he fished alone at the
 river.
                "Maybe she will grow young enough to enjoy fish-
 ing soon," he thought, as he walked into the Style
 Shop. He looked around at the empty shop. Where
 was Jenny? Going into the other rooms, he saw that
 she had not slept in her bed.
                "Maybe she'll come back soon. I'll run the shop
 for her while she is gone," he thought.
                Number Nine got a dust cloth and polished the
 turn~style until it shone. As he finished this task,
 he heard a clatter of hooves, and many voices. He
 ran to the door, and there he saw his mother and
 father and thirteen sisters and brothers sitting in
 the farm wagon. Hitched to the wagon were his

 father's four blue mules, whose ears were so long
 that they reached to the second story of the house.
 The children were all dressed in dainty blue clothing.
 They looked very happy.
                When the family saw Number Nine at the door of
 the Style Shop, they waved, jumped down from the
 wagon, and ran in to kiss him.
                The mules hee-hawed their greeting.
                "We have come to town to get four blue-blooded
 horses and to see how our dear Number Nine is
 getting along," said the father. "We are going to
 stay at Uncle's house for a few days. He will be
 glad to have company."
                Number Nine's mother put her arm around him,
 "City life agrees with you, son. You are looking such
 a nice deep blue. Those breeches aren't the same that
 I made for you, are they?" She pointed to the
 whistlebreeches. Number Nine felt very important.
                "My Boss made them with the magic turn-style,"
 he said. "I can make them play. Listen."
                Number Nine sat down, put his feet up on the
 counter, and lazily crossed his arms. Immediately
 the four whistles struck up a tune.
                "Well, bless my nose!" said his father.
 Number Nine got out of his chair. "I'm in charge

 here today," he said importantly. "I can't loaf."
                He led his mother around the shop, showing her
 the patterns and styles. She kept saying, "oh," and
 "ahz," and "most oztonishing!"
                The children were running here and there, while
 their father examined the turn-style. "Is this the
 magic contraption?" he asked.
                "Yes. Would you like a new suit, father?"
                "Sure you can suit me? I want something prac-
 tical, for the farm work."
                "Just go through the turn-style," urged Number
 Nine, "and I'll push the buttons."
                The father hesitated awhile, stroking his chin and
 gazing at the turn-style. At last he went through.
 Number Nine pushed many buttons, and the farmer
 came out dressed in a suit of blue cloth. It was
 mostly wool, mixed with rubber, twisted through
 with silk, and woven around with fine wire. It was
 the stoutest ozwoven product.
                "That's just what I want," said the farmer. "My
 goat can't chew this up!"
                All the children began clamoring to go through
 the turn-style. "Mother comes first," said Number
 Nine. "Come on, mother. Tell me what style you
 want"
                Mother was all aflutter. She hung back, say-

 ing, "Why, my dress is good enough. I worked on
 it a long time. Guess I'll go through the turn-style
 some other day."
                "Oh, mother! Now, mother!" cried all the chil-
 dren. "We want to see how pretty you can be."
                They got behind her and pushed her against the
 turn-style. Sister Six, a bright blue-faced girl, said,
 "Let me work the buttons, Number Nine. I know
 what's becoming to mother better than you do."
                Sister Six pushed the buttons, and the mother went
 through the turn-style. When she came out, the shop
 was filled with the children's exclamations of de-
 light. Her dress was of two interchanging colors.
 First it was blue, then the blue disappeared and it
 was violet, then it changed back to blue. When she
 moved, the skirt rustled like flowers in the gentle
 breeze of a garden.
                "You look just like a princess!" the girls cried.
                "I'm thrilled," said the mother. "I wouldn't have
 missed this for anything."
                Now it was the children's turn. They lined up.
 There were so many of them, that Numbers Twelve,
 Thirteen, and Fourteen, who were at the end of the
 line, had to stand outside.
                Number Nine took charge of the turn-style. His

 family admired him greatly, and he felt very proud
 of himself. First he sent them through and gave
 each a pair of pajamas. Then he said: "You can have
 any kind of clothes you want."
                The line of children started through the turn-style,
 and Number Nine was busy pushing the buttons
 for COLOR, SIZE, MATERIAL, and STYLE. The old-
 er children came out dressed in the costumes they had
 asked for. When the smallest girls came out, they
 were wearing long dresses', long gloves, high-heeled
 shoes, and plumed hats, and were carrying vanity
 bags. The little boys came out wearing long trousers,
 high silk hats, white bow ties. They were carrying
 canes and wearing big watches in their vest pockets.
                The Style Shop was filled with squeals.
                The father went off to get the blue-blooded horses
 for his farm. The boys and girls played in the attic.
 The smallest children, all wearing their grown-up
 clothes, paraded to the public fountain for ozcream
 sodas.
                When the other children in the Emerald City saw
 these little Munchkins dressed in long dresses,
 plumed hats, and men's suits, they ran to the Style
 Shop and begged Number Nine to let them go
 through the turn-style, too. Number Nine became so
 busy serving these little customers that his mother

 and Sister Six had to help.
                As soon as the children had new clothes, they ran
 out again. Soon the city was full of children dressed
 like grown-ups, drinking sodas at the public fountain.
                At noon the shop was empty of customers. All
 the children went to their homes for lunch. Number
 Nine's family gathered in Jenny's kitchen and
 watched the utensils make the meal. The mixmaster
 wanted to take charge of the cooking.
                The carving knife whittled the potatoes. The
 chopping knife went after the meat and made a fine
 hash of it. The oven opened its door and pushed out
 Jenny's breakfast waffle for the Munchkin children
 to enjoy. The stove sizzled merrily, the tea kettle
 hummed. Every so often, the pan covers danced
 together like cymbals. Each part of the kitchen did
 its best to entertain the family while the lunch was
 getting itself ready.
                The salt and pepper holders were shaking with
 mirth. The table jigged on its four legs. Number
 Nine joined his family and sat laughing with them,
 forgetting the shop. When the meal was ready, the
 whole family went into the dining-room to eat it.
                But in the shop something was happening. Two
 bow-legged gnomes had just entered on pointed tip-

 toe. Seeing nobody about, they were sniffing to see
 what mischief they could do. They were short and
 earth colored, with pointed ears, hands, and feet.
 One was dressed in a green waistcoat and red panta-
 loons, the other had a red waistcoat and green
 pantaloons.
                "Say, Umph," said the one in red pantaloons,
 "what's this shiny doo-dad with the four arms and
 buttons?"
                Umph had climbed onto the third shelf with a mon-
 key wrench and was trying to unbolt the metal cloth.
 He looked down at the turn-style, to which the other
 gnome was pointing.
                "Put a yard of distance between you and it,
 Grumph," warned the gnome on the shelf. "Those
 arms might box your ears."
                "Pooh! The only thing I'm afraid of is eggs. And
 there aren't any eggs in this shop."
                Grumph went closer to the turn-style and began
 poking at the buttons. "See, Umph? It can't hurt
 a body," he said. He leaned against one of the spokes
 and accidentally pushed himself through. Then he
 danced with delight.
                "Snakes and snorts!" he cried. "Look, Umph, I'm
 covered with warts! Big, black ones. Now I'll be
 the handsomest gnome in the gnome kingdom!"

                From head to foot, Grumph was covered with
 warts. They were so large that they pushed out his
 clothes. Umph looked down enviously.
                He slid down from the shelf. "You're right," he
 said. "An'd won't it be good to get back to the damp,
 dark underworld! All this sunshine in Oz is making
 my complexion too clear. I think I'll go through that
 thing and get some warts, too."
                Umph went through the turn-style and came out
 as warty as Grumph. The two gnomes looked at each
 other and scowled.
                Said Umph, "Now I am the handsomest gnome in
 the gnome kingdom!"
                "No, I am," declared Grumph.
                "You are not! I am," shouted Umph, and shook his
 fist in the other's face.
                "No, I am!"
                "No, I am!"
                "No, I am!" Grumph screamed in rage, and kicked
 Umph on his biggest wart.
                "My warts are the ugliest!" cried Umph, and
 he pulled Grumph's whiskers.
                "But mine are bigger," yelled Grumph.
                "They are not!"
                "Yes, they are!"

                Suddenly Umph let go Grumph's beard. "What's
 that?" he said. A whoop and a laugh had come from
 Jenny's dining-room, where the meal had just set
 itself upon the table.
                "Whisk! Scamper!" warned Umph.
                "First we take the wart machine," said Grumph.
 The two gnomes seized the turn-style and jerked it
 so hard that its screws and bolts were torn loose
 from the floor. As soon as it was no longer screwed
 down, its lovely new enamel turned to rust. The
 gnomes were delighted at this change. Carrying
 the turn-style between them, they hustled toward
 the fireplace and pushed it up into the chimney. Then
 they crawled in after it.
                "Isn't it wonderfully dark in here?" Umph asked.
 "Yes, and this soot is filling my nostrils as pleas-
 antly as burning sulphur perfume," said Grumph.
                "Tonight, when the Oz people are sleeping, we'll
 creep out and take the machine away with us,"
 whispered Grumph in the dark chimney.
  
 CHAPTER 19
  
 The Turn-Style Is Rescued
  
 NUMBER NINE and his family were eating their

 third dessert, when the whistlebreeches began
 whistling, reminding the boy that his lunch hour was
 over.
                "I must get back to the shop," he said, rising from
 the table.
                "May I come and help work the turn-style?" ask
 Sister Six.
                "Come along."
                The girl ran ahead of Number Nine, and as the
 boy was stepping into the shop, he heard her cry,
 "It's gone!"
                "What is gone?" he asked.
                "The turn-style. Look!"
                Number Nine ran forward. His heart sank with
 despair. The turn-style was no longer in its place!
                "Help! Thieves! The turn-style has been stolen !"
 they both shouted.
                The Munchkin family came running in from the
 dining-room. When they learned what had happened,
 they began shouting, too. Number Nine was almost
 weeping.
                "What will Jenny say? This is the first time I've
 been in charge of the shop, and this had to happen!"
                While the Munchkins were running through all
 the rooms, looking for the turn-style, in the chimney

 Uinph whispered to Grumph, "Suppose they look up
 the chimney?"
                "We could drop some red-hot coals on them-if
 We had any red-hot coals," answered Grumph.
                "But we haven't any. We had better climb to the
 roof and hide there."
                Together the two gnomes began to climb. Their
 shoes, scraping the inside of the chimney, tickled the
 house. The house began to shake and cough and
 sneeze. Umph and Grumph reached the top and
 pulled themselves over onto the roof. They rubbed
 the warts on their hands together and laughed,
 "They won't catch us now. After dark, we'll steal
 the turn-style, and-OUCH! OH, OUCH! OUCH!"
                The chimney had reached down and caught one
 of them by his waistcoat. A chimney close by caught
 the second. Then they straightened up, holding the two
 gnomes high in the air. Their screams filled the street.
                Inside the shop, the Munchkins heard the noise
 and ran outside. The blue mules were rolling their
 lips at the gnomes. Number Nine was the first to
 see them kicking their bowlegs in the air.
                "Good work!" he called to the chimneys. "Those
 must be the thieves. Give them a good shaking,
 until they tell where they've hidden the turn-style."
                The chimneys began to sway, rattling the teeth of

 the gnomes.
                "YEEOW! Sulphur and brimstone!" they yelled.
 They were shaken so hard that their buttons broke,
 and they fell out of their waistcoats, sprawling on
 the roof.
                "Get back into the chimney!" whispered Umph to
 Grumph. "It's safer there."
                Before the chimneys could catch them again, they
 leaped down a flue and slid down as far as the hidden
 turn-style.
                Number Nine was in despair. "How can we make
 them come out?" he asked his mother. "Shall we
 throw hot water down on them?"
                "No, for the hotter it is, the better they like it,"
 said his mother. Her blue eyes filled with perplexity.
                All the Munchkin family remained outside, look-
 ing up and down the street for help. Just then,
 around the corner, came galloping on its eight short
 legs, a dragonette. This little dragon was purple,
 and it had two heads. Both its mouths were panting
 quick, fiery breaths. Close behind its spiky tail came
 clanking Sir Hokus, in full armor, waving his short
 sword and shouting, "Stop, stop, and let me have
 at thee!"
                The dragonette dashed past the Munchkin family,

 and when Sir Hokus came by, Number Nine caught
 his iron sleeve, stopping him.
                "Good knight, could you lend us your stout right
 arm?" asked Number Nine.
                Sir Hokus came to such a sudden stop that his iron
 heels sparked. He held his sword high in the air,
 crying, "Hail! This blade is at the service of all who
 seek me!"
                "Two bowlegged gnomes are hiding in our chim-
 ney," explained the boy. "I think they have stolen
 our turn-style."
                The knight thrust his sword forward. "A chal-
 lenge! I accept! Lead on to danger!" he cried.
                As Sir Hokus leaped into the shop, the dragonette
 looked over her shoulder, and, seeing that the knight
 was no longer chasing her, turned back to learn the
 reason. Her curiosity led her right to the door of
 the Style Shop. She poked her two heads in, and saw
 Sir Hokus waving his sword at the chimney and
 shouting, "Come out, knaves, and joust fairly!"
                "Sir Hokus, aren't you going to chase me?" she
 called.
                The knight kept waving his sword and throwing
 challenges to the gnomes, until the dragonette said
 in her high, thin voice, "All this higgledy-piggledy
 over a couple of insignificant gnomes! Why, I could

 catch them in a minute!"
                Number Nine turned to her. "Oh, would you?"
                "Why, yes," she replied. "I'll climb onto the roof
 and get them through the chimney."
                But when she started to climb, the house drew back
 from her fiery breath.
                "Could you please hold your breath until you reach
 the top?" asked Number Nine.
                The dragonette held her breath, but even then the
 house shut its eyes while she scaled its wall and slid
 along its roof.
                "I'll drag-on to the chimney," said the dragonette.
 Reaching it, she poked her spiky, saw-toothed tail
 into the flue. The house wriggled with all this
 tickling. In the darkness of the chimney, Umph
 and Grumph saw the spiky tail reaching for them.
                "We're done for," said Grumph. "That tail will
 cut us to pieces."
                The tail pricked Umph's ear. "Ouch! Get down,
 quick!" he bellowed at Grumph and pushed him with
 his foot.
                "This wart machine is blocking the way," growled
 Grumph. "Stop kicking."
                "Then push it down! Ouch! My other ear!"
 shrieked Umph.

                The turn-style came tumbling down. After it
 dropped the two gnomes.
                "Run for it!" cried Umph. But before they could
 get to their feet, the two fire dogs, that hold the
 burning logs in winter, caught them by their bandy
 legs and held on with their teeth.
                Number Nine shouted with joy when he saw the
 turn-style. "Now Jenny won't be angry with me,"
 he exclaimed.
                Sir Hokus sheathed his sword. "I would not stain
 my noble blade with the blood of such rodents. Pray,
 call the rat catcher!"
                "Thank you for all you've done, Sir Hokus," said
 Number Nine.
                The knight stalked out and beckoned with his iron
 fist to the dragonette, who was still on the roof.
                "Thou has done well to drive the gnomes from their
 lair," he called to her. "For thy nobleness and cour-
 age, I shall grant thee two blocks' head start in the
 chase."
                The dragonette peered over the roof. "I must have
 time to let the Munchkin boy thank me." She slid
 down the wall and walked into the shop. Number
 Nine and the other children crowded around her
 with thanks and praise. She was overcome with
 bashfulness at so much attention. She could only

 put her paws over her mouths and cough timidly.
 The children came closer and scratched her heads.
                "Good dragonette," they said. The dragonette
 curled up on the floor like a family pet and lay there
 until Sir Hokus reminded her that he was waiting
 to resume the chase.
                The dragonette jumped up, ran out into the street,
 and galloped merrily for two blocks. Then she
 stopped and looked back to see whether Sir Hokus
 had begun his pursuit. He started after her. She
 grinned with her two faces, flipped her tail, and
 was off again.
                Within the shop, the gnomes were still held fast
 by the fire dogs. The Munchkin children were stand-
 ing before the fireplace and staring with great curi-
 osity at the little earth-colored creatures. They had
 heard much about the gnomes who lived in a king-
 dom underneath Oz. But this was the first time they
 had seen gnomes with their own eyes.
                "Ugh! How ugly they are," said Sister Six.
                "And as bad as they are ugly," said the mother.
                The gnomes screamed and shook their fists in
 anger. The fire dogs held them tighter.
                "What are we to do with them?" asked Number
 Nine. "If we let them go, they'll run somewhere else

 and steal again."
                His mother had an idea. "Now I remember that I
 once heard how to rid the house of gnomes. Just
 wait a minute."
                She went quickly to the kitchen and returned
 carrying a couple of eggs.
                'Yeeow! Yeeow!" screamed the gnomes at the
 sight of the eggs.
                "I have been told that eggs knock gnomes uncon-
 scious instantly," said the mother, and she pitched
 an egg at each gnome's head. They slumped sense-
 less to the floor. The fire dogs unclamped their teeth.
                "Now carry them out," said the mother to Num-
 ber Nine. "Throw them into the river, and ask the
 river to take them back where they belong."
  
 CHAPTER 20
  
 Jenny Escapes
  
 JENNY paced up and down in her chocolate prison
 cell. The cell was like a cage, with no walls, but
 with chocolate bars on all four sides. Tears kept
 dropping from her eyes and freezing on her cheeks
 as she said over and over to herself, "How can I
 possibly win the ozlection when I'm locked up in a

 chocolate prison?"
                Every move that Jenny made could be seen by the
 giant chocolate guard who had been ordered to watch
 her. He paced back and forth with upraised gun.
 Jenny was shivering, for the mountain night was
 very cold, and no one had given her a blanket. She
 did not know what had happened to Scraps and Jack
 Pumpkinhead. Going to the bars, she called to the
 guard.
                "Can you tell me where my two friends are locked
 up?"
                The guard halted and pointed his gun at her.
 "Prisoners are not allowed to speak," he said sternly.
                "Well, I'm cold," said Jenny angrily.
                "So am I," the guard said. "There's nothing to do
 except wait until morning to thaw out."
                "But I'm not made of chocolate. I can freeze, but
 I can't thaw!" spoke Jenny sharply.
                "I can't talk to you any more. It is forbidden," said
 the guard.
                He began pacing again, but he went more slowly,
 as if the cold were in his joints. Jenny felt colder
 than ever.
                "Eating something will make me feel warmer," she
 thought. She looked around her cell. There was

 nothing but chocolate bars, a chocolate stool, and a
 chocolate cot.
                "The sight of so much chocolate makes me sick,"
 she said to herself. "But I'll eat some of it, to get
 some strength. I must escape somehow and warn
 Ozma that the chocolate soldiers are going to attack
 the Emerald City tomorrow."
                Reaching toward the bars, Jenny tried to break
 them with her hands. But they were thick, and,
 besides, they were frozen hard. The chocolate guard
 was pacing more slowly, his legs stiffening with the
 cold. Jenny waited for him to pass. He went very
 slowly.
                'If it gets any colder, he will come to a standstill
 and will not be able to move till morning. That will
 give me a chance to escape, if I can get out of this
 cell," thought Jenny.
                She seized a bar and pulled at it, but it would not
 yield.
                "I guess I'll have to eat through it."
                Putting her face close to a bar, Jenny bit at it and
 quickly spat. "Bah! It's bitter chocolate!" she ex-
 claimed.
                Once again the guard passed. His feet barely rose
 from the ground. He did not turn his head to look
 at her.

                "He is almost stone-stiff," Jenny thought, as she
 took another bite out of the chocolate bar. No mat-
 ter how bitter it was, she must eat away the bar
 before she could escape. She took another bite, and
 another, spitting out the pieces.
                "I'd rather remain here the rest of my life than
 take another bite," she said. "But I have not only
 myself to think of. There are Ozma and the Emerald
 City to be saved."
                Jenny kept eating. The bar was almost gone, and
 if she squeezed hard she might get through the hole
 that she had made. But now the guard was coming
 back, dragging his feet, his gun motionless on his
 shoulder. Jenny drew back into her cell. If he should
 turn and see the bar missing, he would sound an
 alarm and bring warmer, quicker soldiers to the
 scene.
                The soldier came before her cell. His feet slowed
 to a complete stop, and he stood rigid. Jenny waited
 for him to pass, but he remained directly in front of
 her, like a post.
                "Is he watching me, or has he frozen stiff?" Jenny
 thought. She waited, but he did not move. "I be-
 lieve he has frozen stiff and won't move until the
 Sun comes up. If I wait any longer, a warmer soldier

 fllay come to change the guard. I must try to escape
 now!"
                Carefully, Jenny crawled through the opening
 had made and stepped upon the ground. The frozen
 earth creaked under her, and she stopped, waiting
 breathlessly to see if the soldier would turn around
 He remained stiff and staring ahead.
                "I must try to find Scraps and Pumpkinhead,"
 thought Jenny. "They are somewhere in the camp."
                The guard stood in the way. She could not get to
 the camp, except by crawling under his very nose.
 Dropping to her hands and knees, she crept as
 quietly as she could. As she passed the soldier, she
 could feel a slight movement in his legs, as if he
 were trying to take a step. But he was too cold, and
 he remained where he was, while Jenny crept on
 toward the camp.
                She stood up and tiptoed around the corner of
 the cliff. There, on the ground before the General's
 tent, she saw a small bonfire with a dozen soldiers
 sitting around it and keeping soft. Beyond them,
 plainly seen by the firelight, was a cage like the
 one she had been in. Jack Pumpkinhead was staring
 out, and Scraps was standing on her head. Before
 the cell was a slow-moving guard.
                Jenny heard the soldiers around the fire

 in unison, "Time to change the guard!"
                Two soldiers got up. One of them exchanged
 places with the soldier who had been guarding Scraps
 and Jack. Jenny saw the second soldier come toward
 her. She drew back and ran as hard as she could,
 around the cliff and down the mountainside. Before
 she reached the valley, she heard cries announcing
 her escape. Then she heard chocolate bullets zinging
 over her head. Down the mountain and into the
 valley she ran, onto the field of frozen cream
 chocolate. It was no longer soft, but hard as the
 mountain.
                The night was chocolate-dark. There were stars,
 but they were all chocolate stars and gave no light.
 Jenny ran over the hard cream chocolate field, trying
 to find the ozoplane. But she could not see it. Behind
 her she heard soldiers running.
                "I am lost!" she cried. "I shall never be able to
 Warn Ozma."
                Then from a spot in the darkness she heard voices.
 It was Jack Pumpkinhead's Glee Club, singing,
 "She'll be coming 'round the mountain when she
 comes." Jenny ran toward the sounds. She bumped
 into something soft and round. It was one of the
 Pumpkins that decorated the ozoplane. The plane

 Was stuck fast in the hardened cream chocolate.
                Jenny opened the door of the ozoplane and called
 to the shoes, "Everybody help! The soldiers are at
 our heels. We must get the plane wheels loose."
                The shoes tumbled out and wedged themselves
 under the plane. Then they arched themselves,
 slowly raising the plane on their uppers. The choco-
 late cracked loudly as it broke.
                "Hurrah!" cried Jenny. "The plane is free. Now,
 into it, everyone!"
                The soldiers were on the field of hardened cream
 chocolate. Bullets were smashing against the sides
 of the plane. The shoes scrambled in, and Jenny
 jumped in after them. Running to the engine room,
 she pulled the starter lever and felt the plane rising.
 A volley of chocolate bullets splattered on its under
 side.
                "Leaping Leprechauns!" Jenny panted. "That was
 close. I'll have to warn Ozma and get help back to
 Scraps and Jack Pumpkinhead."
                As the plane rose higher than the chocolate moun-
 tam, she saw a white, shining star.
                "That's the morning star. I'll steer toward that.
 By its light, I shall be able to see the Land of Oz."
  
 CHAPTER 21

  
 Number Nine Searches for Jenny
  
 NUMBER NINE was worried. Although the
 turn-style was back in its place and was bright
 and shiny again, there was no Boss to run the shop.
 And how could she win an ozlection when nobody
 could even find her? He asked everyone who came
 into the Style Shop, "Have you seen Jenny Jump?"
                But no one had seen her. Number Nine said to
 himself, "Jenny is the best friend I ever had. She's
 perky and bright, too. There aren't many girls like
 my Boss!" The light in the boy's eyes shone warmly.
 The first day passed, and Jenny did not return.
 Number Nine was so worried that his Sister Six said,
 "I'll take care of the Style Shop if you want to go
 out and look for your Boss."
                It was early evening in the Emerald City when
 Number Nine started his search. He wandered up
 and down asking, "Have you seen Jenny Jump?"
                But no one could help him.
                "If none of the people know where she is, maybe
 the animals do," he thought. Then his heart turned
 over with fright. "Maybe a lion or a tiger has swal-
 lowed her!"

                His legs were shaking as he ran toward the enclo-
 sure where the animals were chained. Reaching the
 wall, he climbed onto it and then looked carefully
 at each lion and tiger. His heart grew lighter. Every
 animal was sleek and thin and could not possibly
 contain Jenny in its stomach.
                Number Nine looked about the enclosure. Every-
 thing was peaceful. He saw Ojo, the elephant boy,
 sitting on Kabumpo's head.
                "Jenny isn't here. You had better search some-
 where else," Ojo replied when Number Nine asked if
 he or Kabumpo had seen her.
                He walked quickly up Doughnut Drive, searching
 for some glimpse of Jenny. When he came close to
 the Banquet Hall, the door opened and the square-
 bodied Head Waiter came out and started down the
 street. Number Nine hurried after him.
                "Hey, Head Waiter! Have you seen Jenny Jump?"
 "Jump what?" asked the Head Waiter, stopping
 and flipping a speck of dust from his square cello-
 phane jacket.
                "I mean Jenny Jump, the stylist."
                "Oh, yes, she is the one who gave me this slick suit
 that got me my job. I saw her yesterday."
                "Where is she now?" the boy asked eagerly.
                "I don't know." The red Quadling Head Waiter

 shrugged his box shoulder, making his cellophane
 suit twinkle in the sunset. "When I left her, she
 was on her way to the river to fish. She said she was
 going through the pumpkin patch."
                "Thank you!" cried Number Nine and, turning, he
 ran in the direction of the pumpkin patch. Coming
 into it, he saw that the familiar ozoplane was no
 longer there. The only thing in sight, besides the
 pumpkins, was the Sawhorse, standing quietly where
 the ozoplane had been.
                Number Nine ran up to it. "Did you see Jenny
 Jump, my Boss, pass along this way yesterday?"
 The Sawhorse shook itself from side to side, say-
 ing, "No, she did not pass by."
                Number Nine turned away in disappointment. But
 the Sawhorse went on, "She did not pass by, but
 passed in. After she got in, it flew away, and they
 vanished."
 "Who? What? When? Where?" Number Nine
 asked in bewilderment.
                "Why, the ozoplane, of course," said the Sawhorse
 impatiently. "With Jenny, Scraps, and Jack Pump-
 kinhead and the Glee Club. And here I've been stand-
 ing without any company for many hours."
                "Oh, if they have gone up in the plane, maybe

 they crashed somewhere," wailed Number Nine.
 "Jenny Jump might be hurt. I must find her now,
 more than ever. I won't stop searching until I've
 looked over the four lands of Oz."
                "Get on my back, and I'll take you," said the Saw-
 horse. "I can go fast, and I never grow tired."
                Number Nine mounted. "First, to the red Quad-
 ling country," said the boy. "Red stands for danger,
 and I fear Jenny is in danger." The Sawhorse
 galloped toward the south.
                The sun sank, and darkness came over all the
 lands of Oz. The wooden Sawhorse ran through the
 valleys and rumbled slowly up the red mountains of
 the Quadling country. Number Nine looked up every
 highroad and byroad. Nowhere did he see any sign
 of Jenny. All night he rode, until the morning star
 showed its bright face in the east. A little light
 spread over the red country. The Quadling farmers
 came out of their red houses and drove their red
 cattle toward the red rivers for their morning drink.
                Number Nine now steered the Sawhorse across
 country, thinking, "I have not seen the ozoplane on
 any of the roads. Maybe it has fallen into one of
 the forests or Quadling quagmires."
                Suddenly he heard a yoice beside him, "Hello, my
 boy. How are your parents and your thirteen sisters

 and brothers?"
                "Fine, thanks," replied Number Nine, turning
 around. He could see nobody.
                "Hullo! Are you the Voice That Lost His Man?
 Haven't you found him yet?" asked Number Nine.
                "The same," said the Voice. "I have searched
 through every corner of the land, and the deadly
 deserts beyond. No trace of my Man have I found.
 But I like this wandering life, and I am no longer
 sad." The Voice sounded very cheerful.
                "Have you seen anything of an ozoplane?" asked
 Number Nine.
                "No, that I haven't. But if you're looking for it,
 I'll be glad to come along and have you keep me
 company."
                While Number Nine rode on, the Voice kept beside
 him, talking.
                "This is great fun," the Voice said. But Number
 Nine could not agree. He was too worried about
 Jenny. When they had gone on for another hour,
 they came to a red stream, beside which grew a red
 oak. Number Nine halted the Sawhorse in the red
 shade of this tree. At this instant the whistle-
 breeches began to play. It was the hour when the
 office boy was due at the Style Shop. Number Nine

 clapped his hands angrily to his breeches.
                "I should think they'd keep quiet while I am try-
 ing to find my Boss," he said. "I've only stopped for
 a drink of water."
                Number Nine dismounted, knelt by the water,
 and took a long drink. The water was the color of
 cherry soda. When Number Nine raised his head, his
 eye caught a shadow in the river.
                "What can that be?" he thought. "That's the re-
 flection of something in the sky."
                Jerking his head up, the boy saw a large, winged
 object, partly covered with pumpkins, plunging
 toward the earth. Its tail was whirling like a top.
 Number Nine jumped up, shouting, "There's the ozo-
 plane! It's in a tail-spin! It's going to smash!"
  
 CHAPTER 22
  
 The Attack on the Emerald City
  
 GOODBYE! Goodbye! This is the end of Jenny
 Jump!" Jenny cried wildly to the shoes. She
 clutched the controls, but she could not stop the ozo-
 plane. The earth seemed to be flying up to meet her.
                ZONG! Red thunder filled Jenny's head. She lay
 stunned. "Oh, oh," she groaned, "my head-. But

 I'm still alive!" She got up slowly and felt herself.
 "And unhurt."
                "Leaping Leprechauns, I must have nine lives!"
 she exclaimed and she climbed out of the ozoplane.
 "Where am I? Everything is red. This must be the
 Quadling country. I must warn Ozma by nightfall.
 How shall I ever get to her in time?"
                From the other side of the plane came the sound
 of galloping hooves. Then, from under the broken
 wing, came the Sawhorse with Number Nine on its
 back.
                "Whistlebreeches!" Jenny sprang toward him.
 She had never been so glad to see anyone in her life.
 "Oh, dear Whistlebreeches !"
                Number Nine's face was shining a neon blue, he
 was so pleased. His dear Boss was back, and unhurt!
                Jenny said, "Tonight the giant chocolate soldiers
 will attack the Emerald City. The ozoplane is broken.
 How can I get to Ozma to warn her in time?"
                The Sawhorse began prancing up and down.
 "Why are we standing here talking?" it asked im-
 patiently. "Get on my back, both of you!"
                Jenny mounted behind Number Nine.
                "I'll come later," said the Voice That Lost His Man,
 "seeing that I'm not in a great hurry."

                Jenny cried, "Why, hello, I didn't know you were
 here, Voice That Lost His Man."
                "Hello and goodbye, Jenny," said the Voice.
                Jenny turned and waved at the ozoplane, where all
 the shoes were standing in the windows.
                "I'll send someone to rescue you. Just wait pa-
 tiently for a few days," she called to them. "Or
 perhaps you can have someone hitch you together
 and hitch-hike home."
                Next moment the Sawhorse was galloping across
 the red country with Number Nine and Jenny on
 its back. It dashed through forests, and leaped over
 brooks. Running up a mountainside, it went some-
 what slower.
                "Hurry, hurry!" Jenny cried.
                "We have a long way to go," Number Nine added.
 At the top of the mountain, Jenny saw a strange
 silver mass sailing up from the horizon into the sky.
                "Look, whistlebreeches," she pointed, "what's
 that?"
                "I don't know," said the boy. "It looks like a silver
 cloud with a dark lining."
                "Oh, that is the chocolate army coming to attack
 the Emerald City. Faster, faster, Sawhorse !" cried
 Jenny.
                The wooden animal plunged down the mountain-

 side, racing so fast that the wind sounded like a fifth
 whistle in Number Nine's breeches. In the valley the
 Sawhorse leaped over the red boulders, its four stiff
 legs throwing up banners of red dust.
                Jenny watched the silver cloud with the dark lin-
 ing. It was coming closer! It now seemed to be of
 such size that a fourth of the sky was covered. Now
 it was over the Land of Oz!
                "Will we reach the Emerald City before it does?"
 Jenny cried. "Faster, faster, good Sawhorse!"
                The animal's hooves hardly touched the ground.
 It sped out of the Quadling wilderness and into the
 farmlands. The red farmers ran out to the road to
 see what was speeding like unbolted lightning.
                Closer and closer to the Emerald City sailed the
 cloud. "We are lost!" thought Jenny. "They will get
 there before us."
                Number Nine dug his heels hard against the sides
 of the Sawhorse. The Sawhorse galloped faster, and
 got ahead of the cloud. On and on it galloped
 through the day. At times the cloud would sail ahead,
 and at times the Sawhorse gained on it.
                Toward evening, Jenny and Number Nine saw the
 green wall of the Emerald City in the distance. The
 silver cloud with the dark lining was directly above

 them.
                "We must reach the gate of the Emerald City be-
 fore the chocolate soldiers steer that cloud down to
 earth," cried Jenny.
                The Sawhorse doubled its speed in a final effort.
 It could go no faster. But the cloud sailed ahead,
 and began to drop to the field outside the city gate.
                "Too late!" groaned Jenny, as she saw the choco-
 late soldiers leap from the cloud and begin to form
 their ranks.
                Number Nine cried hopefully, "It will take them
 a few minutes to get in battle formation. We may
 still make it!"
                The Sawhorse dashed straight on, and then around
 the soldiers, who were blocking the way. Cries of
 "Halt!" came from a thousand chocolate throats, and
 a volley of chocolate bullets came after the speed-
 ing three. When they reached the city gate, it opened
 before them, for the Guardian had seen everything.
 The gate slammed shut behind them.
                "To the palace!" Jenny ordered the Sawhorse. It
 galloped through the streets and parks, while the
 people scattered out of its way. The trees drew up
 their lowest branches, and the houses lifted their
 stoops out of the way.
                "It must be Choose Day," said Jenny, "for the city

 is full of visitors."
                At the palace stairs the Sawhorse stopped so sud-
 denly that Number Nine and Jenny were pitched
 over its head.
                Uncle Henry and Aunt Em were rocking peacefully
 in the palace pavilion.
                "What's the rush?" asked Uncle Henry, as Jenny
 and Number Nine picked themselves up from the
 grass.
                "Land sakes, children, are you hurt?" asked Aunt
 Eni.
                "Where is Ozma?" cried Jenny as soon as she was
 on her feet. "The city is about to be attacked!"
                Aunt Em stopped her rocking. "Why, Ozma and
 Dorothy went off in the carriage to visit Glinda the
 GOOd. What's that you said about a tack?"
                "No time now!" cried Jenny, leaping back upon
 the Sawhorse. "Come on, Whistlebreeches!" Scores
 of people scurried out of the path of the racing Saw-
 horse.
                In another minute they were at the Style Shop.
 Jenny and Number Nine ran inside. The shop was
 filled with Choose Day shoppers, but Jenny and Num-
 ber Nine pulled the turn-style loose from the floor,
 and ran out without speaking to the amazed Sister

 Six, or the shoppers waiting to be served.
                Holding the turn-style, the two remounted the
 Sawhorse and sent it dashing to the city gate. When
 they came up, the Soldier with the Green Whiskers,
 who was the Army of Oz, was hiding under the tower
 stairs. He peeped out fearfully. He was trembling
 so hard that his long green whiskers fluttered like
 a flag. The Guardian of the Gate was running down
 from the tower, carrying an extra key and lock with
 which to fortify the city.
                "That won't do any good," cried Jenny, dragging
 the turn-style up to the gate. "The chocolate army
 has a cloud and can sail right over the wall if it
 has to. Open the gate a little way, so that only one
 chocolate soldier can get through at a time."
                "No, no, no!" screamed the Soldier with the Green
 Whiskers. "Opening the gate to an enemy is not in
 the Army Rule Book."
                "I don't care a chocolate drop about the Army Rule
 Book," retorted Jenny. "The city must be saved!"
                On the other side of the wall the thunder of march-
 mg feet could be heard.
                "There is no time to waste! Open the gate!" cried
 Jenny to the Guardian.
                The old Guardian, with bones and keys rattling,
 hastened to obey. As he opened the gate a short way,

 Jenny set the turn-style in the opening and quickly
 pressed some buttons.
                From outside the gate came an order, out of a
 thousand throats.
                "Forward march! Through that gate!"
                The first chocolate giant appeared in the opening
 and pushed into the turn-style.
                Plink! A tiny tin soldier, no bigger than a thumb,
 marched out of the turn-style!
                Another soldier appeared in the opening. Plink!
 He had become a toy man, as small as a thumb. He
 marched after the first.
                Plink! Plink! Plink! The chocolate giants kept
 pushing themselves into the turn-style and coming
 out no bigger than thumbs, and turned to tin.
                Number Nine gave a shout. "Oh, Jenny, how
 clever you are!"
                Some children, who had run after the Sawhorse,
 seeing the little tin soldiers marching, pounced upon
 them, crying, "Toys! Tin soldiers to play with!"
 They carried them off to the park, where they set
 them up in formation and laughed to see the tiny
 things marching and shouldering arms.
                As the giants on the other side of the gate did
 not suspect what was happening to their comrades,

 they kept coming on, with fierce steps, prepared to
 capture the Emerald City for their moody-faced
 General. When they were changed to toy tin soldiers,
 they no longer remembered anything, and were as
 pleased as the children to play games in the park.
                When the last chocolate giant had been changed
 like the others, the Soldier with the Green Whiskers
 crept out from behind the steps.
                "We have saved the city!" he said, and saluted.
 "I shall go to the supply room and get myself a
 medal." He marched away.
                The Guardian locked the gate. Jenny and Number
 Nine took the turn-style, mounted the Sawhorse, and
 rode triumphantly back to the Style Shop.
                
 CHAPTER 23
  
 The Slide to Freedom
  
 BUT WHAT of poor Scraps and Jack Pumpkin-
 head?" exclaimed Jenny as soon as they reached
 the Style Shop. "I had nearly forgotten that they
 are in prison, waiting to be rescued."
                "Must we do that now? Choose Day is the most
 important shopping day in the week, and the shop
 is filled with out-of-town visitors. We have a busy

 day ahead of us," said the boy. "Besides, we ought
 to celebrate our victory."
                "No time to celebrate when two friends are in
 prison!" Jenny said sternly. "We will set up the
 turn-style, and then Sister Six and I will get down
 to serving customers. I don't want to disappoint
 them. But you must go to the palace and find the
 Wizard of Oz. He will help you rescue Jack and
 Scraps. When the chocolate General learns that his
 army has been captured, he may revenge himself on
 our two friends."
                The turn-style was soon set up. "Perhaps you had
 better not wear the whistlebreeches in the palace.
 They might disturb the Wizard. Step through the
 turn-style, and I'll change your suit for today,"
 said Jenny.
                Number Nine stepped through the turn-style, while
 Jenny pushed some buttons. He came out wearing
 a neat cutaway jacket and well-fitting trousers of
 green velvet. He was delighted and hastened to
 mount the Sawhorse to start for the palace.
                "Hurry!" called Jenny. "Every minute means dan-
 ger for Scraps and Jack Pumpkinhead."
 The boy tried to urge the wooden animal to go
 fast, but the visitors had become so numerous that

 the streets were crowded, and the Sawhorse moved
 slowly through the throng.
                "Try to go faster!" said the boy. "Something may
 happen to our friends while we are dallying."
 Just then a soft voice close to the boy said, "Hello,
 Master Number Nine!" The boy turned and saw a
 lovely young girl, dressed in all the colors of the rain-
 bow, dancing beside him.
                "Why, Miss Polychrome !" he said. "It's been a
 long time since we've played together in the rain.
 How is your parent, the Rainbow?"
                "As beautiful as ever," said the girl, dancing
 along. "Must you hurry so, or can you stay and play
 now?"
                "I am on my way to find the Wizard and ask him
 to rescue two friends from the wrath of an angry
 General."
                "Goodbye, then, till a rainy day." The girl danced
 away.
                Number Nine looked after her, thinking, "Now,
 I hope no one else slows me up." Just then his path
 was blocked by the round, copper figure of Tik Tok,
 the clock man, walking arm in arm with a fierce-
 looking Pirate. "I wish they'd get out of my way,"
 thought the boy. But he dared not say anything.
 The Pirate was talking in a loud, swaggering voice

 that frightened Number Nine.
                "You shine like the sun, my friend Tik Tok. But
 look at me. Never before has Captain Salt appeared
 in public with such muddy sea boots. Where can I
 get a shine?"
                "At-the-zoo-you-can-get-a mon-key-shine," tocked
 the clock man, not in the least frightened by the loud
 voice. The two turned in the direction of the animal
 enclosure.
                "Come on, Sawhorse, run a bit!" urged the boy.
 But another obstacle arose. This was the public soda
 fountain, crowded with thirsty visitors. The Saw-
 horse went around it. Number Nine saw many of
 his brothers and sisters, who waved to him as he
 went by.
                "Poor Scraps and Jack Pumpkinhead. Will I reach
 the Wizard before something happens to them?" the
 boy thought. At last he arrived at the palace. "I
 hope I am not too late!" he cried, as he sprang down
 and ran into the palace.
                He could see no one about. He glanced timidly
 around him, for he had never been in such splendor.
 Then he walked briskly, hoping to meet someone
 who would lead him to the Wizard. He crossed the
 green glass floor of the reception hall and mounted

 a flight of spiral stairs built of black mirrors. Turn-
 ing at the top into a long corridor, he entered a
 passage that led into a Grand Reception Hall, with
 a high, vaulted roof of green crystal. The palace
 seemed deserted.
                He walked through many passages, and past hun-
 dreds of doors. The doors had name plates on them,
 but none of them said WIZARD. Number Nine was
 becoming discouraged. "So much time going to
 waste! I wish Jenny had come with me," he thought
 He passed through room after room, both large
 and small. Then he mounted endless stairs and
 finally went up the highest flight in the palace. These
 were narrow stone steps that wound around and
 around, up to the very top of the highest spire. When
 he reached the top, he saw nothing but another
 closed door.
                "All that climbing for nothing!" he exclaimed in
 disappointment.
                Just then the door opened, and out stepped a little
 man with a shiny bald head and a ruddy complexion,
 carrying a broom and wearing a dressing gown. The
 man began to sweep the dust from the floor. "Is
 there anything I can do for you?" he asked.
 Number Nine said, "Can you tell me where the
 Wizard is?"

                "He is somewhere; with someone you may be
 sure," said the man with a chuckle. "That is the sum
 of it."
                "That isn't some of it, but all of it," snapped Num-
 ber Nine. "I've come all the way up here looking for
 him. Please hurry and tell me where he is !"
                "Let's start at the bottom of the matter," said
 man with the broom. "Maybe I can help you."
                "No, no!" the boy said impatiently. "I can't stop
 to tell you. Scraps and Jack Pumpkinhead are
 prisoners on a chocolate star. Only the great Wizard
 of Oz can bring them back."
                "Come inside," said the short man, with a crackle
 of a laugh. "I am pretty good at finding lost people
 myself."
                Number Nine stepped into the room. It was the
 smallest and dingiest of any room in the palace. In
 each of the four walls was a battered old door. The
 man looked too small and insignificant to belong in
 the palace.
                "He's just a lunatic who lives in the tower.
 can't help me," thought Number Nine.
                The man sat down and motioned Number Nine to
 another chair. "Hungry? I'll whistle up a meal for
 you."

 The man whistled, and immediately one of the
 doors opened and a tray of food walked in on four
 silver legs. It was the most elaborate meal that
 Number Nine had ever seen.
                "Help yourself. Go ahead," said the man. "All I
 want is a cookie."
                "We mustn't lose any time! Think of the two
 prisoners," cried the boy.
 "Come, now, have a bit of food," coaxed the man.
                Number Nine thought he could get away sooner by
 obeying, so he helped himself to some food.
                "He's completely cracked," thought the boy.
                The little man nibbled his cookie. Suddenly he
 shot a question at the boy.
 "How would you like a new job, working for me?
 I need a lazy boy."
                Number Nine stopped eating and said, "No, thank
 you! I have a good job. And I'm not as lazy as you
 think."
                "That's too bad. Then I can't hire you. As soon
 as you are through eating, we'll try to locate your
 missing friends."
                Number Nine jumped up. "I'm all through now."
                "Follow me," roared the little man, holding his
 broom in both hands in front of him.
 As Number Nine stood up, the east door opened

 by itself, and they went through it.
                "This east room is my laboratory," said the little
 man. Number Nine's blue mouth opened in astonish-
 ment at what he saw.
 The room was large and filled with all kinds of
 machinery, bottles, retorts, and tubes. The tubes
 were filled with bright-colored powders and bubbling
 liquids that filled the room with fragrant odors.
 There were also queer mirrors, and telescopes with
 automatic hands that focused and adjusted them-
 selves, and endless gears and wheels, and enormous
 pendulums that swung rhythmically from the ceilinge
 "First, we'll consult the Bureau of Missing Per-
 sons." The little man went to a bureau at the
 wall, pulled open a drawer, and took out a little black
 notebook. "As soon as anything is missing in Oz, its
 name writes itself in this book," he explained. "Some
 of these things have been missing for hundreds of
 years. Here is a Munchkin baker boy who has
 missing for 984 years, 5 days, and 6 hours. My,
 my! I am certainly behind in my work!"
 The little man kept turning the pages of the note-
 book. He read, as if talking to himself, "2 walking
 lamp posts, 1 pink kitten, 20 solid-gold fish, 1 greedy
 cow, and yes, yes, here they are! 1 Jack Pumpkin-

 head and 1 Scraps, a patchwork girl."
 The man looked up. "You are right. They are
 missing."
                "I know it," said Number Nine, jumping at the
 little man with anger. "You are just wasting time.
 I don't believe you can find them!"
 The little man chuckled. "Just step this way, to the
 west room, please." He led the way through another
 door.
                They passed down a hall, and Number Nine stared
 at the crowded hooks and shelves there. He saw
 many wigs and masks, false faces, and false legs and
 arms, noses, and eyes of every color and size. And
 there were animal skins, and the wings of birds,
 bats, butterflies, and insects. Besides these, there
 were dozens of men's suits, frock coats in red, green,
 blue, purple, and yellow, and canes and high silk
 hats.
                "The man must be terribly loony," thought the
 boy. "Who can he be?"
 Next minute Number Nine found himself standing
 in the west room. It was empty, except for a large
 and strange machine in the center.
 "This is the teletable. It locates missing things
 and people." The little man began to turn some dials.
 Number Nine watched him closely. The man went

 on explaining, "The two main parts of this machine
 are the Compound Gazabo and the Goggle-optics.
 With these, one can see and hear to the farthest
 star."
 He pointed to another part, saying, "And here is
 the Trumpet Eye. You put your eye to it and listen.
 You put your ear to it and look. Is it all clear?"
                "As clear as chocolate," said the boy.
                "It's such an intelligent machine, the most stupid
 person can run it. Here, you locate your friends.
 yourself. And if you find anything else, make a note
 of it." The man handed the boy some ruled music
 paper. "I'll just sit down and take a little nap."
                Taking a seat in the corner, the man covered his head
 with a napkin.
                Number Nine sat down before the machine and
 put his ear to the Trumpet Eye. At the same time,
 he watched an oblong mirror attached to it, and his
 fingers turned some dials. Soon a formless mass
 appeared in the mirror.
                "I'm finding something!" exclaimed Number Nine.
 He carefully turned the dials, and the mass in the
 mirror came closer and took shape. It was a pink
 kitten, combing itself with a black comb and mewing
 forlornly.

                "Ahz!" said Number Nine in disappointment. "It's
 only that lost kitten, in the catacombs under the
 city." He made some notes and turned the dials
 again. "I hope I find the prisoners soon."
 The mirror cleared, and then another picture took
 shape. This time Number Nine saw an old man with
 a long blue beard, wearing a baker's cap and a short,
 Munchkin boy's suit, fishing by a blue river. A
 string of five solid-gold fish lay beside him.
                "That must be the Munchkin baker boy who has
 been missing over 984 years. He has caught only 5 of
 the 20 missing solid-gold fish! His beard has grown
 quite long, but he hasn't changed his clothes all the
 time," thought Number Nine.
                "Ho, hum!" The baker's yawn came through
 teletable.
                "The loafer! I suppose it would take a cake of
 yeast to raise him from that soft spot," declared
 Number Nine.
                Once again he made some notes and turned
 dials. This time stars and clouds flashed across
 mirror. Then a chocolate-colored speck came
 view. "I'm getting it!" exclaimed the boy.
 He spun the dials slowly, watching the speck grow
 bigger and take the shape of a star. Then its entire
 shape was no longer in the mirror, but only a part

 of it. He saw a chocolate mountain-top.
                "There they are !" he shouted, catching sight
 of Jack and then of Scraps in their prison cells.
 Marching back and forth before the prison was the
 moody-faced General.
                "That blackguard stayed home himself and sent
 his soldiers to capture the Emerald City," thought
 Number Nine. He heard Scraps calling to the Gen-
 eral,
                "Hi, you fat fox,
                Why won't you box?"
                Number Nine saw the General stop and glare at
 Scraps, saying, "Listen, Rags, for the last time, I
 tell you I'll never be boxed chocolate!"
 At these words Jack Pumpkinhead shook the bars
 and shouted, "When Jenny comes back, she'll make
 it so hot for you, you'll run!"
                "She is never coming back," boasted the General
 with a terrible scowl. "By this time, my army has
 captured the Emerald City. I am awaiting word at
 any moment."
 Number Nine became so excited, he shook his fist
 at the picture in the mirror and yelled, forgetting
 that the instrument could not carry his voice, "Ho,
 ho, is that so, you thick chocolate ninny? You ought

 to see your brave soldiers playing with the children
 in the park!"
                The little man woke from his nap and took the
 napkin from his head.
                "Well," he smiled pleasantly, "have you picked up
 anything of interest?"
                "I have found them!" exclaimed Number Nine
 Proudly. "At least, they're in the teletable. Now,
 how do we bring them home?"
                The little man nodded. "I told you that was a
 smart machine. Now, to the cosmic with my Ozmic
 Ray!"
                The man went to a closet and came back carrying
 a long tube. He connected this to the side of the
 teletable.
                "Keep the picture and the sound clear," he said
 to Number Nine. "Wish them back intensely, while I
 adjust the intensifier."
                The boy closed his eyes and wished hard. When
 he opened his eyes, he saw a golden beam of light
 shooting from the end of the tube through the open
 window, and toward the sky. The machine was sput-
 tering electrically. Number Nine looked into
 mirror. It showed him the other end of the golden
 beam speeding toward the chocolate mountain.
 shower of sparks fell over the General and the prison.

                "Ouch! I'm melting!" came the General's voice.
 The General and the chocolate prison were melting
 down and running in liquid trickles over the moun-
 tain rocks.
                "We're free! We're free!" Jack Pumpkinh
 shouted to Scraps. Then the two leaped over
 liquid chocolate and ran toward the golden ray.
 "Look!" Scraps was so excited she forgot
 rhyme. "It tips down from the mountain like a ban-
 ister. Shall we slide down it?"
                "Yes," said Jack. "Oh, I hope it leads to Emerald
 City!"
                Scraps climbed onto the Ozmic Ray, face down-
 ward, hugging it like a banister.
                "Here I go!
                Toward friend or foe!"
 She shot downward. Jack Pumpkinhead moved
 stiffly, saying, "I hope my head doesn't fly off on the
 way down." Then he slid after her.
                "Here we are, from the star!" came a merry voice
 in the laboratory. Jerking around, Number Nine
 saw Scraps and Jack Pumpkinhead sliding down the
 Ozmic Ray, through the window, and toward the
 teletable!
                Boom! boom! They came to a stop and jumped to

 the floor.
                "Yippee!" cried Scraps, and began turning back-
 flips through the room.
                "Thank Ozness, we're saved," cried Jack, his yel-
 low face beaming.
                Number Nine pointed to the little bald-headed man.
 "Thank him. He saved you. And I don't even know
 his name."
                "Never mind," said the little man hastily. "Ozma
 has just returned, and I must present myself to her.
 I'll have to change my clothes, so you three had
 better go."
                The thought of going down those hundreds of
 stairs made Number Nine sigh. "My legs ache at the
 thought of that long climb down," he said.
                "Then you may use the Ambassa-door," said the
 little man, pointing to the south door. "The three of
 you just stand before it and wish yourselves at the
 foot of the stairs."
                "I didn't get to see the Wizard," said Number Nine
 in disappointment, as he and Jack, and Scraps
 walked to the door. It looked like any old battered
 door, without magical powers. But no sooner had
 Number Nine made the wish, than the Ambassa-door
 whisked him out, and he found himself, along with
 Jack Pumpkinhead and Scraps, in the Grand Hall-

 way on the first floor of the palace.
                The three looked around and saw that the Grand
 Hallway was crowded with people and other crea-
 tures from all the lands of Oz. Among these were
 the celebrated Scarecrow, the Tin Woodman, Pro-
 fessor Wogglebug, Glinda the Good, Princess
 Dorothy, and Aunt Em and Uncle Henry.
                Rows of footmen in green uniforms with gold
 tassels stood erect along the walls. At the foot of
 the stairs stood the Soldier with the Green Whiskers.
 Raising his trumpet to his lips, the Soldier blew four
 notes: TA-RA-TA-TA!
                All heads turned toward the Grand Stairway.
 Number Nine, Jack Pumpkinhead, and Scraps stood
 looking up the stairway. After a few minutes a little
 man in a bright red frock coat, high-heeled boots, a
 shirt with a starched collar appeared on the stairs.
 He carried a brilliant red cane and a high silk hat.
 He came slowly down the stairs, bearing himself
 with great dignity.
                "Why, that's the little man I was with all the
 afternoon!" thought Number Nine. "Can he be as
 important as all this?"
                At the moment the Soldier with the Green
 Whiskers sang out, "MAKE WAY FOR HIS EX-

 CELLENCY, THE GREAT WIZARD OF OZ!"
                "Well!" declared Number Nine in astonishment
 "I guess I was the loony one all the time!"
                The guests now went into the great Banquet Hall
 of the palace, and Number Nine hurried to tell Jenny
 his adventures.
                "Your Sawhorse is outside. the palace, waiting to
 take you back to the pumpkin field," said Number
 Nine to Jack Pumpkinhead. "As for you, Scraps,
 come with me to the Style Shop and Jenny will
 change you from that funny-looking boy's bathing
 suit to your own precious patches."
                Scraps somersaulted happily after him.
  
  
 CHAPTER 24
  
 The Midnight Oil Burns Low
  
 IT WAS almost evening when Jenny closed the
 shop. It had been a busy day, and she was tired.
 But she felt happy to know that the prisoners had
 returned to the Emerald City. Number Nine had
 come and gone and now Jenny went upstairs to get
 ready for bed.
                "Perhaps Ozma will hold the ozlection now that

 I'm back," thought Jenny.
                Before she could undress, there was a knock at
 the shop door. She hurried downstairs. Outside the
 door of the shop, she saw Jellia Jamb, Ozma's maid-
 in-waiting.
                "Come in, Jellia," said Jenny, opening the door
 wide.
                "I can't stay. Ozma sent me to ask you to come to
 the meeting in the Ivory Tower, at the top of the
 Ploz."
                "Ploz?" said Jenny. "What's that?"
                "P.L.O~Public Library of Oz," explained Jellia.
 "The meeting is important. It's about the ozlection,"
 she said, and hurried away.
                Jenny put on her newest dress, a pink trimmed
 with soap bubbles. As she looked into her mirror she
 thought, "I look as young as Number Nine. But he
 doesn't seem as young to me as he used to." Smiling,
 she stepped out into the twilight, drawing the door
 shut behind her. The entire house immediately shut-
 tered itself, except Jenny's bedroom, which remained
 waiting up for her.
                Jenny hurried toward the library building which
 was darkening with the evening. The only light
 came from a small window in the tower.

                "That's a strange place for a meeting," Jenny said
 to herself. "I wonder why they chose that. But Ozma
 acts wisely. I'll know soon enough."
                There was nobody in the street, for the people and
 the houses retire early, and Jenny felt lonesome run-
 ning along by herself. She talked aloud, to keep her-
 self company.
                When she came up to the library building, she was
 no longer alone. For at that moment, there arrived
 Ozma's carriage, drawn by the Cowardly Lion and
 the Hungry Tiger. It stopped at the door, and from
 it dismounted Ozma, Dorothy, Glinda, the Scarecrow,
 the Tin Woodman, Uncle Henry, and Aunt Em. Now
 that she saw the royal party, she felt honored to be
 present. It was indeed an important occasion, and
 tomorrow she would tell Number Nine all about it.
                "Hello, Jenny dear," called Ozma. "It was nice of
 you to come. I was at Glinda's castle when you saved
 the city with your turn-style. If you and your office
 boy had not acted so promptly, the city might have
 been submerged in chocolate when I returned. I
 thank you with all my heart and shall reward you
 in good time."
                "Oh, it was nothing at all, Your Majesty," said
 Jenny.
                The Scarecrow opened the door for Queen Ozma,

 sweeping off his hat and bowing low as she passed.
 Ozma smiled and paused a moment before going in.
 "Professor Wogglebug isn't expecting us," she
 said. "But I know he'll welcome a surprise."
                At this moment the Cowardly Lion spoke up. "Isn't
 this a rather dark part of town?"
                "The books in this library are full of illumination,"
 laughed the Scarecrow.
                "Books have never been known to shed light on
 animals," said the Cowardly Lion dolefully.
                "Don't fear," said Ozma. "You and the Hungry
 Tiger may come with us."
                Uncle Henry unharnessed the animals, and the
 two bounded into the building.
                "Hm!" said the Hungry Tiger, sniffing the air
 and looking around at the thousands of books that
 covered the walls, "not a juicy bone in all this dry
 stuff."
                The Cowardly Lion replied, "During the day there
 are some boneheads here. But at night only the
 bookworms remain."
                "What's a little bookworm to an appetite like
 mine? No, I'll just stay hungry," said the Tiger.
                The rest of the party came into the library and
 went toward the reversible chute. This was a slide

 that carried one up to the top floor of the building.
 This chute was very useful, although it was the re-
 sult of an accident. Professor Wogglebug, who had
 prepared the design for the builder, had accidentally
 copied the specifications backward, reversing the
 action of the slide. The atoms and molecules, all be-
 ing reversed, slid everything up instead of down.
                One by one, the party sat down on the bottom of
 the chute and were slid up, coming to a stop before
 the door of the Ivory Tower. On this door hung a
 sign:
 THE PROFESSOR IS IN
                When they were all assembled at the door, Ozma
 tapped on it. There was no answer. She knocked
 again, more loudly. Still there was no sound from
 inside the room.
                Ozma knocked a third time, so hard that her
 knuckles hurt. But only silence came from within.
                "He must be wrapped in his work over his ears,"
 said the Scarecrow. "I think we must all pound on
 the door."
                They all knocked to help arouse the Wogglebug.
 The Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger thumped
 on the door with their tails, the Scarecrow beat with
 his kingly scepter, the Tin Woodman pounded with
 his funnel hat, and the others used their knuckles.

 They kept up the pounding and knocking until
 Aunt Em said, "I declare, the Professor's mind must
 be wandering."
                "If 'twas a hog wandering, I'd give the hog call.
 That would bring it back," said Uncle Henry. "But
 I suppose you can't use a hog call on a professor!"
                "He's a hog for learning," said Dorothy. "And
 besides, I don't think he'd mind. Go ahead, Uncle
 Henry, and give your best hog call."
                "Hold on, everybody. Here I go!" said Uncle
 Henry, and he cupped his hands around his mouth
 and emitted the loudest, strangest cry that Jenny
 had ever heard. It was a yodel and a whoop and a
 siren scream all in one. It echoed through the empty
 floors below and was carried up again on the rever-
 sible chute.
                "Sakes alive!" said Aunt Em admiringly. "Too
 bad our old neighbors back in Kansas couldn't hear
 that! I'm proud of you, Henry."
                They heard the key turn in the door, and, as the
 door opened, they saw Professor Wogglebug stand-
 ing there, yawning and stretching.
                "Haz, hum!" he said. "I trust this interruption is
 due to no trivial cause."
                The Professor opened his eyes wider. "Our Queen

 herself! Then I know this disturbance is for a worthy
 reason. I was lost in thought, and for three days
 I've been trying to find my way back. Then I heard
 a sound and guided myself back by it."
                "That was Uncle Henry's hog call," said Dorothy.
 "No matter." The Professor waved his antennae
 with dignity. "Pray enter, and break the solitude of
 my sanctum."
                The Wogglebug stood aside, and the royal party
 entered, walking carefully so as not to stumble over
 the books and papers that overflowed the table and
 the chairs and lay in piles on the floor.
                "I must ask you to leave everything in exactly the
 disorder in which you see it," said the Professor.
 "Please seat yourselves as best you can. You, gra-
 cious Queen, may have my chair."
                While Ozma occupied the only vacant chair, the
 others sat on piles of books. The two beasts crouched
 quietly in two corners.
                "We are sorry to disturb you, Professor," said
 Ozma, "but we want to discuss the ozlection. This
 was the best place to meet."
                "Meat? Did someone say meat?" the Hungry Tiger
 leaped up.
                Everyone smiled at the beast, and the Tin Wood-
 man said kindly, "Here you will find only food for

 thought." The Tiger sank back in his corner.
                "A-humph!" said the Professor. "The first thing to
 decide on is a new method of voting. Has anyone
 thought of a way?"
                The others were silent and shook their heads. The
 Professor took off his spectacles, breathed on them,
 and polished them with his handkerchief.
                Ozma said, "We have come here to get your ad-
 vice. This time nothing must happen to the votes."
                Princess Dorothy spoke up, "We must hold the
 ozlection soon."
                The Professor said, "This is a matter of great
 weight. But the wait need not be great."
                "But what will be the way to vote?"
                The Professor smiled wisely. "The way is to
 weigh."
                "My, he sure talks like a professor," said Aunt Em,
 looking blank.
                "Humph! Thank you, madam." The Wogglebug
 bowed, upsetting the pile of books on which he was
 sitting. With undisturbed dignity, he seated himself
 on another pile.
                Uncle Henry said, "It sounds mighty learned, but
 for my part, I don't know what it means."
                "Neither do I," said Glinda.

                "Wait !" said the Wogglebug. "You'll soon under-
 stand that we're discussing weight."
                Aunt Em looked blanker than ever. Jenny spoke
 up, "The Professor means that the voters will step
 on a scale and be weighed!"
                "Excellent, dear child!" said the Professor. He
 went on, looking from one to the other, "In spite
 of the good things that Jenny has done for our
 people, and her being well liked, there is no doubt
 that Ozma will get most of the votes. When a can-
 didate gets almost all the votes in an ozlection,
 there occurs a landslide. And a landslide in such
 a well-laid city as ours would be nothing short of
 a Catastrophe!"
                "That would be dreadful!" said Glinda the Good,
 shuddering.
                "To prevent a landslide," the Professor went on,
 "we must see that the candidates' votes are almost
 evenly balanced."
                "But how can we do that?" asked the Scarecrow,
 whose straw brains were poking out of his head from
 the effort to understand the Professor.
                The Tin Woodman added, "You just said yourself
 that most of the people will vote for Ozma."
                "I think what the Professor means," said Jenny,
 "is that we must leave the ozlection to CHANCE."

                The Professor beamed and bowed toward Jenny.
 "Exceedingly bright! If Ozma were not such a be-
 loved Queen, I might wish that you could take her
 place. But of course that is unthinkable."
                "Unthinkable!" said everybody else in a chorus,
 except Jenny.
                "I am more in the dark than ever," said Uncle
 Henry.
                "That is not surprising," said Aunt Em. "The
 lamp is burning low."
                "Dear me," said the Professor, "I'm all out of
 midnight oil. We'll have to adjourn the meeting.
 Leave everything to me. You, Queen Ozma, order
 the Town Crier to cry to every household that the
 people must find their way to the Public Square next
 Choose Day early, when the weighing will get under
 way. Each in his way will weigh himself. There will
 be entertainment for those who must wait to leave
 their weight."
                Dorothy clapped her hands and cried, "I can't
 wait till next Choose Day. This ozlection is going to
 be a lot of fun,"
  
 CHAPTER 25
  

 The Great Ozlection
  
 ALL ROADS running toward the Emerald City
 from the four countries of Oz were filled with
 traffic. Everyone was coming to vote and shop.
 Every kind and color of wagon was rolling along. On
 the Gillikin high road there were odd little carts
 drawn by purple goats and spotted dogs covered with
 bells and tassels.
                On the main Quadling thoroughfare a farmer who
 was very red in the face rode a roan horse with his
 wife and three children in a single saddle. There
 was a jostle and a clatter of happy family parties.
 When these travelers reached the top of a hill from
 which they could get a clear view of the Emerald
 City, they all stopped to admire the sight.
                The towers and spires were sparkling in the sun.
 Colored banners snapped and rolled in the morning
 breeze. The green, yellow, red, purple, and blue visi-
 tors in the streets looked like moving flowers. In the
 center of the city, the palace and its lawns looked
 like a jewel set on green velvet.
                After the travelers had passed the Guardian of
 the Gate, they saw the city houses smiling with wel-
 come. Flowers of gay colors showed from every yard
 and house. The trees were fussing and primping

 and arranging their fruit and branches to look more
 attractive.
                The Town Crier kept wandering around the city,
 wailing, "Weigh in at the Public Square! All out for
 the ozlection!"
                A few people were still asleep. But the houses,
 hearing his sobs, shook them out of their beds.
 The visiting voters left their carts in the pumpkin
 field and proceeded on foot toward the Public Square,
 close to the palace.
                A broad path led to the heart of the Square, where
 there were two platforms. On one platform sat
 Queen Ozma, and on the other, Jenny. Both girls
 were dressed alike in gold-spangled dresses covered
 with small question marks and X's in honor of the
 ozlection. The dresses had just been turned out of
 the turn-style.
                Beside each girl stood a large weighing scale of
 pure silver, inlaid with emeralds, in the best Oz-ish
 manner. Between the two platforms stood Professor
 Wogglebug. In one hand he held a speaking-tube.
                "Humph!" he cleared his throat, and raised the
 speaking-tube to his lips. "AT-TENTION, EVERY-
 BODY!"
                The laughter and talk in the Public Square ended,

 and the people listened to the Wogglebug. The Pro-
 fessor bowed in appreciation of the silence. Then he
 raised his speaking-tube again.
                "With full use of my wisdom and forethought, I
 have arranged this ozlection. The candidates are our
 gracious Queen, Ozma, and Miss Jenny Jump, Stylist.
 To avoid any mistake, I have decided that Chance
 alone will rule. You good people from our fair lands
 will form a single line. The first person in the line
 will step onto Ozma's platform scale and weigh him-
 self. The second person will step on Miss Jenny
 Jump's scale. The third will go to Ozma's, the fourth,
 to Miss Jenny Jump's, and so forth.
                "I shall keep a record of the weights. The candi-
 date who has in her favor the most poundage of our
 noble citizenry will be our future Ruler. Now, will
 a line please form.?"
                The Wogglebug ran among the people, directing
 them to take their places. Then, looking at his watch,
 he said, "It is now seven fifteen, A. M. The time for
 voting has come. You, Winkie girl"-he pointed to
 the first person in the line"--proceed to Ozma's
 scale."
                Professor Wogglebug hurried after the Winkie
 girl. As she stepped onto the scale, the Professor
 took out his notebook and said, "Sixty-seven pounds.

 Sixty-seven votes for Ozma." He wrote "67" in his
 notebook under the name of Ozma.
                "Next, you Gillikin boy. Don't be bashful. Step
 right up to Miss Jenny Jump's scale. It is not only
 your right, but your duty, to vote!"
                The boy timidly approached Jenny Jump's plat-
 form and stepped on the scale. "Ahz," cried the
 Professor. "Eighty-seven pounds." He wrote the
 number in his notebook under the name of Jenny.
                "Let me see-sixty-seven subtracted from eighty-
 seven leaves twenty-that's twenty votes in Miss
 Jenny Jump's favor!"
                But after two more people had been weighed, the
 Professor cried out, "Our Queen is now leading by
 nine votes!"
 Jenny felt strange, there before so many people.
 Now she knew exactly how a queen must feel.
                "It's not all fun," she said to herself. "But just the
 same, I want to be Queen. If I win, I intend to move
 into the royal palace. But I'll hate to give up the
 Style Shop."
                There were many faces in the crowd that gave
 Jenny a friendly smile. She could see many of her
 styles on the people. At this point, the Soldier with
 the Green Whiskers was directed by the Wogglebug

 to Jenny's scale. A huge gold medal covered half the
 Soldier's chest. He stepped on Jenny's scale, and the
 Wogglebug shouted, "One hundred fifty-five pounds
 of Army vote."
                The Soldier turned indignantly. "I beg your par-
 don, Professor Wogglebug, T.E. But according to
 the Records of the Army, my weight has always been
 one hundred twenty-five. There is no reason why I
 should be twenty-five pounds overweight today!"
 The Soldier was still standing on the scale, and the
 pointer touched 155. The Professor put his hand on
 the scale.
                "Do you dispute the accuracy of this instrument?"
 he said.
                The Soldier turned greener with anger. "Are you
 calling the Army Records false?" he shouted.
                The Wogglebug drew back, studying the Soldier.
 His eyes fell on the large medal.
                "Ah, haz!" he said, pointing at the Soldier's chest.
 "That explains everything!"
 The Soldier's eyes fell on the medal, and his face
 broke into a smile. "Ahz, yes, I had forgotten. My
 decoration for saving the city from the chocolate
 army."
                He marched away from the scale, and Ozma leaned
 toward Jenny's platform.

                "I have been thinking of-" said Ozma, when the
 Wogglebug stepped between the two platforms.
 "Ladies, ladies! I beg to remind you that you are
 holding up the line!"
                "I beg your pardon, Professor," said Jenny and
 Ozma.
                The Wogglebug called, "Next, please. Keep the
 line moving."
                The weighing-in continued. The votes kept closely
 balanced. First Ozma would be ahead, then Jenny
 would overtake her, or pass her. The people were in
 a state of great excitement, not knowing how the
 ozlection would turn out at the end.
                As noon approached, the footmen from the palace
 set up picnic tables in the Public Square. Someone
 said to Jenny, "Could you tell me what the score is
 now?" But Jenny could not see anyone speaking to
 her.
                "It is 15,009 votes for Ozma, and 15,010 for my-
 self." She looked around, "Are you the Voice That
 Lost His Man?"
                "The same. Has my Man been weighed in yet?"
 asked the Voice.
                "I don't know," said Jenny.
                "Oh, here he comes. My vacation is over !" The

 Voice had both disappointment and pleasure in its
 tone.
                Coming from the front of the line and stepping
 around the Wogglebug, Jenny saw a stout, dark man
 with pointed, waxed mustaches. He waved his hands
 as he walked, and when he stepped on the platform
 he wiggled his fingers, as if he were trying to shape
 words with them.
                "I don't know what you are trying to say," said
 Jenny. Then she heard the Voice, "Here I am,
 Master! Is that horrid Cold out of your throat?"
 The dark, round man rolled his eyes and exposed
 his even rows of teeth in a grin. He waved his arms
 and danced, his face radiant with joy. But not a
 sound did he utter.
                "Oh, Master! I know what you would sing if you
 had me inside you." The Voice burst into song beside
 the singer 5 head, "0, Sole Mio!"
                The man clapped his hands and seemed speechless
 with delight. Then the Voice said, "Farewell, free-
 dom! Farewell, the open road!" The next time it
 spoke, it came from the throat of the man.
                "Ahz !" cried the man. "At last my golden voice
 is with me again! Never, never do I fish in the drafts
 again! To you, Miss Jenny Jump, I am so happy, I
 give my weight and my heart!"

                The Professor said, "Just the weight, if you
 please."
                The singer bounded on the scale. The pointer went
 swinging to three hundred pounds!
                "Thank you," cried Jenny. "If all my voters
 weighed as much as you, I'd be sure to win the oz-
 lection."
                As the singer was departing, his mouth wide
 open in song, a midget came up. While the fattest
 woman in Oz stepped on Ozma's scale, the midget
 weighed in on Jenny's.
                Jenny was ready to cry. For Ozma was now in the
 lead. A few minutes later the Wogglebug announced
 that lunch was ready for everyone.
 After lunch the voting was resumed. The score
 kept teetering between Ozma and Jenny. Everyone
 known to the people of Oz was weighed in-Sir
 Hokus, Princess Dorothy, Aunt Em, Uncle Henry,
 Jellia Jamb, Polychrome, and many others.
 At night a full moon hghted the Public Square.
 All over the city, fireworks and entertainments were
 going on. No one thought of sleeping. The houses
 remained wide awake, sharing the excitement. There
 was only a small line of voters remaining unweighed.
 The score still was so close that it looked as if the

 ozlection would be decided with the last votes.
 Number Nine and his family stood patiently near
 the end of the line. When the office boy stepped on
 Jenny's scale, he grinned and leaned close to Jenny,
 saying, "I'm glad I'm voting for you, Boss."
                "If I become Queen," said Jenny, "you shall be
 my front page boy."
                "Thanks, Boss. I'd like that. But if you don't get
 to be Queen, don't feel bad."
                Jenny tossed her head. "I guess my chance is as
 good as Ozma's."
                Each member of Number Nine's family was
 weighed in and then vanished into the crowd. As the
 last people in the line drew closer, word began to
 spread over the city that the ozlection was soon to
 be decided. The people left their fireworks and games
 and massed in the Public Square.
                "A-humph! At-tention, everybody!"
 The Professor stepped to the front of Ozma's plat-
 form. He held up his notebook, reading aloud.
 "The score between the candidates is now: Queen
 Ozma, one million, six hundred thousand and seven
 pounds. Miss Jenny Jump, one million, six hundred
 thousand and twelve pounds. Miss Jenny Jump is
 leading by five pounds. And there are only two
 voters left to cast their weight!"

 The crowd burst into a tremendous shout. The
 Wogglebug held up his hand.
                "Please, please! Save your shouting for the oz-
 lected Ruler of our fair land. Voter, step up to Queen
 Ozma's scale."
                Jenny's heart was beating fast. Two more votes,
 and the ozlection would be decided! She might be
 Queen!
                The next to the last voter stepped onto Ozma's
 scale. A tense silence hung over the Public Square.
 When the Wogglebug spoke, his voice trembled with
 excitement.
 "This voter weighs eighty-three pounds, bringing
 Ozma's total votes to one million, six hundred thou-
 sand and ninety pounds. And now, the last voter,
 who will decide the future destiny of Oz !"
 Jenny was so excited, her feet kept twitching.
                "Am I to be Queen of Oz?" she whispered to herself.
 A weary old man stepped on Jenny's scale.
 "Seventy-eight pounds!" announced the Wogglebug.
 "Bringing Jenny Jump's total to one million, six hun-
 dred thousand and ninety pounds. Great Socrates'
 socks! IT'S A TIE!"
                The people went wild. "A tie, a tie," they cried,
 and many took off their neckties and waved them in

 the air.
                Jenny jumped from her chair. "What are we to
 do?" she cried.
                The Wogglebug shook his head. "The same num-
 ber of people voted for Ozma as for Jenny. And
 there is no one left to vote."
                "Does that mean we are both to be Queen?" asked
 Jenny, her heart bobbing in her throat.
                "Not an ant's chance! Only one person can be
 Queen in Oz. That is the unwritten law of the land!"
 declared the Wogglebug.
                "Must we have another ozlection?" asked Ozma,
 sounding a little tired.
                The Professor joined his hands behind him and
 paced up and down. "Your Majesty, I am con-
 founded and dumfounded! We have the problem-
 but where is the answer?"
                "Here!" came a cheery voice.
 Jenny, Ozma, and the Wogglebug stared toward
 the place from which the voice had come. There,
 walking down the moon path on Ozma's platform,
 came a tiny man with a beard as bushy as a porcu-
 pine and a battered old hat with an owl's feather.
                "It's Siko Pompus!" cried Jenny. "He can decide
 the ozlection."
                "And that I am meanin' to do, my dear," said

 the Leprechaun. "It's glad I am to see ye all!" He
 spun around on his toe, nodding to everyone. The
 people crowded closer to see the queer little man,
 and to learn how he would determine the outcome of
 the ozlection.
                The Wogglebug hurried near to the Leprechaun.
 "Sir, you've come just in time. Both candidates have
 had an equal number of voters. If you step on one
 scale, there should be someone else to step on the
 other scale. But since you are a visitor to the city,
 you must choose which scale you prefer, and decide
 the ozlection."
                Jenny ran to the Leprechaun. She felt light-
 hearted with confidence. "Dear Siko Pompus, vote
 for me! You are my friend!"
                The Leprechaun took Jenny's hand, saying, "Yes,
 Jenny, it's your friend I am. That's why I'm wantin'
 to save ye a heap of responsibility. Stay a simple
 girl!"
                Before Jenny could understand him, he had dropped
 her hand and jumped on Ozma 's scale.
                "QUEEN OZMA IS QUEEN!" Professor Woggle
 bug cried.
                The people's shouts rocked the city. "Ozma, our
 beloved Queen!" they shouted.

                Jenny stamped her foot. "He made me lose the
 ozlection!" she cried furiously. She felt her temper
 rising until it seemed to be boiling in her blood.
 "I'll get you, you old Leprechaun!" she shouted
 and rushed at the little man.
  
 CHAPTER 26
  
 Jenny's Last Flare-Up
  
 JENNY rushed at the little man, her temper be-
 yond her control. But just as she was about to
 grab him, he ran up a moonbeam, out of her reach.
 "I'll get you!" Jenny cried again and tried to run
 up the moonbeam. But she fell through to the
 ground. The Leprechaun went higher and higher
 until he was out of sight.
 "I'll get somebody!" Jenny cried, and she dashed
 at the Wogglebug. The Professor scampered under
 the platform.
                Ozma went to Jenny. "Please, Jenny, keep calm.
 Everything will be all right."
                "Everything is all wrong!" Jenny said. "And I'm
 going to get even!"
                She ran toward the people, and they parted before
 her as if she were a ferocious animal. Jenny ran

 on through the streets.
                "I'm going to do something to make them sorry
 that I'm not Queen!" she cried to herself. She ran
 on, not knowing where she was going or what she
 would do. She ran until she came to the gate of
 the animal-plant enclosure. Her temper gave her
 extra strength, and she threw open the gate and
 ran into the enclosure.
                All around her the animal-plants were peacefully
 sleeping. "I'll set them free!" she stormed. "They'll
 run loose, smashing everything, and the wild animal
 plants will knock over all the people!"
                Jerking a forked branch from a tree, she prodded
 a dandy-lion. The dandy-lion reared up and went
 rushing through the enclosure and out of the gate
 Jenny wrenched open the doors of the fox-glove
 kennels. The blue, gray, silver, and red foxes ran
 out, so excited that they began nipping at the legs
 of other animals.
                Cries, bellows, and yowls began coming up from
 the enclosure. All the animal-plants were awake
 and pulling at their flower chains. Jenny prodded the
 tiger-lilies. The tigers leaped from the plants, ran
 wildly round and round, then burst through the gate.
                From the city came cries, "The animal-plants are

 loose!"
                "Yes," Jenny shouted, "the animal-plants are loose,
 and more will be loose." Her temper was so high and
 so hot, it seemed it would burn the top of her head
 off. She freed the holly-hawks, catnip cats, dogwood
 dogs, and the snap-dragons.
                She ran, kicking and striking at everything that
 got in her way, toward another corner of the en-
 closure. A dark shape rushed toward her. There
 was a threatening cry.
                "Look out Bullhead!"
                "Who's a bullhead!" Jenny shouted. "I'll get you!"
                "You're in the bull-rush pen now," said the heavy
 voice, closer. It gave a long bellow.
                "I'm not afraid of bulls!" Jenny said. Just then
 she was tripped by a horn and fell flat on her face.
                "Who made you stum-bull?" said the animal.
                Jenny gasped, trying to get back enough breath
 to answer. Other bulls came running up, and Jenny
 saw that she was in a bull ring. Heads were lowered,
 silver horns flashed in the moonlight. In the face of
 danger, Jenny's temper was cooling rapidly.
                "Who are you, anyway?" she cried to the circle of
 bulls. They answered, one by one.
                "I'm Tum-bull."
                "I'm F'um-bull."

                "I'm Grum-bull."
                "I'm Mum-bull."
                "I'm Gob-bull."
                "I'm Hum-bull," said a mild and pathetic voice.
 A heavy black shape lumbered close and blew its
 heavy breath in her face. "You'll never get away
 from me. I'm Trou-bull!"
                "Go away, or I'll fix you," Jenny said, her temper
 beginning to boil again. She jumped up, and, in a
 sudden spasm of fury, threw herself at Trou-bull's
 head, catching hold of the horns. The great, shaggy
 beast swung around, lowered its head, jerked her up,
 and sent her sailing through the air.
                Crack! Jenny hit against the fence of the enclo-
 sure and fell into the grass. The fence awoke and
 promptly loosened one of its rails. The rail hit Jenny
 over the head.
                "Oh, oh, what happened?" she said, her eyes clos-
 ing. "Why did I have to get angry?"
                Then she didn't know any more, for she had
 fainted.
  
  
 CHAPTER 27
  

 The Animals Run Wild
  
 THE CITY was filled with confusion. The people
 were running away from the animals who had
 escaped from their plants. Many of them pursued
 people into the houses and cellars. Others ran wildly,
 trying to find shelter. Foxes, lions, and tigers sniffed
 at the houses. The houses passed the alarm from
 door to door. When the animals came too close, the
 houses began fighting them.
                One old house had been lazily scratching its back
 with its chimney, when it felt a dragon sniffing at
 the foot of its stairs. The house was so startled that
 its eyes bulged out, cracking three panes of glass.
 It began to tremble, and it looked so sick with fright
 that its dark green paint began to pale. When the
 dragon passed on, the house recovered its color.
                The dragon passed to another dwelling. This house
 became so enraged that it walloped the beast with
 its chimney. But in the meantime, a catnip slipped
 into the house, crawled into a bed, and fell asleep.
                The merrymaking was over in the Emerald City.
 Everywhere people were trying to get to their homes
 and put the frightened children to bed. Queen Ozma
 sent the Town Crier to cry the animals back to their
 enclosure and to quiet the people. But the Town

 Crier took one look at the animals fighting the
 houses, and turned and ran.
                Number Nine and his father had succeeded in get-
 ting their family safe within the Uncle's house. Then
 Number Nine began to worry about Jenny.
                "I'm going out to see what has happened to my
 Boss."
                "I'll go with you, son. Maybe I can do some good.
 If not that, maybe I can find the blue-blooded horses
 I've been trying to get."
                Soon after they set out, the father saw a bull
 caught halfway in a window. The window had shut
 itself on the bull, squeezing with all its might. The
 clothesline had tied itself around its tail and was
 trying to pull the animal out.
                The Munchkin father grasped the clothesline and
 helped pull the bull into the street. When he had
 got the animal out, he said to it, "What were you
 trying to do?"
                "I was just getting away from all this dreadful
 noise," answered the bull. "And I want to find a
 friend."
                A large tear rolled down the bull's nose. "You're
 the first person who hasn't chased me this night."
                "Would you like me to be your friend?" asked the

 father.
                "But you pulled my tail!" said the bull.
                "I won't do that again," promised the father.
                "All right, then I'll let you own me," said the bull.
 When the father proceeded down the street, the bull
 followed quietly.
                Number Nine and his father went on, and soon
 they came to the dragon that had been having
 trouble with the houses. The dragon was lying in
 the middle of the road, panting hard. It had just
 been knocked down by a sturdy Banana Boulevard
 mansion. It raised its heads as Number Nine and his
 father passed.
                "Will you help me to my feet?"
                "If you want my help, dragon, just blow your
 breath the other way," said the father. "This is my
 new suit of clothes." He pinched out a few burning
 spots in his sleeves. Then he helped the dragon to
 its feet, saying, "Go and lie under a tree."
                "I tried that," said the dragon. "But the trees and
 bushes stuck twigs and briars into my tender skin.
 I'll just limp along after you."
                The dragon and the bull were now following Num-
 ber Nine and his father. His father's four blue
 mules were straying about. Seeing this small pro-
 cession, they joined it. Other animals slipped into

 line. A catnip wildcat with saucy eyes stood in the
 middle of the road, blocking the way.
                "Will you please step aside?" said Number Nine's
 father.
                "Why should I?" retorted the snippy wildcat, her
 hair bristling.
                "Can't you see you're in the way?" the father
 replied patiently.
                "Let me join your parade," said the wildcat.
                The father looked around and was surprised to see
 a string of animals two blocks long following him.
                "Well, if this keeps on, I'll have all the animals
 with me, and I can take them to the enclosure," he
 said.
                Number Nine felt important at the head of this
 parade. "I wish Jenny could see me," he thought.
                The bull was walking directly behind Number
 Nine's father. It rubbed its nose on his neck and
 asked, "Where can I get two or three buckets of
 water to drink?"
                "We'll stop at the elephant fountain and water all
 the animals," said the father.
                They marched to the corner of Pancake Park,
 where an enormous statue of an elephant sprayed
 green water out of its stone trunk into a basin. The

 animals crowded around the basin and began drink-
 ing. Other animals kept coming from other parts
 of the city.
                Many hours had passed since the ozlection. A
 green dawn was beginning to show in the east.
                "Here are the blue-blooded horses I've been look-
 ing for!" exclaimed the father. Number Nine looked
 across the park and saw, in the first rays of morning,
 four blue horses trotting abreast. They came close
 to the bull and stood whispering to it. Then they
 turned and trotted up to the father.
                "The bull says that you are the animals' friend.
 We want to come with you," said one of the horses.
                "That will be fine. I have a snug, clean barn on
 my farm in the Munchkin country," said the father.
 "I have been hunting for you many days."
                When the animals had drunk all they wanted, they
 formed in a procession. Just as the farmer was go-
 ing to lead them off, up came a large girl dressed
 in a suit of brilliant green spangles, with a belt of
 gold and a bright gold sword hanging jauntily at
 her side.
                She marched up to the farmer and saluted. "I am
 General Jinjur," she announced.
                "What I need is not a general, but a Field Mar-
 shal, to marshal these animals back to their field,"

 said the father.
                General Jinjur gave him a haughty stare and
 replied, "In private life, I, too, am a farmer. I can
 handle animals very well."
                "Good!" said Number Nine's father. "You can lead
 these back to the enclosure and see that they are
 safely locked up. I'll take my four blue-blooded
 horses and this bull that wants me for a friend. I'll
 gather my family and start back for the Munchkin
 country. We've had lots of fun and excitement on
 our vacation in the Emerald City. But it's time we
 all got back to the farm."
                Number Nine looked sorry to hear his father's
 words. He said, "Then I must say goodbye, father.
 For I must find Jenny Jump and return with her to
 the Style Shop."
                Number Nine and General Jinjur started toward
 the animal-plant enclosure. General Jinjur walked
 with a spunky strut.
                The animals paraded after them, and in the grow-
 mg daylight the remaining ones who had been
 loosened by Jenny the night before came from the
 houses and other hiding-places and joined the parade.
                The animals quickly went to their places in the
 enclosure. Some lay rubbing their bumps and cuts

 where they had been hit by the houses.
                "Poor animals," said Number Nine, "they need a
 doctor."
 "That looks like one coming," said General Jinjur.
 Looking toward the gate, Number Nine saw a
 short man, dressed in a high black hat and a dark
 frock coat, wearing spectacles, with a stethoscope
 around his neck, and carrying a black bag. Under
 his arm he held a tiny door.
                The little man came bustling by, passing up the
 hurt animals. Number Nine called out, "Say, Doc,
 aren't you going to help these poor creatures?"
                The man in the frock coat stopped. "Later in the
 morning," he said, "I shall pay them a call. Just
 now I have a more urgent case."
                "A ease of what?" asked General Jinjur.
                "The Consequences of Bad Temper," said the doc-
 tor. "This disease is very rare in Oz. The patient is
 a nice little girl, otherwise."
                "Why, you must be talking about Jenny Jump!"
 said Number Nine. "Where is she?"
                "Over there, against the wall of the bull pen. Un-
 conscious from a bad bump on her head," said the
 doctor. General Jinjur pointed her finger at him.
                "I know who you are," she said. "You're the
 Wizard of Oz!"

                "Hush! You know better than to mention my name
 in public!" The little man waved his hand before
 General Jinjur. "Back to your farm!" he said.
                Number Nine's eyes popped. General Jinjur had
 vanished!
                "Where is she?" cried the boy.
                The doctor chuckled. "Didn't you hear me send
 her home? Right now she is getting ready to milk
 the cow. Jinjur is a good girl, but she has to be kept
 in her place. Now to Jenny Jump."
                The Wizard and Number Nine hurried toward the
 wall of the bull pen. "A bull pen is not a suitable
 place for a doctor to work," said the Wizard. He
 tapped the little door that he was carrying under his
 arm. "Do you remember the Ambassa-door that
 transported you from my laboratory to the first floor
 of the palace? This is Ambassa-door, Junior. It is
 going to take Jenny, you, and me to the palace. And
 when Jenny wakes up, she is going to find herself a
 mightily changed girl!"
  
 CHAPTER 28
  
 How Grand I Feel!"
  

 JENNY lay in the Sapphire Guest Room of the
 palace. Queen Ozma stood at the foot of the bed.
 A scepter hung like an ornament at the side of her
 dress. Her usually smooth forehead was drawn with
 worry. Number Nine sat on a stool in a corner of
 the room. The Wizard of Oz leaned over the bed
 where Jenny lay.
                The Wizard straightened up. "That bump on her
 forehead is not serious," he said.
                "Why doesn't she waken?" asked Ozma.
                "I'm keeping her under a spell. While she can
 feel nothing, I am going to remove that bad temper."
 The Wizard looked around at Number Nine. "Will
 you please hand me my bag, there on the table?"
 Number Nine picked up the common looking black
 bag and took it to the Wizard.
                "Open it, young man."
                Number Nine obeyed. The bag was cranimed full
 of vials, bottles, thermometers, and an object that
 looked like a dunce cap made of fine screen wire.
                "The cap, please," said the Wizard.
 There was a light rap at the door. Ozma tiptoed
 over and admitted Princess Dorothy with the Scare-
 crow and the Tin Woodman.
                "How is Jenny?" they whispered.
                "I don't know yet. The Wizard is going to perform

 the operation," said Ozma as she led the three toward
 the bed.
                While the two girls and Number Nine looked on,
 the Wizard put the conical screen cap on Jenny's
 head. "This extractor has never failed me," he said.
 Jenny slept on, and as Number Nine watched, he
 saw a slight smile forming on her lips.
                "She looks as if she is having a pleasant dream,"
 said the boy.
                "She is feeling better already," said Ozma, "for
 her temper just passed into that extractor she is
 wearing."
                Number Nine leaned over to examine the cap. He
 could see nothing inside it. But he did not say any-
 thing.
                The Wizard turned to the boy with a smile. "You
 will hardly recognize your Boss after today. There
 will be no sweeter-tempered girl in the land." He
 looked closely at the mesh cap. "Every bit of ill
 temper is out now."
                Then the Wizard turned to Ozma. "While Jenny is
 wearing the extractor, is there anything else that
 ought to come out?"
                Ozma thought a moment and then said, "She has a
 little too much envy, and that makes her unhappy.

 And perhaps too much ambition."
                "You are right," said the Wizard. "They must
 come out. Envy first." He turned a small screw at
 the side of the cap. He waited a minute and said,
                "There, that's done."
                Number Nine again leaned close to the conical cap,
 but he still saw nothing inside it.
                "Now for the ambition that had Jenny's head
 turned." This time the Wizard not only adjusted the
 screw, but turned the cap. He was smiling at Jenny.
                Number Nine was amazed at the change that now
 came to Jenny's face. Not only was she looking
 milder, happier, and younger; she was actually twice
 as pretty as she had been. Number Nine's blue face
 shone with affection. He could hardly wait for Jenny
 to awaken.
                The Wizard took off the conical cap and held it up
 like a wire cage.
                "Do you see what we have here, Ozma?" he said,
 turning the cap.
                "Yes, I see. She will be so much happier without
 those," said Ozma.
                The Wizard looked at Number Nine and Dorothy.
 "Interesting specimens, aren't they?" he remarked,
 twirling the cap.
                Number Nine shook his head. The wire hat looked

 empty to him. "Gee, Wiz, I don't see anything," he
 said.
                Princess Dorothy said, "You forget, Wizard, that
 we don't have magical eyes like you and Ozma."
                The Wizard laughed. "I can remedy that."
 He reached into his black bag and took out a small
 can labeled "Visibility Powder." Holding the cap
 high, he said, "The bad temper, the envy, and
 ambition have no shape or substance except to
 magical eyes. When I sprinkle some Visibility
 Powder into the cap, those three will take shapes
 which your eyes will see."
                At this moment the door opened, and Jellia Jamb
 with Glinda the Good peeped into the room. Ozma
 beckoned to them to enter. They came on tiptoe to
 the foot of the bed. In her hands Jellia was holding
 something that was covered with a gold cloth. Glinda
 the Good was dressed in a long red robe of flamingo
 feathers, sewn about with rubies. Her beautiful hair
 flowed down to her shoulders.
                The Wizard waved the can of Visibility Powder.
 "Now, watch," he said and turned the can over the
 conical cap, sprinkling the powder downward. Im-
 mediately Number Nine saw an object moving within
 the fine mesh of the cap. Looking closer, he saw a

 black wasp buzzing angrily about and darting at
 the mesh as if it wanted to get out and sting
 someone.
                "That is bad temper," said the Wizard, and shook
 more powder over the cage-like cap.
 At once, a small green snake was wriggling there.
 "That's envy," spoke the Wizard, and for the third
 time he sprinkled some powder.
                Number Nine saw a fat red toad, with a spotted
 back, hopping about. "And that," said the Wizard,
 "is ambition. Now Jenny is free of all these three.
 Interesting specimens, don't you think?"
                "What are you going to do with them, Wizard?"
 asked Glinda the Good.
                "I'll keep them in my laboratory for experiments,
 and later I'll give them to Professor Wogglebug for
 his zoology classes at his College of Art and Athletic
 Perfection."
                The Wizard placed the cap with its three captives
 in his black bag and replaced the can of Visi-
 bility Powder. He turned to Ozma. 'I turn the pa-
 tient over to you."
                Ozma took Jenny's hand, leaned over the sleeping
 girl, and blew softly on both her eyes.
 Jenny's eyes opened. She stared around her and
 said, "Why, I am in the palace!" Then she sat up-

 right, smiling and stretching her arms. "How grand
 I feel!" she exclaimed. "Like a new person!"
                Ozma smiled. "You are a new person, Jenny. You
 will always be sweet tempered, modest, and kind. All
 the people of Oz shall love you, and this boy" --turn-
 ing her eyes to Number Nine--"shall love you most
 of all." Number Nine blushed a furious blue.
                Glinda the Good smiled at Jenny. "Ozma has a
 lovely surprise for you."
                Princess Dorothy and Jellia Jamb nodded their
 heads, smiling at Jenny
                "For me?" said Jenny. Her voice was a young
 girl's voice, and her eyes had a childish wonder in
 them.
                Ozma said, "Since the day you landed in my
 carriage at my Birthday Parade, Jenny, you have
 done many good things for my people. For this you
 deserve a reward."
                Ozma's hand went to the jewelled scepter that
 hung from her belt. She held it over Jenny's head.
                "Jenny Jump, I bestow upon you the title of First
 Duchess of the Realm."
                "A Duchess!" cried Jenny. "Oh, thank you so
 much!"
                Ozma lowered her scepter and went on, "You shall

 have the Sapphire Suite in the palace, right next to
 Princess Dorothy's suite. You shall sit at High Coun-
 cils of State. You shall appear, with Dorothy, at my
 side at public entertainments. And, in addition, you
 shall be Chief Stylist of the Land of Oz."
                Jenny was glowing with happiness. "Oh, Ozma,
 how good you are!" she said.
                Number Nine unexpectedly spoke up, his voice
 heavy with unhappiness, "Isn't Jenny going to live
 in her cottage on Strawberry Street any more?"
                "Oh, certainly," said Ozma. "She will live at the
 palace only when she wishes to."
                Ozma turned to Jellia and uncovered the object
 that Jellia had been holding. It was a dainty coronet
 of silver and sapphires. Taking it between her hands,
 Ozma placed it on Jenny's head.
                "There! You make a very sweet Duchess indeed,"
 said Ozma.
                They all gathered at the banquet table and had a
 party in honor of Jenny. Suddenly she realized she
 had not changed her clothes.
                Jenny looked down at the dress she was wearing.
 It was crushed and spattered with mud from the bull
 pen. "Oh, dear! If I am a Duchess, I had better
 hurry back to my Style Shop and turn out some suit-
 able clothing."

                She slipped from the table. The other girls formed
 a half-circle around her and walked with her to the
 front stairs of the palace. Number Nine, the Scare-
 crow, and the Tin Woodman came behind them.
                "Goodbye, good friends!" said Jenny, and Number
 Nine echoed, "Goodbye!"
                "Goodbye, Duchess Jenny," called the others on the
 palace stairs. They turned back into the palace, and
 Jenny went on with Number Nine.
                Jenny held her head high, as she thought a
 Duchess ought to. The sapphires of her coronet
 flashed in the sun. Number Nine's admiring blue
 eyes never left her.
                As they walked, Jenny was thinking. Finally she
 said, "I believe that I shall keep the Style Shop half
 days, Number Nine. And I shall send for your bright
 Sister Six to become my assistant and keep the shop
 the rest of the time. From now on, you and I are
 going to spend half our time at the playground! Too
 much work isn't good for anyone, do you think?"
                "Whoopee!" cried Number Nine, throwing his cap
 into the air. "That's what I've always wanted to hear
 you say, Jenny!"
                Number Nine and Jenny felt so good, they broke
 into a run and did not stop until they reached the

 shop. The Strawberry Street house looked glad to
 see Jenny back.
                As she came to the door, she said to Number Nine,
 "There is a customer in the shop."
                A little bearded man was sitting on top of the turn-
 style.
                "Leaping Leprechauns! It's Siko Pompus!" Jenny
 cried in her friendliest voice. She had completely lost
 her anger toward him. "Hello, Siko Pompus! Do you
 want a new suit?"
                "No, Duchess Jenny. It's leavin' Oz, I am. Goin'
 back to New Jersey, U.S.A., to get meself a foine
 piece of pepper-cheese. I've stopped in to be sayin'
 goodbye to ye an' to be leavin' ye a little gift."
                "How nice of you! I am sorry to hear that you're
 going," said Jenny.
                Siko Pompus took a small box out of his pocket and
 gave it to her. Then he hopped down from the turn-
 style and skipped through the door.
                "Goodbye, Siko Pompus!" called Jenny and Num-
 ber Nine.
                When the Leprechaun was gone, Number Nine
 turned to Jenny. "Why don't you open your gift box,
 Jenny?"
                "I wonder what it can be," Jenny said, as she lifted
 off the cover. "Oh, it's only odds and ends of junk,"

 she exclaimed in disappointment.
                She began taking the objects out of the box. They
 included an ivory-handled eyeglass for one eye, a
 pair of rose-colored gloves with only eight fingers,
 a gold slipper for her left foot, and a pair of thistle-
 down ear-muffs.
                "Now, what do you suppose I can do with this
 stuff?" Jenny said.
                "Why don't you try them on, Jenny, to see what
 happens?" suggested Number Nine.
                "Just to please you," said Jenny with a little laugh.
 She put on the eyeglass, the gloves, the slipper, and
 the ear-muffs. "Why!" she exclaimed, "They are my
 fairy gifts! I can see more brightly, hear more
 keenly, feel a tingling in my fingers, and-look!"
 She stamped her fairy foot down and, in one leap,
 bounded across the room!
                "You see?" she said. "I am part fairy again!"
                Number Nine said in a pleading tone, "Won't you
 please put those things away and use them only on
 special occasions? I don't want you to be too different."
                Quickly Jenny took off the gifts and dropped them
 into the box. Going to the shelf, she hid the box be-
 hind a large bolt of cloth. "My, I've been made
 Duchess and part fairy, all in one day!"

                "Aren't you going to be my Boss any more?"
                "I simply couldn't"--Jenny hesitated, then burst
 out laughing-"be ANYTHING ELSE!"
                Number Nine seized Jenny's hands, and together
 they danced around the turn-style.
  
 THE END

