
‘A compact yet insightful book providing a wide range of practical 
aspects of management: ideas, explanations and examples. This 
book is useful to the seasoned manager as well as those novice 
intent on making themselves great managers.’
Junid Saham, Director, Master-Pack Group, Penang and Director, 
Areca Capital, Kuala Lumpur and former Director of Dialog Group 
Berhad, Kuala Lumpur
’Whether you are a millennial in management or embarking on 
management, you have to read this no nonsense, straight to 
the point book. It’s a must-read.’
Chris Browne, Development and Employability Coach, 
Resident Coach on Sky TV’s The Chrissy B Show
‘An excellent book – one every manager should read if they 
want to succeed.’
Professor Ashley Braganza, Professor of Organisational 
Transformation and Head of Economics and Finance, 
Brunel University London
‘A book to help you bridge the gap and understand the unwritten 
rules of management in order to develop the professional skill 
set to inspire and motivate your team to success.’
Katharine Lovell, Deputy Headteacher, Fearnhill School
‘This book is packed full of little gems which will help managers 
at all levels be at their best. A must-read for anyone who is 
serious about management as a profession.’
Debbie Niven, Director and Co-founder of Momentum Training & 
Management Consultants
Praise for Be a Great 
Manager – Now!


Be a Great  
Manager – Now!
The 2in1 Manager: Speed Read – instant 
tips; Big Picture – lasting results
Audrey Tang

Pearson Education Limited
Edinburgh Gate
Harlow CM20 2JE
United Kingdom
Tel: +44 (0)1279 623623
Web: www.pearson.com/uk
First published 2016 (print and electronic)
© Audrey Tang 2016 (print and electronic)
The right of Audrey Tang to be identified as author of this work has been asserted by her in 
accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
Pearson Education is not responsible for the content of third-party internet sites.
ISBN:  978-1-292-11966-3 (print)
978-1-292-11968-7 (PDF)
978-1-292-11969-4 (ePub)
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for the print edition is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Tang, Audrey, author.
Title: Be a great manager--now! : speed read--instant tips; big picture--lasting  
   results / Audrey Tang.
Description: Harlow, United Kingdom : Pearson Education, [2016] | Series:  
   Speed read | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016000778 (print) | LCCN 2016006267 (ebook) |  
   ISBN 9781292119663 (pbk.) | ISBN 9781292119694 (e-pub)
Subjects: LCSH: Executives. | Executive ability. | Management.
Classification: LCC HD38.2 .T366 2016 (print) | LCC HD38.2 (ebook) | DDC  
   658.4/09--dc23
LC record available at http://lccn.loc.gov/2016000778
The print publication is protected by copyright. Prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage 
in a retrieval system, distribution or transmission in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, recording or otherwise, permission should be obtained from the publisher or, where 
applicable, a licence permitting restricted ­copying in the United Kingdom should be obtained 
from the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, Barnard’s Inn, 86 Fetter Lane, London EC4A 1EN.
The ePublication is protected by copyright and must not be copied, reproduced, transferred, 
­distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used in any way except as specifically  
permitted in writing by the publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which 
it was purchased, or as strictly permitted by ­applicable copyright law. Any unauthorised 
­distribution or use of this text may be a direct infringement of the author’s and the publisher’s 
rights and those responsible may be liable in law accordingly.
All trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. The use of any 
­trademark in this text does not vest in the author or publisher any trademark ownership rights in 
such trademarks, nor does the use of such trademarks imply any affiliation with or endorsement 
of this book by such owners.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
20 19 18 17 16
Cover design by Two Associates
Print edition typeset in Scene Std 10/14 pts by SPi Global
Print edition printed in Great Britain by Henry Ling Ltd, at the Dorset Press, ­Dorchester, Dorset
NOTE THAT ANY PAGE CROSS REFERENCES REFER TO THE PRINT EDITION

About the author	
xii
Publisher’s acknowledgements	
xiii
Foreword	
xv
Chapter 1  Think like A Manager	
1
	
	 Speed read	
3
	1.1 	 The transit from ‘involvement’ to 
‘co-ordination’	
3
	1.2 	 Know your job	
4
	1.3 	 Ask, don’t assume (1)	
4
	1.4	 The (un)social network	
5
	1.5 	 Managing change	
6
	1.6	 Old vision, new perspective	
7
 	1.7 	 Get proactive	
8
	Big picture	
11
 	1.1	 The transit from ‘involvement’ to 
‘co-ordination’	
11
	1.2	 Know your job	
15
	1.3 	 Ask, don’t assume (1)	
18
Contents

vi
Contents
	1.4	 The (un)social network	
21
	1.5	 Managing change	
24
	1.6	 Old vision, new perspective	
28
	1.7 	 Get proactive	
31
	Chapter 2  Making Teams Work	
35
	
	 Speed read	
37
 	2.1	 Know what a team is	
37
 	2.2	 Know your team	
38
	2.3	 Right person right task	
39
	2.4	 Dealing with disputes and problems	
40
	2.5	 Challenging perceived favouritism or 
discrimination	
41
	2.6	 360° feedback for all	
42
	2.7	  There is a ‘me’ in team	
43
	Big picture	
45
	2.1	 Know what a team is	
45
	2.2	 Know your team	
48
 	2.3	 Right person right task	
51
	2.4	 Dealing with disputes and problems	
54
	2.5	 Challenging perceived favouritism or 
discrimination	
57
	2.6	 360° feedback for all	
60
	2.7	 There is a ‘me’ in team	
63

vii
Contents
	Chapter 3  Developing Staff	
69
	
	 Speed read	
71
	3.1	 Best invest in your staff	
71
	3.2	 Coaching as a management tool	
72
	3.3	 Making appraisals work	
73
	3.4	 Making the TNA meaningful	
74
	3.5	 Training your team	
75
	3.6	 The benefits of secondments	
76
	3.7	 Ask, don’t assume (2)	
77
	Big picture	
79
	3.1	 Best invest in your staff	
79
	3.2	 Coaching as a management tool	
84
	3.3	 Making appraisals work	
88
	3.4	 Making the TNA meaningful	
92
	3.5	 Training your team	
95
	3.6	 The benefits of secondments	
98
	3.7	 Ask, don’t assume (2)	
101
	Chapter 4  Motivating Staff	
105
	
	 Speed read	
107
	4.1	 Be aware that not everyone  
will care as much as you	
107
	4.2	 Extrinsic motivation  
(theories and practice)	
108

viii
Contents
	4.3	 Intrinsic motivation  
(theories and practice)	
108
	4.4	 What do you believe about your team?	
109
	4.5	 The truth behind team building	
110
	4.6	 Emotional labour	
111
	4.7	 Making meetings motivational	
112
	Big picture	
113
	4.1	 Be aware that not everyone  
will care as much as you	
113
	4.2	 Extrinsic motivation  
(theories and practice)	
116
	4.3	 Intrinsic motivation  
(theories and practice)	
119
	4.4	 What do you believe about your team?	
122
	4.5	 The truth behind team building	
125
	4.6	 Emotional labour	
128
	4.7	 Making meetings motivational	
131
	Chapter 5  Delegation	
135
	
	 Speed read	
137
	5.1	 Make sure the task is one  
you CAN delegate	
137
	5.2	 Choose the right person to delegate to	
138
	5.3	 Communicate the task effectively	
138
	5.4	 Allow appropriate time	
139
	5.5	 Offer appropriate support	
141

ix
Contents
	5.6	 Let the task get done  
(don’t micro-manage)	
142
	5.7	 Delegation as a development tool  
(praise and appraise)	
143
	Big picture	
145
	5.1	 Make sure the task is one you  
CAN delegate	
145
	5.2	 Choose the right person to delegate to	
148
	5.3	 Communicate the task effectively	
152
	5.4	 Allow appropriate time	
155
	5.5	 Offer appropriate support	
158
	5.6	 Let the task be done  
(don’t micro-manage)	
162
	5.7	 Delegation as a development tool  
(praise and appraise)	
165
	Chapter 6  Troubleshooting	
169
	
	 Speed read	
171
	6.1	 Responding to a complaint	
171
	6.2	 Investigating a complaint	
172
	6.3	 Don’t go it alone (but be discerning  
about who you involve)	
172
	6.4	 Managing challenging conversations	
173
	6.5	 Whistleblowing	
174
	6.6	 Managing the organisational grapevine	
175
	6.7	 Dealing with bad publicity	
176

x
Contents
	Big picture	
177
	6.1	 Responding to a complaint	
177
	6.2	 Investigating a complaint	
180
	6.3	 Don’t go it alone (but be discerning  
about who you involve)	
183
	6.4	 Managing challenging conversations	
186
	6.5	 Whistleblowing	
189
	6.6	 Managing the organisational grapevine	
192
	6.7	 Dealing with bad publicity	
195
	Afterword – Chapter 6	
198
	Chapter 7  Business Ethics and  
Integrity	
199
	
	 Speed read	
201
	7.1	 The values-led organisation	
201
	7.2	 Profit v. organisational well-being	
202
	7.3	 Maintaining quality	
203
	7.4	 Being responsible	
204
	7.5	 Mad, bad, sad – treating  
a toxic organisation	
204
	7.6	 Ethics in a globalised world	
205
	7.7	 Be proactive	
206
	Big picture	
209
	7.1	 The values-led organisation	
209
	7.2	 Profit v. organisational well-being	
212

xi
Contents
	7.3	 Maintaining quality	
215
	7.4	 Being responsible	
218
	7.5	 Mad, bad, sad – treating a toxic  
organisation	
221
	7.6	 Ethics in a globalised world	
224
	7.7	 Be proactive	
228
A note on case studies	
233
Index	
235

Audrey attained her Doctorate from Brunel 
University Business School. Her thesis 
focused on the training and support of 
service professionals. She is trained as 
an executive coach and her academic 
background is psychology and law. Prior 
to training and coaching, Audrey was a 
secondary school drama teacher (QTS), 
later progressing to Programme Manager 
for vocational qualifications in ‘Supporting 
Teaching and Learning’, and ‘Childcare, Learning and Development’, 
within Further Education.
Audrey is the founder of CLICK Training Consultancy. CLICK 
specialises in experiential learning and offers CPD Standards 
accredited workshops on personal development and employability 
skills for university students, as well as soft-skills for new 
managers. Audrey currently writes and delivers CLICK’s training 
programmes for universities, corporate and community clients. 
She is also a member of the HEA and the BPsS.
As well as appearing as the resident wellbeing expert for The 
Chrissy B Show (Sky 203), Audrey hosts Lifestyle:MK on Secklow 
Sounds Radio (105.5FM), Saturdays 12–2pm, and she regularly 
writes for and presents at national and international conferences 
within the field of learning and development.
About the author

We are grateful to the following for permission to reproduce 
copyright material:
Figures
Figure 3.1 from Coaching for Performance, 4 ed., Nicholas Brealey 
Publishing (John Whitmore 2009).
Picture Credits
The publisher would like to thank the following for their kind 
permission to reproduce their photographs:
(Key: b-bottom; c-centre; l-left; r-right; t-top)
Pearson Education Ltd: 123rf.com 11, 12, 43, 51, 54, 59, 71, 72, 
93t, 108, 140b, 156, 157, 163, 176, 197, 201, 202t, 213, 219, 229, 
Africa Studio. 139r, Alexander Raths 178, ALMAGAMI 93, alphaspirit 
84, 99, 210, 228, Anatolii Stoiko 137, Andresr. Shutterstock 39, 
Andrey Burmakin 162, Andy Dean Photography 216, Nagy-Bagoly 
Arpad 58, aslysun 150, auremar 81, 82, 180, Michael D Brown 31, 
Cartoonresource 40, Konstantin Chagin 45, Champion studio 102, 
Chatchawan 204, Stephen Coburn 24, 52, Stephen Coburn 24, 
52, Creativa 13, Chris Curtis 5, Darq 8, Jeanette Dietl 15, Dmitriy 
Shironosov 112, donskarpo 206t, EdBockStock 76, EDHAR 64, 
Elena Larina 140t, Elena Yakusheva 110, Elnur 65, EmiliaUngur 
205, estherpoon 38, g-stockstudio 183, Blaj Gabriel 131, Christos 
Georghiou 3, 79, 142, Gunnar Pippel 41, Hadi Djunaedi 165, 
Helder Ameida 109b, Hurst Photo 159, hxdbzxy 206b, iofoto 146, 
iQoncept 4, 91, 109t, 149, 171, 173, 207, Brian A Jackson 37, 
Junial Enterprises 174b, Kamil Macniak 119, Lasse Kristensen 190, 
Lightspring 75, Linda Bucklin. Shutterstock 225, Lindsay Lewis 
Publisher’s 
­acknowledgements

xiv
Publisher’s ­acknowledgements
74, Lisa S. 89, Lord and Leverett 195, mangostock 125, Marcin 
Balcerzak 174t, 186, mast3r 202b, mtkang 6, Novelo 73, Olaru 
Radian-Alexandru 221, ostill 172, PathDoc 21, Paul Vasarhelyi 114, 
Pearson Education, Inc. 90, 132, 141, Pressmaster 28, 107, Syda 
Productions 46, Rafal Olechowski 147, 226, Rawpixel 77, Rido 122, 
Risto Viita 7, Robert Churchill 113, S.john 61, Anirban Sarkar 9, 
Sean Locke Photography 175, Sergey Nivens 96, sharpshutter 
193, spaxiax 22, stefanolunardi 128, Steve Collender 48, Stuart 
Miles 143, 209, sunsetman 139l, szefei 118, Tatiana Popova 203, 
Teerapun 153, Kheng Guan Toh 33, 116, Tom Davison 19, Vadym 
Drobot 196, Varina and Jay Patel 42, wavebreakmedia 18, YanLev 
126, Yeko Photo Studio 139c, Zudy and Kysa 138, Zurijeta 111.
All other images © Pearson Education

The landscape of management has changed, with social media 
in particular playing a large role in the shape of the business 
world. This is not just through growing global accessibility, but 
also through the way it changes the perceptions, and often the 
behaviour, of those who engage in it – which is (at the time of 
writing) approximately 1 in 4 people across the globe (eMarketer 
report, 2013).
Accessibility to so many things provides daily distraction, and 
human wants (and seemingly needs) are changing too. While, 
fundamentally, the management theories taught in business 
schools still hold true, they need to be modified to address these 
changes – at least in their practical application.
This book reminds managers of the foundation theories that they 
have been taught, while applying them in the context of the ‘new 
world’. It seeks to assist with organisational ‘fire-fighting’ as well 
as to offer proactive ideas when something isn’t your fault . . . but 
has become your problem.
It is not a regimented ‘How To’, but rather offers ideas, explanations 
and examples to give the new manager more pathways to action 
in an ever-demanding world.
References
eMarketer report (2013) Social networking reaches nearly one in 
four, Emarketer.com, http://www.emarketer.com/Article/­Social-­
Networking-Reaches-Nearly-One-Four-Around-World/1009976 
(retrieved September 2015).
Foreword


Think like a manager
 1.1	
The transit from ‘involvement’ to ‘co-ordination’
 1.2	
Know your job
 1.3	
Ask, don’t assume (1)
 1.4	
The (un)social network
 1.5	
Managing change
 1.6	
Old vision, new perspective
 1.7	
Get proactive
Chapter 1


Chapter title
1.1 The transit from ‘involvement’ to ‘co-ordination’
The moment you take on a management role, your focus changes 
from ‘doing the work’ to ‘getting the work done’. You have moved from 
being a team worker to the position of co-ordinator or shaper (Belbin, 
1981), and so must your mind-set. The first few weeks are essential 
for reframing your outlook because it is at this point of the transition 
where your old role will seem much easier and more comfortable than 
your new one. Never forget that work continues despite your ‘period 
of adjustment’ so you need to make a positive impression while 
hitting the ground running. As with the implementation of any 
successful change, you need the commitment to see it through. One 
of the hardest tasks is learning to direct, effectively, the jobs that 
you might once have enjoyed doing because their completion and 
quality is still your success measure.
Do this
Look at your current ‘to do’ list. How much of it needs to be done 
by you and how much can you delegate to your team? Identify 
the points for delegation and delegate at least one. (This has the 
extra benefit of buying you a little time to settle in.)
Speed Read
1. Think like a manager

Think like a manager
4
 1.2  Know your job 
 A new management role, or indeed any new role, is like joining a 
familiar game without knowing the rules. If you have moved up 
within the organisation, you have an idea of how to play, but it is 
essential to double check that you were doing it right in the first 
place. Familiarity with the policies, or Standard Operating Procedures 
(SOPs), will always help ensure your practice is appropriate, and 
these documents will also form the backbone to dealing effectively 
with any disputes or problems. However, if you see that behaviour 
within your organisation contradicts the official policies, unless 
there is a clear risk to health and safety, it may be beneficial to 
spend some time simply observing and then, if necessary, changing 
the SOP accordingly. After all, it might be the policy that needs 
modification, not the practice.  
 1.3  ask, don’t assume (1) 
 Even if you were lucky enough to have a handover period, there will 
be things that the previous manager did not explain. Unless they are 
a ‘Corporate psychopath’ (Boddy et al., 2010), this is not deliberate. 
They do not  want  you to fail, it is just because some things are like 
 Do this 
 If you haven’t already, set aside some time this week to 
familiarise yourself with the key organisational policies, e.g. 
Sickness; Discipline; Bullying & Harassment; Rewards, Benefits 
and Expenses; Training & Development. 

Speed read
5
second nature to them or because they genuinely did not realise you 
needed to know. Never assume that the person handing over the 
role has told you everything. It is as much up to you to ask, proactively, 
for anything else that you may need to function effectively and as 
quickly as possible. It is not that people do not want to say 
something – they may just not realise that they need to.
1.4 The (un)social network
There have been many reports of people getting fired because of 
questionable social network postings, and it is not uncommon 
for companies to check your ‘profiles’ prior to interview. If you have 
uploaded a picture publicly, those are the reasonable consequences. 
As a manager you need to be even more wary, and this can mean 
restricting your posts, and even your audience. It is certainly no 
longer appropriate to be typing throwaway comments about who 
you like or don’t like in the office, and the cryptic ‘You’ll never guess 
what happened at work . . .’ status feeds will do little to reassure 
Do this
Make a list of all the things you wish you’d known when you 
started your last job. (Or make a list of all the things you wish 
your manager had known while in your last job!) If you STILL don’t 
know the answers – ask someone!

Think like a manager
6
your team, nor will they earn you the trust of your CEO. While you 
do not necessarily have to block people, you may need to explain 
to your friends why your social network profile is changing. If they 
are real friends, they will understand, and support you.
1.5 Managing change
There is an implicit survival belief that if something has been 
around for a long time, it is probably good – after all, it has survived 
that long. As such, the arrival of a new manager can be 
disconcerting for a team, especially if the previous manager has 
been there for some time, or there has been consistency in the 
inconsistency. If you have moved up within the department you 
may need to address the way that your team have seen you in the 
past, and how they will see you now. The departmental chatter 
will cover ‘What is s/he going to be like?’, ‘What will s/he change?’ 
and the really big question ‘Will s/he get on with me?’ If they do 
not already know you, the team themselves will probably run your 
name through a search engine to have a look at your social 
network profile(s). You need to put your team at ease as soon as 
you take your position at the helm.
Do this
Look at your social media presence and ask yourself if you would 
be happy for your bosses to see it. If necessary, start a new 
profile where you can manage your friends list, privacy and posts 
from the onset.

Speed read
7
 1.6  Old vision, new perspective 
 Whether you have taken over a management position or been 
promoted into one, your perspective of the organisation will 
change. You are now responsible for others in your workplace, not 
just yourself. From a more extrinsically motivated approach, e.g. ‘I 
work to live’, as a manager you will be more strongly committed to 
achieving the organisational mission and goals. After all  this has 
become your new success measure. Part of your goal is to drive 
organisational success through the achievements of your team. 
 However, your team may not – and do not have to – observe the 
same commitment. People are motivated to take a job for many 
reasons – money, personal success, ambition – to provide for their 
families, to enjoy the life to which they are accustomed, to be able 
to perform skills they love . . . and so on. The theories of motivation 
(Maslow, Herzberg, McClelland etc.) saturate the pages of 
leadership textbooks. Remain mindful that very few of these 
 Do this 
 Have you had a chat with your team that isn’t a formal meeting? 
As long as you’re not affecting their deadlines, schedule in some 
time for a tea break with them . . . bring cake! (Or fruit!) 

Think like a manager
8
reasons generate a commitment to the organisation. Most will 
motivate the member of staff to remain in work, but unless they 
develop a commitment to the organisation, they may take their 
skills away as other opportunities open up for them. The 
achievement of your organisational vision relies also on 
maintaining the skills set within your staff. This means recognising 
and developing their talent in order to retain them and continually 
improve their performance.  
 1.7  get proactive 
 If you no longer care about your job, that is the time to stop 
managing it. Of course, this will never happen to you: you are 
raring to go, ready to take on this exciting challenge that you put 
yourself up for and achieved! But we are sentient beings, and as 
such cannot help but be influenced or affected by each other. 
What you do and how you behave has an impact on those around 
you. Your influence can therefore be positive or negative, and so 
can that of your team. The advantage of being in the manager’s 
role is that you are finally in a position of some power where you 
can do something to positively affect the workplace. Do not waste 
that opportunity. Instead of always reacting, try to be proactive 
 Do this 
 Identify your high achievers and those who seem to be struggling 
(or keeping their heads down). Find out what is available to help 
you develop or support them further. 

Speed read
9
in your decisions, seek out opportunities for organisational or 
employee development and growth, and take pride in broadening 
your own knowledge. Learn from others, read widely – see this 
position as only the beginning of your career rather than an 
endpoint. A proactive approach to work will also keep you 
motivated! 
 Do this 
 Write down where you see your role within the organisation in 
five years. List three things you can do to start that journey. Do 
one tomorrow! 


1.1 The transit from ‘involvement’ to ‘co-ordination’
‘A manager is not a person who can do the work better than 
his men; he is a person who can get his men to do the work 
better than he can.’
(Frederick W. Taylor, 1911)
Why
A common reason for moving into management or achieving 
promotion is because you are very good at the job you are 
currently doing. However, management requires a new skills 
set. You have to learn to communicate clearly so that your team 
understand exactly what is required of them; you might need 
to teach or support staff with tasks that you found easy; you 
may need to motivate people to complete duties you would have 
done for free. You will also have authority to make decisions or 
effect change, within organisational boundaries, and you may 
be faced with more reporting and feedback tasks which assist 
the smooth running of the department. You have become more 
Big Picture
1. Think like a manager

Think like a manager
12
committed in your allegiance to your organisation’s values and 
mission. Management is the task of developing others to perform 
successfully without just doing the job yourself. Of course your 
hands-on understanding of the work is important, but it will 
feature more in the improvement of working conditions, resources 
or systems.
Business brief
A common goal is promotion, but once this is achieved 
organisations do not always think, or know how, to develop staff 
within their new position. This results in poor performance and 
disillusioned managers. Roberts (1994) found that those who 
perform well within a job tend to be good managers – but they 
do require further training. With this in place to develop the 
management skills set, and options for those who preferred not 
to take a management route, organisational retention was higher 
than would be the case if one or both these factors were not 
present. While promotion is a goal, management is a choice, and 
only the beginning of a career path.

Big picture
13
Try this
Congratulations on achieving your goal. Now focus on 
management as a new challenge:
	 1.	 Reflect on your strengths and weaknesses in relation to 
your new tasks.
	 2.	 Ask for help or for training to develop your skills. If this 
can be demonstrated via your Training Needs Analysis, the 
incentive will be all the greater. Why wait until your first 
appraisal to ask for support?
	 3.	 Recognise that your work relationships may need to change.
	 4.	 Understand the direction for your department or team’s 
overall direction is and communicate this effectively.
	 5.	 Appreciate that while your perspective and goals will 
change, those of your team may not. With this in mind, find 
a way to collaborate with them to achieve your success 
measures.
. . . and if management is not for you, move onto what is!

Think like a manager
14
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
Belbin, M. (1981) Management Teams. London: Heinemann.
Roberts, K. (1994) The transition into management by scientists and 
engineers: A misallocation or efficient use of human resources? 
Human Resource Management, 33: 561–579.
Taylor, F.W. (1911) The Principles of Scientific Management. New 
York, NY and London: Harper & Brothers.

Big picture
15
1.2 Know your job
‘There is nothing which rots morale more quickly and more 
completely than . . . the feeling that those in authority do not 
know their own minds.’
(Lionel Urwick, 1956)
Why
Obviously, knowing what you are doing is central to your credibility, 
and management also involves knowing what everyone in your 
team should be doing too. However, many managers find that 
a lack of knowledge of company policy has been the cause of 
their problems in dealing with issues such as sickness because 
staff members ‘know the system’, but they do not. If you know 
your systems, while you familiarise yourself with your day-to-day 
responsibilities you will also be able to acknowledge if anything 
needs to be changed – and be in a position to effect that change. 
Your new viewpoint enables you to determine whether it is the 
process that is inefficient or if the problem lies in the execution 
(as a team member it is easy to blame the former). To borrow 
a medical term, once a period of ‘watchful waiting’ has been 
completed you are more able to implement change because 
you have a better idea of what might be wrong, and a greater 
understanding of your team, enabling you to action the change 
with the least resistance.

Think like a manager
16
Business brief
Neurolinguistic Programming (NLP) practitioners (and athletes) 
use the ‘match, pace, lead’ technique for success (O’Connor, 
2013). This involves being able to match the person or situation 
(in the case of a transaction it may be the emotional nuance of 
the speaker; in sport it will be the race leader), then pace (i.e. 
move alongside) it before eventually leading it to its conclusion. 
The same process helps implement change effectively too. If 
you know the practices within your department and can function 
within them for a time so you get a clear understanding of how 
they, and the people who perform them, operate, it is then much 
easier to lead a change from that position compared with trying 
to instigate it cold.
Try this
In your new position, before implementing change:
	 1.	 Consider whether it is the practice that needs to be 
changed or the procedure that needs to be rewritten to 
accommodate the practice. Remain mindful that rewriting 
a policy can also be perceived as defeatist, e.g. ‘If you can’t 
beat ’em . . .’, so be clear on your reasons, and be able to 
explain them.
	 2.	 Familiarise yourself with how your department runs – the 
written operational practices as well as what the team are 
doing as a matter of course – and work alongside them 
before leading your change.
	 3.	 Make sure you are aware of HR policies or Standard Operating 
Procedures need changing. This may involve time sequences 
that need to be updated, or evidential records from issues 
or events that may necessitate a change in procedure.

Big picture
17
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
O’Connor, J. (2013), The NLP Workbook: Newburyport, MA: Conari 
Press.
Urwick, L. (1956) The span of control, Harvard Business Review, 
May–June.

Think like a manager
18
1.3 Ask, don’t assume (1)
‘Vice comes from bad habits and aiming at the wrong things, 
not deliberately . . .’
(Aristotle)
Why
Management, like most professional roles, does not afford a great 
deal of ‘settling in’ time. If you have clocked in and you are not 
wearing a training badge or ‘L-plate’, you are implying that you can 
do the job. Therefore it is part of your responsibility to gather as 
much information as you can to make it easy on yourself. When 
people are vacating a position, especially one they have held 
for some time, their focus is not necessarily on passing on the 
mantle. In addition, sometimes they do not realise how much their 
work has become habitual. You have the advantage of a fresh 
pair of eyes as well as the drive to succeed in this brand new 
opportunity, so a little bit of extra effort at this stage will serve 
you well.
Business brief
Research by MIT has found that habit takes over as practice 
progresses (Dougherty, 2015). Once something becomes habitual, 

Big picture
19
you think about it less, which means it becomes more difficult 
to change or adapt. Be mindful of that in the practices of your 
predecessor. However, good practice is to form your own ‘Things 
to do’ practices for whenever you move into a new position. Look 
at the practices surrounding your role, and ask about anything that 
strikes you as odd.
NB: ‘We’ve always done it that way’ is not a good reason; see section  7.7.
Try this
Have a checklist of things that you need to ask at your 
induction. These might include:
	 1.	 Location of the HR policies.
	 2.	 Budget holder authorisation forms.
	 3.	 Other authorisation forms required (e.g. mileage claims, 
holiday, sickness, timesheets, insurance).
	 4.	 Appraisal and mandatory training records for the team.
	 5.	 How to access the intranet.
	 6.	 Names and contacts for specific departments (e.g. 
procurement, finance, HR, learning and development).
	 7.	 Fire procedure and any regular test dates.
	 8.	 Departmental practices (e.g. ‘Pizza Fridays’).

Think like a manager
20
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
Aristotle and Sachs, J. (2002) Nicomachean Ethics. Newbury, MA: 
Focus Publishing/R. Pullin.
Boddy, C., Ladyshewsky, R.K. and Galvin, P.G. (2010) Leaders ­without 
ethics in global business: corporate psychopaths, Journal of 
­Public Affairs, 10, June, 121–138.
Dougherty, A. (2015) Neurons drive habit, News.mit.edu, 19 August, 
http://news.mit.edu/2015/neurons-drive-habit-0819 (retrieved 
September 2015).

Big picture
21
1.4 The (un)social network
‘We don’t have a choice on whether we do social media. The 
question is how well we do it.’
(Qualman, 2010)
Why
We are all using social media, and so are our customers, clients 
and colleagues. It is a means of building a network, targeting a 
wider reach than conventional media methods, but also a form of 
self-expression. However, while writer Pearl S. Buck (1954) wrote 
about self-expression being a form of expressing one’s feelings, 
personality or ideas through art, the term has taken on a wider 
definition, e.g. the posting of a timeline of your life on a forum 
where online ‘friends’ are invited to pass judgment. Because social 
network profiles are so commonplace, it is important to maintain 
an awareness that they need to be managed correctly. If you would 
not say something in public, why would you feel more comfortable 
writing it and pressing ‘send’? The perceived distance between 
yourself and your audience is deceptive. While you might have 
written something in the privacy of your bedroom, someone has 
accessed it in the privacy of theirs – you have not only connected 
directly with them, but you have done so in what would ordinarily 
have been an intimate setting. If you are not prepared to interact 
in that way with your colleagues in real life, you should certainly 
not be doing so online.

Think like a manager
22
Business brief
Eurocom Worldwide (2012) conducted a survey of employer 
behaviour with regard to social networks and found that one in 
five bosses have rejected an applicant on account of their social 
network profile. The previous year they reported that almost 
40% of companies who responded said that they would look 
at an applicant’s social network profile prior to inviting them 
to interview. However, a survey by CareerBuilder found that 
while candidates were being rejected or reprimanded for social 
network profiles which included poor grammar and spelling as 
well as inappropriate posts or photographs, well-managed profiles 
contributed to candidates landing promotions or dream jobs. 
The common reasons cited by CareerBuilder (2012) for hiring a 
candidate based on their social network profile were:
• The candidate appeared a good fit for the company culture
• The candidate showed a wide range of interests
• The candidate’s profile was creative.
Try this
	 1.	 Update your privacy settings and, if necessary, limit the 
audience for information you choose to post on social media.

Big picture
23
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
	 2.	 Update settings so that you need to review ‘tagged’ posts 
(while you may not be able to restrict someone else from 
posting something embarrassing, you certainly do not need 
to link it to your own network).
	 3.	 Ask people to remove photographs of you that you do not 
want to be made public – or at the very least to ‘cut you out’ 
prior to posting them.
	 4.	 Make sure that anything that will be broadcast publicly is 
something you are happy to be seen by anyone worldwide. 
Once it is out of your control, anything can happen to it.
	 5.	 Update your site to convey the sort of image you would 
want to see of a manager.

Think like a manager
24
References
Buck, P.S. (1954) My Several Worlds: A Personal Record. New York, 
NY: John Day.
CareerBuilder (2012) www.CareerBuilder.co.uk (retrieved July 2015).
Eurocom Worldwide Survey (2012) www.eurocompr.com/prfitem.
asp?id=14921 (retrieved December 2015).
Qualman, E. (2010) Socialnomics. New York, NY: Wiley.
1.5 Managing change
‘Every success story is a tale of constant adaptation, revision 
and change. A company that stands still will soon be forgotten.’
(Richard Branson, 2015)
Why
‘One of the reasons “change” is difficult is because “ . . . the longer 
something is thought to exist, the better it is evaluated”.’
(Eidelman et al., 2010)
Your arrival as a new manager is the first change that your team 
will need to become accustomed to, so it needs to be handled 
sensitively. After all, the way you manage your arrival speaks 
volumes about the way you will manage the rest of your work. 
Managers need to be people focused as much as task focused, 
and the most successful manager will encourage their team to 

Big picture
25
collaborate with, not compromise for, them (Blake and Mouton, 
1964). This collaboration becomes essential as you progress 
through your managerial life. When your team share a common 
goal, everyone pulls together to attain it. This becomes its own 
reward.
Business brief
Any change is made easier by collaboration, and to encourage 
this, you need to build trust. Ricci and Wiese (2011) suggest that 
poor collaboration is worse than no collaboration at all, and stress 
the importance of building trust between colleagues. Such trust 
begins with the manager, and progresses into the team as a whole 
as they commit to shared organisational goals and so reap the 
rewards. It is not a straightforward task and needs a manager who 
is able to communicate, who works with integrity and who follows 
through on their commitments or promises. However, as always, 
good practice can become habitual. By smoothly managing your 
arrival as the first change your team have to face, the groundwork 
will be laid to affect future change successfully.
Try this
	 1.	 Do not expect everyone to like you right away. In fact do not 
expect everyone to like you ever . . . the main thing is that 
they trust you and will work for you.
	 2.	 Find a time to meet with the department as a whole to 
introduce yourself, as well as meeting with the individual 
members of the team. This is a good chance to hear their 
aspirations within the organisation so that you can continue 
to develop them.
	 3.	 If you have worked within the team before acknowledge 
that your new role may seem a little strange at first for all 
concerned.

Think like a manager
26
	 4.	 Even if change needs to be implemented quickly, try not 
to do it straight away. Remember what you learned in 
section 1.2: take a moment to learn the ropes, then you 
can Match, Pace and Lead.
	 5.	 If you are there to head a restructure, do not lull people 
into a false sense of security. Being honest (within your 
remit) and giving them time to prepare for change can be 
beneficial for the well-being of the team.
	 6.	 Understand that people will become accustomed to change 
at different times. Make sure that you remain professional 
and consistent with your words and actions.
	 7.	 Learn from your own experiences with managers – which 
behaviours worked for you, which did not?
	 8.	 When you need to implement a change that has been 
fed down to you, if you are unsure, then ask about the 
reasoning behind it, and, as long as you are not breaching 
confidentiality, you will then be able to give a summary to 
your team. When people understand the reasons behind a 
change they are better able to deal with it.
	 9.	 Always be clear with your communications – your message 
is only as good as how well it is received.
	10.	 If you have made a promise, stick to it.
	11.	 Try NOT to make promises (things often change very fast in 
business)!

Big picture
27
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
Blake, R. and Mouton, J. (1964). The Managerial Grid: The Key to 
Leadership Excellence. Houston, TX: Gulf Publishing Co.
Branson, R. (2015) My Top 10 Quotes on Change, Virgin.com, http://
www.virgin.com/richard-branson/my-top-10-quotes-on-change 
(retrieved August 2015).
Eidelman, S., Pattershall, J. and Crandall, C.S. (2010) Longer is better, 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46(6), 9930998.
Ricci, R. and Wiese, C. (2011) The Collaboration Imperative. San Jose, 
CA: Cisco Systems.

Think like a manager
28
1.6 Old vision, new perspective
‘Once you realise that you’re in something that you’ve always 
wanted and you don’t want to lose it, you behave differently . . . 
and that means the integrity, the professionalism, and knowing 
what’s right from wrong.’
(Paul Anka, 2013)
Why
In a small organisation it is sometimes possible to hire only the staff 
who are as committed as you to the success of your organisation. 
This is often true of start-ups where people may need to work 
voluntarily for some time. In a larger organisation, your team may 
have chosen to work there for many reasons including ‘It’s better 
than nothing’, ‘I can’t get a job anywhere else’ and ‘I’m just biding 
my time until I retire.’ This does not necessarily mean that they will 
under-perform, but it does mean that you need to first motivate 
them to find pleasure in personal success with which they can 
associate. While a member of your team may not care whether 
the organisation turns a profit or wins an award at the end of the 
year, they will feel a sense of reward if their personal contribution 
is acknowledged. This will be a factor when considering if they 
should move elsewhere – it was probably a factor for you too at 
some point. In a sideways move, people tend to be leaving their 
manager, rather than their job, so make sure they do not leave 
you. You are now committed to the organisation, so try and get 

Big picture
29
your team to commit to you and in turn your organisation will 
develop. Your actions will speak for the organisation. If you want 
people to commit to it, get them to commit to you first.
Business brief
Do not expect all employees to be as connected to the 
organisation as you. Instead, see yourself as the bridge between 
the organisation and your team. If you want the organisation 
to succeed, you must help your team to succeed – and retain 
the skills set. A Gallup Poll survey taken in 2006 found that 
for over one million US employees, ‘a bad boss or supervisor’ 
was the number one reason for leaving a job, and 75% of the 
reasons for employees leaving are related in some way to the 
manager (Robinson, 2008). Gallup further found that if employees 
felt ‘connected to the organisation’, this would be a reason to 
stay. If there is not full commitment to helping the organisation 
succeed, retention and performance (and thus an organisational 
connection) can be improved by adequate investment in staff, 
such as training and development programmes (Vanthournout et 
al., 2006). A corporate social responsibility White Paper (Gross, 
2009) also found that employee engagement was enhanced by 
positive community or ethical connections (see also section  7.4).
Try this
	 1.	 Familiarise yourself with the organisational mission, values, 
goals and development plan. (Forewarned is forearmed 
with regard to any planned restructuring or redundancies, 
and will help you treat your team with respect and 
integrity.)
	 2.	 Seek to find ways to develop your best employees and 
support those who are doing less well.
	 3.	 Maintain your own sense of integrity, ethics and corporate 
social responsibility (CSR), and be aware of (and highlight to 
your team) what your organisation does regarding CSR.

Think like a manager
30
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
Anka, P. (2013) Paul Anka talks learning right from wrong, The Toronto 
Sun, 15 April, http://www.torontosun.com/2013/04/15/paul-an-
ka-talks-learning-right-from-wrong (retrieved August 2015).
Gross, R. (2009) Corporate social responsibility and employee 
engagement: making the connection [White Paper]. Available at 
http://www.mandrake.ca/bill/images/corporate_responsibil-
ity_white_paper.pdf (retrieved August 2015).
Robinson, J. (2008) Turning around your turnover problem. 
­Gallup.com. www.gallup.com/businessjournal/106912/turn-
ing-around-your-turnover-problem.aspx (retrieved December 2015).
Vanthournout, D., Olson, K., Ceisel, J., White, A., Waddington, T., 
Barfield, T., Desai, S. and Mindrum, C. (2006) Return on Learning: 
Training for High Performance at Accenture. Chicago, IL: Agate B2.
	 4.	 Remember how you felt when you were praised or ignored 
by your own manager. Use those experiences to be the 
manager you always wanted.

Big picture
31
1.7 Get proactive
‘Being proactive is the foundation of the other habits of highly 
effective people.’
(Stephen Covey, 1989)
Why
Sharma (2006) advised that while it is not essential for everyone 
to think like a CEO, the most successful organisational cultures 
are ones where everyone is proactive. As social creatures, 
humans are conditioned to learn from others – especially those 
whom they perceive as being more knowledgeable or powerful 
(Bandura, 1963), so it is not uncommon for teams to take on the 
characteristics of their manager. Being proactive will enable you 
to contribute to driving the organisation forward in a direction that 
you want, as well as keeping you motivated and interested in your 
job. Proactivity affords an element of choice and control, another 
basic human need, which in turn can increase job satisfaction. If 
you demonstrate proactivity yourself, it is even easier for your 
team to be enthusiastic and follow your example.

Think like a manager
32
Business brief
Rotter’s Locus of Control personality framework (1954) found 
that individuals who believed that they had little control over their 
lives (i.e. who had an ‘external locus of control’) were more prone 
to clinical depression that those who believed they had some 
influence (i.e. an ‘internal locus of control’). Within the workplace, 
it was found that employees who had more perceived control 
would be more proactive in improving conditions for themselves – 
or finding another job – compared to those with an external locus 
who tended to complain rather than act (Allen et al., 2005). While 
it seems counter-intuitive to want people to actively seek other 
employment, it is important to appreciate that your skilled and 
proactive staff are highly employable, and therefore are also worth 
actively retaining. A high-flying executive will want to be associated 
with a high-flying organisation and through a commitment to staff 
empowerment you are able not only to help grow your organisation, 
but to do so in a way that your high fliers will appreciate.
Try this
	 1.	 Make time for yourself – proactive thinking benefits from 
reflection, so try not to overfill your calendar every day. The 
manager who does this is likely to be reacting only, and this 
needs to change.
	 2.	 Make a commitment to your own CPD (Continuing 
Professional Development) – embrace all opportunities to 
learn. Even the annual mandatory training refresher might 
bring you a new way of doing something, or a method to 
remember not to use.
	 3.	 Use online networking platforms to make new connections 
with organisations or people that you might wish to 
collaborate with in the future.
	 4.	 On a smaller scale, learn to observe and interpret the 
climate within your department and try to anticipate any 

Big picture
33
issues while they are saplings before they take root and 
grow. 
   5.   Accept that management will always be a challenge, but 
one that can continually enthuse and energise you once you 
are able to, well, manage it. 
 Reflection 
 •  How did it work? 
 
 •  What will I do next time? 
 

Think like a manager
34
References
Allen, D.G., Weeks, K.P. and Moffat, K.R. (2005) Turnover intentions 
and voluntary turnover: the moderating roles of self-monitoring, 
locus of control, proactive personality and risk aversion, Journal 
of Applied Psychology, 90, 980–990.
Bandura, A. (1963) Social Learning and Personality Development. 
New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Covey, S.R. (1989) Seven Habits of Highly Effective People. New York, 
NY: Free Press.
Rotter, J.B. (1954) Social Learning and Clinical Psychology. New York, 
NY: Prentice-Hall.
Sharma, R. (2006) The Greatness Guide. London: HarperElement.

Making teams work
 2.1	
Know what a team is
 2.2	
Know your team
 2.3	
Right person right task
 2.4	
Dealing with disputes and problems
 2.5	
Challenging perceived favouritism or discrimination
 2.6	
360° feedback for all
 2.7	
There is a ‘me’ in team
Chapter 2


Chapter title
 2.1  Know what a team is 
 A team is formed for the purpose of  getting a task done. Whether 
you are choosing that team yourself or you are coming to a 
team that is already formed, people are there predominantly to 
play their part in the bigger picture, albeit for personal reasons. 
Therefore it is the bigger picture that needs to drive the team. If 
you lose sight of that picture, or do not know what it is, you soon 
lose sight of your team. 
 In the workplace the commonality is work and the organisation. 
While it is possible to meet people with whom you connect, this 
is not the essence of a workplace team. Teams that let their 
personal emotions overtake their focus are more likely to fall 
apart than those who retain the success of the task, project or 
organisation as the goal. 
 When respect predominates over liking, teams perform their 
jobs well – acknowledging other’s contributions and appreciating 
differences in approach. Successful team players show awareness 
of their personal preferences, needs and shortcomings, but have 
the interpersonal skills that enable them to collaborate in order 
to attain the organisational goal –  and happy teams see, and 
experience, the value in doing so. 
 SPeeD reAD 
 2. Making teams work 
 

Making teams work
38
Your role as a manager is first and foremost to ensure that 
organisational success is what motivates everyone in your team 
to the point where individual differences are accepted and 
recognised as the way to achieve.
But when will the success of the organisation motivate your 
team? When the rewards that fall from that success (over which 
you have some control) have a direct impact on their personal 
needs, e.g. investment in the working environment, a bonus, job 
security, promotion, working with people they like or praise.
2.2 Know your team
When leading a new team, it is important that you know who your 
team are as regards their workplace behaviours. This is where 
training tools such as the MBTI®, Belbin®, Merrill-Reid or other 
inventories can be helpful. Not only will you be able to identify 
the type of work your team may enjoy and do well, but you will 
also gain insight into their communication style and how best to 
instruct and motivate them.
Do this
Identify the bigger picture of your department. Are your team 
motivated to achieve it? Identify what will inspire them by 
reflecting on each individual.

Speed read
39
 In rewarding your team, consider what brought them to work 
for your organisation in the first instance. Remember it is the 
achievement of the organisational goal ( and how that achievement 
also fulfils your team’s personal needs ) that can make the 
incidental personal gripes or frustrations worth the effort. Do not 
forget, however, that goals and motivations are fluid. Always be 
mindful that over time your team’s personal and work needs and 
preferences may change. 
 2.3  right person right task 
 Just because someone can do something doesn’t mean they are 
the best person for the job. All too often a task is assigned to 
a team member because experience has shown they are good 
at it. However, part of your role is to  develop your staff. Your 
investment means that they, and your department, can continue 
to grow within a fast-changing business world. 
 Do not view work as a static entity. Every organisation needs 
to keep moving forward. In the competitive business world your 
organisation does not just stagnate, it starts falling behind. The 
 Do this 
 Find out if your organisation offers a ‘team tool’ such as the 
MBTI®, or Belbin®. 

Making teams work
40
tasks that your team are currently doing may not be the same 
ones that they will be expected to do 12 months from now. History 
teaches us that specialisation, no matter how perfect the product, 
is no guarantee of continuation. Too narrow a speciality can mean 
that when that task is made redundant, so too is the worker. Make 
sure your best workers want, and are able, to remain with you!
2.4 Dealing with disputes and problems
As well as pre-empting and addressing the potential disputes 
and problems that may arise within a team, it is important to 
acknowledge the role your team themselves have to play. In the 
most effective teams, disputes and problems are dealt with at 
ground level. If your team are confident, capable and have the 
perceived authority to address their issues, they will tend to do 
so, which is very empowering.
Escalating an issue can be perceived as a sign of weakness. 
However, it may also be done with an air of ‘I’m not paid enough 
Do this
Find out what your organisation’s three- to five-year goal is. Ask 
yourself: will my department cope? List three ways you can start 
making your team development-ready right now.

Speed read
41
to deal with this’. Either way, if you are dealing with a dispute or 
problem that has been brought to your attention you are required 
not only to address the problem, but also to address why it 
happened and how to avoid it in future. The latter two points may 
highlight an issue within your organisation, or your management, 
that needs to be addressed. If you do not mend the root cause, 
the problem will recur. 
 2.5  Challenging perceived favouritism or 
discrimination 
 While you may have understandable reasons for treating one of 
your team differently from another, the charge of favouritism can 
still be levied at you, which in turn creates discord within your 
team. As humans we all have personal preferences, and likes and 
dislikes. We have a tendency to prefer situations and people that 
we understand or make us feel comfortable. As such, it is easy 
to overlook favouritism or discrimination in yourself, as you are 
just doing what makes you comfortable or avoiding what makes 
 Do this 
 Think of the last dispute settled in your organisation. Was the 
root cause addressed? If so, keep it at the back of your mind as 
a model when you need to do the same. (If not, make a note of 
how you will behave differently.) 

Making teams work
42
you uncomfortable. However, adherence to the policies and 
procedures will avoid both favouritism and discrimination – when 
our own emotions blur the lines. 
 2.6  360° feedback for all 
 Appraisals are often mistrusted within organisations as they are 
seen as a ‘tick box’ exercise, yet, when done well, they can offer 
valuable insights into current performance and ways of improving. 
One of the appraisal methods you may already be using is 360° 
feedback. If you involve your team in your own appraisal process, 
you not only have a means to develop yourself, but you will have 
also started to embed a culture of appraisal. 
 If you do not trust the appraisal method, why should your team? 
 Do this 
 List the positives that can come out of appraisals – convey these 
to your team . . . then ask them to appraise you. 
 Do this 
 Reflect on your actions from today. How might they have been 
perceived by an outside observer? 

Speed read
43
2.7 There is a ‘me’ in team
Management affords you the opportunity to make a difference. 
It is only in this capacity that you have the authority to effect 
change. Departmental and personal growth are as important as 
each other. The more skills your team attain, the further they 
can take the department, which in turn may yield more personal 
achievements for them.
As a manager you need to encourage cohesiveness, but also 
enable each individual to grow at their own pace. This means they 
have to learn through making their own mistakes and generating 
their own solutions. Of course, you may be time-bound so direct 
input may be necessary at times, but if you have selected the 
right person for the job, and allowed enough time for support 
as required, it is best to turn your attention to progressing your 
own role.
Do this
Identify one thing that makes each member of your team 
individual in their contribution. Praise them for it.
Then praise yourself.


2.1 Know what a team is
‘Teamwork is the ability to work together toward a common 
vision. The ability to direct individual accomplishments toward 
organisational objectives.’
(Andrew Carnegie, cited in Ventura and Templin, 2005)
Why
A common desire of new managers (even if they don’t admit it out 
loud) is to have the sort of team portrayed in TV dramas – a group 
of contradictory, yet complementary, people who pull together 
into the family you choose for yourself. This is idealistic, although 
not impossible. Your priority needs to be not on the group, but on 
the task and the working environment.
You will never please everyone because the emotions of other 
people are not under your control. However, you do have control 
over the working environment, the work you delegate and 
the rewards and recognition you give, which all contribute to 
the overall atmosphere. In the same way as customer loyalty 
correlates with customer experience (Shaw, 2007), so too can 
Big Picture
2. Making teams work

Making teams work
46
team loyalty, productivity and performance be generated by a 
positive workplace experience.
Business brief
A team is ‘a group in which members work together intensively to 
achieve a common group goal’ (Shapiro, 2002). It is not necessary 
for the team to enjoy each other’s company as long as there is 
respect for each other’s skills, clear and open communication, and 
a positive work ethic to achieve the goal. If the goal then results 
in individual personal needs being met, you will find that the team 
operates well on a personal level too.
Your task in a managing a team is to ensure that everyone 
understands and respects each other’s role, that your team have 
the skills (interpersonal and otherwise) to achieve the task and 
that the achievement of the goal is meaningful.
Try this
	 1.	 Be aware of the organisation’s five-year plan and how it will 
benefit your team.
	 2.	 Communicate this to your team so that it is a shared vision.
	 3.	 Make sure each team member understands the importance of 
their role and that of each other in achieving the shared vision.
	 4.	 Ensure your team have the skills (interpersonal and practical) 
to do the tasks you require, and provide training if they don’t.

Big picture
47
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
Coyle-Shapiro, J.A. (2002) A psychological contract perspective on 
organizational citizenship behavior. Journal of Organizational 
Behavior, 23(8), 927–946.
Shaw, C. (2007) The DNA of Customer Experience: How Emotions 
Drive Value. Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan.
Ventura, S. and Templin, M.C. (2005) Five Star Teamwork: How 
to Achieve Success . . . Together. Bedford, TX: Walk the Talk 
Company.
	 5.	 Be aware of what motivates your team personally, and tailor 
your rewards (where possible) to those motivations.
	 6.	 Remember that you cannot make people like each other, 
but you can achieve a positive working environment by 
attending to the above.

Making teams work
48
2.2 Know your team
‘Strength lies in differences, not in similarities.’
(Stephen Covey, 2004)
Why
The knowledge that personality inventories such as the MBTI®, 
Merrill-Reid and Belbin® (to name only a few) provide information 
that is helpful in identifying your team’s communication 
preferences, what positions within the group they enjoy and 
how they are best motivated. This is not new. The right person 
in the right place enhances productivity and performance. Also 
not new is the awareness that in spite of their preferences 
regarding their working environment, people’s motivation to 
work at all is personal and individual. However many managers 
are unable to work effectively with the information that 
they gather, and also do not realise that those preferences, 
motivations and desired rewards change over time.
Business brief
While personality inventories give you information about the 
individuals within your team, and give your team an insight into 
why they think as they do, their use can either be an expensive 
exercise where a simple ‘Buzzfeed Quiz’ (Grandioni, 2014) 

Big picture
49
would have worked instead, or an investment resulting in new 
management styles and a team who is now empowered to take 
active control over their choices.
The results of your inventory of choice need to be used to effect 
better communication within your team, improved leadership and 
breaking down of silos. This means listening to what their needs 
and issues are – and getting others to listen too – then acting on 
the information you have.
However, do not do this in isolation; instead, be aware that 
departmental and personal growth needs to fit within the 
organisational vision.
Try this
	 1.	 If you are holding a ‘listening event’ be sure to also ask for 
solutions. Not only is this good practice for your team but 
they will also find it empowering.
	 2.	 Require honesty from your team and ensure they feel able 
to speak their mind.
	 3.	 Try taking a ‘matrix’ approach to your team:
List your team members and their inventory results. Then ask 
them to list the issues that they currently have or have raised 
in the past, e.g.
Name
MBTI
Issues raised
Action 
needed
Opportu-
nities for 
growth
Reflection
Sally Smith
ESFP
Feels 
undervalued
Joe Bloggs
INTJ
Team feels 
that he could 
contribute 
more in 
meetings

Making teams work
50
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
Belbin Team Roles Inventory: The Home of Belbin Team Roles, http://
www.belbin.com/ (retrieved July 2015).
Buzzfeed Quizzes: http://www.buzzfeed.com/?country=uk 
(retrieved July 2015).
Covey, S.R. (2004) The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People: Restoring 
the Character Ethic. New York, NY: Free Press.
Ask them to generate possible solutions as well as identifying 
opportunities for development that they would like to pursue.
Develop an action plan from each with SMART objectives.
	 4.	 Once your plan has been put into action, be aware of any 
issues that arise. This may indicate that your team’s outlook 
has changed and that you need to revise your matrix.

Big picture
51
Doran, G.T. (1981) There’s a S.M.A.R.T. way to write management’s goals 
and objectives, Management Review (AMA FORUM), 70(11), 35–36.
Grandioni, D. (2014) Buzzfeed quizzes – how do they work? The 
Huffington Post, 20 February, http://www.huffingtonpost.
com/2014/02/20/buzzfeed-quiz-how-do-they-work_n_4810992.
html (retrieved September 2015).
MBTI®: The Myers & Briggs Foundation, http://www.myersbriggs.
org/my-mbti-personality-type/mbti-basics/ (retrieved July 2015).
Merrill-Reid social styles inventory: Merrill, D.W. and Reid, R.H. (1999) 
Personal Styles and Effective Performance. New York, NY: CRC Press.
2.3 Right person right task
‘Please, please, please  – I would love to do some comedy.  
Once you have a reputation for one thing – in my case crying and 
dying – you are typecast.’
(Emily Watson, 2012)
Why
In practical terms, repetitive strain injury (RSI) is caused by ‘doing 
a particular activity repeatedly or for a long period of time’ (NHS 
Choices, 2015). Mentally, too, doing the same thing over and over 
again can result in burnout (Adams, 2011). However, employees 
often find an irony in the fact that the better they are at one 
particular task, the more they are called upon to do it.
This action makes short-term managerial sense. You want a task 
completed well, so you assign it to your best person. However, 

Making teams work
52
praise or rewards for achieving that task may also begin to feel 
habitual rather than motivating. Ensure you are always developing 
your team, or else even ‘sideways moves’ become more attractive!
Business brief
MacGregor’s Theory Y (1966) suggests that people are happy to 
work because they find fulfilment through making a contribution 
and gain a sense of achievement through using and developing 
their skills. Your tasks will continue to be carried out with a 
consistent level of quality if you continually develop the person 
you have assigned to do them. They will then be able to mentor 
new people in carrying out the same tasks, while developing the 
new skill of mentoring. If, throughout their professional lives, their 
work offers them a challenge, their approach will remain fresh.
Try this
	 1.	 If you can spare staff, having your ‘expert’ mentor a less 
experienced team member means that you have options 
in future task assignment. Further, you will then be able to 
develop your ‘expert’ as a mentor as well as freeing them up 
to do something different next time, in turn developing their 
skills.

Big picture
53
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
	 2.	 While praise may be old hat to your ‘expert’, explain to them 
why they have been assigned that particular task again, and 
ask them what skills they would like to develop next time.
	 3.	 Ensure you look for and implement opportunities to develop 
your team.
	 4.	 Use Training Needs Analysis (TNA) to build up a skills profile 
of your team:
Name
TNA skills
New skills acquired
Possible development

Making teams work
54
References
Adams, S. (2011) Boring jobs lead to burnout, The Telegraph, 26 
June, http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/health/8599684/Bor-
ing-jobs-lead-to-burn-out.html (retrieved July 2015).
Gordon, J. (2012) Emily Watson, why the actress signed her latest 
role, The Daily Mail, 9 January, http://www.dailymail.co.uk/home/
you/article-2081772/Emily-Watson-Why-actress-signed-latest-
role.html (retrieved August 2015).
McGregor, D. (1966) The Human Side of Enterprise. New York, NY: 
McGraw-Hill.
NHS Choices (2015) Repetitive Strain Injury, NHS Choices Website, 
http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Repetitive-strain-injury/Pages/
Introduction.aspx (retrieved July 2015).
2.4 Dealing with disputes and problems
‘Do not hover always on the surface of things . . . penetrate into 
the depth of matters, as far as your time and circumstances 
allow, especially in those things which relate to your profession.’
(Isaac Watts, 2010)
Why
There will always be disputes, and in the first instance you may 
do well to remind your team that the goal is the completion of the 
task. However, a positive working environment will always enhance 
performance, because energy and focus are not dissipated on 
gripes about other staff members. If you notice a dispute, or a 
team member brings one to your attention, then dealing with it 

Big picture
55
openly, although sensitively, is a priority before it takes more than 
a difficult conversation to resolve it. It is important to remember 
that if something has been escalated to the point where you are 
made aware, you not only need to fix it, but you must also prevent 
it from happening in future. This means getting to the root cause 
of the problem.
Business brief
Lencioni (2002) identified five key ways in which teams can be 
dysfunctional. He claimed that they can (i) lack attention to 
results; (ii) lack accountability; (iii) lack commitment; (iv) fear 
conflict; and (v) lack trust. In addition, the perception of these 
dysfunctions can be as damaging as the reality.
If a dispute or problem comes to your attention that pertains 
to you, first of all consider whether you are guilty of any of the 
above, or if you may have been perceived as such. The power 
of a psychological contract is such that any breach can result 
in increased staff turnover and certainly lowered productivity 
(Conway and Briner, 2005). If you have made a promise that you 
have not kept, especially without explanation, or if you have 
created a climate of mistrust or lack of appreciation through 
your behaviour, even if unintentionally, you must address the 
problem and take steps to resolve it.
However, if the dispute or problem is unrelated to you, remember 
that the person who has escalated it may feel disempowered, 
because they have had to hand control to someone else, or may 
feel they have no authority to control the situation. In fixing the 
problem it is also important to fix the process so that the same 
situation does not recur, and to ensure that power (and perhaps 
authority) is handed back to the person who escalated the issue 
in the first instance.
The ‘root’ is often a manifestation of one or more of the five 
dysfunctions being played out on the business stage. Investigate 
the potential causes of the problem and take steps at the root 
to avoid its recurrence. Check if your team’s behaviour is causing 

Making teams work
56
any of the five dysfunctions, and identify what skills, knowledge 
or authority the team needs in order to resolve the issue for 
themselves in future.
Try this
	 1.	 Make a note of the disputes or problems that are escalated 
as this may bring you to a larger organisational problem that 
needs addressing. If this is the case, make sure you deal 
with it at the root – or at least bring it to the attention of 
your own managers.
	 2.	 Make a note of why the person who escalated the dispute or 
problem was unable to deal with it themselves, and identify 
what knowledge, skills or authority they would need in order 
to deal with it next time.
	 3.	 Furnish them with the knowledge, skills or authority they 
need to deal with it next time – and do not forget to praise 
them if they did all they could do prior to escalation.
	 4.	 Monitor the situation for any recurrence.
	 5.	 It is even possible to use this basic checklist for disputes or 
problems that you feel unable to deal with.
Reflection
• How did it work?

Big picture
57
• What will I do next time?
References
Conway, N. and Briner, R.B. (2005) Understanding Psychological 
Contracts at Work: A Critical Evaluation of Theory and Research. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lencioni, P.M. (2002) The Five Dysfunctions of a Team: A Leadership 
Fable. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
Watts, I. (2010) The Improvement of the Mind; or, a Supplement to 
the Art of Logic in Two Parts, by Isaac Watts, D.D. Also his Posthu-
mous Works, Published from His Manuscript, by D Jennings, D.D. 
and P. Doddridge, D.D. Gale Ecco, Print Editions.
2.5 Challenging perceived favouritism or 
discrimination
‘Even Jesus had a favourite.’
(Stephen Asma, 2012)
Why
Favouritism, and its counterpart, discrimination, merit a section 
to themselves because they are very easy to engage in these 
behaviours without realising.
Perceived favouritism, indeed any perceived inequity, can lead 
to disharmony within the team. This takes its greatest toll 
on channels of communication because those who feel out of 
favour may start deliberately communicating behind your back 
or withholding information, not maliciously but because it has 

Making teams work
58
become a matter of habit. Not only will this have a negative effect 
on productivity, but it can also result in key team members leaving 
because of the working ‘vibe’.
Business brief
Despite the laws against explicit discrimination, prejudices may be 
held implicitly and be expressed unconsciously. Fiske and Taylor 
(1991) said that humans are ‘cognitive misers’. In order to achieve 
efficiency with our thought processes, we compartmentalise 
people. Prejudices and, in their lesser form, stereotypes, help us 
to do this. While you may feel more sympathetic to the plight of 
one team member than to that of another, you risk showing both 
favouritism and discrimination – not necessarily with regard to 
their race or gender, but perhaps to their work ethic, attitude, 
personality traits or something less discernible. While you may call 
it ‘discretion’ this behaviour can become very wrong.
Try this
	 1.	 Explain that while you are sympathetic, it would be unfair to 
the rest of the team to act contrary to the policy guidelines.
	 2.	 Be aware of your relationships and responses to your team. 
If you have a more positive or negative feeling towards 
one rather than another, you are at risk of demonstrating 
favouritism (or discrimination) at some point.

Big picture
59
 reflection 
 •  How did it work? 
 
 3.  Try to keep your judgment as objective as possible  – 
evidence helps. If you are managing people with whom you 
have a relationship outside of work, always support your 
decisions with substantiated facts. 
 4.  If you do feel that you favour one of your team over 
another (or that you might be discriminating against one in 
particular), reflect on why this is the case. If it is something 
that can be changed, e.g. their work ethic, then meet with 
them and discuss what you would like to see happen. If this 
does not work, instigate proceedings in accordance with 
your policies (although you may first wish to seek advice 
from another manager to verify that you are not acting on 
prejudice). 

Making teams work
60
• What will I do next time?
References
Asma, S.T. (2012) Against Fairness. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago 
Press.
Fiske, S.T. and Taylor, S.E. (1991) Social Cognition, 2nd edn. New York, 
NY: McGraw-Hill.
2.6 360° feedback for all
‘Behaviour is the mirror in which everyone shows their image.’
(Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, cited in Corica, 2014)
Why
Appraisals are an excellent way to acknowledge the achievements 
of your team, as well as find out what their development goals 
are. They are also a good time to address, informally at first, any 
issues that may cause later problems at work. Appraisals are a 
great reason to collate a profile of evidence which may assist 
your team in achieving other steps within their career. For some 
professionals such as doctors who need to re-register their 
professional status after a specific time period, such a portfolio 
is essential. However, many – if not all – of your team will not 
see things that way. While appraisals are an opportunity to give 
and receive praise (the clue is in the title!), employees often fear 
criticism and perceive it as negative feedback rather than an 
opportunity to develop.

Big picture
61
If you don’t trust the system yourself then take steps to change 
it. A ‘tick box’ exercise is a waste of everyone’s time.
If you believe in the appraisal process, demonstrate it by immersing 
yourself in it with your team. Let them see first-hand how you are 
able to learn and develop from their critique, but also how you 
appreciate their praise.
Business brief
The Washington Post (McGregor, 2014) published a study by 
Kansas State University which found that ‘basically everybody 
hates performance reviews (appraisals)’. Culbertson et al. (2013) 
said this was true, even of people who ‘enjoyed learning’. Even 
praise was described as ‘relative’ – with employees who worked 
hard ‘being disappointed with a 4 rating instead of a 5’. Yet 
appraisals are still a staple of organisational practice.
Without any form of benchmark, progress becomes impossible 
to measure and praise becomes meaningless. Therefore unless 
another form of performance review can be developed, appraisals 
are here to stay. In reality, when done well, they become more 
than a star rating. In the same way as children have to be taught 
to look beyond their grade so, too, do your team.
Social Learning Theory (Bandura, 1977) is one of the most 
effective forms of learning. If your team see you embrace your 
appraisal and learn from it, they in turn will be less cynical, and 
may even look forward to their own.

Making teams work
62
Reflection
• How did it work?
Try this
	 1.	 Explain the reasoning behind the appraisal process.
	 2.	 Explain the importance of the appraisal process not being a 
‘tick box’ or ‘grading’ exercise.
	 3.	 Encourage your team to be honest in their appraisal of you.
	 4.	 Encourage your team to ask others for feedback and 
consider it alongside their own views.
	 5.	 Encourage your team to always support their comments with 
evidence. (This also establishes good appraisal practice, and 
gathering evidence is helpful for demonstrating professional 
development too.)
	 6.	 Demonstrate your learning from the criticism as well as your 
appreciation of the praise.
	 7.	 Ask your team to reflect on the exercise and how this will 
assist their own appraisal preparation.

Big picture
63
• What will I do next time?
References
Bandura, A. (1977) Social Learning Theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall.
Corica, L. (2014) Making Changes Easily. Bloomington, IN: Balboa 
Press.
Culbertson S.S., Henning, J.B. and Payne, S.C. (2013) Performance 
appraisal satisfaction: the role of feedback and goal orientation, 
Journal of Personnel Psychology, 12(4), 189–195.
McGregor, J. (2014) Every single person hates performance reviews, 
The Washington Post, 27 January, http://www.washingtonpost.
com/blogs/on-leadership/wp/2014/01/27/study-finds-that-
basically-every-single-person-hates-performance-reviews/ 
(retrieved July 2015).
2.7 There is a ‘me’ in team
‘If you ever find a man who is better than you are – hire him. If 
necessary, pay him more than you pay yourself.’
(David Ogilvy, 2012)
Why
Your role in managing your team is first and foremost one of 
development rather than direct participation. Of course you should 
know how to do the job and if called upon ought not to hesitate 
in joining in, but no-one ever learns if the work is done for them. 
Once you have assigned the roles to your team, let them do their 
job. You may timetable ‘check in’ times but be sure to adapt them 

Making teams work
64
as you see the task getting done and your team’s confidence in 
themselves growing. If they are faltering, find ways of empowering 
them to achieve rather than offering advice. If your team suggest 
ideas for improving current methods, then think about putting 
them into practice and be sure to acknowledge their success later 
if they work out. Even if the ideas have no real impact, this goes 
a long way to developing the individual strengths of your team 
members and will help create loyalty.
With an empowered team, you can turn your attention to 
developing yourself and your role.
Business brief
An article in Forbes Magazine states that ‘managers must be 
leaders’ (Morgan, 2015). This is because you need to establish 
trust within your team and inspire them to achieve, and you 
have a responsibility to drive your organisation forward. As a 
manager you are in a position to affect the organisational vision 
and contribute to growth. However, the only way you have the 
freedom to do so is if the rest of your department is functioning 
efficiently. Therefore it is essential that your team are able to do 
their tasks with confidence.
Your perspective must focus on the ‘bigger picture’, and part 
of that means seizing opportunities for growth. In a changing 
business world where the mantra is no longer ‘the more loyal you 
are, the greater the reward’ but rather ‘the more essential your 

Big picture
65
skills, the more you can demand’ (call it the ‘Footballer model’ if 
you will1), you owe it to yourself, and your team to proactively 
develop personally and professionally.
1	 Footballers come at a high price, but we’re often willing to pay for those skills (The 
Secret Footballer, 2014).
Try this
	 1.	 Once your team is able to do their tasks, be available but 
do not micro-manage. Remember your job is to ‘get things 
done’, not ‘do them’ (see section 1.1).
	 2.	 Do not be afraid to learn from your team. Recognise 
talent and reward it where possible with remunerated 
responsibility. Remember that if you suppress your team’s 
skills, you and your department will only ever be as good as 
your own skills.
	 3.	 Familiarise yourself with the plans for organisational growth 
and identify the skills that will be necessary to effect it.
	 4.	 Train yourself and your team as part of your commitment to 
CPD.

Making teams work
66
As entrepreneur Richard Branson states, on the Virgin website, 
‘Train people well enough so they can leave, treat them well 
enough so they don’t want to.’
Reflection
• How did it work?
	 5.	 Take a keen interest in the changing macro-environment. 
Conduct a SWOT (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, 
Threats) analysis on an annual basis to remain abreast of 
potential change.
	 6.	 Show corporate social responsibility by communicating 
changes in vision, mission or direction to your team so that 
they may also take an active part in their career direction.

Big picture
67
• What will I do next time?
References
Branson, R. (2014) Look after your staff. http://www.virgin.com/
richard-branson/look-after-your-staff.
Ogilvy, D. (2012) The Unpublished David Ogilvy. London: Profile 
Books.
Morgan, J. (2015) Why all managers must be leaders, 
Forbes, 21 ­January, http://www.forbes.com/sites/­
jacobmorgan/2015/01/21/why-all-managers-must-be-leaders/ 
(retrieved July 2015).
The Secret Footballer (2014) The Secret Footballer’s Guide to the 
Modern Game. Croydon: CPI Group (UK) Ltd.


Developing staff
 3.1	
Best invest in your staff
 3.2	
Coaching as a management tool
 3.3	
Making appraisals work
 3.4	
Making the TNA meaningful
 3.5	
Training your team
 3.6	
The benefits of secondments
 3.7	
Ask, don’t assume (2)
Chapter 3


Chapter title
3.1 Best invest in your staff
Before they start work you have made an investment in your staff, 
and this investment will either be returned or lost depending on 
how well you have recruited, retained and nurtured performance. 
Clever recruitment is essential not just to fill your skills gap, but 
in order to find someone who fits the organisational culture and 
vision – because you want them to stay. For high-flying staff, 
the recruitment process alone makes an impression, as does 
the ease with which a new employee settles in (and the respect 
with which an old employee goes) as it speaks volumes about 
the organisation itself. These are important, yet often overlooked 
factors that contribute to the new staff member’s view of the 
organisation, and can affect performance.
Speed Read
3. Developing staff
Do this
Remember that an employee is an investment. Ask yourself how 
much research you’d do when buying a new phone. Make a note 
to do at least that much when recruiting a new member of staff.

Developing staff
72
 3.2  Coaching as a management tool 
 Derived from the original transportation term ‘coach’, personal 
coaching is the act of bringing someone from one place to 
another, helping them to ‘move forward or to create change’ (Starr, 
2011). Coaching happens through a ‘structured conversation’ – 
the structure of which is decided on and shaped by the coach – 
which equips the coachee with the time and space to focus on 
their circumstances, explore the issues they may be experiencing 
and generate their own solutions. The outcome of the coaching 
conversation usually includes improving in some way the 
coachee’s own ability to think, learn and act, and empowering 
them to make better choices when faced with a similar situation 
in future. As such coaching is a form of empowerment.  
 However, many managers do not know how to do it. They prefer 
to give direct answers when advice is sought rather than using 
structured questioning to enable their staff member to come to 
a solution themselves. In situations where there is no time for 
discussion, coaching is of course not appropriate, but if managers 
become familiar with using coaching questions as a matter of 
course staff will seek less direct advice as they will be empowered 
and skilled to answer many of their own questions. 
Coaching also demonstrates that you value what your team 
have to say because you have asked them what they think is 
appropriate to do. You have recognised their ability to answer the 
question they pose. 

Speed read
73
 Coaching is the use of structured questioning and often follows a 
model. The ‘Big picture’ section will give you examples of questions 
that you can use when coaching your staff. 
 3.3  Making appraisals work 
 The appraisal originated as a form of organisational control. It 
was a means to justify labour costs and cuts, and therefore not 
unheard of for the next step to be a promotion or being released. 
However, the management of labour, and labour itself, is now more 
complex. It is, perhaps sadly, no longer the case that a high level of 
specialism in one area is required. More important nowadays is to 
have transferable skills that can be adapted to changes that occur 
within the job itself. With jobs being increasingly client centred, 
personal skills in most roles are as important as practical ones. 
Therefore, apart from in very specific circumstances, it is better to 
hire employees with rounded potential and develop it than look for 
someone who is highly skilled in one area with no room to improve. 
 As such, appraisals, when managed well (that is, correctly 
prepared for and conducted – see section 2.6), are an invaluable 
 Do this 
 Ask yourself what you would do if a team member asked for your 
help. If the answer is ‘Tell them what to do’ or ‘Let them figure it 
out for themselves’, then go straight to   section   3.2 and practise 
the coaching questions! 

Developing staff
74
learning tool and an opportunity to praise as well as to discuss 
concerns. The appraisal should be seen not as a means to an end 
but rather as a way to monitor continued progress. However, this 
is something that many managers must first realise themselves.
3.4 Making the TNA meaningful
There is an abundance of paperwork in business. This is often 
because there is a need for everything to be evidenced and we 
cannot be relied on to do so without a pro forma. Unfortunately, 
forms are often completed as a matter of course, not because they 
are particularly useful documents. To demonstrate investment in 
staff development, most organisations require a TNA where the 
staff member identifies the skills they possess and those which 
they would like to develop. However, the paperwork alone is not 
sufficient. The TNA must be used for appraisals and CPD rather 
than sit in an employee’s file as something checked off the list. 
‘Demonstrate’ means ‘show the existence or proof of’, not just pay 
lip service to it with a few pieces of paperwork.
Do this
Check your appraisal pro forma. Is there a segment for praise? If 
not, add one, and see if you can get it added as standard.

Speed read
75
3.5 Training your team
Training must align with organisational strategy, and give the 
individual the opportunity to develop in a meaningful manner. 
Further, all training must demonstrate a return on investment 
whether that is in performance, financial turnover or retention. 
This raises the question of whether staff are better trained in 
house or by external companies. The former allows for training 
outcomes to match organisational goals precisely, but an external 
organisation can tailor training and often offer something extra 
which will serve your teams well in their own professional 
development. Remember also, that investment in-house can be 
very high if your training team is not always delivering training.
With so many courses on offer, managers sometimes forget that 
training needs to be relevant and have demonstrable results within 
the working arena. It also needs to be something that your team 
can implement right away or else the skills learned will be forgotten. 
Training should also be planned for and factored into the working day 
in order to ensure your department can function with fewer staff for 
the duration.
Do this
Have you seen your team’s TNA? Find it, update it and use it 
by praising the skills they demonstrate and identifying ways to 
develop those they wish to enhance.

Developing staff
76
3.6 The benefits of secondments
Not everyone will work in the same way. Secondments are a way 
of learning from other departments. Staff members can return 
with the knowledge they have acquired while on secondment, 
and can use this knowledge to improve practices within your 
department. Alternatively they may also return having used some 
of your procedures during their placement and reaffirming that your 
department works best (go you!). The opportunity to experience 
different organisational cultures and job roles assists professional 
growth and they may find their secondment offers them something 
which would be so beneficial to their personal career path that they 
cannot pass it up. When looking at the big picture, if someone in your 
team eventually moves floors, at least they are remaining with the 
organisation if not with your department.
Do this
Find out what opportunities exist for secondment in your 
organisation and let your team know.
Do this
Identify which of your team have been on a training course 
recently. Ask them at their next briefing what they have learned 
and how they are using it.

Speed read
77
 3.7  ask, don’t assume (2) 
 Too often problems go unresolved because of a vicious cycle of 
assumptions on both sides: 
   1.   The team assume the manager is too busy or too incompetent 
to make a change so they say nothing. 
 2.  The manager assumes nothing is wrong because nothing has 
been said. 
  3.   If something is said, often no solutions are offered. This might 
be because the team cannot think of one, do not think their 
solution will be acknowledged, or think that the manager will 
take the idea and the credit. 
 4.  But with no solutions, the manager in this instance may 
assume the team have no ideas and will therefore implement 
their own idea which, from their own point of view, is a good 
solution . . . from the team’s point of view, however, it may not 
be.  
 5.  The team assumes the manager is incompetent. 
 (Go back to 1) 
 
 

Developing staff
78
Do this
Ask your team to propose solutions to issues that they raise. 
They are the ones who know best what will work. If their 
solutions cannot be implemented, explain why. Clear lines 
of communication with your team are essential because 
assumption not only causes confusion, but can result in silos 
or silence.

3.1 Best invest in your staff
‘Recently I was asked if I was going to fire an employee who 
made a mistake that cost the company $600,000. No, I replied, 
I just spent $600,000 training him. Why would I want somebody 
to hire his experience?’
(Thomas John Watson Snr, cited in DeNisi and Griffin, 2015)
Why
Avoid continuous turnover. This affects productivity, and 
is demotivating and time-consuming. The more hours spent 
interviewing and inducting, the fewer spent doing your job. For 
your team, constantly seeing people come and go is demoralising, 
and may make them question if they should stay.
Focus on retention. Successful retention will depend on 
the individual needs of the staff member, the organisational 
Big Picture
3. Developing staff

Developing staff
80
requirements (and rewards) and how closely they align, as well 
as on professional development and interpersonal treatment. It 
will also be affected by how your team perceive your treatment 
of them and their colleagues, with strong members of the team 
being more at risk of moving on than others. Performance is 
affected by both recruitment and retention behaviours.
Utilise the induction. Once you have recruited a new member 
of staff, the induction is not only necessary to get them up and 
running as fast as possible, but is also a way to make them feel 
welcome and to integrate them with the team. From then onwards, 
keep supporting them and maintain an awareness of their needs, 
not just for their benefit but also for that of your current team.
Business brief
The average cost of recruitment is around £30k (HR Review, 2014), 
which includes the cost of ‘lost output’ (when an employee leaves) 
and ‘recruitment and absorption’ (of the new worker). It then 
takes about six months before the new employee is performing 
at optimum capacity. You must work to retain them at least to this 
stage, and, if they are a good worker, beyond.
Whether one of your assets remains within your team depends on 
their personal motivations and their alignment with those of the 
organisation. It also depends on you. It is an old but common adage 
that ‘people don’t leave their jobs; they leave their managers’. This 
may be for a variety of reasons – a lack of faith in the manager’s 
leadership ability; a personality clash; a perceived breach of a 
psychological contract; or even because of observed treatment 
of others in the team.
Business ‘extra’ – the ‘honeymoon’ (probation) period
The truth about ‘probation’ or ‘honeymoon’ periods. These are 
often built into employment contracts but have little legal standing, 
therefore it is questionable whether employers gain anything by 
having them. Where an employer (and arguably the employee) 

Big picture
81
may benefit is in the period of notice that needs to be given to 
terminate employment during the probation period, which is often 
shorter than that required during within ‘normal’ employment.
There may also be an organisational procedure for dismissal 
during the probation period. However, your length of service which 
determines eligibility for statutory employment rights begins 
at the start of your employment (whether called ‘probationary 
period’ or not on your contract or not), as does your accrual of 
holiday and sickness time.
‘Unfair dismissal’ cannot be claimed unless the employee has 
worked in the organisation for two years. If, for example, an 
employee wishes to bring a case of ‘Unfair dismissal on the 
grounds of discrimination’ they will be allowed to bring it under a 
case of ‘Discrimination’. 
For more exemptions, please visit the “Compact Law Website: 
www.compactlaw.co.uk/free-legal-information/employment-law/
exceptions-for-unfair-dismissal.html
Try this
	 1.	 Know what you are looking for from the outset. If the job 
description needs to be changed with a view to finding 
someone who is a better match for the organisation’s goals, 
take this opportunity to change it.

Developing staff
82
 2.  Book the venue and recruitment personnel and ensure 
everyone knows how to use the recruitment pro formas if 
scoring candidates. 
 3.  Take the recruitment process seriously. You should consider 
not only whether the candidate has the right skills but also 
if their personality will make them a good fit for the team. 
 4.  Consider an assessment day, of which the interview is one 
part. This offers a better indication of each candidate’s 
overall performance level. 
 5.  Remember to let your interviewees speak. Managers often 
end up answering their own questions and then come away 
thinking the interview went better than it did. 
 6.  Never forget that recruitment is auditable – DO NOT write 
‘funny’ acronyms, e.g. NL (nice legs) on the score sheet. 
   7.   Do not make promises you cannot or do not have the 
authority to keep. 
   8.   Make sure you treat your exiting staff well as this speaks 
volumes about how you will treat your new ones! 
 9.  Ensure you have a means to progress, develop and reward 
your staff. 

Big picture
83
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
DeNisi, A. and Griffin, R. (2015) HR3: Human Resources. Andover: 
Cengage Learning.
HR Review (2014) It costs over 30k to replace a staff member, 
HR Review, 25 February, http://www.hrreview.co.uk/hr-news/
recruitment/it-costs-over-30k-to-replace-a-staff-member/50677 
(retrieved July 2015).

Developing staff
84
3.2 Coaching as a management tool
‘Coaching makes things better in the workplace. It develops a 
human organisation and improves individual and organisational 
durability.’
(Ruth Metz, 2011)
Why
More than any form of advice, coaching empowers your staff. You are 
asking them for their opinion in a safe context and you get to hear 
what they have to say. If their response indicates a training need you 
can correct them at that point and ensure they get help as required. 
More often than not, however, their ideas will be valuable and different 
from your own; coaching thus affords you the opportunity to learn.
Coaching can support personal development, and thus aid the 
retention, recruitment and performance of positive, motivated 
staff. It is both a way of supporting staff and a style of management.
Business brief
As an industry, coaching is continuing to grow – a 2009 survey from 
the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development (CIPD, 2009) 
found that ‘coaching is the most effective talent management 
activity used by organizations’, whilst a survey on behalf of the 
International Coach Federation (ICF, 2009) found that coaching 
improved self-confidence, communication, interpersonal skills, 
work performance and relationships (both cited in Starr, 2011).

Big picture
85
Coaching falls within the second quadrant of Hersey’s (1984) 
Situational Leadership Grid. This is where the use of the term in 
business causes confusion. Within the Situational Leadership Grid, 
the term is used with reference to sports coaching. Coaching in 
sport (where the term originally derived) is more directive than 
within business or personal development. However, the sense in 
which it is used in this chapter, and how the author advocates its 
use in the workplace derives more from ‘life coaching’ – that is, 
coaching as its evolved definition.
The coach (or the coaching manager) uses a series of questions 
to help the coachee (or team member) explore their own thoughts 
and ideas on the situation at hand. Through this the coachee/team 
member is able to generate their own solutions. This is essential 
because it means they are also more likely to action them.
If coaching becomes embedded as a style of management, 
you will have created a culture of coaching which will, in turn, 
encourage your staff to coach junior team members. All of this at 
no extra training cost.
Try this
Coaching is best implemented in two ways.
	 1.	 Executive coaching – external coaching
• Referral from line manager/self-referral (line manager 
aware).
• Or private clients.
• A series of four to six sessions is arranged over a period 
of three to six months.*
• In a referral case a review with the line manager should 
take place after the third and the sixth session; with 
private clients the review process will be between coach 
and coachee, and the line manager will not be involved.
*NB: Coaching needs to have a finite duration as it means that work 
problems are swiftly addressed and sessions are always meaningful.

Developing staff
86
	 2.	 Management training – in-house coaches
• Training leaders and managers via an ICF-recognised 
course.
• Leaders and managers implement a coaching culture 
and this results in their teams coaching others as a 
matter of course.
(NHS North West Leadership Academy, 2015)
Practice using the following coaching models (note that there 
are many; these are the two the author uses):
• CIGAR
The acronym CIGAR stands for Current reality, the Ideal 
position, the Gaps (between the current and ideal), the Action 
available to take, and Review - a reflection on the action taken.
• GROW
The acronym GROW stands for Goal, the current Reality, the 
Options you can take and the Will you have to follow those 
options through.
Each of the headings describes the sort of questions you need to 
ask when discussing the issue at hand. Once you have explored 
the first area to your satisfaction, you move on to the next.
Using the GROW model for example:
For more information on the GROW model, please see Coaching for 
Performance by John Whitmore (2009, Nicholas Brealey Publishing)
Example questions you might ask
G
Goal
• 
What would you like the situation to look like?
R
Reality
• 
How would you describe the situation?
• 
How might X describe the situation?
O
Options
• 
What would help close the gap?
• 
Who have you asked for help?
W
Will
• 
Who can you ask for help?
• 
On a scale of 1–10 how likely are you to follow that 
course of action?

Big picture
87
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
Tips
• For every scale answer that is 7 or below, always ask ‘What 
would make it an 8?’.
• For every ‘I don’t know’ respond with ‘Imagine if you did.’
• The reason for this is that people have often practised 
socially desirable answers and these responses indicate 
a thought that has not yet wholly formed and is therefore 
closer to their actual thinking, the exploration of which 
helps them better move forward.
• Be aware that coaching needs time, and is therefore not 
appropriate for every occasion.

Developing staff
88
References
CIPD (2009) Taking the temperature of coaching, summer 2009 hot 
topic, www.cipd.co.uk/NR/rdonlyres/E27F313C-FFBC-466F-84D8-
A240893A2A22/0/Taking_temperature_coaching.pdf (retrieved 
July 2015).
Hersey, P. (1984) The Situational Leader: The Other 59 Minutes. New 
York, NY: Warner Books.
ICF (2009) ICF Global Coaching Client Study, http://coachfederation.
org/about/landing.cfm?ItemNumber=830 (retrieved July 2015).
Metz, R.F. (2011) Coaching in the Library: A Management Strat-
egy for Achieving Excellence. Chicago, IL: American Library 
Association.
NHS Leadership Academy (2014), Embedding a Coaching Culture 
in the NHS, www.nwacademy.nhs.uk/sites/default/files/lead-
er-june-2015.pdf (retrieved Jan 2016).
Starr, J. (2011) The Coaching Manual. Harlow: Pearson Education.
3.3 Making appraisals work
‘What interested me was not news, but appraisal. What I sought 
was to grasp the flavour of a man, his texture, his impact, what 
he stood for, what he believed in, what made him what he was 
and what colour he gave to the fabric of his time.’
(John Gunther, cited in Zoellner, 2007)
Why
An appraisal is an(other) opportunity for you to speak directly 
with your team. You are able to learn more about their 
professional goals, and in your mind see if they align well with the 
organisation’s. This is not a covert process; it is an opportunity to 
discuss openly how your staff wish to progress and, realistically, 
if your organisation can support them. Use the appraisal to raise 
any concerns, and of course to praise – both with evidence.
Your staff must understand that appraisals are not necessarily 
‘the truth’, but a discussion of how the people interviewed 
perceive them. The opportunity to see themselves through the 

Big picture
89
eyes of others can be extremely thought-provoking and powerful, 
and with this knowledge you can invite them to change the 
perception – or accept it.
Many organisations have an appraisals pro forma – prepare for the 
appraisal, and ensure that your team prepare too. If you value it, 
so will they.
Business brief
With less time to meet face to face, the appraisal can be a welcome 
opportunity to re-engage with discussion, re-affirm relationships, 
as well as re-align goals and professional direction in person.
An appraisal is an organisational form of the ‘Johari Window’ (Luft 
and Ingham, 1955) – a discussion of what is known to yourself, 
to others, or to both, and can often reveal the ‘blind’ area, giving 
you (or those you are appraising) the opportunity to reflect on the 
insights it provides.
The appraisal also forms an important piece of evidence to 
demonstrate that your team are being given the support they 
need so that they are not disadvantaged due to age, disability 
or any other factor. An issue raised within an appraisal must be 
recorded and dealt with.

Developing staff
90
Try this
Make sure YOU measure up as an appraiser!
	 1.	 Plan for each appraisal – be very clear on the message you 
want your staff to leave with.
	 2.	 Complete any appraisal pro formas and have evidence to 
support all points. (Evidence can come from client feedback, 
observation, colleague reports and so on.)
	 3.	 Allow your staff to prepare – make sure they know the time 
and date of the appraisal at least a week in advance and try 
not to reschedule it unless you absolutely have to.
	 4.	 Should you have to cancel or postpone apologise to the 
member of staff – they are likely to be nervous, and you 
can expect them to have prepared.
	 5.	 Set aside a time to conduct the appraisal with no 
interruptions, and in a private room. (Note – it does not 
have to be your room as this can be intimidating. Remember 
appraisals are a discussion as much as a review.)
	 6.	 If you have to raise an issue, present the facts alone and ask 
your member of staff to relate their version of events.
	 7.	 During the appraisal listen to your staff. Explore issues with 
them using the coaching techniques in section 3.2.

Big picture
91
   8.   Focus on the future, but do not give short shrift to the past 
as this may make your staff feel undervalued, especially if 
they have something they wish to discuss. 
 9.  Agree an action plan with SMART goals. Try to have no more 
than three as more can be unmanageable. 
 10.  Agree a review time and date. 
 11.  You might even ask your team what else they feel would 
make appraisals more productive – if you have conducted 
them well, your team will now perceive them positively 
and may be more willing to contribute to making them a 
development tool. 
 12.  If you need support in your own personal communication 
skills (e.g. making eye contact, sincerity, clarity of voice), 
seek it out prior to the appraisal. 
 Reflection 
 •  How did it work? 
 

Developing staff
92
• What will I do next time?
References
Luft, J. and Ingham, H. (1955) The Johari Window, a graphic model of 
interpersonal awareness, in Proceedings of the Western Training 
Laboratory in Group Development. Los Angeles, CA: University of 
California.
Zoellner, T. (2007) Homemade Biography: How to Collect, Record, and 
Tell the Life Story of Someone You Love. New York, NY: Griffin.
3.4 Making the TNA meaningful
‘Knowing is not enough; we must apply. Willing is not enough; 
we must do.’
(Johann Wolfgang von Goethe)
Why
The TNA may be part of the induction or the appraisal process 
and is often seen as ‘another exercise in form filling’. As such, on 
completion it is often filed never to be seen again, or added to a 
spreadsheet of sorts to ensure that the member of staff who has 
completed it is up to date with any mandatory training. It often 
serves little other purpose, but that does not prevent it being a 
long document that takes time to complete for both manager and 
staff member. As with appraisals, it is essential to make the TNA 
meaningful. With most paperwork, if it has to be done it will take 
part of your day that could be spent doing ‘actual’ work, therefore 
it needs to be useful and much more than a box-ticking exercise.

Big picture
93
Business brief
Mike Cooley (1982) in his book Architect or Bee? proposed that 
while computers were originally introduced to the design world to 
give architects more freedom to create (like the bee), the outcome 
unfortunately resulted in the ‘freed’ mind space being taken up with 
processes as the architect first had to learn new systems to use the 
computer. Once those processes were learned, however, technology 
assisted in enhancing design beyond imagination. The TNA to the 
manager is like the first computer to the architect. It is extra work.
However, if the TNA can be utilised as a working curriculum vitae of 
skills, or as a development plan, it becomes a document that can 
be referred to and updated as new qualifications are gained and 
later safe time when your team (or department) wishes to progress.
It is an achievement list for each appraisal and a written reminder 
of personal, professional and departmental progress and can 

Developing staff
94
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
assist with the inevitable ‘update of the CV’ as members of your 
team prepare for promotion or to move on (or both).
Try this
	 1.	 Make sure your organisation’s TNA doesn’t just list the skills 
that employees should have in the form of tick boxes. Allow 
the staff member space to comment on their abilities.
	 2.	 Ensure that there is a means to request further training in 
certain areas.
	 3.	 Read the TNA and use it when requesting staff training.
	 4.	 Retain the TNA and use it as part of the appraisal process, i.e. 
update it as an objective and ongoing measure of progress.

Big picture
95
References
Cooley, M. (1982) Architect or Bee? The Human/technology 
­Relationship. Boston, MA: South End Press.
Goethe, J.W. (n.d.) quoted in Purnell, L.D. (2012) Transcultural Health 
Care: A Culturally Competent Approach. Philadelphia, PA: FA Davis 
Publishing.
3.5 Training your team
‘Excellence is an art won by training and habituation. We do 
not act rightly because we have virtue or excellence, but we 
rather have those because we have acted rightly. We are what 
we repeatedly do. Excellence, then, is not an act but a habit.’
(Aristotle)
Why
Training is often viewed as the ‘poor relative’ within an organisation. 
Staff grimace at having to undertake mandatory training 
courses, and managers begrudgingly view it as a necessary evil 
for completing their employee tick boxes. With moves towards 
e-learning and in-house staff often delivering training courses 
in addition to carrying out their ‘real’ job, it is no wonder that 
its value is being overlooked. When the trainer may lack the 
necessary skills, and the quality of the session is questionable, 
a self-fulfilling prophecy that ‘training is a waste of time’ ensues.
Business brief
Vanthournout et al. (2006) charted the return on investment 
Accenture received once they had committed to a focus on training 
as a means to retain staff and increase performance. Instead of 
slashing the training budget in an effort to cut costs, Accenture 
instead invested in it, finding that their staff appreciated the 
interest, stayed longer, encouraged people to join the organisation 
and put what they learned into practice. In addition, their in-house 
learning and development team could be outsourced to apply 

Developing staff
96
their skills elsewhere and so bring financial benefit to Accenture. 
‘For every dollar Accenture invests in learning, the organisation 
receives that dollar back plus an additional $3.25 in measurable 
value to its bottom line – in other words, a 353% return on learning’ 
(Vanthournout et al., 2006).
If the organisational goals are supported, and what is learned is 
put into practice, the life of the training is prolonged. Training, if 
done well, can be one of your organisation’s most financially viable 
and valuable resources, as what is learned is ploughed straight 
back into organisational performance – and good in-house training 
can even be outsourced.
Try this
	 1.	 Use the TNA and appraisal development pages to source 
training that is meaningful to your staff.
	 2.	 If you do not have an in-house department, ask Procurement 
to see which providers the organisation has a pre-existing 
relationship with. (This can help financially.)
	 3.	 Ensure that your training requests match organisational 
development goals.
	 4.	 Ask staff to report back on what they learned from the 
training sessions.
	 5.	 Ensure that what is learned can be put into practice within 
the department.

Big picture
97
Reflection
• How did it work?
	 6.	 Use an evaluation model such as Kirkpatrick and Kirkpatrick’s 
(1994) structure to assess and review the return on 
investment. The model covers:
(a)	 The reaction to the session. This is ascertained through 
the sheets given at the end of the session . . . known 
somewhat disparagingly as ‘happy sheets’ as many 
learning and development departments feel that 
participants are likely just to rate everything ‘good’ if 
they had fun.
(b)	 The learning that has taken place. This may be measured 
through summative assessment.
(c)	 Post-training behaviour. This is commonly obtained 
through a follow-up session with the trainee’s line 
manager three to six months after the programme, 
where observations of the changes that have occurred 
are discussed.
(d)	 Results or return on learning. This is the fundamental 
success of training and can be measured in retention or 
performance figures.
	 7.	 Make time for your own training.

Developing staff
98
• What will I do next time?
References
Aristotle (1999) Nicomachean Ethics, trans. Irwin, T.H. Indianapolis, 
IN: Hackett Publishing Company.
Kirkpatrick, D.L. and Kirkpatrick, J.D. (1994) Evaluating Training Pro-
grams. San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler Publishers.
Vanthournout, D., Olson, K., Ceisel, J., White, A., Waddington, T., 
Barfield, T., Desai, S. and Mindrum, C. (2006) Return on Learning – 
Training for High Performance at Accenture. Chicago, IL: Agate.
3.6 The benefits of secondments
‘A change is as good as a rest.’
(Proverb)
Why
Your team can be your learning channel and secondments are 
a good way to become familiar with other departments, learn 
different ways of working and sometimes appreciate that 
you are doing a good job. One opportunity that secondments 
afford is the chance to understand the organisation in a more 
holistic manner. How does one department affect another? How 
do our actions impact on others? That alone can assist more 
collaborative working. Another opportunity is for your staff to 
experience different management cultures. Large organisations 
in particular may have departments that are quite disparate in 
nature; however, it can mean that certain departmental cultures 

Big picture
99
may be more suited to certain personalities than others. As such, 
if there has been a personality clash within your department a 
secondment can afford the necessary space, may result in a 
better fit and might ultimately mean that a good member of staff 
is not lost to the organisation as a whole.
Business brief
Reasons for secondments have been divided by McKenzie (2003) 
into five key areas: (i) secondments can be developmental and thus 
mutually beneficial to the secondee and the two departments 
(the one left and the one entered); (ii) secondments might be 
strategic, for example when a department needs a particular skill 
and someone is brought in to fulfil that need temporarily; (iii) they 
may be an alternative to a tribunal; (iv) they may be an attempt 
to keep a valued worker within an organisation; or (v) they may 
be a form of transition to support with redundancy. Whatever the 
reason, the development of skills is a large part.
Bond (2002) and Critchley (2002) identified nine benefits of 
secondments on the nursing profession: security, enablement, 
career enhancement, opportunity, networking, diversity, 
motivation education and nurture.
View secondments as an excellent opportunity to progress the 
skills set of your staff, as well as retain their loyalty.

Developing staff
100
Reflection
• How did it work?
Try this
If a member of staff is considering a secondment be very clear 
about the following:
	 1.	 Where they will be working and any new regulations they 
may need to meet.
	 2.	 How long the secondment is to be for.
	 3.	 What skills they will learn/offer.
	 4.	 Who will replace them in your department.
	 5.	 Whether the secondment can be terminated early in the 
event of any issues.
	 6.	 What those potential issues may be.
	 7.	 Whether they need extra training or insurance and whether 
this affects their pay, holiday entitlement and other 
statutory benefits.
	 8.	 Who will deal with supervision/appraisals/disciplinary 
issues.
	 9.	 How they will be re-integrated back into the original 
department.
	10.	 How the organisation will learn from the shared experience.

Big picture
101
• What will I do next time?
References
Bond, P. (2002) Changing places, Nursing Management UK, 9(8), 
12–16.
Cambridge Dictionaries Online (2015) http://dictionary.cambridge.
org/dictionary/english/a-change-is-as-good-as-a-rest (retrieved 
August 2015).
Critchley, D. (2002) Second sight, Nursing Management UK, 9(7), 
12–13.
McKenzie, J. (2003) Secondment Benefits, McKenzie and Associates 
website, www.secondments.com (retrieved July 2015).
3.7 Ask, don’t assume (2)
‘Don’t make assumptions. Find the courage to ask questions 
and to express what you really want. Communicate with others 
as clearly as you can to avoid misunderstandings. With just this 
one agreement, you can completely transform your life.’
(Don Miguel Ruiz, 2015)
Why
People change and it can be a long time between appraisals to 
find out why a previously motivated worker now seems to be 
disheartened, or a heretofore quiet worker is suddenly becoming 
more active, if you do not ask. Often when you choose to 
assume it is because you don’t want to know the answer, and 
yet communicating openly may reveal the reality to be less 
problematic than what you have been assuming and enable a 

Developing staff
102
shared solution to be generated. Or it may simply be arrogance 
that is making you assume – in which case you are more than 
likely to be wrong!
Business brief
In any conversation it is important to realise that there are four 
levels of listening (Starr, 2011). These may be described as follows:
Cosmetic – where the listener is not really engaged, but nonetheless 
makes the right sort of noises: ‘uh-huh’, ‘mm’ and so on.
Conversational – where there is a level of engagement in the 
conversation.
Active – where the listener asks questions and probes further. 
They may also paraphrase and summarise statements back 
to the speaker.
Deep – This is the level of listening that goes beyond what is 
actually being said. It can include noticing body language, or 
repetitive phrases, or changes in tone which can all prompt the 
listener to enquire further into a particular area.
(Starr, 2011)
The more you are able to engage deep listening the more you will 
learn about your team. Even something that you think you know 
about a team member can be challenged when addressed directly 
as body language can betray the words spoken. Even if you are 
worried about the answer, it is always best to ask the question 
and then listen – with your ears and eyes.

Big picture
103
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
Try this
	 1.	 Practise deep listening – outside the workplace as well as 
within. Like any skill, it can only be developed with use.
	 2.	 Take opportunities to talk with your staff, even if it is 
only small talk. This can go some way to establishing 
rapport and building trust so that when you need to talk 
about something significant it is not a daunting prospect. 
(However, avoid over-familiarity as it is important to retain 
your professionalism.)
	 3.	 If the situation arises where a serious or difficult conversation 
needs to take place, consider having it in a neutral location 
rather than your office as it offsets the perception of power.

Developing staff
104
References
Ruiz, D.M. (2015) The Four Agreements, A Toltec Wisdom Book, 
ExpressionsofSpirit.com, http://www.expressionsofspirit.
com/4-agreements.htm (retrieved August 2015).
Starr, J. (2011) The Coaching Manual. Harlow: Pearson.

Motivating staff
 4.1	
Be aware that not everyone won’t care as much as you
 4.2	
Extrinsic motivation (theories and practice)
 4.3	
Intrinsic motivation (theories and practice)
 4.4	
What do you believe about your team?
 4.5	
The truth behind team building
 4.6	
Emotional labour
 4.7	
Making meetings motivational
Chapter 4

Motivating staff
106

Speed read
4.1 Be aware that not everyone will care  
as much as you
As a manager, you are closer to the organisational values 
and vision than your team. People are motivated to work for 
different reasons. Some work to live and they will be extrinsically 
motivated – mainly by money or time off. Others may have a 
greater intrinsic drive, especially if they are in an organisation with 
in which they hope to progress. By moving into a management 
role, you too have an intrinsic drive, but just remember not all of 
your team will. Motivation is about having a variety of methods 
to encourage and inspire, and if you can get your team engaged 
on a project-by-project basis (even if they are not engaged with 
the organisation as a whole), that’s a bonus.
Speed Read
4. Motivating staff
Do this
Make a list of all the things that have motivated you in the past – 
do one of them for your team tomorrow!

Motivating staff
108
4.2 Extrinsic motivation (theories and practice)
Incentives such as pay, time off in lieu (TOIL), or other benefits 
may motivate your team to perform efficiently and effectively, 
but should those incentives be stopped or changed, a rapid 
decline in productivity often follows. While extrinsic motivating 
factors are effective for new staff or those who ‘work to live’, they 
are less successful in inciting those who have a passion for their 
vocation or have chosen the organisation within which they wish 
to progress. They are also sometimes out of your direct control 
and therefore could become a false promise. A mixture of extrinsic 
and intrinsic motivation is required at all times – not just when you 
want something done!
4.3 Intrinsic motivation (theories and practice)
Intrinsic motivation can be as simple as praise, recognition and 
acknowledgement. Opportunities to develop as well as the offer 
of support or the knowledge that help is there should your staff 
need it can be very motivating. Intrinsic motivation penetrates 
the core of why someone wants to work, and is what drives them 
when all other circumstances seem less than positive. However, it 
is most often overlooked and once it wanes, your best staff leave.
Do this
Ask yourself – and be honest – do you only motivate your staff 
when you want something? Choose another thing off the list 
you’ve just made (above), and do it . . . just because.

Speed read
109
 4.4  What do you believe about your team? 
 Actors and sports stars are only as good as their last performance. 
Unfortunately humans have a tendency to ‘compartmentalise’ 
and you may find you are labelling a team member unfairly just 
because of something they said or did – which you may even have 
perceived incorrectly. If this affects your behaviour towards them 
(positively or negatively) it can affect your relationship with them, 
 Do this 
 Ask your staff to write down on Post-its what they love about 
their jobs . . . get them to stick them up on the office door or 
noticeboard. 

Motivating staff
110
and may even sometimes impact on your relationship with the rest 
of your team. You might be labouring under a misapprehension – 
look at your beliefs and assumptions and test them every so 
often! 
 4.5  the truth behind team building 
 You don’t need to go white-water rafting or change tyres on F1 cars 
to ensure you have a motivated team. It’s not so much the task as 
the day-to-day (emotional) investment you have in your team that 
counts! ‘Team days’ can sometimes be viewed with suspicion – as 
if ‘that’s the manager paying lip service to team building’. This is 
especially so in a team that is already dysfunctional. However, 
behaviour is dynamic, and although it can take time, attitudes can 
change . . . but not as the result of one day, no matter how thrilling. 
Building a team relationship is the same as any relationship – it’s 
the little, seemingly insignificant things that count, and these 
mount up. It is also those very things that can tip the balance if 
your staff consider leaving for another job.  
 Do this 
 Write down one assumption you have about your team members, 
then look for evidence to support or refute it. Challenge your 
own thinking. 

Speed read
111
4.6 Emotional labour
Motivating a team also requires emotional support for the 
manager – be mindful of your own support needs and network. 
Interpersonal relationships are important in successful team 
management, but they can be one-sided. You may feel that 
you are giving support, advice and motivation and getting little 
in return. What you are most likely receiving is productivity 
and success in your department because your team is feeling 
positive – and that is as it should be. Your team, however, are not 
there to make you feel loved. If you think of emotion as water, 
and yourself as a sponge, having to contain the anxieties of your 
team, of course means you too need emotional support . . . a sort 
of metaphorical hug. That, however, must come from personal 
resilience, colleagues or your own line management, not your 
team or the interpersonal balance can be detrimentally shifted.
Do this
Reflect on ‘team days’ you have enjoyed. Identify what made 
them special. Use that as your guide when planning the next 
one.
Do this
Identify who you turn to when you need support. If the list is 
empty, fill it with at least one name . . . it can even be someone 
from a social media network such as LinkedIn.

Motivating staff
112
4.7 Making meetings motivational
Meetings are a great opportunity to brief, troubleshoot and 
motivate, but all too often they are considered by all to be a waste 
of time. Yet, if a meeting is clearly organised (time, date, venue, 
agenda) with a workable format and a strong chair, it can be one 
of the most positive parts of a day.
Do this
Look at your last meeting agenda. Does it allocate an amount of 
time to discuss each point? If so, did you stick to these? When 
you put together the agenda for your next meeting, assign 
realistic times to each point and be strict about moving through 
the list – if necessary, arrange a time for after the meeting to 
expand on matters that need to be discussed with the relevant 
people.

Big Picture
4.1 Be aware that not everyone will care  
as much as you
‘Anger, resentment and jealousy doesn’t change the heart of 
others – it only changes yours.’
(Sharon L. Alder, 2011)
Why
If you remain aware of the fact that not everyone cares as much 
as you then you are better placed to look for creative forms of 
motivation rather than being upset that your initial attempts are 
having little effect. (Negativity consumes a lot of brain power and 
creativity and is therefore unproductive.) Motivation, as with all 
behaviours, is dynamic and therefore what may motivate someone 
at one time may not at another. It is best to try to encourage 
your team to engage with the project or task they are doing as 
completion will be its own reward, but this is not always possible. 
Also, never forget that just because you think a task is exciting, 
that doesn’t mean the person doing it will agree!
4. Motivating staff

Motivating staff
114
Business brief
Theories of motivation range from being money orientated, e.g. 
Taylor (1911) or McGregor’s Theory X ([1966] 2006), to more 
personal incentives, e.g. having social needs met (Mayo [1933] 
2003), self-actualisation (being the best you can be) (Maslow, 
1967), or McGregor’s Theory Y ([1966] 2006), and the creative 
manager uses a mixture of them all. A bonus (especially if it is not 
perceived as significant) will not motivate a disheartened worker 
in the same way as praise and acknowledgement might, and a 
team member who needs the money won’t necessarily care if the 
task you give them is meaningful as long as it enables them to 
work the extra hours. However, if you can convince them of the 
importance of their role within the wider organisation, you will 
find that motivation becomes less important than recognition and 
acknowledgement of performance.
Try this
	 1.	 Find out what incentives you are able to offer (e.g. time off 
in lieu, flexi hours, bonuses, cake or treat funds).
	 2.	 Find out what drives your team and try to motivate them 
accordingly.
	 3.	 Ask colleagues about their approaches to motivation – what 
works, what doesn’t.
	 4.	 Ensure that you know the significance of all your team 
members within the wider organisation – and tell them!

Big picture
115
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
Alder, S.L. (2011) 300 Questions to Ask Your Parents Before it’s too 
Late. Springville, UT: Horizon.
Maslow, A.H. (1967) A theory of metamotivation: the biological 
rooting of the value-life, Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 7(2): 
93–127.
Mayo, G.E. ([1933] 2003) The Human Problems of an Industrial Civili-
zation. London: Routledge, reprint.
McGregor, D. ([1966] 2006) The Human Side of Enterprise. New York, 
NY: McGraw-Hill Professional, reprint.
Taylor, F.W. (1911) The Principles of Scientific Management. New 
York, NY and London: Harper & Brothers.
	 5.	 Praise and acknowledge good work. Be present within your 
team so you know when to reward them.

Motivating staff
116
4.2 Extrinsic motivation (theories and practice)
‘Motivation is everything. You can do the work of two people, 
but you can’t be two people. Instead, you have to inspire the 
next guy down the line and get him to inspire his people.’
(Lee Iacocca)
Why
Extrinsic motivation is any motivation that comes from outside 
the individual. This can include money, time, promotion and also 
praise and recognition – even though the latter are more personal. 
Often extrinsic motivation is the dominant motivator for finding 
a job in the first instance, and these strategies are therefore the 
ones that you will often consider first.

Big picture
117
Business brief
It is too easy to think that if someone is being paid to do something 
that is motivation enough. Praise and recognition are also 
motivators. They are the easiest to give, yet they are most often 
overlooked. In a study conducted among members of staff regarding 
their relationships with their manager, common responses were:
‘No-one notices what I do until I’m not there – then they have 
a go that things aren’t done.’
‘When you do a good job, it doesn’t matter, but if you make a 
mistake, they are on top of you for ages.’
‘Once a manager even said to a team “You get so many cards 
and emails from people – they come to me, so you don’t ever 
get them. But you’re doing a good job.” I know what he was 
trying to say – but WHY don’t they ever get them? If he hadn’t 
turned up for the last five minutes of their training session – 
and even then we had to force him there – they would never 
have known.’
‘It was like she had just gone round everyone to make sure she 
said something, it was like “Thank you for showing up.”’
(Tang, 2012)
Get praise right, and you’ll be rewarded in performance.
Try this
	 1.	 Interpersonal motivations such as acknowledgement 
through comments, emails, cards or perhaps a ‘cake Friday’, 
whether from yourself, colleagues or clients, should always 
be shared.
	 2.	 Include a ‘celebration’ section in team meetings or briefings, 
making appreciation habitual.
	 3.	 As a general rule, make praise public but discipline private – 
however, you need to know your team. If some team 
members are easily embarrassed or are always receiving 
praise, tell them that is why you are praising them in private!

Motivating staff
118
 Reflection 
 •  How did it work? 
 
   4.   Any time you need to reiterate rules, remind your team  why 
those rules are in place. 
 5.  Find out your remit for offering financial and working time 
rewards, but use them sparingly. 
 6.  Be present – know what is happening in your team and 
acknowledge the performance as well as any improvement. 
If you need to, keep your own record of who has been 
praised and look for ways to praise others who haven’t had 
recognition for a while. 
 7.  Be genuine in your praise. There is nothing worse than praise 
for praise’s sake. 

Big picture
119
• What will I do next time?
References
Iacocca, L. (1986), Iacocca: An Autobiography. New York, NY: Bantam.
Tang, A. (2015) Love’s Labours Redressed, Reframing Emotional 
Labour. Saarbrücken: LAP Lambert Academic Publishing.
4.3 Intrinsic motivation (theories and practice)
‘You can motivate by fear and you can motivate by reward. But 
both these methods are only temporary. The only lasting thing 
is self-motivation.’
(Homer Rice, cited in Corbin et al., 2014)
Why
While people are drawn to organisations for extrinsic reasons 
(money, career development, recognition), their choice of 

Motivating staff
120
organisational field is often more intrinsic. Therefore they have 
often applied for a job which they not only feel they can do, but, 
to a great extent, want to do. This means that if the job is due to 
change, unless the change is desired or understood, motivation 
is easily affected.
Business brief
Menzies Lyth (1960) conducted a study on nurses working in a 
ward of terminally ill patients. In order to ‘protect’ them against 
the emotional pressures of the job, management implemented 
changes such as rotating nurses on a regular basis so that they 
were unable to form too great an attachment to their patients, 
and encouraged them to refer to patients not by their name but 
by their illness. This completely contradicted the very reasons 
why the nurses had entered the caring profession in the first 
place and had a negative effect on motivation and performance. 
While thinking they were acting in the best interests of their staff, 
the management had got it very wrong.
The study may have been carried out some decades ago, but the 
point remains valid: that, too often work-based decisions still get 
made by those who do not engage in the practice on a regular 
basis. Learn what the job means from those doing it – or do it 
yourself for a while!
For a great video on how to help staff stay intrinsically motivated, 
check out FISH! Philosophy at http://www.fishphilosophy.com/.
Try this
	 1.	 Rather than thinking you know best, speak to your team to 
try to generate solutions for problems (the ‘Thinking Hats’ 
technique at the end of this chapter may help). Be clear with 
restrictions, i.e. if you cannot do something, make that clear.
	 2.	 If a change needs to be made to the role of one of your 
team members, make sure your team understand why 

Big picture
121
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
this change is necessary in terms of the bigger picture. If 
a change negatively affects how someone does their job, 
they are better able to accept it if they understand it is for 
the ‘greater good’.
	 3.	 Cutting costs is not usually accepted as part of the ‘greater 
good’ unless you can show it is the only way for everyone to 
retain their jobs.
	 4.	 If you are changing a job description, then make sure this 
is also done through HR. If it is possible to add an extrinsic 
incentive to soften the blow, this can sometimes help the 
period of adjustment.
	 5.	 Monitor changes to the job, and do not be too proud to 
change them again if they are clearly not working out 
(following steps 1–4 to do so).

Motivating staff
122
References
Corbin, C., McConnell, K., Le Masurier, G., Corbin, D.E. and Farrar, T.D. 
(2014) Health Opportunities Through Physical Education with 
Web Resources. Pudsey: Human Kinetics Publishers.
FISH! Philosophy (n.d.) http://www.fishphilosophy.com/ (retrieved 
August 2015).
Menzies Lyth, I. (1960) Social systems as a defence against anxiety, 
Human Relations, 13, 95–121.
4.4 What do you believe about your team?
‘Begin challenging your own assumptions. Your assumptions 
are your windows on the world. Scrub them off every once in a 
while, or the light won’t come in.’
(Alan Alda, 2006)
Why
Performance is dynamic, and you need to be working with what 
you see at the present time rather than on past experience. If you 
don’t, then some of your team may feel unsupported, while others 
may receive favourable treatment for things they have not done. 
While it is most likely that a team member who has performed 
well in the past will continue to do so, if you work on assumption 
rather than what is happening you may miss when a good team 
member is struggling, or when someone suddenly finds a task 
very easy and excels at it.

Big picture
123
Business brief
‘The most successful people need your support and development 
too  – they won’t always ask  . . .  don’t let the reasons you 
hired them be the very reasons they leave’ (Tang, 2015). Past 
performance can be a predictor of future behaviour, but it is a 
fallible one. It is better to be aware of patterns of performance 
and seek to test your perceptions through discussion with your 
team, or with others with whom they have worked. Note your 
own responses too. Do you always respond to someone who 
calls loudly – if so, are you neglecting others? Are the people 
staying below the parapet truly happy or are they looking for 
an escape route? Is your team’s behaviour a reflection of your 
own? Remember that we are fundamentally egocentric and 
automatically only see things from one perspective, and to get 
a better idea of the full picture we need to look more widely. 
If you ignore the person who seems quiet, you may lose them 
to another organisation. If you are constantly trying to help the 
one who shouts the loudest, the chance to empower them gets 
smaller. If a high flier seems to be doing ok – just take the time 
to double check that this is the case.
Try this
	 1.	 Remain approachable and listen to your team when they 
choose to talk to you.
	 2.	 Remember that when someone (especially someone 
very capable) asks for help it is often because they have 
struggled silently for some time!
	 3.	 Be aware that high fliers can need help, and it is far more 
important to retain them rather than those who simply 
shout the loudest – whom you may never please anyway!
	 4.	 Remember that the reason why you don’t delegate jobs that 
you wouldn’t do yourself is partly because sometimes you 
may need at least the basic knowledge to teach others.

Motivating staff
124
	 5.	 If you notice that someone is excelling at a task, acknowledge 
it and use the opportunity to update their TNA. Look for 
more opportunities to involve them in that area in future if 
they are enjoying it.
	 6.	 Remember that sometimes people fall into team roles not 
because they enjoy them, but out of habit.
	 7.	 Ultimately, remain aware!
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
Alda, A. (2006) Never Have Your Dog Stuffed and Other Things I’ve 
Learned. New York, NY: Random House.
Tang, A. (2015) Blog post, High fliers need your helping hand too, 
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/channel/leadership_and_man-
agement (retrieved August 2015).

Big picture
125
4.5 The truth behind team building
‘If you want to build a ship, don’t drum up people together to 
collect wood and don’t assign them work . . . teach them to 
long for the endless immensity of the sea.’
(Antoine de Saint-Exupery)
Why
Team building days, while often enjoyable at the time, and clearly 
sometimes an investment, do little more than energise staff 
temporarily. This certainly gives the impression that the working 
environment is positive and often means that any cracks are papered 
over for a while. However, in the long term, if a team is dysfunctional 
this needs to be addressed, and a team building day that focuses 
on ‘having fun’ alone is not going to do it, but may simply put off 
the inevitable breakdown a while longer. What you need to do is 
understand the foundation of a team – the common goal. Then get 
your team to respect each other and each other’s skills, recognising 
that they need to work together to achieve what they want. The 
premise behind ‘team building days’ is simple – it is not about individual 
tasks and jobs, but everyone wanting that project to succeed.
Business brief
If a dysfunctional team falls within any of the five areas identified 
by Lencioni (2002) – see Chapter  2 – it is obvious that a ‘fun day’ 
is not going to address the problem. While Sherif et al.’s (1954) 
‘Robbers’ Cave’ experiment found that conflict can be broken down 
by forcing people to work together (on a task they can succeed in), 
seeing their behaviour, engaging in guided reflection on the reasons 

Motivating staff
126
for this behaviour and how it is perceived, and discussing how they 
can move through the conflict is the only way to build a team.
Try this
	 1.	 Sometimes a ‘listening event’ – especially in a dysfunctional 
team – is of more help at first. However, the ‘Thinking Hat’ 
technique (section  4.7) could be used to avoid the event 
becoming a ‘moan fest’.
	 2.	 An immersive learning option is to try one of the ‘Exit Games’ 
events that take place all over the country (see www.
exitgames.co.uk). In these events, groups of two to ten 
people are put in a room together from which they have to 
escape within 60 minutes. The activity itself, with the stress 
involved in working under time pressure, is enough to reveal 
the different communication styles of the participants, but in 
addition, all participants are watched (and with permission can 
often be recorded) on video camera. At the time of writing A 
Great Escape in Bletchley, UK and Pfeffermind Games running 
‘Mission Accepted’ in Berlin, Germany, currently offer the only 
CPD accredited ‘Escape Package’ where teams engage in the 
activity and then have the opportunity to watch and reflect on 
their performance through a guided debrief and training session.
	 3.	 Nevertheless, if you are running a team building day, 
remember that it is an investment. If you have been slipshod 
with the venue, the refreshments and the activities, it 
speaks volumes about how much you value your team!

Big picture
127
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
de Saint-Exupery, A. (n.d.) BrainyQuote.com, http://www.
brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/a/antoinedes121261.html 
(retrieved August 2015).
Lencioni, P.M. (2002) The Five Dysfunctions of a Team: A Leadership 
Fable. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
Sherif, M. (1954) Experimental study of positive and negative inter-
group attitudes between experimentally produced groups: Rob-
bers’ Cave Study, cited in Sherif, M., Harvey, O.J., White, B.J., Hood, 
W.R. and Sherif, C.W. (1954/1961) Study of Positive and Negative 
Intergroup Attitudes Between Experimentally Produced Groups: 
Robbers Cave Study, (10). Norman, OK: University Book Exchange.
www.agreatescaperoom.com
www.exitgames.co.uk and www.thelogicescapesme.com (the UK’s 
most informative websites on the growing phenomenon)
https://www.cpdstandards.com/providers/?s=21190 (accredited 
Teambuilding activity link)

Motivating staff
128
4.6 Emotional labour
‘If your emotional abilities aren’t in hand, if you don’t have self-
awareness, if you are not able to manage your distressing 
emotions, if you can’t have empathy and have effective 
relationships, then no matter how smart you are, you are not 
going to get very far.’
(Daniel Goleman, 2005)
Why
It is the role of your managers to replenish your emotional store, or 
to contain your anxieties. However, this does not always happen. It 
is not advisable to expect partners or families to be the sounding 
board for your concerns because they do not know first-hand how 
you do your job. The most common response if you complain a lot 
about work is ‘Well, just leave!’ Too often you do not want to leave, 
but you do, however, want things to improve.
Business brief
Arlie Russell Hochschild (1983) defined emotional labour as any job 
that requires one to put on a bodily display of emotion that may 
meet the expectations of others, but is in conflict with what one is 
really thinking and feeling. The manager is an emotional labourer. 
You will need to be supportive when you may feel frustrated, or 
nurturing in the face of unkindness. You cannot seek your emotional 
support from your team, but you do need emotional support from 

Big picture
129
somewhere. If you think of emotion as a sponge – and as a manager 
a part of your job involves containing the anxieties of your team – at 
some point you will need to release it or you will no longer be able to 
do your job effectively. Conversely, if you see emotion as a supply 
which keeps diminishing as you expend it, it needs to be recharged.  
 try this 
 1.  Draw a line down the middle of the gingerbread man. 
 2.  On the left-hand side (inside the shape) write down all the 
things that you feel about your job – good and bad. 
 3.  On the right-hand side (outside the shape) write down all the 
things you would LIKE to feel about your job. 
 4.  On the left-hand side (outside the shape) identify the people 
who could help you turn the negative things (inside left) to 
the positive (outside right). 
 5.  On the right-hand side (inside the shape), put together a 
plan of action of the things you will do to feel more positive. 
(No more than five things  – otherwise you will become 
overwhelmed and not do them!) 
 6.  Seek solace and support in colleagues  – ideally those 
of similar status to you as they will understand your 
experiences and concerns. Further, you are likely to be able 
to help them in return! 

Motivating staff
130
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
Goleman, D. (2005) Emotional Intelligence: Why it can Matter More 
than IQ. New York, NY: Bantam Books.
Hochschild, A.R. (1983) The Managed Heart. Berkeley and Los Ange-
les, CA: University of California Press. 

Big picture
131
4.7 Making meetings motivational
‘If you had to identify, in one word, the reason why the human 
race has not achieved, and will never achieve, its full potential, 
that word would be “meetings”.’
(Dave Barry, 1999)
Why
If your own reaction to meetings is ‘Oh what a waste of time’, 
at least you are now in a position to change them. Meetings are 
an opportunity to meet face to face with the majority of your 
team, and therefore the best way to make sure information is 
communicated and discussed. However, they usually fail because 
of poor management. Many staff feel meetings are a waste of 
time, yet they needn’t be.
Business brief
Once you have your time, venue, cakes/biscuits, agenda and 
attendees, you need to structure the meeting itself. First, you 
must ensure there is a strong chair who can keep time. Do not 
over- or underestimate the times stated on your agenda. What’s 
more, USE your agenda as a working document – it’s not there just 
for show, so stick to the times and topics!
The small points can often be worked through quickly, but there 
will always be areas that require a lot of discussion.

Motivating staff
132
Edward de Bono (1985) used ‘Thinking Hats’ as a method of 
evaluation and analysis, and it is a system that can be applied to the 
more contentious meeting topics or during a ‘listening event’.  Each of 
the six hats is a different colour and is used to represent the nature 
of the discussion at that point in time e.g.: The white hat represents 
facts; the red – feelings; the black – cautions; the yellow – benefits; 
the green – ideas (or creativity) and the blue hat represents action 
(or process). The chair can use each hat to shape the discussion and 
move it along. The chair should time the use of each hat, and not 
allow hats to be merged, e.g. ‘We are now moving onto the “black 
hat” – I would like you to raise all negative aspects surrounding the 
issue within the next three minutes. If you do not raise it now, you will 
NOT get another chance as we will move onto the next hat.’
Using hats or not, being strict with timing and explicit with your 
instruction that concerns should be raised now rather than later, 
enables the group to speak at a time when things can be done 
(rather than whinge later at the water cooler). Be firm on times 
and, in addition, empower your team to generate solutions after 
they have aired their feelings.
Whatever your tools to structure a meeting, the key is to remain 
on time and generate solutions, and a structure facilitates this.
Try this
	 1.	 If this meeting is following a previous one, make sure 
the minutes are circulated in good time after the original 

Big picture
133
Reflection
• How did it work?
meeting (ideally while your team can still remember what 
was discussed).
	 2.	 Send out your requests for agenda topics early enough for 
people to think about them. If there is a contentious point, 
make sure that you say the meeting will include it.
	 3.	 Once you have the agenda, make sure you estimate your 
times as accurately as possible.
	 4.	 Ask for apologies and set the date/time/venue so your 
team can plan.
	 5.	 See if your budget will cover refreshments – even a simple 
packet of biscuits can say something about your appreciation.
	 6.	 Start on time – if need be, swap minor agenda items if 
someone essential to one of the points is late.
	 7.	 Use the Thinking Hats or a similar tool to structure the 
discussion of contentious points or problems.
	 8.	 Stick to your times for each agenda point – and always allow 
time for solutions to be generated.
	 9.	 Thank your team for attending and ensure the minutes are 
typed up, approved by you and circulated for approval within 
two days of the meeting.
	10.	 Action solutions generated where possible, and keep your 
team updated.

Motivating staff
134
• What will I do next time?
References
Barry, D. (1999) Dave Barry Turns 50. New York, NY: Ballantine Books 
Inc.
de Bono, E. (1985) Six Thinking Hats: An Essential Approach to  
Business Management. New York, NY: Little, Brown, & Company.

Delegation
 5.1	
Make sure the task is one you CAN delegate
 5.2	
Choose the right person to delegate to
 5.3	
Communicate the task effectively
 5.4	
Allow appropriate time
 5.5	
Offer appropriate support
 5.6	
Let the task get done (don’t micro-manage)
 5.7	
Delegation as a development tool (praise and appraise)
Chapter 5


Chapter title
 5.1  Make sure the task is one you CAN delegate 
 Delegation is a necessity. It is a way of developing your team as 
well as ensuring your own work is completed. The art of delegation 
merits a chapter to itself as new managers often struggle with 
it, and getting it right – or wrong – makes a great impact on staff. 
Successful delegation is about knowing  what to delegate as well 
as  how.  Common mistakes new managers make range from one 
end of the spectrum (delegating too small, or too menial, a task) 
to the other (delegating something which should not be delegated 
at all). The other consideration is whether you have the personnel 
who actually have the skills to  do the task. Whether you delegate 
a task to your team, to another department or to colleagues, the 
point is not to rid yourself of your responsibility for the job, but 
rather to formally engage others to get the job done. 
 SPeeD reAD 
 5. Delegation 
 
 Do this 
 Can you identify your fears about delegating? How many can 
you substantiate? This chapter is all about getting delegation 
right – so read on. 

Delegation
138
 5.2  Choose the right person to delegate to 
 Once you have decided whether a task can, or should, be 
delegated, the next decision is choosing the right person for 
the job. Delegation is a means to develop your team, enabling 
them to consider the roles of management. It is a way for you to 
demonstrate your trust in them, as well as a means of reducing 
your own workload in order to concentrate on other matters. The 
person you choose needs to be capable of doing the task (or able 
to learn), and needs to be of appropriate authority depending on 
the nature of the task to be delegated.  
 5.3  Communicate the task effectively 
 Delegation is not just saying ‘Here’s the project, off you go’. That 
is not because your team won’t understand the job, but rather 
because they may not understand exactly what you want and 
what your standards are – in the same way that two people 
may have two completely different perspectives of the same 
 Do this 
 List the jobs you need to delegate and the options for delegation. 
Match them up. (Visual representations often help clarify your 
thinking.) 

Speed read
139
situation. Even if you are not sure what you want, if you at least 
know what you do not want, then make that clear. A little time 
and effort spent in explaining your expectations will make a huge 
difference (personally, professionally and in performance) in the 
long run. 
 You asked for a ‘cake’ . . . which did YOU expect? 
 5.4  Allow appropriate time 
 While you may have your concerns about the deadlines you 
have been given, try to protect your team from them. If you 
know a task will take you a certain amount of time to complete, 
 
 
 Do this 
 Ask the person to whom you delegated the task to complete 
the form when they in turn delegate the same task to 
someone else. 

Delegation
140
do not expect it to be done in much less by someone else, 
especially if you are delegating it to someone who may have 
less experience than you. If you are delegating something to 
someone for the first time, build in ‘check in’ time, just in case 
more help is needed than you first considered. Alternatively, if 
someone seems to be approaching the task very confidently – 
for example, because they have experience that you do not – 
then allow them less time, but remember to check in and keep 
an eye on progress.
Do this
With each task you delegate, base the time frame on how long 
you would take to complete the task. If you are delegating the 
task to someone with around the same level of experience, allow 
them a similar amount of time. If they have less experience, 
allow them more time.

Speed read
141
 5.5  Offer appropriate support 
 ‘My door is always open’ is not only vague, but often untrue. To 
get support ‘just right’ is hard. Set aside specific time for a face 
to face ‘check in’ on the task, and also be available for quick 
questions. Ask your team to prepare the questions prior to their 
meeting with you – not only does this ensure that everything 
is discussed in an efficient manner, but it is good practice of 
other management skills that your team can develop. Resist 
the temptation to solve any issues on your team’s behalf, 
but support them, perhaps through coaching questions  (see 
 Chapter  3  ). If you have to intervene, then make it clear why you 
are doing so.  
 Do this 
 Set clear times for your team to feed back to you and keep those 
times free. (If no-one calls, use this time as ‘team development 
time’ to evidence their appraisals or find appropriate training 
courses for them.) 

Delegation
142
 5.6  Let the task get done (don’t micro-manage) 
 If intervention at an earlier point  (see  section  5.5 ) was 
unnecessary, and you are confident that the job will be done well, 
then let your team do it. There is nothing more disheartening for 
your team – or time wasting for you – than micro-management. Of 
course the task will ultimately be your responsibility, but so was 
the delegation of it. If you’ve done that correctly, the task itself 
should be easy to sign off. 
 Do this 
 If you feel the urge to micro-manage, visit this webpage  now : 
 Open Letter to Micromanagers by Scott Berkun ( http://
scottberkun.com/2009/letter-to-micromanagers/ ). 

Speed read
143
5.7 Delegation as a development tool  
(praise and appraise)
Once the task is done offer feedback to your team, and pass on 
any praise from higher sources. Never forget that it is no longer 
the ‘doing’ of the job that showcases your skill, but the ‘getting 
it done’. Praise your team, keeping note of their success for the 
appraisal process. Find the time to debrief them on the task 
and ask them what they enjoyed, which areas they would like to 
develop in and whether they would wish for a similar opportunity 
should it arise. Not only are you up-skilling your workforce, but 
you are also encouraging your team to take an active approach 
to their professional development. This can only benefit future 
performance. Getting a job is not the end, it is the beginning – help 
your team navigate their path within your organisation.
Do this
If you have delegated all your tasks, you can work on your own 
development. Return to your three-point goal in section  1.7 and 
move onto point 2!


5. Delegation
5.1 Make sure the task is one you CAN delegate
‘You can delegate authority, but you cannot delegate 
responsibility’
(Byron Dorgan, cited in Maxwell, 2014)
Why
Delegation is another means of communicating within your 
organisation and it will be judged by your team and colleagues in 
the same way as your other behaviours. If you do not delegate you 
will not have the capacity to complete the tasks that you have, 
which can, in turn, negatively impact on your behaviour within 
the workplace. Further, you also deny yourself an opportunity to 
develop the skills of your team, which helps you fulfil another 
element of your role  – moving your department forward. An 
organisation that is not progressing is stagnating, and appropriate 
delegation is one way of driving it on.
Business brief
Managers often allow their egos to prevent them from delegating 
and, when they realise they cannot possibly hold onto every 
task that needs to be done, they delegate poorly. This may be 
because they have assigned a task that either gives the team 
the impression that they are being ‘stitched up’ or, alternatively, 
is one that in reality can only be done by the manager. Having to 
ask for a task back after realising that it cannot be done without 
breaching confidentiality does not do much for your credibility. 
Big Picture

Delegation
146
Breaching a psychological contract through poor delegation is also 
a huge contributor to workplace cynicism due to the questions it 
raises about the integrity of the people involved (Johnson and 
O’Leary-Kelly, 2003), e.g. ‘My job description states a commitment 
to developing my skills, but instead I’m writing a checklist of the 
items the client should have delivered.’ It would be better to 
delegate the task of writing to the client to request the delivery 
checklist while agreeing a new system so the oversight does not 
recur. This is a more meaningful task than simply writing a list and 
allows negotiation skills to be developed.
Try this
If you have taken heed of the previous chapters (and in 
particular section  1.2), this task is quite easy – you already 
know what your job entails. It is therefore easy to decide which 
current tasks can be delegated, and assess incoming work 
with the same consideration.
A rule of thumb is:
• If the task contains confidential information it cannot be 
delegated.

Big picture
147
 •  All other tasks can. 
 • Proviso (a) to the above – always bear in mind that 
delegation is a development tool. If clearing out the 
stock cupboard is not fun for you, it certainly will not 
be fun for the person who could be your successor . . . 
on the other hand, however, ‘managing the stock levels’ 
may well be interesting. 
 • Proviso (b) to the above  – you will not always be 
delegating to your immediate team. Are other 
departments better placed to assist you with the task?   
 • Always remember delegation  develops others and 
supports your workload  – it should never be about passing 
the buck to someone else. 
 See delegation as a fundamental part of your job description 
and perfect the art. 

Delegation
148
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
Johnson, J. and O’Leary-Kelly, A.M. (2003) The effects of psycholog-
ical contract breach and organizational cynicism: not all social 
exchange violations are created equal, Journal of Organizational 
Behavior, 24, 627–647.
Maxwell, J.C. (2014) Good Leaders Ask Great Questions: Your Founda-
tion for Successful Leadership. Nashville, TN: Center Street.
5.2 Choose the right person to delegate to
‘The conventional definition of management is getting work 
done through people, but real management is developing 
people through work.’
(Agha Hasan Abedi, cited in Anderson, 2013)

Big picture
149
Why
Delegation involves (i) getting a job done, and (ii) developing the 
skills of your team. When done correctly it demonstrates trust 
and ensures development as well as a high level of performance. 
Asking someone to do a task that they have already proven they 
can do makes sense because the work will be done quickly and 
done well. However, this does not progress their skills. Asking 
someone to do a task in which they have no experience will 
develop their skills, but it may take longer, and they may need 
extra support so as to not feel they have been ‘set up to fail’. In 
the short term who you choose to delegate to may depend on 
factors such as available time and personnel, but even with those 
constraints, if you know your staff (and their workplace needs) 
and know your job, it is a highly effective way to get tasks done to 
a high level of performance, and will strengthen your team whilst 
enabling personal and departmental growth.
Business brief
This chapter starts with the presumption that you are planning on 
delegating – or rather, planning your delegating! Schriesheim et al. 
(1998) found that if a delegated task was perceived as ‘dumping’ it 
resulted in lower extrinsic satisfaction at work. In today’s current 
job climate, there is an abundance of highly qualified graduates, 

Delegation
150
but not a lot of jobs (Bloomberg Business Insider and multiple 
2015 news reports). Therefore staff development is ever more 
important. However, rather than cynically developing your team 
so that they don’t go somewhere else for a better deal, seize 
this opportunity to nurture this abundant talent into your own 
high fliers. ‘Nothing engages someone like having trust placed in 
them . . . Trust is the most compelling form of human motivation, 
and delegation is a practice that demonstrates trust’ (Covey, 
2013). However, trust relies on you having a firm belief in the 
ability of the person to do the job. Trust is demonstrated by tasks 
that engage, not those that could be done by just about anyone. 
Trust entails ensuring the person you are entrusting with the task 
has the tools to succeed. Trust is mutual. With the potential for 
such empowerment, delegation should not be taken lightly.
Try this
When choosing the person/department to delegate to:
	 1.	 Be aware of the options available to you. This means 
considering the other departments within your organisation 
as well as your own team. Even if you do not use outside 
staff, you might be able to use their materials.

Big picture
151
Reflection
• How did it work?
	 2.	 If you have little time available and you know your delegate 
is good at the task explain this to them. Then look for 
opportunities to develop the skills they wish to develop the 
next time round.
	 3.	 If you are using delegation to develop your team, be aware 
that you may need to offer support which means you 
need to have the time available to do it. If you can spare 
a staff member then having the learner shadow the more 
experienced employee may be an option. This has the added 
bonus of allowing the ‘expert’ to develop their mentoring 
skills within a task that they are already familiar with.
	 4.	 If you are delegating a ‘menial’ task acknowledge this, and 
try to avoid having to do so again in the future by asking the 
delegate to develop a better system. This will make the task 
more engaging, and again will allow your staff member to 
develop problem solving skills.
	 5.	 Remain aware of what your team wants. If a team member’s 
wants and your needs are a close fit, delegation is where the 
two overlap.

Delegation
152
• What will I do next time?
References
Anderson, C. (2013) 16 Management Quotes from the Top Managers in 
the World, SmartBusinessTrends.com, http://smartbusinesstrends.
com/16-management-quotes/ (retrieved August 2015).
Covey, S.M.R. (2013) Podcast interview transcribed: https://www.
entreleadership.com/articles/how-to-delegate#sthash.IDIIsIA4.
dpuf (retrieved August 2015).
Schriesheim, C.A., Neider, L.L. and Scandura, T.A. (1998) Delegation and 
leader-member exchange: main effects, moderators, and measure-
ment issues, Academy of Management Journal, 41(3), 298–318.
5.3 Communicate the task effectively
‘Cyclops, you asked about my famous name . . . my name is 
Nobody.
‘Polyphemus roared “Nobody is killing me, my friends” . . . 
‘They answered him . . . “well then, if nobody is hurting you . . . it 
must be sickness given by great Zeus, one you can’t escape.”’
(The Odyssey, Homer)
Why
The arguably overused training exercise where one person describes 
a picture that the other has to draw demonstrates that ‘circle 
shaped head’ (or other descriptive term) can mean one thing to 
one person and something very different to another. In delegating 

Big picture
153
your task you need to make your expectations, standards of 
quality and deadlines clear. This is especially so if you have not 
previously delegated this particular task to anyone before or if you 
are delegating to a new or untried person or team. In the latter 
case, the person or team in question may use a process or method 
to complete the task that conflicts with your own. Make sure that 
you know what you are getting by making your wishes clear.
Business brief
Parsons (1998) states that effective delegation is highly correlated 
to job satisfaction and common complaints include poorly defined 
tasks and poor planning from the management. When faced with 
the unknown it is natural for people to feel apprehensive, mainly 
because they do not want to fail. Therefore, when delegating it is 
your responsibility as manager to make the pathway to success clear. 
This is only possible if you know what your desired outcome is and if 
the basic resources are in place to achieve it. This may include people 
with the correct skills, or the correct equipment. Of course people 
can be highly ingenious so it is possible to succeed without the latter, 
but if you are going to attempt this, at least make it clear beforehand 
that problem solving of this nature is to be part of the delegated task.
Try this
A little extra effort in the early stages of delegation can 
prevent problems in the later stages – when there is less time 
to fix them.
	 1.	 Know the outcome that you want – ‘completed’ is too vague 
a term.

Delegation
154
Reflection
• How did it work?
	 2.	 If you do not have time to explain (and even if you do) write 
your list of expectations so it is easy for your delegate to 
refer to them.
	 3.	 If possible, give an example of the finished product or 
outcome.
	 4.	 Make sure you set clear boundaries. If you are happy for your 
delegate to take their own initiative, then let them know. If 
you would rather they didn’t, then make that clear too.
	 5.	 Explain what materials are available for use and if innovation 
of any kind is required.
NB: If the delegate does act on their own initiative or uses any type 
of innovative thinking or method, then be sure to acknowledge this 
and praise them for it.
	 6.	 Ensure your timeline (including the times for ‘checking back’ 
on progress) is unambiguous.
	 7.	 ALWAYS take time to double check if your delegate has 
any questions before and during the task. Establish which 
means of communication should be used and ensure you are 
available to answer any questions they may have. 

Big picture
155
• What will I do next time?
References
Homer (n.d.) The Odyssey, Classics.mit.edu, http://classics.mit.edu/
Homer/odyssey.html (retrieved August 2015).
Parsons, L.C. (1998) Delegation skills and nurse job satisfaction, 
Nursing Economics, 16(1), 18–26.
5.4 Allow appropriate time
‘If you don’t have time to do it right, when will you have time 
to do it over?’
(John Wooden, cited in ESPN.com, 2010)
Why
Giving someone too much or too little time to do a task can 
damage performance. Too much and they may be tempted to 
wait until the last minute and rush it, too little and they may feel 
overwhelmed. If you have already considered the person and their 
level of experience along with the resources they will have at their 
disposal you should be able to assign a realistic time frame to 
the task. It is even easier if you have a frame of reference, i.e. 
how long the task has taken previously. The time frame required 
is particularly pertinent to justify if the task is supplementary to 
your delegate’s everyday duties.

Delegation
156
Business brief
The SMART approach to goals was defined by Doran in 1981. The 
acronym stands for:
• Specific
• Measurable
• Attainable
• Relevant
• Time-bound
It is time that is of interest in this chapter. The T in SMART 
originally stood for ‘time-bound’, but recent use of the acronym 
has often substituted the word ‘timely’ (e.g. Haughey, 2014). This 
does not create the sense of urgency that ‘time-bound’ does, 
and so is best avoided. Doran (1981) states that if a time frame 
is specified then the mind is already primed to consider the task, 
thus making your delegate more proactive in their focus. ‘Timely’ 
on the other hand suggests that as long as it is done ‘in good 
time’ everything will be fine. This defeats the purpose of having 
SMART-defined goals in the first place. Effective delegation does 

Big picture
157
Try this
	 1.	 Be aware of the final deadline YOU need to meet.
	 2.	 Ask your delegate what they believe would be a realistic 
time frame within that boundary.
	 3.	 Build in extra time for a face to face check in (Use your 
judgment when deciding how much time to allow – you know 
the task, the person and their materials.)
	 4.	 Allow at least a day (more if the task is bigger) for someone 
who has the mind-set of a ‘completer finisher’ to consider 
the task (Belbin, 1981).
	 5.	 Never forget that you retain ultimate responsibility for the 
end product.
not have room for vagueness, and neither do your staff . . . or your 
success as a manager!

Delegation
158
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
Belbin, M. (1981) Management Teams. London: Heinemann.
Doran, G.T. (1981) There’s a S.M.A.R.T. way to write management’s goals 
and objectives, Management Review (AMA FORUM), 70(11), 35–36.
ESPN.com (2010) John Wooden’s greatest quotes – the wizard’s wis-
dom ‘Woodenisms’, Sports.ESPN.go.com, 5 June, http://sports.espn.
go.com/ncb/news/story?id=5249709 (retrieved August 2015).
Haughey, D. (2014) Smart Goals, Projectsmart.co.uk, http://www.
projectsmart.co.uk/smart-goals.php (retrieved July 2015).
5.5 Offer appropriate support
‘My success was due to good luck, hard work, and support 
and advice from friends and mentors. But most importantly, it 
depended on me to keep trying after I had failed.’
(Mark Warner, cited in Saeks, 2010)

Big picture
159
Business brief
Chapman (2012) listed a set of ten levels of delegation, from ‘Do 
as you are told’, to ‘Decide what action needs to be taken and 
manage the situation accordingly’. There is no hard and fast rule 
to the amount of support given on a delegated task – your job is to 
know the needs of your delegates, choose the most appropriate 
level and be prepared to adapt as you proceed. Delegation has 
certain similarities with situational leadership (Blanchard et al., 
1985) and you must choose whether to ‘Tell’ (or direct the task), 
Why
Although one of your key duties is ‘getting the job done’, a skilled 
manager is as much a team leader as an expert on the process 
of completing the task. A good manager will know their team 
and will work with people as individuals, rather than just issuing 
directives. Someone new to a task will need more guidance than 
someone with a lot of experience; you may wish to extend the 
remit of more experienced staff members and delegate them 
more challenging tasks. Successful performance is achieved 
through understanding the person and their knowledge of, and 
ability to perform, the process. Of greatest benefit to you will be 
communicating with your delegate and figuring out how much 
guidance they will require.

Delegation
160
‘Sell’ (or coach the task), get ‘Participation’ (merely support the 
task) or ‘Delegate’ (leave the entire task to the delegate). Be sure 
not to confuse this meaning of the verb ‘delegate’, as used in 
Blanchard’s work, with the more general use and the way we are 
using it in this book, i.e. assigning all or part of a task to someone 
and supporting them to do the work effectively. This requires you 
to have a good understanding of your team. This is key to your 
ability to delegate successfully. Further, as delegation is about 
empowerment, resist the temptation to solve any problems 
should the delegate get stuck. Instead use coaching techniques 
(Chapter 3) to help them come up with solutions, while being on 
hand to assist with this if necessary.
Try this
	 1.	 Ask your delegate how much support they think they will 
need, timetable it in and review it regularly.
NB: If your delegate thinks they will need a lot of support but 
you believe they need less, have the first meeting with them as 
scheduled, praise them for what they have achieved so far and then 
suggest a longer gap before the next catch-up. If you insist from 
the beginning that your own suggested timetable for meetings is 
correct, your delegate may feel undermined (and in any case you 
may be wrong!). If the situation is the reverse (you believe they need 
more support than they think they do) then an early review date is 
only sensible and should not be postponed.
	 2.	 Ask your delegate what support they will need and provide 
it.
	 3.	 Ensure you have an accessible (and monitored) means of 
communication should extra help be needed.
	 4.	 Use coaching questions to assist in the first instance when 
help is required.

Big picture
161
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
Blanchard, K.H., Zigarmi, P. and Zigarmi, D. (1985) Leadership and the 
One Minute Manager: Increasing Effectiveness through Situa-
tional Leadership. New York, NY: Morrow.
Chapman, A. (2012) Delegating Authority Skills, Tasks and the Pro-
cess of Effective Delegation, Businessballs.com, www.business-
balls.com/delegation.htm (retrieved July 2015),
Saeks, F. (2010) Superpower! How to Think, Act, and Perform with 
Less Effort and Better Results. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.

Delegation
162
5.6 Let the task get done (don’t micro-manage)
‘Even if you are 30% better at a task than someone who works 
for you, the time it takes for you to check on them every few 
hours and demand approvals over trivial decisions, costs more 
in morale, passion for work and destruction of self-respect 
among your staff than the 30% you think you’re adding.’
(Scott Berkun, 2009)
Why
One of the biggest complaints from staff is that they do not 
feel trusted to do the jobs they have been asked to do. If you 
have chosen your delegate correctly, and you have allowed 
sufficient time and offered the appropriate support, why are 
you still involved in the task? Why are you not using your (now 
freed up) time to complete your other work, or starting to move 
your department forward? The point of delegation is not doing 
the task yourself. If you are hanging onto the task you need to 
ask yourself why.

Big picture
163
Business brief
Our own fear of failure, classified as a specific phobia in the DSM 
IV (APA, 1994), can often result in us sticking to tasks we know we 
can do. Vygotsky’s (1978) theory of learning suggests that people 
learn through the guidance of a ‘more knowledgable other’ (MKO) 
who can support the learner from the known to the unknown. In 
the case of delegation and your team, the MKO is you. But what 
about when it’s just you? Unfortunately managers don’t always 
have someone looking out for them, so you need to be your own 
guide. If you are aware that you are micro-managing, ask yourself 
‘Why am I doing this?’ If the answer is ‘Because my delegate is 
failing’ then readdress sections  1–5 in this chapter. If it is ‘Because 
I don’t want to let go’, cut those strings – you’re a manager now!
Try this
	 1.	 Always bear in mind your skills set is focused on 
‘co-ordinating the process’ not ‘doing’ it. Your abilities are 
assessed according to how well you have delegated.
	 2.	 Ask yourself why you are micro-managing and take steps to 
solve it.
	 3.	 Read the rest of Scott Berkun’s Open Letter to Micro­
managers and ask yourself how you would feel if you were 
the person being micro-managed.
	 4.	 Identify what your fears are about the job – see if they can 
be addressed without the need for micro-managing.

Delegation
164
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
American Psychiatric Association (APA) (1994) Diagnostic and Statis-
tical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th edn. Washington, DC: APA.
Berkun, S. (2009) An Open Letter to Micromanagers, Scottberkun.
com, http://scottberkun.com/2009/letter-to-micromanagers/ 
(retrieved August 2015).
Vygotsky L.S (1978), Mind in Society: Development of Higher Psycho-
logical Processes, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Big picture
165
5.7 Delegation as a development tool  
(praise and appraise)
‘Our work is our most important resource to develop our 
people.’
(Jim Trinka and Les Wallace, 2015)
Why
Recognising and praising the efforts of your team reinforces the 
knowledge that you had trust in them and they came through for 
you. This will give them confidence in future tasks. In addition,  it 
means that as you pass more of your work onto them, you can 
acquire new work for yourself. You are developing your staff, and 
they in turn are allowing you the freedom to develop yourself and 
your department. Praise and recognition can be given immediately 
and in an informal manner; they can also be given more formally 
through the appraisal process. The latter is important because it 
is a chance to put on the record what your staff have been able 
to achieve. When you do so, take care to be specific with your 
congratulations.
Business brief
Halvorson (2011) in the Harvard Business Review said one of the 
most effective ways to become more successful is to be specific 
with our goals. If your delegates have succeeded in planning and 

Delegation
166
executing an event for 300 people, be specific when praising 
them – it will sound a lot better than ‘they hosted a nice party’. We 
are not very good at being specific at defining our goals, perhaps 
because we do not always know what we want, but when a goal 
has been achieved it is easy to break down each element and 
frame it as a skill that has been attained. Your praise following 
the successful completion of a clearly delegated task should be 
specific and involve quantification and, if necessary, comparison. It 
is good practice for you to do this as a manager as your team may 
not be as good at doing it themselves. Quantifying and praising 
exactly what has been achieved addresses both the delegate who 
is too modest as well as the one who is too arrogant.
Try this
	 1.	 Informally praise successes as you see them
	 2.	 Formally break down what has been done and include it as 
skills attained in your staff member’s next appraisal.
	 3.	 Ask them what they would like to develop further and look 
for opportunities to progress this.
	 4.	 Implement those opportunities and update your team’s 
TNA/appraisal form.
Reflection
• How did it work?

Big picture
167
• What will I do next time?
References
Halvorson, H.G. (2011) Nine things successful people do differently, 
HBR.org, http://hbr.org/2011/02/nine-things-successful-people 
(retrieved July 2015).
Trinka, J. and Wallace, L. (2015) Leadership Quotes, Govleaders.org, 
http://govleaders.org/quotes.htm (retrieved August 2015).


Troubleshooting
 6.1	
Responding to a complaint
 6.2	
Investigating a complaint
 6.3	
Don’t go it alone (but be discerning about who you 
involve)
 6.4	
Managing challenging conversations
 6.5	
Whistleblowing
 6.6	
Managing the organisational grapevine
 6.7	
Dealing with bad publicity
Chapter 6


Chapter title
 6.1  Responding to a complaint  
 Prevention is always better than cure, but inevitably you will need 
to deal with complaints. These can stem from within your team, 
or from your client base. See the complaint as an opportunity – 
the complainant chose to talk to you first instead of voting with 
their feet. While it is never pleasant to receive criticism, how you 
respond can retain, gain or lose loyal custom. Knee-jerk reactions 
are often not appropriate and being too quick to change something 
following a singular complaint may risk upsetting others. When 
dealing with complaints remain calm and open minded and treat 
the process as an investigation. 
 SPeeD ReAD 
 6. Troubleshooting 
 
 Do this 
 Next time you receive a complaint, extract the FACTS and start 
investigating from there. 

Troubleshooting
172
 6.2  investigating a complaint 
 When investigating a complaint start from a neutral standpoint, 
and if you cannot do that, ask someone else to investigate or go 
over your findings with you. Employing a technique such as the 
‘5 Whys’ is useful in getting to the root of the complaint. Fixing 
the issue at the root will be more effective than managing the 
symptoms as it will prevent recurrence. 
 6.3  Don’t go it alone (but be discerning 
about who you involve) 
 If you need support with your investigation, or if the investigation 
reveals something that you are not sure how to address, seek 
support from other management colleagues or your Human 
Resources (HR) department. Don’t allow your pride to compromise 
an already delicate situation. Ask for help if you need it, but 
 Do this 
 If, during your investigation, you ask ‘Why?’ and the reply is ‘I don’t 
know’, take a leaf from coaching  ( section    3.2  )  and say ‘Imagine 
if you did’. 

Speed read
173
remember to involve the appropriate people. Not only is turning an 
investigation into organisational grapevine fodder embarrassing 
for those involved, but it can cause you problems on the legal 
front as well. 
 6.4  Managing challenging conversations 
 If a challenging conversation needs to happen, have it as soon as 
possible before the issue requires more than just a conversation. 
Be sure of your facts, and bring in a neutral person (such as a 
member of HR) if you feel that you will be affected emotionally. 
Allow the person with whom you are having the conversation to 
bring someone as well. Arrange a convenient time for all parties at 
a neutral place, and follow the simple steps within the ‘Big picture’ 
section. 
 Do this 
 Identify who you know that could help you with an investigation. 
Keep this list handy. 

Troubleshooting
174
 Do this 
 Refer to the list you just made  ( section   6.3 ). Could any of those 
people be your ‘neutral’? 
 6.5  Whistleblowing 
 If your team or your clients cannot talk to you, make sure they can 
talk to someone – and someone who isn’t the media. Anonymous 
feedback or suggestion boxes (that people know exist!) are a 
way of encouraging a climate of reporting especially when there 
is a huge emphasis placed on meeting targets. It takes a lot of 
courage for someone to speak out against an organisational 
culture. However incredulous you may be, take the act seriously. 
A genuine injustice will come out no matter how much you try to 
hide it – don’t let cover-ups be at the expense of people! 
 
 

Speed read
175
Do this
Read your whistleblowing policy, and make sure your team know 
who they can talk to – if not to you.
6.6 Managing the organisational grapevine
The organisational grapevine has its benefits, as long as you take 
the rumours with a pinch of salt. However, if you hear discussion 
about something under your control the best plan is to address 
the issue by being open and transparent. Communicate. It is 
always better that information comes from YOU as you know it 
is accurate. (But it never hurts to hear what the gossip is either. 
Don’t add to it, but be aware you may need to correct it!)
Do this
Think back to the last thing you heard on the organisational 
grapevine – who was it from and how much of it was true? Bear 
this in mind for future rumours.

Troubleshooting
176
 6.7  Dealing with bad publicity 
 It is always a shame when a complaint finds its way into the public 
domain – but with the amount of review sites available online it is 
almost inevitable. Do not get drawn into an argument – address the 
complaint when you find out about it, investigate it and respond 
to the facts in an explanatory rather than a defensive manner. If 
there are complete untruths or clear misunderstandings within 
the statement present these from your point of view and offer 
to make amends within your remit. Try to speak to the person 
directly as a genuine complainant may have suggestions for 
improvement but, again, do so with a neutral observer. Don’t forget 
that sometimes people just enjoy complaining and an unfounded 
complaint may need to be described as such. 
 
 Do this 
 Try NOT to google yourself! 

6.1 Responding to a complaint
‘You can’t heal what you don’t acknowledge.’
(Jack Canfield, in Minow, 2012)
Why
A genuine complaint can be seen as receiving an opportunity to 
make amends. Rather than ignoring the problem and moving their 
custom, or, in the case of a member of staff, leaving the company, 
the complainant has given you an opportunity to right the 
perceived wrong. Even if you are unable to address the complaint 
in full immediately, show your appreciation by acknowledging 
receipt at once. Feeling unheard can be frustrating, and the longer 
it goes on, the more time you are leaving for the complainant to 
create scenarios in their head – most of them unpleasant for you.
Business brief
‘Complaining is hard to avoid, but try to do it with a purpose,’ writes 
Alina Tugend (2013) in The New York Times. The best type of 
complaint foregoes the ‘whiney, entitled air’ (Bowen, 2013) and is 
clear about the desired solution. Those are the type of complaints 
to treasure because they not only move you to act, but also indicate 
what you can do to please the complainant. Unfortunately, the 
purpose of most complaints is to vent rather than rectify (Tugend, 
2013), but that doesn’t mean you respond any differently. Thank 
the person for bringing it to your attention (note that sometimes 
complaints are indirect, e.g. ‘I’m a bit warm’ rather than ‘Can you 
6. Troubleshooting
Big Picture

Troubleshooting
178
turn off the heating, please?’), and act on it. Investigate, conclude 
and report back. Meanwhile, also try to encourage your staff to be 
specific with their complaints or concerns.
Try this
	 1.	 Always acknowledge receipt of a complaint, and if you 
cannot respond directly, state exactly when the complainant 
will receive their response. (This may be directed by your 
policies, but good practice is within 14 days.)
	 2.	 Begin your investigation ensuring you seek only to discuss 
the facts of the matter.
	 3.	 Produce your report and response in a timely manner – 
bearing in mind that you may need to show your response 
to those you have spoken to within the investigation before 
sending it to the complainant.
	 4.	 If the complaint is unfounded, be clear in your reasons why 
and signpost the complainant with regards to taking the 
matter further.
	 5.	 Make sure you have documented your process according to 
your ‘dealing with complaints’ procedure.

Big picture
179
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
Bowen, W. (2013) A Complaint Free World, Will Bowen.com, http://
www.acomplaintfreeworld.org/ (retrieved September 2015).
Minow, N. (2012) Interview: ‘Chicken Soup’s’ Jack Canfield about his 
new book on tapping into ultimate success, beliefnet, August, 
http://www.beliefnet.com/columnists/moviemom/2012/08/
interview-chicken-soups-jack-canfield-about-his-new-book-on-
tapping-into-ultimate-success.html (retrieved September 2015).
Tugend, A. (2013) Complaining is hard to avoid, but try to do it with 
a purpose, The New York Times, 3 May, http://www.nytimes.
com/2013/05/04/your-money/the-satisfaction-and-annoy-
ance-of-complaining.html (retrieved September 2015).

Troubleshooting
180
6.2 Investigating a complaint
‘This act of complaining . . . is a symptom not the disease 
itself. Just as the severity of a medical complaint should be 
measured not by how loudly it draws attention to itself but by 
the extent to which the body is really damaged, so we should 
not mistake the loudness of a complaint for its seriousness.’
(Julian Baggini, 2008)
Why
The act of investigating is fraught with emotion. Whether valid or not, 
complaints immediately trigger a feeling of defensiveness. If you, or 
others, are in a position of defensiveness, this hinders finding out 
if there really is a problem that needs to be addressed. If you can 
remove the emotion – from your own perception as well as those you 
wish to involve in your investigation – you will make better progress 
in identifying the facts and solving the problem.
Business brief
Baggini (2008) advises that the act of complaining or ‘just saying/
observing/other-polite-means-of-raising-the-point’ occurs when 
the person moved to speak feel that things are not as they ‘should 
be’. However, the way that the complainant chooses to express 
themselves may vary according to their perception of the event, 
their communication preferences and what the act of complaining 
means to them. For Baggini, some people ‘are never happier than 
when they get the chance to complain, while others are deeply 

Big picture
181
unhappy . . . but just accept it’. The fact that a complaint has 
arrived means you need to investigate it, and do your best to see 
through the surrounding ‘white noise’.
Root cause analysis is a technique used widely within engineering 
which offers a structured, and unemotional, approach to 
investigation. It usually includes five steps:
Step 1.	 Define the problem
Step 2.	 Collect data and information about the problem
Step 3.	 Identify all possible causes of the problem
Step 4.	 Based on the above, identify the root cause  – the 
singular cause that gave rise to everything else
Step 5.	
Recommend and implement solutions for tackling the 
problem at the root.
(Mindtools, Root Cause Analysis, 2015)
Using these steps will enable you to structure a full explanation of 
your findings and what you intend to do which you can then feed 
back to the complainant.
Try this
When you receive a complaint:
	 1.	 Acknowledge receipt at once and give a reasonable time 
frame for your response.
	 2.	 Try to remove the emotion from the situation by listing the 
facts of the case.
	 3.	 Once you have the facts present them to the relevant 
parties, making time for a meeting with them if necessary. 
Be sure you do not assign blame  – every party to the 
investigation must feel that this is simply fact-finding.
	 4.	 If necessary remind each party of the need for confidentiality.
	 5.	 Use root cause analysis techniques  – e.g. explore the 
responses given by each person by using the ‘5 Whys’ (i.e. 
asking ‘Why?’ five times).

Troubleshooting
182
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
Baggini, J. (2008) Complaint: From Minor Moans to Principled 
­Protests. London: Profile Books.
Mindtools (2015) Root Cause Analysis, Mindtools.com, http://www.
mindtools.com/pages/article/newTMC_80.htm (retrieved August 
2015).
	 6.	 Collaborate to find solutions.
	 7.	 Frame your response to the complainant with an explanation 
of why the issue occurred and what you are going to do 
about it.
	 8.	 If appropriate allow the parties to the investigation, as well 
as HR, to see your response before you send it, and make 
sure you do so within the time frame set.

Big picture
183
6.3 Don’t go it alone (but be discerning  
about who you involve)
‘Schadenfreude: a feeling of pleasure or satisfaction when 
something bad happens to someone else.’
(Cambridge Dictionaries Online, 2015)
Why
It is important to involve others in your investigation. These 
include the people to whom you are speaking directly (or those 
whom you are investigating), as well as one or more members of 
HR, a line manager or, if appropriate, a union representative. It is 
important that you stress the importance of discretion and remind 
everyone involved of company policy on confidentiality during 
investigations. Discretion is essential because investigations can 
be embarrassing for those involved – especially if they involve a 
suspension. Further, it is a natural reaction to feel relief (if not 
pleasure and satisfaction) at someone else being the subject of 
a complaint and not you. This can lead to gossip and must be 
carefully managed.
Business brief
As part of your investigation, you may need to request employee 
files from HR, seek advice from a union or even ask a union 

Troubleshooting
184
representative to attend any necessary meetings. It is worth 
reminding everyone concerned of the need for discretion, 
especially when bringing members of your own team into the 
investigation. Gossiping about something confidential may be 
seen as a human need: ‘Gossip builds social bonds because shared 
dislikes create stronger bonds than shared positives’ (Gueret, 
2011). Therefore, whenever someone knows something that 
others do not, it may be tempting for them to wield this power 
in order to manipulate social bonds to their own advantage. 
While gossip may not in itself be harmful, it can provide evidence 
of harassment or discrimination, it can be detrimental to the 
investigation and it is also unproductive (West Virginia Employment 
Law Letter, 2008). Always make sure to remind your team of the 
need for professionalism and discretion.
Try this
	 1.	 Ensure your investigation occurs in a private setting and 
that all records are kept confidential.
	 2.	 Remind those involved of the need for discretion.
	 3.	 Reassure those you speak to that this is an investigative 
process and not a witch hunt.
	 4.	 Be aware of exactly who you have involved in the investigation 
so you know who to meet with if word spreads.
	 5.	 Should word get out, it is best to call a meeting with 
everyone, explain the negative impact of gossip and outline 
the consequences should it continue. This does not mean 
that you should threaten your team. Rather, explain to them 
the risks of the whole department becoming accountable 
simply for having engaged in idle chatter.

Big picture
185
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
Cambridge Dictionaries Online (2015), http://dictionary.cambridge.
org/dictionary/english/schadenfreude (retrieved August 2015).
Gueret, C. (2011) Why we love to gossip, Psychologies Magazine, 
December, https://www.psychologies.co.uk/self/why-we-love-
to-gossip.html (retrieved August 2015).
West Virginia Employment Law Letter (2008) What can HR do about 
workplace gossip?, HR Hero Line, 4 April, http://www.hrhero.
com/hl/articles/2008/04/04/what-can-hr-do-about-workplace-
gossip/ (retrieved August 2015).

Troubleshooting
186
6.4 Managing challenging conversations
‘The single most important thing [you can do] is to shift [your] 
internal stance from “I understand” to “Help me understand”. 
Everything else follows from that.’
(Patton et al., 2000)
Why
As with the section on responding to a complaint in a timely manner, 
if a conversation needs to happen and it is put off, the matter 
can escalate. Similarly to investigations, the secret to managing 
a difficult conversation is to manage the emotional impact on you 
and those with whom you are having the conversation.
Business brief
In the first instance, ACAS (Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration 
Service) prefers to reframe the term ‘difficult’ as ‘challenging’. 
They emphasise the importance of remaining in control of your 
emotions and the situation in order to address the matter and 
generate solutions so that all parties may move forward positively.
They offer excellent guidance in easy-to-follow downloadable 
handouts for a number of workplace scenarios including 
‘challenging conversations’. In summary they propose a focus on:

Big picture
187
1.	 Facing the problem
2.	 Containing the problem
3.	 Remaining in control of the problem
(ACAS, 2014)
In facing the problem, you first must be sure that you are the right 
person either to deal with the matter or escalate it if not. What 
will help is your knowledge of any relevant HR procedures and 
policies and not being afraid to seek support if necessary. You 
need to deal with the issue in a timely manner communicating 
with all relevant parties along the way.
The key is to remove the fear of ‘challenging conversations’ by 
focusing on the facts and working with the parties to generate 
a solution.
To contain it, remain discreet and professional and ensure that 
records are made and kept accurately and confidentially. To 
remain in control, seek support from HR, as well as reflect on your 
own emotional concerns with regards to undertaking challenging 
conversations.
Try this
	 1.	 Acknowledge that difficult (or challenging) conversations 
are part of your working life, and reflect on your reasons for 
worrying about them.
	 2.	 Arrange a time and private venue for the conversation that 
are convenient for all parties concerned.
	 3.	 If necessary ask someone neutral to be present when you 
have a challenging conversation, and allow the other 
party or parties to be accompanied by someone they 
trust too. Ask for feedback and observations on your 
performance.

Troubleshooting
188
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
	 4.	 Always open with the facts of the issue – and stick with 
them. Exploring the facts may reveal other issues that need 
to be addressed but again, make sure it is the facts that you 
record for further investigation.
	 5.	 Plan your conversation so that all points you need to cover 
are covered.
	 6.	 Seek solutions from the parties to the conversation – try not 
to focus on getting your ideas accepted as your perspective 
may differ from that of the people directly involved.
	 7.	 Implement the solutions and monitor them for success – 
praising the new status quo.

Big picture
189
References
ACAS (2014) Challenging Conversations and How to Manage Them, 
ACAS.org.uk, http://www.acas.org.uk/media/pdf/0/d/Chal-
lenging-conversations-and-how-to-manage-them.pdf (retrieved 
August 2015).
Patton, B., Stone, D. and Heen, S. (2000) Difficult Conversations: How 
to Discuss What Matters Most. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
6.5 Whistleblowing
‘One thing I learned as a journalist is that there is at least one 
disgruntled person in every workplace . . . and at least double 
that number with a conscience.’
(Michael Moore, 2011)
Why
Whistleblowing can be categorised as ‘internal’  – reporting 
suspected misdemeanours within the organisation – or ‘external’ – 
reporting the same to the press or other public bodies. Organisations, 
of course, much prefer internal whistleblowing. The only way 
to encourage reporting is to create a culture where people are 
free to talk without fear of reprisal. People often do not feel at 
liberty to talk because the simple act of reporting something can 
sometimes result in a black mark against the person who made 
the report. This is when you need to ask yourself what value you 
place on the truth.
Business brief
Whistleblowing can conjure up a wealth of emotions. It can be 
perceived as a betrayal, with the whistleblower a traitor to the 
organisation, rather than as an essential act for the greater good 
(Larmer, 1992). The fear of reprisal is great, and the media is quick 
to publish stories of whistleblowers who have faced persecution 
in the workplace. Rowe (1993) found that staff were more likely to 
report wrongdoing if there was a choice of confidential methods. 

Troubleshooting
190
Suggestion boxes, automated software (where forms are 
uploaded and processed by a complaints team rather than the line 
manager) or someone outside the department with a link to HR are 
just some of those options. It is important to ensure all your team 
recognise that you do not condone unethical behaviour, but until 
you know about it, you cannot respond. Maintaining open dialogue 
is better than placing a great weight on blowing the whistle.
Try this
	 1.	 Continue to state your values and make it clear that (even if 
reporting affects targets) you would rather be made aware 
of issues than not.
	 2.	 Encourage your team to raise any concerns even if they end 
up unfounded.
	 3.	 Be extra aware when sentences begin ‘This probably sounds 
silly . . . ’.
	 4.	 If investigation is not merited, take the time to explain to the 
person raising the concern why this is the case, and take 
steps to avoid that misunderstanding from recurring.
	 5.	 Should there be a number of reports, act on them by carrying 
out root cause analysis in order to identify the root of the 

Big picture
191
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
problem and generate meaningful solutions which you must 
then implement.
	 6.	 Familiarise yourself with the number of methods that your 
staff can use if they are unhappy and cannot speak with you 
about the issue.
	 7.	 Remind staff that even though the initial contact may be 
confidential, when the issue is investigated, those involved 
will have a right to know who raised it in the first instance. 
However, ensure them that there will be no reprisals – and 
make sure this turns out to be the case.

Troubleshooting
192
References
Larmer, R.A. (1992) Whistleblowing and employee loyalty, Journal of 
Business Ethics, 11(2), 125–128.
Moore, M. (2011) Here Comes Trouble. New York, NY: Grand Central 
Publishing.
Rowe, M. (1993) Options and choice for conflict resolution in the 
workplace, in Hall, L. (ed.) Negotiation: Strategies for Mutual Gain. 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications, Inc., pp. 105–121.
6.6 Managing the organisational grapevine
‘Gossip, as usual, was one-third right and two-thirds wrong.’
(L.M. Montgomery, 1988)
Why
As discussed in section 6.3, while gossip is something that is 
regularly engaged in, it is not productive and can result in negative 
consequences. However, especially in larger organisations, the 
grapevine is a useful companion to the more formal channels of 
communication. Although flavoured by perception and opinion, news 
travels much faster through the grapevine than by any other method. 
There is no preventing it, but it is wise for you to take the information 
you hear with a pinch of salt and advise your team to do the same.
Business brief
Lorette (2015) says that the ‘grapevine allows feelings to be 
expressed instead of bottled up. People need to talk about what 
is affecting them . . . If managers can tap into the grapevine, they 
can learn a substantial amount about the issues and problems of 
their employees.’ Use the grapevine as a starting point for open 
dialogue with your team about any issues they may be having. 
Lorette (2015) goes on to say that much of the information on 
the grapevine is true but may be skewed. Think of the grapevine 
as the Mogwai – embrace it, but do not always believe it . . . and 
certainly do not feed it after midnight.

Big picture
193
Try this
	 1.	 Explain to your team that you are aware of the organisational 
grapevine, but remind them that information is likely to be 
unreliable. If they are concerned about anything they hear, 
encourage them to speak to you about it.
	 2.	 If there is a rumour that needs to be addressed do so 
as quickly and as openly as possible – ideally with your 
whole team. Make sure that any follow-up information, or 
a summary given later to anyone not present at the time, 
comes directly from you or else the sense may get twisted 
in transmission.
	 3.	 If you hear something on the grapevine that you think is 
a matter of concern, raise it with the people involved and 
explain how you heard it. If they do not know they are the 
subject of gossip, they may be pleased with the heads up.
	 4.	 Do not spread anything that you hear on the grapevine!

Troubleshooting
194
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
Lorette, K. (2015) The importance of the organisational grapevine in 
internal business communications, Small Business Chron, http://
smallbusiness.chron.com/importance-grapevine-internal-busi-
ness-communications-429.html (retrieved August 2015).
Montgomery, L.M. (1990) Chronicles of Avonlea. London: Bantam 
Books.

Big picture
195
6.7 Dealing with bad publicity
‘Above all, to thine own self be true.’
(William Shakespeare, Hamlet, Act 1, Scene 3)
Why
Thanks especially to the internet, bad publicity – true or not – 
can spread quickly and easily, and can damage your business or 
reputation within seconds. The most important weapon you can 
use is communication. Address each complaint through a focus on 
the facts. If the criticism is unfounded, say so. Most importantly, 
remember that no matter how reasoned your approach and how 
valid your explanation, with the reach of the internet, someone is 
likely to take umbrage. As long as you feel that your integrity has 
not been compromised, there is no more you can do.
Business brief
The service recovery paradox is a business phenomenon where 
if a client or customer perceives a service error to be minor 
and/or not directly attributable to the organisation, and the 
organisation is able to deal with it, then the loyalty of that client 
or customer is greater than if the error had not occurred (Magnini  
et al., 2007). Therefore, not only is it right to address complaints 
professionally, but there is benefit in doing so as well.

Troubleshooting
196
Try this
	 1.	 Before responding, check the facts. If there are inaccuracies, 
contact the person who reported the situation and make 
this clear – but do not discuss anything further.
	 2.	 Respond as soon as possible to present a public statement 
that answers all issues raised.
	 3.	 Make sure that your own HR and management are aware of 
the situation and support your actions.
	 4.	 Make sure that your team does not speak to the press 
without your permission.
	 5.	 If an apology is needed, make one (note that you may need 
to exclude accepting liability).
	 6.	 If a criticism is unfounded explain why, but do so openly with 
evidence rather than defensively with attitude.
	 7.	 If appropriate and within your remit, offer to make amends.
	 8.	 Show that you have learned from the situation and state 
the steps being taken to rectify the situation and measures 
implemented to make sure it does not occur again.
	 9.	 If possible take steps so that new good publicity outshines 
the bad.

Big picture
197
 Reflection 
 •  How did it work? 
 
 DO NOT: 
•  Go on an internet rant venting your frustrations IN CAPS! 
•  Reply to social media posts with anything other than the 
official statement or ‘no comment’ – you will never win 
over everyone and will risk saying something detrimental 
if you become riled. 
•  Google yourself for a while as you are bound to find 
something that prompts the two points above. 
•  Over-think the situation – if you have done everything you 
can, and retained your integrity, you will soon be ‘old news’ 
as people move onto the next story. 

Troubleshooting
198
• What will I do next time?
References
Magnini, V.P., Ford, J.B., Markowski, E.P. and Honeycutt Jr, E.D. (2007) 
The service recovery paradox: justifiable theory or smoldering 
myth? Journal of Services Marketing, 21(3), 213–225.
Shakespeare, W. (1985) Hamlet, Prince of Denmark, ed. Edwards, P., 
New Cambridge Shakespeare. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Afterword – Chapter 6
Bear in mind that in the aftermath of any complaint, the important 
thing is to re-settle your team. Your staff must know that the 
organisation has their best interests at heart and will always work 
to support them.

Business ethics  
and integrity
 7.1	
The values-led organisation
 7.2	
Profit v. organisational well-being
 7.3	
Maintaining quality
 7.4	
Being responsible
 7.5	
Mad, bad, sad – treating a toxic organisation
 7.6	
Ethics in a globalised world
 7.7	
Be proactive
Chapter 7


Chapter title
 7.1  The values-led organisation 
 A mission statement is a pledge of greatness, e.g. ‘If you join 
our organisation we will . . . ’ – and why not? Without a goal how 
would you know what success looks like? However, this says little 
about how you are going to get there. Many organisations are now 
moving towards being ‘values-led’ and it is not uncommon to see 
words like ‘Integrity’, ‘Communication’ or ‘Excellence’ featuring 
on every organisational touchpoint. More important than listing 
values is  living them, and that is where organisations can fail. It 
is essential for every organisation to identify with their values to 
allow them to be assimilated into everyday performance. 
 SPEED rEAD 
 7. Business ethics and integrity 
 
 Do this 
 If you were to write down three values that described your 
organisation’s practices, what would they be? Is that a good 
thing? If not, identify what you can change to make them positive. 

Business ethics and integrity 
202
7.2 Profit v. organisational well-being
A business needs to make a profit because that is the only way 
it is able to survive. However, it is counter-productive to aim for 
this at the expense of your staff. If you reduce your team and 
ask them to compensate for the areas you have downsized, you 
will soon be left with a staff with no strength – nor desire – to 
work. The fear of redundancy along with the loss of friends and 
colleagues can have a detrimental effect on your team. Any profit 
that is made (or saved) will be short term as your business will 
not be healthy enough to continue to grow. If you need to make 

Speed read
203
human resource cuts, be specific in your decisions and look to 
performance rather than job role – streamline correctly and your 
team may even thank you. Do it wrongly, and your organisation 
will struggle to survive. 
 7.3  Maintaining quality 
 When you are asking staff to work with less support and fewer 
resources, quality will always be compromised. While you may 
be making savings in the short term, can you afford the cost of 
rebuilding a brand after a major service failure? 
 Do this 
 Identify who works well and who is in need of support. Give this 
support with the help of SMART action plans. 
 Do this 
 Ask yourself – do I have any quality concerns? If you do, then 
raise them! 

Business ethics and integrity 
204
7.4 Being responsible
Corporate social responsibility is another phrase that is commonly 
seen on corporate touchpoints. Organisations are quick to display 
their badges of honour (e.g. investors in people, gold standards 
etc.) and of course this is attractive to new recruits. However, 
once again, surface without substance is soon unmasked. It is 
now not enough to ensure your investments – and your clients – 
are ethical, and that you are not contributing too greatly to the 
carbon footprint, nor to wastage of any raw materials, but, as 
with the organisation’s values, you have to be seen to be living 
in a responsible manner. With the speed at which questionable 
practices can be publicised via social media, responsibility cannot 
be taken lightly.
7.5 Mad, bad, sad – treating a toxic organisation
Robinson (2009) proposes that in the same way as people can 
be afflicted with an illness, so too can an organisation. A sick 
organisation will impact on its own propensity for growth and 
performance. While often seen in entrepreneurial firms, where 
Do this
What have you done that’s socially responsible? Tweet it!

Speed read
205
the ‘character’ of the organisation is shaped by the CEO, larger 
organisations may also become sick due to established culture 
and practice. How healthy are you?
7.6 Ethics in a globalised world
With the presence of the internet, the world is ever smaller. 
However, just because you come into contact with global 
organisations, it does not mean your practices will converge. 
The cultures within which many organisations operate will differ 
from yours due to the laws and regulations within the country. 
There will be workplace practices that may be unacceptable to 
some organisations but expected in others. You need to be able 
to navigate a world whose reach is growing, but whose individual 
cultures will need time to change.
Do this
Does your organisation have a high turnover? See if you can 
identify why – and outline a way to address it. Put forward your 
suggestions to your own managers.

Business ethics and integrity 
206
 7.7  Be proactive 
 You are a great manager – you are reading this book which means 
you want to learn and develop, and that alone is a positive trait. 
Management is to the employee as university is to the A-level 
student. There is no longer anyone telling you what to do. You 
will get help if you ask, but its quality will vary. You need to take 
responsibility for things which you may never have done before, 
and may end up doing things which you thought you had left 
behind many years ago. This isn’t a rule book, it’s a pick ’n’ mix 
of ideas and concepts which you can use, develop, and mix and 
match. Choose whichever you like, use whichever you like – the 
more you have, the wider your choice. 
 
 
 Do this 
 Identify which ethical standards your organisation stands by. 
Tweet about those too! 

Speed read
207
No two organisations will be the same to manage, no two 
managers will be alike in their approach and no two books will give 
you the same advice. However, what is a constant is the fact that 
the good manager gets the job done through the collaboration of 
their team – the better the collaboration, the better the result. 
But the world is dynamic and will continue to change, so you must 
continue to reflect on your actions, adapting them as necessary. 
You have approximately six months before you become a part of 
the organisational culture, so use that time wisely to instigate 
change if necessary (or possible), and try to remain proactive in 
your thinking. Management is active as much as responsive; take 
it as a ride, not as a journey.
Do this
Chat with like-minded people, share ideas and good practices. 
Learn from each other. Go to http://businessmatters.
freeforums.net/ and start a discussion.


7.1 The values-led organisation
‘Our values are not just words on a page – they are in our DNA. 
They underpin everything we do and are reflected in the day-
to-day behaviour of the company.’
(Diageo, cited in Great Place to Work, 2014)
Why
Many organisations are able to establish their vision but do not 
consider the reality of the collateral damage that has been 
sustained on the way there. Being values-led focuses attention 
onto behaviour as the excuse of ‘the end justifies the means’ 
is removed. When you are bound by values, the means is the 
yardstick by which you will be judged. Values must be lived, not 
Big Picture
7. Business ethics and integrity

Business ethics and integrity 
210
just espoused. While you may choose your values, or they may 
be pre-existing, the most accurate description of what is being 
‘lived’ comes from the staff members themselves. Your team 
experience the organisational culture on a day-to-day basis, so 
the wise manager will check in with their views from time to time.
Business brief
A ‘values-led business is based on the idea that business has a 
responsibility to the people and the society that make its existence 
possible’ (Cohen and Greenfield, 1997). A survey conducted 
by the Great Place to Work Institute found that of the top 100 
organisations on the UK’s ‘Best Workplace’ list, 97 per cent were 
values-led. However, their research also found that each value 
must be clearly defined with examples of the behaviour expected 
(Great Place to Work, 2014). In addition, if managers are perceived 
to be breaching these values, then trust will be lost, which in turn 
has an effect on performance and turnover. A lack of transparency 
behind decisions taken is the cause of some perceived breaches 
(Great Place to Work, 2014), but it is also notable that in larger 
companies, values can become ‘lost in translation’ if efforts are not 
made to define and reinforce them (Sunley, cited in Cooper, 2015).
Always be aware of the values you personally uphold and seek 
to engage with them in your daily working life. Even without 

Big picture
211
organisational directives, ethical behaviour is embedded in ethical 
people.
Reflection
• How did it work?
Try this
	 1.	 Whether you are values-led or not, ask your team to come up 
with the values that they believe the organisation embodies. 
If you are surprised (or shocked), at least you know and have 
the option to work to change them!
	 2.	 Ask your team what sort of values they would want to stand 
by and what changes they would suggest in terms of how 
your organisation conducts itself.
	 3.	 Ask your customers/clients what values they perceive the 
organisation stands for, and what values they would like you 
to embody.
	 4.	 If a breach has occurred investigate why it has been 
perceived as such and offer an explanation.
	 5.	 If you are a smaller organisation, take care to continue to 
reinforce and define your values as you grow.
	 6.	 Always be mindful that values need to be embodied, not just 
vocalised.

Business ethics and integrity 
212
• What will I do next time?
References
Cohen, B. and Greenfield, J. (1997) Ben & Jerry’s Double Dip. New 
York, NY: Fireside.
Cooper, N. (2015) Leadership Disconnect v’s Values-led Organisa-
tions, changeboard.com, http://www.purplecubed.com/images/
uploads/Changeboard%201(1).pdf (retrieved September 2015).
Great Place to Work (2014) Institute Research Paper, Greatplacetow-
ork.co.uk, http://www.greatplacetowork.co.uk/storage/docu-
ments/organisational%20values%20are%20they%20worth%20
the%20bother%20final2%20web%20031114.pdf (retrieved Sep-
tember 2015).
7.2 Profit v. organisational well-being
‘If your conduct is determined solely by considerations of profit 
you will arouse great resentment.’
(Confucius)
Why
With organisations such as the National Health Service tendering 
for business, and educational establishments opting to raise their 
tuition fees, money is a bigger issue than ever. Your organisation 
needs to be financially sustainable but the common option 
seems to be reducing staff and expecting those who remain to 
compensate. As a worker you know this is not feasible – what 
makes you think it is as a manager?

Big picture
213
Business brief
Many European firms are starting to implement ‘no emails after 6’ 
or other policies to allow their staff to take a break from work but, 
in contrast, in the UK managers are still working longer hours than 
ever (Stevens, 2011). Hollinshead et al. (1999) suggested that this 
is due to organisational downsizing coupled with an inability to 
‘distinguish fat from muscle’, a view which is not often voiced, but 
is arguably highly relevant today. Of course a blanket approach of 
‘cutting jobs to save money’ is inappropriate, but there will always 
be members of staff who work neither hard nor effectively – and 
often they can be identified by other team members. If you are 
not discerning enough when you are forced to make difficult 
decisions regarding redundancies your strongest workers are 
likely to take what’s offered because they will easily walk into 
another job, leaving you with the dead weight – and working after 
6pm. With few hard-working staff members remaining, you will be 
left with a ‘depressed’ organisation which is unable to respond 
to any opportunities for growth (Hollinshead et al., 1999). The 
good manager must identify and maximise positive contributions 
while dealing swiftly with those who have a negative effect on 
the organisation.
Try this
	 1.	 Draw a grid with skills that you need from your team on the 
horizontal and the names of your team members on the 
vertical. Mark off their skills by ticking the relevant boxes. It 

Business ethics and integrity 
214
is often obvious that one person is not pulling their weight 
in a certain area, but by making your thought process 
more objective, you will be able to see if they are in fact 
contributing somewhere else. (NB: Do not allow your team 
to become aware of this. They may have their suspicions but 
these become harder to ignore in the face of evidence.)
	 2.	 If someone is not contributing then speak with them and 
give them the opportunity to do so. Ask them if there is 
anything that you can do to support them better.
	 3.	 If necessary make it clear that there will be consequences 
if they are unable to improve their performance. Offer them 
the opportunity to change their working remit if possible.
	 4.	 Put in an action plan to support them (ideally worked out 
with them – see section 2.4 on dealing with disputes and 
problems) and check their progress, acknowledging if 
improvements are made, and following through on the 
consequences if not.
	 5.	 Engage your staff in generating solutions that do not involve 
human resource cuts.
Reflection
• How did it work?

Big picture
215
• What will I do next time?
References
Confucius (n.d.) www.revolutionalminds.com/confuciusquotes/ 
(retrieved September 2015).
Hollinshead, G., Nicholls, P. and Tailby, S. (1999) Employee Relations: A 
Contemporary Perspective. Harlow: Financial Times/Prentice Hall.
Stevens, M. (2011), British staff work more hours than the European 
average, CIPD.co.uk, www.cipd.co.uk/pm/peoplemanagement/b/
weblog/archive/2011/12/08/british-staff-work-more-hours-than-
european-average-says-ons-2011-12.aspx (retrieved Jan 2016).
7.3 Maintaining quality
‘Quality means doing it right when no-one is looking.’
(Henry Ford, cited in Anderson, 2013)
Why
Whilst many people realise that blanket cuts are not the answer 
to sustainability, few can think of an alternative, and even fewer 
strive to implement it should they come up with one. The last 
section discussed how cuts need to be well-judged, and the 
astute manager will seek advice from the staff:
‘If I had to save money in my department, I’d do it through being 
stricter on waste. We waste so much and sometimes things 
go in the wrong bins. The staff are a bit blasé about it, but I 
suppose if I told them that it was either save here, or lose a 
team member, they’d all do it.’
(Team Leader, NHS).

Business ethics and integrity 
216
However, it takes a very strong-minded person to stand firm when their 
job could be on the line, but a short-term decision will have implications 
for long-term gain – make sure those decisions are positive.
Business brief
‘False economy’ is defined by the Cambridge Dictionary as ‘an action 
that saves money at the beginning but, over a longer period of time, 
results in more money being wasted than saved’. If you cut human 
resources but do not have the staff to complete the job (or have 
overworked staff signed off sick) you will spend more in hiring and 
training new, less experienced staff. Similarly, if you cut the quality 
of materials and then have to recall a product or, worse, pay hefty 
compensation should someone suffer damage or injury through 
using it, your business will find it hard to survive. Of course there is a 
mentality that says ‘I won’t be here to see the consequences’, but that 
is not the thought process of a good manager – and if you are thinking 
that, it might be in the best interests of everyone if you resign. Have 
the integrity to do the right thing, even in the face of adversity.
Try this
	 1.	 Involve your team in a periodic cost-audit where you can 
examine what is being spent and how your department can 
be more efficient. Remember that efficient stock taking or 
ordering practices as well as saving on waste can make a 
huge difference to budget.

Big picture
217
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
Anderson, E. (2013) 21 quotes from Henry Ford on business, leader-
ship and life, www.forbes.com, 31 May, http://www.forbes.com/
sites/erikaandersen/2013/05/31/21-quotes-from-henry-ford-
on-business-leadership-and-life/ (retrieved September 2015).
Cambridge Dictionary Online (2015) http://dictionary.cambridge.org/
dictionary/english/false-economy (retrieved September 2015).
	 2.	 It is fine to let your team know that your preventative 
measures are in place to try to prevent job losses in the long 
term. (If there is an ultimatum and it is beyond your control, 
be honest and convey the urgency but not the threat.)
	 3.	 Respect your job, and respect all the people who help you 
get it done.

Business ethics and integrity 
218
7.4 Being responsible
‘The knowledge that we are responsible for our actions and 
attitudes does not need to be discouraging because it also 
means that we are free to change this destiny.’
(Anaïs Nin, 1969)
Why
Corporate social responsibility applies not only to you and 
your organisation but to those with whom you do business. 
Social media is quick to spread news about unethical practices 
(whether founded or not), and if you are unable to dispel the 
myths, your reputation will be tarnished. From carbon footprint 
to discrimination, the bigger the organisation the harder you can 
fall . . . and the more people there will be who may want to push 
you off your perch. High standards in these practices are easier 
to enforce locally, but they are also important if you outsource.
Business brief
Cost-saving outsourcing practices have been under scrutiny 
in the fashion industry, with Nike’s link to sweatshops nearly 
costing them through public boycotts (Kokemuller, 2015). Apple, 
too, recently suffered a blip in their fortunes when it was found 
in 2010 that 18 members of the factory in China that made most 
of Apple’s goods attempted suicide due to working practices 
(14 succeeded) (Jefferies, 2014). The reality is that if you say to 
someone ‘You can buy this phone for n pounds, and this ethically 
manufactured one for nnnn pounds’ the customer’s own integrity 
is likely to become questionable. However, this does not make 
it right to condone poor practice. Further, your competition – 
whether or not they are guilty themselves – may continue to 
add fuel to the flame.

Big picture
219
Try this
	 1.	 Be aware of the practices within your organisation – and 
those of your clients. If you outsource your work, ensure 
that the practices undertaken by the organisation in 
question comply with your own.
	 2.	 If you outsource, join the Ethical Trading Initiative, a UK-based 
company that since 1998 has been working to improve the 
lives of workers in global supply chains through their Code 
of Practice. The Code can be retrieved here: http://www.
ethicaltrade.org/
	 3.	 Note that there is frequent debate on whether businesses 
should be promoting employment within their own country 
or outsourcing, and you may be asked to justify your choices.
	 4.	 Always be aware that you will only hear one side of any 
story, and sometimes it may not be accurate. Ethics is a 
sensitive area with huge repercussions if handled badly. 
If you are concerned, raise those issues internally first 
(following appropriate organisational protocol).

Business ethics and integrity 
220
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
Ethical Trading Initiative Code of Practice: http://www.ethicaltrade.
org/eti-base-code (retrieved September 2015).
Jefferies, D. (2014) Is Apple cleaning up its act on labour rights? The 
Guardian, 5 March, http://www.theguardian.com/­sustainable-
business/apple-act-on-labour-right (retrieved September 2015).
Kokemuller, N. (2015) Is outsourcing an ethical practice? Small Busi-
ness Chronicle, http://smallbusiness.chron.com/outsourcing-eth-
ical-practice-80639.html (retrieved September 2015).
Nin, A. (1969) The Diary of Anais Nin, Vol. 1: 1931–1934. New York: 
Mariner Books.

Big picture
221
7.5 Mad, bad, sad – treating a toxic organisation
‘If personality were really the problem, the cure would be 
psychotherapy.’
(Chris Argryis, 1986)
Why
In the same way as a sick person finds it difficult to function, so 
too will a sick organisation. Companies, and on a smaller scale, 
departments, can become ‘ill’ due to the behaviour of those in 
charge. Do not let yours succumb.
Business brief
Robinson (2009) defined three areas of ‘illness’ within organisations 
and classified them as follows:
• Mad: ‘odd, eccentric or dysfunctional patterns of thinking . . . 
with reduced capacity for close interpersonal relationships’.
• Bad: ‘impulsive or dramatic patterns of behaviour . . . with a 
corresponding lack of empathy’.
• Sad: ‘dependent, avoidant and obsessive compulsive  . . . 
disorders’.
Each of these types affect performance and organisational 
growth. Further, this organisational ‘illness’ sometimes either goes 

Business ethics and integrity 
222
unrecognised because it is so embedded in practice or is ignored 
altogether (Frost, 2007).
If your behaviours, or those of any of your team or colleagues, give 
you any cause for concern, do not ignore the issue. Acknowledge 
and monitor the questionable behaviours to see whether a 
pattern emerges.
If you find that your organisation (or department) is sickly, Frost 
(2007) suggests the following:
• You may need to accept what you cannot change – but be 
aware that these patterns exist so that you can continue 
challenging them.
• You may decide to leave for a healthier workplace. (It is even 
possible – see section  3.6 on secondments – that you may 
return with ideas for ways in which you can treat the illness.)
Try this
This is a simple training exercise developed by Chris Argryis 
(1986) to uncover any prevailing ‘sickly’ routines. Do this 
exercise yourself or ask your team to do it.
	 1.	 Think of a relevant issue and write down what you would do 
about it.
	 2.	 Imagine you had the opportunity to bring the issue up at a 
meeting. On one half of a sheet of paper, write down what 
you would say.
	 3.	 On the other half of the paper, write down what you believe 
the response would be.
	 4.	 Now predict the outcome.
Argryis (1986) found that most people believed the response 
would be ‘There’s nothing we can do’ or words to that effect, 
with most predicted outcomes being ‘Save it for another 

Big picture
223
meeting’ – by which time the problem may have been forgotten 
or superseded.
If you find that the prediction and outcome are positive drivers 
for change, congratulations; if you find that yet another matter 
has been swept under the proverbial carpet, you may have a 
sickly organisation.
In this case:
• Examine the ‘routines’ identified by the exercise and see 
if you can address them individually, e.g. if someone says 
‘Nothing can be done’ – ask the question anyway and 
follow it up with ‘Why?’.
• If you can make a change – no matter how small – do it.
• Try not to let important issues go. Even if they cannot be 
solved at once, keep them as agenda points.
• Encourage your team to provide suggested solutions 
when they identify an issue – sometimes defensiveness 
is just a cover for not having any ideas.
• Consider the use of instilling creativity. While this is not 
to advocate GCSE Drama exercises, sometimes a meeting 
energiser which enables staff to be creative reminds them 
that ‘no’ does not always have to be an option:
• In one such exercise a team throws an imaginary ball to 
each other. As each person throws it, they say what it is. 
The receiver catches the ball and acknowledges what it 
is, then throws it on to another person, describing it as 
something else. This serves the purpose of developing 
creativity, but also acknowledging and accepting other 
people’s ideas – no matter how wacky.

Business ethics and integrity 
224
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
Argryis, C. (1986) Skilled incompetence, Harvard Business Review, 
September, https://hbr.org/1986/09/skilled-incompetence 
(retrieved September 2015).
Frost, P.J. (2007) Toxic Emotions at Work and What You Can Do About 
Them. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Robinson, D.A. (2009) Pathologies and Wellness in Entrepreneurial 
Firms, Epublications.bond.edu.au, http://epublications.bond.edu.
au/business_pubs/67 (retrieved September 2015).
7.6 Ethics in a globalised world
‘Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed 
citizens can change the world; indeed it’s the only thing that 
ever has.’
(Margaret Mead, cited in Cool, 2008)

Big picture
225
Why
Desensitisation can occur when you are constantly exposed to 
something which at first repulses you. Similarly, an unethical 
practice may at first appal, but as it becomes part of your everyday 
understanding of the world, it is easy to ignore. A business in the UK 
is able to deal with a business in a different part of the world where 
legal practices and sanctions may differ and so gain an advantage in 
terms of productivity. However, this is likely to come at a cost. Just 
because you may not see the impact directly, it does not mean that 
it is not happening. It is important to continue to remain, and keep 
those with whom you do business, accountable on ethical issues.
Business brief
Aslanman (2015) observed that with globalisation comes 
greater interdependence and integration, and a need for greater 
regulation surrounding trade. Rather than canny investments 
alone, globalisation offers organisations the opportunity to be 
educators and enforcers of basic rights for workers.
Ethical practice also applies to your own staff. ‘Family Hold 
Back’ (Collinson, 1927) – the practice where the guest (or in the 
business sense, the customer/client) always comes first, can 
be detrimental to organisational health. Of course the ultimate 
goal of a business is profit (as this ensures survival), but a rich 
organisation with no-one to run it is going to fail just as quickly.

Business ethics and integrity 
226
Try this
	 1.	 Be explicit with your standards of ethical practice and expect 
the same from others with whom you work – whether they 
are clients, customers or employees.
	 2.	 If there is a practice you are unsure about, try to understand 
it from the point of view of the other person or business, and 
in turn request that they consider yours.
	 3.	 If an agreement cannot be reached, if your standards are 
explicit and a breach is clear, you should maintain your own 
standards whatever the consequences.
	 4.	 Appreciate that ethical decisions are not always clear cut.
	 5.	 Encourage your team to make ethical decisions themselves.
	 6.	 Be aware of, and implement, changes in ethical guidelines in 
industry standards.
	 7.	 Reflect regularly on your practice to ensure that you are not 
making your own employees sacrifice too much for the sake 
of profit.

Big picture
227
Reflection
• How did it work?
• What will I do next time?
References
Aslanman, S. (2015) Gaps of social justice in a globalised world, 
paper presented at the International Journal of Arts and Sciences 
Conference, Las Vegas, 2015.
Collinson, W.E. (1927) Contemporary English: A Personal Speech 
Record. Berlin: B.G. Teubner.
Cool, J.C. (2008) Communities of Innovation: Cyborganic and the Birth 
of Networked Social Media. Ann Arbor, MI: ProQuest.

Business ethics and integrity 
228
7.7 Be proactive
‘The most dangerous phrase is “We’ve always done it this way”.’
(Grace Hopper, cited in Johnson Lewis, 2015)
Why
Part of the purpose of this book is to think about your own 
practices. If you can understand why you behave in certain ways 
you will have a better understanding of at least one person in 
your organisation. You may also gain an insight into how others 
think and behave through observation, reflection and knowing 
that there are alternatives to every action. Once you have that 
understanding, what happens next is up to you. You can choose 
to make changes, or to keep things as they are, but a broadened 
insight means you remain in control. Management is not an easy 
ride, neither is it a clear road. You will need to make many judgment 
calls and your integrity will be tested. You may need to question 
your beliefs and your practices and sometimes make changes or 
exceptions. What is most important is that you remain proactive. 
Management is not a passive word, neither is it reactive. Being in 
charge means being able to shape your ride.

Big picture
229
Business brief
Once someone has become ‘institutionalised’ they have become 
part ‘of a particular system, society or organisation’ (Cambridge 
Dictionary Online, 2015). This means that questionable practices 
are often not called to account, nor even recognised! The great 
manager remains aware of their own good practice as well as that of 
their team and colleagues, while knowing they can all always learn 
and evolve. Learning requires reflection on what has gone before, 
and then making changes which are continually modified as one 
acquires experience. According to Argryis and Schon (1978) many 
organisations excel at ‘single loop’ learning, which is responding 
to an incident (often) in the same way that they have always 
done – this may result in a short-term ‘fix’, but it does not allow 
the organisation to progress. For Argryis and Schon (1978) the only 
effective learning is ‘double loop’ – where assumptions and actions 
are constantly reviewed following reflection and new experiences. 
What often stands in the way of this sort of learning is pride, which 
leads to defensive behaviour. It is important to remember that 
business is about growth and sustainability – if you are not learning, 
you are not moving; if you are not moving, you are stagnating.
Make reflection and revision part of your ritual. You chose your 
role, you chose this book – you must be choosing to grow!

Business ethics and integrity 
230
Reflection
• How did it work?
Try this
	 1.	 If someone questions a practice, try to look at it from their 
point of view. They may have identified a genuine flaw, or 
you may not have explained it correctly – both need your 
attention.
	 2.	 In responding to a problem, examine your assumptions 
critically – if they are unfounded, change them.
	 3.	 Reflect on your solutions and be realistic in your appraisal.
	 4.	 Do not be afraid of getting it wrong – that is the best way 
to learn. Remember, if you are not learning, you may be 
stagnating.
	 5.	 ALWAYS conduct an exit interview, whether in person or via 
an electronic platform. Too often people may choose to 
leave rather than question practices they believe cannot – 
or will not – change. Asking direct questions may give you 
some answers, and ideas for improvement. For example:
(a)	 What changes in practice might you suggest to improve 
performance?
(b)	 What do you feel we could have done better?
(c)	 What could we have done to retain you?

Big picture
231
• What will I do next time?
References
Argryis, C. and Schon, D. (1978) Organizational Learning: A Theory of 
Action Perspective. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Cambridge Dictionary Online (2015) http://dictionary.cambridge.org/
dictionary/english/institutionalize (retrieved September 2015).
Johnson Lewis, J. (2015) Women’s History, abouteducation.com, 
http://womenshistory.about.com/od/quotes/a/grace_hopper.
htm (retrieved September 2015).


A note on case 
studies
All case study quotes within each chapter were collected during 
the author’s PhD research published here: http://dspace.brunel.
ac.uk/handle/2438/7038 (retrieved September 2015). Permission 
was given to use each example, with job title identification, and 
interviews were conducted pursuant to Brunel University’s ethical 
permissions.


Index
ACAS (Advisory, Conciliation and 
Arbitration Service) 186
accountability 184
lack of 55
Accenture 95–6
acknowledgement 28, 64, 66, 108, 114–
15, 117–18, 178, 181, 187, 222
action plans 50, 214
actions 29, 51, 85, 98, 216, 228 see 
also under team members
adaptation 19, 64 see also change
agendas 112, 131, 133
Alda, A. 122
Alder, S. 113
Anka, P. 28
anxieties 128–9
apologies 196
Apple 218
appraisals 42, 60–2, 73–5, 88–94, 96, 
100–101, 143, 165–6, 230
appreciation 117
Argryis, C. 221–2, 229
Aristotle 18, 95
Aslanman, S. 225
Asma, S. 57
assumptions 18, 77, 101, 110, 122, 230
authority 40, 56, 82, 103, 138, 145
awareness 87, 151, 219, 226
bad management 29–30
Baggini, J. 180
Barry, D. 131
behaviour 4, 8, 55, 58, 60, 80, 109, 123, 
145, 212, 222, 229
of employees 55, 97, 126, 222
of employers/organisations 22,  
209–11, 221–2
in the workplace 38
Belbin® 38–9, 48
Berkun, S. 162
Open Letter to Micro-managers 163
‘big picture’, the 38, 64, 73, 173
Blanchard, K.H. 159–60
body language 102
Bond, P. 99
Bono, E. 132
brands 203
Branson, R. 24, 66
Buck, P. S. 21
burnout 51
Buzzfeed 48
Canfield, J. 177
CareerBuilder 22
careers 66
Carnegie, A. 45
challenges 33, 52, 159, 222, 228
to one’s own thinking 110, 122
change 39, 48, 66, 98, 101, 120, 205, 
207 see also adaptation
implementing/effecting 3, 15–16, 
25–6, 120–1, 222–4, 228–30
managing 6, 24
responding to 66
Chapman, A. 159
Chartered Institute of Personnel and 
Development (CIPD) 84
China 218
choices 49, 206, 219
CIGAR 86
clients/customers 204, 211, 218,  
226
coaching 72–3, 84–7, 160 see also 
mentors
collaboration 25, 37, 98, 207
commitment 7–8, 12, 29, 65, 146, 224
lack of 55
communication 11, 13, 26, 46, 49, 57, 
66, 78, 84, 91, 102, 138–9, 143, 
145, 152, 160, 175, 178, 180, 
187, 192, 201
competition 218

Index
236
directing 3
discipline 117
discrimination 57–9
dismissal
unfair 81
disputes 40–1, 54–6
documentation 178
Doran, G.T. 156
Dorgan, B. 145
downsizing 213
Eidelman, S. 24
emotions 37, 42, 45, 111, 120, 128–9, 
132, 180–1, 187, 189
employability 32
engagement 150–1, 214
Ethical Trading Initiative 219
ethics 29, 204, 206, 211, 216, 218–19, 
225–6, 229 see also corporate 
social responsibility (CSR)
Eurocom Worldwide 22
excellence 201
experience 39, 122, 140, 155, 159
of customers 45
experiences 26, 76, 98–100, 129, 229
experts 52–3, 151
explaining 62, 154
facts 171–2, 180–1, 188, 196
failure 158, 163, 225, 230
‘Family Hold Back’ 225
favouritism 41–2, 57–9
fear 55, 119, 137, 163, 202, 230
feedback 42, 60, 62, 90, 141, 143, 174, 
187 see also appraisals
feelings see emotions
Forbes Magazine 64
Ford, H. 215
Frost, P.J. 222
globalisation 225
GOAL 86
goals (personal) 7, 13, 86, 89, 91, 96, 
165–6 for organisational goals 
see organisations, missions and 
goals of
Goethe, J.W. 60, 92
Goleman, D. 128
complaints 171–2, 176, 178, 180–2, 
186, 190, 198
responding to/dealing with 171, 
177–8, 181, 196–7, 230
confidence 84
confidentiality 145–6, 183–4, 187, 189, 
191
conflict 55
Confucius 212
consistency 6
Continuing Professional Development 
(CPD) 32, 65, 74
contracts 146
control 49, 55, 73, 228
conversations 102–103, 131–2, 188, 
190, 192, 207
difficult 103, 173, 186–7
‘structured’ 72–3
Cooley, M.
Architect or Bee 93
co-ordination 3, 11, 163
‘corporate psychopaths’ 4
corporate social responsibility (CSR) 29, 
66, 204, 218–19
cost-cutting 121, 203, 215–16, 218
Covey, S. 31, 48
creativity 113, 223
credibility 145
Critchley, D. 99
criticism 62, 196
receiving 171, 230
Culbertson, S.S. 61
deadlines 139–40, 153, 157
decision-making 11, 216, 226
delegation 3, 45, 123, 137–40, 142–3, 
145–57, 159–60, 162, 165–6 see 
also team members, delegating to
desensitisation 225
development see also personal growth
of employees 9, 12, 29, 50, 53, 60, 
62–5, 74–6, 80, 82, 84, 89, 93, 
95–6, 98–100, 108, 123, 141, 
143, 145–51, 162, 165
of oneself 32, 65, 143, 206 see 
also Continuing Professional 
Development (CPD)
differences 48

Index
237
Kansas State University 61
Kirkpatrick, D.L and Kirkpatrick, J.D. 97
knowledge 15, 56, 76, 89, 118, 123, 
163, 165, 218, 228–9
leadership 159
situational 159
learning 9, 26, 32, 62, 65, 76, 95–100, 
163, 196, 206, 229–30
tools 74, 143, 147, 165
legalities 173, 205
LinkedIn 111
listening 49, 90, 94, 102, 123, 151, 160
active 102
deep 102–103
‘listening events’ 49, 126
lists 107, 173–4
Locus of Control 32
Lorette, K. 192
loyalty 46, 64, 195
Lyth, M. 120
McGregor, D. 52, 114
Theory X 114
Theory Y 52, 114
management style 84–5
‘matrix approach’ 49
MBTI® 38–9, 48
McKenzie, J. 99
Mead, M. 224
meetings 112, 131–3, 141, 184, 222–3 
see also agendas
Merrill-Reid® 38, 48
mentors 52, 151
Metz, R. 84
micro-management 65, 142, 163
mistakes 43, 196, 230
money-saving 215–16, 218 see also 
cost-cutting and waste, reducing
monitoring 66, 74, 121, 140, 160, 188, 
214, 222
Montgomery, L.M. 192
Moore, M. 189
morale
lack of 79, 142
motivation 7–9, 11, 31, 38, 47, 52, 80, 
107–108, 111–13, 117, 119–20, 
131 see also
gossip 175, 183–4, 192–3
Great Place to Work Institute 210
guidance 159
Gunther, J. 88
habit 58, 124
Halvorson, H.G. 165
handovers 4–5
happiness 52, 109
lack of 191
Hasan Abedi, A. 148
health and safety 4
help (calls for) 73, 123, 172
Hershey, P. 85
hiring 28
Hochschild, A.R. 128
Homer 152
honesty 49, 62, 217
‘honeymoon’ period 80–1
Hopper, G. 228
Human Resources (HR) 16, 19, 121, 
172–3, 182–3, 187, 190, 196, 
203, 214
improvements 64, 214, 230
incentives 108, 114
individuals 38, 43, 48, 63–4, 75–6, 79, 
159 see also team members
induction (of new staff) 80
information 18, 48, 57, 146, 192–3
initiative 154
innovation 154
insight 89
inspiration 107
institutionalisation 229
integrity 195, 197, 201, 218, 228
internet, the 176, 195, 197, 205–206, 
230
interviews 4, 82
exit 230
investigations 171–3, 178, 180–4, 186, 
188, 190–1, 211
involvement 3, 11, 183
job applications 22
job satisfaction 109, 129, 149, 203
job security 116, 202, 213, 216
‘Johari Window’ 89

Index
238
Patton, B. 186
pay 116, 202, 212
people-focus 24
perceptions 88–9, 103, 123, 126, 180, 
195, 211
performance 8, 12, 46, 48, 71, 75, 80, 
84, 86, 95–7, 109, 114, 117–18, 
120, 122–3, 149, 155, 187, 201, 
203, 210, 221, 230
improvements in 118, 214
reviews of see appraisals
personal growth 43, 76, 86, 89, 93, 149, 
229
personal needs 38–9, 79
personality 21, 32, 99, 221
inventories 48–9
perspective 7, 13, 28, 64, 77, 138 see 
also ‘big picture’
planning 153
policies see under organisations
practices 4, 16, 19, 96, 201, 205, 207, 
218–19, 222, 226, 228–30 
see also Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOPs)
departmental 19, 76
praise 30, 43, 52–3, 61–2, 88, 108, 
114–18, 143, 165–6, 188
predecessors 19
preferences 39, 48, 180
preparation 90
pressure 120
proactivity 8–9, 31, 65, 156, 228
probationary period see ‘honeymoon 
period’
problems (at work) 60, 112, 120, 181, 
187, 221–2 see also teams, 
problems within/dysfunctional
solving 151, 153, 160, 180–1, 230 
see also solutions
procedures 16 see also Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOPs)
productivity 46, 48, 108, 111
professionalism 26, 103, 184
profit 202, 225–6
progress 61, 74, 93, 107–108, 140, 214
projects 125
promises 26, 82
promotion 12, 94
publicity 195–6
team members, motivations of
extrinsic 116, 119
intrinsic 108, 120
theories of 114
National Health Service (NHS) 212, 215
negativity 113, 120, 129, 132, 142, 213
negotiation 146
Neurolinguistic Programming (NLP) 16
Nike 218
Nin, A. 218
objectivity 59
observing 32, 126, 228
Ogilvy, D. 63
opportunities 9, 32, 50, 53, 75–6, 88, 
98–9, 103, 108, 124, 143, 145, 
166, 171, 177, 222, 225
organisational boundaries 11, 154
organisational grapevine, the see gossip
organisations 8, 29, 71, 99, 143, 198, 
225, 229
attitudes towards 71
cultures of 31, 98, 174, 189,  
205–207, 210–11, 213
growth/development of 32, 64–5, 
95–6, 100, 209, 211–13, 216, 221
missions and goals of 7, 12, 25, 
39–40, 46, 80–1, 89, 96, 125
and their people 119, 202–203, 205, 
207, 214, 228
policies and procedures of 4, 15, 19, 
42, 58–9, 81, 116, 175, 183, 187, 
211, 226
strategy of 75, 211–13, 216, 228
success of 38, 96, 203, 216, 218
toxic 204–205, 213, 221–3
understanding 98, 228
values of 12, 107, 201, 204, 206, 
209–11, 218–19, 225–6
view of 7
vision of 8, 49, 64, 66, 107, 209
well-being of 202–205, 213, 216, 222
outsourcing 96, 218–19, 225
over-familiarity 103
over-thinking 197
Parsons, L.C. 153
passion 108–109

Index
239
social bonds 184
Social Learning Theory 61
social networking/media 21, 111, 204, 
206
pitfalls of using 5, 21–2, 197
profiles 5–6, 22–3
using 6, 21–3, 32
solutions 72, 77–8, 102, 120, 132, 141, 
181–2, 187, 188, 191, 214, 223, 
230 see also problems, solving
specialisation 40
specificity 165
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) 
4, 16
support (giving) see team members, 
supporting
support (having) 172, 183
SWOT analysis 66
task-focus 24
tasks 52, 66, 113, 122, 124, 137–40, 
143, 145–7, 149–50, 152–5, 157, 
159–60, 162, 166
Taylor, F. 11, 114
team days 111, 125–6
team members 13, 42, 63, 65, 99, 
110, 225–6, 228 see also 
development, of employees
achievements of 60, 93, 160
actions/activities of 6, 15, 62, 98
attitudes/beliefs of 71, 77, 107, 109, 
198, 202, 211, 222
behaviour of see behaviour, of 
employees
confidence of 64
delegating to see delegation
departure/loss of 58, 79, 108, 123, 
202–203, 205, 210, 213–17, 230
development of see development, of 
employees
empowerment of 49, 66, 72, 84, 99, 
132, 147, 149–50, 160
encouragement of 113–14, 149–50, 
190, 214, 223
expectations of 29, 153–4
gaining the confidence of/putting at 
ease 6, 24–5, 202
investment in 29, 71, 79, 97, 110, 
125–6, 145
quality 203, 215–16
Qualman, E. 21
questions 154, 230 see also help 
(asking for)
reasons 181, 190
recognition 108, 114, 116–17, 125, 165 
see also acknowledgement
records 19
recruitment 71, 80–2, 95–6
reflection 13, 32, 38, 62, 89, 111, 126, 
226, 228–30
regulations 100, 205, 225
relationships 13, 58, 84, 110–11, 116–17
repetitive strain injury (RSI) 51
reputation 218
resources 155, 203
respect 37, 46, 217
responsibility 65, 142, 157, 204, 206, 
210, 226
restructuring 26
results 97
reviews 176
rewards 4, 38–9, 45, 47–8, 52, 65, 80, 
82, 113, 115, 118
Rice, H. 119
Ricci, R. and Wiese, C. 25
‘Robbers’ Cave’ experiment 125
Roberts, K. 12
Robinson, D.A. 221
Rotter, J.B. 32
Ruiz, D.M. 101
rules 118
Saint-Exupéry, A. 125
Schon, D. 229
Schriesheim, C.A. 149
secondments 76, 98–100
self-actualisation 114
service failure 203
service recovery paradox 195
Sharma, R. 31
Situational Leadership Grid 85
skills 8, 13, 32, 46, 53, 56, 65, 74–5, 
93–4, 96, 99–100, 125, 137, 143, 
146, 149, 151, 153, 163, 213
interpersonal 84, 91
transferrable 73
SMART objectives 50, 91, 156–7, 203

Index
240
technology 93
‘Thinking Hats’ 120, 126, 132–3
time 32, 43, 149, 162
frames 140, 154–6
lack of 151
managing 133
wasting 61, 112, 131
time-off 108
training and development 4, 12–13, 
75–6, 84, 86, 92, 94–7, 100, 141, 
152
costs of 85
Training Needs Analysis (TNA) 13, 53, 
74–5, 92–4, 96, 124, 166
transparency 210
Trinka, J. 165
troubleshooting 112
trust 6, 25, 64, 103, 138, 149–50, 162, 
210
lack of 55, 61
truth 175–6, 189, 192, 195
Tugend, A. 177
turnover (of staff) see team members, 
departure/loss of
understanding 12, 46, 120–1, 129, 138, 
160, 226, 228 see also under 
organisations and teams
lack of 176, 190
Urwick, L. 15
values 190, 210–11 see also 
organisations, values of
Vanthournout, D. 95
Vygotsky, L.S. 163
Wallace, L. 165
Warner, M. 158
Washington Post 61
waste 216
reducing 215–16
Watson, E. 51
Watson, T.J. 79
Watts, I. 54
whistleblowing 174–5, 189–90
Wooden, J. 155
working environment 47–8, 54, 58, 225
team members (continued)
matters concerning 19
motivations of 28, 38–9, 47–8, 52, 80, 
99, 107–109, 111–12, 114, 116–
17, 119–20 see also motivation
problems with 90, 103, 117, 128–9, 
213–14, 222
relations between 54
relations with 109–11, 117–18, 159, 
166, 202, 207
retention of 32, 75, 79–81, 95, 97, 
123, 230
roles of 46, 63, 120–1, 124
supervision of 100, 116, 140
supporting 8, 11, 43, 73, 84, 88–9, 
91, 99, 111, 122–4, 128–9, 141, 
159–60, 162, 191, 198, 203, 
213–14
talking to 7, 25, 72, 78, 88, 94, 102–
103, 114, 120–1, 123, 132, 141, 
143, 160, 190–1, 214
see also conversations
treatment of 30, 41–3, 58–9, 72–3, 
80–2, 88, 90–1, 95, 99, 117–18, 
120–1, 123, 159, 198,
202–203, 212–14, 217, 225–6, 230
valuing 91, 99, 114–17, 213, 217
team-work 3, 25, 37, 126
teams 37, 45, 49, 63, 77, 99, 166, 198, 
207, 213–14
achievements of 7, 38–9, 43, 52, 153, 
213
building 110–11, 125–6, 223
characteristics of 31, 98, 211
cohesiveness of 43
development of 52–3, 61–4, 66, 95–6, 
99–100, 107, 110–11, 126, 145, 
149, 151, 165, 222–3
goals/direction of 125, 143, 157
problems within/dysfunctional 40–1, 
51, 54–8, 110, 125, 222–3
success of 37, 46, 52, 64, 66, 75, 97, 
108, 111, 114, 125, 145, 158–9, 
165
understanding 38, 114, 118, 151, 
159–60, 213–14
well-being of 26, 80, 91, 139, 198, 202

