
Become a SuperLearner:
Learn Speed Reading & Advanced 
Memory
By
Jonathan Levi
With
Lev Goldentouch
Anna Goldentouch
J. Levi Publishing
 

Copyright © 2015 Jonathan Levi.
Become a SuperLearner: Learn Speed Reading & Advanced Memory
All rights reserved. This book is an authorized excerpt from a published work by the authors.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed or transmitted in any form or by any
means, including photocopying, recording, or other electronic or mechanical methods, without the
prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical
reviews and certain other noncommercial uses permitted by copyright law. For permission requests,
write to the publisher,
J. Levi Publishing
superlearner@jle.vi
Trademarked names appear throughout this book. Rather than use a trademark symbol with
every occurrence of a trademarked name, names are used in an editorial fashion, with no intention of
infringement of the respective owner’s trademark.
The information in this book is distributed on an “as is” basis, without warranty. Although
every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this work, neither the author nor the publisher
shall have any liability to any person or entity with respect to any loss or damage caused or alleged to
be caused directly or indirectly by the information contained in this book.
 

To my loving parents and godparents, who taught me to value learning,
knowledge, and self-improvement above all else.

 

FOREWORD
I became a SuperLearner by accident in 2008.
I had just taken a year sabbatical from grad school and moved to
Chicago to chase a girl (which was a horrible idea given the fact that it was
right at the front of the recession), and I was having some serious trouble
finding a quality job. Story short, I ended up waiting tables for a year.
In the process of finding work, I had a lot of free time on my hands. A
lot of it was spent applying to jobs, but the rest was spent on a couch
reading. It started with books about the brain. How memory worked, what
memory was, how we perceive things, why we perceive things, names and
descriptions of parts of the brain, neurological diseases and disorders – the
whole gamut. You see, my grandmother was in very advanced stages of
Alzheimer’s, which kept me constantly with her memory on my mind.
That eventually led me to investigate curious anecdotes of curious
people with curious brains. The most famous one being Kim Peek (the
inspiration for the 1988 film, Rainman), an autistic savant who was able to
read and memorize two pages of books at a time or count the amount of
dropped toothpicks in seconds. Less famous were people like Rüdiger
Gamm, a mental calculation prodigy who could calculate any 2-digit
number’s power (provided the power was a lowish number), and Ben
Pridmore, one of the best competitive memorizers in the world and the at-
the-time world record holder for memorizing a deck of cards (in 24.74
seconds!).
The fascinating thing about these latter “savants,” was that they were
actually just ordinary people (or at least they claimed to be). They claimed
to have taught and trained themselves those mind-bending abilities. Ben and
his memory fascinated me simply because I had always had a poor memory
and absolutely refused to believe it was a thing I could just train and turn
on. Because of my grandmother’s increasingly failing memory, I was
especially interested in improving my memory.
I spent the next few months trying to learn as much as I could, but it
was a tricky thing trying to find all of the information in one place. I would
find an out-of-date book about this technique over here, that failed to

mention an even better technique for that over there, and the rest was all
scattered over the internet. I remember it being very frustrating. Back then,
and pretty much still to this day, there have not been any books that really
smash it out of the park with having all the right techniques and tools in one
place. Thankfully, SuperLearning does. The authors of this book have
concentrated, condensed, and made easily digestible all the things you need
to be a well-rounded Super Learner, all into one book. I seriously wish I had
had this book back when I started.
But now you do.
Fast forward a year after I started learning Super Learning techniques,
my grandmother passes away and I move back home to Miami to finish
grad school. Her passing gives me motivation and inspiration like I have
never felt and I end up taking my memory skills to the next level. Long
story short, I ended up winning the championship 3 times between 2010 and
2014, but I developed skills that changed my brain for my entire life. As a
result of SuperLearning, I have changed the way I live my life and approach
absolutely everything. It was the single most important addition to my life.
Now it’s your turn!
Nelson Dellis
4-Time USA Memory Games Champion
March 2015

 

PREFACE
“What you have in your pocket, anyone can take. What you have in
your mind, nobody can.”
-Unknown
This course was developed out of a deep passion for personal development
and a sincere desire to help others learn more effectively. By the end of this
course, you will improve your memory, learn the skills to increase your
reading speed, and increase your comprehension. In short, you will become
a SuperLearner.
What is a “SuperLearner”? A SuperLearner is a person who has a
deep and burning thirst for vast amounts of knowledge, and the means,
skills, and habits to acquire that knowledge rapidly. A SuperLearner simply
seeks to push beyond the boundaries of traditional, laborious learning, and
add skillsets to his or her life that vastly improve their effectiveness in our
information-driven world.
The skills, methods and techniques taught in this course have helped
tens of thousands of students increase their reading speed, “hack” their
learning process, and develop the infrastructure for remembering an influx
new information. Though originally offered as a bestselling online course,
the material has been meticulously and lovingly adapted for both paperback
and eBook formats.
As Jonathan walks the reader through the process of becoming a
SuperLearner, he refers to the currently popular idea of “life hacking.”
Wikipedia defines “life hacking” as follows:
Life hacking refers to any trick, shortcut, skill, or novelty
method that increases productivity and efficiency, in all walks
of life. It is arguably a modern appropriation of a Gordian
knot - in other words, anything that solves an everyday
problem 
in 
an 
inspired, 
ingenious 
manner. 
(Ref:
http://jle.vi/gc)

Terminology changes from generation to generation. However, the
ability to become a SuperLearner is irrespective of age or generational
terminology. Whether you are seeking to “hack” a solution, “learn” a new
skill, “develop” a new habit, “ace” the ability to learn, or “keep” your mind
sharp, this course will guide you through the steps necessary to accomplish
your goal. If your goal is to be able to read faster with greater
comprehension and set up a structured system for accessing the information
you learn, then this course will help you obtain those goals.
The course lays out progressive steps with each section introducing
new skills, which build upon the previous section. There are homework
assignments and quizzes in each section. The homework provides the
necessary practice to develop the skills of a SuperLearner.
Therefore, it is vitally important that you progress through each section
in the order presented. If you skip around, you may very well become
frustrated and miss the ultimate skill of becoming a true SuperLearner.

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION TO THE COURSE

Chapter 1:	How the Course Came To Be
Chapter 2:	Course Syllabus And Timeline
Chapter 3:	Learning How To Learn
Chapter 4:	What Is A SuperLearner?
Chapter 5:	An Overview Of What You Will Be Learning

 

Chapter 1: How This Course Came To Be 
My name is Jonathan Levi. I have the distinct privilege and honor to explain
the skills taught in this course. Along the way, you will learn how to
develop those skills to become a SuperLearner.
My friends and coauthors, Dr. Lev Goldentouch and Prof.  Anna
Goldentouch, answer common questions from current and former students
in the “Ask Dr. Lev” and “Ask Prof. Anna” sections in various chapters. We
each are excited to offer this course, to help you become a SuperLearner,
and to open doors that enhance your lifestyle. If you have additional
questions, please feel free to use the links in the PDF Syllabus to contact
myself, Dr. Lev (via the KeyToStudy blog), or to post in the course
Facebook Group.
We Begin With A Story...
Before we get started, I would like to tell you a quick story of how this
course actually came to be. Several years ago, I was working in a venture
capital firm with some very smart people. I came to know Lev Goldentouch
who was working in one of the startups in the firm.
Lev and I started to talk. Before long, we started sending each other
articles from TechCrunch or Psychology Today. We had many similar
interests.
However, I noticed something interesting. When I would send Lev an
article, I would get a reply back in about a minute or two with half a page of
comments. Lev also had a habit of sending me five to ten news articles
every morning as he sat there and drank his coffee. These articles were
often sent about a minute or two apart and all came in the span of under half
an hour.
Eventually, I started to wonder what was up, and so I went into Lev’s
office. I saw him scrolling up and down on the page. I said, “Lev, if you are
not actually going to read the article, just tell me you are not interested and
that is fine, I will stop sending them.” Lev told me, “Actually, I did read the
article.”

When I looked into his comments, I saw that, in fact, his
comprehension of the article was extraordinarily high. I said, “Oh, you read
the article before I sent it to you.” However, I was mistaken. I saw Lev
scrolling rapidly on a page as we chatted, and continued my line of inquiry:
"So, you're scrolling through and skimming the articles?" Lev replied, “No,
the speed at which I scroll is actually the speed of me reading.”
I was shocked. I immediately scoffed, “How’s that possible? How do
you have that level of detail and clarity when you are scrolling on the page
as fast as I would scroll if I were searching for something?” Lev told me
that his wife, Anna, is one of the leading specialists here in Israel in the
field of speed reading and SuperLearning. I am a big believer in kismet, and
on that day, it was working in my favor.
I had previously tried to learn the skill of speed reading and, quite
frankly, never succeeded. I tried Tim Ferriss’ PX Method, and the Evelyn
Wood’s Seven-Day Speed Reading and Learning Program. I learned to scan
and turn pages very quickly, but my comprehension was appalling.
When Lev and I checked, my speed was actually about 450 words a
minute, with 20 to 30% comprehension. Lev, on the other hand, was
comfortably reading about 1200 words a minute - at 80 to 90%
comprehension. The difference was dramatic. Lev was able to read a 300-
page book in about an hour and a half, tell me all the pertinent details, and
where to find everything.
I have always been interested in accelerated learning and life hacking.
In fact, I was on my way to a condensed ten-month MBA program, where I
would have a ton of reading and a ton of stress.
Lev generously offered to introduce me to his wife for one-on-one
training sessions. I took Anna's course, (which was not cheap, by the way)
and it took about six weeks. Those six weeks changed my life more than I
could have ever imagined.
In the process of obtaining my MBA, I would find myself reading the
pages of an exam and then looking up to rest my eyes as I planned about my
response. Without fail, everyone else in the auditorium would take another
10 to 15 minutes to read the exact same content.
There were many funny times where study group mates would
comment, “You know, we’d appreciate it if you would actually read the
article.” I echoed Lev’s words to me earlier, “I read the article. Check out 

page 32, Exhibit C. You will find the exact information you've been looking
for.”
No “Genius” Designation Required
It is very important to note that Lev, his wife Anna, and I are not
particularly genius people. However, we each were taught to learn quickly
and effectively. We have learned to take advantage of the things that our
brains are most drawn to, and we are now able use that understanding to
accelerate our learning and understanding.
Now, ever since I acquired this skill, I have had many people ask me
how they too can learn to do the same thing. I have shared Anna’s course
with a number of people. In fact, a few of my friends have taken it, either in
person or on Skype. However, Anna is only one woman, and a mother of
three at that, and, as I mentioned, her course is not cheap.
That was the beginning of the brainstorming sessions. Anna, Lev and I
wanted a way that we could share this incredible skill set with the world.
I was taking some courses online, including one on Udemy, and I
thought it would be a great platform to teach this skillset to many people.
Anna's course had never been recorded, and other than one-on-one Skype
sessions, had never been taught online before. Lev, Anna, and I thought it
would be a great way to spread the potential of Anna’s teachings. We
collaborated on the course and result was our bestselling online course on
Udemy. At the time of this publication, we are among the most successful
paid courses of all time having enrolled roughly 25,000 students!
Our next goal was to produce this book, so that many others may have
the opportunity to become SuperLearners.
Laying The Groundwork
You are probably very eager to get started. However, there are a few more
things to cover as we lay the groundwork for effective use of this course.
First, at the end of some chapters, there are recommended
supplementary materials that are hyperlinked in the PDF Syllabus (see
Chapter 2). Pay attention to these resources, as they are an integral part of
this course.
Homework

Download the Syllabus for this course at http://jle.vi/pdf.
After you download the Syllabus, check out the recommended
supplementary materials for this chapter. The supplementary material is a
vital part of this course. As you interact with the material, it will increase
your ability achieve your goal of becoming a SuperLearner. More on that
later.

 

Chapter 2: Course Syllabus & Proposed 
Training Schedule
Online Resources
SuperLearner Syllabus: This is an extremely important document because
this gives you all the resources that we cover in the course with convenient
and easy to find links. Begin by downloading the PDF Syllabus at
http://jle.vi/pdf. Please note the sections and chapters of this book
correspond to the Syllabus. The resource material and exercises are
clickable links in the PDF file, and provide much faster access to the online
exercises and external resource material utilized in this course.
It is imperative to note that all the exercises and all the supplemental
resources are integral parts of this course. The exercises are designed
specifically to achieve targeted skills, and fulfill some of the psychological
requirements for adult learning. The supplemental resources give you not
only practice and improve skill sets, they are also an important part of
training your mindset and ensuring your success as you go through the
course.
Browser Bookmark ZIP File: If you are tech savvy, you may also
choose 
download 
the 
SuperLearner 
Bookmarks 
ZIP 
file
(http://jle.vi/bookmarks), which you can import into your browser to add
instantly all of the resources to your bookmarks.
Proposed Training Schedule
“How Long Until I Will Be Able to…?”
Students love to ask these types of questions, and the answer is always: “it
depends.”
This outline serves as a rough timeline that will apply to the average
student. Of course, every student arrives to the course with different levels
of training, different learning challenges, and different bad habits. For this
reason, different exercises and milestones will take longer for different
people.

In each step, we try to provide an indication as to when you will know
it’s time move on. There is a suggestion along the side of the PDF Syllabus
as to roughly where you should be each week.
Please note the Syllabus has been included below in a slightly different
format. As always, use your judgement. If you need more time to master an
exercise, then spend the time to accomplish your goal. Do not force yourself
to move on just meet an arbitrary timeline. Because adult learners all have
different schedules and responsibilities, the dedicated time for learning new
skills may not be conducive to the schedule provided. Remember, it is a
guideline.
Remember: Learning is Not a Spectator Sport!
WEEK 1
SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION
Chapter 1	About Us: How This Course Came To Be
Chapter 2	Course Syllabus
Chapter 3	Learning How To Learn
Chapter 4	What is a “Super Learner,” Anyways?
Chapter 5	Overview: What You Will Be Learning
SECTION 2: IMPROVE YOUR MEMORY: BUILDING THE 
SUPERLEARNING INFRASTRUCTURE
Chapter 6	Why We Need To Improve Our Memory First
Chapter 7	 How We Store Information: A Very Brief
Explanation
Chapter 8	Why Images Are The Most Powerful Way To
Remember
Chapter 9	What Types Of Images Come Naturally To You?
Chapter 10	 The Theory In Action: Learning Something
New

WEEK 2
SECTION 3: USING MENTAL MARKERS FOR LEARNING
Chapter 11	What Do Pictures Have To Do With Reading?
Chapter 12	Creating Effective Markers For Better Memory
Chapter 13	Demonstration: Creating Markers As We Read
Chapter 14	Trying Out Your New Skills
Chapter 15	Linking Markers For Better Retention
WEEK 3
SECTION 4: PRE-READING AND PREPARATION
Chapter 16	Pre-Read Before You Read
Chapter 17	Creating An Intense Interest And Curiosity
WEEK 4
SECTION 5: READ WITH YOUR EYES, NOT WITH YOUR INNER 
VOICE
Chapter 18	How Most People Read: Subvocalization
Chapter 19	Saccades: Using Your Eyes As Effectively As
Possible
Chapter 20	Improving Your Eye Span: Wider Saccades
Chapter 21	More Efficient Saccades
WEEK 5
SECTION 6: LET’S SPEED THINGS UP!
Chapter 22	Speed Training With A Card
Chapter 23	Training At The Speed You Wish To Read

Chapter 24	Speed Tip: Tricking Your Brain Into Speeding
Up
Chapter 25	Creating Markers At Speed
WEEK 6
SECTION 7: SYSTEMS FOR CREATING AND MAINTAINING 
LONG-TERM MEMORIES
Chapter 27	Mind Mapping
Chapter 28	Memory Temples (Expanded & Improved!)
Chapter 29	Number Memorization System
Chapter 30	Chunking
SECTION 8: GOOD LEARNING HABITS
Chapter 31	Sleeping And Learning
Chapter 32	The Proper Learning Environment
Chapter 33	 Using Software To Help Us Maintain
Memories
WEEK 7 AND BEYOND – NEVER QUIT
SECTION 9: APPLYING YOUR NEW SKILLS TO ANYTHING AND 
EVERYTHING
Chapter 34	 Tailoring The Skills: Dense Materials Or
Textbooks
Chapter 35	Tailoring The Skills: Learning Languages
Chapter 36	Tailoring The Skills: Never Forget A Face Or
A Name
Chapter 37	SuperLearning By Video Or Audio
Chapter 38	Thank You & Congratulations
“Once you stop learning, you start dying.” -Albert Einstein

At The Conclusion Of The Six Weeks: 
You should also continue to monitor your reading speed and practice the
relevant exercises until you reach at least 700  wpm with 85%
comprehension. Usually, this happens around week 10.
Closing Thought
1. Do something every day. Make the time for at least 10 minutes of
practice every day.
2. Don’t rush through the material. New skills take time to learn and
then practice to perfect. You cannot become a concert pianist in six weeks,
especially if you do not know how to read the notes on the music in front of
you!
Homework
Check the PDF Syllabus for homework assignments and recommended
supplementary materials.

 

Chapter 3: Learning How To Learn 
This chapter will explain the necessity of overcoming some deeply
ingrained bad habits and crutches in order to unlock our potential as a
SuperLearner.
As we dive into the course, we are going to be relearning how to
learn. Of course, you have not gotten this far in life without an ability to
learn. Yet, no matter where your skill level is for learning, you can benefit
from learning these skills. Anyone from a struggling high school student to
a skilled musician or top programmer can learn these skills and thereby
increase their ability to learn.
Obviously, you know how to read, or you would not have bought this
book. Second, you have a desire to increase your reading speed,
comprehension, and memory skills in order to become a SuperLearner.
Congratulations!
You already have what it takes to become a SuperLearner. As
mentioned earlier, the prerequisites for becoming a SuperLearner are
determination, diligence, and learning how to best utilize brain functions.
However, we need to break a lot of the old learning habits and
behaviors that have been ingrained in the past. Behaviors like laying in a
dark room while reading and studying. Another behavior that is critical to
break is the habit of "subvocalization." This and many other habits will be
explained as we progress through the course.
Training Methodology
By design, we are going to be using a training methodology called
progressive overload. Weight lifters and bodybuilders use this same
methodology. They consistently overload their body’s capabilities forcing
the body, or in our case, the mind to adapt.
 

Over time, in a sequence of adaptations, you will see dramatic
improvements but that does not mean it is pleasant or easy along the way.
Frustration Is Normal
You are going to confront a lot of resistance as you try to break these old
habits, and that is okay. It is part of the process. Just understand that speed
reading and accelerated learning can help with a whole host of things, from
attention deficit to memory issues.
We are going to get there. Just be patient with yourself. Do not beat
yourself up and remember that some of these habits you have had for many
years.
These habits are crutches that you have come to rely on. It is perfectly
natural to encounter some resistance and difficulty in overcoming them. Do
not worry, in time you will learn to walk and even run without those old
crutches.
Homework
Check the Syllabus for homework assignments and recommended
supplementary materials.

 

Chapter 4: What Is A SuperLearner?
SuperLearner Definition
A SuperLearner is someone who is able to synthesize, understand, and
retain vast amounts of information in a short time period.
In this chapter, we will meet some SuperLearners and begin to explore
how they function. Check out the videos in the supplementary materials!
SuperLearner (noun): One who is repeatedly able to synthesize,
understand, and retain vast amounts of information in abnormally
short periods of time.
Now, let’s make sure we have clear understanding of what exactly a
SuperLearner is. In my mind, a SuperLearner is someone who is able to
synthesize, understand, and retain a vast amount of information in a very
short timeframe. I was personally first turned on to the idea of
SuperLearning when I read Tim Ferriss’ The 4 Hour Workweek.
Tim has his own strategy for accelerated learning, which leans heavily
on something called the Pareto Principle. It is the idea that 20% of the
results come from 80% of the efforts and 80% of the results come from
20% of the efforts. Tim then finds the 20% that is going to yield the 80%
and he concentrates his efforts on that 20%. By concentrating on the 20%,
he has been able to become a salsa champion, a sumo-wrestling champion,
learn languages in short periods of time, and so on.
IMPORTANT: 
SuperLearning does not mean that we are sacrificing quality of learning
or doing the bare minimum. In fact, other famous SuperLearners include
Elon Musk, the cofounder of PayPal, Inc. and CEO of Tesla Motors, and
SpaceX; or how about Tim Doner, a 19 or 20-year old kid who showed up
on YouTube in May 2013, and has taught himself 23 languages (at various
levels) since the age of 13.
In addition, another famous polyglot recently gave a TED Talk. His
name is Benny Lewis. He has developed a system for fluently speaking a

language in just three months. He has learned eight languages so far. He is
definitely an amazing SuperLearner.
Make sure to reference the Syllabus for clickable links to the videos of
some of these amazing people. One common thread that you will notice
with all of them is not one of them claims to be geniuses. Take the time to
watch these videos.
SuperLearners are not exceptional, geniuses, or gifted people. They are 
people with a desire to learn and unique methods to do so. They are 
learning how to learn.
In fact, the majority of these people say that anyone can do what they
do. Benny, for example, struggled for years even to learn Gaeilge, the
second language in his home country of Ireland. SuperLearners have trained
themselves in various highly effective skills in reading, memory and so on
to overcome all the usual challenges of education. With enough work, you
will do the same.
Homework
Check the Syllabus for homework assignments and recommended
supplementary materials.

 

Chapter 5: An Overview Of What You Will Be 
Learning
Chapter Overview
This chapter will give you an overview into what we will be learning. While
you may be excited to dive immediately into a book or an online course you
have been meaning to get around to, it is important that we learn the skills
in the appropriate order, so you get the most out of this course.
Understand The Goal
Our goal is to become a SuperLearner. We understand there are old learning
habits to break and new skills to learn.
Now, let’s talk about how we are going to get there. I want to give you
a quick overview of what we are going to be learning and in what order. I
know you want to dive in and go as fast as you can. You may be tempted to
jump around and try out different chapters in this book just to “see what
they are” or “see if they work.”
However, and this is a really big however, it is important you learn
these skills in the appropriate order, so you get the most out of this course.
Jumping around will leave you frustrated and, and will not teach you
anything.
First and foremost, in Part 2, we have to work on our memory. We
have to gain a general understanding of how new information is learned.
In Part 3, we will start talking about "Mental Markers." This is a
hugely important habit for effective learning. We will be spending quite a
bit of time perfecting our skills there.
Then in Part 4, pre-reading and prep work, we are going to learn how
to prepare our minds for intensive learning sessions with a brief overview of
some best practices.
Once all that is done, in Part 5 we are finally ready to learn speed
reading. We will be learning the difference between how most people read
and how speed readers read. I will actually be teaching you some incredible
techniques that will double or triple your reading speed almost instantly,

and improve your comprehension and focus. Since we have done the
groundwork of improving memory at that point, you will be able to
comprehend and retain most of that information. In fact, you will retain
much more than you could have ever imagined.
In Part 6, we will speed things up even more, with some hacks to
smooth out the learning curve of speed reading.
By Part 7, you will have developed the capacity to absorb huge
amounts of information very quickly; we will therefore learn how to store
this information long-term.
In Part 8, we address healthy learning habits to give you that extra
edge.
Finally, in Part 9, I will teach you how to tailor your new skills
towards different things like learning languages, meeting people, absorbing
online classes, and much more.
Let me just say, I know it seems like a long journey until we get to the
really sexy parts like speed reading; however, please be patient. As I said, it
is important we take things step by step. This course is not meant to be
consumed in a day, a few days, or even a couple of weeks.
Along the way, you should practice the different skills and exercises
we are going to give you. Together, these exercises should be practiced 20-
60 minutes a day until you see significant progress. Only then should you
move on to the next set of exercises. It is fine to read the next set of
chapters or section, but do not rush yourself.
Practice: 20 to 60 minutes a day until you see significant progress and
then move to the next set of exercises
Every skill is going to build on previous skills. It is like building a
brick wall. If the foundation is faulty, the wall will crumble. If even one row
of bricks is set off center, the wall will not hold in strong winds. Learning
the skills in order and learning them well will prepare the foundation for
your future learning endeavors and will hold fast in the heat of MBA
exams, oral exams or jobs that require tons of reading and recall.
It is better to take an extra day, or even a week, to learn the skills in
order to get the most out of the exercises than to push yourself to meet some
arbitrary time designation in order to rush through the course. Move

forward at your own pace and keep progressing in the learning process.
Shoes do not come in just one size. Individuals do not progress at the same
rate. It is okay to learn new skills at your pace.
The caveat is to practice daily. The old adage always applies to
learning new skills – use it or lose it.
One Last Thing
Okay, we have just one more very important thing to cover before we get
started.
I want you to grab a writing instrument. I want you write down in the
space provided below 3 to 5 different goals and/or reasons why you want to
become a SuperLearner.
Explain to yourself why this is an important thing for you to acquire
and why are you going to put in the work to make it happen. Later on, when
we talk a little bit about the requirements for adult learners, you will
understand why this was such an important step to complete in advance.
So, go ahead and write those things down. Do not skip this step. It is
really extremely important.
My Goals / Reasons 
For Wanting To Succeed In This Course 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
ASK DR. LEV: SETTING YOUR SUPERLEARNING GOALS

When you try to develop SuperLearning skills, it is very important not to
lose sight of your goals.
Do I want to develop a super-skill? Super-skills set us apart from
other human beings, help promote our reputation on LinkedIn and draw
people to us in various ways we enjoy. However, this comes with a price.
While the word record in speed reading is above 10,000 words per
minute, I do not know anyone who actually needs to read THAT fast. I
have spent almost 10 years developing my learning skills, and I hold a
modest 2000 words per minute position. Jonathan and most of my best
students stop around 1000 words per minute. Why? They just cannot
afford to read hundreds of articles per week. If you really want to excel,
you need to spend at least 1-2 hours per day speed reading. Do you have
enough curiosity, time and willingness to read that much?
Do you want to read FAST? Reading at 1000 wpm is very fast.
Often other people look at this in disbelief. You could read almost any
article in minutes, forming a qualified opinion on almost any subject.
This is a proper result of our SuperLearning course done right.
Now the question is how do you keep the speed from dropping? You
will start to lose speed if you:
•
Do not read at least 15 minutes a day
•
Jump from language to language without training in one
language consistently
•
Do not get enough sleep
Therefore, before you get to 1000 wpm, ask yourself, “What kind of
material will I enjoy and can easily obtain that will keep me speed-
reading at least 15 minutes a day?”
Do you want to pass exams? If you want to pass exams, the core
value of this course is improving your retention and not your reading
speed.
•
Do spend more time on various ways to make markers and link
them together.
•
Do spend more time on finding your personal style and on
creating stories.
The saccades and subvocalization suppression may be wrong for you
right now, since they take weeks to master and even then, they marginally
reduce the retention quality.

Do you want to master a field of knowledge? When you are trying
to master a new field of knowledge, the ability to links ideas together is
more important than the ability to read or remember a piece of
information. You should investigate complex ways of chunking data and
linking all the pieces of data you have together. You should also prioritize
and distinguish what to focus on and what is “nice to have.” Most
importantly, every time you read something completely new, pause a bit
to process the information: creating great links takes time and creative
effort.
Do you want it all? Eventually you may read this list and
understand that you want it all. This means that you can revisit this book
and our online resources from time to time and adapt to the
SuperLearning style that is best for you now.
 
Homework
Check the Syllabus for homework assignments and recommended
supplementary materials.
 

 

SECTION 2: IMPROVE YOUR MEMORY: BUILDING 
THE INFRASTRUCTURE FOR SUPER-LEARNING 

Chapter 6:	Why We Need To Improve Our Memory First
Chapter 7: How We Store Information: A Very Brief
Explanation
Chapter 8:	 Why Images Are the Most Powerful Way to
Remember
Chapter 9:	What Types of Images Come Naturally to You?
Chapter 10:	 The Theory In Action: Learning Something
New

 

Chapter 6: Why We Need To Improve Our 
Memory First 
Chapter Overview
We are going to start our journey by improving our memory. This chapter
will explain why that is so important.
Fortunately, this is not boring stuff at all. This is a general theory of
how to improve learning, not just for reading, but also for meeting new
people, learning new skills, and more. While we work our way through the
course, you will be able to apply these skills in your everyday life, and that
by itself is an important aspect of learning.
The Hose And Bucket Metaphor
So, let’s dive in and start by improving our memory.
To understand why we need to improve our memory first, I want you
to imagine a bucket. Above that bucket, you have a funnel and pointing into
the bucket right now is your average garden hose. Filling the bucket is no
problem, right?

Now, imagine we switch out that garden hose for a fire hose. Big
problem, right? The funnel overflows, water spills everywhere. In about a
second the bucket overflows, too, and it is not long before you have to shut
the water off completely.
If we take this metaphor for our learning process, it is easy to
understand why we have to upgrade the bucket first, and then the funnel
before we finally upgrade the hose.
SuperLearning is only possible with the proper infrastructure in place.
This is to say that without the right infrastructure, speed reading is
useless, even impossible, and that is why I personally failed twice before
reaching Anna’s course.
As a demonstration of my reading speed, imagine scrolling through a
webpage at a constant, steady pace. Now, reading this quickly is actually
not nearly as challenging as you might think.
Comprehension (or what we call markers (mental images that have
been created)/storing memories) at this speed is a very different challenge.
That is why we must improve our memory first.
Rote Memorization And/Or Childhood Mnemonics 

Most of us, when we have to learn new information, are subjected to rote
learning (memorization of information based on repetition) or the
mnemonic devices of our childhood, such as, I before E except after C, or
the 
mathematic 
algorithm, 
PEMDAS 
(parentheses, 
exponents,
multiplication/division, addition/subtraction).
These methods are hugely effective for children learning simple things
like mathematical conventions, but they do not allow us much flexibility
with the information, and we become highly dependent on them. How many
of you, for example, have to think back to the alphabet song before you can
confidently declare what the 11th letter is in alphabet?
New Memorization Skills 
What if you were required to memorize:
•
Information that is much more complex
•
The chronological order of historical events
•
All the ligaments in the human body
For those types of learning requirements, you need an entirely new set
of memorization skills. You would need skills that give you a richer
understanding of material extending way beyond songs or acronyms.
Don't worry; it is actually much more fun than it sounds. This is a
general theory on how to improve learning, not just for reading but also for
meeting new people, learning new memorization and retention skills, and
much more. While we work our way through the course, you will be able to
apply these skills in your daily life, and that feeling of success will only
accelerate your progress and motivation.
If you don’t use it, you literally lose it!
Homework
Check the Syllabus for homework assignments and recommended
supplementary materials.

 

Chapter 7: How We Store Information: A Very 
Brief Explanation 
Chapter Overview
This chapter is extremely crucial. It explains the inner workings of the brain
(in layman’s terms), and helps us understand how we can “hack” the system
our brain uses to record information. No prior knowledge is required, and
the supplementary information below is optional, just in case you are
curious to learn more!
Your Brain 
Now, I am not a cognitive scientist, and, so you are going to have to forgive
this very basic explanation. It is important that you understand why we do
some of the strange things that we are going to do in this course, and how
this relates to the actual inner workings of your brain.

Your brain is made up of tiny little cells called neurons.
These electrically excitable cells process and transmit information
using electrochemical signals. These signals are called synapses.
Synapses are specialized connections between the cells, but that is not
relevant at this point. What you need to know is that neurons connect to
each other, and form neural networks.
Now this is where it gets really, really important.
The more connections there are to a neuron, the less likely it is to be
removed or to fade away.
To give you a metaphor, I want you to imagine two roads. One is a six-
lane highway connecting eight medium sized towns, and another one is a
country road connecting one house to another.
Which road is more likely to receive regular maintenance and
improvements? Which road is more likely to be neglected and eroded from
lack of maintenance?
For example, this is why you rarely forget information like your
childhood address, even if you have not used it for years and years because

there are so many connections, and stories, and experiences, around that
piece of information.
Your brain determines critical information and never lets it erode
away.
Your brain determines information that is critical and will never let it
erode away. Knowing this can benefit us tremendously. The process of
SuperLearning necessitates that we create more connections to the
information we want to learn. This way the brain is forced to remember the
information like it would remember everyday information that we use.
Think about how children learn, for example. They pick up a spoon,
and they play with it time and time again. They eat with it; they drop it on
the floor; someone picks it up and gives them another one; and the child
drops it again. All the while, they are building connections; understanding;
a history around that spoon; what the spoon does; and how it feels in their
hand and mouth. Finally, they learn to remember the name – spoon.
Learning To Create New Memories
This is also why writing things down, and/or creating mnemonics is a
useful tactic for learning. You are simply creating new memories in the
form of stories, songs, muscle memories, or sentences. You are associating
new information to a word you already know, such as the popular "FOIL"
mnemonic in mathematics (first, outer, inner, last for the order of
mathematical operations).
As we have said before, we can go far beyond this. We can build
connections in a much more efficient and rich way and that is what we are
going to be learning.
Ask Dr. Lev: Neurons and Long-Term Retention
Neurons are arranged into clusters of neurons that fire together making 
each other stronger. For long-term retention you do need to connect your 
new information with an existing strong pattern (prior knowledge), or 
generate a new strong pattern by collecting many pieces of strongly 

related information (cool exciting trend) or by spaced repetition (hard 
work). Weaker relations will help creativity, but will probably not 
generate long-term retention.
Homework
Check the Syllabus for homework assignments and recommended
supplementary materials.

 

Chapter 8: Why Images Are The Most 
Powerful Way To Remember 
Chapter Overview
In this chapter, we do an important exercise to demonstrate how effective
your brain is at recognizing a huge amount of information very quickly
through imagery.
In the supplementary materials, you will find another TED Talk about
memory, from a U.S. national memory champion. He started out as a
normal guy. He explains how he (and other memory champions) uses vivid
imagery to remember long lectures, decks of cards, and so on. We also
mention this TED Talk in Chapter 27, so you can watch it now or later on in
the course.
Remembering Pictures Is Easier Than Remembering Words
Evolution has yielded us some pretty interesting skills. We have been telling
oral histories for thousands of years. These tales pale in comparison to the
amount of time we have been hunting and gathering. For this reason, not
only can we spot an approaching predator very quickly, we can also
remember pictures far better than spoken words.
This is super useful if you need to remember where you saw that herd
of buffalo going, or what that berry looked like that made everyone really,
really sick. Because of this evolutionary development, visual information is
simply easier to recall than auditory information. It also has to do with the
fact that pictures are more encoded.
Pictures are imbued with rich information such as color, context,
shape, and size. They are more likely to have a higher number of neural
connections (connections between neurons, which send information via
neurotransmitters).
Picture Exercise
To demonstrate this, I want to go through an exercise. Below is a
picture. I want you to look at the picture for just two seconds. I want you to

try to understand as much detail as you can about it in that short amount of
time. Then, cover it up with your hand and do not cheat.
What are the people doing? How are they feeling? What is the
context? I bet you, if I asked you to, you could write me at least a thousand
words about the composition, where things were laid out, what the meaning
and significance of the photo is. A photo is just information, and you have
just read and remembered thousands of words worth of information in a
matter of seconds. This demonstrates how effective it is to see things as
pictures and symbols rather than auditory information.
Learn to transform concepts, ideas and other information into pictures.
The best types of pictures are strange, bizarre or emotionally connected
to memories.
For this reason, we have to learn to transform concepts, ideas, and
other important information into pictures immediately when we encounter
the data. The best types of pictures, by the way, are strange, bizarre or
emotionally connected to memories. We will be covering that in a little bit
more detail soon.

The Neuroscientist’s Story
For now, I want to tell you a pretty interesting story that actually happened
while I was building this course. I was chatting with a neuroscientist from
Austria. We were talking about the process of learning, neural networks
and, specifically, how it related to languages.
We began to talk about different ways to learn, and she recanted a
story to me of when she was in med school, long before she started to
understand how the brain functioned. Apparently, one of her first tasks was
to memorize all of the bones in the human body, which is a momentous
task.
She was telling me that she struggled a great deal in memorizing the
bones. This was because she was simply looking at the bones in a diagram -
a very undetailed image without any emotional connection. She said she
struggled and struggled.
Then, the next assignment she had was to memorize all of the
ligaments in a human body. The way that the students in the class learned
was much more memorable, though: they had to dissect a cadaver from top
to bottom. She told me, “I promise you, I will never forget a single ligament
in the human body.”
One thing that really caught my attention is how she described it. She
told me,
“Those images will never leave my mind.”
Now, I think it is important to draw a conclusion from this. It is
important to realize that in both situations (the textbook with the bone
diagrams and the cadavers) there were images involved. However, the
detailed experiential images of the cadaver, the very concrete minute
details were what allowed her to memorize the ligaments much better than
the bones.
This is a really interesting segue, because in the next chapters, we are
going to be talking about what types of images are most poignant and most
memorable, and also how we can better store images laced with
significance and meaning to improve our long-term memory.
Homework

Check the Syllabus for homework assignments and recommended
supplementary materials.

 

Chapter 9: What Types Of Images Come 
Naturally To You? 
Now, there are different types of images, of course, and different types of
images will be more effective for different types of people. Let’s do a quick
test to determine if you choose the stereotypical (catalog) image, a
personal (favorite) image, a fictional (comical) image or a graphical
(drawing) image.
From there, we know what images you should be imagining and which
ones will be most effective for you.
I want you to imagine a coffee cup. You can close your eyes if you
want or keep them open, but imagine that coffee cup as vividly as possible.
What is the design of the coffee cup? How tall is it? How full?
Congratulations - you just created your first "marker."
What type of image did you choose for your marker?
Is it a stereotypical coffee cup that you might have seen in a catalog?
Is the cup one you just made up? Is it a coffee cup that you remember from
a previous experience? Do you see the cup as a drawing? Take note of this
because this is most likely your ideal style of image.
Of course, if you choose a coffee cup that already has neural links,
such as the one your mother used to sip from while she made you breakfast,
that is best. It will allow you to link new information about coffee and
coffee cups in general to those preexisting, deeply encoded memories.
Sometimes you will get personal images and sometimes not. You have
to learn to go with what comes naturally, i.e., what pops in your head at the
moment. Try to lean towards whatever type of image you find is most
conducive for you to remember. Just relax and go with the image that comes
to mind.
There are two important points to remember when you start creating
these images. First, make sure that the images are as detailed as possible.
Not just a coffee cup, but a ruby red coffee cup about half full with a little
handle and a textured finish.
Second, make sure that you create connections, memories and stories
based on that image, even if it is a fictional one. Imagine a character you

know drinking from it. This is very slow going at first. Believe me, I
understand that; however, we are working towards building up a
vocabulary of pictures and reference points, just like you have a
vocabulary of words.
Eventually, you should have a mental image (A.K.A. "Marker") for just 
about everything you wish to remember.
This will give you reference points, and various memories and ideas that
you can connect around coffee cups, cars, groups of people, whatever it is.
Dr. Lev Explains Images
You can use any image as long as you infuse it with meaning. This
meaning may come from your own life, some fictional or nonfictional
histories you know, your creativity, etc. You may combine some or all of
the meanings.
Typically, images are either highly creative or highly logical.
Imagine you run a Google image search. If your marker is easily
recognizable, the initial marker visualization is good enough. The details
and links are added to the marker by connecting markers with other
information within the text or context.
 
What If You Have A Hard Time Visualizing? 
This difficulty is fairly common. Perhaps 10% of people have difficulty
visualizing.
Here are our recommendations:
Work to develop this skill. You can view images and then close your
eyes and try to recall them. During the recall process, engage as many
senses as possible, i.e., how does it feel, smell, taste? It is possible to
succeed in this course without developing a strong visual memory, but it
will be much more difficult.
Try to see what types of images are easier for you to visualize and
focus on them, i.e., comic characters, photographic images, pencil sketches,
paintings.

You may have an easier time remembering other sensory information,
such as feeling heat or cold, smelling chocolate, etc. If so, that is fine. These
sensations can also be markers.
Some students who have difficulty visualizing images find it easier to
relate to diagrams or colors as memory points or triggers.
The main point is not to give up. You will figure out something that
works for you.
Homework
Check the Syllabus for homework assignments and recommended
supplementary materials.

 

Chapter 10: The Theory In Action: Learning 
Something New 
This entire chapter is an exercise to practice the use of visual markers, and
demonstrate how effective they are.
Let’s dive into an exercise. I am going to throw some random concepts
at you, and I want you to try to make "markers," or mental images, for each
of those concepts:
California
For example, if an article talks about California, you convert California to
an image. I want you to take note of what type of image you chose for
California. Is the image stereotypical, personal, fictional or graphical? Try
to connect the image of California to one or two existing memories that you
have.
World War II
Try converting World War II to an image. Is the image a movie you saw
with a friend, or a museum you visited? Do not create just a generic concept
of World War II such as a warplane; be very specific in creating the image.
Can you hear the planes and the bombs? Can you see the flag being raised
at Iwo Jima? What is the first image that comes to mind when think of
World War II?
Now, Try It On Your Own
I want you to open any random Wikipedia article or use the featured Wiki of
the day in your chosen language. I want you to choose about 10 to 20
concepts or ideas in that article, and convert them to images – or what we
call "markers".
Once you have those 10 to 20 markers, and you have taken time to link
them to your own memories, I want you to try to play them back. Can you
name all 10 to 20? Is there a difference between the ones that you do
remember and the ones that you do not?

Most likely, the ones you are going to remember are the ones you have
best described with highly meaningful and concrete images, images that are
well linked to other memories of yours. You can try this a few times and see
how you improve over time. If you want a real challenge, I want you to try
to remember them in chronological order.
Now, as you go about the rest of your day or week, try this with
anything you are trying to learn, either for work or school or even in this
course. Choose something you want to remember, and create a visual
mental marker for it. Get as detailed as possible and see how it actually
helps you learn more effectively.
Homework
Check the Syllabus for homework assignments and recommended
supplementary materials.

 

Thanks for downloading our free preview!
 
We hope you have enjoyed it, and that it has embarked you on a 
lifelong journey of accelerated learning.
if you wish to keep reading, please consider purchasing the full book on 
Amazon or the Apple iBookStore 

APPENDICES
Appendix 1:	Baseline Reading Speed and Retention Test 1
Appendix 2:	Reading Speed and Retention Test 2
Appendix 3:	Reading Speed and Retention Test 3
Appendix 4:	If You Have Questions

 

Appendix 1: Baseline Reading Speed And 
Retention Test 1
In order to understand and measure your progress in both reading speed and
quality of retention, let’s assess your baseline reading speed and
comprehension.
Question 1:
Instructions:
Read the following text at the fastest speed you can, while attempting
to remember and store at least 80% of the pertinent details. Use a timer,
starting and stopping at the indicated points, to measure your speed. Once
you have completed reading the selection, you will be asked a series of
questions that test your understanding and retention of the material.
Speech: Copyright Franklin Delano Roosevelt, 1941. View the full text
here: http://jle.vi/roosevelt
--START YOUR TIMER-—
Mr. Vice President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the Senate, and of the
House of Representatives:
Yesterday, December 7th, 1941 -- a date which will live in infamy --
the United States of America was suddenly and deliberately attacked by
naval and air forces of the Empire of Japan.
The United States was at peace with that nation and, at the solicitation
of Japan, was still in conversation with its government and its emperor
looking toward the maintenance of peace in the Pacific.
Indeed, one hour after Japanese air squadrons had commenced
bombing in the American island of Oahu, the Japanese ambassador to the
United States and his colleague delivered to our Secretary of State a formal
reply to a recent American message. And while this reply stated that it
seemed useless to continue the existing diplomatic negotiations, it contained
no threat or hint of war or of armed attack.
It will be recorded that the distance of Hawaii from Japan makes it
obvious that the attack was deliberately planned many days or even weeks

ago. During the intervening time, the Japanese government has deliberately
sought to deceive the United States by false statements and expressions of
hope for continued peace.
The attack yesterday on the Hawaiian islands has caused severe
damage to American naval and military forces. I regret to tell you that very
many American lives have been lost. In addition, American ships have been
reported torpedoed on the high seas between San Francisco and Honolulu.
Yesterday, the Japanese government also launched an attack against
Malaya.
Last night, Japanese forces attacked Hong Kong.
Last night, Japanese forces attacked Guam.
Last night, Japanese forces attacked the Philippine Islands.
Last night, the Japanese attacked Wake Island.
And this morning, the Japanese attacked Midway Island.
Japan has, therefore, undertaken a surprise offensive extending
throughout the Pacific area. The facts of yesterday and today speak for
themselves. The people of the United States have already formed their
opinions and well understand the implications to the very life and safety of
our nation.
As Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy, I have directed that all
measures be taken for our defense. But always will our whole nation
remember the character of the onslaught against us.
No matter how long it may take us to overcome this premeditated
invasion, the American people in their righteous might will win through to
absolute victory.
I believe that I interpret the will of the Congress and of the people
when I assert that we will not only defend ourselves to the uttermost, but
will make it very certain that this form of treachery shall never again
endanger us.
Hostilities exist. There is no blinking at the fact that our people, our
territory, and our interests are in grave danger.
With confidence in our armed forces, with the unbounding
determination of our people, we will gain the inevitable triumph -- so help
us God.
I ask that the Congress declare that since the unprovoked and dastardly
attack by Japan on Sunday, December 7th, 1941, a state of war has existed

between the United States and the Japanese empire.
--STOP YOUR TIMER-- 
How long did it take you to read this text (518 words) with ≥ 80%
retention?
• Under 1 Minute (Over 500 words per minute)
• 1:00 - 1:30 (300-500 words per minute)
• 1:30 - 2:00 (250-300 words per minute)
• 2:00 - 2:30 (200-250 words per minute)
• 2:30 - 3:00 (175-200 words per minute)
• Over 3 Minutes (Less than 150 words per minute)
(To get an exact number, divide 518 by the number of seconds on your
timer, then multiple by 60. For example, if it took you 2 minutes 20
seconds, you would divide 518 by 140 seconds and multiply by 60, for a
result of 222 words per minute.)
• Reading Speed: ___________wpm
Question 2:
What day was the speech delivered?
•
December 7, 1941
•
December 1, 1941
•
December 8, 1941
•
December 9, 1941
Question 3:
The Japanese failed to reply to the message sent by the United States.
•
True
•
False
Question 4:
Which of the following had not been attacked by Japanese Forces at
the time of the speech?
•
Hong Kong
•
Guam
•
Wake Island
•
Midway Island
•
Marshall Islands

•
Oahu
•
Philippine Islands
Question 5:
In addition to the land attacks, US ships between San Francisco and
Honolulu were targeted in which type of attacks?
•
Kamikaze
•
Fire bombing
•
Torpedo
•
Cannon
Question 6:
The speaker is delivering his speech in his capacity as:
•
Commander of the Navy
•
The President of the United States
•
The Secretary of Defense
•
The Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy
Question 7:
The speaker describes the acts of the Japanese forces as
“unspeakable.”
•
True
•
False
Question 8:
Which phrase does the speaker not mention in his speech?
•
Japanese Ambassador
•
Secretary of State
•
Pearl Harbor
•
Washington, D.C.
•
Mr. Vice President
•
Malaya
 

 
Answers
1.	Reading Speed: ___________wpm
Reading Retention: __________%
2.	December 8, 1941
3.	False
4.	Marshall Islands
5.	Torpedo
6.	The Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy
7.	False
8.	Pearl Harbor

 

Appendix 2: Reading Speed And Retention 
Test 2
We have yet to get into speed reading itself, but by now, your
comprehension should have improved dramatically, and with the skill of
pre-reading, you should be able to read a little bit faster.
Check your progress with this quick speed and comprehension test.
If you do not see a major improvement in your speed, don’t worry: that
is coming up in this chapter. You should however see a marked difference in
your retention score.
Question 1
Instructions:
Read the following text at the fastest speed you can, while attempting
to remember and store at least 80% of the pertinent details. Use a timer,
starting and stopping at the indicated points, to measure your speed. Once
you have completed this question, you will be asked a series of questions
that test your understanding and retention of the material.
--START YOUR TIMER-- 
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I’m only going to talk to you just for a minute or so this evening,
because I have some -- some very sad news for all of you -- Could you
lower those signs, please? -- I have some very sad news for all of you, and,
I think, sad news for all of our fellow citizens, and people who love peace
all over the world; and that is that Martin Luther King was shot and was
killed tonight in Memphis, Tennessee.
Martin Luther King dedicated his life to love and to justice between
fellow human beings. He died in the cause of that effort. In this difficult
day, in this difficult time for the United States, it’s perhaps well to ask what
kind of a nation we are and what direction we want to move in. For those of
you who are black -- considering the evidence evidently is that there were
white people who were responsible -- you can be filled with bitterness, and
with hatred, and a desire for revenge.

We can move in that direction as a country, in greater polarization --
black people amongst blacks, and white amongst whites, filled with hatred
toward one another. Or we can make an effort, as Martin Luther King did,
to understand, and to comprehend, and replace that violence, that stain of
bloodshed that has spread across our land, with an effort to understand,
compassion, and love.
For those of you who are black and are tempted to fill with -- be filled
with hatred and mistrust of the injustice of such an act, against all white
people, I would only say that I can also feel in my own heart the same kind
of feeling. I had a member of my family killed, but he was killed by a white
man.
But we have to make an effort in the United States. We have to make
an effort to understand, to get beyond, or go beyond these rather difficult
times.
My favorite poem, my -- my favorite poet was Aeschylus. And he
once wrote:
Even in our sleep, pain which cannot forget
falls drop by drop upon the heart,
until, in our own despair,
against our will,
comes wisdom
through the awful grace of God.
What we need in the United States is not division; what we need in the
United States is not hatred; what we need in the United States is not
violence and lawlessness, but is love, and wisdom, and compassion toward
one another, and a feeling of justice toward those who still suffer within our
country, whether they be white or whether they be black.
So I ask you tonight to return home, to say a prayer for the family of
Martin Luther King -- yeah, it’s true -- but more importantly to say a prayer
for our own country, which all of us love -- a prayer for understanding and
that compassion of which I spoke.
We can do well in this country. We will have difficult times. We’ve
had difficult times in the past, but we -- and we will have difficult times in
the future. It is not the end of violence; it is not the end of lawlessness; and
it’s not the end of disorder.

But the vast majority of white people and the vast majority of black
people in this country want to live together, want to improve the quality of
our life, and want justice for all human beings that abide in our land.
And let’s dedicate ourselves to what the Greeks wrote so many years
ago: to tame the savageness of man and make gentle the life of this world.
Let us dedicate ourselves to that, and say a prayer for our country and for
our people.
Thank you very much.
--STOP YOUR TIMER-- 
How long did it take you to read this text (625 words) with ≥ 80%
retention?
▪
Under 1 Minute (Over 600 words per minute)
▪
1:00 - 1:30 (400-600 words per minute)
▪
1:30 - 2:00 (300-400 words per minute)
▪
2:00 - 2:30 (250-300 words per minute)
▪
2:30 - 3:00 (200-250 words per minute)
▪
Over 3 Minutes (Less than 200 words per minute)
(To get an exact number, divide 625 by the number of seconds on your
timer, then multiple by 60. For example, if it took you 2 minutes 20
seconds, you would divide 625 by 140 seconds and multiply by 60, for a
result of 268 words per minute.)
This 
speech 
is 
copyrighted 
material. 
View 
the 
original:
http://www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/rfkonmlkdeath.htm
Question 2
Martin Luther King was shot and killed in
•
Memphis, Tennessee
•
Nashville, Tennessee
•
Jacksonville, Florida
•
Birmingham, Alabama
Question 3
The speaker gives his audience a choice between moving forward with
greater polarization or making an effort to replace violence with
understanding, compassion, and love.
•
True
•
False

Question 4
The speaker mentions that a member of his own family was also killed.
•
True
•
False
Question 5
The speaker shares his favorite poem, a work by the poet...
•
Homer
•
Aeschylus
•
Socrates
•
Robert Frost
Question 6
The speaker lists various things that the United States does not need.
Which of these does he not mention?
•
Division
•
Hatred
•
Violence
•
Segregation
•
Lawlessness
Question 7
Which of the following does the speaker urge the audience to pray for?
•
The family if Martin Luther King
•
Their own country
•
Understanding
•
Compassion
•
All of the above
Question 8
The speaker remembered to thank his audience at the end of his
speech.
•
True
•
False
 

 
Answers
1.	Reading Speed: ___________wpm
Reading Retention: __________%
2.	Memphis, Tennessee
3.	True
4.	True
5.	Aeschylus
6.	Segregation
7.	All of the above
8.	True

 

Appendix 3: Reading Speed And Retention 
Test 3
Take this quiz only after you have been practicing your optimized,
efficient saccades and broken the “sound barrier.” This should take a couple
of weeks, so we recommend skipping the quiz for now if you intend to
continue reading. Come back to it later to track your progress!
Question 1
Instructions:
Read the following text at the fastest speed you can, while attempting
to remember and store at least 80% of the pertinent details. Use a timer,
starting and stopping at the indicated points, to measure your speed. Once
you have completed this question, you will be asked a series of questions
that test your understanding and retention of the material.
--START YOUR TIMER-- 
I am honored to be with you today at your commencement from one of
the finest universities in the world. I never graduated from college. Truth be
told, this is the closest I’ve ever gotten to a college graduation. Today I
want to tell you three stories from my life. That is it. No big deal. Just three
stories.
The first story is about connecting the dots.
I dropped out of Reed College after the first 6 months, but then stayed
around as a drop-in for another 18 months or so before I really quit. So why
did I drop out?
It started before I was born. My biological mother was a young, unwed
college graduate student, and she decided to put me up for adoption. She
felt very strongly that I should be adopted by college graduates, so
everything was all set for me to be adopted at birth by a lawyer and his
wife. Except that when I popped out they decided at the last minute that
they really wanted a girl. So my parents, who were on a waiting list, got a
call in the middle of the night asking: “We have an unexpected baby boy;
do you want him?” They said: “Of course.” My biological mother later

found out that my mother had never graduated from college and that my
father had never graduated from high school. She refused to sign the final
adoption papers. She only relented a few months later when my parents
promised that I would someday go to college.
And 17 years later I did go to college. But I naively chose a college
that was almost as expensive as Stanford, and all of my working-class
parents’ savings were being spent on my college tuition. After six months, I
couldn’t see the value in it. I had no idea what I wanted to do with my life
and no idea how college was going to help me figure it out. And here I was
spending all of the money my parents had saved their entire life. So I
decided to drop out and trust that it would all work out OK. It was pretty
scary at the time, but looking back it was one of the best decisions I ever
made. The minute I dropped out I could stop taking the required classes that
didn’t interest me, and begin dropping in on the ones that looked
interesting.
It wasn’t all romantic. I didn’t have a dorm room, so I slept on the
floor in friends’ rooms, I returned coke bottles for the 5¢ deposits to buy
food with, and I would walk the 7 miles across town every Sunday night to
get one good meal a week at the Hare Krishna temple. I loved it. And much
of what I stumbled into by following my curiosity and intuition turned out
to be priceless later on. Let me give you one example:
Reed College at that time offered perhaps the best calligraphy
instruction in the country. Throughout the campus every poster, every label
on every drawer, was beautifully hand calligraphed. Because I had dropped
out and didn’t have to take the normal classes, I decided to take a
calligraphy class to learn how to do this. I learned about serif and san serif
typefaces, about varying the amount of space between different letter
combinations, about what makes great typography great. It was beautiful,
historical, artistically subtle in a way that science can’t capture, and I found
it fascinating...
--STOP YOUR TIMER-- 
How long did it take you to read this text (625 words) with ≥ 80%
retention?
•
Under 1 Minute (Over 600 words per minute)
•
1:00 - 1:30 (400-600 words per minute)

•
1:30 - 2:00 (300-400 words per minute)
•
2:00 - 2:30 (250-300 words per minute)
•
2:30 - 3:00 (200-250 words per minute)
•
Over 3 Minutes (Less than 200 words per minute)
(To get an exact number, divide 584 by the number of seconds on your
timer, then multiple by 60. For example, if it took you 2 minutes 20
seconds, you would divide 584 by 49 seconds and multiply by 60, for a
result of 715 words per minute.)
This speech is copyrighted; view the original: http://jle.vi/sj
I have measured and recorded my speed alongside my previous
measurement - now test my comprehension!
Question 2
The speaker tells us he never...
•
Graduated from college
•
Attended college
•
Understood why people go to college
•
Regretted dropping out of college
Question 3
The speaker dropped out of ____ College after the first ____ months,
but he stayed around for another 18 months or so.
Question 4
The speaker’s biological parents gave him up because they wanted a
girl.
•
True
•
False
Question 5
The speaker’s biological mother insisted all of the following except
that...
•
Her child be adopted by college graduates
•
Her child go to college
•
Her child would grow up with siblings
Question 6
The speaker dropped out of college because...
•
It was too expensive for his parents
•
He didn’t see the value in it
•
He didn’t know what he wanted to do in life

•
He figured it would work out “OK”
•
All of the above
Question 7
Which of the following did the speaker not do to get by after dropping
out of college?
•
Return Coke bottles
•
Sleep on the floor
•
Walk long distances
•
Eat at a Hare Krishna Temple
•
Sell artwork
Question 8
The speaker tells the story of how he became fascinated with one
subject in particular: ____
 

 
Answers
1.	Reading Speed: ___________wpm
Reading Retention: __________%
2.	Graduated from college
3.	Reed, 6 months
4.	False
5.	Her child would grow up with siblings
6.	All of the above
7.	Sell artwork
8.	Calligraphy

 

Appendix 4: We Would Love To Hear From 
You!
If you have questions, comments, concerns, or any other type of
inquiry, please reach out to us:
superlearner@jle.vi

 

GLOSSARY
Encoding – adding meaning to the information by converting it into
something we understand: acoustic, semantic (meaning), or visual
information.
Gordian knot: The Gordian Knot is a legend of Phrygian Gordium
associated with Alexander the Great. It is often used as a metaphor for an
intractable problem (disentangling an “impossible” knot) solved easily by
cheating or “thinking outside the box” (“cutting the Gordian knot”).
Life Hacking: Refers to any trick, shortcut, skill, or novelty method
that increases productivity and efficiency, in all walks of life. It is arguably
a modern appropriation of a Gordian knot - in other words, anything that
solves an everyday problem in an inspired, ingenious manner
Marker: Mental images that have been created and imbued with
details, which are used to represent specific information
Neurons: Electrically excitable cells that transmit information using
electrochemical signals
Polyglot (noun): A person who speaks, writes, or reads a number of
languages
Retrieval –accessing the newly-stored information, thereby solidifying
its neural connections and integrity
Saccade (noun): A rapid movement of the eye between fixation points
Storage – transferring the encoded information from working memory
to short term memory and (hopefully) to long term memory
SuperLearner (noun): One who is repeatedly able to synthesize,
understand, and retain vast amounts of information in abnormally short

periods of time. A SuperLearner is a person who desires to take learning to
the next level by acquiring skills that enhance reading speed,
comprehension, and memory
Synapse: These electrically excitable cells process and transmit
information using electrochemical signals. These signals are called
synapses. Synapses are specialized connections between the cells.

 

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
 

Jonathan A. Levi SuperLearner (800+wpm), 
Life Hacker, Entrepreneur, Investor
Jonathan Levi is an experienced entrepreneur, angel investor, and lifehacker
from Silicon Valley.
After successfully selling his Inc 5,000 rated startup in April of 2011,
Levi packed up for Israel to gain experience in the Venture Capital industry.
While in Israel, Levi enlisted the help of speed-reading expert and
university professor Anna Goldentouch and machine learning expert Dr.
Lev Goldentouch, who tutored him in speed-reading, advanced
memorization, and more. Levi saw incredible results while earning his
MBA from INSEAD, and was overwhelmed with the amount of interest his
classmates expressed in acquiring the same skill set. Since acquiring this

“SuperLearning” skill, he has become a proficient lifehacker, optimizing
and “hacking” such processes as travel, sleep, language learning, and
fitness. He later collaborated with his tutors, creating the blockbuster
Udemy course Become a SuperLearner among others. More recently, he has
founded the Becoming SuperHuman Blog & Podcast, a spinoff brand of his
successful online courses.
Levi has been featured in such publications and programs as the Wall
Street Journal, Nana10 Television, The Silicon Valley Business Journal,
Bimmer Magazine, BMW Blog, and Donna Fenn’s latest book, Upstarts!
How GenY Entrepreneurs are Rocking the World of Business and 8 Ways
You Can Profit from Their Success, among other blogs, podcasts, and
publications.

 

Dr. Lev Goldentouch, Lifehacker And 
Technology Guru
Dr. Lev Goldentouch earned his PhD in machine learning and information
theory when he was 27 years old. Understanding the similarities of machine
learning and human super-learning allowed Lev to learn immense amounts
of knowledge in many technological and cognitive subjects. Immediately
afterwards Lev opened a consulting company, which offers its services to
highly skilled individuals, agile startups and technological giants like
Samsung.
The super-learning tools developed by Lev allow ordinary people to
learn at 10 times the speed of their colleagues, and enable machines to solve

extremely complex problems.
Lev is an active lifehacker, holds a number of patents, and is
constantly looking for new and better ways to do things. He takes great
pride in sharing his unique knowledge and experience with others.
Lev is also a prolific writer. Lev published several books and articles
on various technical and cognitive subjects, creativity and languages. Lev’s
blog www.keytostudy.com holds a large number of insightful advices,
training exercises and useful resources.

 

Prof. Anna Goldentouch, Education Guru
Prof. Anna Goldentouch started teaching super-learning skills when she was
17 years old. Anna developed the super-learning abilities as a tool to deal
with personal dyslexia, after taking several courses on super-learning. After
finishing advanced degrees in education and sociology, Anna started to
teach in Bar Ilan and Ben Gurion Universities in Israel. Anna’s courses on
speed reading, memory development and didactic techniques are extremely
popular with students. Anna also provides consulting services and training
for various large companies and government services.
Anna made it her mission to teach people how to learn in a better,
more efficient and fulfilling way.

Anna provides 1:1 Skype sessions for students all over the world,
seminars for institutions, corporate bodies and government organizations.
Anna’s ability to create extremely effective custom-tailored learning
strategies saved countless hours to tens of thousands on Anna’s students.
Anyone in need of Anna’s advice can write to info@keytostudy.com

 

OTHER BOOKS AND COURSES

Become a SuperLearner: Learn Advanced Memory & Speed Reading
(90% Off): http://jle.vi/1j
Become a Speed Demon: Automation & Efficiency to Reclaim Time
(90% Off): http://jle.vi/1k
Become a Travel Wizard: Lean to Game the System & Travel for Free
(90% Off): http://jle.vi/1l

