

Becoming Your Own 
China Stock Guru
THE ULTIMATE INVESTOR'S GUIDE 
TO PROFITING FROM CHINA'S 
ECONOMIC BOOM
James Trippon
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.


Additional Praise for Becoming Your 
Own China Stock Guru
“This book is a must read for anyone interested in China and even 
considering it! Jim Trippon’s track record of picking winning stocks 
is remarkable. I have known Jim personally and he truly is a guru. 
Anyone remotely interested in China should own this book.” 
—Marc Siegel, President, China Direct, AMEX (CDS)
“China’s ﬁ nancial system has gone from the brink of collapse a few 
short years ago to an economic powerhouse with arms that stretch 
around the world. In Becoming Your Own China Stock Guru, Jim 
 Trippon shows how serious investors can reap the rewards of China’s 
fast- growing economy.”
—Don Stowers, Editor, Oil & Gas Financial Journal
“Jim’s grasp of the historic, cultural, and economic forces shaping 
the current Chinese market, and its challenges, helps lift the veil of 
wonderment and points to opportunities for all investors.”
—Tom Hudson, First Business TV


Becoming Your Own 
China Stock Guru
THE ULTIMATE INVESTOR'S GUIDE 
TO PROFITING FROM CHINA'S 
ECONOMIC BOOM
James Trippon
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Copyright © 2008 by James Trippon. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 
108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written 
permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate 
per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, 
Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 750-4470, or on the web at 
www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be 
addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River 
Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at 
http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have 
used their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations 
or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of 
this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability 
or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended 
by sales representatives or written sales materials.  The advice and strategies 
contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with 
a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable 
for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited 
to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical 
support, please contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at 
(800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993, or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that 
appears in print may not be available in electronic books. For more information 
about Wiley products, visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Trippon, James.
  Becoming your own China stock guru: the ultimate investor’s guide to profiting 
 from China’s economic boom/James Trippon.
   p. cm.
  Includes index.
  ISBN 978-0-470-22312-3 (cloth)
   1. Investments—China. 2. Stocks—China. 3. Investments, Foreign—
 China. 4. China—Economic conditions—1976-2000. 5. China—Economic 
 conditions—2000- I. Title.
 HG5782. T725 2008
 332.63'220951—dc22
2007044840
Printed in the United States of America.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

For my Children . . .
May you be wise enough
to make a changing future your servant,
and never your master.


Contents
Acknowledgments 
ix
About the Author 
xi
Introduction 
xiii
Part I Trends—Why the Future Belongs to China
Chapter 1 
Sunrise in the East: China Becomes 
the New World Superpower 
3
Chapter 2 
Sunset in the West: The End of 
U.S. Economic Supremacy 
27
Chapter 3 
Breaking the Chains of the Bicycle 
Kingdom: China’s Dreams Come True 
51
Chapter 4 
The Coming Financial Flood 
71
Chapter 5 
Becoming a Guru 
87
Part II China’s Economic Landscape
Chapter 6 
China’s Booming Base—Manufacturing 
93
Chapter 7 
China’s Auto Industry—In Full Gear 
99
vii

Chapter 8 
China’s Energy Industry—Red Hot 
105
Chapter 9 
China’s Bonanza—Banking and Finance 
111
Chapter 10 China’s Communications 
Revolution—Almost Free Speech 
117
Part III Understanding China’s Financial Centers
Chapter 11 Beijing—The Epicenter of a 
Capitalist Revolution 
125
Chapter 12 Shenzhen—China’s Test City 
133
Chapter 13 Shanghai—China’s Own Manhattan 
139
Chapter 14 Taiwan—The Breakaway Prodigy 
145
Chapter 15 Hong Kong—China’s Modern Frontier 
151
Part IV Building a China Stock Guru Portfolio
Chapter 16 Buying China Without Leaving Home 
159
Chapter 17 Understanding the Safest Way to 
Invest in Chinese Stocks 
165
Chapter 18 Identifying Opportunities in 
Chinese Stocks 
171
Chapter 19 Assembling Your Portfolio and 
Managing Risk 
177
Conclusion: A Peek at Your Guru Future 
185
Notes 
189
Index 
197
viii 
Contents

ix
Acknowledgments
W riting a book, like any great effort, requires a team. There 
are countless people who helped me along my path and allowed the 
idea for this book to become a reality. First and foremost, thanks to 
my dear wife, Kim, who tolerates my extended absences while I scour 
China for new investment opportunities. 
 
 Very special thanks go to my  China Stock Digest  team, especially 
Johnson Zhang and Professor Wu in Shanghai, Eric in Hong Kong, 
Susanne in Shenzhen, Gyan in Beijing, and George Wolff, Gigi 
Guthrie, Amal Zaid, and Ramona Moreno in the United States. 
Thanks also to Bernie Joseph, who runs my team in the Philippines. 
 
To Sam Juneau, one of the few Renaissance men of our age, 
I owe tremendous respect and admiration. I also wish to acknowl-
edge James Wolfenson, past president of the World Bank, whose 
insights about the future of China have greatly broadened my under-
standing about the most dynamic economy on the planet. 
 
I also owe a great deal to my friend Dan Nip, who has assisted 
me immeasurably in his capacity as the president of the Houston -
 Shenzhen Sister City Association. Thanks as well to Jim and Kathi 
Austin and my fellow board members at the Houston International 
Festival. I must also acknowledge the contributions of my friends at 
Houston ’ s Asian Chamber of Commerce, especially Elsie Huang, and 
thank my fellow members of the Petroleum Club of Houston. I also 
greatly appreciate the help I have received from Dong Chunming 
at the Chinese Magnesium Association, Connie Pang at the Shekou 
Container Terminals, Ltd., Ben Toh at the Venetian Macau,  Ermanno 
Pascutto at Troutman Sanders Hong Kong, and Liu Fuzhong at the 
Shenzhen Stock Exchange. 
 
I ﬁ nd great peace with the help of my friends at Chapelwood 
UMC, especially Jim Jackson, Wick Stuckey, and Dale Dodds. The 
same is true of Joel Osteen at Lakewood Church and my Iron Men 
brothers at the Second Baptist Church. 

 
 To my publishing world friends: I wish to say thank you to the 
whole team at John Wiley  & Sons, as well as to John Willig at  Literary 
Services, Inc., Don Nicholas at Mequoda, Ed Finn at  Barron ’ s , 
Bob Bly, Peter Fogel, James DiGiorgia, Paul Krupin, and the  Harrison 
Brothers at Radio - TV Interview Report, and last, but never least, 
 Steven Halpern at AOL Finance. 
 
Special thanks go to my media friends, including Tom Hudson at 
First Business, the entire gang at CNBC, Fox News, the Fox Business 
Network, and CNN International. I also gained valuable insight from 
Don Stowers at the  Oil  & Gas Financial Journal,  Kira Brecht at  SFO Maga-
zine, Deborah Duncan and Peggy Tuck in Houston, and Andy Giersher 
at WBBM Chicago. Thanks for your recognition and advice to Mark 
Hulbert at the  Hulbert Financial Digest.  And a salute also goes to Donald 
Trump, who has made being rich fashionable again. 
 
I also owe a debt of gratitude to those writers and journalists 
who make me and our fellow countrymen think: Bill O ’ Reilly, Lou 
Dobbs, Wolf Blitzer, William J. O ’ Neal, Paul Kangas, Ann Coulter, 
Anderson Cooper, Ted Koppel, Laura Ingraham, Jean Chatzky, and 
Tim Russert. I would be remiss if I failed to acknowledge Charles 
Githler and Howard Gold, who have opened new horizons in the 
ﬁ nancial universe to the public at the World Money Show. Thanks 
also go to Steve Crowley, the voice and the brains of the American 
Scene radio broadcast and to Jon Stewart and Stephen Colbert, who 
not only make us think, but also allow us to laugh while doing so. 
 
Finally, I wish to thank anyone who has helped me  appreciate, 
 understand, and write about the Chinese economic phenomenon but 
may have been omitted because of a lack of space or an  inadvertent 
lapse of memory. 
 
I hope in these acknowledgments to live up to the wisdom of 
Confucius, who wrote,  “ Forget injuries, never forget kindnesses. ” 
I must say I have enjoyed a great many kindnesses on my remarkable 
voyage of discovery in China. I thank the Chinese people, who have 
endured so much and yet succeeded so magniﬁ cently.  
x 
Acknowledgments

xi
 About the Author 
 Jim Trippon is America ’ s foremost authority on successful China 
investing. Trippon serves as editor - in - chief for the  China Stock Digest, 
America ’ s top - performing Chinese investment newsletter. A former 
Pricewaterhouse CPA, Jim has worked extensively inside China and 
has invested in its ﬁ nancial markets for years. Trippon manages a full -
 time team of ﬁ nancial analysts in China from his ofﬁ ces in  Houston 
and throughout China. 
 
 Trippon runs the Trippon Wealth Management Group, LLC, an 
SEC Registered Investment Advisory that works with corporate pen-
sion plans, private trusts, and some of America ’ s wealthiest families 
to implement China investment strategies. 
 
Trippon, his wife, and children reside in Houston, Texas. 
 
For a complimentary issue of Trippon ’ s China Stock Digest news-
letter, visit  chinastockdigest.com . 


xiii
 Introduction 
 When I was young, I used to think that money was the most 
 important thing in life. Now that I am old, I know it is. 
— Oscar Wilde  
 If you ’ re reading this introduction while still in the bookstore and 
are considering buying this book, let me ask you a question: Does 
the idea of the United States losing its status as the world ’ s largest 
manufacturing superpower bother you? What will this mean to your 
family ’ s ﬁ nancial future? We are at a watershed moment in world 
history. The greatest economic superpower the world has ever seen 
is being born right now. China ’ s economic revolution is only three 
decades old and it is already changing the investment landscape of 
the world. The moment you opened this book, you opened the door 
to the most signiﬁ cant ﬁ nancial opportunity since the emergence of 
the United States as an industrial power. 
 My goal is to help you make money from the Chinese economic 
miracle. I know for a fact that China offers you more proﬁ t poten-
tial than you could ever enjoy by limiting your investment choices 
to the U.S. stock market. How can I be so sure? 
 I know from experience. So do the subscribers to my monthly 
newsletter, the  China Stock Digest  (for a free sample issue, visit my 
web site at  chinastockdigest.com ). Many subscribers say that follow-
ing my China investment research was the best ﬁ nancial decision 
they ever made. They, too, have experienced the amazing returns 
that investing in a supercharged economy can bring. 
 I ’ m also here to reassure you that investing in the mysterious 
East doesn ’ t have to be mysterious at all. My job is to make the 

 process simple. With this book, I intend to take the mystery out of 
the process. I wish to pave the way for you to proﬁ t from a huge 
economic event  . . .  an event that has already taken the steam out 
of some familiar American companies. 
 How can I say conﬁ dently that the new Chinese economy is an 
appropriate target for our investment dollars? Some readers may 
worry about China ’ s chaotic and tragic past. Today, China is still 
a one - party state, run by Communist Party ofﬁ cials. So how can 
 capitalism thrive and earn double - digit returns for investors under a 
communist banner? As I will show you, the proof is in the  pudding. 
China is delivering spectacular returns, and continues to grow at an 
enviable rate. 
 Now, my guess is that most readers will not be able to name a 
single investment - grade Chinese company. After all, there are hun-
dreds of Chinese ﬁ rms listed on American stock markets; some are 
very proﬁ table and some are very speculative investments. I will 
help you learn how to tell them apart. 
 Most U.S. investors have developed a level of comfort investing 
in U.S. ﬁ rms. As such, it ’ s no surprise that the very idea of placing 
our hard - earned dollars in the hands of companies on the other 
side of the world can be a bit daunting. But remember, the golden 
rule of investing is diversiﬁ cation. There ’ s nothing magic about U.S. 
companies or the U.S. economy. In fact, there is a real risk in putting 
all your eggs into any single basket, in the United States or in China. 
 Scan any newspaper on any given day and you ’ ll see plenty of 
disturbing reports about deep structural problems in the U.S. 
economy. The dollar is weakening against most world currencies. 
Our nation ’ s deﬁ cits are deep and the U.S. government is not tak-
ing action to remedy problems that the Comptroller General of the 
United States calls  “ potentially disastrous. ” That ’ s why diversiﬁ ca-
tion offshore makes so much sense. It ’ s a safety measure as well as a 
potential proﬁ t center. 
 The mainstream media have frankly done a lousy job of informing 
U.S. residents about the economic miracle happening on the oppo-
site side of the globe. The emergence of China is without a doubt 
the biggest economic story of the twenty - ﬁ rst century. What do the 
United States ’ s powerful television networks report on? Pandas. With 
a few notable exceptions, most newspapers have also missed the boat 
on China. 
xiv 
Introduction

 The speed of economic, social, and physical change in China 
is nothing short of breathtaking. Many China experts openly 
admit that after a few years away from major cities like Shanghai, 
Shenzhen, and Beijing, they often become disoriented when they 
return. The pace of change is so great that the skylines of China ’ s 
cities can become almost unrecognizable after even a brief absence. 
I see amazing changes every time I return on my regular investment 
tours. 
 With so much change underway and so little attention being 
paid to it by the West, it ’ s no small wonder there are many miscon-
ceptions about China. I want to introduce you to the new China, 
a dynamic and dramatically expanding economic superpower. 
I want to offer you the perspective and insight of an investment 
 professional who is personally witnessing and participating in an 
unprecedented economic revolution. As an investor, I believe you 
also need to become familiar with the remarkable nature of the 
world ’ s fastest - growing major economy. As the saying goes about 
so many things in China, especially about ideas and technologies 
derived from the West, this is capitalism with  Chinese characteristics. 
I will explain the Chinese investment revolution as simply as possi-
ble, but I ’ m going to include a lot of supporting detail. 
 I do believe that it ’ s important to understand the booming 
economic sectors we will be investing in as new China stockhold-
ers. Always keep in mind: China is still in transition from a centrally 
planned communist system to a free market economy. The rules are 
different from those anywhere else in the world and investors need 
to know how the system functions. That ’ s why you ’ ll ﬁ nd detail in 
this book about subjects that go beyond the day - to - day functioning 
of the markets. 
 In a transitional economy like China ’ s, the government is always 
a factor and there are several levels of government that have a vested 
interest in the fate of many corporations. Sometimes, the Chinese 
government is industry ’ s greatest friend. Sometimes,  ofﬁ cial  policy 
discriminates, boosting investments in some  companies while 
 holding back other corporations in the same  sector. The state is 
often a part owner or a majority owner of some of the nation ’ s larg-
est  companies. Knowing the difference is vital to the success of your 
China portfolio. That ’ s why I make it a point of pride to maintain 
ofﬁ ces inside China as well as in the United States. 
 
Introduction 
xv

 China ’ s two internal stock markets are a world unto  themselves. 
I don ’ t recommend investing a penny directly in either the Shanghai 
or Shenzhen exchanges. In fact, it is relatively difﬁ cult to do so. 
That ’ s a good thing. Chinese regulators are doing their best to calm 
things down, but the two exchanges are wildly volatile. Stocks listed 
on the mainland are usually overpriced compared to stocks in the 
same companies traded in New York or Hong Kong. 
 I say it ’ s easier, safer, and cheaper to stick to trading on U.S. 
exchanges. 
 What should investors do when stock trading in Shanghai and 
Shenzhen goes through one of its periodic frenzies? The cardinal 
rule is: Don ’ t overreact. Don ’ t go on a buying spree when Shanghai 
catches a dose of  share fever and drives stock prices through the roof. 
And don ’ t panic when China ’ s internal markets fall back to earth. 
 Keep your eyes on the fundamentals, which I explain later in 
this book. You need to know how to take advantage of  volatility. 
Sharp market setbacks have presented my subscribers with jaw -
 dropping buying opportunities. Sometimes, roaring markets in the 
throes of share fever are nothing more than a bright, ﬂ ashing sell 
signal. To borrow a phrase, you need to know when to hold them 
and when to fold them. 
 I should reveal my bias before you go any further. Yes, I am 
very excited about the opportunities in China. I do believe there 
is a lot of money to be made by participating in the development 
of the world ’ s fastest - growing major economy. But I am no zealot. 
The rising economic tide in China will not lift all boats. Proﬁ ts are 
not guaranteed. Investors need guidance to discern the difference 
between winners, risky bets, and outright losers. 
 Yes, China presents us with an entirely new economic para-
digm. We will be talking about millions, billions, and trillions of 
dollars  circulating through a once - stagnant communist economy. 
Staggering amounts of new wealth are now being created. But this 
is not the time to ignite another dotcom frenzy. Quite the opposite. 
 I am, and always have been, a value investor. That means I look 
for companies that are underpriced. As a certiﬁ ed public account-
ant, I believe in examining the books. I want to invest in companies 
that have attractive ﬁ nancial metrics, not pie - in - the - sky promises for 
the future. 
 Join me as we explore the real - life economic miracle of China. 
Let me show you the investment opportunities available in the rise 
xvi 
Introduction

of the greatest economic power since the United States ’ emergence 
as an industrial giant during the twentieth century. Join me as we 
proﬁ t from China ’ s capitalist revolution. 
 Dedicated to your proﬁ ts, 
 Jim Trippon 
 Shanghai, China 
 
Introduction 
xvii


I
P A R T
TRENDS
WHY THE FUTURE BELONGS 
TO CHINA


3
   1 
C H A P T E R
Sunrise in the East 
 CHINA BECOMES THE NEW WORLD SUPERPOWER
   Success depends upon previous preparation, and without such 
preparation there is sure to be failure. 
— Confucius 
 Wake up, world! China will have the world ’ s largest  economy 
within 10 years. That ’ s a bold statement, but it ’ s nevertheless 
 absolutely true. 
 China ’ s capitalist revolution ofﬁ cially started with a speech 
given three decades ago by the self - proclaimed supreme leader 
Deng Xiaoping. At the time, China ’ s state - run economy was such 
a disaster that the government couldn ’ t even feed its own people. 
Peasants were starving in the countryside. 
 Yet, for most Chinese people, the nation ’ s decrepit state - run 
economy was the only system they had ever known. How could Deng 
Xiaoping drag China out of the economic dark ages and bring pros-
perity to the people . . .   or at least provide enough food to ﬁ ll their 
stomachs? 
 The year was 1978. A dramatic decision had been made 
in Beijing. China would scrap the communist principles that 
 underpinned its economy and embrace U.S. - style capitalism. In 
his speech announcing this historic change of course, the supreme 

4 
Trends
leader admitted China faced some serious economic problems. 
Then he said something utterly unexpected to kick - start the wheels 
of change in China: 
 “ To get rich is glorious! ” 
 Coming from the leader at the pinnacle of China ’ s Marxist -
 Leninist communist economy, Deng ’ s proclamation was truly 
astounding. From a politician of lesser stature, those few words would 
have been political heresy and a likely shortcut to a death sentence. 
 But Deng didn ’ t stop there. He went on to say that some peo-
ple and some regions of the country would be allowed to get rich 
ﬁ rst. Chairman Mao would have turned in his grave if he had heard 
such a statement. Mao, the late Chinese ruler, had spent more than 
a quarter of a century in a determined effort to destroy the inequal-
ities of the nation ’ s political and economic elites. But instead of 
creating a nation of equals, the old China resulted in the world ’ s 
largest social and economic disaster. 
 Now, less than two years after Mao ’ s death, his successor, the 
new supreme leader, was calling for a different revolution  . . .  a 
 capitalist revolution in the world ’ s largest communist country! Long 
before Mikhail Gorbachev prodded the Soviet Union into  perestroika 
and ultimate oblivion, Deng Xiaoping had realized that his nation 
needed a total industrial and economic transformation to prevent 
chaos and avoid the possible collapse of the Chinese state. He had 
to create an economic miracle. 
 To those who criticized Deng, his reply was quick and pragmatic. 
 “ Black cat, white cat, all that matters is that it can catch the mice, ” 
he said. With that simple, time - tested metaphor, China ’ s new leader 
brusquely dismissed decades of Marxist - Leninist ideology. The most 
important things, he believed, were jobs and money to feed and 
house his destitute nation. If that meant some people got rich in 
the process, too bad for communist ideology. Deng was China ’ s ﬁ rst 
new capitalist.  
 Who Wants to Be a Chinese Millionaire? 
 It is hard to grasp how far China has come in just three decades. 
Although it is still a communist country in name, China has  created 
more than 300,000 millionaires  1 and 108 billionaires.  2 (If you 

 
Sunrise in the East 
5
include the billionaires who reside in Hong Kong, China has an 
amazing  150 billionaires  . . .  more billionaires than any country in the 
world except the United States. ) That old communist, Deng Xiaoping, 
has already been proven right. Getting gloriously rich has turned 
out to be a surprisingly real possibility in the new China. 
 China ’ s new rich are becoming richer with unprecedented 
speed. In 1999, the  Hurun Report  ranked only 50 Chinese as being 
wealthy. During this time, the cutoff point to rank among the glori-
ously rich required a net worth of a mere  $ 6 million. 
 Today, the list has been expanded to include an almost unbe-
lievable 800 Chinese multimillionaires. What ’ s more, the cutoff 
point on the new listing of China ’ s wealthy class has been boosted 
to almost  $ 100 million. Never before has so much personal wealth 
been created in just a short period of time. The survey quite rightly 
compares the booming Chinese economy and the nation ’ s new 
economic landscape to the Industrial Revolution of the United 
Kingdom and the robber baron period of the United States, 
 “ when vast areas of the economy were wide open to be exploited 
by smart, ruthless and fast - moving entrepreneurs. ” 3 China ’ s capi-
talist revolution is creating economic growth much faster and on a 
much larger scale than in either Britain or the United States. 
 Table  1.1 illustrates the extraordinary growth of wealth in China 
that took place in the twinkling of an eye — just eight years. 
Table 1.1  Towering China Wealth
Year
Minimum Wealth to Qualify For 
China’s “Rich List”
Number of People on List
1999
$6,000,000
 50
2000
$42,000,000
 50
2001
$60,000,000
100
2002
$84,000,000
100
2003
$110,000,000
100
2004
$150,000,000
100
2005
$60,000,000
400
2006
$100,000,000
500
2007
$105,000,000
800
Source: Hurun Report, hurun.net.

6 
Trends
 According to the  Hurun Report,  the 500 richest Chinese are now 
worth an average of 100,000,000 yuan, which is the equivalent of 
 $ 276 million US! 
 The story of wealth creation in China is revealed in part by the 
sectors in which the nation ’ s new rich have ﬂ ourished. Table  1.2  
demonstrates the sectors in which the Chinese have made their 
money.  
 As depicted in Table  1.2 , the top of the heap for creating inde-
pendent fortunes in China is in property development. Rupert 
Hoogewerf, CEO of the  Hurun Report,  says,  “ What stands China 
out from the rest of the world is that  China ’ s entrepreneurs are all ﬁ rst 
generation.  There has been a revolution in China ’ s attitude towards 
wealth. ” Indeed, many Chinese I have met are jealous of the new 
rich, but all aspire to become wealthy themselves. That ’ s why mil-
lions of ordinary Chinese people open stock market accounts every 
year, driving the Shanghai and Shenzhen exchanges to record 
heights. 
 In the process of creating an entirely new wealthy class, 
China ’ s burgeoning economy has transformed the countryside. 
Table 1.2  Millionaires by Sector
Sector
Number of People
Percent in Sector
Property
220
24%
Manufacturing
205
22%
IT
73
8%
Healthcare
55
6%
Finance
47
5%
Services
44
5%
Iron and steel
41
4%
Retail
38
4%
Food and drink
36
4%
Energy
36
4%
Apparel
33
4%
Mining
31
3%
Chemicals
22
2%
Civil infrastructure
14
2%
Agriculture
12
1%
Oil and gas
9
1%
Media
6
1%
Source: Hurun Report, hurun.net.

 
Sunrise in the East 
7
Approximately 300 million desperately poor people have been 
lifted out of poverty. Moreover, the average person ’ s income has 
been increased by 400 percent.  4 
 Towering new cities have sprouted in empty ﬁ elds to house 
China ’ s growing middle class and their places of business. A never -
 ending ﬂ ood of peasants are ﬂ ocking into urban areas from the 
rural countryside in search of jobs and prosperity. This relocation 
movement is widely considered one of the greatest migrations in 
history and it is still going on. Although population estimates tend 
to be a bit unreliable, it is projected that 160 cities in China now 
have a population greater than one million. No other nation in the 
world has ever seen anything like it. 
 The Recipe for China ’ s Urban Transformation 
and Economic Growth 
 Economic growth is the driver of China ’ s urban transformation. 
From 1978 to 2006, the average growth of China ’ s gross domestic 
product (GDP) has exceeded 9.6 percent every year  5 (see Table  1.3 ). 
The speed and steadiness of China ’ s growth is unprecedented. So 
is the scale of this economic event, touching the lives of 1.3 billion 
people. 
 In 2006, China ’ s economic growth rate was a world - beating 11.1 
percent.  6 Compare that ﬁ gure to the United States, which considers 
a 3 percent annual growth rate to be a sign of a thriving economy.  
 In labor - intensive industries, China has become the dominant 
manufacturer in the world. Chinese factories now make 70 percent 
of the world ’ s toys, 60 percent of its bicycles, 50 percent of its shoes, 
and more than one - third of the world ’ s luggage.  7 Among higher -
 technology products, China produces two - thirds of the world ’ s 
 photocopiers and microwave ovens, one - third of all DVD - ROM 
drives and desktop computers, and a quarter of the globe ’ s TV sets 
and PDAs. 8 
 It ’ s no secret that Chinese factory workers earn an average of 
 $ 5.00 a day or less.  9 For those who wonder when China ’ s economic 
growth will run out of steam, the vast pool of available workers in 
the countryside provides a tangible answer. China will not run out 
of cheap labor anytime in the near future, not when hundreds of 
millions of people are waiting in line to take their place in China ’ s 
growing and much - envied middle class. 

8 
Trends
Table 1.3  China’s Trade with the World ($ billions)*
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
Exports*
148.8
151.1
182.7
183.8
194.9
249.2
266.2
325.6
438.2
593.3
762
969.1
% Change
23
1.5
20.9
0.5
6.1
27.8
6.8
22.4
34.6
35.4
28.4
27.2
Imports
132.1
138.8
142.4
140.2
165.7
225.1
243.6
295.2
412.8
561.2
660
791.6
% Change
14.3
5.1
2.6
1.5
18.2
35.8
8.2
21.2
39.8
36
17.6
20
Total
280.9
289.9
325.1
324
360.6
474.3
509.8
620.8
851
1,154.60
1,421.90
1,760.70
% Change
18.7
3.2
12.1
0.4
11.3
31.5
7.5
21.8
37.1
35.7
23.2
23.8
Balance
16.7
12.3
40.3
43.5
29.2
24.1
22.5
30.4
25.5
32.1
102
177.5
*PRC exports reported on a FOB basis; imports on a CIF basis.
Source: PRC General Administration of Customs, China’s Customs Statistics; and the National Bureau of Statistics. 
Compiled by the US-China Business Council.

 
Sunrise in the East 
9
 In China, workers cannot easily relocate from city to city to 
increase their salary because, under Chinese law, people are required 
to have a  hukou  to take a job in a city.  10 A hukou is an ofﬁ cial pass 
that allows migrants to travel into a city. Some estimates, however, 
indicate that the Chinese labor pool includes a ﬂ oating population 
of 100 million workers who are considered illegal immigrants. These 
laborers, who stream in from the countryside without a hukou, earn 
as little as a dollar a day. 
 Compare China ’ s wage advantage to the United States, where ordi-
nary factory workers earn an estimated  $ 15 to  $ 30 per hour and auto-
workers can earn more than  $ 50 per hour when beneﬁ ts are included. 
 Critics blame the Chinese government for unfairly gaining a 
competitive advantage by manipulating its currency — that is, by 
keeping the Chinese yuan (also known as the  renminbi ) artiﬁ cially 
cheap. Politicians in Washington accuse China of undervaluing its 
currency by as much as 40 percent, giving the nation ’ s exports an 
unfair advantage over U.S. products. Turn on the evening news 
and you ’ ll see a steady stream of pundits like Pat Buchanan and 
Lou Dobbs beat this drum. That ’ s not enough of an advantage, of 
course, to make up for the huge wage disparity between the United 
States and China. There is much more to it than that. 
 The fact is, there are many, many countries around the world 
with rock - bottom labor costs, not just China. In the Far East, nations 
including Vietnam, the Philippines, Indonesia, and Bangladesh all 
vie hungrily for manufacturing jobs, offering labor at rates even 
lower than those offered by China. 
 As is evident by studying Mexico, an inexpensive and sometimes 
desperate labor force is no guarantee of economic growth. Despite 
its shared border, Mexico has fallen behind China as an exporter to 
the United States. The beneﬁ ts of the North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA), physical proximity, and an abundant supply 
of cheap labor have not been enough to give Mexico an economic 
edge over China. 
 The main ingredient in China ’ s stunning recipe for success is 
its cheap, determined, and highly dependable labor force. Here ’ s 
another key to the Chinese economic miracle: 
 China ’ s workers are supported by a uniquely determined and 
well - organized government that is focused on one prime direc-
tive: to make the economy grow by any means possible.  

10 
Trends
 China ’ s highly motivated and organized workforce is supported 
by an equally motivated government. Beijing is actively building a 
vast, modern national infrastructure that has already succeeded in 
turning the once poverty - stricken nation into the world ’ s factory 
ﬂ oor. New roads, railways, airports, universities, and all of the tools 
that are required to build a modern economy are in place in the 
major cities and under construction throughout the country. This 
immense modernization project is part of a determined effort to 
make China a world leader and cement its place as an advanced 
society on the global stage. Beijing has no intention of losing its 
economic status to a lower - wage manufacturing nation. The United 
States serves as a sharp reminder of the importance of staying on 
the leading edge of infrastructure, education, and research and 
development. 
 From Rags to Riches 
 How has China grown to become the world ’ s second largest  trading 
nation, surpassing Germany and now challenging the United States? 
 To some degree, the credit goes to our old capitalist mentor, 
Deng Xiaoping. He did much more than proclaim a slogan about 
the glory of riches. He put his life and freedom at stake to create 
a modern economy in China. Even though he had been purged 
from government as a  “ capitalist roader ” in 1966 and was put under 
house arrest 10 years later as a so - called  rightist,  Deng ultimately 
unleashed the capitalist spirit in China. Nationwide acceptance of 
capitalism is another key to China ’ s growth. 
 By promoting a program called the  “ Four Modernizations, ” 
Deng set out to revamp agriculture, industry, science and tech-
nology, and education. In agriculture, Deng ’ s reforms set farmers 
free economically by allowing them to keep the proﬁ ts from crops 
they grew in excess of their government - mandated quotas. Markets 
suddenly appeared in thousands of villages as farmers sold their 
produce for cash. Private and collective enterprises appeared as 
peasants began manufacturing toys, ﬁ reworks, bricks, and clothing. 
Successful peasants became rich by Chinese standards and began 
building homes, sparking the creation of larger industries. 
 To help promote industry, Deng created special economic 
zones (SEZs) in the coastal provinces of Guangdong and Fujian. 
As he hoped, tax subsidies attracted Hong Kong ’ s manufacturing 

 
Sunrise in the East 
11
tycoons, who set up large - scale manufacturing plants. The number 
of zones eventually multiplied and the program of tax incentives 
and grants was expanded, creating an industrial explosion along 
China ’ s coastal regions. Meanwhile, moribund state - owned enter-
prises (SOEs) faced (for the ﬁ rst time) competition and the pros-
pect of bankruptcy. 
 Science and technology in China had been severely disrupted 
by the Gang of Four ’ s ill - conceived attack on the nation ’ s schools 
and universities during the notorious Cultural Revolution. As part 
of the modernization effort, an emergency program was put in 
place to expand the education system. Admissions were allotted 
according to merit - based testing rather than by party afﬁ liation. 
 In a remarkable display of pragmatism, hundreds of thou-
sands of students were sent out of the country, even to the capital-
ist Mecca — the United States — in search of modern scientiﬁ c and 
technical knowledge. They brought U.S. expertise and attitudes 
home with them. Today, Chinese universities turn out an estimated 
352,000 engineers annually. 11 
 The Market Opens 
 Deng Xiaoping also deserves substantial credit for legitimizing 
stock markets in China. While touring the special economic zone 
of Guangdong in 1992, Deng realized the power of capital invest-
ment. As he marveled at the economic boom underway in cities like 
Shenzhen, he responded to a question about equity markets. He 
said, in a famous quotation,  “ Are such things as securities and stock 
markets good or not? It is permitted to try them out, but it must be 
done in a  determined fashion. ” 12 
 It was one of Deng ’ s last major pronouncements, and it unleashed 
a ﬂ urry of capitalism at home and abroad. The issuing of shares and 
trading of stock had been tried out in a tentative and poorly organ-
ized way for many years before Deng exhorted the nation to proceed 
in a  “ determined fashion. ”  
 After Deng ’ s 1992 declaration, China ’ s would - be capitalists took 
full advantage of their new freedom to get rich by trading in a grow-
ing pool of equities, not all of them legitimate. Stock markets ﬂ our-
ished in mainland China, taking investors on a wild and volatile 
ride. Companies and brokerages appeared, soared, and sometimes 
disappeared. The two markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen now 

12 
Trends
offer more than 1,800 listings and valuations are still highly volatile, 
when compared to Western standards. 
 The China Securities Regulatory Commission is engaged in 
an ongoing effort to root out corruption and bring stability to the 
nation ’ s internal stock markets following a number of scandals and 
multiyear market crashes. Although many shady companies and dis-
honest brokerages have been put out of business, Shanghai and 
Shenzhen continue to be unstable and immature markets, driven 
more by individual speculators than by experienced institutional 
investors. Fortunately, the two mainland markets remain mostly off -
 limits to most foreign investors. Only a few large offshore institutions 
are permitted to trade in Shanghai and Shenzhen under the title of 
Qualiﬁ ed Foreign Institutional Investors (QFII). 
 Why is the regulation of China ’ s internal stock markets a fortu-
nate situation for U.S. investors? Because China ’ s best companies 
were ﬁ rst listed overseas in New York and in the special economic 
zone of Hong Kong. That gives U.S. investors easy access to the best 
China has to offer. We have more access to quality Chinese compa-
nies than the Chinese people themselves. 
 Less than a year after Deng ’ s determined pronouncement in 
favor of stock markets, a leading carmaker known as Brilliance China 
Automotive (CBA) was listed on the New York Stock Exchange, rais-
ing just  $ 80 million in its initial public offering (IPO). Brilliance 
was listed as an ADR, an American Depositary Receipt. An ADR is a 
form of equity that represents ownership in the shares of a foreign 
company trading in U.S. ﬁ nancial markets, including the New York 
Stock Exchange and the NASDAQ. 
 Although U.S. investors were slow to warm up to ADRs from 
China, informed Chinese investors knew what a good deal the U.S. 
investment community was getting. Desperate for foreign  capital, 
the Chinese government had listed only its so - called  National 
Champions on overseas markets. Companies that earned the name 
National Champions included the biggest and most prestigious 
companies in the country, including vast state - owned enterprises 
that were undergoing capitalist reforms. To the frustration of 
China ’ s would - be investors and the operators of the Shanghai and 
Shenzhen stock markets, the nation ’ s biggest companies were not 
initially listed on mainland markets and some are still not. 
 Adr.com  currently displays a total of 203 Chinese companies 
listed on U.S. exchanges (including Hong Kong – based ﬁ rms). 

 
Sunrise in the East 
13
Taking into account the Greater China region, another 108 
Taiwanese ﬁ rms are listed in the United States as ADRs. Many of the 
smaller, more speculative Chinese ﬁ rms are listed on the NASDAQ. 
But the National Champions have emerged among the biggest 
ﬁ rms on the NYSE by market cap. Five of the world ’ s biggest com-
panies (as measured by market capitalization) are now Chinese, 
compared to only three in the United States. 
 China ’ s big ﬁ ve are China Life (LFC), PetroChina (PTR), China 
Mobile (CHL), Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC), 
and China Petroleum and Chemical (Sinopec) (SNP). The three 
U.S. ﬁ rms still in the top 10 by market cap are ExxonMobil, General 
Electric, and Microsoft. Royal Dutch Shell of the Netherlands 
and Russia ’ s Gazprom round out the list. ( Note:  Industrial and 
Commercial Bank is not listed in the United States.) 
 Chinese IPOs, especially those of Chinese banks ﬂ oated on 
the Hong Kong market in 2007, have now joined the ranks of the 
largest IPOs in history. And Guangdong, the site of one of Deng 
Xiaoping ’ s ﬁ rst special economic zones, has become the breeding 
ground for the greatest number of China ’ s new millionaires.  13 
 Expat Export Advantage 
 But there is much more to China ’ s lightning - fast emergence as an 
economic superpower than the actions of one determined leader. 
China also had the advantage of an important base of knowledge 
and capital in Hong Kong, which had become a world ﬁ nancial and 
manufacturing capital during 155 years of British rule. 
 Advanced technical knowledge is being transferred from Taiwan, 
the breakaway Chinese province that had rebelled against the main-
land in a sharp rejection of the communist revolution of Chairman 
Mao. As a free market economy, the island of Taiwan has become a 
world center for semiconductor manufacturing and a major inves-
tor in developing Chinese technology industries despite ongoing 
hostility between the two powers ’ governments. Expatriate Chinese 
communities in Singapore and Malaysia also contribute to China ’ s 
emergence as a dynamically expanding economy. 
 The capitalist world has never seen anything like China ’ s sudden 
economic expansion. The restructuring of the nation ’ s  economy 
and the resulting efﬁ ciency gains have contributed to a more than 
 ten  fold  increase in GDP since 1978.  14  

14 
Trends
 Exports are booming at an accelerating rate. China ’ s trade 
 surplus for the ﬁ rst six months of 2007 zoomed to a record  $ 112.5 
billion. The scale of China ’ s expansion is so large that the statistics 
defy comprehension. For the month of June 2007 alone, exports 
were up by a breathtaking 85 percent over the previous year.  15 The 
nation ’ s growth rate topped a stunning 11.9 percent that quarter. 
China ’ s imports are also booming and would be headline news if 
Table 1.4  China’s Top Imports 2006 ($ billion)*
Commodity Description
Volume
% Change*
Electrical machinery and 
 equipment
219.0
25.3
Power generation equipment
109.2
13.4
Mineral fuel and oil
89.1
39.0
Optics and medical equipment
58.8
17.8
Plastics and articles thereof
37.8
13.6
Inorganic and organic chemicals
36.1
10.1
Ores, slag, and ash
32.2
23.6
Iron and steel
27.0
–15.4
Copper and articles thereof
17.2
33.3
Vehicles other than railway
17.0
38.4
*Percent change over 2005.
Source: PRC General Administration of Customs, China’s Customs Statistics. 
Compiled by the US-China Business Council.
Table 1.5  China’s Top Exports 2006 ($ billion)*
Commodity Description
Volume
% Change*
Electrical machinery and equipment
227.4
32.0
Power generation equipment
186.6
24.7
Apparel
88.6
34.5
Iron and steel
51.9
52.2
Optics and medical equipment
32.6
28.0
Furniture
28.0
25.0
Inorganic and organic chemicals
23.2
21.5
Toys and games
22.6
18.4
Vehicles other than railway
22.4
34.8
Plastics and articles thereof
22.2
25.0
*Percent change over 2005.
Source: PRC General Administration of Customs, China’s Customs Statistics. 
Compiled by the US-China Business Council.

 
Sunrise in the East 
15
exports weren ’ t growing even more quickly (see Tables  1.4 and  1.5 , 
respectively).  
 The Essential Consumer Class 
 The Chinese people are also beginning to embrace the new  consumer 
culture. Retail sales are increasing at a rate of almost 18 percent per 
year, with total consumption for 2007 reaching above one trillion 
 dollars. 16 The world ’ s fastest - growing exporter is now the world ’ s 
 fastest - growing consumer market. 
 Newly wealthy Chinese consumers are snapping up automobiles 
and housing at record rates. Car sales rose by more than 34 percent 
in the ﬁ rst ﬁ ve months of 2007, despite an increase in taxes. House 
sales leapt by 27 percent in the same period, even though prices 
continued to climb. 
 One sure sign that people are feeling rich is an increase in 
travel, tourism, and dining out. Once again, the Chinese are  posting 
sales increases in this luxury segment that would make any Western 
nation envious. Retail sales in lodging and catering rose by almost 
19 percent in the ﬁ rst ﬁ ve months of 2007 to hit a new high of 
 $ 12 billion. According to a report by the Credit Suisse bank, China ’ s 
booming economy will boost it to second place behind the United 
States as the world ’ s biggest consumer market by 2015. 
 China ’ s appetite for the better things in life can sometimes seem 
surprising, considering that a recent survey  17 revealed that the aver-
age income for urban workers in Beijing was less than  $ 4,600. The 
driving force behind the surge for luxury items is the capital ’ s top 
wage earners who report much better earnings. High - level workers 
in the banking, securities, legal services, and petroleum exploration 
industries earned an average of  $ 12,500 in 2006, a princely sum, 
considering the purchasing power of a dollar or its equivalent in 
Chinese yuan. 
 The Chinese Academy of Social Sciences conducted a three - year 
study and reported that as many as 240 million people have now 
joined the ranks of the nation ’ s middle class. Just two decades ago, 
a mere eight million Chinese households were considered middle 
class. The academy deﬁ nes the middle class as managers, profes-
sionals, skilled technicians, and service workers who earn between 
 $ 2,500 to  $ 10,000 a year. 18 There is still a great deal of room for 
growth. China won ’ t be fully transformed from an agricultural 

16 
Trends
 society into an industrial economy before the year 2015, possibly 
not until 2021. 19 That is not all that far away. 
 In real terms, the income of China ’ s middle class has grown 
faster than even Deng Xiaoping might have hoped when he ﬁ rst 
exhorted the nation to go ahead and get rich. The per capita 
income of urban residents rose from a miniscule 343 yuan (about 
 $ 44) back in 1978, to an average of 11,759 yuan in 2006. The per 
capita income of farmers stood at 134 yuan in 1978 (about  $ 17), 
growing to 3,587 yuan in 2006  20 (about  $ 473, adjusted for inﬂ a-
tion). Farmers still lag city dwellers by a wide margin, but millions 
have at least been lifted above starvation wages. 
 Who are these new Chinese? The blue uniform of Chairman 
Mao is long gone. So is the angry image of dissent in Tian ’ anmen 
Square. The Chinese middle class is now much like any other in the 
world: white collar, college - educated, and ambitious. Unemployment 
is still high, approaching 10 percent, and so the level of competition 
for a good job is ﬁ erce. Competition for jobs means workers tend to 
remain stable once they have found a position. 
 The government is scrambling to create new industries and 
new jobs for the millions of educated young people and migrant 
farmers who enter the workforce every year. Always worried about 
the specter of social unrest, the Chinese government has set itself the 
mind - boggling task of creating 10 million new jobs every year. 
 Because China enjoys a household savings rate of at least 30 per-
cent, 21 the potential to invest China ’ s capital pool in new industry 
and to expand internal consumption is still enormous. The nation ’ s 
growing pool of wealth is transforming China ’ s internal economy, 
and these changes inﬂ uence our investment decisions. 
 A study by Grey Global Group of Beijing found that the mem-
bers of the younger generation in China are very conﬁ dent about 
their futures and driven to get ahead in the business world. Money 
and self - image are important to this new breed of Chinese con-
sumer. They are willing to experiment by buying new gadgets and 
wearing trendy clothes. More than half say they need to take risks to 
be successful, and Grey Global interprets this ﬁ nding as the emer-
gence of a huge unmet demand for new trends from consumer 
product companies.  22 
 As disposable income increases, we expect to see the pool of 
Inter net subscribers within China to grow substantially. It is  projected 
to reach 200 million by the end of the decade and may pass that 

 
Sunrise in the East 
17
 milestone much sooner. We also expect the market for appliances, 
especially luxury appliances, to increase. And there is little doubt 
that demand for automobiles, oil, energy, cell phones, and housing 
will continue to rise exponentially as millions of Chinese migrate to 
the major cities and join the nation ’ s capitalist revolution.  
 Rising Economy, Hidden Dragon 
 The statistics we read in the newspaper can be misleading in a 
country as large and diverse as China because they paper over the 
wide gap between urban wealth and rural poverty. On a national 
basis, China ’ s gross domestic product (GDP) per capita was a rela-
tively humble  $ 1,800 in early 2007.  23 The average worker ’ s income 
is expected to rise to  $ 2,400 by 2010.  24 But this surprisingly low 
measure of individual wealth and productivity is distorted by the 
huge number of Chinese people who live in the countryside, many 
of them yearning for an opportunity to enjoy the prosperity of city 
dwellers. The World Bank estimates that 150 million Chinese still 
live in absolute poverty without adequate food or clothing.  25 But the 
Bank says the lot of the rural Chinese is improving, with an astound-
ing 400 million people having been lifted out of poverty between 
1985 and 2001. 
 A word of advice: Investors should always look at China ’ s growth 
statistics with a jaded eye, but not because they tend to be over-
stated, as was usually the case with centrally planned economies 
like the now defunct Soviet Union. To the contrary, China ’ s num-
bers are usually understated. Why? Because China prefers not to 
alarm the world or attract undue hostility from its trading partners 
with revelations about the scale of its economic expansion. As the 
always - quotable Deng Xiaoping once said,  “ China should disguise 
its ambition. ” 
 Here ’ s a startling example. In early 2006, the Chinese government 
decided to take a deeper look at its recent economic growth statistics 
and concluded it had made an error, a very big one. Beijing bureau-
crats suddenly discovered (or perhaps revealed) that the size of the 
economy had been underestimated by a whopping  $ 280 billion.  That ’ s 
billion, with a capital  “ B. ” The revelation of China ’ s new growth ﬁ gures 
touched off the equivalent of an earthquake on the world ’ s economic 
scene. 

18 
Trends
 Many comfortable assumptions were shaken up badly. Observers 
in the European Union noted with particular alarm that China 
had suddenly replaced Italy as the world ’ s sixth - largest economy. 
 Europolitix.com  worried aloud,  “ The Asian dragon now threatens 
the French number ﬁ ve ranking. ” Of course, both France and Italy 
have now been left in the dust by China ’ s economic dragon. 
 Just how important was this discovery? The revision of China ’ s 
2006 economic growth estimates followed a one - year economic cen-
sus that discovered the missing  $ 280 billion in hidden  economic 
output during 2005. To put it in perspective, the census result 
meant that China had discovered a new internal economy equal 
in size to the economies of entire countries. This previously unre-
corded economy is on a par with the economies of Turkey or 
Indonesia. 
 The new economic numbers boosted China ’ s gross domestic 
product for 2005 to almost  $ 2 trillion, as measured by the conven-
tional yardstick of nominal GDP (see Figure 1.1). That resulted in a 
colossal jump of 17 percent in the GDP from the previous year. 
 The new GDP numbers transformed our own understanding 
of the Chinese economy, and they made it a much more attractive 
investment arena. Previously, statistics were calculated from data 
provided by institutions such as large factories, a method left over 
from the days of the centrally planned communist economy. In 
China ’ s increasingly market - based economy, these supply - side ﬁ g-
ures entirely missed the cash component of economic activity. 
 Supply - side economic numbers fail to take into account the 
amount of money that consumers  actually spend.  This ongoing 
accounting error has thoroughly distorted perceptions of the 
Chinese economy for decades and given economists countless 
sleepless nights. The new numbers reveal a picture of China that 
is far more balanced and hopeful than we had dared imagine. 
What has been revealed is a giant service economy within China. 
North Americans take the service economy for granted because 
so much of our economic activity is based on value - added services 
and knowledge - based products. It turns out that China is also fast 
becoming a player in this arena. 
 Fears that the Chinese economy was in a bubble, driven largely 
by excessive investment, have been eased considerably. This shows 
that the national economy is much more diversiﬁ ed and healthier 
than anyone had known. 

 
Sunrise in the East 
19
 There may be more hidden economic activity to be revealed in 
China, adding to its already phenomenal growth proﬁ le. Dong Tao 
of Credit Suisse First Boston says that China may still be underesti-
mating the size of its service sector by another  $ 200 billion. 
 Who Is the World ’ s Real Economic Superpower? 
 The shape of the world economy is changing so quickly that it will 
soon be unrecognizable to those who are not following the China 
story. It may seem that China still has a long way to go before it 
eclipses the United States ’ s economy, which had a GDP of more 
than  $ 13 trillion in 2006. 26 But the day is coming. 
 Conventional wisdom predicts that China will overtake the 
United States in 2035 in nominal GDP terms. But that prediction 
severely underestimates China ’ s accelerating economic growth and 
the scale of its economic transformation. 
 The World Bank has an alternative and very credible way of 
measuring national economic output, the PPP method:  Purchasing 
Power Parity.  Many economists believe that PPP provides a more 
meaningful way of comparing economies than the usual nominal 
GDP ﬁ gure. Here ’ s what the World Bank ﬁ gures tell us. As  measured 
by Purchasing Power Parity, the Chinese economy is  already  the sec-
ond largest on the planet, following only the United States. 
Figure 1.1  People’s Republic of China’s Nominal Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) from 1952 to 2005
Source: billcara.com.
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
16,000
18,000
20,000
GDP (in billions of RMB yuan)
Korean
War
1952
1956
1960
1964
1968
1972
1976
1980
1984
1988
1992
1996
2000
2004
Year
Great Leap
Forward
Cultural
Revolution
Market-Based Economic
Reforms since 1978
67.9 billion in 1952
Farm privatization
Shenzhen SEZ
Shanghai SEZ
WTO entry
1997 Asian
Financial Crisis
18232.1 billion in 2005

20 
Trends
 This is a big shift in America ’ s worldview and it calls for a few 
words of clariﬁ cation. Purchasing Power Parity is a way of comparing 
the economies of countries without the distortions caused by cur-
rency exchange rates and other disparities. Rather than estimating 
GDP by national currencies, PPP calculations compare the average 
costs of goods and services between countries. Imagine, for exam-
ple, that a factory worker in China has to pay much less for a new 
washing machine than his counterpart in the United States. The 
Chinese worker may be earning less than the U.S. worker in abso-
lute dollar terms, but he may be richer than the raw numbers indi-
cate because of his greater purchasing power for a given basket of 
goods and services. The World Bank and the Central Intelligence 
Agency (CIA) use PPP when comparing national economies. 
 By the standard of Purchasing Power Parity (PPP), China had a 
GDP of   $ 10.1 trillion  in 2006.  27 Compare that with America ’ s GDP, 
estimated at  $ 13.13 trillion, using the same PPP yardstick. China is 
very close and catching up quickly. 
 As I said at the beginning of this chapter, China is deﬁ nitely 
on track at current growth rates to surpass the United States as 
the world ’ s number one economic power within 10 years. In its 
 “ Eleventh Five - Year Plan, 2006 – 2010 ” the Chinese government set 
ambitious goals to transform the nation into a  “ well - off society ” in 
the next 20 years and to  double GDP in 10 years. 28 
 China ’ s growth affects the whole world and it has been a par-
ticular boon to its Asian neighbors. Roughly one - third of China ’ s 
trade volume is conducted within the Asian region, amounting to 
approximately half a trillion dollars. This increased trade volume 
has allowed Asian nations to enjoy higher rates of growth than 
industrialized countries in the West.  29 Japan is one of the great ben-
eﬁ ciaries of increased trade with China. The island nation is ﬁ nally 
reporting GDP growth of more than 2.5 percent after years of 
 stagnation, when growth barely touched the 1 percent mark. 
 Former Australian prime minister Paul Keating calls China 
the motor of the world economy.  30 Keating, who has also served as 
Australia ’ s treasurer, calculates that China adds  $ 400  billion to  $ 500 
billion worth of new wealth to the world ’ s economy every year, an 
amount that has now surpassed the U.S. contribution to global 
wealth creation. 
 In Table  1.6 , you ’ ll notice that the United States ranks number 
one among China ’ s trading partners. The United States ’ exports to 

 
Sunrise in the East 
21
China are rising very quickly, up an average of 22 percent a year 
since China joined the World Trade Organization in 2006,  31 con-
tributing to the sustained prosperity of the United States. And, 
while the United States may not be number one among countries 
exporting to China, the trend is still positive (see Table  1.7 ). 
Table 1.6   China’s Top Trading Partners, 2006 ($ billion)*
Rank
Country/Region
Volume
% Change*
 1
United States
262.7
24.2
 2
Japan
207.4
12.5
 3
Hong Kong
166.2
21.6
 4
South Korea
134.3
20.0
 5
Taiwan
107.8
18.2
 6
Germany
78.2
23.6
 7
Singapore
40.9
23.3
 8
Malaysia
37.1
20.9
 9
The Netherlands
34.5
19.8
10
Russia
33.4
14.7
*Percent change over 2005.
Source: PRC General Administration of Customs, China’s Customs Statistics. 
Compiled by the US-China Business Council.
Table 1.7  China’s Top Suppliers, 2006 ($ billion)*
Rank
Country/Region
Volume
% Change*
 1
Japan
115.7
15.2
 2
South Korea
89.8
16.9
 3
Taiwan
87.1
16.6
 4
United States
59.2
21.8
 5
Germany
37.9
23.3
 6
Malaysia
23.6
17.3
 7
Australia
19.3
19.3
 8
Thailand
18.0
28.4
 9
Russia
17.7
37.3
10
Singapore
17.7
7.0
*Percent change over 2005.
Source: PRC General Administration of Customs, China’s Customs Statistics. 
Compiled by the US-China Business Council. All rights reserved.

22 
Trends
 China ’ s Biggest Import: Your Factories 
 One of the great mistakes made by U.S. politicians and television 
commentators is to focus angrily and exclusively on the downside 
of China ’ s ballooning export surplus. But why blame China? 
 Here are the facts. Many of the factories that have been built in 
China in the past decade are the result of offshoring. Unlike out-
sourcing, offshoring involves the shifting of an entire corporation ’ s 
production apparatus to the Chinese mainland to take advantage 
of low labor costs. According to Ma Kai, the minister of the pow-
erful National Development and Reform Commission, China has 
received more foreign direct investments than any other coun-
try for 14 straight years. By the end of 2006, there were 590,000 
 foreign - invested ﬁ rms in China.  32 This is unlike any economic 
event in history. More than half a million foreign ﬁ rms have staked 
their place in China. Tens of thousands have uprooted their facto-
ries and voted with their feet by rebuilding manufacturing facilities 
inside China! 
 This is an astonishing economic migration. It is clear that 
the Chinese economic miracle has as much to do with offshor-
ing by developed nations and foreign investment as any initiative 
sponsored by the Chinese. China ’ s entry into the World Trade 
Organization in 2001 may have given foreign businesses comfort 
that they could operate in a stable legal structure. It was foreign 
ﬁ rms, however, many of them Asian as well as from the United 
States, that are responsible for a massive shift of production facili-
ties to China ’ s mainland. 
 The consequences of the Chinese offshoring revolution are 
effectively a double - edged sword. Stephen Roach at Morgan Stanley 
estimates that more than half of America ’ s whopping trade deﬁ -
cit with China results from offshore production.  33 Millions of U.S. 
workers have lost factory jobs to offshoring. Yet America ’ s unem-
ployment rate remains remarkably low. Clearly our economy is cre-
ating new jobs to ﬁ ll the gap. What ’ s more, economists at Morgan 
Stanley estimate that cheap imports from China have saved U.S. 
consumers  $ 600 billion since the mid - 1990s and provided a source 
of cheap parts to U.S. manufacturers. 
 The rise of Chinese consumerism may eventually begin to 
reduce the yawning trade imbalance that has struck so much 
fear into the hearts of U.S. economists. Chinese authorities 

 
Sunrise in the East 
23
 acknowledge that their economy is far too dependent on exports. 
That ’ s why news of increasing Chinese retail consumption and the 
development of an internal service economy is music to the ears of 
 economic observers inside China and outside. 
 China ’ s leaders want to build an economy that won ’ t suddenly 
collapse if foreign demand for their exports begins to wane. As one 
Chinese diplomat told  The Economist, “ Imports, that ’ s real diplomacy, 
because it means you ’ re attractive to others. It means that other 
countries need you, not that you need them. ” 34 
 By the same token, developed economies, the United States 
in particular, all desperately want China to consume more foreign 
goods and services. Thanks to China ’ s ballooning trade surplus, it 
has become the world ’ s largest holder of foreign exchange reserves. 
In a stunning development, China passed the one trillion dollar 
mark in foreign exchange holdings during the last quarter of 2006. 
 As if a trillion dollars of extra cash weren ’ t enough, the ﬂ ood 
of foreign currency continues to pour in at an accelerating rate. 
During the ﬁ rst half of 2007, another quarter of a trillion dollars 
was added to the nation ’ s pool of foreign reserves.  35 
 This unprecedented trove of wealth gives China immense 
power. Until 2006, most of China ’ s foreign exchange surplus was 
simply invested in U.S. Treasuries and bonds issued by other indus-
trialized nations. As every investor knows, U.S. Treasuries may be 
secure, but they do not pay a princely return. 
 When China passed the trillion dollar mark in foreign exchange 
assets, banking authorities decided they needed a better return on 
their holdings. Two hundred billion dollars has been carved out 
of the nation ’ s foreign exchange reserve to invest in securities that 
offer higher returns and higher potential risk. How the Chinese 
decide to invest this block of money is the big question. 
 Interestingly, the ﬁ rst slice of China ’ s foreign exchange,  $ 3 bil-
lion, was invested in the private capital ﬁ rm Blackstone. That money 
was rushed into the market to take a stake of the company before 
it launched its IPO. The remaining billions have the power to 
shake up stock markets. How ironic it is that a nation still run by 
the Communist Party has suddenly acquired the ﬁ nancial resources 
to reshape the world ’ s capital markets. (As 2007 came to a close, 
Beijing decided to allocate a signiﬁ cant portion of this fund to bail-
ing out ailing banks and to the provision of badly needed social 
services.) 

24 
Trends
 Chinese tariffs and government - sanctioned protectionism are 
often blamed for the nation ’ s huge trade imbalance with the United 
States. But that is far from the truth. China is actually twice as open 
to trade as the United States is and three times as open as Japan. 
According to C. Fred Bergsten, the highly respected director of the 
Peterson Institute for International Economics, China has been 
the fastest - growing market for U.S. exports for the last 15 years. 
Testifying before the Senate Finance Committee, Bergsten pointed 
out that U.S. exports to China grew by 160 percent between 2000 
and 2005, while America ’ s exports to the rest of the world rose by 
only 10 percent. China ’ s ratio of imports to GDP has soared from 
5 percent in 1978 to 30 percent in 2005.  36 
 The United States is unlikely to become competitive with 
Chinese labor costs in the foreseeable future. That ’ s why the United 
States must invent new services and knowledge - based products that 
will appeal to China ’ s growing middle class.  
 Wise Words from the Guru 
 The United States remains a powerful innovator. China, however, 
has the potential to become a much bigger customer for U.S. inno-
vation and become a powerful partner with our knowledge - based 
industries. Because China has a population of 1.3 billion people, 
we have not yet begun to experience its full potential. China is still 
at an early stage of development compared with the growth curve 
of other countries, including Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan. 
According to Carsten Holz, a professor of economics at Hong 
Kong University of Science and Technology, these countries all 
experienced a similar economic rise from poverty. Judging by the 
track records of Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan, it appears that 
China still has a lot of room to grow. Holz predicts that China ’ s 
GDP (measured by purchasing power) will surpass the United 
States in 2010 and says it will continue growing rapidly until 2015.  37 
 Because of China ’ s economic transformation, the world is enter-
ing a new phase of economic development that will shake up every 
assumption about our world that has prevailed for the past century. 
There is simply no doubt that China will emerge as the world ’ s larg-
est economy. But China cannot achieve this goal without ongoing 
capitalist reform and investment. 

 
Sunrise in the East 
25
 As an unabashed capitalist, I see the emergence of China as an 
opportunity for investment. As an investor, I expect the Chinese 
economy to continue growing and I look forward to seeing my 
 clients ’ and readers ’ investment dollars grow right along with them. 
I, for one, believe that nothing helps economies grow like enlight-
ened capitalism. And, nothing returns proﬁ ts to investors like well -
 informed capitalism. 
 The most populous country in the world is still in transition 
from communism to free market capitalism. As investors, you 
and I have the privilege of proﬁ ting from China ’ s new capitalist 
revolution.     


27
   2
C H A P T E R
  Sunset in the West 
 THE END OF U.S. ECONOMIC SUPREMACY     
 What is of the greatest importance in war is extraordinary speed: 
One cannot afford to neglect opportunity.  
— Sun Tzu  
 My dad was an infantry soldier during World War II. If you saw 
the movie  Saving Private Ryan,  you would have a good idea of what 
landing in Normandy was like for my dad and his comrades on the 
early morning of D - Day. Of the 550 men in Dad ’ s engineering bat-
talion, only 50 were still alive after the ﬁ rst hour of combat. This 
certainly became a deﬁ ning moment in the life of my dad. 
 Likewise for the millions of U.S. soldiers who spent World War II 
ﬁ ghting in the Paciﬁ c, the war years were a deﬁ ning experience not 
only in their personal lives, but for their entire generation. When Dad 
and his fellow soldiers came home from the war, they returned to a 
United States that was much stronger and more prosperous than the 
one they had left. 
 At war ’ s end, the United States was the world ’ s only remaining 
and functional industrial power. Europe was, for the most part, a 
bombed - out shell, with Germany, France, and the Soviet Union 
all in shambles economically. Japan, likewise, was made to pay a 

28 
Trends
 devastating price for initiating what the Chinese still refer to as the 
 “ War of Japanese Aggression. ” 
 Unlike Europe and Japan, however, the United States was full 
of shining new factories that could produce abundant quantities of 
 industrial and consumer products with great speed and  efﬁ ciency. 
Hence, the world ’ s industrial center of gravity had shifted to the United 
States from Europe for the ﬁ rst time in history. The United States 
became the world ’ s leading economy and its primary manufacturing 
center. We continued to hold the position as the world ’ s largest econ-
omy throughout the remainder of the twentieth century and into the 
twenty - ﬁ rst.  
 A Tough Pill to Swallow 
 This will be a tough pill for many of us to swallow, but the fall of 
U.S. economic and military supremacy is inevitable, and will be 
here much sooner than most of us realize. 
 It has happened to every empire throughout history. In ancient 
times, the Persians and the Medes ruled the world. Later, the Greeks 
and Romans took center stage. The British Empire in the nine-
teenth century was the economic and military superpower that gov-
erned much of the planet. It appears, unfortunately, we are next on 
this list of Great Power nations to go into eclipse. 
 The question for investors is brutally simple: 
 Will we go down with the ship? Or will we seize upon new 
 opportunities and prosper?  
 The simple fact is that the United States is exporting its money 
 and its manufacturing muscle to China at a rate that is both alarm-
ing and unprecedented in this nation ’ s history. During 2006, the 
United States rang up a stunning  $ 232.5 billion trade deﬁ cit with 
China. In fact, the United States is running a multibillion - dollar 
trade deﬁ cit with every one of its top 10 trading partners. 1 
 While the United States continues its headlong plunge into 
deepening trade deﬁ cits, China has been accelerating in exactly the 
opposite direction, ringing up unprecedented surpluses. During 
the ﬁ rst half of 2007, China ’ s trade surplus zoomed to a record -
 breaking  $ 112.5 billion. That was the ﬁ rst time the nation ’ s surplus 
broke through the 100 - billion dollar barrier over any six - month 

 
Sunset in the West 
29
period. While the United States ’ deﬁ cits grew deeper, the Chinese 
trade surplus had skyrocketed by 85 percent over the previous year 
for the month of June 2007.  2 Sadly, it seems the United States is 
driving in reverse. 
 It may seem like a distant memory, but the United States was the 
world ’ s banker less than 20 years ago. It is now the largest debtor 
nation that the world has ever seen. The U.S. debt - to - GDP ratio is a 
mind - boggling 400 percent.  3 While Chinese wage earners save more 
than 30 percent of their income, the United States has descended into 
a negative personal savings rate. Despite their empty bank accounts, 
U.S. consumers continue to ﬂ ock to malls and big box stores, buying 
cheap imports, ﬁ nanced by credit cards and by loans made against 
the evaporating equity they hold in their homes. The cyclone of 
volatility that rattled the world ’ s equity and credit markets following 
the United States ’  notorious subprime loan debacle revealed all too 
sharply the wobbly underpinnings of the U.S. economy. 
 China now holds the power. What ’ s more, the bulk of China ’ s 
ﬁ nancial power is poised directly over the United States ’ economy. 
As I mentioned in the ﬁ rst chapter, China cashed in most of its 
foreign currency surplus by purchasing U.S. Treasury bonds until 
recently. In other words, China routinely accepted U.S. IOUs in 
return for its huge reserves of foreign exchange. 
 The tide began to turn when the Chinese central bank announced 
it would diversify its holdings into higher - yielding assets, having real-
ized that Treasuries just didn ’ t pay enough interest compared to other 
investments. Because U.S. Treasuries are denominated in a sinking 
currency, the U.S. dollar, China ’ s returns have been depressed even 
further. 
 But China ’ s decision to diversify a portion of its investments 
is just a hint of the economic threat the United States faces. The 
Chinese government has the option of simply turning off the ﬂ ow 
of credit to the United States entirely by declining to buy any more 
U.S. Treasuries. The result would be a sudden rise in U.S. interest 
rates, which would trigger a steep plunge in the value of the dollar 
and a bloodbath on U.S. stock markets. The net effect would be a 
deep recession in the United States, so deep that it might well rival 
the Great Depression of the twentieth century. 
 Would China ever pull the plug on the U.S. economy? 
Most experts say that would never happen because the deliberate 
devastation of the United States ’ economic engine would severely 

30 
Trends
damage the Chinese economy as well. We are, after all, their best 
customer. 
 That argument sounded convincing until recently. As the drum-
beats of anti - China rhetoric and trade protectionism rose once 
again in Washington, China threw down the gauntlet in what was 
called the  “ nuclear option. ” 
 Xia Bin, the ﬁ nance chief at China ’ s Development Research 
Center, warned in early August of 2007 that China could sell its 
U.S. dollar holdings if Washington imposed trade sanctions to force 
a revaluation of the Chinese yuan. Another high - ranking ofﬁ cial, 
He Fan, of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, went even fur-
ther, declaring that Beijing had the power to set off a dollar col-
lapse if it chose to do so.  4 Beijing has the power because it holds 
an estimated  $ 900 billion worth of U.S. Treasury notes, bonds, and 
other assets, all denominated in dollars. The exact amount is a state 
secret. Kathy Lien, chief strategist at dailyfx.com warned,  “ With   $ 1.3 
trillion in foreign reserves, most of which are held in U.S. dollars, 
China has what it takes to cripple the U.S. economy. ” 5 Since she 
made her remarks, China ’ s foreign exchange reserves have risen 
to approximately  $ 1.5 trillion and Chinese clout on the world eco-
nomic scene has increased proportionally. 
 U.S. citizens are witnessing an eerie echo of the nuclear standoff 
that made the Cold War with the Soviet Union so terrifying. Under 
a doctrine called  Mutually Assured Destruction  (MAD), the United 
States and the Soviets stockpiled enough weapons to obliterate each 
other several times over. If either side launched a ﬁ rst strike, the 
other could be sure that the attacker would certainly be annihilated 
in return. MAD was a powerful incentive for both sides to be very 
cautious in word and deed. Neither was foolish enough to launch a 
ﬁ rst strike. 
 Throwing caution to the wind, U.S. politicians are now becom-
ing increasingly belligerent toward Beijing despite the obvious 
vulnerability of the U.S. economy. Before invoking the  “ nuclear 
option ” in August of 2007, Chinese authorities had never so much 
as warned that they might stop  buying  U.S. Treasuries. But as anti -
 Chinese rhetoric rose in Washington, Beijing upped the ante, 
threatening to crush the U.S. dollar, the world ’ s reserve currency, 
with a massive sale. In their view, sweeping trade sanctions by 
Washington would be the equivalent of a  “ ﬁ rst strike. ” A full - scale 
counterattack would be justiﬁ able. 

 
Sunset in the West 
31
 Without question, such a move would have devastating economic 
global consequences. Of course, China would also suffer grievously 
if it pulled the trigger in this game of  Mutually Assured Economic 
Destruction . But the mere fact that Beijing issued the threat speaks 
volumes about the new balance of power in the world. 
 The United States has suddenly become an economic  weakling. 
It, unfortunately, grows ever weaker as it continues to pile up 
moun tains of new debt with China and with its many other trading 
partners. 
 The Game of Mutually Assured Economic 
Destruction: Will China Pull the Trigger? 
 While the United States ’ economic underpinnings erode, China is 
quickly becoming the world ’ s dominant economic power, one with 
a very aggressive temperament. But why would China play such a 
dangerous game of brinksmanship with Washington? Would it actu-
ally pull the trigger? 
 The answer to that crucial question requires some understand-
ing of the Chinese psyche. Most Westerners, unfortunately, have 
little knowledge or appreciation of China ’ s proud new mentality. 
China ’ s grueling hardships in the past remain a mystery to most 
U.S. citizens. The important fact is this:  China does not want to be 
seen as a threat, but it will not tolerate being threatened. Not after what has 
 happened in its past. 
 Over the course of 2,000 years, China has historically reigned as 
one of the world ’ s greatest economic powers and an early scientiﬁ c 
pioneer. It is responsible for earth  shaking inventions that include 
the creation of gunpowder and paper. During its long history, 
China regarded itself as the world ’ s most advanced civilization, hav-
ing created sophisticated systems of government, law, and banking. 
The country ’ s own name, China, translates literally into the phrase 
 “ The Middle Kingdom. ” In other words, the Chinese look upon 
their nation as being the center of the world. 
 Unlike other great civilizations of the past, the ancient 
Chinese did not conduct wars of conquest to create a sprawl-
ing empire. Instead, neighboring countries, including Korea and 
Japan, adopted many key elements of Chinese civilization, includ-
ing  systems of  writing, the arts, and law. As China ’ s culture spread, 
so did the nation ’ s trade in exotic exports such as silk and ﬁ ne 

32 
Trends
 porcelain, products that would eventually be prized in every corner 
of the world. 
 Among Westerners, Marco Polo may have been one of the ﬁ rst 
to appreciate China ’ s power and its economic potential. During 
his travels in the eleventh century to a city that would eventu-
ally become known as Beijing, the Italian explorer marveled at 
China ’ s enormous wealth, its complex social structure, and its 
developed industries — including the manufacture of steel and the 
 mining of coal, which he called  “ the rock that burns. ” Commerce 
was  conducted with paper money, yet another Chinese invention. 
Marco Polo ’ s elaborate and grand descriptions of Kublai Khan ’ s 
Imperial Court shaped European understanding of China for 
 centuries to come. 
 The West now has a much different perspective, one shaped by 
events that the Chinese would consider quite recent. Since the eight-
eenth century, many Europeans and U.S. citizens have looked down 
on China as an economic backwater and a political basket case. Torn 
by civil wars, invasions, famine, and ruinous political purges like 
the Cultural Revolution (1966 – 1976), China has been an object of 
pity, perhaps even scorn. While the United States was experiencing 
its own emergence as an economic superpower, it employed legions 
of so - called Chinese coolies to perform hard labor, including build-
ing the nation ’ s railroads. Convinced of their own manifest destiny, 
many U.S. citizens thought of China as a helpless giant, unable to 
feed its own people or move out of the Middle Ages. 
 But modern Chinese people have an entirely different view of 
history, and they remain intensely proud of ancient China. They 
look back upon the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the years 
before the nation ’ s economic resurgence, as  “ the hundred years of 
humiliation. ” They blame foreigners for the decline of the Middle 
Kingdom, and not without justiﬁ cation.  
 The Century of Humiliation 
 Britain ’ s two Opium Wars against China during the nineteenth 
century resulted in some of the worst humiliations. China lost both 
wars and was forced to legalize British - sponsored opium imports 
from India. Untold numbers of Chinese people became addicts as a 
result. French troops supported Britain in the second Opium War. 
As a result of that conﬂ ict, China was forced to yield Hong Kong 

 
Sunset in the West 
33
to Britain and to open several ports to trade under the terms of 
grossly unfair treaties. Several countries followed Britain and forced 
unequal terms of trade onto China. British meddling in China also 
sparked several rebellions, leading ultimately to the collapse of the 
Qing dynasty in 1911. The ancient Chinese system of government 
never recovered from these blows. Fatally weakened, China was left 
prone to brutal civil wars and foreign invasions. 
 Japan invaded China twice, once in the nineteenth century 
and again during the twentieth century. Bent on expanding the 
Japanese empire and exploiting Chinese raw materials and mar-
kets, Japanese forces invaded the province of Manchuria in 1931. 
Ongoing conﬂ icts ultimately provoked full - scale war between 
the two nations in 1937. Japanese forces responded brutally to 
Chinese resistance with a policy called  “ The Three Alls ” : kill all, 
loot all, burn all. The horrors and documented atrocities of the 
Japanese occupation continued until the end of the Second World 
War. Although Japan had been defeated, postwar China was weak, 
demoralized, and wide open to a communist takeover. 
 How deep do the wounds from history ’ s humiliations go? To 
this day, the Chinese government issues angry diatribes whenever 
the Japanese prime minister visits the Yasukuni war shrine in Tokyo. 
The shrine is revered by the Japanese because it honors 2.5 million 
soldiers who have died since 1869 ﬁ ghting for Japan. But the shrine 
is a direct affront to Chinese sensibilities because it houses four-
teen Class A war criminals, some of whom were implicated in the 
atrocities in China.  6 Japan says the annual visits to the shrine are 
intended to pray for peace, not to honor war criminals, but such 
diplomatic insults still provoke angry anti - Japanese demonstrations 
in China ’ s major cities. 
 The details of Chinese history may seem unimportant and irrel-
evant to Western businessmen and investors. But the sharp contrast 
between China ’ s rich imperial past and its most recent hardships 
form a 2,000 - year - old backdrop that shapes the nation ’ s state of 
mind and its political actions to this day. 
 There is little evidence that Chinese leaders or its people accept 
any national responsibility for their century of humiliation. Foreign 
meddling is to blame. They feel intensely that the hundred years 
preceding the nation ’ s current economic revival were an embar-
rassing deviation from the nation ’ s long history as the world ’ s most 
advanced civilization. The Chinese leadership is intensely focused 

34 
Trends
on the goal of reestablishing the nation ’ s position as the world ’ s 
preeminent power.  
 “ You ’ re Either With Us, or Against Us ”  
 Few Westerners understand why China has a chip on its shoulder, 
why it responds so angrily to U.S. complaints about unfair trade 
practices. But to be lectured by politicians from the United States, a 
rich and powerful nation that didn ’ t even exist a few hundred years 
ago, is seen by virtually all Chinese people as unbearably insulting. 
Even though China is already on a trajectory to become an eco-
nomic superpower, the nation ’ s leaders remain acutely aware of the 
horrors of the past and worry about the impoverished millions of 
peasants still eking out a living in rural areas. Any threat to China ’ s 
current economic rise, especially from a wealthy Western nation, is 
regarded as utterly intolerable by Beijing. 
 It is true that Beijing may not always be a fair player in the 
game of economic competition. Complaints about rampant and 
open piracy of Western intellectual property are never effectively 
addressed. China ’ s currency may indeed be unfairly undervalued 
compared with the U.S. dollar, but the Chinese point to other Asian 
nations that may be equally guilty of currency manipulation, but are 
not criticized by the United States. 
 China sees the world in terms that were immortalized by 
President George W. Bush when he said,  “ Nations are either with 
us or against us. ” By the same token, China does not make ﬁ ne 
 distinctions among competing nations. Beijing reserves particular 
suspicion and animosity for the nations it holds responsible for its 
100 years of humiliation. 
 Growing the Chinese economy is a concern that trumps all oth-
ers. Beijing is determined that there will be no going back. That 
is why Chinese authorities hinted they might be prepared to  “ go 
nuclear ”  economically if the United States were to ﬁ re the ﬁ rst shot 
in a trade war. For Chinese ofﬁ cials, Mutually Assured Economic 
Destruction is preferable to humiliation. 
 For the record, President George W. Bush scoffed at the idea 
of an attack on U.S. currency, saying it would be  “ foolhardy. ” U.S. 
Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson said the idea was  “ absurd. ” 7 
Indeed, several days after Chinese ofﬁ cials threatened a run on 
the dollar, a posting appeared on the central government ’ s main 

 
Sunset in the West 
35
web site saying,  “ U.S. dollars and government bonds are an important 
part of China ’ s foreign reserve investments. ” Those words were 
attributed to an unnamed ofﬁ cial with the People ’ s Bank of China.  8 
Although the threat had ofﬁ cially been withdrawn, China had sent 
a powerful message to the highest levels of the U.S. government. 
With one verbal shot across Washington ’ s bow, Beijing exposed a 
fundamental weakness of the U.S. economy. 
 As One Country Rises, Another Country Falls 
 It gives me no pleasure to predict a rocky road ahead for the United 
States ’  economic supremacy. But the evidence of danger to the U.S. 
stock market and the nation ’ s economy is plain to see and should 
be a concern to all U.S. investors. 
 Call me a lone voice in the wilderness if you wish. But remem-
ber, no politicians and very few ﬁ nancial analysts or media pun-
dits have predicted major economic reverses in the past. Even the 
 biggest events, including the Great Depression, the Asian ﬁ nancial 
crisis of the 1990s, and the market crash that followed the dotcom 
debacle, were not predicted by those who should have seen the warn-
ing signs. (To be fair, one newspaper,  Barron ’ s , sounded the alarm 
before the  “ tech wreck ” of 2001 – 2002, but most market analysts 
were too busy issuing buy recommendations to say anything nega-
tive about the United States ’ much - heralded  “ new economy ” ). 
 I ’ m as patriotic as any U.S. citizen and that ’ s why it ’ s my 
 reluctant responsibility to issue some words of caution about the 
direction we ’ re now headed in. Prudent investors need to know 
where the dangers lie  before another crisis erupts, not after. 
 In my view, the United States is staring helplessly at a double -
 barreled economic shotgun. Both barrels are aimed directly at our 
nation ’ s economic heart. Even more appalling, we U.S. citizens are 
facing a danger that we created ourselves. 
 The United States is running  two massive and extremely danger-
ous deﬁ cits, not just one. First, there is our current account  deﬁ cit, 
which reﬂ ects the United States ’ proﬂ igate spending abroad  relative 
to our income from imports. During 2006, the current account def-
icit ballooned to  $ 811 billion. The net U.S. foreign debt rose to the 
almost incomprehensible level of more than  $ 2.5 trillion.  9 That ’ s 
trillion, with a capital  “ T. ” 

36 
Trends
 Believe it or not, some economists declared those ﬁ gures to 
be good news when they were revealed in 2007. Why? Because the 
United States ’ total foreign debt actually turned out to be lower 
than they had expected. It seems foreign governments, including 
the Chinese and private investors, saved our bacon that year by 
 purchasing almost two trillion dollars worth of U.S. securities. But 
this is economic quicksand. 
 If the dollar continues to decline, returns to foreign investors 
from U.S. securities will drop right along with them. We are in dan-
ger of a ﬁ re sale of U.S. stocks, bonds, and currency, and we have 
little left in the way of reserves to deal with a crisis. Our current 
account deﬁ cit is draining both our credibility and our credit as a 
trading nation. 
 The U.S. government has not responded to the current account 
imbalance despite repeated warnings that the situation is becom-
ing dangerous. Until relatively recently, it was believed that a cur-
rent account deﬁ cit of more than 3 percent of any nation ’ s GDP 
was unsustainable. Alarmingly, the United States ’ deﬁ cit for the ﬁ rst 
quarter of 2007 rose to 5.7 percent. It averaged 6.5 percent of GDP 
during 2006. 10 
 The United States simply cannot be expected to continue to 
build up foreign liabilities forever. The economic equivalent of a 
perpetual motion machine or an antigravity device does not exist. 
According to a study by a think tank called the McKinsey Global 
Institute, a 30 percent depreciation of the U.S. dollar may be 
required to eliminate the current account deﬁ cit.  11 
 Just as serious as our foreign debt is the United States ’  parallel 
deﬁ cit, that is, the federal government ’ s budgetary shortfall. The 
ofﬁ cial U.S. budget deﬁ cit during 2006 was a walloping  $ 248  billion. 
That ’ s bad enough, but it would have been far worse if corporate 
accounting standards had been used. An analysis by  USA Today  found 
that the federal government would have racked up a  $ 1.3  trillion 
loss for the year if generally accepted accounting principles had 
been used. 
 Ordinary accounting requires corporations as well as state 
and local governments to count expenses as soon as a transaction 
occurs, even if payment is to be made later. But the federal gov-
ernment doesn ’ t follow these rules and its obligations for Social 
Security and Medicare don ’ t show up on the books. The newspaper 

 
Sunset in the West 
37
concluded that taxpayers are on the hook for an astronomical  $ 59 
trillion, more than  $ 500,000 for every household in the country. 12 
 These are truly frightening ﬁ gures, but are they manageable? 
The United States would have to generate an astonishing amount 
of new wealth from burgeoning export industries to ﬁ nance its 
 obligations. The government would have to raise far more reve-
nues from a prosperous workforce that would somehow be grow-
ing wealthier by the year. Unfortunately, that ’ s not happening. The 
trends are not in our favor. 
 “ A country cannot close its trade deﬁ cit if its economy is 
being moved offshore, ” says Paul Craig Roberts, a former  assistant 
 secretary of the treasury for economic policy.  13 Roberts points out 
quite accurately that moving U.S. production offshore hits the trade 
deﬁ cit from both ends because when goods once produced domes-
tically become imports, the nation ’ s ability to export consequently 
declines. So much for the idea of burgeoning export income. 
 What about growing wealth in the workforce? The evidence indi-
cates that the United States ’  displaced workers are highly unlikely 
to be moving to better - paying jobs or earning wages that might 
enrich the nation ’ s tax base. The Bureau of Labor Statistics says the 
nation ’ s 10 fastest - growing job categories are: home health aides, 
network systems and data communications analysts,  medical assist-
ants, physician assistants, computer software engineers, physical 
therapist assistants, dental hygienists, dental assistants, and personal 
and home care aides.  14 If the Department of Labor is correct, the 
prospects for a rich export economy based on an expanding knowl-
edge - based industrial sector are not bright. 
 Sending U.S. jobs offshore may also be damaging the U.S. 
economy more than ofﬁ cial statistics reveal. A detailed analysis by 
 BusinessWeek magazine found that offshoring by U.S. ﬁ rms tends to 
create a phantom gross domestic product. If so, ofﬁ cial calculations 
about the size of the United States ’ GDP are off by about  $ 66 bil-
lion and the United States ’ growth rate is lower than Washington is 
telling us. 
 China, in the meanwhile, continues to grow stronger as it spreads 
both its economic and political inﬂ uence throughout Asia and the 
developing world. The effect of Chinese economic growth and 
demand for resources has been especially profound on an old U.S. 
ally, Australia. In the years before Deng Xiaoping launched China 

38 
Trends
on the capitalist road, Chinese trade with Australia amounted to 
no more than  $ 100 million a year. In 2006, trade between the two 
nations had soared to  $ 33 billion, making China Australia ’ s largest 
trading partner.  15 As a supplier of resources, especially liquid natural 
gas (LNG), and as the world ’ s largest source of uranium, Australia is 
looking forward to an increasingly close and proﬁ table relationship 
with its Chinese customers. 
 This Australian trend is appearing throughout the Asia - Paciﬁ c 
region. China is now, or soon will become, the primary trading 
partner for all countries in East Asia, replacing both Japan and the 
United States, according to a report from Australia ’ s prestigious 
Lowy Institute.  16 In fact, Chinese trade with the whole of East Asia 
soared above the half - trillion-dollar mark during 2006. 
 As the volume of trade in the region continued to grow at a 
double - digit pace year after year, China racked up a trade  deﬁ cit  of 
 $ 87.5 billion in 2006 with its East Asian trading partners. Exporting 
nations were only too happy to increase their shipments and rake 
in more than  $ 87 billion worth of income. 
 China has now become the largest export market for the Republic 
of Korea, the number two export market for Japan, the number three 
export market for Thailand, and the number four export market for 
Indonesia, Singapore, the Philippines, and Malaysia.  17  
 As China ’ s industrial engine grows in strength, its appetite for 
raw materials and commodities has become voracious. The country 
represents about 5 percent of the global economy, but it consumes 
a whopping 20 percent of global aluminum and copper produc-
tion, about 30 percent of steel, iron ore, and coal, and a remarkable 
45 percent of cement produced annually. China ’ s increased com-
modity consumption has also been a boon to Latin American coun-
tries, including Chile, Argentina, and Brazil, which have joined in 
the export of raw materials to fuel the Chinese economic engine.  18  
 Losing the Race 
 Although Beijing was once hostile and openly antagonistic to capi-
talist economies and to U.S. allies in Asia, the new China is now lev-
eraging its economic clout in a much more productive and friendly 
fashion. Chinese diplomats are working feverishly to weave a web of 
positive ambassadorial and trading relationships with  neighboring 

 
Sunset in the West 
39
nations throughout Asia. A total of 28 countries and regions, which 
account for a quarter of China ’ s foreign trade, have joined the 
Middle Kingdom ’ s ever - expanding free trade territory. Eleven free 
trade zones have either been set up already or are currently being 
negotiated with China ’ s trading partners.  19 While the United States 
tries to expand its free trading relationships beyond Mexico into the 
developing nations of South America, China is aggressively staking 
out its territory among the world ’ s fastest - growing economies in Asia. 
 The United States ’ traditional allies in the Asia - Paciﬁ c basin are, 
unfortunately, feeling snubbed by the United States at a time when 
Beijing is actively courting them. In a recent incident, key Asian 
leaders had hoped to revive relations with the United States by stag-
ing a celebration in the form of an ofﬁ cial summit. The summit was 
scheduled to mark 30 years of ofﬁ cial ties between Washington and 
ASEAN, a group representing the rapidly growing nations of Brunei, 
Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the 
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam. Unfortunately, 
President Bush canceled his planned celebration of Asian - American 
cooperation in the summer of 2007 because of the intense pressure 
of events stemming from the war in Iraq. 
 Adding to the region ’ s feeling of isolation from the United 
States, U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice also canceled 
her planned meeting with the much larger 27 - member ASEAN 
Regional Forum (ARF) in Manila. The ARF is the only high - level 
ofﬁ cial security group in the Asia - Paciﬁ c region, and it includes 
Russia, India, China, and the European Union.  20 It marked the 
second time Rice dropped out of the Asian summit in three 
years. Walter Lohman, director of the Asian studies center at the 
Washington - based Heritage Foundation, called the situation a sig-
niﬁ cant setback in U.S. - ASEAN relations, noting that ASEAN is 
the largest U.S. export market after Europe and Japan. Rice was 
forced to bail out because of the worsening conﬂ ict between the 
Palestinians and the Israelis. 
 In September of 2007, President Bush did manage to put in 
an abbreviated one - day appearance at the Asia-Paciﬁ c Economic 
Cooperation (APEC) summit of Asia - Paciﬁ c economies in Sydney, 
Australia. Unfortunately, he managed to alienate many of the eco-
nomic leaders, while Chinese president Hu Jintao struck a chord 
with the assembled summit. President Hu talked about the economic 

40 
Trends
beneﬁ ts that Asian nations are  gaining from Chinese trade. President 
Bush focused on the threat of  terrorism, referring to the summit as 
OPEC instead of APEC, and mistakenly calling his hosts Austrians 
instead of Australians. The slight did not go unnoticed. Even Bush sup-
porters in Australia were offended, saying the president ’ s comments 
illustrated  “ the increasing tin ear of the Bush administration in Asia. ” 21  
 As the United States turns its attention away from the Asia - Paciﬁ c 
region, China is extending its reach in all directions. In addition to 
establishing multiple free trade agreements, it is opening diplomatic 
channels and courting inﬂ uential groups, including ASEAN    3 
(the extra three are Japan, South Korea, and China itself). 
 According to the Business Roundtable, China ’ s ambitious 
expansion of its free trade zones puts the United States to shame.  22 
The organization says,  “ China, a new entrant to the world trading 
system, has pivoted off of its 2001 entry into the WTO [World Trade 
Organization] to launch an active FTA [free trade] diplomacy, with 
negotiations involving 28 countries underway or proposed, includ-
ing a partially completed agreement with ASEAN, negotiations with 
the Gulf Cooperation Council, Australia, New Zealand, Pakistan, 
and the South African Customs Union. ” The United States is nego-
tiating with just seven trading partners. 
 The Business Roundtable is sharply critical of U.S. inaction on 
trading relationships around the world. The organization ’ s stinging 
report is entitled,  “ We Can ’ t Stand Still: The Race for International 
Competitiveness. ” We appear to be losing that race. 
 The report notes that when a free trade agreement is con-
cluded that excludes the United States,  “ U.S. exporters suffer trade 
discrimination; they face higher tariffs than their competitors, as 
well as more limited access to services markets . . .  . This discrimi-
nation is particularly signiﬁ cant where U.S. businesses are trying to 
gain a competitive foothold in key strategic markets. The result of 
a lack of agreements is weaker positioning in the global economy. ” 
It goes on to say that  “ Approximately 300 FTAs have been negoti-
ated around the world, with more in the ofﬁ ng; the United States 
has implemented only ten. Our major international competitors 
are not standing still. Neither should the United States. ” 23 
 Ambitious Chinese trade negotiators have deﬁ nitely not been 
standing still when it comes to relations with central Asia. China 
opened a new Asian diplomatic and economic channel with its oil - rich 
(widely ignored) neighbors by creating the Shanghai Cooperation 

 
Sunset in the West 
41
Organization (SCO). The group includes Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, 
Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and Russia. SCO is considered a competitor 
to NATO. 
 Chinese authorities have also been careful to establish friendly 
economic and diplomatic relations with Africa, a continent that 
is hungry for outside assistance and attention. Although China ’ s 
growing inﬂ uence in Africa has received scant notice in the 
United States, Chinese leaders, including President Hu Jintao and 
Premier Wen Jiabao, have made several high - proﬁ le state visits to 
the continent. Among the countries they have paid their respects 
to are: Morocco, Nigeria, Kenya, Egypt, Gabon, Algeria, Ghana, the 
Republic of Congo, Angola, South Africa, Tanzania, and Uganda. 
China ’ s remarkable diplomatic push has not gone unappreciated 
among African leaders and their people. China scored surpris-
ingly well in an opinion poll conducted by the Pew Global Attitudes 
Project in 2007. The Pew researchers found that among 8 out of 
10 African nations surveyed, China was named among the country ’ s 
closest allies. Of course, the United States has poured billions of 
dollars worth of aid into Africa over the course of many decades, 
but China, a relative newcomer to the continent, rivals the United 
States in all but one country (see Figure  2.1 ). 24 
 Although Chinese trade with Africa is relatively meager, less 
than  $ 38 billion during 2005, China has promoted friendly rela-
tions by sponsoring approximately 900 aid projects on the conti-
nent. 25 China has much to gain by establishing solid relations with 
Africa ’ s 53 nations. Chief among its interests is oil, and China has 
endured severe international criticism for assisting in the develop-
ment of the oil industry in Sudan, a country that has become an 
international pariah for its genocidal policies in Darfur. Other 
natural resources, including aluminum ore, bauxite, are abundant 
in Africa. These natural resources will become very important to 
China ’ s future industrial expansion. 
 Also, more than 800 Chinese companies have set up shop in 
Africa to build telephone networks, extend railroads, and establish 
satellite communications systems.  26 The teeming African populace 
also has the potential to become a very large market for inex-
pensive Chinese manufactured products. Without question, the 
continent is becoming an integral part of the Chinese sphere of 
geopolitical inﬂ uence, while the United States remains preoccu-
pied elsewhere.  

42 
Trends
Figure 2.1  Allies and Threats in Africa
Source: Pew Global Attitudes Project.
Ethiopia
Ghana
Closest
Allies
U.S.
China
EU
U.S.
Britain
China
al Qaeda
Ivory Coast
Nigeria
65
56
32
33
15
14
Ivory Coast
China
U.S.
S. Africa
France
B. Faso
Mali
69
69
37
68
60
23
Kenya
U.S.
China
Britain
Somalia
Sudan
al Qaeda
63
41
28
55
33
32
Mali
U.S.
China
France
al Qaeda
U.S.
Ivory Coast
56
49
48
31
15
12
Nigeria
U.S.
Britain
China
U.S.
Iran
China
58
40
27
32
14
12
S. Africa
U.S.
Britain
EU
Zimbabwe
Nigeria
Iran
57
37
25
41
26
19
Tanzania
U.S.
China
Britain
al Qaeda
U.S.
Iran
37
32
22
27
23
13
Uganda
*Democratic Republic of Congo
U.S.
Britain
Kenya
Sudan
Somalia
DRC*
57
29
24
42
21
17
Senegal
France
U.S.
China
U.S.
Gambia
al Qaeda
50
45
30
15
12
8
Biggest
Threats
Eritrea
Nigeria
al Qaeda
 
%
58
53
40
 
%
86
69
29
 The Defensive Military 
 As China extends a seemingly friendly hand of diplomacy around 
the globe, it continues to build a modern and lethal military force. 
Once a large, but poorly trained and ill - equipped army of more 

 
Sunset in the West 
43
than a million troops, the newest version of the People ’ s Liberation 
Army (PLA) threatens to obliterate the United States ’ claim to be 
the world ’ s lone superpower. It has acquired advanced weaponry, 
international reach, and the ability to ﬁ ght a modern, information -
 based war. China has been accused of numerous cyberattacks on 
governments and ﬁ nancial institutions in the United States and the 
United Kingdom. 
 China ’ s military spending is shrouded in secrecy and the 
Pentagon believes that Beijing ’ s public statements about its military 
are deliberately misleading. On March 4, 2007, Beijing announced 
a 17.8 percent increase in its military budget, bringing its ofﬁ cial 
defense budget estimate for 2007 to approximately  $ 45 billion. But 
the Pentagon says actual Chinese defense expenditures remain far 
higher than the ofﬁ cially disclosed ﬁ gures. 
 In its 2007 report,  “ Military Power of the People ’ s Republic 
of China, ” the U.S. Department of Defense says China ’ s pub-
lished defense budget does not include major spending programs 
that include the cost of strategic forces, foreign arms purchases, 
research and development, and paramilitary forces. Contrasting 
with China ’ s lowball budget, the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) 
estimates China ’ s total military spending for 2007 could be between 
 $ 85 billion and  $ 125 billion.  27 The highest estimate listed in the 
Pentagon report puts Beijing ’ s military spending above  $ 140 billion 
on a purchasing parity power basis. 
 Beijing prefers to portray its military expenditures as purely 
defensive, but the Chinese arsenal is vast and could be used in a war 
of aggression. The PLA already is among the most powerful armed 
forces in the world and it continues to grow exponentially. Few 
U.S. citizens appreciate the fact that China has an array of nuclear -
 tipped intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) capable of strik-
ing any target in the continental United States. In fact, China ’ s 
ICBM arsenal is currently being modernized with new missiles to 
increase their survivability in case of a nuclear attack. 
 The People ’ s Liberation Army has not grown signiﬁ cantly in 
numbers over the years, with a standing force remaining at approxi-
mately 1.4 million troops, but the armaments at the disposal of 
PLA soldiers have increased in both potency and in numbers. 
China is building a blue - water navy, armed with 5 nuclear subma-
rines, 53 diesel submarines, and more than 100 destroyers, frigates, 
and missile patrol aircraft. A new type of nuclear - powered ballistic 

44 
Trends
missile submarine equipped with sea - launched ICBMs is currently 
 undergoing sea trials. There are also unconﬁ rmed reports that an 
aircraft carrier may be under construction. 
 The Chinese coast is bristling with hundreds of short - range 
ballistic missiles, while the navy ’ s ships are armed with supersonic 
cruise missiles, antiaircraft missiles, and precision - guided missiles 
designed to destroy targets on shore or at sea. In the air, China 
has an arsenal of more than 1,500 ﬁ ghters and almost 800 bomb-
ers. In space, China has 35 satellites. China stunned the aerospace 
community in January of 2007 by scoring a direct hit on one of its 
own obsolete weather satellites, demonstrating the army ’ s ability to 
knock enemy spacecraft out of the sky. 28 
 Many PLA armaments were purchased from Russia, but the 
Chinese are not content with the quality of weapons acquired 
abroad, especially Russian ﬁ ghter aircraft. China is building an air-
craft industry of its own to assemble both commercial and military 
airplanes. Because it has been blocked from purchasing strategically 
important components in Western nations, China is conducting an 
active espionage program to acquire secret weapons technologies. 
 Military ofﬁ cials in Beijing are also acutely aware of the impor-
tance of information management in combat. The Pentagon 
believes they have developed the capability to severely disrupt U.S. 
communications and Internet systems. But Beijing has no intention 
of challenging the United States directly with its growing military 
power, at least not yet. The Chinese are cagey enough to realize 
that direct military competition with the United States was largely 
responsible for the collapse of the Soviet Union. 
 The Chinese have focused on two goals in the near term. 
Above all, Beijing is intent on defending its deeply held claim to 
sovereignty over the island of Taiwan. The last time the Taiwanese 
angered Beijing with a seemingly insigniﬁ cant diplomatic faux pas, 
in 1995, the Chinese army quickly ﬁ red 10 missiles into the waters 
off Taiwanese shores. The United States responded by sending two 
aircraft carrier groups into the region to enforce its commitment 
to stability in Taiwan. China backed down, but resented the United 
States ’  perceived interference in what it considers an internal affair. 
 Today, with its growing military power, China has not devel-
oped the ability to launch an attack against the U.S. military, but 
it has deﬁ nitely upped the ante over Taiwan. Any future showdown 
between the U.S. navy and Chinese forces in the Taiwan Strait 

 
Sunset in the West 
45
would be a bloody affair and it ’ s likely the United States will take 
pains to avoid another confrontation with China ’ s new navy and 
its potent missile arsenal. In military parlance, the Chinese have 
greatly  “ upped the cost ” of enforcing the United States ’ commit-
ment to oversee a peaceful resolution of the dispute over Taiwan. 
 For the time being, China and the rest of Southeast Asia are 
content to let the U.S. military do the costly work of maintaining 
regional stability in the Asia - Paciﬁ c region, using the enormous 
contingent of U.S. forces already positioned there. But every Asian 
nation is well aware of China ’ s growing military power and political 
inﬂ uence. 
 When North Korea stunned the world by testing a nuclear 
weapon on October 6, 2006, the United States ’ response was unchar-
acteristically muted. Washington relied on Beijing to apply pres-
sure on North Korean dictator Kim Jong - Il. The tactic worked. Six 
months later, North Korea announced that it would agree to shut 
down its main nuclear facility after  $ 25 million in previously frozen 
funds were transferred to Pyongyang from a bank in Beijing. 
 The question remains: Why is China expanding its military 
power so aggressively if its intentions are purely defensive? In 
August of 2007, U.S. Navy Secretary Donald C. Winter posed that 
very question during a visit to Australia. Winter said that China 
must be more transparent about its military intentions and its 
naval build - up in the Asia - Paciﬁ c region. As the navy secretary said, 
 “ We continue to take a look at China and try to understand what 
the Chinese intent is . . . . We ’ re trying to understand not only what 
it is that they ’ re doing, but why they are doing it. ” 29 Some observ-
ers say the Pentagon is worried that China is preparing to deal 
with future internal unrest and economic difﬁ culties by stimulat-
ing nationalist fervor by using aggressive military and diplomatic 
tactics. 30  
 But China is also building its military muscle to enforce its great 
power status. According to the U.S. Defense Department, China ’ s 
leaders see the ﬁ rst two decades of this century as a  “ twenty - year 
period of opportunity, ” believing that conditions will be peaceful 
and conducive to economic, diplomatic, and military development. 
This period of peace will quietly enable China ’ s rise to become a 
great power. The Pentagon says China is conducting its  “ peaceful 
development ” campaign to soothe foreign concerns over China ’ s 
military modernization and its global agenda by proclaiming that 

46 
Trends
China ’ s rise will be benign.  31 All the while, China continues to 
extend its military reach. 
 After the 20 - year period of opportunity, China ’ s tone may 
change dramatically as it comes into competition with the United 
States over the world ’ s dwindling oil supplies. China ’ s oil imports 
are increasing with breathtaking speed as automobile owner-
ship soars, a worrisome trend at a time when the nation ’ s existing 
petroleum reserves are drying up. Almost 60 percent of China ’ s oil 
imports already come from the Middle East and that proportion is 
going to increase. By 2015, China will look to the Persian Gulf for 
at least 70 percent of its oil supply.  32 
 Chinese oil companies have attempted to diversify the nation ’ s 
petroleum supplies by buying access to reserves in Kazakhstan, 
Russia, Venezuela, Sudan, West Africa, Iran, and Canada, but there 
is simply not enough oil available from these sources to slake 
China ’ s growing thirst. By 2030, China may have more cars than 
the United States and import just as much oil as the United States 
does today.  33 Its need for oil is certain to spark competition for 
energy supplies, particularly oil, with the world ’ s biggest and most 
proﬂ igate energy user, the United States. 
 The People ’ s Liberation Army is currently very much aware that 
China depends on the United States navy to patrol the sea lanes 
through which most of the nation ’ s oil imports from the Middle 
East are shipped. This fact alone gives the U.S. effective control of 
oil in the event of a showdown over supplies. That is a prospect that 
China cannot passively accept. 
 Ninety percent of China ’ s oil is currently transported by tankers 
through the narrow and strategically vulnerable Straits of Malacca. 
Most of this oceangoing oil originates in the Persian Gulf, and 
Chinese authorities are deeply uncomfortable that the U.S. navy 
has effectively assumed responsibility for ensuring the continuity 
of China ’ s oil shipments through the Gulf and another potential 
choke point at the mouth of the Gulf, the Straits of Hormuz. 
 Looking forward two or three decades into the future, U.S. 
and Chinese ofﬁ cials understand fully that Middle Eastern oil will 
become increasingly scarce while Chinese demand continues to 
grow. Worldwide competition for precious oil will inevitably become 
more intense. The potential for open conﬂ ict or at least a peaceful 
superpower showdown is certain to increase, and the Chinese have 
no intention of leaving themselves vulnerable to U.S. intimidation 
or dominance. 

 
Sunset in the West 
47
 That ’ s why the Chinese have been busy courting Saudi Arabia, 
Iran, and oil - rich central Asian nations, while building a formida-
ble blue - water navy. Continued economic expansion is simply not 
negotiable, and Beijing ’ s mandarins are well aware that the nation ’ s 
economy already depends on imported oil. Future oil shipments 
are a lifeline that the world ’ s emerging superpower is preparing to 
defend aggressively. 
 Will it come to a war over oil? I certainly hope not. But the 
Chinese are not ignoring the possibility. Will the dollar collapse 
under pressure from China? Again, I hope not, but we are currently 
undermining the economic foundation of the United States and leav-
ing ourselves vulnerable to foreign attack. Will U.S. inﬂ uence in Asia 
be eliminated? Probably not, but it is in decline as the United States 
closes military bases in Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan under increasing 
pressure from China and Russia through the Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization, an expanding and aggressive rival to NATO.  34  
 U.S. investors can no longer count on the world remaining their 
oyster forever. Whether China achieves all of its ambitions, there is 
no doubt that the Middle Kingdom is determined to regain its sta-
tus as a world superpower, both economically and militarily. 
 By China ’ s own reckoning, it is only halfway along the road to 
full industrialization. The nation ’ s planners expect to complete 
the process in the year 2021,  35 remarkably close to the end of the 
much - heralded 20 - year period of opportunity. But China does 
not see its long - term future solely as the so - called workshop of the 
world. While economic planners push the nation ’ s industrial expan-
sion into remote and underdeveloped regions in the West, a more 
sophisticated initiative is well underway in China ’ s heavily industri-
alized eastern coastal area.  
 Why China Needs Its Own Neil Armstrong 
 Chinese leaders have long wished to develop an advanced tech-
nological infrastructure supporting a modern, knowledge - based 
economy. In other words, they wish to compete with the United 
States and Europe on the cutting edge. As you will read later in this 
book, China is building an auto industry that aims to overwhelm 
the likes of Toyota and General Motors. It is building a banking 
system that already houses the world ’ s largest ﬁ nancial institutions 
(as  measured by market capitalization). China has skipped a gen-
eration in the construction of a modern communications system by 

48 
Trends
moving directly to a massive system of wireless telephony without 
the expense of constructing a national grid. 
 Looking into the future, the Chinese are building an aircraft 
industry that hopes to compete with Boeing and Airbus in the 
construction of commercial aircraft. China is also building sophis-
ticated weaponry including missiles, guided bombs, rockets, naval 
craft, and a range of military aircraft, including ﬁ ghters, bombers, 
transports, trainers, and reconnaissance aircraft. 
 China ultimately has its sights set on the moon and Mars. In 
2003, China became the third nation in history to put a man into 
space. The China National Space Administration plans to put a 
man on the moon in 2024, and expects to begin unmanned mis-
sions to Mars as early as 2014. China ’ s existing space program has 
already launched satellites for foreign customers and placed many 
of its own vehicles in orbit. There is little doubt that some Chinese 
spacecraft are designed for military applications. 
 For decades, China has been underestimated as a potential eco-
nomic competitor because of its lack of innovation, and not without 
reason. The Chinese are justly notorious for their failure to protect 
Western intellectual property from piracy. China has been able to 
appropriate Western technological discoveries without payment or 
penalty, but that is a practice that cuts both ways. By failing to develop 
homegrown technologies and intellectual property, China has also 
failed to build knowledge - based industries that can develop original 
and competitive ideas. By permitting the theft of intellectual prop-
erty, the Chinese state has also undermined domestic industries that 
might have beneﬁ ted economically from innovation. There is little 
incentive to create a culture of innovation if any new idea can be rou-
tinely copied free of charge. 
 Chinese authorities are belatedly attempting to come to grips 
with the problem. In 2006, research and development budgets grew 
by 22 percent, but the nation ’ s R & D totals are still far behind those 
of the United States, both in real terms and as a percentage of gross 
national product.  36 
 Remarkably, China rose to become the third - highest - ranking 
country for patent applications in 2007. China is now ahead of the 
European Union but still behind the United States and Japan as 
measured by the total number of patent applications ﬁ led. Chinese 
industry has experienced a 32 percent surge in patent applications 
since 2005. 

 
Sunset in the West 
49
 As China strives to build a knowledge - based economy, it has 
established industrial parks and welcomed the likes of Microsoft, 
General Motors, and IBM to establish facilities there. Cooperating 
with the Chinese has begun to pay off for Microsoft. The company 
spent 15 years and lost billions of dollars of revenue trying to sell 
its software at a proﬁ t in China. It was impossible to succeed when 
pirated Microsoft programs were being sold on the street for as 
 little as three dollars. 
 After committing more than $100 million to new research 
within China, Microsoft ’ s investments have begun to pay off. In 
2006, the Chinese government required personal computer mak-
ers to load legal software onto their computers.  37 The relationship 
between Microsoft and China is now ﬂ ourishing. Bill Gates enthuses 
about the quality of researchers working in his Chinese develop-
ment centers. The Chinese president, Hu Jintao, made a point 
of visiting Microsoft headquarters in Seattle before  meeting with 
President Bush on his visit to the United States in 2006. Microsoft 
products are being sold legally at a fraction of their price in U.S. 
markets, but Gates is optimistic that he has established the founda-
tion for a proﬁ table business in China. 
 In another example, IBM is shifting its focus to China as well. 
After selling its personal computer business to the Chinese ﬁ rm 
Lenovo, IBM began moving some of its own operations to the 
Chinese mainland. IBM announced in the fall of 2006 that it would 
move its global procurement headquarters to Shenzhen. That 
marked the ﬁ rst time the headquarters of an IBM corporatewide 
organization had been located outside the United States. IBM ’ s 
move reﬂ ects the growing shift of high technology to Asia. The com-
pany says it chose China for its procurement headquarters because 
it has nearly 3,000 suppliers across Asia, accounting for 30 percent 
of the  $ 40 billion that IBM annually spends on procurement.  38 
 Investors Beware  . . .  Time to Get Ready 
 There are many uncertainties surrounding China ’ s ability to suc-
ceed in the creation of an advanced, knowledge - based economy. 
But there is little doubt that China will continue to grow rapidly and 
the world ’ s industrial focus will continue to shift to the East for the 
foreseeable future. Investors cannot ignore this trend or its effect 
on U.S. corporations. Diversiﬁ cation abroad is just as  important 

50 
Trends
for the investment community as it is for the industries that began 
offshoring their factories many years ago. 
 Not surprisingly, it is Deng Xiaoping, the leader who imple-
mented China ’ s modernization, who set the standard for Chinese 
behavior during its current growth phrase. In the early 1990s, he 
gave a few words of guidance to China ’ s foreign and security policy 
apparatus. These words have come to be known as the  “ 24  character ” 
strategy. Deng ’ s words accurately describe China ’ s strategy as it 
approaches its destiny as an economic and military superpower. They 
are as follows:  
 Observe calmly; secure our position; cope with affairs calmly; 
hide our capacities and bide our time; be good at maintaining a 
low profile; and never claim leadership.  
 China will not bide its time quietly forever. One day, it will claim 
leadership. Investors beware, and get ready!   

51
3
C H A P T E R
  Breaking the Chains of the 
Bicycle Kingdom
 CHINA ’ S DREAMS COME TRUE   
 Nothing in life is to be feared. It is only to be understood.  
— Madame Curie 
 Two clients of mine recently reminded me of the enormous gap 
in most U.S. citizens ’ understanding of the new China. Like many 
of my clients, this gentleman and his wife had been to Beijing and 
the Great Wall a few years after China opened itself up to Western 
tourism. Because they had never made a subsequent trip back to 
Beijing, they still retained their ﬁ rst impressions of China more 
than two decades later. 
 Remembering the Forbidden City, they recalled a particularly 
poignant scene. Near the exits, a large black automobile had been 
parked in the middle of a wide plaza with an ancient structure in 
the background. Just in front of the ofﬁ cial - looking car was a pho-
tographer with a large, old - fashioned camera. He approached my 
two clients and asked them with a series of gestures if they would 
like to have their picture taken. Somewhat bafﬂ ed, because they 
were carrying their own cameras, the two politely declined. Soon 
after, a large Chinese family in blue fatigues assembled to be 

52 
Trends
 photographed and it became clear that the centerpiece of the 
 picture was to be the car, not the outskirts of the Forbidden City. 
 The image spoke volumes about the nation ’ s economy and 
the hopes of the Chinese people not so very long ago. Beijing had 
almost no automobiles except for ofﬁ cial, Soviet - style limousines. 
Despite the absence of automotive trafﬁ c, the city ’ s wide boulevards 
were jammed with millions of bicycles carrying blue - suited men, 
women, and children toting their belongings through a gray haze 
created by coal - burning heaters and stoves in every home. The idea 
of owning a family car and a modern apartment was as far from 
reality for the average Beijing resident as the fantasy of buying a 
private jet is for working class U.S. workers. That ’ s why they posed 
their families in front of this impossible luxury, a large family car, 
and paid a photographer a few yuan to capture a fantasy they could 
not even record because they had no camera of their own. 
 As they chatted about their memories of the old China, my 
clients called up a host of images that demonstrated just how far 
that country has come, and how little we in the West have noticed. 
While shopping in a grim, state - run department store, they found 
nothing at all that would be pleasing as a gift for friends and family 
back home. China offered few consumer luxuries beyond white silk 
handkerchiefs. When my two friends opened their shoulder bags to 
dig around for a camera they were swarmed by dozens of curious 
onlookers eager to see what consumer delights their Western visitors 
harbored in their portable treasure chests. (They carried emergency 
rations of peanut butter and cans of tuna, along with photographic 
gear and the usual assortment of travel paraphernalia like hats, 
scarves, and rain gear  . . .  nothing special, but a trove of wonders to 
the ill - fed, shabbily dressed but friendly mob that looked on.) 
 As you ’ ll see in this chapter, China has changed far more than 
the West has. The strictures of communism have been abandoned, 
but China retains a heavy measure of state involvement in the econ-
omy. Historically a trading society and an international economic 
force, China has left behind the days of isolation and humiliation. 
The dream of building a business or owning shares in a corpora-
tion is no longer a forbidden fantasy. The Chinese people may have 
lost some of the security that went with cradle - to - grave socialism, 
but they have gained a measure of prosperity and hope that was the 
stuff of pure fantasy a remarkably short time ago  . . .  a time that my 
two clients remembered as if it were yesterday.  

 
Breaking the Chains of the Bicycle Kingdom 
53
 The New Frontier for Gucci, Rolex, and 
Mercedes-Benz 
 When most Westerners think about China, they still have a distorted 
and outdated mental picture. Many Americans still believe that 
China is populated by masses of impoverished people, dressed in 
Chairman Mao suits or People ’ s Liberation Army uniforms, riding 
around Beijing in a sea of bicycles. That was true in the 1970s, but 
today ’ s China is full of rapidly modernizing mega  cities with freshly 
poured streets and landscaped urban boulevards. Modern China is 
now a place where you are more likely to see a Mercedes-Benz or 
BMW than a bicycle. 
 As a result of this move toward luxury goods, the legendary 
 “ bicycle kingdom ” of China has now been overwhelmed by trafﬁ c 
jams. China is the world ’ s second - largest auto market, and cycling 
has become a dangerous venture on crowded, smoggy city streets. 
The newly mobile Chinese people are quickly indulging their 
dreams of luxury transportation. In fact, BMWs and Mercedes sales 
are rising more quickly in China than anywhere else in the world. 
Sales of the BMW brand, especially the China - made 5 - Series sedans, 
rose 36 percent to 22,891 vehicles during the ﬁ rst half of 2007. Over 
roughly the same period, Mercedes - Benz sold 15,830 cars and SUVs 
in the Chinese market (including Hong Kong and Macau). That ’ s 
up 30 percent from a year earlier.  1 
 America may be losing its edge as a manufacturing base, but 
it is leading the charge in China ’ s wealth explosion. The creation 
of brand consciousness in China has become a big money sci-
ence, studied in depth every year at the China Luxury Summit in 
Shanghai. Hundreds of Western marketing experts and executives 
from top - tier brands gather in the ballrooms of Shanghai ’ s posh 
Marriott Hotel to work out strategies to entice China ’ s super  rich 
consumers to indulge deeply in the fruits of materialism. Even the 
richest material fruits of all, private jets and ocean  going yachts, are 
on sale from the likes of Boeing Business Jets, Embraer Aircraft of 
Brazil, and Ferretti Yachts of Italy. 
 The Boston Consulting Group, Ernst  & Young, and Goldman 
Sachs have been studying the emergence of the wealthy elite in 
China for years. According to some estimates, this privileged elite is 
growing by as much as 20 percent a year, putting China on track to 
become the second - largest luxury goods market in the world next 

54 
Trends
to the United States by 2015. The China Market Research Group 
estimates that the volume of luxury goods sold in China will top 
 $ 12 billion in the next decade.  2 The worldwide luxury goods mar-
ket is currently estimated at  $ 50 billion. The contrast to the old 
China could hardly be greater. 
 According to a report by Goldman Sachs, Chinese purchases of 
high - end items intended to display social status — including designer 
handbags, perfumes, and watches — will grow by 25  percent annu-
ally until 2009. 
 Poverty is still a serious problem in the countryside, but in 
China ’ s gleaming ﬁ rst - tier cities, the drab ghost of China ’ s past 
is quickly being pushed into the dark recesses of memory by 
the newly arrived spirits of Coco Chanel, Louis Vuitton, and 
Christian Dior. Every major luxury brand has a presence in cities 
like Shanghai and Beijing, just as they have for years in the capi-
talist bastions of Hong Kong and Taipei. For the ultra - wealthy 
Chinese, there are lavish events, such as the Millionaire Fair in 
Shanghai. Every year, it attracts hundreds of China ’ s nouveau 
riche, who are eager to discover satisfying ways to spend their new-
found wealth and enhance their prestige. Diamond - encrusted cell 
phones and multimillion - dollar Swiss watches now hold the same 
appeal to China ’ s new rich as they do to the conspicuous consum-
ers of the West. 
 As the level of wealth in China grows with the nation ’ s boom-
ing economy, brightly lit shopping malls and luxury stores are 
beginning to spring up throughout China in second - tier cities such 
as Harbin, Wuxi, and Wuhan. These teeming urban areas, with a 
population greater than a million and names virtually unknown in 
the West, have become home to luxury brands like Giorgio Armani 
and Prada. Each of these brands has exactly 21 outlets in the new 
China. 3 
 Fine watches have also become an increasingly  important 
sign of success for Chinese men. In 2006, China rose to become 
Switzerland ’ s tenth - largest export market as sales of ﬁ ne Swiss 
watches grew more quickly than in the United States, Japan, 
Singapore, or any nation in the oil - rich Middle East. The 
Federation of the Swiss Watch Industry says  $ 334 million worth 
of timepieces was sold in China in 2006, a 14.9 percent increase 
over the previous year.  4 The new China is the new luxury goods 
destination.  

 
Breaking the Chains of the Bicycle Kingdom 
55
 The Essential Expanding Class 
 Ultra - luxury consumption is only the tip of the iceberg. The emer-
gence of a large middle class is also vital to the development of a 
stable society and a sustainable economy. Chinese Premier Wen 
Jiabao recently stressed the importance of developing a consumer 
mentality among the nation ’ s burgeoning middle class. Premier 
Wen warned the nation that it was far too dependent on investment 
and exports, a problem that made the economy unstable because 
of its excess liquidity and its vulnerability to global downturns. 
 At ﬁ rst glance, China ’ s consumption curve seems to be rising 
exponentially. In addition to the notorious trafﬁ c jams caused by 
swarms of new cars, cities like Beijing and Shanghai are surrounded 
by vast housing projects and dense clusters of freshly built apart-
ment towers. But look inside these new homes and you will ﬁ nd 
the average Chinese family continues to live a relatively Spartan 
existence. 
 We have to adjust our perspective to understand the reality of 
China ’ s newly afﬂ uent middle class. To qualify as a member of the 
middle class, a family must earn at least 80,000 yuan, or approxi-
mately  $ 10,000 a year.  5 It doesn ’ t sound like much, but it ’ s enough 
to purchase a modest automobile and an apartment, a bonanza by 
the standards of a mere 30 years ago. Most members of the middle 
class are academics, doctors, engineers, ofﬁ ce staff for state - owned 
enterprises, and bureaucrats. 
 You may remember the term  Purchasing Power Parity, which 
I used when discussing China ’ s gross national product. The fact 
that a  middle - class family is able to purchase a car and a home on 
an income of 80,000 yuan a year indicates that a very small salary 
by U.S. standards goes a relatively long way in China. The Chinese 
equivalent of a  $ 10,000 annual U.S. income gives a Chinese family 
the power to purchase a lifestyle that would cost many times that 
amount in any industrialized Western nation. This is a real - life dem-
onstration of Purchasing Power Parity in today ’ s China. In terms of 
hard currency, a middle class family may appear to be  impoverished. 
But when measured by purchasing power, this same family is begin-
ning to approach parity with an average Western family. 
 Although the members of this emerging class own homes and 
automobiles, they are generally considered conspicuous savers, not 
consumers by the standards of most Western economies. Although 

56 
Trends
the new middle class family typically splurges on a television, a wash-
ing machine, and a few small appliances, various estimates indicate 
that the Chinese people save between 30 percent and 40 percent of 
their income, a great deal more than their Western counterparts. 
Chinese families know they must save because government pensions 
and health insurance plans, once provided by state - run enterprises, 
are now largely a thing of the past. 
 Unexpectedly, it is the afﬂ uent upper middle class, a group 
that earns more than  $ 50,000 a year, that stands out as an excep-
tion to the rule among China ’ s avid savers. A study by the McKinsey 
Consulting company found a surprising jump in the number of 
these relatively highly paid Chinese, who are suddenly interested in 
borrowing money. Thirty - one percent of this afﬂ uent class is now 
prepared to break with the cultural bias against borrowing, a bias 
that has traditionally regarded borrowing as a sign of  weakness.  6 
Only 19 percent of the people in this group would admit to wanting 
a loan only a few years ago, in 2004. The McKinsey ﬁ ndings showed a 
boom in the demand for loans as this select group sought bank loans 
for houses, investments, and education. 
 The growth of the middle class and the willingness of the upper 
middle class Chinese people to spend and borrow money is criti-
cally important for a host of economic and social reasons. A  sizable 
 middle class is universally believed to be an essential anchor for 
social and political stability in any emerging economy. A middle 
class that spends its income is especially important to China because 
the nation ’ s economy needs to develop internal markets that 
are not vulnerable to ﬂ uctuations in demand for exported goods 
abroad. 
 Just as important is the development of a Chinese market for 
Western goods, a market that will address the growing chorus of 
complaints from the United States and Europe about the balance 
of payments problem. China ’ s huge export surplus could spark 
a global economic crisis if the imbalance continues unabated. 
Avoiding such an international crisis is crucial for investors and 
working people of all developed economies. 
 Some economists also blame China ’ s avid savers for sparking 
excessive economic growth and stimulating inﬂ ation. The boom 
on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock markets is widely attributed 
to ordinary citizens seeking better returns on their money than the 
banks offer. 

 
Breaking the Chains of the Bicycle Kingdom 
57
 There are conﬂ icting reports about the true size and growth 
rate of China ’ s middle class. For example, McKinsey found that 
approximately 2 million Chinese belonged to the most afﬂ uent seg-
ment of the middle class. They also estimated that this wage - earning 
elite would grow at a rate of 15 percent a year. 
 But what about the most important bloc of Chinese consumers, 
those with the  $ 10,000 to  $ 12,000 incomes? The image of the frugal 
middle class may also be going the way of the bicycle. China appears 
to be embarking on a spending binge the likes of which the world 
has never seen. According to the National Bureau of Statistics, total 
retail sales exploded in 2007, growing at a rate of 15.9 percent from 
the year before.  7 For example, automobile sales are rising at a rate 
of 30 percent annually, while sales of home electronics and mobile 
phones are increasing at a rate of more than 20 percent annually. 
These are the kind of economic growth statistics that would make any 
Western nation green with envy. But many experts say that these 
ﬁ gures understate the real rate of consumption in China because 
sales of services are not included, and services are one of the fastest -
 growing sectors of the economy. 
 Services are an essential element of any thriving middle class. 
Some service sectors provide ﬁ nancial and legal counsel, which 
tend to stabilize the economy and enhance wealth creation. Sales 
and marketing services facilitate the growth of new and innovative 
economic sectors. Personal services usually make life more enjoy-
able. A developed service sector is a hallmark of a stable, modern 
economy, and the fact that China is developing a service infrastruc-
ture bodes well for the future.  
 Consumerism Rising 
 The end of the bicycle kingdom will be obvious for the whole world 
to see by 2015. That ’ s when China ’ s consumer market is expected to 
become the second largest in the world. Only the United States, which 
now accounts for 42 percent of global consumption, will rank as a 
bigger consumer than China.  8 The Credit Suisse bank predicts that 
China ’ s share of global consumption will rise to 14.1 percent of the 
total among the world ’ s major economies by 2015, while America ’ s 
share is projected to drop to 37.7 percent. It ’ s not that U.S. consumers 
will lose their appetite for consumption. It ’ s simply that the Chinese 
will begin to catch up and they will do so in huge numbers. 

58 
Trends
 We have to envision China ’ s immense potential for growth to 
fully understand these economic shifts in power and tectonic ﬁ nan-
cial changes. Some sources estimate that only 110 million people 
out of a population of 1.3 billion are currently members of the con-
suming class.  9 Goldman Sachs predicts that this number, however, 
will grow exponentially to a staggering 650 million people by the 
year 2015. If Goldman Sachs is correct, the world will see a continu-
ing explosion of economic activity in China, as retail consumption 
expands by almost 600 percent in less than a decade. The prospect 
is unprecedented, even by U.S. standards of consumerism. 
 Attaching some dollar ﬁ gures to this exponential consumption 
curve yields awesome economic potential. China ’ s true retail mar-
ket is currently a relatively paltry  $ 450 billion a year, or  $ 346 per 
capita, which is about half that of Malaysia.  10 Assuming roughly 600 
percent growth, a market for almost  $ 3 trillion worth of retail goods 
could emerge in less than a decade. Such a development would 
have worldwide consequences, creating increased global demand 
for resources, ﬁ nished products, and labor. 
 Make no mistake. The new China is emerging with buying power 
that would have thrilled China ’ s capitalist pioneer, Deng Xiaoping. 
A revolution in spending and afﬂ uence is on its way. China ’ s wealth 
explosion will indeed shake the world.  
 Riding the Wave of the Real Estate Boom 
 Another myth that goes hand in hand with China ’ s old bicycle king-
dom image is the perception that China ’ s urban masses are content 
to live in cramped apartments or ancient neighborhoods called 
hutongs. In the oldest parts of most cities, China ’ s hutongs form a 
maze of crowded alleyways and one - room homes clustered around 
communal courtyards. 
 These developments are currently being bulldozed on a vast 
scale to make way for high - rise buildings. They are being sacri-
ﬁ ced as a part of China ’ s capitalist revolution. Former premier Zhu 
Rongi conceived of the idea of using the housing market as a driver 
of economic growth.  11 
 Ancient neighborhoods are disappearing especially quickly 
in Beijing, where image - conscious authorities have been eager to 
erase the traces of the old China in hopes of impressing Olympic 
 visitors. Although some people will miss the tightly knit hutong 

 
Breaking the Chains of the Bicycle Kingdom 
59
 neighborhoods, which were seen by tourists as a link to ancient 
China, no one will miss the poorly maintained, dingy apartment 
blocks that were once provided by the government or by state -
 owned enterprises. 
 Now an urban real estate boom has lifted many Chinese cit-
ies out of their dismal and dilapidated past.  12 City dwellers are 
ﬁ nally permitted to own the property they inhabit and they are rid-
ing the wave of a real - estate buying frenzy. According to the  Wall 
Street Journal, home ownership rates in Chinese cities are as high as 
80 percent, exceeding U.S. home ownership rates of 69 percent. 
(Farmers are still not allowed to own the land they work on and 
must continue to lease it from the state, which assumed ownership 
of all land during the communist revolution.) 
 Real estate prices are rising rapidly, and construction projects 
are springing up to meet the demand. In every major city, a maze 
of construction cranes dominates the skyline as speculators rush to 
build new high-rises at a rate that often worries government ofﬁ -
cials, who are concerned about the development of a real estate 
bubble. 
 Although inﬂ ation does not appear to be a serious problem yet, 
except among foodstuffs, Chinese government economists appear 
to be as worried about the prospect of runaway inﬂ ation as former 
Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan once was. Ofﬁ cials have 
repeatedly jacked up interest rates and bank reserve requirements 
in hopes of cooling off investment - driven growth in real estate and 
excess industrial capacity. Beijing has tried to clamp down on the 
issuance of new loans and building permits in hopes of cooling off 
the nation ’ s property ownership craze, but with limited effect. 
 Chinese homeowners may not be rich by Western standards, 
but their incomes are rising two or three times faster than in other 
low - wage Asian countries.  13 Some companies are having trouble 
holding on to their most talented workers, and the situation could 
become worse. Westerners have always imagined that China has a 
virtually unlimited supply of low - cost labor. But the nation is rapidly 
moving from an era of labor surplus into an era of potential labor 
shortage. 14 The Chinese Academy of Social Sciences warns that the 
engine of the Chinese economic miracle — cheap labor — may be in 
short supply by 2010, triggering demands among workers for even 
higher wages and increasing competition for housing in prosperous 
urban areas .

60 
Trends
 If China does develop a labor shortage, there will plenty of even 
lower - wage countries waiting in line to take up the slack. Some jobs 
are already migrating to Vietnam, where factory wages average a 
meager  $ 50 to  $ 60 a month, which is half the level paid by facto-
ries along China ’ s highly developed east coast.  15 But, as we will see, 
China is eager to move up the ladder of technically advanced econ-
omies with an eye to competing directly with the United States. The 
Chinese middle class has left the era of bicycles and hutongs in 
the past and most Chinese people who have not already joined the 
new elite are eager to move to the city, buy an apartment, and com-
mute to work in a new car. China ’ s ambitious dreams of national 
prosperity will continue to drive economic growth in every sector 
and company accessible to Western investors. 
 The Red Shadow 
 One of the persistent myths that has prevented many U.S. investors 
from feeling comfortable with investing in China is the looming 
shadow of communism, embodied in the outdated and somewhat 
frightening name,  Red China.  No system could be further from the 
principles of pure communism, yet the myth persists in many minds 
that the Chinese economic juggernaut is run by a communist clique 
similar to the old Maoist or Stalinist regimes. 
 Vocal critics of China have emerged in the U.S. media and the 
political arena, and they never miss an opportunity to invoke 
the specter of the Cold War by referring to China, formally known 
as the People ’ s Republic of China, as Communist China or Red 
China. 16 The term is both misleading and increasingly irrelevant. 
 China is a communist country in name only. It is obviously true 
that the nation ’ s central government is run by an elaborate central-
ized structure that still carries the name of the Communist Party 
of China. Much of the political apparatus that surrounds the presi-
dent, Hu Jintao, is a leftover from the days of Chairman Mao. The 
president is still the General Secretary of the Communist Party, 
and he relies on the support of a pyramid of political party bod-
ies, including the nine - member Politburo Standing Committee, 
which functions like the inner circle of the cabinet. Moving down 
the chain of command is the Central Committee and its power-
ful 24 - member Politburo, a group that usually meets in secret ses-
sions to work out policy. Finally, there is the National Congress of 

 
Breaking the Chains of the Bicycle Kingdom 
61
the Communist Party of China, whose 2,217 members meet every 
ﬁ ve years to discuss policy and approve leadership choices for the 
higher bodies. As impressive as this huge body may appear to be, 
the Congress has no real legislative power. 
 It would be fair to say that Western - style democracy is a long way 
off for the People ’ s Republic of China. The closest thing to a demo-
cratic election is the selection of delegates to the National Congress 
by regional branches of the Communist Party. But choosing a del-
egate to attend a Congress that meets only twice a decade could 
hardly be called participatory democracy. Real leadership choices 
and national policy decisions are made by Politburo members and by 
high - ranking ofﬁ cials who head powerful bureaucracies with names 
like the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC). 
 But the absence of democracy is not the same thing as com-
munism. China could hardly be further from the basic principles 
of communism, an ideology that calls for the establishment of a 
society without social classes in which there is common ownership 
of the so - called means of production. China ’ s new rich and the 
nation ’ s middle class make up a privileged elite. Moving down 
the pecking order are factory workers and laborers. Near the bot-
tom of the social hierarchy are migrant workers who often go hun-
gry because they have chosen to seek employment in cities without 
the required papers or hokous. Sharing the bottom of the social 
ladder are the rural poor, who do not own the land they live upon. 
China claimed that it had eliminated poverty in 2000 because ofﬁ -
cials believed that almost no one earned an income of less than 
 $ 77 a year or just 22 cents a day, an amount which Beijing deemed 
to be sufﬁ cient to enjoy the basic necessities of life. 17 But the World 
Bank deﬁ nes absolute poverty as an income of less than a dollar 
a day and even Chinese authorities agreed that  “ 26 million disa-
bled people or those living in extremely bad natural environment 
areas ” were indeed impoverished. 
 As is evident from the information presented here, the new 
China does not meet one test of real communism. The nation ’ s 
extremes of wealth and poverty have created many distinct classes. 
Even one of China ’ s ofﬁ cial news outlets, the  Xinhua news agency, 
acknowledges that the nation ’ s rich are getting richer and the 
poor are getting poorer.  18 Just how far China has strayed from  
being a classless society was revealed recently in a survey by the Asia 
Development Bank. 

62 
Trends
 Looking More and More Like the United States 
 The Asia Development Bank uses a mathematical measure of income 
inequality called the Gini coefﬁ cient, a standard also endorsed by 
the World Bank, to study social class rankings and economic  equality. 
A low Gini coefﬁ cient indicates a society in which there is a consid-
erable degree of equality. For example, a country with a Gini coefﬁ -
cient of zero would have achieved perfect income equality, in effect, 
a classless society. By contrast, a country with a Gini coefﬁ cient of 
one would indicate the opposite extreme in which a single person 
controls all wealth. 
 Obviously, no nation has ever achieved absolute equality, but 
it is revealing to discover where China stands on the spectrum. 
Chairman Mao would roll in his grave if he could see how far China 
has strayed from his proletarian vision. Inequality in China rose 
to an all - time high in the Asia Development Bank ’ s latest report. 
China ’ s Gini coefﬁ cient jumped to 0.473, up from 0.40 back in 
1993. Compare that to the United States, the bastion of capitalist 
inequality, which had a Gini coefﬁ cient of 0.41 in the same survey. 
China now has greater income inequality than the United States. 
 China has indeed become an unequal, class - structured society. 
It has strayed very far from the communist ideal even though the 
government is clearly struggling to reduce the gap between rich 
and poor. The Asia Development Bank warns that the gap could 
slow the spread of prosperity, because the poorest people have 
less access to education, health care, bank loans, and other things 
needed to beneﬁ t from economic growth. The bank acknowledges 
that China ’ s poorest people have beneﬁ ted from the nation ’ s eco-
nomic boom but the incomes of the richest 20 percent of the popu-
lation have grown much more quickly than those of the poor.  
 China ’ s Capitalist Revolution 
 What about that other standard of real communism, that is, equal 
ownership of all things, especially the means of production? Most 
Chinese have enthusiastically embraced private ownership of every-
thing from property to proﬁ table companies. The stock markets in 
Shanghai and Shenzhen have become the subject of conversation 
at every level of society, from taxicabs to ofﬁ ce towers. As  share fever 
gripped Chinese cities during the internal stock market boom of 

 
Breaking the Chains of the Bicycle Kingdom 
63
2006 – 2007, ofﬁ ce managers complained publicly that no work was 
getting done while the markets were open because everyone was 
busy watching their shares rise and fall. Even gray - haired grand-
mothers, veterans of the Maoist years crammed into smoky broker-
ages, hoping to ﬁ nd the stocks that would make them rich. 
 Even in bookstores, I ﬁ nd no market for Chairman Mao ’ s 
famous Little Red Book of slogans, except among tourists. Among 
the Chinese people crowding into bookshops, the  overwhelming 
demand is for more business books, and Western authors are 
 popular. From very technical volumes to the likes of  How to Win 
Friends and Inﬂ uence People  by Dale Carnegie, young Chinese readers 
can ’ t seem to get enough information. 
 Of course, many of the biggest businesses in China are at least 
partially state owned. That includes giant oil companies, banks, 
telephone systems, and manufacturers. Many of the companies 
whose shares trade on the New York Stock Exchange as American 
Depositary Receipts (ADRs) are majority - owned by the Chinese 
 government. The very idea may smack of communism, but in prac-
tice, Chinese authorities have developed a taste for proﬁ tability, even 
in state - owned enterprises (SOEs), as they are called. 
 The current state of China ’ s SOEs is a total turnaround from 
the situation a mere decade ago. During the early 1990s, Beijing 
looked on enviously as the so - called tiger economies of Asia raced 
ahead with their economic development and modernization. South 
Korea, Thailand, the Philippines, Malaysia, and even Indonesia fol-
lowed in the footsteps of Japan, ﬁ rst building low - wage manufac-
turing economies and then progressing up the economic ladder. 
South Korea rose from a poor, war - ravaged agrarian society to a 
world - class auto - manufacturing nation in four decades. To the cha-
grin of the Chinese, even their renegade province, Taiwan, estab-
lished itself as a world - leading source of advanced microchip design 
and manufacture. 
 While the world raced ahead, China ’ s state - owned factories were 
chronic money losers. Some mega projects like the Three Gorges 
Dam were set into motion by huge injections of state  capital. But 
proﬁ ts and efﬁ ciency failed to materialize in China ’ s lumber-
ing SOEs. The solution was obvious among the Asian economic 
tigers and in China ’ s own special economic zones, like Shenzhen. 
Building enterprises from the ground up and streamlining SOEs to 
earn proﬁ ts by working efﬁ ciently was the only option. 

64 
Trends
 Setting up more special economic zones within China turned 
out to be a boon to the growth of manufacturing and the crea-
tion of new companies. But special economic zones couldn ’ t stop 
the hemorrhaging of money from the giant mills and factories 
left over from the days of Chairman Mao. What happened after 
1997 is worth noting. In the space of just ﬁ ve years, Beijing laid off 
25 million workers from the most heavily subsidized SOEs.  19 Many 
of the worst companies were shut down. The employment shocks 
that have hit the United States and Europe as a recent result of 
China ’ s ascendancy don ’ t begin to compare to the harsh economic 
discipline that China ’ s leaders imposed on their own people. The 
government had realized that even state - run businesses needed to 
make a proﬁ t, preferably a healthy one. 
 The best evidence of the government ’ s shifting mind-set is 
among the nation ’ s biggest banks. Before China began the pain-
ful process of capitalist reforms, government - owned banks were 
treated like a policy arm of the leadership in Beijing. Money - losing 
 enterprises were granted huge loans with no hope of ever seeing 
repayment. If the government wanted to prop up a corrupt and 
bloated factory, it would order a bank to write increasingly large 
loans. The banks themselves eventually seemed to be on the verge 
of collapse. 
 The scope of the problems in China ’ s banking system was a 
state secret, but Standard  & Poor ’ s estimated that the total amount 
of nonperforming loans in the ﬁ nancial sector could have been 
as high as  $ 864 billion in 2004.  20 Seeking to ﬁ ll the black hole 
in the nation ’ s banking industry, the government began bailing 
out the ailing ﬁ nancial giants. China Construction Bank (CCB) 
and Bank of China received  $ 22.5 billion each. Industrial   and 
Commercial Bank of China received a stunning  $ 40 billion bailout. 
Bailouts of smaller banks are continuing to this day. 
 All the money in the world wouldn ’ t have helped, of course, if 
the banks had continued to issue bad loans. Western bankers were 
very skeptical about the government ’ s reforms. By 2006, Hong Kong 
investors were ﬁ nally convinced of the success of the reform process 
when the once - failing banks were listed on the Hong Kong Stock 
Exchange. They generated some of the largest initial public offer-
ings in history. 
 Capitalism is now ﬂ ourishing and proﬁ ts are pouring in among 
China ’ s once - moribund state - owned enterprises. Giant companies 

 
Breaking the Chains of the Bicycle Kingdom 
65
like China Life (LFC), Aluminum Corporation of China (ACH), and 
Yanzhou Coal (Y ZC) have been among the top performers on U.S. 
stock exchanges, and I ’ m proud to say they have greatly enhanced 
the results of my own stock newsletter, the  China Stock Digest.  Their 
performance on U.S. markets is not based on a fad or a bubble like 
the dotcom ﬁ asco. These are now real companies, earning huge 
proﬁ ts. 
 During 2006, the nation ’ s biggest SOEs booked record revenues 
and proﬁ ts as they evolved from socialist control to capitalist man-
agement principles. The biggest and best of the SOEs, the so - called 
national champions, registered an increase in revenues of 20.1 per-
cent during 2006. In total, they raked in a whopping  $ 1.044 trillion. 
Proﬁ ts rose almost as fast as revenues, up 18.2 percent for the year 
to  $ 97 billion.  21 
 Individual companies have delivered even greater proﬁ t increases. 
For example, during the ﬁ rst half of 2007, China Life (LFC) proﬁ ts 
increased 160 percent from the same period the year before. Net 
proﬁ ts for the ﬁ rst half of the year more than  doubled  to  $ 3.1 billion. 
Guangshen Railway Company (GSH) says total revenues for the ﬁ rst 
half of 2007 increased 165.1 percent year over year to  $ 611 million 
and proﬁ ts increased 97.5 percent. Aluminum Corporation of China 
(ACH) reported an increase in revenues of 32 percent for the ﬁ rst 
half of 2007 as production soared. To any investor, these are breath-
taking gains. 
 Investors in these SOEs have learned to live with the fact that 
the government is a controlling shareholder. Government partici-
pation is a factor that cuts both ways. Understanding that Beijing 
has embraced capitalism means that bureaucrats are eager to see 
proﬁ ts. Successful managers are rewarded, and the central govern-
ment beneﬁ ts from dividends and share price increases. Ofﬁ cials 
will adjust state policy at times to assist the national champions, 
beneﬁ ting shareholders in the process. 
 There are 154 enterprises directly under the supervision of 
the Chinese central government through the State - owned Assets 
Supervision and Administration Commission (SASAC). If one were 
to include the assets of provincial governments, the number of 
SOEs increases to 424. The SASAC is primarily concerned with 
the proﬁ tability of its holdings. The central government gener-
ally shares this view, and it is working to reduce the total number 
of state - operated companies in hopes of streamlining the economy 

66 
Trends
and increasing efﬁ ciency. Larger state enterprises beneﬁ t from this 
relationship, as competing ﬁ rms are eliminated or the assets of 
smaller ﬁ rms are folded into their portfolios. 
 But, at times, the SOE and government must balance the desire 
for proﬁ t and efﬁ ciency with the needs of the people. For example, 
China faces major air and water pollution problems. As a result, 
the government has stepped in to restrict bank loans for new cap-
ital investments in energy - intensive industries. Because of a policy 
written in 2007, top managers of the country ’ s leading state - owned 
enterprises risk losing promotions or even their jobs if their compa-
nies fail to meet energy saving and pollution - reduction targets.  22 
 Another example of the conﬂ ict between proﬁ t and meeting 
the needs of the people concerns commodity businesses. Prices 
of some commodities, such as gasoline, are capped by the cen-
tral government to control inﬂ ation and prevent unrest in poorer 
parts of the country. As a result, the proﬁ ts of reﬁ ners like Sinopec 
Shanghai Petrochemical (SHI) have been restrained. 
 In short, China ’ s SOEs fall somewhat short of operating in an 
environment of total free market capitalism. At times, the govern-
ment gives them a leg up over the competition. At other times, it 
places restrictions on corporations. Those restrictions are often 
no worse than Western antimonopoly laws or the increasingly 
strict environmental controls imposed by the U.S. government.  23 
Of course, price controls have a much more socialistic ﬂ avor. The 
thing that matters to shareholders is proﬁ tability, and the Chinese 
government has put a premium on proﬁ t growth, sometimes at 
the expense of the environment.  
 Unleashing Private Investment 
 The government is also reducing its stake in national enterprises 
by selling shares on the open market. In early 2007, the govern-
ment was expected to put  $ 78 billion worth of shares up for sale 
on China ’ s internal stock exchanges.  24 As the year progressed, 
nervousness over the size of the share sale faded when it became 
clear that share prices and corporate proﬁ ts were rising inexora-
bly. The total value of government holdings to be sold at market is 
 estimated to be  $ 250 billion, an amount called an overhang because 
of the potential for massive share sales to strain market liquidity 
and dilute share prices. So far, nothing of the kind has happened. 

 
Breaking the Chains of the Bicycle Kingdom 
67
It remains most unlikely that the government will ever relinquish 
controlling interest in its national champion corporations. 
 Of course, not all Chinese businesses are run by SOEs. As the 
forces of capitalism have been gradually unleashed, thousands of 
private businesses have sprung up, and many of them have also 
returned spectacular proﬁ t growth and shareholder returns. Private 
companies have ﬂ ourished in the Internet sector as entrepreneurs 
have rushed to create the Chinese equivalents of companies like 
Yahoo! (one Chinese version is called SINA), eBay (Alibaba is one 
Chinese equivalent), and Google (which is being beaten by Baidu). 
These Chinese brands serve a population of Internet users that 
will soon surpass that of the United States. Baidu is traded on the 
NASDAQ as BIDU and SINA is traded under its own initials, SINA. 
 Taiwan - based companies are also increasing their presence 
on the mainland. One of the world ’ s biggest chipmakers, Taiwan 
Semiconductor (TSM), is building new factories in China to take 
advantage of the low cost of doing business there. 
 Changes in the law are even spurring the growth of one - man 
companies. Chinese media report that the growth of one - man ﬁ rms 
has mushroomed since the introduction of the new  Company Law 
in 2006. Before the law was passed, a self - employed person was 
exposed to unlimited liability if his business failed. The courts had 
the power to take all of the business owner ’ s possessions, including 
those of his family, to make good on losses and debts. Under the 
popular new law, the liability of one - man corporations is limited to 
the amount of registered capital, an amount set by law at approxi-
mately  $ 13,000. 
 While capitalism ﬂ ourishes at all levels, from giant state enter-
prises to one - man companies, the Chinese people face challenges 
caused by the collapse of social systems that existed under the 
communist system. Providing health care, education, and old - age 
pensions used to be the responsibility of employers, and under 
Chairman Mao all employers belonged to the state. When succeed-
ing administrations dismantled the communist system, they shifted 
much of the responsibility for these social services to individuals 
and families. Even for young families, health care currently ranks 
among the most important expenditures in the household budget. 
In 2004, private spending accounted for 64 percent of health - care 
expenditures in China.  25 Many older Chinese simply decide to avoid 
treatment because they cannot afford it.  

68 
Trends
 The Future Capital of Capitalism 
 China has veered further from the dictates of communism and 
socialism than many western European nations. The government 
has said it is committed to make sure that everyone has access to 
good health care, and it has even called in U.S. management con-
sultants to help it construct a workable system. New initiatives are 
being implemented to help the rural poor educate their children. 
A viable social safety net will ultimately be essential as China ’ s pop-
ulation ages. Because of the one - child policy, it is estimated that 
the ratio of workers to retirees will decline from six to one in 2000 
to just two to one in 2040.  26 Ironically, China has strayed so far 
from its old cradle - to - grave socialist policies that the government 
has realized that the pendulum must swing back. More funding 
is being directed toward social programs as Beijing realizes that a 
greater level of ﬁ nancial security is essential to maintain stability in 
society. 
 Without question, the bicycle kingdom is long gone. China 
today is an exciting hybrid of new capitalism, ancient tradition, and 
a smattering of reminders from the stultifying years of communism. 
It ’ s true that dyed - in - the - wool Marxists still remain in a few positions 
of inﬂ uence, calling for China to turn back the clock. But that will 
never happen. 
 In some ways, China ’ s central government is as tough as 
Chairman Mao ’ s so - called dictatorship of the people. Critics of the 
government, from Internet bloggers to accredited journalists, are 
routinely silenced and sometimes imprisoned. It is a rigidly author-
itarian regime and it is not democratic in any way that we would 
recognize. But that does not make it a communist power in any 
meaningful sense, except in name. 
 Beijing has decided that economic development, social sta-
bility, and the survival of the regime are critically important prin-
ciples. Leading academics and China watchers believe that the 
nation ’ s educated and prosperous middle class wants no part of 
open democracy for the time being because the peasant populace 
of the countryside is uneducated and unprepared.  27 The elite fear 
that the masses would be too easily swayed by demagogues and 
 corruption. They look at the collapse of another communist super-
power, the Soviet Union, and feel relieved that political revolution 
took a backseat to capitalist economic reforms. 

 
Breaking the Chains of the Bicycle Kingdom 
69
 It ’ s true that the portrait of Chairman Mao still looms over 
China ’ s Tian ’ anmen Square. But the Great Helmsman ’ s inﬂ uence 
has changed over the years. His slogans have disappeared from the 
public consciousness. China ’ s old and failed economy has been 
wrenched away from the Marxist principles of communism to make 
the new China the capitalist wonder of the world. 


71
 4
C H A P T E R
The Coming Financial Flood   
 The want of money is the root of all evil .
 
— Samuel Butler 
 The economic events that are moving China forward are also 
serving to push America off center stage. We have already seen the 
decline of the United States ’ middle class caused by the exportation 
of entire manufacturing sectors because China is producing many 
products and goods that are taking away the jobs of many average 
U.S. workers. 
 Don ’ t believe me? Here is a list of industries that used to be based 
in the United States that are now long gone or disappearing, leaving 
behind empty and crumbling factory buildings.  1  
 Adhesives and sealants 
 Auto parts, including electrical assemblies 
 Baby goods 
 Bedding 
 Bicycles and motorcycles  
 Building materials and hardware  
 Clothing 
 Computer parts and computer monitors 
 Construction equipment, including pumps, drills, and chainsaws  
 Crafts and small gifts 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

72 
Trends
 Cameras 
 Electronics, including televisions, and radios  
 Eyeglass frames and sunglasses 
 Fashion accessories 
 Fitness and bodybuilding equipment 
 Food products  
 Furniture and fiberboard  
 Home healthcare products  
 Household goods and tools 
 Industrial tools 
 Jewelry 
 Kitchen appliances and parts 
 Laboratory equipment 
 Lamps and bulbs 
 Machines, including generators and air conditioners 
 Office supplies, equipment, and machinery 
 Outdoor home tools and entertainment items 
 Paper goods 
 Pigments and specialty chemicals 
 Police and military equipment 
 Shipbuilding 
 Shoes and leather goods 
 Small motors and other mechanical devices 
 Telephones 
 Textiles and fibers 
 Tires and rubber goods  
 Toys and recreational goods  
 How We Helped Create the Flood 
 The  Made in China  label is everywhere, in every ﬁ eld of endeavor, 
whether you are aware of it or not and Americans helped put it 
there. As you can see in Figure  4.1 , the surge of Chinese imports 
has become a tidal wave in the ﬁ eld of consumer goods within the 
past 15 years. In today ’ s economy, China accounts for 80 percent of 
the United States ’ toy market, 50 percent of the footwear  market, 
almost 50 percent of the consumer electronics market, and 12 per-
cent of the clothing market, making it the number one source for 
clothing sold in the United States.  2 Sales of Chinese - made DVD 
players, mobile phones, and personal computers to American 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

 
The Coming Financial Flood 
73
 consumers are soaring. According to Nicholas Lardy of the Institute 
for International Economics, U.S. imports of notebook computers 
from China increased exponentially from  $ 5 million to more than 
 $ 7 billion between 1998 and 2004. During the same period, sales of 
Chinese - made mobile phones rose from  $ 75 million to more than 
 $ 4 billion; DVD player imports from China rose from less than half 
a million dollars to  $ 3 billion; and sales of made - in - China digital 
cameras jumped from  $ 7 million to  $ 3 billion. 3 
 It wasn ’ t supposed to happen this way. For centuries, Western 
businessmen have regarded China as a vast potential market and 
a source of proﬁ ts, not competition. In the 1800s, a British writer 
famously remarked,  “ If only we could persuade every person in 
China to lengthen his shirt - tail by a foot, we could keep the mills of 
Lancashire working around the clock. ” 4 Sadly, the mills of Lancashire 
are a distant memory and the remaining textile mills of North and 
South Carolina are also disappearing as China becomes  “ the major 
textile exporter to the world. ”  5  
 With relatively few exceptions, early Western efforts to turn 
China into the world ’ s largest consumer paradise have been met 
with opposition, even though the dream lives on in books like  One 
Billion Customers  by James McGregor, formerly of the  Wall Street 
Journal. The reality is that China prefers to sell goods to the world, 
not to buy ﬁ nished goods from other countries. China wants the 
employment and the revenue that comes from producing consumer 
0
50
50
100
200
150
Percent of GDP (RHS)
Goods and services balance (LHS)
250
2.00
4.00
0.00
2.00
6.00
4.00
8.00
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
US$ billion
Percent
Figure 4.1  Net Exports of Goods and Services, 1992–2006
Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China, China Statistical Yearbook 2006; International 
Monetary Fund; International Financial Statistics; CEIC.

74 
Trends
products for six billion potential customers in every corner of the 
globe. To this day, Chinese corporations are reaping the fruits of 
this strategy with exceptional proﬁ t growth, as shown in Figure  4.2 . 
 Many early attempts to penetrate the Chinese consumer market 
ended in ﬁ asco because Chinese authorities insisted that manufac-
turers who wanted access to Chinese markets form joint ventures 
with moribund state - owned enterprises. For example, the 1980s 
attempt by American Motors to become the ﬁ rst U.S. automaker 
with access to the Chinese market was a dismal and unproﬁ table 
experience for all concerned.  6 During the 1990s, Western business-
men recounted a litany of frustrations as they tried to build enter-
prises around the endlessly tempting lure of one billion Chinese 
customers. Instead of hungry markets and eager partners, they 
found that  “ signed agreements and memoranda of understanding 
turned out to be worthless; court rulings were not enforced; state -
 owned enterprises were exempt from costly environmental regula-
tions; expensive licenses, processed by lackadaisical bureaucrats, 
were required at every turn; counterfeiting and abuse of intellec-
tual property rights were rampant. ” 7 
 But China proved to be a much easier nut to crack for the thou-
sands of foreign companies that decided to set up factories on the 
Chinese mainland to manufacture or assemble products and ship 
them out to the world. The bureaucrats of Beijing were willing to 
roll out the red carpet for foreigners who provided jobs and tech-
nology without demanding access to domestic markets. According to 
2
0
4
6
10
8
All industrial enterprises
State-owned and state-controlled
industrial enterprises
12
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
Percent
Figure 4.2  Industry Profits as Percent of GDP 1999–2006
Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China, China Statistical Yearbook 2006; CEIC.

 
The Coming Financial Flood 
75
a respected French think tank, half of all Chinese exports resulted 
from the processing and assembly of imported parts by 2007.  8  
 It ’ s not just parts and raw materials that foreign businesses are 
sending to China. Entire factories — which are the means of produc-
tion — are being disassembled, crated, and shipped from the United 
States and Europe to be rebuilt thousands of miles away as mod-
ern components of the Chinese industrial engine. Along with the 
machines and their components, the West is sending away the blue-
prints and the technological expertise that went into the design and 
operation of the modern economy ’ s industrial muscle and sinew.  9 
The Chinese government, increasingly dominated by technocrats, 
fully understands the importance of acquiring Western technol-
ogy so they can penetrate Western markets with desirable goods. 
Newly learned Western technologies are being put to use to serve 
the Chinese — the very same consumers that Western entrepreneurs 
have coveted for more than a century. It goes without saying that 
Westerners export jobs along with the machinery and technical 
expertise underpinning America ’ s and Europe ’ s industrial base. 
 Chinese buyers are also snapping up entire companies. 
Wanxiang Group owns an auto parts maker in Rockford, Illinois, 
and the Chinese computer maker Lenovo purchased IBM ’ s entire 
laptop business in 2004 for a surprisingly modest  $ 1.25 billion. 
Lenovo became the third - largest personal computer maker in the 
world as it grew to build machines for IBM ’ s existing markets as well 
as the vast Chinese and Asian markets. Lenovo computers started 
making a strong appearance in North America during the 2007 
Christmas season. 
 Western resources are also attractive to cash - rich Chinese buy-
ers. In 2005, the China National Offshore Oil Company (CNOOC) 
tried to buy Unocal. An uproar in Congress and in the media about 
foreign ownership of U.S. resources forced CNOOC to withdraw its 
 $ 18.5 billion bid. A substantially lower bid by Chevron actually won 
the day. But smaller resource deals have garnered much less bad 
publicity. A deal between the Cleveland - Cliffs Company and Laiwu 
Steel saved 500 U.S. jobs at a bankrupt mine in Minnesota ’ s Iron 
Ridge. 10 The deal cost the Chinese partners the equivalent of  $ 43 
million and provided a supply of ore essential for China ’ s booming 
steel industry. We can expect this resource buying trend to spread 
throughout the United States and Europe as China ﬂ exes its grow-
ing economic muscle. 

76 
Trends
 The Next  “ Asian Tiger ”  
 The United States is not the only country being affected by China ’ s 
surge to economic power. China now rivals both Japan and South 
Korea in one of Asia ’ s core industries, shipbuilding. During the 
ﬁ rst half of 2007, China ’ s shipbuilding industry posted a 151 per-
cent increase in proﬁ ts, raking in a remarkable  $ 848 million over six 
months. China is recognized as the world ’ s number three shipbuilder, 
but growing demand for ocean  going transport has boosted the indus-
try to unprecedented heights. Measured by new and existing orders, 
China ’ s shipbuilding industry has vaulted ahead of Japan and South 
Korea to become number one in the world. 
 The remarkable rise of the post – World War II Japanese econ-
omy is one of the models that Chinese leaders, economists, and 
businessmen are hoping to emulate on a much larger scale. China 
looked on with jealousy as the so - called Asian tiger economies of 
Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, and Hong Kong led the 
Asia - Paciﬁ c region out of postwar economic stagnation. The new 
economies of Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, and the Philippines 
followed suit while China struggled to shake off the remnants of the 
communist economic system. 
 The turning point for China was likely the East Asian ﬁ nancial 
crisis that ripped through the economies of the tiger nations dur-
ing 1997 and 1998. Sparked by a collapse of the Thai currency, the 
baht, the ﬁ nancial crisis dragged down the currencies and stock 
markets of many Southeast Asian nations. The crisis put an end 
to the explosive growth phase called the Asian economic miracle, 
and it provided an opening for China ’ s economic rise. China ’ s cur-
rency did not collapse because the nation ’ s currency, the yuan, was 
pegged to the dollar, and the Chinese central bank had sufﬁ cient 
liquidity to maintain the peg and defend itself against currency 
speculators. 
 Having survived the economic tsunami that has left some of the 
Asian tigers still struggling, China ’ s leadership realized the next step 
had to be a decisive move up the value chain. Assembling comput-
ers and cell phones is not the same thing as designing them, manu-
facturing sophisticated components, or marketing the end product 
in wealthy Western nations. Chinese businessmen and leaders real-
ized that that ’ s where the money is. As such, they eagerly began 
creating, making, and producing lavish goods that were in demand 

 
The Coming Financial Flood 
77
from foreign markets. They manufactured these goods with low 
production costs and then exported them to Western countries at a 
competitive price, which often resulted in a lucrative proﬁ t.  
 The  “ China Price ”  
 China has gained access to Western markets, but the downside has 
been relentless pressure to reduce production costs every single 
year. The phrase  China price  sprang up in the context of the endless 
search for lower prices, ﬁ rst by pitting American workers against 
Chinese laborers and then by pitting dollar - a - day Chinese workers 
and their employers against each other in a competitive race to the 
bottom. 
 There ’ s nothing wrong with price competition in a market 
economy as long as quality standards are maintained at every level 
of the production and marketing process. Certainly, unskilled work-
ers in poor countries are generally grateful for employment that 
provides a living wage. But it ’ s easy to see why Chinese leaders are 
eager to see the nation ’ s economy move up the value chain. 
 The furor over the recall of Chinese - made toys contaminated 
with lead paint during 2007 brought home the perils of being a low -
 cost manufacturer. Chinese manufacturers all along the production 
chain took virtually all of the blame and suffered most of the harsh 
economic consequences for the lead contamination. American 
media paid little attention to Chinese assemblers ’ complaints about 
being forced to continually shave production costs and produce 
goods using ﬂ awed Western designs while the Western companies 
at the top of the pyramid reaped huge proﬁ ts and assumed mini-
mal responsibility for product testing. An executive from one of the 
companies at the center of the substandard Chinese goods contro-
versy, Mattel, was forced to make a humiliating apology on Chinese 
television, admitting that most of the problems with his company ’ s 
products had been caused by Mattel ’ s own design ﬂ aws, not by sub-
standard Chinese manufacturing processes. 
 Of course, nothing excuses the decision to use lead as an ingre-
dient in a child ’ s toy. But it ’ s worth looking at problems from more 
than one perspective. To use a more benign example, it is quite 
true that giant big box stores like Wal - Mart have been indispensa-
ble to the emerging Chinese economy. In little more than a decade, 
countless factories and armies of unskilled Chinese workers have 

78 
Trends
been able to produce and sell products within competitive Western 
economies through companies like Wal - Mart without establishing 
their own supply chains, product development departments, brand-
ing campaigns, or marketing strategies. Doing so within China 
would have taken decades, meaning retailers like Wal - Mart have 
been an integral part of the Chinese economic miracle. 
 By the same token, low - cost production in China has been 
essential to the American retailer ’ s rise to global dominance. Cheap 
goods from Wal - Mart have also beneﬁ ted penny - pinching U.S. 
consumers. Chinese - made goods have become so predominant 
in Wal - Mart, a chain that used to pride itself on selling American -
 made goods, the company might as well call itself China - Mart. 
American consumers have beneﬁ ted from lower prices, and it has 
been argued, not without justiﬁ cation, that many products now 
made in China will never again be produced in the United States 
because there are many other low - wage countries that would hap-
pily take the place of Chinese manufacturers if they could. U.S. 
workers simply could not compete. 
 Who Pays the  Real China Price? 
 China ’ s pollution crisis provides yet another compelling incentive 
for Beijing to push its capitalist class to move up the value chain. 
The scale of the nation ’ s environmental problems is so great that 
it almost deﬁ es description. The World Health Organization 
( WHO) calls China ’ s air pollution the deadliest in the world. WHO 
blames China ’ s air pollution for killing an appalling number of 
people, 656,000 every year, with almost 100,000 more dying from 
the effects of water pollution.  11 In a ranking of the 20 most pol-
luted cities in the world, the World Bank claims that 16 of those 
cities are in China. Ninety percent of China ’ s urban groundwa-
ter is contaminated, and 75 percent of the surface water ﬂ owing 
through Chinese cities is too polluted to be used for either drinking 
or ﬁ shing. 12 By the government ’ s own admission, 100 of China ’ s 660 
cities face extreme water shortages because of the pollution crisis.  13 
Half of the nation ’ s population, almost 700 million people in 278 
cities, live without any form of sewage treatment.  14 China is also the 
world ’ s largest emitter of sulfur dioxide, the main component of 
acid rain. China is even surpassing the United States as the world ’ s 
biggest emitter of greenhouse gasses. 

 
The Coming Financial Flood 
79
 China ’ s economy has already begun to suffer as a result of 
the pollution crisis. In an effort to measure the economic dam-
age caused by pollution, the State Environmental Protection 
Administration (SEPA) began calculating something called the 
Green GDP, which measures China ’ s extraordinary annual growth 
in its gross domestic product and subtracts the real economic cost 
of pollution. The country ’ s ﬁ rst green GDP report in 2004 showed 
losses of  $ 54 billion caused by pollution, which accounts for more 
than 3 percent of the year ’ s total GDP. Based on this calculation, 
China ’ s economic growth doesn ’ t look so good. Annual double -
 digit increases were suddenly called into question. We can only 
assume that the problem has become much worse. In March of 
2007, senior Beijing ofﬁ cials ordered the environmental agency to 
keep the latest green GDP ﬁ gures a secret.  15 Many provinces and 
cities involved in compiling the report said they wanted to pull out 
of the green initiative because they were afraid that regional eco-
nomic growth could be affected. 
 The pollution crisis is contributing to a broader shift in the 
direction of China ’ s economic growth. According to SEPA, a crack-
down on polluters resulted in more than 3,000 companies being 
shut down in 2006 and more than 8,000 being punished in 2007. 
Hundreds of projects that would have damaged the environment, 
including new steel mills and power plants, have been canceled. 
State - owned enterprises have been ordered to cut pollution dis-
charges by 10 percent and energy consumption by 10 percent no 
later than 2010. 16 
 In a new industrial initiative, ﬁ nancial institutions are being 
encouraged to provide loans to new environmental protection and 
pollution reduction projects. New restrictions are being imposed 
on exports that require large amounts of energy or generate large 
amounts of pollution, such as steel, non  ferrous metals, cement, and 
petrochemicals. China is also set to make large investments in pol-
lution control technology. Such policy shifts are slow in coming but 
they will guide our investment choices. One of our best investment 
performers has been Suntech Power (STP), a company that makes 
pollution - free solar electricity panels. 
 China ’ s leaders have resorted to blaming the West for  global 
pollution problems, and their argument is not entirely without 
merit. Looking at the situation through China ’ s eyes, Western 
nations have been busy polluting the planet ’ s air and water for 

80 
Trends
more than a century. While Europe and the United States rose as 
industrial powers, burning spectacular amounts of coal and oil 
in the process, China was largely an agrarian nation, stuck in the 
Middle Ages, due in large part to the previously mentioned 100 
years of humiliation. Now, as the Chinese see it, their moment has 
come to match the West by rising to industrial and political great-
ness. The onus is on the West to clean up its act ﬁ rst, at least from 
Beijing ’ s point of view. 
 But China faces environmental challenges too great to ignore. 
The global problem of climate change can be attributed partly to 
Western pollutants discharged over the past century, but blaming 
the West doesn ’ t solve the problem. Just as in the United States ’ 
early years of industrialization, severe internal pollution has been 
regarded as the price of progress in modern China. The pioneer-
ing capitalists and captains of U.S. and British industry cared lit-
tle about polluting the air and water when there was a proﬁ t to be 
made. Now China faces the problem of balancing economic growth 
against environmental concerns in an accelerated time frame. 
During a period of exploding energy demand and a growing pol-
lution crisis, I predict a great future for Chinese companies like 
Suntech Power (STP) in renewable energy ﬁ elds. 
 Much like a massive ship moving at high speed, the Chinese 
economy will need time to change course. The obvious long - term 
goal is to shift the economy to a less polluting, value - added founda-
tion. For the time being, the nation ’ s ravenous energy needs will 
demand the construction of more coal - ﬁ red electricity - generating 
plants. General Electric (GE) has carved out a multibillion - dollar 
market for gas - powered turbines in China, turbines that will gener-
ate much cleaner energy than coal. 
 In a typical Chinese business strategy, Beijing has found a way 
to leverage its turbine purchases to develop new high - technology 
industries. In 2003, GE won the bidding under a technology trans-
fer arrangement to become China ’ s leading supplier of sophisti-
cated gas turbines.  17 In a joint venture agreement with the Harbin 
Power Equipment Company and the Shenyang Liming Aero - Engine 
Group, GE will engage their Chinese partners in the construction 
and assembly of its most advanced gas turbines. China will acquire 
considerable technological expertise from its U.S. partner, although 
GE says it retains the most important industrial secrets of building 
high - energy turbines. 

 Speaking at the World Economic Forum in 2007, Premier Wen 
Jiabao admitted to an audience of thousands of global business 
leaders that China faced problems of excessively rapid economic 
growth, depletion of resources, environmental degradation, and 
mounting pressure on prices.  “ To resolve these problems, ” he said, 
 “ we are putting into practice scientiﬁ c thinking on development 
and an innovation - based model of development. ” 18 In other words, 
China is determined to move up the value chain and into eco-
nomic territory dominated by the United States and other Western 
nations. 
 Climbing the Economic Value Chain 
 China ’ s preference for high-tech industries continues to increase 
as the nation ’ s environmental and economic challenges grow 
more difﬁ cult. The 352,000 engineering graduates that pour out 
of China ’ s universities every year are the heart and soul of China ’ s 
high tech future. Their numbers dwarf the United States ’ s gradua-
tion rates of 137,000 engineers per year.  19 Engineers make up the 
bulk of Beijing ’ s technocratic administration, and they are creating 
the framework of China ’ s economic future. 
 In its effort to encourage high-technology companies to estab-
lish a base in China, the government has offered a variety of tax 
breaks and incentives as well as access to the domestic market. The 
Chinese Ministry of Commerce estimates that more than  $ 70 bil-
lion worth of foreign investments have been pumped into the 
nation ’ s high-tech sector, generating a total of  $ 192 billion worth 
of exports.  20 Evidence of the growing importance of high technol-
ogy to China ’ s industrial model is the volume of exports from the 
sector. Beijing says more than 43 percent of all exports by foreign -
 funded businesses were from the high-tech sector, an increase of 
18.2 percent in just ﬁ ve years. 
 Foreign ﬁ rms are doing much more than helping to establish 
China ’ s rising position in the manufacturing chain. They are help-
ing to fund the research and development (R & D) that underpins 
any high technology enterprise. Multinational companies have set up 
no fewer than 750 R & D centers in China.  21 Some estimates say the 
number of foreign research and development ofﬁ ces is nearing 1,000. 
 The names of the companies that are sending a part of their 
research and development budgets to Shanghai, Shenzhen, and 
 
The Coming Financial Flood 
81

82 
Trends
Beijing are among the best - known brands in the world. They 
include Oracle, Nokia, Panasonic, Nortel, and Hewlett - Packard. 
One of the largest investments is from Microsoft, which plans to 
invest  $ 100 million in China for its own operations in addition 
to the  $ 65 million the company has already invested in Chinese -
 based software enterprises. Microsoft China is expected to increase 
its Chinese workforce from 1,000 to 3,000 by 2012.  22 
 Another core of most advanced Western economies, the phar-
maceutical and biotechnology industries, are also helping fund 
the research and development movement in China. Novartis and 
Agilent have established R & D centers. Eli Lilly has struck a drug 
development deal with Chi - Med of Shanghai. Chi - Med is also work-
ing with Merck and Procter  & Gamble. Staging clinical trials of new 
drugs in China has become an increasingly popular trend for multi-
national drug developers because of the relative ease of ﬁ nding par-
ticipants in China ’ s vast population and because of the much lower 
cost of conducting trials there.  23 
 One of the biggest breakthroughs in China ’ s effort to go high 
tech is the construction of a  $ 2.5 billion Intel (INTC) chipset plant 
in Dalian. The factory, dubbed FAB - 68, will be one of the largest 
single foreign investments ever made in China. Intel says it is mak-
ing the investment in FAB - 68 because China is its second - largest 
market after the United States and is expected to be the world ’ s big-
gest information technology market by 2010.  24 Like Taiwanese chip 
manufacturers, Intel will not use its most advanced technologies 
in its Chinese branch plant because of concerns over the rampant 
theft of intellectual property in China. 
 China also has its eye on another high-tech industry of the U.S. 
economy, the aircraft industry. Boeing says China is now the com-
pany ’ s largest foreign supplier of parts. More than 3,000 people 
are working for Boeing in joint ventures, supplying products under 
 $ 2.5 billion worth of contracts.  25 Boeing and Airbus have little 
choice but to enter into joint ventures with Chinese partners if they 
want to sell aircraft in that country. Boeing estimates that China will 
need more than 2,900 new airplanes to meet the growing demand 
from Chinese airlines, so the incentive to transfer some technology 
is very considerable. 
 Not surprisingly, China is diving into the fastest - growing seg-
ment of the aircraft industry with an airplane design of its own. The 
new ARJ21 is a small, regional jet that will compete with successful 

 
The Coming Financial Flood 
83
aircraft in the same category produced by Bombardier of Canada 
and Embraer of Brazil. The ﬁ rst ARJ21, a 90 - seat jet, is expected 
to roll off the assembly lines of a company that still bears the old 
 communist - era name China Aircraft Corporation 1. In 2009, 
Chinese carriers will begin ﬂ ying the aircraft with engines made by 
General Electric and foreign - made avionics. It will shock no one to 
learn that China increased the tax on imports of small commercial 
jets several years ago, forcing both Bombardier and Embraer to 
strike joint venture agreements for the assembly and production of 
regional jets with China Aviation Industry Corporation 1.  26 
 Imitation Is Not Always Flattery — It ’ s Stealing 
 President Hu Jintao proclaimed in 2006 that  “ independent innova-
tion is the core of national competitiveness, ” but  foreign  innovation 
is still the true engine of China ’ s effort to become a world - class tech-
nology leader. While it is true that China ’ s investment in research 
and development is projected to rise from 1.34 percent of GDP to 
2.5 percent by 2020, the nation still isn ’ t getting a lot of innovation 
from its homegrown efforts. According to the State Intellectual 
Property Ofﬁ ce (SIPO), only 0.03 percent of Chinese enterprises 
actually own the key technologies for which they claim to have intel-
lectual property rights. Despite China ’ s enormous foreign trade 
volume, only 2 percent of that trade is in patented Chinese high-
technology products. 
 From a global perspective, China has ﬁ nally made it into the 
top 10 lists of nations applying for patents. The World Intellectual 
Property Ofﬁ ce (WIPO) says China ’ s patent applications increased 
by 44 percent in 2005, putting the Chinese ahead of Canada, 
Australia, and Italy in innovation. But the United States is still the 
world leader with a total of 45,000 applications for inventions and 
creations, a huge lead over China ’ s 2,452 applications. 
 Foreign innovators also lead in the number of patent applica-
tions ﬁ led within China. SIPO says Chinese innovators produced only 
18 percent of internal patent applications for inventions compared to 
86 percent from foreign companies.  27 An astonishing 99 percent of 
Chinese enterprises have never applied for a patent, and 60 percent 
do not own their own trademarks, according to the State Intellectual 
Property Ofﬁ ce. China ’ s rapid industrial modernization has not yet 
been accompanied by expertise in branding and marketing. 

84 
Trends
 One of the sad ironies of patenting an invention in China is that 
the patent ofﬁ ce is often a ﬁ rst stop for intellectual property thieves. 
In fact, patents sometimes serve as a production guide for intellec-
tual property pirates. Companies that ﬁ le for patents in Beijing risk 
losing their technology to copycats before they can manage to bring 
their products to market in China. Despite almost monthly pledges 
by state ofﬁ cials to protect intellectual property (IP), counterfeiting 
of foreign technology, trademarked goods, ﬁ lms, and music bra-
zenly continues. 
 The problem of protecting intellectual property is especially 
severe in the auto industry. Blatant piracy ﬁ rst surfaced at a Chinese 
auto show in 2003 when an obvious copy of the General Motors 
 Spark (known in the United States as the  Aveo ) appeared under the 
Chinese brand name  QQ . To the astonishment of GM executives, 
the  QQ  was such a perfect copy of the  Spark that the doors could 
be exchanged and ﬁ t perfectly. The tiny  QQ  sells for approximately 
 $ 5,000, about half the cost of the  Spark . General Motors and Chery, 
the Chinese manufacturer of the  QQ  , quietly reached a settlement 
after the U.S. automaker accused the Chinese company of brazenly 
copying its  Spark model.  28 Although critics accuse the Chinese ver-
sion of miserably failing crash tests, it has now become one of the 
most common sights on the roads of Chinese cities. Other joint 
venture car companies, including BMW and Chrysler, have also 
accused their partners of stealing the designs of their luxury mod-
els and producing copies.  29 
 Dan Koeppel of  Popular Science  investigated the industrial boot-
legging business in China and found that some factories, which 
were legitimately producing products for Western contractors with 
their day shift, would simply hire a second shift for the sole pur-
pose of counterfeiting. This  ghost shift  would secretly use the plant ’ s 
entire facilities to make near - perfect copies of the brand name 
products that were churned out legally during the day. In other 
cases, large teams of engineers would be assigned to pick apart and 
duplicate the workings of high-tech exports, beating the foreign 
contractor to market with his own technology. Koeppel ’ s report, 
titled  “ China ’ s iClone, ” includes a disturbing video of a brand new 
Chinese copy of Apple ’ s leading - edge product, the iPhone. The 
clone was available in China shortly after Apple brought its product 
to market with a global publicity blitz. The sad fact is this: China 
may not be beating the West in innovation, but it is snapping up 

 
The Coming Financial Flood 
85
the crown jewels of America ’ s industrial base and innovative genius 
by hook and by crook. 
 China is educating armies of new engineers to act as the 
nation ’ s foot soldiers in the long march to supremacy in high tech-
nology. But without a culture that encourages innovation and a 
legal system that vigorously protects intellectual property, China ’ s 
innovators will lag behind the competition in leading - edge indus-
tries. There is very little incentive for Chinese entrepreneurs to 
design, test, and market new products when it is so much cheaper 
to produce imitations. 
 Prosecutions for dealing in stolen intellectual property rarely 
amount to more than a slap on the wrist. In effect, Beijing is tac-
itly giving counterfeiters the go - ahead because somewhere between 
10 and 30 percent of the nation ’ s GDP is believed to come from 
piracy and counterfeiting. Domestically, piracy accounts for as much 
as 20 percent of retail sales.  30 The International Intellectual Property 
Alliance estimates piracy rates remain at more than 90 percent 
across all copyright industries. 
 China cannot have it both ways. At the World Economic Forum 
in Dailan, Premier Wen Jiabao appealed to foreign companies to 
bring more research and development to his nation. He pledged 
to protect their rights,  “ particularly intellectual property rights. ” 
But Western businessmen know that the system is often rigged 
against them. Even with the best of intentions from the top levels of 
government, the courts and provincial governments (local authori-
ties and the police) are extremely reluctant to impose a real crack-
down. That means top - tier companies like Intel (INTC) and Taiwan 
Semiconductor Manufacturing (TSM) will be extremely reluctant 
to produce cutting - edge products on the Chinese mainland. The 
plants they are building now will be relegated to churning out chips 
that are two or three generations behind the leading edge.  
 Your Blueprint for an Ark 
 There is no question that the world ’ s economic center of gravity is 
shifting toward China. Sixty - three percent of the huge increase in 
China ’ s foreign exports over the past decade comes from foreign 
companies and joint ventures doing business in China. Among 
them are branch operations of 51,000 American companies.  31 
Despite the many problems that face China and face companies 

86 
Trends
doing business in China, we are witnessing the dawn of the Chinese 
century. It makes sense to invest accordingly. Smart investors are 
diversifying their holdings into select Chinese stocks and taking a 
long second look at their holdings in U.S. ﬁ rms. 
 China ’ s most proﬁ table enterprises are not those that process 
goods for foreign contractors. They typically operate on razor - thin 
margins. The big money is still among the modernized enter-
prises that were once entirely state - owned. The best of these com-
panies enjoy revenues in the billions of dollars. They may have 
relinquished their monopolies, but the best of China ’ s national 
champion corporations still have dominant shares of the energy, 
telecommunications, and resources sectors. Some have risen to join 
the ranks of the largest companies in the world, and many of them 
are easily available to investors on the New York Stock Exchange as 
ADRs. 
 There are also fast - growing private companies emerging in the 
newest sectors of the Chinese economy. There is ﬁ erce competition 
among companies staking out their territory in Internet commerce, 
advertising, security, gaming, brewing, and computer manufactur-
ing. Generally speaking, companies that have no state ownership 
are listed as ADRs on the NASDAQ exchange. They may be rising 
rapidly, but they tend to be the more volatile Chinese issues. 
 As we conclude our broad overview of the unprecedented 
hybrid that is the new Chinese economy, we ’ re going to take a 
closer look at the sectors that may be appropriate for diversiﬁ ed 
investments. Becoming your own China stock guru requires a sub-
stantial amount of background information, but fortunately, it has 
been my pleasure to do the legwork for you. Read on to ﬁ nd out 
more about where the money is being made in the new China.   

87
5
C H A P T E R
 Becoming a Guru   
 Money is a headache, and money is the cure.  
 
—Everett Mamor 
 After reading the ﬁ rst four chapters of this book, any thinking 
person would agree that China will eventually become the world ’ s 
largest economy. The evidence is as clear as it is overwhelming. 
Armed with this insight, however, we need ask ourselves a funda-
mental question: 
 Will we allow China ’ s unstoppable rise in economic power to increase or 
decrease our wealth? More simply put, will we be China winners or China 
losers? 
 This is a question we need ask both as a nation, and as indi-
viduals. Just look around the country where you live. The impact 
of China ’ s rise on American families is already everywhere to be 
seen. You need travel no farther than Detroit, Michigan, to meet 
countless  China losers among the ranks of unemployed auto indus-
try workers. The old - style U.S.  $ 65 - an - hour manufacturing salaries 
cannot possibly compete with Chinese factory workers who typically 
work just as hard as we do but who instead make that  $ 65 wage, not 
per hour, but for an entire month of labor. In the southern United 
States, textile mills and shoe factories that existed for generations 
now stand idle. These unfortunate people are sometimes referred 
to as  China losers — that is, the victims of a new breed of hard - working 

88 
Trends
Chinese capitalists, each of whom is determined to earn their own 
piece of the American dream. 
 Yet being a  China loser  need not be the future for our nation in 
general, nor for you, the reader, in particular. All too frequently, 
I marvel at a blunder or newly missed opportunity that we, as a 
nation, make in our national policies toward China. Think about it. 
A nation of 1.3 billion people is desperately yearning for our style 
of economic freedom and for our help in implementing the capi-
talist system that created the American dream. They are willing to 
make almost anyone smart enough to recognize the opportunity 
from this tectonic shift in world affairs fabulously wealthy. 
 Clearly most Americans just don ’ t get it when it comes to China. 
Becoming a  China winner  (or dare we say  . . .  a China guru) may 
make you extremely rich, but it may make you unpopular.  
 Guru  –   noun 2 a :  a teacher and especially intellectual guide 
in matters of fundamental concern  b :  one who is an acknowl-
edged leader or chief proponent  c :  a person with knowledge or 
 expertise. — Merriam - Webster 
 This is because almost everywhere we turn, we see self - serving 
politicians and self - proclaimed  nationalists on cable TV demonizing 
those yearning Chinese masses who strive to be just like us. The real 
tragedy is that for every  China loser  I see, there could have been a 
 China winner  in his place  . . .  a  China winner     who understands what is 
going on in the world around him and ﬁ nds a way to proﬁ t from it. 
 To illustrate how one can be a  China winner,  consider the exam-
ple of Hong Kong. During the 1980s, as China opened its doors 
to foreign capitalists, one of the ﬁ rst groups to beneﬁ t were the 
 successful industrialists of Hong Kong. At that time, Hong Kong 
had many factories churning out consumer products that were 
exported worldwide. They quickly realized, though, that the sala-
ries paid in Hong Kong could not possibly compete with the ridicu-
lously low labor rates paid on the Chinese mainland. What did the 
Hong Kong industrialists do? They moved their factories into China 
and brought the proﬁ ts home to beneﬁ t the Hong Kong economy. 
Today, almost 30 years later, you do not see an endless stream of 
unemployed factory workers collecting unemployment beneﬁ ts and 
living on the streets of Hong Kong. You see, instead, a prosperous 
city, with a robust service economy, very high per capita high wages, 

 
Becoming a Guru 
89
and an unemployment rate of less than 5 percent. In other words, 
Hong Kong residents adapted to focus on their strengths and 
became  China winners,  not  China losers.  Those of us in the United 
States would be wise to follow their example. 
 For now, though, we will leave foreign policy questions to the 
diplomats. Our focus at the moment is making sure that you, dear 
reader, become one of the China winners. Together, we will protect 
our families and increase our fortunes. Together, we shall proﬁ t 
handsomely from China ’ s unstoppable rise on the world economic 
stage. No  China loser status for us, thank you very much! 
 What If Bill Gates Had Been Born in China? 
 It ’ s amazing when you stop to consider how much the world has 
changed over the past 25 years. As a result of the fall of totalitarian 
state - run economies, living standards throughout the world have 
been raised. In fact, it ’ s no coincidence that the two areas of the world 
with the most poverty — the Middle East and Africa — are the last to 
undergo a capitalist revolution. It ’ s also no coincidence that these 
non capitalist areas are hotbeds for extremism and violence, because 
capitalism is the path to peace and prosperity, and as more nations 
have embraced the free market, the world has become a more egali-
tarian place. 
 Bill Gates is no beauty contest winner, but nevertheless, he 
makes a good poster boy for capitalism. After all, he used his  mind 
to build the world ’ s largest fortune — in excess of  $ 40 billion —
 and his company, Microsoft, made hundreds of millionaires and 
increased the world ’ s productivity in the process. Gates is now giv-
ing away his billions to global charities, and his efforts will undoubt-
edly improve countless lives throughout the world. Bill Gates 
exempliﬁ es the fact that economics is not a zero sum game and 
that a rising tide can lift all boats. His story demonstrates the  win -
 win - win proposition of capitalism. But just think: What if Gates had 
been born in China instead of the United States? 
 Gates himself coined a term for this inequality of circumstance —
 the  ovarian lottery.  Gates means by this that in the past, it would have 
been better to be born an average Joe in the United States than a 
genius almost anywhere else in the world. Just think if Gates had 
been born in the Soviet Union under Stalin. In all likelihood, he 

90 
Trends
would have never earned  $ 40,000, let alone  $ 40 billion. But more 
than Gates himself, it is the world that would have lost out. 
 Before the fall of the Berlin Wall, half of the world was under 
totalitarian rule. This means that there was probably an Eastern 
hemisphere Gates to equal the West ’ s version, but instead of mak-
ing hundreds of billions for himself and others, the East ’ s Gates 
toiled away in obscurity since birth; his talent and ambition crushed 
under the heel of a left - wing regime. But since capitalism has swept 
through most of the world — including China — Gates himself has 
said,  “ Now, I would rather be a genius born in China than an aver-
age guy born in Poughkeepsie. ” 
 Think about it: The next generation will have more than twice 
the number of people from which a Bill Gates or Warren Buffett 
may emerge. Imagine the compounding effect of a Chinese 
Gates and a Chinese Buffett to match their Western counterparts. 
The world ’ s wealth will not just double, it will multiply exponen-
tially, and everyone in the world will be better off for it. But who 
will make the  most money? Will it be those who invest in the next 
Microsoft and get in early? 
 The split - adjusted value of a share of Microsoft in 1986 was just 
 $ 0.08. If you had invested a mere  $ 3,000 in MSFT shares on March 
13th of that year, you would now have more than  $ 1 million! That ’ s a 
return on investment of more than 36,000 percent! Financial  pundits 
always talk about ﬁ nding the next Microsoft, but the fact is that 
they ’ re probably looking in the wrong hemisphere. We know that the 
economies of China and the United States are headed in opposite 
directions — so which nation is more likely to produce the next great 
investment opportunity? 
 If you believe, as I do, that China is the answer, then we must 
become gurus on China. We must become, as Webster would say, 
 “ a person of knowledge and expertise. ” Later in this book I pro-
vide you with speciﬁ c tools and resources, like the ones I have on 
my web site  chinastockdigest.com . These are the same resources 
that have created tremendous proﬁ ts for my private clients and for 
those who follow my China stock research. But for now, let ’ s roll 
up our sleeves and learn about the industries and industrial centers 
in our world ’ s new land of opportunity  . . . the new capitalist China.     

II
P A R T
CHINA’S ECONOMIC 
LANDSCAPE


93
6 
 
C H A P T E R
  China ’ s Booming 
Base — Manufacturing    
 Being ignorant is not so much a shame as being unwilling 
to learn. 
 —Benjamin Franklin 
 The heart and soul of China ’ s economic explosion is manufacturing. 
China may aspire to move up the labor - and - ﬁ nished - goods value chain, 
but it will never fully abandon the basis of its economic success. Beijing 
has set its sights, instead, on expansion on every front. 
 From the sprawling factory complexes of Shenzhen to the cot-
tage industries of the North, China has proven itself to be adept 
at ﬁ nding a niche and ﬁ lling it with astoundingly inexpensive 
manufactured goods. Most of us will remember the amazement 
we felt when brand new DVD players, which initially hit the mar-
ket as thousand - dollar jewels of high technology suddenly began 
appearing in electronics stores and even groceries for as little as 
 $ 30. It didn ’ t take long for the machines to ﬂ y off from the shelves 
at those prices. Chinese manufacturing has shown the power to 
transform technology, to shape economies, and to change our own 
lives.  

94 
China’s Economic Landscape
 Building the Industrial Base 
 As we know, the low cost of labor has been one of the factors driving 
China ’ s manufacturing competitiveness. The total average hourly 
labor cost in China is about  $ 1, compared to an average of  $ 30 per 
hour in the United States.  1 But there is much more to it than that. 
China is building more proﬁ table industrial sectors, while clinging 
tenaciously to its hard - won manufacturing dominance. 
 China has at least 1.3 billion mouths to feed and some experts 
believe the real population of the country is substantially larger. 
The sheer numbers of people entering the job market every year, 
perhaps as many as 12 million, create a powerful competitive force 
that tends to hold wages in check. This relentless tide of job seekers 
also puts pressure on the central government to keep on expanding 
the manufacturing sector. 
 There ’ s no disputing China ’ s amazing success so far. Just over 
two decades ago, China ’ s presence on the world stage as a manufac-
turer and exporter was absolutely tiny. The nation produced a pal-
try  $ 8.7 billion worth of manufactured exports amounting to less 
than one percent of the world ’ s total.  2 After decades of  double - digit 
growth, China has become the world leader. Taking into account 
exports from Hong Kong and Taiwan, as well as mainland China, 
the Greater China industrial engine grabbed a 10 percent share of 
the world ’ s manufacturing exports in 2004  3 and has continued to 
grow exponentially. 
 Manufactured goods now account for 89 percent of China ’ s 
merchandise exports and an extraordinary 32 percent of the 
nation ’ s GDP.  4 Half of China ’ s ﬁ scal revenue is generated by man-
ufacturing and almost half of the urban working population of 
the nation works in manufacturing. Not since the emergence of the 
American industrial colossus in the late eighteenth and early nine-
teenth centuries has there been a phenomenon anything like it. 
The United States became the world ’ s manufacturing leader by 
continuous innovation. U.S. manufacturers became dominant by cre-
ating the mass production line, by inventing new products, such as 
relatively inexpensive automobiles, and by implementing increas-
ingly efﬁ cient production processes, including computer - controlled 
systems and industrial robots. China ’ s manufacturing might is based 
on its manpower (and womanpower). 

 
  China ’ s Booming Base — Manufacturing    
95
 Who Transformed China? 
 A powerful combination of forces has come together in an entirely 
different way in China. The entrepreneurial spirit of Chinese busi-
nessmen (and women, who now rank among the nation ’ s billion-
aires) is legendary, and the end of true communism unleashed a 
pent - up wave of capitalist forces. Deng Xiaoping ’ s special economic 
zones drew upon the ambitions of expatriate Chinese throughout 
Asia, even though attracting new enterprises from Hong Kong was 
Deng ’ s primary goal. Chinese students have gained advanced edu-
cation and expertise at universities throughout the Western world, 
and, although many have chosen to stay in the countries where they 
got their education, millions have returned with expertise and an 
appetite for economic success. 
 One of the oddities of China ’ s development is the number of 
small cities and towns that have become known for their specialties 
in particular manufacturing sectors. Haining, for example, a city 
of fewer than half a million people near Shanghai, has become a 
world - renowned source of leather goods. Most of Haining ’ s 3,000 
factories are involved in the production of leather products. A little 
farther from Shanghai, Taizhou has become the center of the plas-
tic molding industry. In the Guangdong region, dozens of towns are 
known for their product specialties: toys in Chenghai, ceramics in 
Fengxi, motorcycles in Pengjinag, underwear in Yanbu, furniture 
in Dachong, and shoes in Pingzhou.  5 Chinese entrepreneurs have 
clearly been able to draw from locally developed skills and special-
ties imposed by former communist taskmasters to develop indus-
tries that are now so large that they sometimes satisfy a very high 
percentage of global demand. It speaks volumes about the aggres-
siveness of China ’ s entrepreneurial drive that humble beginnings 
like state - owned factories and cottage industries have burgeoned 
into global forces. 
 The increasingly capitalist governments of China ’ s regions 
and provinces, as well as Beijing, have taken pains to ensure that 
entrepreneurs have every advantage. In the past, banks were 
encouraged to lend money with abandon, and ofﬁ cials tended to 
look the other way when environmental regulations were broken. 
That is changing, but the government has many other tools at its 
disposal.  

96 
China’s Economic Landscape
 Why Foreign Business Can ’ t Resist China 
 Foreign companies investing in a major manufacturing facility in 
certain parts of China pay no tax at all for as long as 20 years. Import 
duties and value - added taxes may also be waived. The land a manu-
facturing facility is built on may be provided free of charge. What ’ s 
more, grants may be doled out to help train workers or to compen-
sate the company for a generous portion of its capital investment.  6 
Intel has been very secretive about the terms of its new  $ 2.5 billion 
chipset manufacturing plant, but we can assume the incentives were 
generous. The incentives listed here certainly surpass anything avail-
able in the United States. 
 What ’ s more, the money to build new facilities continues to 
pour in. China is second only to the United States as a recipient of 
foreign direct investment (FDI). Foreign investment in the United 
States tends to be liquid because it is often placed in stocks and 
bonds and can easily be withdrawn. Foreign direct investment in 
China is usually placed in factories and real estate. Although China 
has the lowest trade barriers of any developing country, it has tight 
restrictions on foreign investment in its internal stock markets. 
 The drive to attract new manufacturing concerns is so great 
that the government has added a slew of hidden subsidies, some 
of which are being contested as possible violations of World Trade 
Organization (WTO) rules to ensure fair competition. The cost of 
electricity is kept artiﬁ cially low, the prices of other forms of energy, 
including coal and petroleum, are subject to price controls and sub-
sidies to reduce the cost of shipping, and water is sold below its true 
value, 7 despite the fact that the nation is running desperately short 
of clean, fresh water supplies. 
 Manufacturing concerns in the West are coming to realize that 
they have little choice but to consider moving lock, stock, and barrel 
to China if they wish to survive. It ’ s not just a question of matching the 
so - called China price demanded by major retailers like  Wal - Mart. It ’ s 
also a question of matching the competition. If a manufact urer ’ s chief 
competitor is able to slash prices by moving operations to the Chinese 
mainland, any other company in the same ﬁ eld will be forced to take a 
long look at its chances of survival if it keeps its production facilities in 
a relatively high - wage Western country. In addition to all of the other 
incentives, there are other cost considerations, including an employ-
er ’ s freedom from health care obligations and possible labor union 
problems.  

 
  China ’ s Booming Base — Manufacturing    
97
 Becoming Number One 
 For U.S. industries like auto parts manufacturing and  furniture 
making, the result has been a tailspin. American imports of 
Chinese - made furniture, for example, increased sixfold between 
1996 and 2002, driven by deep price cuts by China - based factories. 
In a petition to the U.S. government, a coalition of 28 American 
furniture makers complained that their operating income had been 
slashed by 75 percent over two years,  8 and the industry faced possi-
ble collapse. 
 The United States remains a manufacturing colossus, but that 
sector ’ s share of the U.S. economy is declining while Chinese 
industry aggressively takes up the slack. In July of 2007, China 
raced past a new economic milestone, becoming the number one 
source of exports to the United States. For decades, America ’ s 
closest industrialized neighbor, Canada, jealously clung to its posi-
tion as the number one exporter to the United States. But Canada 
ﬁ nally fell behind when China sold  $ 28.6 billion worth of goods to 
the United States in August of 2007, beating Canada by more than 
 $ 4 billion. 9  
 Although Chinese manufacturers often complain that their 
proﬁ t margins are being squeezed by U.S. buyers and international 
competitors with even lower wage structures, the evidence indicates 
that China is doing very well indeed. The textile industry faces the 
most intense cost - cutting pressures, but it is growing at a rate of 
15 percent a year as measured by output value, proﬁ ts, and exports, 
with a total output of  $ 307 billion in 2006.  10 The industry is mod-
ernizing and raising productivity to keep ahead of foreign com-
petitors. China ’ s computer and home appliance sectors recorded 
massive proﬁ t increases during the ﬁ rst half of 2007. The Chinese 
 Xinhua news agency boasts that computer enterprises enjoyed a 
600 percent increase in proﬁ ts, and home appliance companies 
rang up a 513 percent proﬁ t increase. The manufacturing proﬁ t 
boom extended through many sectors, with the nation ’ s major 
steelmakers reporting earnings increases between 80 percent and 
156 percent, due to increased demand, prices, and productivity.  11 
 Chinese workers are not yet the most productive in the world. 
U.S. workers still hold that honor, partly because they work so many 
hours. But a survey by the International Labor Organization found 
that productivity was rising fastest in China and East Asia. Average 
annual productivity growth was 2.1 percent in the industrialized 

98 
China’s Economic Landscape
world compared to a stunning 8.5 percent in Asia. In fact, China ’ s 
exports are growing so quickly that the government has repealed 
some of the tax incentives given to energy - intensive and pollution -
 producing industries that manufacture 2,200 products.  
 Tomorrow ’ s Manufacturing Giants 
 Where does it all end? Despite the nation ’ s breakneck pace of 
growth, one of China ’ s top scientiﬁ c institutions says the economy 
won ’ t be transformed from an agricultural into an industrial econ-
omy until 2015. 12 China is going full speed ahead. 
 Looking to the future, Chinese industries are reaching out to 
become global players. The IBM Institute for Business Value says 60 
Chinese ﬁ rms will join the ranks of well - known multinationals in the 
next decade.  13 Here ’ s a list of 12 ﬁ rms to watch as Chinese manu-
facturing takes on a global presence: BaoSteel, Haier Appliances, 
Lenovo Computers, Hisense Home Electronics, Midea Group Appli-
ances, SVT Group Electronics, Younger Textiles, CHINT Electron-
ics, Wahaha Beverages, Skyworth Home Electronics, People Electric 
Appliance Group, and Aux Group Appliances. 
 Watch those names. IBM says they are the companies with the 
potential to be the next Sony or Samsung or IBM. 

99
7
C H A P T E R
  China ’ s Auto Industry — In Full Gear   
 Capital as such is not evil; it is its wrong use that is evil. Capital 
in some form or other will always be needed. 
— Mohandas K. Gandhi 
 The biggest car - buying boom in history is happening right now 
in China. The people of China have fallen in love with automobile 
ownership in a big way and they are creating a massive industry to 
satisfy domestic demand and eventually to supply the world. 
 The Chinese love affair with the automobile is reminiscent of 
the United States ’ own romance with the car. Auto ownership is a 
symbol of success, independence, and mobility. Sales of automo-
biles continue to boom because customers continue to buy the larg-
est and most luxurious vehicle they can afford. Commutes are slow 
and getting slower every month, but still Chinese workers  prefer 
driving to work over public transit even though major cities are 
scrambling to add miles of subway lines and ﬁ elding ﬂ eets of spar-
kling new buses. 
 Full Speed Ahead 
 Since the turn of the century, sales have been increasing at a rate of 
at least 25 percent every year, with annual sales ﬁ gures approaching 
ten million vehicles.  1 In 2006, China raced past Japan to become 

100 
China’s Economic Landscape
the world ’ s second - largest market for new vehicles, with total sales 
of 7.2 million units.  2 Only the United States buys more automobiles 
than China and many economists predict that the U.S. record won ’ t 
stand forever. Americans currently own an estimated 226 million 
vehicles. By 2025, China ’ s total car ownership is expected to surpass 
that number and continue to increase exponentially. The Chinese 
economy has broken every speed limit set for it in the past and it 
wouldn ’ t be surprising to see China become number one much 
sooner. 
 As discussed in Chapter  4 , Beijing has established national goals 
to limit energy consumption and reduce pollution. Paradoxically, 
the government is also doing everything it can to build a car cul-
ture and a car industry that will rival the United States. Although 
approximately 15,000 miles of highways are already completed, the 
government is pushing ahead with the construction of more road-
ways. For example, a huge national highway system that is 52,800 
miles long, is under construction. When completed, the Chinese 
network of roads and highways will be approximately the same 
length as all of the interstates built in the United States since the 
1950s. It apparently matters little to bureaucrats that streets and 
highways become more clogged every year and smog ﬁ lls the air in 
cities like Beijing. What seems to matter more is further develop-
ing the auto industry so that it can be the largest in the world. 
 Despite the crowding on the roads, the growth of auto own-
ership in China has a long way to go by world standards. Twenty -
 seven people out of every thousand in China currently own a car. 
According to the  Xinhua news agency, the world ’ s average level of 
vehicle ownership is 150 units for every 1,000 people. 
 Take note of this sobering fact before you consider driving a car 
in China. According to the Ministry of Public Security, the number 
of experienced drivers in China is estimated at about 73 percent. 
What makes for an experienced driver? More than three years of 
experience behind the wheel. That means millions and millions of 
drivers that we might consider novices are engaged in urban war-
fare for room to move on swarming city streets. Auto accidents 
account for an appalling 650 deaths and 45,000 injuries daily, mak-
ing China the most dangerous driving environment in the world.  3 
A Beijing trafﬁ c cop has a life expectancy of only 45 years, partly 
due to air pollution levels. 

 
China’s Auto Industry—In Full Gear 
101
 Automakers Battle for Position 
 China ’ s relentless increase in new car sales indicates that the 
nation ’ s demand is far from being satisﬁ ed. According to the pow-
erful National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC), 
the car ownership ratio will rise to 40 vehicles for every 1,000 peo-
ple by 2010.  4 The NDRC also predicts that 55 million vehicles will 
be swarming over China ’ s roads by 2010. As a result of the increased 
number of cars and trucks on the roads, ofﬁ cials optimistically pre-
dict that the nation ’ s gasoline consumption will rise by no more 
than 50 percent because of increasing engine efﬁ ciency. 
 An astonishing number of vehicle manufacturers have sprung 
up to ﬁ ll the voracious public demand. There seems to be no gen-
eral agreement on the total number of carmakers in China, with 
estimates ranging from 100 to 150. The situation is reminiscent of 
the early years of automobile manufacturing in the United States, 
when dozens of ambitious companies leaped into the business, only 
to go bankrupt or be swallowed up by the conglomerates that would 
eventually become known as the Big Three. 
 If it ’ s difﬁ cult to keep up with the number of Chinese auto man-
ufacturers, it ’ s even more difﬁ cult to keep track of the number of 
 models. In 2005, a record number of new models, 105 varieties, hit 
the market and production began to exceed demand. The NDRC says 
production capacity has risen above 10 million units annually and new 
models are still pouring into showrooms from Beijing to Tibet. 
 As the market grows, foreign automakers have been struggling 
to increase their market share through joint ventures with the big-
gest Chinese manufacturers. After the ﬁ rst, trouble - plagued joint 
venture between American Motors Corporation (which was later 
taken over by Chrysler) and Beijing Jeep in 1983, the government 
realized that stronger measures were needed. By 1991, a mere 
81,000 cars were being produced by the entire industry, but the 
growth curve was about to take off with 25 percent increases in pro-
duction and sales every year. 5 
 Beijing had decided that automobile manufacturing was to 
become a national  pillar  industry and the world ’ s automakers rushed 
in to take part in what they expected to be a gold rush. After Bei-
jing Jeep, Volkswagen rushed in to become China ’ s leading brand 
through joint ventures called Shanghai Auto Industries—  Volkswagen, 

102 
China’s Economic Landscape
First Auto Works — Volkswagen. Other multinational joint  ventures 
followed, including Shanghai Auto Industries — General Motors, 
Chang ‘ An — Ford, 
Chang ‘ An— Suzuki, 
Guangzhou 
 Automobile 
Group — Honda, Donfeng - Nissan, Donfeng - Kia,  Donfeng -  Citroen, 
Beijing - Hyundai, 
Chery - Chrysler, 
Chery - Fiat, 
 Brilliance 
China 
 Automotive — BMW, and Guangzhou Automobile Group—  Toyota. 
 The crowd of national and international automakers competing 
for the Chinese automobile market has sparked a price war, forcing 
most manufacturers to offer price cuts. But internal demand has 
been so great that the industry giants have still managed to report 
extraordinary proﬁ t increases. For example, the car industry as a 
whole reported a 65 percent jump in proﬁ ts for the ﬁ rst half of 
2007, clearing a total income of  $ 4 billion.  6 One of China ’ s inde-
pendent car companies, Chery, recorded the biggest proﬁ t increase 
among the majors, with growth of 210 percent.  
 Best Sellers 
 The best - selling models in China are hybrids from joint ventures. The 
top ﬁ ve models are the Volkswagen Jetta, the Volkswagen Santana, 
the Buick Excelle, Toyota ’ s Camry, and Chery ’ s famous QQ. 
 Chery is also joining up with foreign companies to compete in 
overseas markets. China ’ s most successful independent car com-
pany has struck an agreement with the Chrysler Group to assemble 
small, inexpensive cars in China for export under the Dodge brand 
name. Chery is also working on a deal with Fiat and Alfa Romeo. 
Another independent, Geely, hopes to have a model in U.S. show-
rooms before 2010. Brilliance China Automotive, a BMW partner, 
may have a car in U.S. showrooms even sooner. 
 Chery is already a major exporter of its own models. Sales 
abroad for 2007 are in the 100,000 range, with China ’ s total auto 
exports exceeding 500,000.  7 Current exports are to less developed 
nations such as Brazil, Uruguay, Egypt, Ukraine, and countries in 
Africa. Not wanting to repeat the ﬁ asco of Yugoslavia ’ s failed Yugo 
automobile in North America, Chinese brands are gaining experi-
ence in the Third World before attacking more critical markets. 
 Before exporting completed automobiles, China had already 
taken an aggressive stance in the auto parts industry. China has 
raced ahead of Germany to become the second - largest exporter 

 
China’s Auto Industry—In Full Gear 
103
of car parts to the United States. Japan remains the number one 
exporter of parts, but Chinese companies are not standing still. 
Chinese ﬁ rms like Wonder Auto Technology and Wanxiang are 
buying U.S. plants so they can access U.S. technology and markets. 
Chinese manufacturers are beating even Mexican auto parts facto-
ries through lower costs for labor, raw materials, and the low value 
of the Chinese yuan. 
 Many of the partners in joint ventures are at least partly 
owned by provincial governments in China, with a percentage of 
shares being offered on the Shanghai and Hong Kong exchanges. 
Brilliance China Automotive Holdings Ltd. (CBA) is one of the ﬁ rst 
and still one of the few automotive enterprises to be offered as an 
ADR in the United States. 
 Direct investment in automotive enterprises through the Shanghai 
stock exchange is still off-limits to most foreigners. Investment on the 
Hong Kong exchange is almost as difﬁ cult to manage, unless one 
invests through a growing variety of funds, as we see later in this book. 
 For the time being, the industry is in something of a shakedown 
phase, as a surplus of manufacturers engage in cutthroat pricing to 
win market share. For the time being, it remains difﬁ cult for inves-
tors to pick the probable winners in China ’ s automotive boom and 
own shares directly in those companies. Ownership of shares in 
resource suppliers, parts suppliers, and major energy ﬁ rms will likely 
be the safer bet until the industry ’ s dominant players emerge and 
offer more ADRs in the United States or shares become available 
through mutual funds and exchange - traded funds in Hong Kong. 
 Investors who own U.S. and European automotive stocks should 
also keep an eye on the progress of joint ventures with Western 
companies to stay aware of who is winning the race for dominance 
on China ’ s roads and which company will reap substantial future 
proﬁ ts from the growing auto export market.  
 Tomorrow ’ s Global Giants 
 China is ultimately destined to take its place on the world stage, just 
as Japanese and South Korean automakers have done. They will be 
a competitive group and three of those mentioned in this chapter 
are projected to be industry leaders. The IBM Institute for Business 
Value says a total of ﬁ ve companies in the motor vehicle industry 

104 
China’s Economic Landscape
have the potential to become global players. They are SAIC, Chery, 
and Geely in the auto manufacturing ﬁ eld and Wanxiang in auto 
parts and Lifan in motorcycles. 
 Look for these brand names to follow in the footsteps of Toyota, 
Nissan, Hyundai, and Kia. The Chinese are closing in quickly in our 
rearview mirrors.  

105
8
C H A P T E R
 China ’ s Energy Industry — Red Hot    
 He that waits upon fortune is never sure of a dinner.  
 —Benjamin Franklin 
 If you still think the China story doesn ’ t amount to much beyond a 
few  Made in China  labels at your local Wal - Mart, think again. Think 
back to the last time you pumped gas and try to remember how 
much lower your gas bill was just three years ago. Anyone who has 
recently taken a road trip can tell you that the price of oil has never 
been higher. And from one investment guru to another, let me just 
tell you that the price of gas is not going to drop dramatically for an 
extended period ever again. Never. 
 China ’ s voracious thirst for oil and energy, along with the grow-
ing demand for oil imports in other developing nations, is a world -
 changing event. Far beyond the momentary sticker shock we all 
feel at the gas pumps, competition for energy supplies is transform-
ing the global economy, the environment, and the political arena. 
Expensive energy has boosted the proﬁ t margins of multinational 
oil giants so dramatically that howls of protest have been heard 
from vocal and powerful critics in the United States and abroad. 
The search for new energy sources has set off territorial disputes 
for drilling rights under the Arctic ice cap, resulting in interna-
tional disputes among Russian, U.S., Canadian, and other northern 
powers. Moreover, the environmental consequences of the energy 

106 
China’s Economic Landscape
boom will become an unavoidable bone of contention as green-
house gas emissions continue to soar. 
 Why is it all happening so quickly? In a word: China. The 
growth in demand for energy in China is so rapid that it boggles 
the imagination. Total energy consumption in this nation of  1.3 bil-
lion has risen by an average of 11 percent every year for the past 
ﬁ ve years. 1 Taking into account China ’ s booming demand for all 
forms of energy, the nation is increasing its power consumption by 
an amount equivalent to that of a country the size of England every 
year. Some analysts say the rate of energy expansion is even greater.  
 China ’ s Insatiable Appetite 
 Seventy percent of China ’ s energy consumption depends on the 
nation ’ s ample reserves of coal. Demand for coal - powered electric-
ity rose by a remarkable 90 gigawatts in 2006. In more comprehen-
sible terms, China ’ s power grid added the equivalent of two large 
coal - ﬁ red generating stations every week.  2 Two new power plants a 
week! The equivalent of 104 new coal - burning plants per year! On 
the global energy scene, nothing on this scale has ever happened 
before. 
 So, to those who say China ’ s presence on the world energy scene 
hasn ’ t yet touched Western oil prices, I can only reply,  “ Rubbish! ”  
Oil prices are adjusting not only in accordance with existing 
demand, but also in anticipation of future supply shortages. OPEC 
claims to be raising its output to satisfy global energy needs, but 
it has not so far been enough to keep pace with the incredible 
demand surge from China and East Asia. 
 China will be assigned much of the blame as worldwide energy 
supplies hit a major crunch in the coming decade. But keep in 
mind that developing nations are also increasing their energy 
 consumption. Developed countries, including many Asian eco-
nomic powerhouses like Japan, Taiwan, and South Korea have 
ofﬂ oaded many of their energy - intensive industries to China. 
Offshoring of industrial infrastructure adds to Chinese energy 
demand, but it hasn ’ t done much to dampen the thirst for oil 
in the countries that sent their industries abroad. Most Western 
nations continue to increase their own consumption of imported 
oil every year despite pious pronouncements about the  importance 
of conservation. 

 
China ’ s Energy Industry — Red Hot    
107
 During the 1990s, China was actually an oil exporter. But those 
days are long, long gone. During 2007, China passed a sobering 
milestone. The country ’ s imports of crude oil exceeded domes-
tic production for the ﬁ rst time in its history. With more than 
50 percent of China ’ s oil supplies now coming from other coun-
tries, the economic and political implications are obviously global. 
The United States is on a collision course. Competition with China 
for energy resources is about to become a good deal more intense, 
but for the time being, the new energy picture barely appears on 
the American public ’ s radar screen. 
 Where and when will it end? Not anytime soon. China ’ s imports 
of crude leaped by an unprecedented 14.4 percent in 2006 and 
were on track to exceed 10 percent for 2007.  3 Double - digit increases 
in oil imports have been a reality for years and are not likely to ease 
unless a price squeeze or a supply crunch changes the behaviors of 
Chinese consumers and consumers worldwide. For the time being, 
newly wealthy Chinese drivers are buying gas - guzzling SUVs and 
other energy hogs with almost as much abandon as U.S.  consumers. 
Chinese industries use 20 to 100 percent more energy per unit of 
output compared to their American and Japanese counterparts, 
according to the World Bank. Inefﬁ cient though it may be, energy -
 hungry Chinese industries continue to expand relentlessly.  
 Building Up Reserves of Energy 
 Adding to the sharp energy demand curve is the awareness that 
China is building its ﬁ rst strategic petroleum reserve. Much like the 
U.S. reserve, China ’ s four strategic reserve stations are being pre-
pared to supply the nation through periods of domestic crisis and 
international shortages without disrupting the domestic economy 
or the lives of Chinese citizens. When the tanks are ﬁ lled, presum-
ably by 2012, China should have enough oil in reserve to carry the 
nation through a 30 - day supply crunch. Buying the oil needed to 
ﬁ ll the tanks is expected to add as much as 2 percent to the annual 
growth rate of crude imports.  4 Predicting the end of demand from 
China ’ s strategic reserve is impossible because the government is 
attempting to time its purchases to coincide with dips in interna-
tional prices. 
 Nothing depicts the story of China ’ s red - hot energy sector 
more vividly than a comparison between ExxonMobil and Sinopec. 

108 
China’s Economic Landscape
During 2006, ExxonMobil, the world ’ s largest publicly traded 
 company, hired 149 supertankers to ferry oil around the globe, 
mostly to American consumers. This private navy was the largest 
the world had ever seen, at least until China came into the pic-
ture. Now Asia ’ s largest oil reﬁ ner, China Petroleum  & Chemical 
Corporation, known as Sinopec (SNP), is hiring more supertank-
ers than ExxonMobil to haul oil from Angola and Venezuela as well 
as other international destinations.  5 In addition to the impressive 
number of supertankers in the Sinopec ﬂ eet, the company is sharply 
increasing the number of ships being leased. In 2005, Sinopec hired 
only 86 ships. In 2006, more than 100 vessels were hired for single 
voyages. In 2007, the number raced past the 150 mark. Of course, 
Sinopec is only one of several major Chinese oil companies actively 
seeking foreign sources of oil. 
 China is also scrambling to discover and exploit more sources 
of oil domestically. The country ’ s biggest and oldest reserve, the 
Daqing ﬁ eld, is in steep decline despite intensive efforts to boost 
production with modern extraction technologies. Important new 
reserves have been discovered in Bohai Bay and farther out into the 
South China Sea. But China ’ s National Bureau of Statistics, which 
strives to avoid painting gloomy pictures, reported that national oil 
production rose only 2 percent in 2006, while the economy grew by 
more than 11 percent.  6 In the month before the Bureau made the 
report, May of 2007, oil imports jumped by a grossly disproportion-
ate 23 percent. 
 Domestic coal production is rising, too, but not nearly fast 
enough. A 7 percent increase in coal production during the ﬁ rst 
half of 2007 brought national output to more than a billion tons 
for the period. But it seems the nation ’ s biggest energy resource 
just can ’ t keep pace with demand. Once again, China is being trans-
formed from being a net exporter of coal to an aggressive importer. 
Companies like Yanzhou Coal (Y ZC) have become partners in the 
development of major mines abroad like the giant Austar coal mine 
in New South Wales, Australia. 
 The search for more oil sources, meanwhile, has taken China to 
many countries that the United States considers unsavory. Among 
the dictatorships and backwaters of the world, China ’ s biggest sup-
plier is Angola, followed by Saudi Arabia, Iran, and Russia. The 
Chinese are also currently forging deals with the likes of Sudan 
and Myanmar (formerly known as Burma). China ’ s oil companies 

 
China ’ s Energy Industry — Red Hot    
109
also have interests in 20 African countries, including Libya, Algeria, 
and Ethiopia. Pursuing these oil sources is a high - risk strategy that 
is guaranteed to alienate many Western powers that are competing 
for oil supplies, but consider many of China ’ s energy partners to be 
pariahs at best, and a danger to world peace in the case of Iran. 
 Electrifying the Future 
 Finding more oil and digging more coal will never provide the 
long - term solutions that China needs to maintain its energy growth 
curve and prevent future electricity shortages. According to  Xinhua, 
China ’ s electric power capacity was boosted tenfold over the past 
three decades, but that still isn ’ t enough. With more than 500 mil-
lion kilowatts of power on the nation ’ s power grid in 2006, state 
ofﬁ cials were conﬁ dent that this unprecedented reserve would pre-
vent brownouts that year. They were wrong. According to the State 
Electricity Regulatory Commission (SERC), power consumption 
increased faster than the growth of the economy, up more than 
15 percent in the ﬁ rst half of 2007. The situation has become so 
pressing that Beijing has now opened a strategic asset, the nation ’ s 
power grid, to foreign investors in hopes of improving its notori-
ously poor efﬁ ciency and preventing electricity shortages. 
 In an effort to diversify supplies and ﬁ nd cleaner sources of 
electric power, alternative forms of energy, including solar, wind, 
and other renewable sources of power, are being developed. 
Hydroelectric power projects are being built in increasingly remote 
areas of the country, but there are no new equivalents of the mas-
sive Three Gorges Dam in the works. More immediately, natural 
gas is being tapped as an energy source for the future. Large new 
reserves have been discovered in China, and major terminals are 
being built in coastal regions to receive liqueﬁ ed natural gas (LNG) 
ships from suppliers in Australia and farther aﬁ eld. Coal - bed meth-
ane from the nation ’ s vast coalﬁ elds is another promising source, as 
is coal liquefaction, a technology that converts coal into gasoline. 
 Nuclear generating stations are an attractive alternative for 
generating large amounts of electricity, with low immediate impact 
on the nation ’ s pollution crisis. Westinghouse has signed a long -
 awaited, multibillion - dollar contract to build four nuclear power 
stations for China. Under the guidance of Westinghouse ’ s new 
 parent, Toshiba of Japan, the American company will hand over 

110 
China’s Economic Landscape
the  technology for its most advanced reactors. French and Russian 
 reactor builders are also working on contracts to build nuclear 
power stations in China. A total of 32 new reactors are expected 
to come online before 2020. But, in another sobering measure of 
China ’ s insatiable energy demand, nuclear power is not expected to 
furnish more than 4 percent of the nation ’ s electricity by the 2020 
construction deadline. 
 Energy efﬁ ciency and energy conservation are essential to pre-
venting severe shortages in the future. Sounding somewhat desper-
ate, the NDRC announced in late 2007 that investments amounting 
to an almost unimaginable 10 percent of national GDP would be 
required to get the necessary renewable energy projects underway. 
The powerful government agency is welcoming foreign partners. 
Meanwhile, the most effective way of improving energy supplies —
 conserving them — is taking root in a country not accustomed to 
energy efﬁ ciency. Tax policies are being implemented by the gov-
ernment to force large and wasteful energy consumers to cut back. 
The big opportunity for the future is in promoting energy efﬁ -
ciency and proving renewable sources of energy. Those are the 
better mousetraps that China needs desperately to prevent major 
shortages in coming decades. 
 Companies providing solar energy equipment to the world, 
such as Suntech Power (STP), have been among China ’ s best per-
forming internationally traded stocks. Oil exploration and reﬁ n-
ing companies like Sinopec (SNP), PetroChina (PTR), and China 
National Offshore Oil Corporation (CEO) have also performed 
very well on stock markets and they outstrip many Western competi-
tors in the global search for new oil supplies. 
  

111
9
C H A P T E R
 China ’ s Bonanza —
 Banking  and Finance   
 A bank is a place that will lend you money if you can prove that 
you don ’ t need it. 
— Bob Hope 
 Depending on when you last checked their balance sheets, 
China ’ s biggest banks are either basket cases or superstars. In fact, 
there seemed to be little hope for the survival of China ’ s entire 
banking industry during the early years of the capitalist revolution. 
But today, Chinese and foreign investors are creating a ﬁ nancial 
system that will certainly become a powerful international force, a 
development that once seemed extremely remote.  
 Avoiding a Financial Crisis 
 Long before the Chinese economic miracle became a twenty - ﬁ rst 
century phenomenon, the nation ’ s banking system was notorious 
for the lackluster and inefﬁ cient management of its own ﬁ nances. 
China ’ s major national banks were often referred to as  policy banks 
because they had the unenviable task of carrying out ﬁ nancial poli-
cies that were dictated by the government. These economic strate-
gies and procedures often made little ﬁ nancial sense. For example, 

112 
China’s Economic Landscape
the Beijing government mandated that its agricultural, commercial, 
merchant, and industrial banks lend out enormous amounts of 
money to failing state enterprises with little hope that the money 
would ever be paid back. Most people would call these absurd loans 
losses, but in the banking world they go by the more polite name of 
 nonperforming loans,  or NPLs. (Calling a deadbeat ’ s worthless paper a 
nonperforming loan makes it sound more like a high -  performance 
automobile with a repairable engine problem, rather than a total 
ﬁ nancial loss for which somebody might have to be blamed.) 
 The issuance of non  performing loans created a ﬁ nancial  crisis 
that threatened to ground China ’ s ﬂ edgling market economy. 
Although a number of authors have suggested that the problem was 
bad enough to spark a global ﬁ nancial panic, the scale of China ’ s 
non performing loan crisis has never been fully revealed. Yet, many 
economists believe that the issuing and spending of nonperforming 
loans was a problem that involved many different groups, not just 
the government. Although moribund state industries took money 
without the slightest intention of paying it back, bureaucrats and 
corrupt middlemen who ordered billions to be paid out were also 
to blame for this ﬁ nancial disaster. Also, bank ofﬁ cials who meekly 
provided these outrageous loans and did not enforce repayment 
are also to blame. Some of China ’ s biggest banks became known as 
 state - owned basket cases. 
 Although China ’ s gargantuan nonperforming loan problem has 
not been solved, it is no longer considered to be a ﬁ nancial crisis. 
Once estimated to be more than 23 percent of the banking indus-
try ’ s assets, NPLs had been reduced to 8.98 percent by the end of 
June 2007.  1 Among the major Chinese banks currently listed on 
Asian stock exchanges, some nonperforming loan ratios have fallen 
below 2 percent. This diminishing number of NPLs has been essen-
tial to the nation ’ s economic health. 
 The Banking Transformation 
 What happened in China during the twenty - ﬁ rst century is one 
of the great ﬁ nancial revivals of our time. A combination of for-
eign direct investment and the offshoring of industries established 
the industrial base that ultimately sparked the Chinese banking 
engine into life. According to Alfred Yeung of Ernst and Young,  “ The 
extent to which that nation ’ s banking assets are now public is a truly 

 
    China ’ s Bonanza — Banking  and Finance    
113
remarkable feat and underscores the [government ’ s] commitment 
to reform in the banking sector. ” 2 Banks, which were once thought 
of as  “ zombies ”  or  “  basket cases, ”  grew tenfold in just four years. 
The China Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC) estimated that 
the total assets of the banking sector totaled  $ 5.78 trillion in 2006, 
with proﬁ ts of  $ 53 billion.  3 State - owned commercial banks raked in a 
return on equity of 14.9 percent. 
 Another arm of China ’ s ﬁ nancial services sector, the securities 
industry, is also booming, partly as a result of bank stock  listings. In 
October 2006, the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China set 
a world record with its  $ 21.9 billion initial public  offering. Proﬁ ts at 
securities dealers, once beset by losses, stock market stagnation, and 
accusations of corruption, soared during 2007 as China ’ s internal 
stock markets set one record high after another. The Shanghai Securities 
News reports that the combined net proﬁ ts of 23  mainland - listed 
brokerages rose by 425 percent during the ﬁ rst half of 2007.  4 As the 
Chinese securities industry recovers from a multiyear slump, foreign 
ﬁ rms will be permitted to invest in mainland brokerages. 
 China ’ s biggest banks have completed their reforms and gone 
public, joining the ranks of the world ’ s top 10. The Bank of China 
and China Construction Bank are numbers six and seven, respec-
tively on the list of the world ’ s top 10 banking institutions as meas-
ured by assets.  5 Earnings are booming among the major listed 
banks and among smaller regional ﬁ rms. While Industrial and 
Commercial Bank (ICBC) brought in earnings of almost  $ 5 billion 
during the ﬁ rst half of 2007, up approximately 50 percent, China 
Merchants Bank took in  $ 736 million, an increase of 100 percent in 
proﬁ ts. Industrial Bank showed proﬁ t growth of almost 90 percent, 
while China Citic Bank and China Minsheng Bank generated proﬁ t 
increases of 80 percent and 60 percent respectively. 
 As Chinese share prices have escalated, Industrial and Com-
mercial Bank has risen to become the world ’ s largest bank by 
market capitalization with a value of  $ 254 billion. That exceeds Citi-
group ’ s market cap by  $ 3 billion and puts ICBC far ahead of the 
third - place contender, HSBC Holdings, which has a market cap 
of just  $ 215 billion.  6 To some degree, ICBC ’ s success reﬂ ects stock 
market conditions in China and a high degree of government own-
ership through non  tradable shares more than the intrinsic value of 
the bank. Citigroup took in revenue of  $ 90 billion in 2007, almost 
four times the earnings of ICBC. 

114 
China’s Economic Landscape
 Improving the processes and efﬁ ciencies of Chinese banks was 
by no means a cheap or easy task. Nouriel Roubini, of New York 
University, estimates that the Chinese government injected a whop-
ping half trillion dollars into the banking system to stabilize the sec-
tor and prepare major banks for stock exchange listings.  7 However, 
the rescue isn ’ t over yet. In 2007, one of the big four state - owned 
banks, the Agricultural Bank of China, remained unlisted and 
received a capital bailout of  $ 40 billion. The Agricultural Bank of 
China suffered an especially severe burden of bad loans because it 
had been tasked to support a difﬁ cult and often unproﬁ table sec-
tor of the economy. Beijing is also preparing a second round of 
loan bailouts, starting with a  $ 20 billion capital injection into the 
Commercial Development Bank using its huge foreign exchange 
reserves. 
 Chinese banks had to get their houses fully in order by 2007 
because the nation ’ s ﬁ nancial sector was being opened up to for-
eign competition under the terms of China ’ s accession to member-
ship in the World Trade Organization. Seventy - one foreign banks 
were operating in China before the 2007 deadline, but most had 
been limited to dealing in foreign currency transactions. At the 
time this book was published, nine major multinational banks had 
applied for retail licenses, which will give them access to China ’ s 
huge pool of savings, estimated at more than  $ 4 trillion.  8 The for-
eign banks incorporated to do retail business in China are Citigroup 
of the United States, the Bank of East Asia and Hang Seng Bank 
of Hong Kong, HSBC and Standard Chartered of Britain, Mizuho 
Corporate Bank and Sumitomo Mitsui Bank of Japan, ABN Amro 
Holdings NV of the Netherlands, and DBS Bank of Singapore.  
 Our Piece of the Action 
 We are witnessing the development of an important symbiotic 
relationship between Chinese banks and their foreign partners. 
Most foreign banks are aware that they cannot establish branches 
throughout China because of the cost and logistical complexity 
of such a vast undertaking. For the most part, they must rely on a 
nationwide network of native Chinese banks to establish a presence 
throughout the country. In the resulting symbiotic relationship, 
foreign banks work with Chinese branches and banks by providing 

 
    China ’ s Bonanza — Banking  and Finance    
115
ﬁ nancial services that the Chinese are unable to provide. China ’ s 
major banks realize that they do not have the expertise or the expe-
rience required to compete effectively in modern consumer bank-
ing. Therefore, they tend to rely on their foreign partners for help 
in providing services such as credit cards, ATM machines, remit-
tances, and various forms of retail lending. 
 China ’ s policy banks also need help dealing with the needs of 
modern business clients. Sophisticated banking services, including 
equipment leasing, corporate ﬁ nancial restructuring, and inter-
national consulting, are essential for Chinese industries seeking to 
establish a global presence. As a result, joint ventures and equity 
purchase agreements are being established between Chinese and 
foreign banks to give both parties in international operations a 
ﬁ nancial stake in a successful outcome. One of the pioneers in the 
ﬁ eld of joint ventures is Bank of America Corporation, which paid 
 $ 3 billion for a 9 percent stake in China Construction Bank in 2005.  9 
 The Bank of America – China Construction Bank deal has been 
fruitful for both sides. Bank of America has also been able to team 
up with the China Construction Bank in joint ownership of a major 
leasing venture aimed at the power generation and rail industries. 
What ’ s more, Bank of America ’ s purchase price for its 9 percent 
equity stake looks like a bargain in view of CCB ’ s September 2007 
IPO on the Shanghai exchange, which raised  $ 7.7 billion for just 
3.85 percent of the Chinese bank ’ s expanded share capital. 
 Not all partnerships between Chinese and Western banks are 
harmonious, but foreign operations are generating substantial prof-
its. A report from the Chinese Securities Journal says proﬁ t growth 
tripled at Citigroup, ABN Amro, and other foreign banks after 
they were allowed to offer local currency services. In total, over-
seas banks earned  $ 401 million in the ﬁ rst ﬁ ve months of 2007, 
an increase of 43 percent from the same period a year  earlier. 10 
Foreign banks have opened 186 outlets in 25 Chinese cities, target-
ing high net worth individuals who are looking for improved cus-
tomer service and are impressed by the international reputation 
of foreign banks. China ’ s national banks operate approximately 
10,000 branches each, but the China Banking Research Center says 
foreign - funded banks have enjoyed rapid proﬁ t growth with their 
experience in serving small and medium enterprises, private bank-
ing, and the securities industry. 11 

116 
China’s Economic Landscape
 As foreign ﬁ nancial giants reach into China, Chinese banks are 
also reaching out to the world. China Development Bank is par-
ticipating in the biggest global investment ever made by a Chinese 
bank, and attempted to invest as much as  $ 13.5 billion in a com-
plex transaction involving Britain ’ s Barclays Bank and its Dutch 
rival, ABN Amro. China ’ s leading banks are also applying to set 
up branches in the United States, serving American branches of 
Chinese companies. 
 During the ﬁ rst half of 2007, foreign insurance companies have 
been relatively slow to establish positions in China, with 45 compa-
nies from 15 countries taking in premiums of  $ 2.11 billion.  12 The 
China Insurance Regulatory Commission believes that domes-
tic insurers can learn from foreign companies ’ experience in risk 
 control, corporate governance, and product development. The poten-
tial market is huge for companies that can establish a presence 
through the vast branch network of domestic operators.  
 Banking on the Future 
 It is no exaggeration to say that every aspect of China ’ s ﬁ nan-
cial industry is on a steep trajectory to achieve world - class  status. 
Standard Chartered plc believes that China could become its 
largest market for private banking in just 10 years.  13 The global 
accountancy giant Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu expects that China 
will become its largest market as measured by staff and revenues in 
approximately 20 years. 
 The future seems limitless in a market as large as China ’ s. 
The Chinese stock market is already bigger than that of Japan. The 
Chinese ﬁ nancial services industry, however, is not meeting the needs 
of consumers. Although foreign institutions are restricted from 
gaining majority ownership in China ’ s ﬁ nancial institutions, they 
are facing the greatest investment management opportunity in the 
world through joint ventures. As the Chinese middle class becomes 
ever larger and more sophisticated, insurers, brokers, bankers, and 
ﬁ nancial advisers will discover an increasingly wealthy customer base, 
numbering in the hundreds of millions. 
 China ’ s banks have so far chosen not to list on U.S. stock 
exchanges as ADRs, but a stake in them is available to investors 
through the mutual funds and exchange - traded funds described in 
the concluding chapters of this book. 

117
10
C H A P T E R
 China ’ s Communications 
Revolution — Almost Free Speech    
 An investment in knowledge pays the best interest.  
 —Benjamin Franklin 
 North Americans like to imagine they ’ ve undergone an entirely 
unique communications revolution over the past 10 years, fast -
 forwarding into the twenty - ﬁ rst century with innovations including 
wireless Internet access, cellular and satellite telephones, and hybrid 
devices like Blackberries and iPhones. But the speed of change 
in the United States has been minor compared to the communi-
cations revolution underway in China. Truly, the pace of progress 
China has achieved in the communications arena is nothing short 
of breathtaking. 
 The Ultimate Communications Device 
 During the same hyperactive decade that most of us marvel at, the 
Chinese people have jumped an entire  century  in their communica-
tions abilities. When Deng Xiaoping ﬁ rst exhorted his countrymen 
to go ahead and get rich, the dial telephone was the most advanced 
communications tool available and the vast majority of Chinese 
homes couldn ’ t afford one. Even the privileged families that could 
manage to pay for a telephone had to wait years for service. 

118 
China’s Economic Landscape
 China now has more than half a trillion cellular telephones. If 
this isn ’ t a revolution, nothing else qualiﬁ es. To be exact, the total 
number of handsets exceeded 600 million in late 2007, according 
to the Ministry of Information. This number continues to grow 
exponentially. Every month another ﬁ ve million subscribers sign up 
for instantaneous cell phone service. Pause a moment to consider 
that — ﬁ ve million new subscribers every month, when just a few 
years ago, the residents of China couldn ’ t even afford telephones! 
 What is equally notable about the communications  phenomenon 
is that the products China provides are of optimal quality and incor-
porate the most innovative technology. For example, the voice qual-
ity and data transfer capabilities of the Chinese cell phone providers 
surpass anything we currently have available in the United States. 
I know from my own personal experience. As one of the 600  million 
cell phone users in China, the service I get from China Mobile 
when using my personal cell phone in Shanghai is far superior 
and quite a bit less expensive than anything I can get from a cell 
phone company in the United States. When I am in China, I can use 
my cell phone on an elevator or even while I am on the subway —
 and I always get perfect reception. Try doing that in New York or 
San Francisco. Moreover, if I need to make more calls, I can recharge 
my cell phone account at any newsstand. Also, unlike my U.S.  service 
plan, my Chinese plan does not have an associated monthly serv-
ice fee. Certainly, China has made it easier to  “ reach out and touch 
someone ” than we have done in the United States. 
 Just 30 years ago, China had made very few strides from the 
days of Alexander Graham Bell. Today, there are twice as many 
Chinese cell phone users as there are people in the United States. 
The number of subscribers, who sign up for monthly service, would 
make up a contingent of customers large enough to support an 
entire communications company in the United States. The trend is 
still accelerating, and that, in my mind, counts as a world - scale com-
munications revolution. 
 The nation ’ s two giant cell phone companies are China Mobile 
(CHL) and China Unicom (CHU). China Mobile is by far the larger. 
These companies earned their superior status by monopolizing the 
competition and setting up user - friendly features that brought in 
extra revenue. It goes without saying that these two telephone com-
panies are majority state - owned enterprises, but that does not mean 
they haven ’ t performed exceptionally well for buyers of their ADRs. 

 
  China ’ s Communications Revolution — Almost Free Speech  
119
 Handsets, which enable a person to do more than just talk on 
the phone, are one option that appeals to the Chinese communi-
cations consumer, while generating high revenues for the cellular 
phone companies. Chinese city dwellers consider their mobile tele-
phones a necessity of life. Handsets are used for much more than a 
quick chat or maybe a photograph. They are, instead, typically used 
for business or to surf the Web. For example, during the onset of 
a recent typhoon in Shanghai, a Chinese friend of mine was busy 
looking up storm tracks from AccuWeather online from his tiny 
handheld phone. 
 Text messaging is another feature that provides extra revenue 
for mobile phone companies. The Chinese are very uncomfort-
able with the idea of leaving messages when they can ’ t get through. 
Who knows when someone might get around to listening to your 
urgent message if they had to hunt through their voice mail? 
Who else might hear your private message? That ’ s why texting is 
an essential skill in China, not just an idle diversion for Western 
 teenagers. Texting puts your urgent communication (and they are 
all urgent in today ’ s China) on the screen of your intended target 
without a nanosecond of delay. Cell phones also generate revenue 
streams from downloads of ringtones, wallpaper, games, and other 
enhancements. 
 A slew of NASDAQ - listed companies sprang up to sell these 
services to the nation ’ s cohort of 600 million cell phone users and 
they have performed very well for several years. But China Mobile 
and China Unicom have crushed the proﬁ t streams of a number 
of these smaller ﬁ rms by muscling into their territory and shut-
ting added - value providers out of their revenue stream as much as 
possible. 
 Revenues collected from China ’ s cell phone users are consider-
ably lower than averages in the Western world. Right now, the name 
of the game is market penetration, and China Mobile (CHL) is 
the leader by a country mile. As market penetration begins to satu-
rate China ’ s main cities, cell phone providers are reaching out to 
the countryside. Penetration in rural areas is estimated at roughly 
25 percent of the available market. Inexpensive monochromatic 
phones and low - cost service contracts are being offered to attract 
isolated rural subscribers. 
 That means hundreds of millions of cell phones have yet 
to be sold in China and just as many service contracts are waiting to 

120 
China’s Economic Landscape
be signed. The Chinese cell phone industry does lag in the produc-
tion of handsets, but it is gearing up to compete with the likes of 
Nokia, Samsung, Motorola, and Ericsson. Although foreign brands 
dominate 70 percent of the Chinese cell phone market, the con-
sulting ﬁ rm China Center for Information Industry Development 
Consulting predicts that China is on track to produce 500 million 
cell phones annually. 1 
 The Wired World 
 Fixed - line telephones are largely controlled by two major  state -
 owned enterprises, China Telecom (CHA) and China Netcom (CN). 
In Taiwan, Chungwha Telecom (CHT) is the biggest player in both 
ﬁ elds, and a very nice dividend payer in the island ’ s more static 
telephony market. 
 The mainland ’ s ﬁ xed - line operators are working against some 
big disadvantages. Cell phones have come to dominate the market 
partly because service is easily and almost instantly available. Fixed -
 line phones require countless miles of copper wire to link every 
phone in every home in every city. This kind of network is some-
thing that has evolved over time in the developed world. But hook-
ing up the entire Chinese nation with hard  wired phone service in 
the space of just a few years would have been an unimaginably large 
logistical undertaking. 
 Cell phone networks have proven to be much easier to set up, 
requiring just a few towers here and there to serve vast numbers of peo-
ple. Building a robust network of cellular towers and microwave trans-
mission links in the most remote parts of the country has proven to 
be a problem that the Chinese communications industry has mastered 
very nimbly. Long before copper wires could reach every village and 
home, cell telephones have captured much of the available market. 
 That doesn ’ t mean there ’ s a lack of business opportunities 
for ﬁ xed-line operators like China Netcom and China Unicom. 
Even though increasing numbers of subscribers are migrating to 
 cellular service, they still share a market of 370 million users.  2 The 
two companies are rapidly expanding their broadband services to 
most of the Chinese mainland, where a huge market opportunity 
still awaits them. The number of broadband users in China is grow-
ing so quickly that demand for service will soon surpass that of the 

United States. According to the research ﬁ rm Ovum, there should 
be at least 79 million broadband subscribers in China by the end of 
2007, surpassing the United States and making it the world ’ s largest 
broadband market.  3 Broadband use is projected to continue grow-
ing with an anticipated 139 million subscribers online by 2010. 
 The next step is broadband telephony using 3G and 4G (third 
generation and fourth generation technology) systems. China insists 
that these systems be developed domestically, probably to fend off 
foreign rivals and to enhance domestic intelligence - gathering capa-
bilities in wireless communications. Political stability is always a con-
sideration in the new China, right alongside proﬁ tability.  
 The Internet Revolution 
 By broadband, by cell phone, or by a stolen moment at a cyber caf é , 
the Internet has become a hugely popular means of communication 
among the Chinese people, especially among well - educated, pros-
perous males. Once again, China is catching up with the United 
States in the Internet revolution. With at least 150 million citizens 
already online, and an average annual growth rate of 8  percent, 
the Chinese Information Ministry predicts there will be more than 
200 million Internet users by 2010. Like so many government pre-
dictions, this forecast is probably conservative. 
 The Chinese communications revolution is already generat-
ing impressive amounts of money. The sector ’ s value is projected 
to expand at a rate of 15 percent annually, generating revenues of 
 $ 337 billion by 2010. According to the Ministry ’ s calculations, this 
projection will amount to a remarkable 10 percent of China ’ s GDP.  4 
Revenues from the digital publishing industry have already risen 
above  $ 2.5 billion per year. Internet advertising, still in its infancy, 
brought in  $ 640 million in 2006. Custom ring tones, games, and 
animations for cell phones generated a billion dollars. Internet 
periodicals and books brought in almost  $ 100 million. 
 Game - playing on the Internet with multiple participants is enor-
mously popular and proﬁ table, generating an anticipated  $ 1.3 
 billion in 2007. The sector is China ’ s largest Internet segment and 
it is expected to expand at a rate of 11 percent a year until 2017.  5 
Participation in multiple user games has become so popular that it 
has raised alarm among the mandarins of Beijing, who regard it as 
something of a dangerous addiction for the nation ’ s youth. 
 
  China ’ s Communications Revolution — Almost Free Speech  
121

122 
China’s Economic Landscape
 China ’ s Internet industry has also developed its own very 
 successful versions of Google and eBay. China ’ s homegrown search 
engine, Baidu (BIDU) has outpaced Google. Alibaba has modeled 
its e - commerce offering to appeal to uniquely Chinese tastes, beat-
ing eBay in the Internet auction business through  taobao.com  and 
providing B2B services internationally through Alibaba web sites. 
 Amazon.com  has pledged to expand its investment in online retail-
ing in hopes of beating its Chinese rival,  dangdang.com . So far 
 dangdang.com is beating Amazon ’ s Chinese portal,  joyo.com , but 
the online retail business is still in its infancy among China ’ s ﬂ edg-
ling Internet users and the ﬁ ght for dominance is too close to call. 
Among China ’ s listed Internet companies, valuations tend to be 
extremely high and earnings among smaller operators very volatile. 
 The Internet has opened the door to communications and infor-
mation sharing in a way that China has never experienced before. 
Despite government censorship of sensitive topics and the blockage 
of taboo web sites, computers and cell phones have become a main-
line media source for the nation ’ s thought leaders. Blogs are read 
daily by corporate executives and government ofﬁ cials. The relent-
lessly growing demand for Internet access bodes well for Chinese 
web portals like  sina.com  (SINA) and  sohu.com  (SOHU). 
 Computer makers are experiencing growth rates well over 100 
percent,  6 with companies like Lenovo (LNVGY) leading the charge. 
According to the  Xinhua news agency, China ’ s computer companies 
raked in proﬁ ts of more than  $ 3 billion during the ﬁ rst six months 
of 2007, up 600 percent from the same period the year before. The 
nation ’ s 100 leading information technology companies sold more 
than 12 million computers in China over the ﬁ rst half of 2007, with 
proﬁ ts for the top 100 companies in the sector rising 112  percent. 
Some Chinese telecom equipment companies are now targeting the 
U.S. market, competing directly with Cisco and Nortel.  
 The Road Ahead 
 China may have skipped over much of the twentieth - century com-
munications revolution, but it is determined to compete, and per-
haps even dominate, the twenty - ﬁ rst century in a truly globalized, 
information - driven economy. This is an attractive and accessible 
investment arena with a great deal of room for further growth.  

III
P A R T
UNDERSTANDING CHINA’S 
FINANCIAL CENTERS


125
11
C H A P T E R
 Beijing — The Epicenter of a 
Capitalist Revolution    
 He who knows when he can fight and when he cannot, will be 
victorious. 
— Sun Tzu  
 Beijing, the epicenter of China ’ s capitalist revolution, is a 
city that reminds me a great deal of Washington, D.C. Not that 
Beijing  resembles Washington in its appearance; it doesn ’ t resem-
ble Washington by its urban architecture very much at all. Where 
Beijing does resemble the U.S. capital a great deal, however, is in 
the fairly predictable thought processes of its residents. 
 If you turn on any U.S. Sunday morning talk show, you will prob-
ably hear the latest about what is going on inside the Beltway — that 
is, the topical focus for the next hour of the program will be on the 
decisions that have been made in the very center of America ’ s capi-
tal. After recapping the latest changes in national policy, these shows 
will typically proceed to debate how the decisions made inside the 
Beltway will affect the rest of the country and often the entire world. 
 Beijing, China ’ s capital, works pretty much the same way. Just 
as in Washington, Beijing also has a beltway (well, okay, Beijing 
has several beltways, which they call ring roads). In fact, at present, 

126 
Understanding China’s Financial Centers
Beijing has seven ring roads, with more on the drawing board. 
Perhaps they need more beltways, because unlike Washington, 
which has a population of fewer than 1 million residents, Beijing 
has a population of more than 15 million. Given that Beijing ’ s pop-
ulation size is roughly 10 times that of Manhattan, the stories you 
have heard about serious pollution problems in Beijing are regret-
tably true. Even to a ﬁ rst - time visitor, however, it is obvious that 
Beijing is a very prosperous city. 
 Decisions made in Beijing deﬁ nitely affect every part of China. 
More and more, however, they also affect the entire world, both 
politically and economically. Not that this is a bad thing. I would 
argue that it is absolutely necessary for China ’ s inﬂ uence to be 
recognized, accepted, and respected if we are to maintain a world 
of peace and prosperity. But let ’ s be honest about it. If we think a 
bit, we would all have to admit that China ’ s rise to economic world 
power status makes China ’ s increase in global political inﬂ uence 
inevitable. The sooner we accept this reality, and stop attacking this 
obvious fact about China ’ s emerging supremacy, the more effec-
tive we will be in accomplishing our own national and international 
goals in this new world environment. 
 What ’ s more, it is undeniable to anyone (excepting, of course, 
the aforementioned Lou Dobbs and Pat Buchanan) that China ’ s 
leadership has quickly brought more wealth to more people than 
ever accomplished before in human history. Frankly, as an una-
bashed capitalist myself, my hat is off to China on the wealth crea-
tion score. 
 The problem, at times, comes when members of the old style, 
supposedly wealthy world economies treat China as if it were a 
 second - class citizen among developed nations. Not a savvy strategy 
toward the same China that already is the largest holder of U.S. 
debt and that will in a few years have the world ’ s largest economy. 
As a student of ﬁ nancial history, I recognize it as the same mis-
take that the European ruling class made with regard to Baron 
Rothschild following the Napoleonic Wars. The Euro - snobs of 
that era snubbed the Rothschilds because they thought they were 
socially inferior, just as many Westerners snub China today. This 
ethnocentric attitude was and still is not a smart mentality. Many 
of those Western investors who fail to study the past, unfortunately, 
tend to get expensive lessons in the future.  

 
Beijing — The Epicenter of a Capitalist Revolution 
127
 The Sites of Beijing 
 Beijing, in addition to being China ’ s modern political center, is rich 
in history. Just as in Washington, you will ﬁ nd the legacy of times 
past, a period of centuries when China was once before the world ’ s 
largest economy. But unlike Washington, Beijing holds not only 
some of mankind ’ s most interesting ancient sites; it is also the home 
to some of the modern world ’ s most modern structures as well. 
 When you visit Beijing, the capitalist world ’ s new Mecca, here 
are my suggestions for must - see sites: 
 The Great Wall: Started in 750 B.C., the Great Wall is one of the 
Seven Wonders of the World. In Beijing, the Great Wall was 
built primarily during the Ming Dynasty. If you don ’ t mind 
crowds, see the Ba Da Ling section, about two hours from the 
city center by bus. Take the cable car to get to the top, and 
bring your camera! 
 The Forbidden City:  This UNESCO World Heritage Site is the 
world ’ s largest palace compound. You could spend an  entire 
week exploring the Forbidden City, which 24 of China ’ s 
 emperors called home. Enter at Wu Men, the Meridian Gate, 
and hire a guide to get oriented.  
 Tian ’ anmen Square: Built in 1417, Tian ’ anmen is the Gate of 
Heavenly Peace, and the square around it is the largest cen-
tral square in the world. Leading to the Forbidden City, the 
gate now features Chairman Mao ’ s portrait. 
 Temple of Heaven:  Built during the Ming Dynasty, the Temple of 
Heaven is the largest imperial worship architecture group in 
the world, and is larger than the Forbidden City. The temples 
and impressive gardens will be a welcome respite from the 
bustle of Beijing. 
 Summer Palace:  Situated on the shores of the enchanting Kuming 
Lake in the suburbs of Beijing, the Summer Palace is serene 
beauty exemplified. See how the emperor and his family lived 
outside of Beijing, amid 717 acres of imperial gardens.  
 Peking Man Site:  Located at Zhoukoudian, roughly 30 miles from 
Beijing, the Site of Peking Man was discovered by Chinese 
 paleoanthropologist Pei Wenzhong in 1929. Peking Man 

128 
Understanding China’s Financial Centers
lived in the Beijing area 690,000 years ago, and the fossils 
found in the cave date back 10,000 years. 
 Peking (Beijing) Opera:  The Peking Opera has delighted audien-
ces around the world for 200 years. Make time to see the 
 acrobatics, dance, and song that is considered opera in 
China. Performances take place at the Beijing Huguang 
Hall, a nineteenth - century guildhall, with its own museum 
dedicated to Chinese opera.  
 Lama Temple:  Once the home of Prince Yin Zhen, this Qing 
 Dynasty temple is now dedicated to Tibetan Buddhism, which 
is evident by the throngs of Tibetan monks. The buildings 
and gardens are both ornate and formal. The Lama Temple 
is truly a magnificent sight to see. 
 Prince Gong ’ s Mansion:  Built in 1777, Prince Gong ’ s Mansion is 
the largest mansion from the Qing Dynasty. The complex 
covers nearly 15 acres, which includes a seven - acre garden, 
three courtyards, a pavilion with more than 40 rooms, and a 
grand theater house. 
 Beihai Park:  Located behind the Forbidden City, this park has a his-
tory going back five dynasties (10,000 years). Within the park 
is Qionghua Island, the Five - Dragon Pavilion with its floating 
bridges, and other pavilions, buildings, and a restaurant.  
 After familiarizing yourself with Beijing ’ s past, and getting its 
tourist activities out of your system, it would be a good idea to get 
a picture of Beijing ’ s likely future. To do that, I would suggest you 
spend some time on Chang ’ an Street. Chang ’ an Street is Beijing ’ s 
premier business and commercial boulevard. It houses not only 
many of Beijing ’ s central government buildings, it also is the home 
to some of the most elite boutiques and shopping this side of 
Beverly Hill ’ s Rodeo Drive. 
 How, you may ask yourself, does a supposedly poor Third World 
country sustain luxury shops with names like Cartier, Tiffany, and 
Ferragamo? The answer is not by catering to wealthy tourists. The 
answer, much like with the Rothschilds of the nineteenth century, is 
that the supposedly poor residents of China are often more wealthy 
than many of us in the United States. 
 Of course the most spectacular sights of twenty - ﬁ rst - century 
Beijing are the new Olympic venues, China ’ s showcase to the world, 

 
Beijing — The Epicenter of a Capitalist Revolution 
129
demonstrating the nation ’ s new status as a modern superpower. 
China has always placed a high priority on training its athletes and 
winning gold medals, and the new Olympic venues are designed to be 
prizewinners in their own right. Long after the games are over, most 
Olympic cities proudly display their most memorable venues. Beijing ’ s 
innovative  “ bird ’ s nest stadium ”  stands proudly among them. 
 Olympic venues are only one element of Beijing ’ s architectural 
declaration that it has arrived on the world stage in a very big way. 
Stand aside, Chicago. Forget Dubai. Beijing wants to be the world ’ s 
next great architectural city. To see an example, gaze at the spec-
tacular titanium and glass bubble that appears to be ﬂ oating in a 
lake adjacent to the Great Hall of the People. Although it seems 
light enough to be blown downstream, this bubble houses the mas-
sive National Center for the Performing Arts, a showpiece structure 
that contains an elegant, silk - wallpapered theater, a luxurious opera 
house, and a stunning concert hall that features China ’ s biggest 
pipe organ. With soaring public spaces and seating for more than 
5,000, the center ’ s  bubble on a pond  concept is a remarkable contrast 
to the ponderous Stalinist architecture that used to be the norm for 
major public buildings in the communist world. 
 One more architectural standout cements Beijing ’ s status as a 
laboratory for the boisterous and avant - garde in public architec-
ture. The China Central Television tower is a  $ 600 million project 
that must be seen to be believed.  To say that it will become one 
of the largest buildings in the world in terms of ﬂ oor space, or that 
as the home of Beijing ’ s government broadcaster CCTV it will be 
the world ’ s largest corporate headquarters, falls far short of explain-
ing this building ’ s impact and ambition. With two sloping towers 
for legs, the CCTV building is topped by a massive angular complex 
that hangs 525 feet above the ground. Some say the mirrored build-
ing looks like it will fall down and others say it is a wild extravagance 
that sends the wrong message to a country that needs to focus on 
conserving resources. But Beijing is sending a message to the world, 
and that message is all about newfound wealth and power. 
 Big Government 
 Beijing is also competing with other cities in China for ﬁ nancial 
inﬂ uence, housing the headquarters of 10 of China ’ s top 20 domes-
tic commercial banks. Not surprisingly, three large state - owned banks 

130 
Understanding China’s Financial Centers
and two state - controlled insurance companies are ofﬁ cially based in 
the nation ’ s capital, where they used to take orders only from their 
political masters. As discussed in Chapter  9 (Banking and Finance), 
most of the old policy banks now have shareholders as well as the 
government to answer to. 
 It would be a mistake to assume that China ’ s capitalist revolu-
tion has eliminated the role of big government in the affairs of 
business and the economy. Just as it does in the United States, the 
central government does its best to manage the macroeconomy, 
attempting to create as many jobs as possible without creating runa-
way inﬂ ation. Unlike the U.S. system, the Chinese government con-
tinues to be a major player in the world of business and it remains 
a majority shareholder in hundreds of national corporations, 
referred to previously as state - owned enterprises (SOEs).  
 Because the nation is still in transition from the Maoist 
days of central planning, the central government controls the 
world of business on many levels. National electricity - generating 
 corporations, for example, are subject to national standards and 
 regulations as they might also be in the United States. But Beijing 
also controls what rates consumers will pay for electricity. Coal -
 ﬁ red generating stations can be temporarily shut down by gov-
ernment decree to reduce air pollution and to improve China ’ s 
image around the globe during the Olympic Games. Negotiations 
with France, Japan, Russia, the United States, and Canada over the 
future construction of nuclear power stations are a matter of inter-
national diplomacy, overseen by the highest levels of government 
in Beijing, not by independent electricity companies. By the same 
token, China ’ s publicly traded oil and petrochemical  corporations 
are subject to the political intrigues of Beijing. Pump prices of gaso-
line and other reﬁ ned petrochemicals are government controlled 
and some reﬁ ners have been forced to operate at a loss to pacify 
consumers. On the other hand, Beijing ’ s proﬁ t - conscious bureau-
crats have bailed out energy companies and banks with multibillion -
 dollar subsidies. 
 Beijing ’ s mandarins can take a hand in almost any aspect of 
the business world if the national interest is deemed to be at stake. 
That ’ s especially true of giant SOEs, but even smaller enterprises 
are affected by policy decisions made in the capital. More than in 

 
Beijing — The Epicenter of a Capitalist Revolution 
131
any other capitalist country, investors need to pay attention to the 
policies and trends of the central government because of Beijing ’ s 
disproportionate clout in the business world. China may have left its 
communist history in the past, but it will be a very long time before 
Beijing relaxes its authoritarian ways. In China ’ s capital, managing 
business is an integral part of managing the country. 


133
12
C H A P T E R
 Shenzhen — China ’ s Test City    
 Life ’ s tragedy is that we get too old too soon and wise too late. 
— Benjamin Franklin  
 More than 25 years after Deng Xiapong gave Shenzhen 
 permission to experiment with capitalism, the city has probably 
become the biggest and most economically successful city that most 
Western investors have ever known. The bustling metropolis of 
Shenzhen is the economic heart of the Guandong special economic 
zone (SEZ), the ﬁ rst of the regions set aside by Deng Xiaoping to 
unleash the capitalist experiment in communist China. Since its 
inception, four more SEZs have been created in China, following 
the Shenzhen model. 
 By any measure, Shenzhen has been a stunning example of 
the power and success of free market capitalism, thriving even in the 
embrace of a once oppressive communist behemoth. Deng Xiaoping 
gave Shenzhen preferential treatment and incentives,  including 
offers of cheap land and tax holidays in order to entice economic 
growth and foster prosperity. In doing so, he sought to draw upon 
the capital and the entrepreneurial energies of Shenzhen ’ s nearby, 
spectacularly successful southern neighbor, Hong Kong. Surprisingly, 
this economical - entrepreneurial marriage worked better than  anyone 
had imagined possible.  

134 
Understanding China’s Financial Centers
 The Evolution of Shenzhen 
 Not so long ago, Shenzhen was a small ﬁ shing village that offered 
little promise of economic prosperity. Intuitively, the government 
used its natural resources and geographic location to transform it 
into a booming capitalist epicenter. Built near the mouth of the 
Pearl River delta, Shenzhen established a number of deep  water 
harbors and container terminals that have become an essential out-
let for the city ’ s ever - expanding manufacturing base. As a result, 
Shenzhen has become the fourth - busiest port in the world and is 
the second - busiest port in China, after Shanghai. 
 Shenzhen was also intended to develop a manufacturing base 
much like that of Hong Kong. In fact, the city drew away most of 
Hong Kong ’ s manufacturers and spawned many more factories in 
the process, thanks to the cheap labor that the city drew from the 
Chinese hinterlands. The city has spawned some of China ’ s better -
 known high-tech industries, including Huawei and ZTE Corporation, 
which are vying to become leading suppliers of telecommunications 
equipment on a global scale. 
 The biggest manufacturing operation in Shenzhen and in most 
of China is Foxconn, which operates a factory that covers more than 
a square mile of land. Foxconn, also known as Hon Hai Precision 
Industry Company, is a Taiwanese high - tech ﬁ rm that does most 
of its manufacturing in China. The company ’ s Shenzhen facility 
employs an astonishing 270,000 people, many of whom live in cor-
porate dormitories and dine in company cafeterias. Although you 
may have never heard of the company before, everyone has heard 
of its products. The Foxconn plant produces the iPod and the 
iPhone for Apple, Intel - branded motherboards, computer parts for 
Dell and Hewlett - Packard, gaming systems for Sony and Nintendo, 
and cell phones for Motorola. 
 Unlike surrounding Chinese cities, Shenzhen has escaped the 
worst of the choking pollution that has come to characterize so 
much of China ’ s economic miracle. Shenzhen does have an unu-
sually fresh and modern look among China ’ s rapidly industrial-
izing urban environments because it is almost entirely a newly - built 
city. Along prestigious thoroughfares like Shen Nan Road, glass 
and steel  high - rises stretch more than 70 stories into the air, each 
structure  seeming to look even newer and more modern than the 
last. Although the city ’ s government likes to portray Shenzhen as 

 
Shenzhen—China’s Test City 
135
 something of a garden spot, it does have some environmental  hazards. 
The city ’ s lushly landscaped boulevards are overcrowded with BMWs, 
Mercedes-Benzes, and Lexus sedans as well as the usual swarm of 
less expensive Chinese and foreign brand cars. Attempting to cross 
the street on foot or riding a bicycle is most deﬁ nitely a threat to life 
and limb. 
 Even by Western standards, the sprawl of modern ofﬁ ce tow-
ers and luxury apartments throughout Shenzhen is breathtaking. 
As the nation ’ s fastest - growing city over the span of more than two 
decades, the Chinese have developed a slogan for Shenzhen ’ s ever -
 changing urban face,  “ One new high rise every day, and one new 
boulevard every three days. ” That hardly seems like an exaggeration 
when surveying the city ’ s forest of ofﬁ ce towers from the heights 
of Shun Hing Square, a gleaming green glass high-rise, which cur-
rently holds pride of place as the city ’ s tallest building. Even the 
most jaded visitors from New York or Las Vegas would be impressed 
with almost everything except the city ’ s endless trafﬁ c jams.  
 The Shenzhen Stock Exchange 
 Another impressive economic feature of the city is the Shenzhen 
Stock Exchange, but not for its physical appearance. Located in 
a relatively modest green glass tower, the Shenzhen exchange is 
almost silent and not at all crowded. It is an entirely electronic 
stock exchange, modeled after the NASDAQ. The Shenzhen Stock 
Exchange (SZSE) is intended to provide capital for relatively new 
high-tech enterprises with much lower values than stocks traded in 
Shanghai. The exchange says it has 635 listed companies, 35 million 
registered investors, and 177 exchange members. Since its creation 
in 1990, the SZSE has generated a market capitalization of approxi-
mately  $ 690 billion, a fact brought to life in Figure  12.1 . On a daily 
basis, around 600,000 deals, valued at approximately  $ 807 million, 
trade on the SZSE.  1 Frankly, these statistics may seem lower than an 
investor guru would expect and they may already be out of date, con-
sidering the spectacular rise in share values over the past two years.  
 Even exchange ofﬁ cials privately admit that they are  dealing 
with a very hot market and that some stocks may be overvalued. 
Exchange executives are trying to limit excessive volatility by 
 capping trading in a stock if its price moves up or down more than 
10 percent in a single day. Companies that trade at the upper limit 

136 
Understanding China’s Financial Centers
for three days in a row are asked to disclose any known reasons for 
the volatility of their stock. Exchange ofﬁ cials say that revenues are 
rising rapidly for SZSE stocks, but valuations are too high for their 
liking with an average P/E ratio of 40. They are hoping for the 
creation of a derivatives market by the China Securities Regulatory 
Commission (CSRC) to help moderate the upward pressure on 
stock prices. 
 The Shenzhen market has also developed what it calls an SME 
board, a separate exchange that trades in small and medium - size 
enterprises. Most of the action in Shenzhen is off-limits to foreign-
ers unless they are Qualiﬁ ed Foreign Institutional Investors (QFIIs). 
Foreigners who make the grade may be restricted to trade in B 
shares, shares which are denominated in Hong Kong dollars. Investor 
gurus, please take note: This market trades for only four hours a day, 
from 9:30 to 11:30  A.M. and from 1:00 to 3:00  P.M. local time.  
 The Next World Capital Alliance 
 As a city, Shenzhen has grown so rapidly and covered so much 
 territory that it has virtually merged with its predecessor and men-
tor, Hong Kong. Shenzhen certainly has a larger population than 
Hong Kong, with an ofﬁ cial tally of approximately 8.5 million, 
Figure 12.1  Shenzhen Exchange Example
Source: Reproduced with permission of Yahoo! Inc. YAHOO! and the YAHOO! logo are 
trademarks of Yahoo! Inc. (http://finance.yahoo.com/).
20,000
0.5
0.0
1.0
2.0
2,627
5,000
10,000
15,000
1.5
Billions
2002
2004
2006

 
Shenzhen—China’s Test City 
137
 compared to Hong Kong ’ s population of slightly less than 7 million. 
Informal estimates of Shenzen ’ s population run as high as 12 mil-
lion because of the inﬂ ux of undocumented migrant workers from 
other provinces. 
 Chinese citizens who travel between Shenzhen and Hong Kong 
must go through customs and immigration checkpoints before they 
enter either city. Hong Kong says it is considering a plan that could 
allow Shenzhen ’ s registered residents to enter Hong Kong freely. 
If approved, the measure would be the ﬁ rst step toward creating a 
uniﬁ ed Hong Kong – Shenzhen metropolis. 
 Together, Hong Kong and Shenzhen have ambitions to become 
a world ﬁ nancial capital, on a par with New York, London, and 
Tokyo. Physical links between the two cities are increasing daily, but 
it remains to be seen whether Beijing will entertain the creation of 
a new supercity on China ’ s southern coast.  


139
13
C H A P T E R
 Shanghai — China ’ s 
Own Manhattan    
 A bank book makes good reading — better than some novels. 
— Harry Lauder  
 Shanghai is the kind of city that deserves — and has — its own 
book. A brief chapter can hardly do justice to China ’ s biggest and 
most complex metropolis. 
 Although other Chinese cities are economically prosperous, 
Shanghai is considered by many to be China ’ s ﬁ nance and banking 
capital. The city now ranks as number three among world ﬁ nancial 
centers, behind only New York and London. With its soaring skyline, it 
now has more skyscrapers than New York and it is home to more than 
500 multinational corporations. Although major economic reforms 
didn ’ t get under way in Shanghai until 1992, which is more than a dec-
ade later than in the special economic zone of Shenzhen, Shanghai 
has quickly reclaimed its place as the economic hub of China. 
 Unlike Shenzhen, its boomtown sister city to the South, Shanghai 
is a city with a history going back 700 years. From its origins as a 
 trading center at the mouth of the Yangtze River, Shanghai has 
grown to become the world ’ s busiest port, handling approximately 
450 million tons of cargo every year. The bulk of China ’ s industrial 

140 
Understanding China’s Financial Centers
and  manufacturing output is sent out to the world from Shanghai ’ s 
 massive container terminal. 
 Many Westerners will have seen photographs of the new Shanghai 
skyline, with its iconic Oriental Pearl TV Tower dominating the city. 
The city ’ s ofﬁ ce buildings, with their eye - catching, and futuristic 
appearance and high - powered lighting, loom over the city, meta-
phorically pronouncing their dominance as an economic power. As 
in Manhattan, height and architecture speak volumes about a compa-
ny ’ s relative ﬁ nancial importance in China ’ s new capitalist economy. 
 The famous view of the Pudong ﬁ nancial center ’ s skyscrap-
ers and the Oriental Pearl TV Tower across the Huangpu River 
captures only a fragment of Shanghai ’ s scale and its momentum. 
Along the river, huge illuminated billboards glide past throngs of 
shoppers, advertising the city ’ s wealth of consumer goods. (A fast -
 growing Chinese advertising pioneer, Focus Media (FMCN), runs 
the glaring river billboards and thousands of illuminated electronic 
posters in posh high - rise elevators.) 
 This city of 21 million people is so large that it has earned ofﬁ -
cial status as a full - ﬂ edged province in the structure of the Chinese 
government. It has a public transportation system approximately 
the size of London ’ s network, with almost 1,000 bus lines. 
 The Face of New Money 
 Arriving at one of the city ’ s two main airports and traveling to the 
heart of the business district provides a remarkable prism from 
which to view the new Shanghai and the new China. Offshore, a 
few miles from the Pudong airport, lines of tankers steam into the 
port, providing imported oil, the lifeblood of every Chinese city. 
Pudong Airport, with its sweeping roofs and immensely long termi-
nals, speaks volumes about the scale and ultra  modern ambitions of 
the city itself. The airport is expected to become the largest in the 
world by 2015 with three vast terminals and ﬁ ve runways handling 
a staggering 100 million passengers a year. Passengers who wish to 
skip past Shanghai trafﬁ c can be whisked silently to the city by an 
advanced, elevated Maglev train. 
 The wealth of the Shanghai region is apparent not only in the 
glittering towers of the city ’ s many business districts or its spotless 
transportation facilities. On the suburban roads surrounding the 

 
Shanghai—China’s Own Manhattan 
141
city, new apartment complexes rise skyward, some of them reaching 
unprecedented levels of garishness. The richest of these buildings 
mix nineteenth century Parisian proﬁ les with elaborate Greco - Roman 
decoration. Yet another example of how money talks in Shanghai, 
sometimes very, very loudly. 
 The old and the new rub shoulders in Shanghai unlike any of 
the freshly minted special economic zones. Along the broad, new 
highways and boulevards leading into Shanghai, major intersections 
carry workers to vast factories with familiar multinational names 
like General Motors, Toyota, and ABB (the giant Swiss engineering, 
electric power, and automation conglomerate). Shanghai ’ s old and 
historic ﬁ nancial district, the Bund, is ﬁ lled with luxury shops, res-
taurants, and glittering department stores. But among those  lavish 
shops and streets, you can also ﬁ nd an entire mall devoted to fake 
goods: inexpensive, counterfeit copies of Western brand name items. 
 The city also faces severe challenges from pollution, overcrowd-
ing, and trafﬁ c and it is creating satellite cities to absorb its bur-
geoning population. Competing urban centers, including Beijing 
and Hong Kong, continue to ﬁ ght for a share of Shanghai ’ s riches. 
Still, one can ’ t help but admire and believe in a city that rose from 
infamy and stagnation to become one of the world ’ s ﬁ nancial capi-
tals in 15 short years. It ’ s the kind of economic miracle that only 
the United States used to be capable of. 
 Shanghai ’ s Economic Engine 
 Shanghai may have been a late starter in the Chinese  manufacturing 
boom, but it has most certainly caught up. The gross domestic prod-
uct of the Shanghai region is estimated at a staggering $450 billion, 
half the size of the entire economy of India.  1 The city proper has a 
GDP of $134 billion. The BBC estimates that the Shanghai region, 
with its two adjoining provinces, accounts for 30 percent of China ’ s 
foreign exports and 20 percent of the nation ’ s manufacturing. 
 The ﬁ nancial services industry accounts for 7.8 percent of 
Shanghai ’ s economy.  2 Ninety - eight foreign banks are vying for ofﬁ ce 
space and for customers in the new Shanghai. This is an  astonishing 
turnaround for a city that was closed to foreign  ﬁ nanciers by 
Chairman Mao. During Mao ’ s communist revolution, overseas banks 
ﬂ ed to Hong Kong to enjoy capitalism ’ s freedoms. When China 

142 
Understanding China’s Financial Centers
began to reopen its doors to capitalism, Shanghai became the ﬁ rst 
Chinese city to open itself to foreign ﬁ nancial institutions. Soon 
after, foreign banks began to swarm into the Pudong district to 
stake out their turf. Logos of the world ’ s ﬁ nancial giants, including 
Citigroup, now struggle vainly for visibility among Shanghai ’ s tallest 
towers, which are dominated by the likes of the Bank of China and 
China Life. 
 A rivalry for ﬁ nancial dominance has developed between 
Hong Kong and Shanghai and it continues to this day. Hong Kong ’ s 
bankers and ﬁ nanciers are ever the salesmen, touting their easy 
access to the Chinese mainland. But Shanghai barely has to strug-
gle to compete because foreign and Chinese banks now ﬂ ock to 
this city, which is the new center of China ’ s ﬁ nancial action. 
 The Chinese government has made a change from its early 
sense of ambivalence toward domestic stock markets. In the 1990s, 
the nation ’ s biggest and most important corporations were listed in 
other parts of the world before investors in Shanghai and Shenzhen 
could take a stake in them. The early days of China ’ s internal stock 
markets had been marred by spectacular failures, insider trading, 
and other forms of corruption. The abuses of the system at times 
were so egregious that major riots broke out over secret   “ internal 
distribution ” of share offerings by the state - controlled Peoples 
Bank of China (PBOC).  3 It turned out that the PBOC was acting as 
a player in the markets rather than a regulator, forcing Beijing to 
 create the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC). 
 Corruption was not eliminated quickly or easily in Shanghai 
or Shenzhen by the ﬂ edgling, inexperienced CSRC. Figure  13.1 
depicts the Shanghai Composite Index. While looking at the ﬁ gure, 
you will see a multiyear slump, caused by widespread investor dis-
couragement with stock market regulation.  
 The Chinese government is now funneling major IPOs into 
the Shanghai stock exchange, making some of China ’ s state - owned 
corporations among the biggest in the world, measured by market 
capitalization (among them are the Industrial and Commercial 
Bank of China, China Life, and PetroChina). The government has 
two good reasons for funneling new IPOs into the giant Shanghai 
exchange. First, Beijing ’ s mandarins hope to spread out the funds 
of inexperienced investors who have bid up the values of smaller 
companies to unrealistic levels. Second, the government is hoping 
that an  increasing ﬂ ow of investment money into the stock market 

 
Shanghai—China’s Own Manhattan 
143
may help soak up excess liquidity, which is driving up real estate 
prices to levels that may be unsustainable. 
 Many old brokerages went bankrupt or faced prosecution dur-
ing Shanghai ’ s protracted market slump. New ﬁ rms are thriving but 
there is still something of a Wild West atmosphere to investing in 
Shanghai. Unless you invest solely online, you may ﬁ nd yourself in a 
back alley, looking for a brokerage that looks more like the betting 
window at a dog track than an oak - paneled boardroom. The scene 
at such a brokerage brings home the contrast between the old and 
the new Shanghai. 
 The Old and the New 
 Miles from Pudong ’ s gleaming towers, dingy rooms are ﬁ lled with 
China ’ s retail investors, shouting and playing cards as they glance at 
monitors ﬂ ashing the latest changes in stock prices. There is no CNBC 
or Fox Financial Channel to interpret the market ’ s ﬂ uctuations, 
just the apparent superstitions of gray - haired women and men who 
gamble on a stock market that, like Shenzhen ’ s market, may be in a 
 bubble. It currently has no derivatives or short - selling mechanisms 
that would create an incentive to drive prices down. (The authori-
ties say various forms of derivatives are in the works and that Chinese 
investors may also be allowed to bet on H shares in Hong Kong.) 
Figure 13.1  Shanghai Composite Index
Source: Reproduced with permission of Yahoo! Inc. YAHOO! and the YAHOO! logo are 
trademarks of Yahoo! Inc. (http://finance.yahoo.com/).
6,000
0.0
2.0
6.0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
4.0
Billions
2002
2004
2006

144 
Understanding China’s Financial Centers
 But, before we judge Chinese investors too harshly, take a closer 
look at the antique computer monitors that ﬁ ll Shanghai ’ s broker-
age ofﬁ ces. Along with computer - generated charts, we see Bollinger 
Bands, MACD indicators, and classic  “ candlesticks ” — which are the 
tools of technical analysts. Perhaps Shanghai ’ s retail investors are 
more sophisticated than the government credits them with being. 
 Remarkably, the future Shanghai may be even more remark-
able than today ’ s instant city. Visit the Shanghai Urban Planning 
Exhibition Hall near People ’ s Square and you will see a model of 
the city as it is expected to look in 2020. The scale of architecture 
on display is overwhelming. The exhibit is big enough to cover a 
volleyball court. Shanghai ’ s economy is expected by 2020 to have 
grown ﬁ ve fold, making it the richest economic region in the world.   

145
14
C H A P T E R
 Taiwan — The Breakaway Prodigy    
 It is better to have a permanent income than to be fascinating. 
— Oscar Wilde  
 Known by many names, the island of Taiwan has been another 
outstanding performer among the Greater China economies and 
the so - called Asian Tiger economies. At once a center of interna-
tional tension and political intrigue, Taiwan and its capital city 
of Taipei have deﬁ ed predictions that the island nation would be 
invaded and swallowed by mainland China. After breaking away 
from the mainland ’ s political inﬂ uence during Mao Zedong ’ s 
revolution, Taiwan managed to transform itself from an underde-
veloped, agricultural island with few natural resources into an eco-
nomic powerhouse that has become a leading producer of high 
technology goods and manufacturing centers in the world. 
 Building the Beautiful Island 
 Originally called Formosa or  beautiful island  by Portuguese explor-
ers in the 1600s, Taiwan adopted the controversial name  Republic of 
China after breaking away from the government of mainland China 
in the wake of Chairman Mao ’ s communist revolution in 1949. Two 
million nationalists ﬂ ed to the island with a substantial portion of 
China ’ s currency reserves, and adopted a constitution that claimed 

146 
Understanding China’s Financial Centers
sovereignty over all of China. But while Chairman Mao was busy 
spreading communist revolution among mainland Chinese, the 
Taiwanese were busy making money by becoming one of the world ’ s 
great high-tech manufacturing centers. 
 During the 1960s, foreign investment in Taiwan helped intro-
duce modern, labor - intensive technology to the island. With U.S. 
assistance, Taiwan became a major exporter of labor - intensive prod-
ucts, such as shoes and textile - based goods. Products were usually 
stamped  Made in China  to the dismay of the mainland government, 
which claimed to be the one true China and claimed sovereignty 
over the island of Taiwan. 
 As the island built its economic engine, the total value of interna-
tional trade with Taiwan increased more than ﬁ vefold in the 1960s. 
While the mainland struggled through the communist revolution 
under Chairman Mao, Taiwanese trade grew nearly tenfold in the 
1970s, and doubled again in the 1980s. The 1990s saw a more mod-
est level of trade growth because of the Asian ﬁ nancial crisis. 
 During the 1980s, Taiwan ’ s focus shifted increasingly toward 
sophisticated, capital - intensive and technology - intensive  products 
for export. The nation also focused on developing the service  sector. 
The electronics industry is now Taiwan ’ s most important industrial 
export sector and is the largest recipient of U.S. investment. During 
the 1980s and 1990s, Taiwan became the world ’ s largest supplier of 
computer monitors. It currently remains a leading personal compu-
ter manufacturer. Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing (TSM) is 
one of the world ’ s largest suppliers of silicon chip products. Many 
other Taiwanese companies have followed in TSM ’ s footsteps, includ-
ing the highly automated textile production industry, which contin-
ues to be an important industrial export sector. 
 The success of Taiwan ’ s trading practices continues today. The 
United States is Taiwan ’ s second - largest trading partner, receiv-
ing 20 percent of Taiwan ’ s exports and supplying 16 percent of its 
imports. Taiwan is the United States ’ s eighth - largest trading partner. 
Taiwan ’ s two - way trade with the United States exceeds $45 billion. 
 Real growth in Taiwanese GDP has averaged about 8  percent 
during the past three decades. Exports have grown even faster and 
have provided the primary engine for industrialization. Inﬂ ation 
and unemployment are low, the trade surplus is  substantial, and 
Taiwan ’ s foreign reserves are among the world ’ s largest pools of 
capital, exceeding $500 billion. Also, the appreciation of the New 

 
Taiwan—The Breakaway Prodigy 
147
Taiwan dollar (NT), rising labor costs, and increasing  environmental 
consciousness in Taiwan has caused many labor - intensive industries, 
such as shoe manufacturing, to move to mainland China and less 
developed regions of Southeast Asia. 
 It remains to be seen how much future economic development 
will occur on the island of Taiwan itself. Taiwan has now become a 
major investor in the People ’ s Republic of China (PRC), Thailand, 
Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia, and Vietnam.  
 The Love - Hate Relationship 
 Taiwan ’ s economic success has been remarkable considering the 
island nation ’ s status as a political outsider on the world stage. 
Because of mainland China ’ s enormous political clout and its grow-
ing economic muscle, most trading nations have been extremely 
reluctant to reestablish diplomatic relations with the renegade island. 
Few countries dare to give offense to the PRC, which is expected to 
become the world ’ s largest economy. 
 Money has a way, though, of trumping politics. The lack of formal 
diplomatic relations with all but a few of its trading partners appears 
not to have seriously hindered Taiwan ’ s continuously expand ing 
commerce. Taiwan maintains trade ofﬁ ces in more than 60 countries 
with which it does not have ofﬁ cial diplomatic relations. In addition 
to the World Trade Organization (WTO), Taiwan is a member of 
the Asia Development Bank under the name  Taipei, China  and the 
Asia - Paciﬁ c Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum under yet another 
name:  Chinese Taipei.  
 Taiwan ’ s stock exchange has been affected by that nation ’ s 
love - hate relationship with mainland China. Tension between the 
two countries and occasional military threats disrupt business and 
consumer conﬁ dence. At the same time, increasing amounts of 
Taiwanese investment capital is sent across the straits to the main-
land as investors try to take advantage of the mainland ’ s exception-
ally cheap labor and ongoing economic growth. 
 Despite China ’ s deep hostility to the Taiwanese government and 
all forms of Taiwanese nationalism, the two entities are best of ene-
mies. China has overtaken the United States to become Taiwan ’ s 
largest export market and its second - largest source of imports after 
Japan. China is also the island ’ s number one destination for foreign 
direct investment. 

148 
Understanding China’s Financial Centers
 China says trade with Taiwan rose to a record level of $108.7 
billion in 2006, an increase of 18 percent from the year before. 
Tourism between the mainland and the island of Taiwan is also 
ﬂ ourishing.  1 Despite the public hostility between the two entities, 
a remarkable four million Taiwanese visited the mainland in 2006, 
while 200,000 people from the Chinese mainland made the trip to 
Taiwan. 
 Taiwan is investing billions in mainland China ’ s development. 
The Chinese Ministry of Commerce says it approved more than 
$11 billion worth of Taiwanese projects in 2006.  2 
 The Taiwanese stock market recovered from the shock of the 
Asian economic crisis of 1997 – 1998. The Taiex Index was also 
badly shaken by the tech wreck that decimated the NASDAQ in 
2001 – 2002. During 2007, the index rebounded to highs of almost 
90,000. Figure  14.1 illustrates the rise and fall of the Taiex over 
 several years. 
 Despite ongoing nervousness about the tension between Taiwan 
and the PRC, the island nation ’ s economy remains strong and 
 stable. Its Gross Domestic Product measured by PPP is estimated 
at $681 billion and continues to grow at approximately 4.7 percent 
per year. 3 
Figure 14.1  Taiex Index
Source: Reproduced with permission of Yahoo! Inc. YAHOO! and the YAHOO! logo are 
trademarks of Yahoo! Inc. (http://finance.yahoo.com/).
2,000
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
Year
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
8,000
9,000
10,000
11,000
Taiex
Base: 1966 average  100

 
Taiwan—The Breakaway Prodigy 
149
 A Foggy Future? 
 Although Taiwan has experienced a great deal of economic  prosperity, 
the island nation now faces many of the same economic issues as 
other developed Asian economies. With the prospect of continued 
relocation of labor - intensive industries to countries with cheaper work 
forces, Taiwan ’ s future development will have to rely on further trans-
formation to an increasingly high technology and service - oriented 
economy. Moreover, textile production is declining in importance 
for Taiwan as the island loses its competitive advantage to cheap - labor 
economies. 
 Overshadowing all other considerations is the extreme hostil-
ity Taiwan faces from the People ’ s Republic of China. Beijing feels 
no compunction about threatening war if Taiwan openly declares 
its independence. Both sides are heavily armed and the quantity 
and sophistication of China ’ s armaments is growing exponentially. 
Although an outbreak of hostilities may seem unlikely from distant 
shores, it is a real danger and it makes stock markets nervous. 
 I believe, personally, that both sides will back away from the brink 
and that recognition of the advantages of trade and cooperation will 
knit Taiwan and the People ’ s Republic into a close relationship, a 
relationship that makes much more economic sense than making 
or even threatening war. The rise and fall of hostility between the 
two sides will nevertheless continue to add an element of volatility 
to Taiwanese stocks and ADRs because of the dire economic conse-
quences that would follow an outbreak of war.  


151
15
C H A P T E R
 Hong Kong — China ’ s 
Modern Frontier   
 He who will not economize will have to agonize. 
— Confucius 
 More than 10 years after its return to China, Hong Kong 
retains its reputation as the world ’ s freest economy. The city has 
been awarded that honor for 13 consecutive years, a period span-
ning its existence as a British colony and as a part of China, by both 
the Heritage Foundation and the  Wall Street Journal. 
 Building an Economic Cornerstone 
 The Hong Kong economy enjoyed decades of spectacular growth 
under a century and a half of British rule, evolving from a trading 
hub to an inexpensive manufacturing center to becoming the bank-
ing and ﬁ nancial services nexus for Southeast Asia. With an aggres-
sive and well - educated workforce, Hong Kong manages to stay on 
top economically. Even setbacks seem to be overcome with remark-
able speed by Hong Kong ’ s extraordinary work ethic. 
 Hong Kong has endured and recovered from repeated economic 
tremors in recent years. First, there was the Asian currency crisis of 
the late 1990s, which caused a 5.3 percent decline in the economy 
in 1998. Then the high-tech stock bubble burst on Wall Street and 

152 
Understanding China’s Financial Centers
sent shock waves around the world, causing some  reverberations in 
Hong Kong. The worldwide scare over the Severe Acute Respiratory 
Syndrome (SARS) virus and the HN51 bird ﬂ u virus struck at Hong 
Kong ’ s reputation for safety. In particular, the SARS health scare was 
especially hard on the economy as tourists and business travelers 
canceled their plans to visit the  “ special administrative region, ” caus-
ing a 2.3 percent economic decline. 
 Overshadowing all of the other economic tremors was the politi-
cal earthquake caused by the handover of Hong Kong from British 
to Chinese rule on June 30, 1997. Fortunately, under the terms of 
the sovereignty deal, the People ’ s Republic of China (PRC) agreed to 
grant Hong Kong special status during the takeover period, which has 
yielded economic beneﬁ ts for both sides. 
 For the time being, Hong Kong is governed as a special admin-
istrative region (SAR), still operating under the British - legislated 
Basic Law of Hong Kong. Under the terms of the Sino - British Joint 
Declaration, the PRC has promised that Hong Kong will have a rela-
tively high degree of autonomy until at least 2047, which is 50 years 
after the transfer of sovereignty. Under this unique  One Country, 
Two Systems  policy, Hong Kong retains its own legal system, currency, 
customs policy, cultural delegation, international sport teams, and 
immigration laws, while the PRC represents Hong Kong diplomati-
cally and militarily. 
 By any measure, the handover was an extraordinarily pragmatic 
arrangement agreed to by the PRC. The Hong Kong economy has 
now returned to full health, with the real GDP rising dramatically 
for more than two years. GDP rose by 8.6 percent during 2004, 
by 7.3 percent in 2005, and by a remarkable rate of 6.6 percent 
during 2006. 
 The Transformation of an Economy 
 Over the years, Hong Kong ’ s economy has transitioned from a 
labor - intensive manufacturing base to an overwhelming concen-
tration on service industries. The four economic pillars of Hong 
Kong are made up of crucial service sectors that include trade and 
 logistics, which constitutes 27.6 percent of GDP; ﬁ nancial services, 
12.2 percent; tourism, 2.9 percent; and professional services and 
other producer services, 10.5 percent. Taking all service sectors into 
account, they make up 90 percent of the economy. 

 
 Hong Kong — China ’ s Modern Frontier  
153
 Hong Kong is now number one in Asia as measured by personal 
wealth and per capita production. Put in perspective, Hong Kong ’ s 
economic strength overwhelms its closest Chinese rival, Shanghai, 
which, in a recent comparison, had a per capita GDP of $5,620. 
Hong Kong produced an exceptional GDP of $37,400, more than 
the per capita GDP of some developed Western economies. 
 Hong Kong ’ s external sector, including the high value  tourism 
industry, also showed robust growth in 2005. In 2005, a total of 
23.4 million visitors, or 3.4 times the size of the local population, 
came to Hong Kong, representing a 7.1 percent increase from 
2004. From January through August of 2006, tourist arrivals rose 
by 10.4 percent year on year. Tourists from the Chinese mainland 
accounted for more than half of the total. 
 Trade with China is an increasingly important engine in Hong 
Kong ’ s robust growth. Despite its small geographical size, Hong Kong 
is the world ’ s eleventh - largest trading economy. 
 Hong Kong ’ s major export trade market is the Chinese main-
land, which received 47 percent of Hong Kong ’ s total exports dur-
ing the ﬁ rst eight months of 2006. During that period, the city ’ s 
exports to the Chinese mainland surged by 13.7 percent. Hong 
Kong ’ s trade performance is partly fueled by labor - intensive out-
sourcing to Guangdong, where the majority of Hong Kong compa-
nies have extended their manufacturing base. 
 Hong Kong is also the largest source of overseas direct invest-
ment in the Chinese mainland. By the end of 2005, the largest 
portion of all the overseas - funded projects registered in mainland 
China were tied to Hong Kong interests. Capital inﬂ ow from 
Hong Kong amounted to $259.5 billion, accounting for 41.7 percent 
of the national total. 
 By the same token, the Chinese mainland is one of the leading 
investors in Hong Kong. According to one analysis, the mainland ’ s 
cumulative direct investment in Hong Kong was $130.8 billion 
or 29 percent of Hong Kong ’ s total stock of inward direct invest-
ment at the end of 2004. It is estimated that there are over 2,000 
 mainland - backed enterprises registered in Hong Kong, with total 
assets exceeding $220 billion. 
 Hong Kong functions as an international banking hub for 
China, Asia, and the world. There are 16 Chinese banks and 7 rep-
resentative ofﬁ ces operating in Hong Kong. The Bank of China 
has now become the second - largest banking group in Hong Kong, 

154 
Understanding China’s Financial Centers
dwarfed only by the international giant HSBC. China ’ s other big 
lenders, including Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, 
Agricultural Bank of China, and China Construction Bank, have 
also opened branch operations in Hong Kong. 
 The Basis of the Boom 
 As shown in Figure  15.1 , Hong Kong ’ s stock market is the second 
largest in Asia and the seventh largest in the world, when measured 
by market capitalization. 
 Market performance as measured by the Hang Seng Index con-
tinues to be impressive. It has set new record highs, as increasing 
numbers of mainland ﬁ rms seek to be listed on the Hong Kong 
Exchange. As mentioned earlier, the listing of the Industrial and 
Commercial Bank set a record as the world ’ s largest IPO. 
 Many companies operating in China are managed from head-
quarters in Hong Kong. Mainland Chinese ﬁ rms, especially those with 
state ownership are traded on the Hong Kong market as  H Shares.  
 Hong Kong is a popular venue for regional headquarters or 
branch ofﬁ ces for multinational companies that manage their busi-
nesses in the Asia Paciﬁ c region. Based on a government survey, a 
total of 3,845 overseas companies had regional operations in Hong 
Kong on June 1, 2006. This is a 20 percent increase from three years 
earlier. The United States has the largest total number of regional 
 Figure 15.1  Hong Kong Hang Seng Index  
Source: Reproduced with permission of Yahoo! Inc. YAHOO! and the YAHOO! logo are 
trademarks of Yahoo! Inc. ( http://finance.yahoo.com/ ).
30,000
0.0
2.0
6.0
1,894
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
4.0
Billions
1990
1995
2000
2005

 
 Hong Kong — China ’ s Modern Frontier  
155
 headquarters and ofﬁ ces in Hong Kong, with 889  companies, 
 followed by Japan (731), the United Kingdom (337), and the Chinese 
mainland (268). The trend is on the upswing. The number of 
regional headquarters and ofﬁ ces whose parent companies were from 
the United States, Japan, and the United Kingdom, for example, all 
increased by 20 percent from June 2003 to June 2006. Those from the 
Chinese mainland increased 33 percent in those three short years. 
 Hong Kong has weathered the worst economic storms of the 
Asia Paciﬁ c region and still comes out on top. With the continuing 
emergence of China, Hong Kong is positioned to serve both the 
Chinese economic colossus and to be a bridge between China and 
the rest of Asia and the industrialized Western world.  
 The Secret of the Gateway 
 Hong Kong residents are fond of saying they have only their peo-
ple, their intelligence, and their knowledge to make the economy 
run. With no natural resources to speak of, aside from a world -
 class harbor, Hong Kong depends on its highly competitive people 
to retain its status as the indispensable economic gateway between 
China and the rest of the world.    


I V
P A R T
BUILDING A CHINA STOCK 
GURU PORTFOLIO


159
16
C H A P T E R
 Buying China Without 
Leaving Home   
 Life is really simple, but we insist on making it complicated.  
 —Confucius 
 Every fall, I provide an opportunity for a select group of my 
 China Stock Digest  newsletter subscribers to travel with me deep 
inside China to see with their own eyes the incredible economic 
progress China is making. These trips normally ﬁ ll quickly after they 
are announced on my  China Stock Digest  web site, as the number of 
available spaces are limited, and my primary role in life is that of 
professional investor, not a tour guide. 
 If you ever are lucky enough to have the chance to come see 
China with me, you will be in for a real eye-opener. I have built, 
over the years, solid relationships with senior executives, university 
researchers, and government ofﬁ cials all over China. This provides me 
access to one of the most important resources for successful  investing: 
reliable information. I have often learned about new policies and eco-
nomic opportunities long before they become public knowledge in 
the West. 
 If you are interested in traveling to China, please visit my web 
site at  chinastockdigest.com . 

160 
Building a China Stock Guru Portfolio
 Do I Need to Travel to China to Invest? 
 One of the ﬁ rst questions I am typically asked by new China inves-
tors is whether it is necessary to travel to China to purchase Chinese 
stocks. The answer is a resounding  No! China investments can be 
easily made right at home in the United States or London, without 
ever traveling to China. 
 There are ﬁ ve basic ways investors can make stock investments 
in China: 
 
 1.   U.S. American Depositary Receipts 
 
 2.   U.S. mutual funds that invest in China 
 
 3.   Exchange - traded funds (ETFs) and index funds 
 
 4.   Chinese companies that trade only in China or Hong Kong 
 
 5.   U.S. stocks for companies that do significant business in China  
 Each of these investment approaches has unique advantages 
and risks. Before getting into the speciﬁ c pros and cons of these 
approaches, it ’ s important to discuss the nature of the stock mar-
kets inside China and the shares they trade. 
 Chinese stock markets are composed of four unique stock 
exchanges. They are the Hong Kong, Shanghai, Shenzhen, and Taipei 
markets. These exchanges run under three different market systems. 
 Hong Kong ’ s stock exchange operates similarly to the London 
Stock Exchange. By contrast, the Taipei Stock Exchange is run 
according to Taiwanese rules, which are also similar, but not identi-
cal, to the regulations in London and New York. Therefore, one of 
the issues investors have to consider with regard to risk is that Hong 
Kong and Taipei have a history of ﬁ nancial regulations and legal 
systems that are fairly well established and reliable. 
 The stock exchanges in Shanghai and Shenzhen are run by the 
People ’ s Republic of China (PRC). These Chinese exchanges are 
operating in a country that has explosive economic growth, but has 
yet to have its regulatory infrastructure keep up with it. Although 
this is generally true in any emerging market, it creates an added 
level of risk in the PRC. 
 Speciﬁ cally, the issues of intellectual property protection, ﬁ nan-
cial disclosure, corporate governance, and the amount of information 
that gets released to a potential investor all create a higher level of 
risk dealing in the Chinese internal markets than you would have in a 
more transparent or regulated markets such as those in New York and 

 
Buying China Without Leaving Home 
161
London. That ’ s why we place a premium on research and information 
at my investment research company and in my  China Stock Digest.  
 Also, the Chinese market system is still evolving and emerging 
from a complex ﬁ nancial and political history. There is a confus-
ing variety of shares to be understood. There are  A, B,  and  C shares 
traded on the Shanghai and Shenzhen exchanges, while there are 
 H, N, and  L shares traded in New York, Hong Kong, and London. 
 From one guru to another, I recommend that you avoid most 
of these shares. Nevertheless, here ’ s a brief primer so you won ’ t be 
confused by terminology when an alphabet soup of share offerings 
confronts you: 
 A Shares are usually held only by Chinese residents and are 
denominated in yuan (also known as  renminbi ), the local cur-
rency of the People ’ s Republic of China. As of 2003, quali-
fied foreign institutional investors (QFIIs) were authorized to 
trade in  A shares in Shanghai and Shenzhen. QFIIs must have 
at least $10 billion in assets under management. 
 B Shares are designated for foreign investors and are denomi-
nated in foreign currencies on the Shanghai and Shenzhen 
exchanges. 
 C Shares are owned by state - run corporations and are not yet 
publicly traded. 
 H Shares are stocks of companies incorporated in China and 
listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange and on foreign 
 exchanges, such as Singapore.  
 N Shares are stocks of companies incorporated in China 
and listed on the New York Stock Exchange, sometimes as 
over - the - counter (OTC) shares.  
 L Shares are stocks of companies incorporated in China and 
listed on the London Stock Exchange. 
 Red Chips  are stocks of Chinese companies incorporated out-
side the People ’ s Republic and listed in Hong Kong. The busi-
ness of these companies is conducted within China and they 
are controlled by shareholders on the mainland.  
 American Depositary Receipts (ADRs) and American Depositary 
Shares (ADSs).  ADRs and ADSs are traded on the New York 
Stock Exchange. 
 Global Depositary Receipts (GDRs).  GDRs are traded largely on 
the London Stock Exchange. 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

162 
Building a China Stock Guru Portfolio
 When investing in China, you want to focus your efforts where 
you can receive the best possible return with the least amount of 
risk. Of the ﬁ ve possible ways to invest in China, therefore, we will 
focus on only three: 
 
1.   American Depositary Receipts 
 
2.   U.S. mutual funds that invest in China 
 
3.   ETFs and index funds 
 We will not spend our time on the other two options, namely 
traveling to China to purchase shares with local Chinese brokerage 
accounts, nor will we focus on investing in U.S. companies that do 
business in China as a way to play the China market. 
 Don ’ t Book Your Plane Ticket Yet 
 There are various reasons why it does not make sense to travel 
to China to purchase shares. If you were to travel to China and 
attempt to open a brokerage account, you would face a number 
of hurdles that make it completely impractical for most investors. 
First, you would need to speak Chinese, namely either Mandarin or 
Cantonese. Very few foreign investors can do this. Second, broker-
age ﬁ rms in Hong Kong would refuse to open a trading account for 
any American investor unless they maintain a permanent address in 
Hong Kong and can prove legal Hong Kong residency. 
 Next, there would be no economic advantage to you if you 
traveled to China to invest. In mainland China, presuming you can 
speak enough Mandarin to complete a new account form, you would 
only be allowed to purchase Chinese  B share stocks. Most of these  B 
shares already trade in the United States as ADRs, so what would be 
the point of going to China to buy them? You would not be allowed to 
purchase  A share stocks because they are offered only to Chinese citi-
zens. So, there is no advantage to going through the hassle required 
to travel to China to invest in stocks you can easily purchase as ADRs 
in the United States without the additional language barrier and 
travel costs. 
 Would You Invest in a U.S. Company in China? 
 It is also an unwise decision to buy investments in a U.S. company 
that is doing business in China simply because it has operations 
there. The reason is that one cannot adequately estimate how much 

 
Buying China Without Leaving Home 
163
of an impact the U.S. company ’ s operations in China will have on 
the ﬁ rm ’ s overall ﬁ nancial results. For example, General Motors 
has been quite successful to date in its efforts to establish itself in 
China. But if its operations in China represent only 1 percent of 
the company ’ s worldwide income, even if it is successful, you won ’ t 
see a big impact on the company ’ s stock price. 
 Most of the people who have an interest in China want to 
see results in their portfolio over a three - year to ﬁ ve - year period, 
and they don ’ t want to wait 20 years for a behemoth like General 
Motors or General Electric to get established enough in China to 
see meaningful results in their ﬁ nancial performance. As such, it is 
not recommended that investors buy stock in U.S. companies doing 
business in China solely or primarily because those companies are 
doing that. 
 Guru ’ s Focus on Investments That Work 
 As a result of the problems noted in two of the methods mentioned 
(that is, traveling to China to open brokerage accounts and buy-
ing stocks of Western companies doing business in China), I focus 
our attention instead on the three methods that are practical for 
investing in China. In the next few chapters, I discuss how investing 
in American Depositary Receipts, U.S. mutual funds that invest in 
China, and ETFs and index funds will help you proﬁ t from China ’ s 
economic boom. 


165
17
C H A P T E R
 Understanding the Safest Way to 
Invest in Chinese Stocks   
 Those that won ’ t be counseled can ’ t be helped. 
— Benjamin Franklin 
 We need to get a clearer picture of the three viable options for 
investing in China ’ s stock market to proﬁ t from her economic boom: 
American Depositary Receipts, exchange - traded funds (ETFs) —
 including exchange - traded index funds — and mutual funds that 
invest in China. In this chapter we learn about the primary characteri-
stics of these three investment options so that investors can see why 
they are the safest way to invest in Chinese stocks.   *  
   *  Each of these products is specifically defined by the U.S. Securities and 
Exchange Commission in their official literature and on their web site, sec.gov. 
I have attempted to translate the SEC ’ s more technical definitions into a reader -
 friendly format. In my efforts, I want to note my appreciation to the SEC in mak-
ing a  standard definition available to the public, and acknowledge their contribu-
tion to this chapter from their official literature, which has been adapted for our 
 purposes. 

166 
Building a China Stock Guru Portfolio
 American Depositary Receipts 
 The stocks of most Chinese companies that trade in the U.S. markets 
are traded as American Depositary Receipts (ADRs), which are issued 
by U.S. depositary banks. The acronyms  ADR  and  ADS  (American 
Depositary Shares) are sometimes used  interchangeably. An ADR is 
actually the physically negotiable certiﬁ cate that evidences ADSs in 
much the same way a stock certiﬁ cate evidences shares of stock. An 
ADS is the security that represents an ownership interest in depos-
ited securities in much the same way a share of stock represents an 
ownership interest in a corporation. In other words, ADRs are the 
instruments actually traded in the market. 
 Each ADR represents one or more shares or a fraction of a 
share of a foreign stock. If you own an ADR, you have the right to 
obtain the foreign stock it represents, but U.S. investors usually 
ﬁ nd it more convenient to own the ADR. The price of an ADR usu-
ally corresponds to the price of the foreign stock in its home mar-
ket, adjusted for the ratio of ADRs to foreign company shares. In 
the case of the inﬂ ated and economically isolated Shanghai and 
Shenzhen stock markets, the valuation of an ADR will generally be 
lower (cheaper) than shares of stock traded on the mainland. 
 Owning ADRs has some advantages compared to owning for-
eign shares directly. These advantages include: 
 When you buy and sell ADRs, you are trading in the U.S. market. 
Your trade will consequently clear and settle in U.S. dollars.  
 The depositary bank will convert any dividends or other cash 
payments into U.S. dollars before sending them to you.  
 The depositary bank may arrange to vote your shares for you 
as you instruct. 
 On the other hand, there are some disadvantages to ADRs, 
including: 
 It may take a long time for you to receive information from 
the company because it must pass through an extra pair of 
hands. You may receive information about shareholder meet-
ings only a few days before the meeting, well past the time 
when you could vote your shares.  
•
•
•
•

 
Understanding the Safest Way to Invest in Chinese Stocks 
167
 Depositary banks charge fees for their services and will deduct 
these fees from the dividends and other distributions on your 
shares. The depositary bank also will incur expenses, such as 
for converting foreign currency into U.S. dollars, and usually 
will pass those expenses on to you. 
 Curious investors can learn more about the origins of ADRs at 
investorpedia.com. 
 Exchange - Traded Funds 
 Another way to invest internationally in the stock market is through 
exchange - traded funds (ETFs). An exchange - traded fund is a type 
of investment whose key objective is to achieve the same return as a 
particular market index. As such, ETFs are also often referred to as 
index funds. Increasingly popular with investors, ETFs are listed on 
stock exchanges and, like stocks (and in contrast to mutual funds), 
trade at known prices throughout the trading day. 
 Open - ended mutual funds differ substantially from exchange -
 traded funds in that they can be bought and sold only once a day. 
Unlike exchange - traded funds, the price at which you buy or sell 
your open - ended mutual fund is not known at the time you place 
the transaction, and will not be set until after the market closes 
on the day of the purchase or sale. 
 A share in an ETF that tracks an international index gives expo-
sure to the performance of the underlying stock portfolio along with 
the ability to trade that share like any other security. 
 Investors who want to sell their ETF shares generally do this by 
selling the fund in their brokerage account as if it were any other 
listed stock. 
 Owning exchange - traded funds has some advantages compared 
to owning ADRs or mutual funds, including: 
 When you buy an ETF, you receive the benefit of diversifica-
tion among the numerous stocks that make up the index the 
ETF is attempting to mimic. This reduces the stock - specific 
risk that can arise from owning ADR shares.  
 When you buy an ETF, you do not normally pay significant 
sales charges, known as loads, which are common to many 
stock mutual funds. 
•
•
•
•

168 
Building a China Stock Guru Portfolio
 On the other hand, there are some disadvantages common to 
ETFs, including: 
 ETFs can, at times, have more price volatility than open - ended 
mutual funds. This is because the ability to trade these funds 
throughout a market day at fixed prices has sometimes at-
tracted speculators and day traders to this type of investment. 
 ETFs can, at times, reduce your portfolio ’ s diversification (com-
pared to some open - ended mutual funds) because they tend 
to overweight their portfolio among those stocks that have a 
larger market value (also known as market capitalization).  
 Mutual Funds 
 Mutual funds that invest in China are another viable option for 
investing in China ’ s stock market. A mutual fund is a company that 
pools money from many investors and places the money in stocks 
or other securities or assets, or some combination of these invest-
ments. The combined holdings the mutual fund owns are known 
as its portfolio. Each share represents an investor ’ s proportionate 
ownership of the fund ’ s holdings and the income those holdings 
generate. 
 There are different kinds of funds that invest in foreign stocks. 
Here ’ s how they work: 
 Global funds  invest primarily in foreign companies, but may 
also invest in U.S. companies. 
 International funds  generally limit their investments to compa-
nies outside the United States. 
 Regional or  country funds invest principally in companies located 
in a particular geographical region (such as Asia) or in a single 
country, such as China. Some funds invest only in emerging 
 markets, while others concentrate on more developed markets.  
 International investing through mutual funds can reduce some 
of the risks mentioned earlier. Mutual funds provide more diversi-
ﬁ cation than most investors could achieve on their own. The fund 
manager also should be familiar with international investing and 
have the resources to research foreign companies. The fund will 
handle currency conversions and pay any foreign taxes, and is likely 
•
•
•
•
•

 
Understanding the Safest Way to Invest in Chinese Stocks 
169
to understand the different operations of foreign markets. Like 
other international investments, mutual funds that invest interna-
tionally often have higher costs than funds that invest only in U.S. 
stocks. 
 Study Your Options 
 Now that you have a greater understanding of the different types of 
investments you should be considering when thinking about proﬁ t-
ing from China ’ s economic boom, take the time to choose the one 
that will work best for you. It ’ s important to study your options and 
make an informed decision before you invest your money. Read on 
to continue your guru training and take a deeper look at how to 
identify opportunity in Chinese stocks and maximize the potential 
of your investment choices. 
  


171
18
C H A P T E R
 Identifying Opportunities in 
Chinese Stocks   
 There are three methods of gaining wisdom. The first is reflection, 
which is the highest. The second is imitation, which is the easiest. 
The third is experience, which is the bitterest.  
— Confucius 
 We learn in this chapter a system that you can use to analyze 
individual Chinese stocks and we examine the challenges experi-
enced by investors as they do so. In Chapter 19, we will discuss how 
to combine these stocks into a working portfolio and manage its 
risk, that is, you will learn how to build a China Stock Guru port-
folio. We will also review opportunities among China - based mutual 
funds and exchange - traded funds (ETFs). But ﬁ rst, we need to know 
how to look at a Chinese stock and identify whether we have found 
treasure or trash. 
 Regardless of whether you ultimately decide to build your own 
China portfolio with individual stocks, or choose instead to access a 
ready - made portfolio of China stocks by investing in a mutual fund 
or ETF, the process that I discuss in this chapter can make you a 
savvier investor and help you proﬁ t from China ’ s economic boom. 

172 
Building a China Stock Guru Portfolio
 Measuring Your Stock ’ s Value 
 I remember quite well, and I suspect you do, too, back  during the 
heyday of the United States ’ dotcom craze, when young investment 
analysts, often fresh out of college, would appear on ﬁ nancial tel-
evision networks and glorify the newest breed of Internet - related 
companies. Although the companies hyped were often different, 
the underlying story was generally the same. The typical pitch went 
something like this:  “ The Internet is the biggest technology inno-
vation of our time and will undoubtedly revolutionize our busi-
ness and personal lives. Because the Internet industry is so new, we 
needn ’ t worry about traditional measures of investment value such 
as book value, price to earnings multiples, and proﬁ tability. ” 
 I believe these traditional measures are crucially important. It 
is worth your time to understand them because these measures will 
make the difference between a stock market bust like the dotcom 
craze and the potential to proﬁ t from growing corporate giants in 
China.
 Traditional Definitions of Stock Value 
 Book Value  A company ’ s book value is calculated by using this 
formula: Assets  – Liabilities = Book Value .
 Book Value per Share  A company ’ s book value per share is calcu-
lated by using this formula: Book Value/Shares  Outstanding.  
 Price to Book Ratio  This figure is determined by using this 
 formula: Price per Share/Book Value per Share  .
 Generally speaking, the lower the Price to Book Ratio, the 
 better the value the stock represents. Value investors like 
myself generally are looking to buy stocks at Price to Book 
Ratios that are below the average for the market at any given 
point in time. 
 Price to Earnings Ratio  This figure is determined by using this 
formula: Price per Share/Earnings per Share  .
 Generally speaking, the lower the Price to Earnings Ratio, 
the better the value the stock represents. Value investors 
like  myself generally are looking to buy stocks at Price to 
Earnings Ratios that are below the average for the market 
at any given point in time. 
 Price to Sales Ratio  This figure is determined by using this 
 formula: Price per Share/Revenue per Share  .
•
•
•
◆
•
◆
•

 
Identifying Opportunities in Chinese Stocks 
173
 Generally speaking, the lower the Price to Sales Ratio, the 
better the value the stock represents. Again, value investors 
like myself are generally looking to buy stocks at Price to 
Sales  Ratios that are below the average for the market at any 
given point in time. 
 For a time, the dotcom hot stock approach seemed to work. 
Countless numbers of investors became convinced of the power of 
this new technology. Billions were poured into the new industry and 
into the unproven stocks that represented it. Month after month, 
Internet stocks would rise in price, despite the fact that these com-
panies were burning up their cash reserves faster than a bunch of 
drunken sailors on shore leave so they could ﬁ nance the massive 
business losses and the hard - to - justify salaries of their management 
team. The lack of corporate proﬁ tability and the unrealistic stock 
valuations assigned to these speculative investments ultimately 
became their undoing, and the undoing of many of their investors ’ 
personal fortunes. 
 The moral of this story is this: Just because a signiﬁ cant new trend 
emerges that will change the world ’ s economic landscape doesn ’ t 
mean that we can succeed if we fail to identify the stocks that will 
beneﬁ t from that trend, or if we pay too much to buy those stocks. As 
investors, we will not succeed without doing our shareholders ’ home-
work. As you look at the stock values created by the economic rise of 
China, you must remember that some stocks will become gems and 
a great many stocks will ultimately become junk in the marketplace. 
Your investment success and ability to proﬁ t from China ’ s economic 
boom depends on your skill at differentiating between the two.  
 The Three Keys 
 I suggest that you look at three measures to identify the value of a 
Chinese investment. The three measures I look at most closely are 
the Price to Earnings Ratio, the Price to Book Ratio, and the Price 
to Sales Ratio. Using all three of these traditional measures in com-
bination allows me to identify the nuggets of gold as I pan through 
the sea of Chinese stocks. To illustrate this point, let ’ s look at an 
example of this process. 
 In late February 2007, the Chinese markets fell hard, based 
on a prediction of a recession in the United States, announce-
ments made by the Chinese government about changes in stock 
◆

174 
Building a China Stock Guru Portfolio
 trading rules, and comments made by former U.S. Federal Reserve 
 Chairman Alan Greenspan in a speech he gave in Hong Kong. My 
research team in China immediately informed me of these events. 
On the morning of this pullback, I received calls from CNN want-
ing my thoughts on what this all meant for investors before the 
stock markets opened in the United States. As a result, I quickly ran 
an analysis of all of China ’ s top companies using the three meas-
ures of value I recommend, the Price to Earnings Ratio, the Price 
to Book Ratio, and the Price to Sales Ratio. Had you been a sub-
scriber to my  China Stock Digest,  you could have saved yourself some 
math, as I immediately completed this exercise and informed my 
subscribers of the results of my analysis and provided a list of spe-
ciﬁ c actions to consider. My answer to CNN was based on my review 
of the three measures of stock value of China ’ s top industrial com-
panies. Experience has proven that any viewer serious about invest-
ing in China had just been handed a gift. 
 For example, one of the companies I reviewed in March 2007 
was the Aluminum Corporation of China (ACH), China ’ s premier 
aluminum producer and one of the country ’ s best run and most 
proﬁ table industrial companies. Tables  18.1 and  18.2 show what my 
analysis revealed.   *  
 Based on even a cursory review of market value, my  analysis 
 indicated we could buy shares in one of China ’ s premier  high - growth 
blue chip companies at a Price to Earnings level of less than half what 
we would pay for a U.S. company. Of course, the U.S. company might 
possibly have lackluster growth in a mature industry. Based on my 
Table 18.1  Stock: Aluminum Corporation  of 
China (NYSE: ACH)
Price on March 1, 2007
$23.00/Share
Price to Book Value
2.4
Price to Earnings
8.0
Price to Sales
1.2
  *  This example is for illustration purposes only, and is not intended to 
 recommend the purchase of this or any other stock. The attractiveness of a stock 
for  investment purposes is a dynamic process. The example that follows recogniz-
es the process used to identify an investment opportunity for a stock at a particu-
lar historic point of time. The current price and attractiveness of this stock or any 
other may have no relation whatsoever to its past price or investment viability.  

 
Identifying Opportunities in Chinese Stocks 
175
ﬁ ndings, I immediately sent out an alarm to my newsletter subscribers 
to buy this company. This method of stock analysis was quite effective, 
as the stock has since proceeded to more than double in value.  
 Stick with Traditional Values 
 I go through all this explanation to make a point: Even in China, 
the world ’ s fastest - growing major economy, we need not abandon 
time - tested, successful approaches to identifying value in stocks as 
we build our portfolios. When making our move into China, we can 
ignore many of the analysts we see on ﬁ nancial television programs. 
Let them claim you can forget about traditional value measures in 
China. That ’ s the same old story they gave about the Internet a dec-
ade ago, and that they gave about the biotech industry the decade 
before that. We know better, thank you very much. 
 When building our portfolio in China, any investor who ignores 
traditional measures of value does so at his own peril (see Figure  18.1 ).   
Table 18.2  Comparison to the Typical 
American Company in March 2007
Price to Book Value
2.7
Price to Earnings
17.8
Price to Sales
1.4
Figure 18.1  Identifying Stock Values Equals Profits
Source: Reproduced with permission of Yahoo! Inc. YAHOO! and the YAHOO! logo are 
trademarks of Yahoo! Inc. (http://finance.yahoo.com/).
80
0.0
5.0
15.0
16
20
40
60
10.0
Millions
Nov 06
Jan 07
Mar 07
May 07
Jul 07
Sep 07
Splits:
ALUMINUM CP OF CHINA LTD ADS H
as of 5-Oct-2007


177
19
C H A P T E R
 Assembling Your Portfolio and 
Managing Risk   
 If China continues to press ahead toward a free - market economy, it 
will surely propel the world to new levels of prosperity. Much of how 
the world will look in 2030 rests on this outcome.  
— Alan Greenspan
 The Age of Turbulence: Adventures in a New World 
 Now that you know how to identify the value in Chinese stocks, 
it is time to assemble your portfolio. In this chapter, I give advice on 
how to choose stocks for your portfolio and assign them the appro-
priate weight. I also provide advice on the parameters of the three 
methods an investor can use to access ﬁ nancial opportunities that 
we discussed in previous chapters. When building your portfolio, it 
is important to be mindful of the increased risk and volatility associ-
ated with the great ﬁ nancial rewards that you may receive.  
 Building a China Stock Guru Portfolio 
 In our last chapter, I illustrated the process I use to analyze and dif-
ferentiate opportunities among China - based American Depositary 
Receipts. In addition to using this fairly straightforward process of 
ﬁ nancial calculation, I have the added advantage of having my own 
team of analysts inside China. This allows me access to another 

178 
Building a China Stock Guru Portfolio
piece of the puzzle that is not always revealed by the numbers 
alone, namely, it keeps me current on consumer trends, govern-
ment policies, and economic changes that may not yet be reﬂ ected 
in the numbers. 
 Having local knowledge is a distinct advantage in a society 
that is changing as quickly as China. It has allowed subscribers 
to my  China Stock Digest  newsletter to multiply their investments, 
often 200 percent or more on a single stock, which is far above the 
returns available in either the exchange - traded funds (ETFs) or 
from most Chinese mutual funds. 
 If building an individual stock portfolio and proﬁ ting from 
China ’ s economic boom is your goal, you would be wise to receive 
ﬁ rst hand knowledge of the occurrences unraveling in China as they 
happen. Before you do so, I recommend that you make sure that 
you have enough capital to own at least 10, but ideally 20, different 
Chinese stocks. (You can access some of my real - time research by 
visiting my web site, chinastockdigest.com, where you can get a free 
trial issue, to keep you on top of changes going on inside China.) 
This means you need to have investment capital of at least  $ 50,000 
or more. If you do not have sufﬁ cient investment funds to do this, 
I suggest that you focus on building your portfolio from mutual 
funds and ETFs. 
 When building a portfolio for one of my clients, whether they 
are a high net worth family or a corporate pension fund, I always 
make sure that I have purchased a wide variety of stocks so the port-
folio will not get crushed should one of my recommendations fall 
short of expectations. As such, I recommend buying stock in at least 
15 to 20 different companies, all with equal weighting in the port-
folio. If you have the resources to make this type of investment, you 
can be quite successful. If buying 15 to 20 different names is out 
of your budget, let ’ s examine our other choices, exchange - traded 
funds and mutual funds. 
 China ’ s Top - Performing Exchange - Traded Funds 
 China - oriented exchange - traded funds are a quick and easy way 
to access the Chinese stock market. The two most popular funds 
for this purpose are the IShares FXI Index and the IShares EWH 
Hong Kong Index. As China becomes more prosperous, though, I 
am sure new funds will become available. Both of these index funds 

 
Assembling Your Portfolio and Managing Risk 
179
can be purchased through a regular U.S. brokerage account on any 
trading day. Let ’ s look at bit closer at both of these funds. 
 FXI — The IShares F   TSE Xinhua China 25 Index  This fund seeks 
investment results that generally correspond to the price and 
yield performance, before fees and expenses, of the FTSE/ 
Xinhua China 25 Index. The fund generally invests at least 
90 percent of assets in the securities of the index or in ADRs 
or GDRs representing securities in the index. This fund can be 
 located on any stock quote system using its trading symbol, FXI.  
 EWH — The IShares MSCI Hong Kong Index This fund seeks to 
 provide investment results that generally correspond to the price 
and yield performance of publicly traded securities in the Hong 
Kong market, as measured by the MSCI Hong Kong Index. (MSCI 
stands for Morgan Stanley Capital International, Inc., the creator 
of the index.) The fund normally invests at least 95  percent of 
 assets in the securities of its underlying index and in ADRs based 
on the securities in its underlying index. It uses a representative 
sampling strategy to try to track the index. The index consists of 
stocks traded primarily on the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong 
Limited. It is nondiversified. This fund can be  located on any 
stock quote system using its trading symbol, EWH.  
 The China - based ETFs have been among the top performers 
on Wall Street. Consider the performance of these funds in recent 
years in Table  19.1 . 
 The advantage of both of the funds depicted in Table  19.1 is 
that you can access a basket of Chinese stocks quickly without hav-
ing to think about, or research, the individual companies involved. 
 The disadvantage with both of these funds typically includes high 
price earnings ratios, which can signiﬁ cantly increase risk. Another 
disadvantage of ETFs is the associated problem of the weighting 
•
•
Table 19.1  Top-Performing ETFs in China
Fund Name
Symbol
Thru 12/16/07
2006 Performance
IShares TR FTSE Index
FXI
53.8%
83.1%
IShares MSCI Hong Kong
EWH
35.6%
29.3%
Sources: Barclays Global Investors and MSN Money.

180 
Building a China Stock Guru Portfolio
method that is used to structure these funds. Weighting by market 
capitalization, which is what we typically ﬁ nd in index funds, means 
a disproportionate concentration of money (and therefore risk) is 
placed in the companies having the largest total market value (also 
known as market capitalization). Risk is not spread evenly among all 
of the companies in the index, but is instead shifted to only some of 
the more concentrated companies. 
 Chinese ETFs are also often unmanaged. For example, the two 
funds depicted in Table  19.1 are not actively managed. That means 
no one is checking to see whether the companies included have 
released poor earnings or are undergoing challenges in their busi-
ness units. If you want to receive active management on your China 
investments you must either build your own portfolio using ADRs 
or invest in China by using China - focused mutual funds. 
 Top - Performing Mutual Funds in China 
 A mutual fund is a company that pools money from many investors 
and invests the money in stocks or other securities or assets. The 
combined holdings the mutual fund owns are known as its portfo-
lio. Each share represents an investor ’ s proportionate ownership of 
the fund ’ s holdings and the income those holdings generate. 
 A recent search of China - oriented mutual funds indicated doz-
ens of these instruments with new ones coming out all the time. 
The advantage of investing in China stocks, by way of a China - based 
mutual fund, is that you save the time and effort of doing your own 
research. You also can pick up diversiﬁ cation and possibly avoid the 
overweighting problems found in the ETFs that attempt to mimic 
the China market indexes. 
 Many China - based mutual funds have been among the top per-
formers on Wall Street. Consider the performance of the following 
funds in Table  19.2 . 
 Remember, however, that mutual funds, just like any other invest-
ment, are not free from risk. When evaluating a mutual fund, it is 
important to investigate the fund ’ s operating expenses, sales charges, 
and track record. One resource many investors ﬁ nd helpful when 
evaluating mutual funds is the research available from Morningstar, 
which is based in Chicago. You can access them through their web 
site at morningstar.com. One ﬁ nal point, when doing your research 
on China mutual funds, don ’ t forget to apply the same type of price 

 
Assembling Your Portfolio and Managing Risk 
181
earnings and ﬁ nancial ratio analyses that we discussed in the  previous 
chapter on the fund ’ s top holdings.  
 Risk Management Techniques 
 Emerging equity markets, like China, present special challenges for 
investors. The typical techniques many investors use to limit risk 
include quality (stock valuation metrics), diversiﬁ cation, and stop 
loss orders. 
 The starting point for limiting risk is building quality into your 
portfolio. In other words, you should not overpay for your hold-
ings based on traditional stock valuation metrics such as the Price to 
Earnings Ratio, the Price to Book Ratio, and the Price to Sales Ratio. 
 Diversiﬁ cation is another effective tool, perhaps even the most 
effective tool, at our disposal in managing risk in our portfolio of 
China stocks. Investors often lack an awareness of the power of diver-
siﬁ cation. The typical investor understands that diversiﬁ cation may 
reduce volatility, but suspects that diversiﬁ cation simultaneously 
impairs returns. Diversiﬁ cation often functions to improve returns, 
not diminish them. Investors need to be educated about this poten-
tial dual beneﬁ t. 
 Diversiﬁ cation is not merely a matter of owning a couple of 
dozen different stocks. If all of these stocks have similar risk  factors, 
such as being in the same asset class or industry, they will tend to 
move together. Therefore, when one stock is doing poorly, they 
will all tend to do poorly. Ineffective diversiﬁ cation is illustrated in 
Figure  19.1 . 
 As long as the assets in a portfolio do not move together, you 
can achieve effective diversiﬁ cation. This point was proven by 
Table 19.2    Top Performing Mutual Funds in China
Fund Name
Symbol
Thru 12/14/2007
2006 Performance
AIM China Fund Class A
AACFX
65.2%
42.79%
Mathews China Fund
MCHFX
60.8%
64.8%
Eaton Vance Greater China
EVCGX
56.8%
47.6%
Templeton China World
TCWAX
33.7%
40.9%
ING Greater China Class A
IFCAX
36.4%
48.8%
Fidelity China Region
FHKCX
22.9%
29.7%
Source: MSN Money/Google Finance.

182 
Building a China Stock Guru Portfolio
Harry Markowitz ’ s Nobel Prize – winning theory, which shows that 
when the securities in a portfolio do not move together, the risks 
inherent in each security are reduced. Please note, however, that 
diversiﬁ cation does not assure a proﬁ t, or protect against loss in a 
declining market. Figure  19.2 shows how effective diversiﬁ cation 
would appear. 
 For the purpose of proﬁ ting from China ’ s economic boom, the 
key to diversiﬁ cation is not to allow any one stock or industry to 
become a disproportionately high percentage of the portfolio. For 
example, if every stock in your China portfolio was in the Chinese 
banking sector, and China developed a banking crisis, your portfo-
lio would suffer losses on a disproportionate basis. The goal with 
Figure 19.1  Ineffective Diversification
Time
Asset A
Asset B
Value
Figure 19.2  Effective Diversification
Time
Asset A
Asset A
and B
Asset B
Value

 
Assembling Your Portfolio and Managing Risk 
183
diversiﬁ cation is to select industries that would offset one another ’ s 
performance. Likewise, if your Chinese stock portfolio was made up 
of only three or four companies, a crisis in any one company could 
destroy the proﬁ tability of the entire portfolio. 
 The ﬁ nal risk management tool we will consider is the stop loss 
order. A stop loss order is an order to sell a stock once the price 
of that stock drops below a speciﬁ ed level. When the speciﬁ ed stop 
price is reached, the stop order is entered to sell the stock at the 
next available market price. 
 The purpose behind stop loss orders is to create limits that will 
trigger a restructuring of your portfolio in a down market. When 
limits are reached, equities will be pulled out of your portfolio and 
moved to cash equivalents. Limits could be set to trigger restructur-
ing whenever equities decline to a ﬁ xed percentage (for example, 
10 percent of their prior valuation). 
 Essentially, the creation of limits is a stop - loss mentality, which 
means that you do not let your losses spiral downward while you 
pray for a magic recovery to save you. Failure to set restructuring 
limits has destroyed more retirement portfolios than any other fac-
tor I have seen during my years as a ﬁ nancial adviser. 
 With a stop loss order, you do not have to actively monitor how 
a stock is performing. Because the sell order is triggered automati-
cally when the stop loss price is reached, however, a sale could be 
triggered by a short - term ﬂ uctuation in a stock ’ s price. Also it is 
important to know that in a fast - moving market, the price at which 
the trade is executed may be much different from the stop price. 
 Remember, setting restructuring limits is easier said than done 
with mutual funds because there is no way to place stop loss orders 
on the typical open - ended mutual fund. Therefore, either you or 
your adviser must constantly monitor your portfolio ’ s performance 
to avoid potentially devastating losses. 
 The use of stop loss orders will theoretically reduce the level 
of risk in your portfolio. There are limitations to stop loss orders, 
however, which at times make them ineffective. The ﬁ rst problem 
is that setting a stop loss order does not guarantee that you will sell 
your stock at the preset stop price. When a stop order triggers a 
sale, your stock will trade at the next  available  price, which may be 
far below the price you set. Second, in a highly volatile stock (as 
is often the case in China ’ s emerging market) you may ﬁ nd your-
self selling a good stock that ﬂ uctuates within a normal price range, 

184 
Building a China Stock Guru Portfolio
only to learn later that it has appreciated after your stop sale and 
you are unable to repurchase it at anywhere near the discounted 
price you sold at. Therefore stop losses should be used only with 
caution and a great deal of forethought.  
 The Bottom Line 
 Using the tools of risk management covered in this chapter can-
not guarantee you will never have a loss in your portfolio, but when 
they are used proactively, they will go a great way to lessening the 
likelihood and pain from a market decline.    

185
    Conclusion: A Peek at Your 
Guru Future    
 It is not the strongest of the species that survives, nor the most 
 intelligent, but the one most responsive to change.  
— Charles Darwin  
 Imagine, for a moment, that you have a time machine. Suppose it 
could take you into the future, say 50 years from now, to see what 
life in the United States would be like. Or, should you command 
it to do so, it could instead take you to ages past where you could 
seize an investment opportunity, unrecognized by the common 
people of that era. 
 To make things even more interesting, what if you were to use 
such a machine to visit the United States at the start of its Industrial 
Revolution? Knowing what you know today, you would likely buy 
stock in the companies destined to be the great U.S. industrial 
giants for mere pennies on the dollar, companies like General 
Electric, for example, which in 1896 became one of the ﬁ rst mem-
bers in the newly formed Dow Jones Industrial Index. 
 Perhaps the Roaring Twenties are more your style. Perhaps you 
would choose instead to travel to the United States in 1925, where 
you could make a measly  $ 500 investment in the Dow Jones Industrial 
Index. Had you used your time machine for that  purpose, you would 

186 
Conclusion: A Peek at Your Guru Future
be a multimillionaire today. Think of the ﬁ nancial power you would 
have. But alas, dear reader, we have no machine to transport us to 
the past, and no such opportunities are in easy reach because the 
U.S. Industrial Revolution ended more than a century ago. Today ’ s 
United States has a stable, mature economy, one that can help an 
investor maintain a certain standard of living. But today ’ s United 
States is not going through the type of fundamental shift that created 
the fortunes of the nation ’ s Gilded Age, and established family dynas-
ties like the Rockefellers, the Morgans, and the Vanderbilts. 
 Do not despair over our lack of a time machine to take us to 
ages past. We have something almost as good. When we look closely 
at the tectonic shifts in world economic events brought about by 
the fall of the Bamboo Curtain in China, we at least will have a 
semblance of a time machine that will allow us to see a great deal 
of the future to come. Armed with that vision, we can make some 
shrewd ﬁ nancial decisions today that may have as much impact on 
our personal fortunes as if our time machine could take us back 
to 1896 to invest in General Electric when it was added to the Dow 
Jones Industrial Average or even to 1925 to buy into the Dow Jones 
Industrial Index. 
 The book you have just completed provides you with a view of 
the future. It is a future where the United States is no longer the 
world ’ s largest economy. Like the British Empire of a hundred years 
ago, the United States must, like it or not, make room for the pros-
perity of other upcoming nations. The next century for the United 
States is likely to be a time in which gasoline and housing prices 
could easily double or triple from where they stand today. It is a 
period in which the formerly rich nations will pass the torch to the 
hungry new waves of capitalists. It is a time in which you will either 
have created the personal fortune required to thrive and protect 
your family, or you will join the uninformed masses that will be 
tossed about by the currents of world events. 
 It is undeniable that China will have the world ’ s largest and 
most prosperous economy within a generation. Just as if we had 
a time machine to visit the dawn of the United States Gilded Age, 
we have the ability to seize the opportunities created from this fun-
damental shift in the world ’ s economic environment and harness 
their success to help build our own fortunes. 
 I hope that I have provided you with the vision and the tools 
needed to proﬁ t from China ’ s capitalist revolution. If you need a 

 
Conclusion: A Peek at Your Guru Future 
187
helping hand or a word of encouragement, please visit my web site, 
chinastockdigestguru.com, which has abundant resources to keep 
you on the right path. I even have a gift for you there to help you 
get started. 
 The future lies ahead and beckons you to become its master. 
Will you answer its call? 


189
   Notes 
 Chapter 1 Sunrise in the East 
 1.  World Wealth Report, Merrill Lynch Capgemini. 
  2. Hurun Report,  October 2006; Rupert Hoogewerf,  2007 China Rich List, 
October 2007. Also,  China Daily,  October 10, 2007, and Forbes/Bloomberg, 
March 25, 2007.  
  3.  “ China ’ s Richest Is a Woman, ” Hurun Report,  October 6, 2007; 2007  China Rich 
List, magazine commentary. 
  4. Jonathan Worrall and Peter O ’ Shea,  From Wall Street to the Great Wall (Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley  & Sons, 2006), 41. 
  5. National Development and Reform Commission, May 7, 2007.  
  6. National Bureau of Statistics, July 11, 2007.  
  7. Oded Shenkar,  The Chinese Century  (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Wharton School 
Publishing, 2004), 2. 
  8. Clyde Prestowitz,  Three Billion New Capitalists (New York: Basic Books, 2005), 74.  
  9.  allcountries.org/china_statistics . 
 10.  BBC News, September 19, 2001. 
 11. Thomas L. Friedman,  The World Is Flat  (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 
2005). 
 12. Carl E. Walter and Fraser J.T. Howie,  Privatizing China , Second Edition 
( Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley  & Sons, 2006), 3. 
 13.  Hurun Report, October 2006. 
 14.  CIA World Factbook, 2007. 
 15.  VOA News, July 16, 2007. 
 16. National Development and Reform Commission, July 11, 2007.   
 17. Beijing Municipal Bureau of Statistics.  
 18.  The Economist, April 13, 2007. 
 19. National Development and Reform Commission, October 11, 2006.  
 20. The UN poverty benchmark is an income of less than  $ 1 a day. 
 21.  pbs.org , January 11, 2006. 
 22.  greyglobalgroup.com . 
 23. National Development and Reform Commission, July 11, 2007.  
 24.  People ’ s Daily, September 20, 2006. 
 25. World Bank, 2006 report as quoted by CIA World Factbook 2007  .
 26.  CIA World Factbook, 2007. 

190 
Notes
 27.  CIA World Factbook, 2007. 
 28. FAO,  fao.org/docrep/009/ag088e/AG088E04.htm . 
 29.  People ’ s Daily, April 5, 2006. 
 30. Keating ’ s keynote address to the World Banker Summit, Jakarta, Indonesia, 
March 26, 2007.  
 31.  Thomson NewsEdge, August 30, 2006. 
 32. National Development and Reform Commission, Ma Kai statement, May 7, 
2007. 
 33. From Paul Craig Roberts, chairman of the Institute for Political Economy and 
Senior Research Fellow, Hoover Institution, Stanford University. Roberts relied 
heavily in his remarks on statistics from Morgan Stanley. Roberts was assistant 
secretary of the treasury for economic policy from 1981 to 1982. Quoted from 
 newsmax.com . 
 34.  The Economist, April 1, 2007. 
 35.  Industry Week, July 11, 2007. 
 36. Testimony by C. Fred Bergsten before the Hearing on U.S. - China Economic 
Relations Revisited, Committee on Finance, United States Senate, March 29, 
2006. 
 37. Carsten Holz,  Far Eastern Economic Review, April 2006. 
 Chapter 2 Sunset in the West 
  1. From comments by Chinese Minister of Commerce, Bo Xilai, July 13, 2007.  
  2. From comments by Chinese Minister of Commerce, Bo Xilai, July 13, 2007.  
  3. Paul Saxena,  dailyreckoning.com.au , May 9, 2007. 
  4.  The Telegraph, United Kingdom, July 10, 2007. 
  5.  dailyfx.com , Wednesday August 8, 2007, was also quoted in  Marketwatch.com , 
August 8, 2007. 
  6. BBC,  http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/asia-pacific/1330223.stm ;  japan-guide
.com/e/e2321.html .  
  7.  China Economic Review, August 9, 2007. 
  8.  Shanghai Daily, August 12, 2007. 
  9. U.S. Commerce Department.  
 10. U.S. Commerce Department.  
 11. McKinsey Global Institute,  The U.S. Imbalancing Act: Can the Current Account 
 Deficit Continue,  June 2007. 
 12.  USA Today, “  Taxpayers on the Hook for  $ 59 Trillion, ” May 29, 2007. 
 13. Paul Craig Roberts,  Moving Our Economy Offshore, vdare.com/roberts/economy_
offshore.htm , February 18, 2004.  
 14. U.S. Department of Labor,  The Ten Fastest Growing Occupations — 2004 – 2014. 
 15. Dr. Malcolm Cook,  The Future of the Australia - China Relationship,  Lowy Institute 
of Australia, July 2007. 
 16. Dr. Geoff Raby,  The Chinese Economy: Impact on Korea and Australia, Lowy  Institute 
of Australia, August 4, 2005. 
 17. Liao Xiaoqi, Vice Minister of Commerce, July 15, 2007.  
 18. Stanford University ’ s economist Ronald McKinnon, in the  Journal of Turkish 
Weekly, August 15, 2007. 

 
Notes 
191
 19.  China Daily  report on Chinese Vice Minister of Commerce Liao Xiaoqi, July 15, 
2007. 
 20. Voice of America report by David Gollust, U.S. Department of State, July 24, 
2007. 
 21.  Associated Press – International Herald Tribune  quotes from Greg Sheridan, foreign 
editor of  The Australian, September 7, 2007. 
 22.  businessroundtable.org ,  We Can ’ t Stand Still: The Race for International 
 Competitiveness,  March 8, 2007.  
 23. Ibid.  
 24. Pew Global Attitudes Project,  Global Opinion Trends: 2002 – 2007,  July 24, 
2007.  
 25. Chinese government ’ s official web portal,  gov.cn . 
 26.  U.S. News and World Report,  “ China is Making Friends and Influencing People, ” 
July 29, 2007. 
 27.  Military Power of the People ’ s Republic of China,  Defense Department annual 
 report, May 2007.  
 28. All figures are from  Military Power of the People ’ s Republic of China,  Defense 
 Department annual report, May 2007.  
 29.  The Star, Malaysia, August 8, 2007. 
 30.  Military Power of the People ’ s Republic of China, Defense Department annual 
 report, May 2007.  
 31. Ibid.  
 32. Executive Director Gal Luft, The Institute for the Analysis of Global Security, 
Los Angeles Times, February 2, 2004. 
 33. Ibid.  
 34.  Agence France Press, “ China, Russia, Central Asian Leaders Tout New Strength, ” 
2007. 
 35. Chinese Academy of Social Sciences,  People ’ s Daily, August 16, 2007. 
 36. Research and development investment rose to 1.4 percent of GDP in 2006, 
according to the Intellectual Property Research Centre at Shanghai Jaiotong 
University. 
 37. David KirkPatrick,  Fortune, July 9, 2007. 
 38. IBM news release, October 12, 2006. 
 Chapter 3 Breaking the Chains of the 
Bicycle Kingdom 
  1.  Theautochannel.com , August 17, 2007. 
  2. Shaun Rein,  Fashionably Sensitive Chinese Investing, China Market Research 
Group, March 5, 2007.  
  3.  International Herald Tribune,  “ Luxury Brands Upbeat on Chinese Market, ” 
May 22, 2005. 
  4. The Federation of the Swiss Watch Industry, February 5, 2007. 
  5. Professor Jonathan Unger, Contemporary China Centre, Australian National 
University,  Far Eastern Economic Review, April 2006, 27 – 31. 
  6. Ken Lam, McKinsey Consulting,  China Economic Review, August 29, 2007. 

192 
Notes
  7. National Bureau of Statistics, China Knowledge Online,  chinaknowledge.com/
news/news-detail.aspx?cat=general & id=11209 , October 30, 2007.  
  8. Credit Suisse Bank,  Times of Oman,  March 24, 2007.  
  9. Arthur Kroeber, Dragonomics Research,  China Economic Quarterly, May 9, 
2007. 
 10. Jonathan Anderson, chief economist for UBS,  BusinessWeek, May 9, 2007. 
 11. Shai Oster,  “ Property Owners Feel Right at Home in China, ” Wall Street Journal, 
March 14, 2007.  
 12.  Xinhua, “ Property Management Regulation Amended, ” September 2, 2007. 
 13. David Dollar, World Bank China Director,  The Economist, April 1, 2007. 
 14.  China Daily, “ China Faces Labour Shortage in 2010, ” May 12, 2007. 
 15. Don Lee,  “ Manufacturers Taking Flight, ”  Los Angeles Times, August 18, 2006. 
 16. Lou Dobbs of CNN and his staff have apparently made it an editorial practice 
to use the term  Communist China  as often as possible, disregarding the term ’ s 
irrelevance.  
 17. Global Policy Forum,  “ China Says Absolute Poverty Is Eliminated, but Millions 
Are Grindingly Poor, ” November 17, 2000. 
 18.  People ’ s Daily,  “ China Wealth Gap Yawning. ” This article quotes  Xinhua  as an 
official source for its observations about the Chinese wealth gap. August 7, 
2007. 
 19. James Kynge,  China Shakes the World.  (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2006). 
 20.  BusinessWeek, “ China Bank Bailout, ” January 26, 2004. 
 21.  Xinhua - Forbes,  “ Bumper Year for State - Owned Enterprises, ” February 21, 2007. 
 22.  China Daily, “ SOE Heads ’  Careers Linked to Green Targets, August 30, 2007.  
 23.  China Daily, “ China Fights Against SOE Monopolies, ” June 25, 2007. 
 24.  Business Times,   “ China ’ s State Share Reform to Pass Tough Test, ”  March 24, 2007.  
 25.  Wall Street Journal,  “ China Seeks Advice on Health Overhauls, ” May 1, 2007. 
 26.  Fortune, “ China Goes from Red to Gray, ” June 20, 2006. 
 27. Professor Jonathan Unger, Contemporary China Centre, Australian National 
University,  Far Eastern Economic Review, April 2006. 
 Chapter 4 The Coming Financial Flood 
  1. Global Manufacturer Trade Directory of China manufacturers, China  suppliers, 
and China exporters. 
  2.  businessroundtable.org . 
  3. C. Fred Bergsten, Bates Gill, Nicholas R. Lardy, and Derek Mitchell,  China The 
Balance Sheet: What the World Needs to Know Now about the Emerging Superpower 
(New York: Public Affairs Books, Center for Strategic and International Studies 
and the Institute for International Economics, 2006). 
  4.  Washington Times  review of  The China Dream: The Quest for the Last Great Untapped 
Market on Earth,  by Joe Studwell (New York: Grove/Atlantic, 2002), April 14, 
2002. 
  5.  People ’ s Daily,  “ China Is Alibi of World Textile Trade Friction, ” September 17, 
2005. 

 
Notes 
193
  6. Jim Mann,  Beijing Jeep: A Case Study of Western Business in China (New York: Simon 
and Schuster, 1989). 
  7.  Washington Times  review of  The China Dream: The Quest for the Last Great Untapped 
Market on Earth,  by Joe Studwell (New York: Grove/Atlantic, 2002), April 14, 
2002. 
 8.  Centre d ’ Etudes Prospectives et d ’ Information Internationales, Paris 2007. 
  9. James Kynge,  China Shakes the World  (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2006). Kynge 
eloquently describes the disassembly of factories and mills in Germany and the 
United States, following them to China where they are rebuilt, and explaining 
the aftereffects on Western economies.  
 10.  USA Today, “ Force of China ’ s Impact Grows in USA, ” December 12, 2006. 
 11. World Health Organization,  “ Chinese Air Pollution Deadliest in World, Report 
Says, ” National Geographic News, July 9, 2007. 
 12. C. Fred Bergsten, Bates Gill, Nicholas R. Lardy, and Derek Mitchell,  China The 
Balance Sheet: What the World Needs to Know Now about the Emerging Superpower 
(New York: Public Affairs Books, Center for Strategic and International Studies 
and the Institute for International Economics, 2006). 
 13.  China Daily, Qiu Baoxing, deputy minister of construction, June 7, 2005. 
 14. Zhao Baojiang, China Association of City Planning, August 30, 2007.  
 15.  China Daily, “ Green GDP Shown Red Signal, ” March 23, 2007.  
 16.  Xinhua, “ China to Reduce Pollution Discharge by 10 Percent, ” June 4, 2007. 
 17.  New York Times,  “ GE Unit Gets China Contracts, ”  March 8, 2003.  
 18.  China Daily, “  Wen Outlines Economic Strategies, ” September 7, 2007. 
 19. Duke University study of 2004 graduation rates from  Investors Business Daily, 
December 12, 2005. 
 20.  People ’ s Daily,   “ Over  $ 70 bln Foreign Investments Put into Hi - Tech, ”   January 27, 
2006. 
 21.  Chinanews.cn , February 9, 2006. 
 22.  Chinaview.com , September 28, 2006. 
 23.  BusinessWeek,  May 28, 2007;  Wall Street Journal , National Congress of the 
 Communist Party of China August 21, 2007. 
 24.  The Associated Press/International Herald Tribune,  “ Intel Breaks Ground in China 
for US  $ 2.5 billion Silicon Fabrication Plant, ” September 8, 2007. 
 25.  Xinhua, “ China Becomes Largest Supplier of Parts for Boeing, ” September 7, 
2007. 
 26. Donald Greenlees and Nicola Clark,  “ China ’ s ARJ21 Regional Jet Eyes Global 
Market, ”   International Herald Tribune,   people.com.cn ,  aerospace-technology.com .  
 27. Patent data from WIPO, SIPO,  China News, People ’ s Daily, and  Xinhua. 
 28. Dan Koeppel,  “ Piracy on Parade at China Car Show, ” The Age,  Australia, June 
2007;  Popular Science,  “ China ’ s iClone. ” 
 29.  China National News,   “ Chinese Company Accused of Copying BMW Car, ” 
 September 7, 2007. 
 30. Oded Shenkar,  The Chinese Century  (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Wharton School 
Publishing, 2004). 
 31.  Wall Street Journal, “ Sorting out U.S. - China Relations, ” May 26, 2007. 

194 
Notes
 Chapter 6 China ’ s Booming Base — Manufacturing  
  1. C. Fred Bergsten, Bates Gill, Nicholas R. Lardy, and Derek Mitchell,  China The 
Balance Sheet: What the World Needs to Know Now about the Emerging Superpower 
(New York: Public Affairs Books, Center for Strategic and International Studies 
and the Institute for International Economics, 2006). 
  2. Joseph Quinlan, managing director and chief market strategist of Banc of 
America Capital Management,  The Globalist. 
  3. Yiannis G. Moustrous, Elliott H. Gue, and Ivan D. Martchev,  The Silk Road to 
Riches: How You Can Profit by Investing in Asia ’ s Newfound Prosperity  (Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Financial Times/Prentice - Hall, 2006). 
  4. Gordon H. Hanson and Raymond Robertson,  China and the Manufacturing 
 Exports of Other Developing Countries, Macalester College, July 2007. 
  5. Marco Bellandi and Marco R. Di Tommaso,  The Case of Specialized Towns 
in  Guangdong, China, in  European Planning Studies, vol. 13, no. 5 (London: 
 Routledge, July 2005), 707 – 729. 
  6. Clyde Prestowitz,  Three Billion New Capitalists (New York: Basic Books, 2005). 
  7. James Kynge,  China Shakes the World (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2006). 
  8. Oded Shenkar,  The Chinese Century  (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Wharton School 
Publishing, 2004). 
  9.  CNN Money, “ China Now Number 1 Source of Imports, ” September 11, 2007. 
 10.  Thechinanews.net ,  “ Double - Digit Growth for Chinese Textiles, ”  March 25, 
2007. 
 11.  Xinhua ,  “ Computer, Home Appliances Sectors See Over 5 - fold Growth in 
 Profits, ” September 12, 2007. 
 12.  Chinaview.cn ,  “ China May Achieve Industrial Economy by 2015, ” January 28, 
2007.  
 13. IBM Institute for Business Value,  “ Going Global: Prospects and Challenges for 
Chinese Companies on the World Stage, ” April 4, 2006. 
 Chapter 7 China ’ s Auto Industry — In Full Gear 
  1.  Xinhua, “ China Auto Industry — WTO, ” August 10, 2007. 
  2.  San Francisco Chronicle, “ China ’ s New Middle Class in Love with Cars — Big Cars, ” 
August 18, 2007. 
  3. Kelly Sims Gallagher,  China Shifts Gears: Automakers, Oil, Pollution, and  Development 
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2006).   
  4.  Shanghai Daily/China News Services, May 24, 2006. 
  5. Kelly Sims Gallagher,  China Shifts Gears: Automakers, Oil, Pollution, and  Development 
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2006).   
  6.  China Daily, China Association of Automobile Manufacturers, August 14, 2007.  
  7.  People ’ s Daily. 
 Chapter 8 China ’ s Energy Industry — Red Hot 
  1.  The Economist/Thomson Dialog NewsEdge,   “ China Economy Critical issues –  Energy, ” 
July 27, 2007.  

 
Notes 
195
  2.  Wall Street Journal, “ Sorting out U.S. - China Relations, ” May 26, 2007. 
  3.  Marketwatch.com ,  “ China ’ s Crude Oil Imports Rise, ” May 7, 2007. 
  4. David Winning,  “ China ’ s First Quarter Crude Imports Rise, More Growth Seen 
as Strategic Reserve Built, ”  Marketwatch.com , April 10, 2007. 
  5. Poten  &  Partners,  “ Bloomberg: Sinopec May Hire More Supertankers than 
Exxon Mobil, ” China Economic Review, April 27, 2007. 
  6. The Bureau ’ s report and a supporting report from the Customs General 
 Administration of China was released in the West on May 16, 2007 in a Bloomberg 
story entitled  “ China ’ s Oil Output Rises 2% as Demand Increases (Update 1). ”  
 Chapter 9 China ’ s Bonanza — Banking and Finance  
  1.  China Daily/Xinhua, “ Chinese Banks Report Profits of US  $ 35.8b in 1st Half, ” 
stats from CBRC, October 6, 2007.  
  2. Fei Ya,  “ Public Banks a Remarkable Feat: Study, ” China Daily, June 22, 2007. 
  3.  China Daily, “ CBRC Outlines Current State of Banks, ” July 6, 2007. 
  4.  China Daily,  “ Innovative Securities Dealers First - half Profits up 425 Percent, ” 
 August 15, 2007. 
  5. Boston Consulting Group, April 25, 2007.  
  6.  China Economic Review,  “ ICBC Becomes World ’ s Largest Bank, ” July 24, 2007. 
  7. Alan Wheatley,  “ China ’ s Buoyant Economy not Unsinkable, ” Reuters, June 29, 
2007. 
  8.  International Herald Tribune,  “ China to Let Nine Foreign Banks Incorporate, ” 
December 24, 2006. 
  9. Jonathan Stempel,  “ Bank of America, China Construction in Venture, ” Reuters, 
September 6, 2007. 
1 0.  China Daily, “ Banks Face Foreign Peers, ” January 26, 2007, July 4, 2007. 
 11.  Xinhua, “ Overseas Banks in China Report Sharp Growth, ” August 18, 2007. 
 12. China Insurance Regulatory Commission, July 25, 2007. 
 13.  Singapore Business Times, “ China Could Be Key in Private Banking: Stanchart, ” 
June 26, 2007. 
 Chapter 10 China ’ s Communications Revolution —
 Almost Free Speech  
  1.  Xinhua, “ 70 Percent of Cell Phones Are Foreign Brands, ” September 5, 2007. 
  2. Ministry of Information Industry,  “ China Produced 348 Million Handsets in 
January - August Period, ” China Daily, October 6, 2007. 
  3. Stuart Corner,  “ China Largest Broadband Market by 2007, ”  Ovum Research, 
 September 2, 2006. 
  4. Xi Guohua, vice minister of information industry,  “ China has 144 million 
 Netizens by March, ”  Xinhua, May 17, 2007. 
  5. Credit Suisse and Wallace Cheung,  “ Online Game Market, ” Reuters, June 28, 
2007. 
  6. Xinhua, “ Computer, Home Appliances Profits Grow Five - fold, ” September 12, 
2007. 

196 
Notes
 Chapter 12 Shenzhen — China ’ s Test City  
  1. All data are from the Shenzhen Stock Exchange. 
 Chapter 13 Shanghai — China ’ s Own Manhattan  
  1. Steve Schifferes,  “ Creating a Global City, ” BBC, Shanghai, May 7, 2007. 
  2.  CEO - CIO China Magazine,  “ China Business Feature: China — A Tale of Two 
 Financial Cities, ” June 8, 2007. 
  3. Carl E. Walter and Fraser J. T. Howie,  Privatizing China: Inside China ’ s Stock 
 Markets (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley  & Sons, 2006). 
 Chapter 14 Taiwan—The Breakaway Prodigy  
  1.  China National News,  “ China Doing Roaring Trade With Rival Taiwan, ” January 
17, 2007. 
  2.  Xinhua, January 17, 2007. 
  3. CIA World Factbook, 2007. 

Index
ABB, 141
ABN Amro Holdings NV, 114, 115, 116
ADRs. See American Depositary Receipts 
(ADRs)
ADSs. See American Depositary Shares (ADSs)
Africa, 41, 42
Agilent, 82
Agricultural Bank of China, 114, 154
Aircraft industry, 44, 48, 82–83
Alibaba, 67, 122
Aluminum Corporation of China, 65, 174
American Depositary Receipts (ADRs), 
12–13, 63, 103, 161, 166–167
American Depositary Shares (ADSs), 161, 166
APEC summit, 39
Apple Computer, 134
Appliances, 17, 97
ASEAN Regional Forum, 39
Asia, 40–41, 151
Asian Development Bank, 62, 147
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
(APEC), 147
Australia, 37–38
Automobile industry, 15, 47, 84, 87, 97, 
99–104
Automobiles, 53, 57, 99–101
Aux Group Appliances, 98
Baidu, 67, 122
Banking and finance industry, 47, 64, 
111–116, 129–131
in Hong Kong, 151, 153–154
in Shanghai region, 141–142
Bank of America Corporation, 115
Bank of China, 64, 113, 153–154
Bank of East Asia, 114
Bank reserves, 59
BaoSteel, 98
Barclays Bank, 116
Beijing, 15, 58, 125–131
Biotechnology industry, 82
Bird flu virus, 152
Blackstone, 23
BMW, 53, 84
Book value, 172
Bootlegging, 84–85
Branch operations, 85, 114, 154
Brand consciousness, 53
Brilliance China Automotive (CBA), 12, 103
Budget deficit, U.S., 36–37
Bush, George W., 34, 39–40
Capitalism, 10, 64–65, 68
Cell phones, 57, 118–120. See also 
Telephones
Chery, 102, 104
Chi-Med, 82
China:
aircraft industry, 44, 48, 82–83
auto industry, 99–104
banking and finance, 47, 64, 111–116
becoming new world superpower, 3–25
and capitalism, 10, 64–65, 68
communications industry, 47–48, 117–122
currency, 9
current state of SOEs, 63–64
domestic coal production, 108
economic growth, 7–10, 17
emergence of wealthy elite, 53–54
energy industry, 105–110
establishing free trade agreements, 39–40
exports, 14, 85, 94, 97, 102–103
financial centers, 125–155
foreign exchange reserves, 30
foreign-invested firms in, 22
government, 60–61, 68, 129–131
197

China: (continued)
gross domestic product, 7, 13, 17, 18, 24
growth in number of wealthy people, 4–6
health care expenditures, 67
high tech industry, 81
home ownership, 59
hostility toward Taiwan, 149
identifying opportunities in stocks, 
171–175
imports, 14, 72–73, 107
income, 59, 62
industry profits as percent of GDP, 74
inflation, 56, 59
Internet use, 121–122
investing in, 159–163
knowledge-based industries, 48, 49
labor pool, 9–10
manufacturing in, 93–98
and middle class, 15–16, 55–57
military power, 42–47
offshoring, 22–24, 37, 71–72
oil imports, 46–47
personal savings, 56
pollution, 66, 78–80
population, 7
poverty, 54, 61
and private investments, 66–67
ratio of imports to GDP, 24
real estate boom, 58–60
research and development, 81–83
retail sales, 15, 57, 58
safest way to invest in stocks, 165–169
service economy, 18
share of global consumption, 57
shipbuilding industry, 76
social classes, 61
stock markets, 160
tariffs, 24
technological infrastructure, 47–49
top performing ETFs, 178–180
top-performing mutual funds, 180–181
top suppliers, 21
trade barriers, 96
trade imbalance with U.S., 24, 28
trade negotiations, 40–41
trade surplus, 14, 23, 28–29
trading partners, 8, 20–21, 37–38, 39–40, 
146, 148, 153
world’s sixth-largest economy, 18
and WTO, 21, 114
China Aviation Corporation I, 83
China Banking Regulatory Commission, 113
China Citic Bank, 113
China Construction Bank, 64, 113, 115, 154
China Development Bank, 116
China Insurance Regulatory 
Commission, 116
China Life, 13, 65, 142
China Luxury Summit, 53
China Merchants Bank, 113
China Minsheng Bank, 113
China Mobile, 13, 118, 119
China National Offshore Oil Company, 
75, 110
China National Space Administration, 48
China Netcom, 120
China Petroleum and Chemical. See Sinopec
“China price,” 77, 78–80
China Reconstruction Bank, 113
China Securities Regulatory Commission, 
12, 136, 142
China Stock Digest, 159, 161, 174, 178
Chinastockdigestguru.com, 187
China Telecom, 120
China Unicom, 118, 119
Chinese Ministry of Commerce, 148
CHINT Electronics, 98
Chrysler, 84, 102
Chungwha Telecom, 120
Citigroup, 113, 114, 115
Cleveland-Cliffs Company, 75
Coal, 106, 108, 109
Commercial Development Bank, 114
Commodity businesses, 66
Communications industry, 47–48, 117–122
Communism, 60–61
Competition, 77, 94, 96
Computer industry, 97, 122, 146
Construction projects, 59
Consumer culture, 15–17, 22–23, 55, 57–58
Consumer goods, 72–73
Corporate governance, 160
Corruption, 142
Counterfeiting, 84–85, 141
Country funds, 168
Culture of innovation, 48
Currency, 9, 76, 151
Current account deficit, 35–36
Dangdang.com, 122
DBS Bank, 114
Deficits, U.S., 35–36
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, 116
Democracy, 61
198 
Index

 
Index 
199
Deng Xiaoping, 3–4, 10–11, 50, 133
Derivatives market, 136, 143
Developing countries, 106
Diversification, 168, 181–183
Dollar, U.S., 36, 76
Duties, 96
East Asia, 38
Economic equality, 62
Economic growth, 7–10, 17, 56
Education, 11, 68, 85, 95
Electricity, 96, 106, 109–110
Electronics, consumer, 57, 72–73, 97, 146
Eleventh Five-Year Plan, 2006–2010, 20
Eli Lilly, 82
Energy industry, 96, 105–110
Engineers, Chinese, 11, 81, 85
Entrepreneurship, 95
Environmental problems, 78–80, 135, 141
Equity purchase agreements, 115
Exchange-traded funds (ETFs), 167–168, 
178–180
Exports, 13–15, 85, 102
China’s top, 14
Chinese surplus of, 56
from Hong Kong, 94, 153
from Taiwan, 146
United States, 20–21, 24
ExxonMobil, 13, 107–108
FAB-68, 82
Factories, 7, 22–24, 74–75, 82
Farmers, 16
Financial centers, 125–155
Financial disclosure, 160
Financial services industry, 141–142
Focus Media, 140
Foreign debt, U.S., 35–36
Foreign direct investment, 96, 147, 153
Foreign exchange reserves, 23, 30, 36
Foreign-invested firms, 22
Foreign investments, 81
Foreign reserves, 146
Four Modernizations, 10
Foxconn, 134
Free trade zones, 39, 40
Fujian, 10
Furniture industry, 95, 97
Gasoline, 101
Gas-powered turbines, 80
Gates, Bill, 89–90
GDP. See Gross domestic product (GDP)
GDRs. See Global Depositary Shares (GDRs)
Geely, 102, 104
General Electric, 13, 80
General Motors, 49, 84, 102, 141, 163
Gini coefficient, 62
Global Depositary Shares (GDRs), 161
Global funds, 168
Governance, corporate, 160
Government, Chinese, 60–61, 68, 129–131
Green GDP, 79
Greenhouse gasses, 78
Gross domestic product (GDP):
China, 7, 13, 17, 18, 24
and China’s merchandise exports, 94
China’s ratio of imports to, 24
and Chinese communications industry, 121
Chinese industry profits as percent of, 74
Hong Kong, 152
Shanghai, 141, 153
Taiwan, 146, 148
United States, 20, 37
Guangdong, 10, 13, 95, 133, 153
Guangshen Railway Company, 65
Haier Appliances, 98
Hang Seng Bank, 114
Hang Seng Index, 154
Harbin Power Equipment Company, 80
Health care, 67, 68
Hewlett-Packard, 82
High tech industry, 7, 13, 81, 145–146
Highways, 100
Hisense Home Electronics, 98
Home ownership, 59
Hong Kong, 13
and British rule, 32–33, 152
as Chinese financial center, 151–155
economy, 151, 152–154
exports from, 94
GDP, 152
industries in, 88–89
rivalry with Shanghai for financial 
dominance, 142
and Shenzhen, 136–137
trade with China, 153
Hong Kong Stock Exchange, 154, 160, 161
Hon Hai Precision Industry Company, 134
Housing, 15. See also Real estate
HSBC Holdings, 113, 114, 154
Huawei, 134

200 
Index
Hu Jintao, 39, 60
Hundred years of humiliation, 32–34
Hydroelectric power, 109
IBM, 49, 75, 98
Immigrants, illegal, 9
Imports:
into China, 14–15, 23
from China into U.S., 22, 72–73, 97
China’s ratio to GDP, 24
crude oil into China, 107
duties and taxes, 96
Income:
average in Beijing, 15
average worker’s, 17
Chinese, 7, 59
inequality, 62
middle class, 16
Index funds. See Exchange-traded funds 
(ETFs)
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, 
13, 64, 113, 142, 154
Industrial Bank, 113
Industries:
labor-intensive, 7, 146, 152, 153
U.S., 71–72, 75, 87
Inflation, 56, 59, 66, 146
Information technology, 82
Infrastructure, 10
Innovation, culture of, 48
Insurance companies, 116, 130
Intel, 82, 85, 96
Intellectual property, 84–85, 160
Interest rates, 29, 59
International funds, 168
International Intellectual Property 
Alliance, 85
Internet, 16–17, 67, 121–122
Investments:
in Chinese stocks, 160, 165–169, 
171–175
in Hong Kong, 153
identifying value of Chinese investment, 
173–175
overseas direct, 153
private, 66–67
in U.S. companies in China, 162–163
iPod, 134
IPOs, 12, 13, 142–143
Iran, 47
IShares EWH Hong Kong Index, 178–179
IShares FXI Index, 178–179
Japan, 20, 33, 38, 76, 116
Jobs, 16, 37
Joint ventures, 74, 115
Joyo.com, 122
Kim Jong-II, 45
Knowledge, technical, 13
Knowledge-based industries, 48, 49
Korea, 38
Labor, 9–10
low-cost, 7, 59, 94, 134
shortages, 60
Labor-intensive industries, 7, 146, 152, 153
Laiwu Steel, 75
Lenovo, 75, 98, 122
Lifan, 104
Liquefied natural gas (LNG), 109
Loads, 167
Loans, 56, 64, 112, 114
Lodging/catering industry, 15
London Stock Exchange, 161
Luxury items, 15, 53–54
Malaysia, 13, 38
Manufacturing, 93–98, 152–154
Market capitalization, 113, 154, 168, 180
Markowitz, Harry, 182
Mattel, 77
Medicare, 36
Merck, 82
Microsoft, 13, 49, 82, 89–90
Middle class, 15–16, 55–57, 71
Middle East, 46
Midea Group Appliances, 98
Military power, 42–47
Mizuho Corporate Bank, 114
Mobile phones. See Cell phones
Morningstar, 180
Multinational companies, 81, 98, 101–102, 
139, 154–155
Mutual funds, 168–169, 180–181
Mutually Assured Economic Destruction, 
31–32, 34
NAFTA. See North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA)
NASDAQ, 12–13
National Champions, 12–13, 65
National Development and Reform 
Commission, 22, 101
NATO, 47

 
Index 
201
Natural gas, 109
Natural resources, 41, 75
New York Stock Exchange, 12–13, 161
Nokia, 82
Nominal GDP, 19
Nonperforming loans, 64, 112
Nortel, 82
North American Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA), 9
North Korea, 45
Novartis, 82
Nuclear power, 109–110
Offshoring, 22–24, 37, 71–72
Oil, 41, 46–47, 105, 107–109
Olympic games, 58, 128–129
One Billion Customers (McGregor), 73
One-child policy, 68
One Country, Two Systems policy, 152
One-man companies, 67
Opium War, 32–33
Oracle, 82
Over-the-counter (OTC) shares, 161
Ownership, private, 62
Panasonic, 82
Patents, 48, 83
People Electric Electronics, 98
Peoples Bank of China, 142
People’s Liberation Army (PLA), 43–44
Per capita income, 16
Personal savings, 29
PetroChina, 13, 110, 142
Pharmaceutical industry, 82
Piracy, intellectual property, 84
PLA. See People’s Liberation Army (PLA)
Policy banks, 111–112
Pollution, 66, 78–80, 100, 126, 134, 141
Population, 7, 137, 140
Port city, 134, 139
Poverty, 7, 17, 54, 61
PPP method. See Purchasing power parity 
(PPP method)
Price competition, 77
Price controls, 96
Price to book ratio, 172, 173, 174
Price to earnings ratio, 172, 173, 174
Price to sales ratio, 172–173, 174
Proctor & Gamble, 82
Production, 37, 74–75, 77, 78, 153
Productivity, 17, 97–98
Protectionism, 24
Purchasing power parity (PPP method), 
19–20, 55, 148
Qualified Foreign Institutional Investors 
(QFII), 12, 136, 161
Real estate, 58–60, 143
Recession, 29
Regional funds, 168
Renminbi. See Yuan
Research and development, 48, 81–83
Retail sales, 15, 57, 58
Retirees, 68
Risk management, 177–184
Rural areas, 7
SAIC, 104
Sales, retail, 15, 57, 58
SARS virus, 152
SASAC. See State-owned Assets Supervision and 
Administration Commission (SASAC)
Saudi Arabia, 47
Savings, 16, 29, 56
Securities and Exchange Commission, U.S., 
165
Securities industry, 113
Self-employment, 67
Semiconductor manufacturing, 13
SERC. See State Electricity Regulatory 
Commission (SERC)
Service economy, 18, 57, 146, 152–154
SEZs. See Special economic zones (SEZs)
Shanghai, 139–144, 153
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), 
40–41, 47
Shanghai Stock Exchange, 11–12, 142–143, 
160
Shares, types of, 161
Shenyang Liming Aero-Engine Group, 80
Shenzhen, 133–137
Shenzhen Stock Exchange, 11–12, 135–136, 
160
Shipbuilding, 76
Shoe industry, 87, 95, 146
SINA, 67, 122
Singapore, 13, 38
Singapore Stock Exchange, 161
Sino-British Joint Declaration, 152
Sinopec, 13, 66, 107–108, 110
SIPO. See State Intellectual Property Office 
(SIPO)

202 
Index
Skyworth Home Electronics, 98
Social class, 61, 62
Social Security, 36
Social services, 67
SOEs. See State-owned enterprises (SOEs)
Sohu.com, 122
Space program, 48
Special administrative region (SAR), 152
Special economic zones (SEZs), 10–11, 64, 
95, 133
Standard Chartered of Britain, 114, 116
State Electricity Regulatory Commission 
(SERC), 109
State Environmental Protection 
Administration (SEPA), 79
State Intellectual Property Office (SIPO), 83
State-owned Assets Supervision and 
Administration Commission (SASAC), 
65–66
State-owned enterprises (SOEs), 11, 63–64, 
65–66, 79, 130
State-run corporations, 161
Steel industry, 97
Stock analysis, 173–175
Stock exchanges, 66–67
Chinese, 62–63, 116, 160
Hong Kong, 154
legitimizing in China, 11–12
Shanghai Stock Exchange, 142–143
Shenzhen Stock Exchange, 135–136
Taiwan, 147, 148
Stocks:
assembling portfolio, 177–184
measuring value of, 172–173
Stock valuation metrics, 181
Stop loss orders, 181, 183–184
Strategic petroleum reserve, 107
Subprime loan crisis, 29
Sumitomo Mitsui Bank of Japan, 114
Suntech Power, 79, 80, 110
SVT Group Electronics, 98
Switzerland, 54
Taiex Index, 148
Taipei, 145
Taiwan, 13
Chinese sovereignty over, 44–45
communications industry, 120
companies on mainland China, 67
exports from, 94
as financial center, 145–149
Taiwan Semiconductor, 67, 85, 146
Taiwan Stock Exchange, 147, 148, 160
Taobao, 122
Tariffs, 24
Taxes, 96
Technology, 13, 47–49, 72–73
Telecom equipment, 122, 134
Telephones, 117, 120–121. See also Cell 
phones
Textile industry, 87, 97, 146, 149
Text messaging, 119
Three Gorges Dam project, 63, 109
Toshiba, 109–110
Tourism/travel, 15, 148
Tourism/travel industry, 153
Toyota, 102, 141
Trade:
barriers, 96
between China and Hong Kong, 153
China’s with the world, 8, 20
deficit, 22, 28
sanctions, 30
with Taiwan, 146, 148
Trademarks, 83
Trade surplus, 14, 23, 28–29, 146
“24 character strategy,” 50
Unemployment, 16, 22, 87, 146
United States:
automobile ownership, 100
decline of middle class, 71
deficits, 35–37
end of economic supremacy, 27–50
foreign companies’ branch operations, 
85
GDP, 20
home ownership rates, 59
imports from China, 22, 72–73, 97
interest rates, 29
and Middle East oil production, 46
nominal GDP, 19
offshoring, 37, 71–72
recession, 29
regional headquarters and offices in 
Hong Kong, 154–155
trade with China, 20–21, 22, 24, 28
unemployment, 22, 87
as world’s largest debtor nation, 29
Urban areas, 7, 16
Volkswagen, 102

 
Index 
203
Wahaha Beverages, 98
Wal-Mart, 77–78
Wanxiang Group, 75, 103, 104
Water, 78, 96
Wealth, 4–5
in China, 4–6, 53–54, 61
in Hong Kong, 153
individual, 17
in Shanghai region, 140–141
Westinghouse, 109–110
WIPO. See World Intellectual Property Office 
(WIPO)
Wonder Auto Technology, 103
Work ethic, 151
World Intellectual Property Office (WIPO), 
83
World Trade Organization (WTO), 21, 
114, 147
Yanzhou Coal, 65, 108
Younger Textiles, 98
Yuan, 9, 30, 76
ZTE Corporation, 134



SPECIAL FREE GIFTS FROM THE AUTHOR
To help you get full value from this book, 
there is a collection of 
FREE BONUS RESOURCES 
waiting for you at www.ChinaStockGuru.com 
DOWNLOAD YOUR FREE BONUSES IMMEDIATELY AT
www.ChinaStockGuru.com
 FREE CHINA MIRACLE LETTER 
SAMPLE ISSUE (a $29 value)… Jim’s TOP PERFORMING
China Investment Research WILL KEEP YOU INFORMED on opportunities
in China. Get your FREE sample issue today! 
 FREE CHINA INVESTOR E-MAIL 
COURSE (a $199 value)… Jim’s quick start E-Mail course
will help you take action immediately on the concepts taught
in this book!  
 FREE TICKETS TO LIVE EVENTS (a $499 value)… 
See Jim Trippon LIVE at one of his China training events at no charge!  
 FREE CHINA DVD…  The Hidden China
DVD…Witness the China Miracle with your own eyes. Go behind the scenes
(TO AREAS STRICTLY OFF LIMITS to tourists) to see the Chinese factories
and port facilities that will change the economic balance of power for
centuries to come. This $99.00 value is yours FREE simply by paying
shipping and handling. 



