
Beginner’s Guide to  
Reading 
Schematics
Third Edition
Stan Gibilisco
New York    Chicago    San Francisco    Athens  London 
Madrid    Mexico City    Milan    New Delhi 
Singapore    Sydney    Toronto

Copyright © 2014, 1991, 1983 by McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved. Except as  
permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced 
or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher.
ISBN: 978-0-07-182779-9
MHID: 0-07-182779-X
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-0-07-182778-2,    
MHID: 0-07-182778-1.
E-book conversion by codeMantra
Version 1.0
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after 
every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit 
of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations 
appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and 
sales promotions or for use in corporate training programs. To contact a representative, please visit the 
Contact Us page at www.mhprofessional.com.
McGraw-Hill Education, the McGraw-Hill Education logo, TAB, and related trade dress are  
trademarks or registered trademarks of McGraw-Hill Education and/or its affiliates in the United States 
and other countries and may not be used without written permission. All other trademarks are the  
property of their respective owners. McGraw-Hill Education is not associated with any product or vendor  
mentioned in this book.
Information contained in this work has been obtained by McGraw-Hill Education from sources  
believed to be reliable. However, neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its authors guarantee the  
accuracy or completeness of any information published herein, and neither McGraw-Hill Education 
nor its authors shall be responsible for any errors, omissions, or damages arising out of use of this  
information. This work is published with the understanding that McGraw-Hill Education and its  
authors are supplying information but are not attempting to render engineering or other professional 
services. If such services are required, the assistance of an appropriate professional should be sought.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the 
work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 
and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse 
engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, 
sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill Education’s prior consent. 
You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is 
strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL EDUCATION AND ITS LICENSORS 
MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR  
COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING 
ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK 
OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR 
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors do not warrant 
or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation 
will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its licensors shall be liable to 
you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any 
damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education has no responsibility for the content of any  
information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill Education and/or 
its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages 
that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the 
possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever 
whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.

About the author
Stan Gibilisco has authored or coauthored more than 50 books on 
physics, electronics, mathematics, and computing. He began his career 
as an electronics engineer, wireless broadcast technician, and maga-
zine editor. The American Library Association named Stan’s McGraw-
Hill Encyclopedia of Personal Computing (1995) as one of the “Best 
References of 1996.” In addition to authoring several books in McGraw-
Hill’s DeMYSTiFieD series of home study guides, he has written three 
books in McGraw-Hill’s Know-It-All series for students who enjoy math-
ematics. Stan’s Teach Yourself Electricity and Electronics has become a 
classic in the field.

This page intentionally left blank 

Contents
Introduction   ix
1    What’s the scheme?   1
Block diagrams   2
Schematic diagrams   2
Schematic symbology   4
Schematic interconnections   6
Visual language   8
2    Block diagrams   13
A simple example   13
Functional drawings   13
Current and signal paths   16
Flowcharts   18
Process paths   22
Summary   24
3    Component symbols   25
Resistors   25
Capacitors   30
Inductors and transformers   34
Switches   39
Conductors and cables   43
Diodes and transistors   46
v

vi    Contents
Electron tubes   49
Cells and batteries   53
Logic gates   54
Summary   56
4    Simple circuits   57
Getting started   57
Component labeling   66
Troubleshooting with  
schematics   71
A more complex circuit   75
Schematic/block combinations   78
Summary   81
5    Complex circuits   83
Identifying the building blocks   83
Page breaks   91
Some more circuits   94
Getting comfortable with large 
schematics   106
Summary   111
6    Let’s learn by doing   113
Your breadboard   113
Wire wrapping   117
Kirchhoff’s current law   119
Kirchhoff’s voltage law   123
A resistive voltage divider   125
A diode-based voltage reducer   132
Mismatched lamps in series   137
Summary and conclusion   144
A    Schematic symbols   145
B    Resistor color codes   163
Suggested additional  
reading   167
Index   169

vii
Introduction
Have you “caught the electronics bug,” only to grow sick with 
apprehension as you encountered diagrams with arcane symbols the 
moment you decided to build, troubleshoot, or repair something? If 
so, you’re holding the cure in your hands right now.
A little knowledge of electronics symbology can eliminate a lot 
of fear and confusion. Don’t give up electronics just because you’ve 
come across some spooky graphics. That would be like giving up a 
sport because you fear the pain of training. That’s where the coach 
comes in! A good coach streamlines your training in any sport and 
helps you get past the pain. Schematic diagrams, well drawn and 
clearly portrayed, can help you to design, build, maintain, trouble-
shoot, and repair electronic equipment.
Schematic diagrams are like road maps of electronic highway net-
works. These drawings can help you find your way through the 
elements of simple circuits, complex devices, and massive systems. 
Once you’ve learned what the symbols and notations stand for, read-
ing a schematic will come as easily to you as planning a trip with the 
aid of a road atlas.
This book contains all the information that you’ll need in order 
to begin exploring electronic circuits. It can help you build a solid 
background for a career in electronics, whether you decide to go 
into design, maintenance, or repair. This book explains the rationale 
behind schematic diagrams, how to use or interpret each symbol, and 

how the symbols interconnect to reflect real-world circuits. You’ll 
even get a chance to diagram and perform some experiments!
Once you’ve completed this book, you’ll have plenty of informa-
tion and confidence, so that you can continue your quest to enter 
whatever field of electronics suits your fancy, whether it’s something 
as humble as shortwave or amateur radio, or something as cutting-
edge and exotic as bioelectronics, space communications, or mecha-
tronics.
I welcome your suggestions for future editions. Please visit my 
website at www.sciencewriter.net. You can e-mail me from there.
Above all, have fun!
Stan Gibilisco
viii    Introduction

1
What’s the scheme?
You’ll encounter three types of diagrams in electricity and electronics: 
block, schematic, and pictorial. Each type of diagram serves its own 
special purpose.
1. 
A block diagram gives you an overview of how the discrete cir-
cuits within a device or system interact. Each circuit is represented 
with a “block” (a rectangle or other shape, depending on the 
application). Interconnecting lines, sometimes with arrows on 
one or both ends, reveal the relationships between the circuits.
2. 
A schematic diagram (often simply called a schematic) includes 
every component that a circuit contains, with each component 
having its own special symbol. This book is devoted mostly to 
schematics.
3. 
A pictorial diagram, sometimes called a layout diagram, shows 
the actual physical arrangement of the circuit elements on the 
circuit board or chassis, so that you can quickly find and identify 
components to test or replace.
When you troubleshoot an unfamiliar electronic circuit, you’ll usu-
ally start with the block diagram to find where the trouble originates. 
Then you’ll refer to the schematic diagram (or part of it) to find the  
faulty component in relation to other components in the circuit. A 
pictorial diagram can then tell you where the faulty component phys-
ically resides, so that you can test it and, if necessary, replace it.
1

2   What’s the scheme?
Block diagrams
Block diagrams work well in conjunction with schematics to aid cir-
cuit comprehension and to streamline troubleshooting procedures. 
Each block represents all of the schematic symbols related to that part 
of the circuit. In addition, each block has a label that describes or 
names the circuit it represents. However, the block does nothing to 
explain the actual makeup of the circuit it represents. The blocks play 
a functional role only; they describe the circuit’s purpose without 
depicting its actual components. Once you’ve gained a basic under-
standing of the circuit functions by looking at the block diagram, you 
can consult the schematic for more details.
To understand how you might use block diagrams, consider the 
following two examples.
First, suppose that you want to design an electronic device to per-
form a specific task. You can simplify matters by beginning with a 
block diagram that shows all of the circuits needed to complete the 
project. From that point, you can transform each block into a sche-
matic diagram. Eventually, you’ll end up with a complete schematic 
that replaces all of the blocks.
Alternatively, you can go at the task the other way around. Imagine 
that you have a complicated schematic, and you want to use it to trouble-
shoot a device. Because the schematic shows every single component,  
you might find it difficult to determine which part of the device has 
the problem. A block diagram can provide a clear understanding of 
how each part operates in conjunction with the others. Once you’ve 
found the troublesome area with the help of the block diagram, you 
can return to the schematic for more details.
Schematic diagrams
A schematic diagram acts, in effect, as a map of an electronic circuit, 
showing all of the individual components and how they interconnect 
with one another. According to one popular dictionary, the term sche-
matic means “of or relating to a scheme; diagrammatic.” Therefore, 
you can call any drawing that depicts a scheme—electronic, electrical, 
physiological, or whatever—a schematic diagram.
One of the most common schematic diagrams finds a place in almost  
every car or truck in the United States. It’s a road map, of course, 

Schematic diagrams    3
and it portrays a specific sort of scheme. The scheme might involve 
the paths of travel within a small town, within a state or province, or 
across multiple states or provinces. Like a schematic diagram of an 
electronic circuit, the road map shows all the components relevant to 
the scheme it addresses. Motorists make up their own schemes, which 
often comprise small portions of the total scheme included in the 
road map. Likewise, an electronic schematic shows all of the relevant 
components, and it allows a technician to extrapolate the components 
and interconnections when testing, troubleshooting, and repairing a 
small circuit, a large device, or a gigantic system.
Imagine that you want to travel in your automobile from point 
A to point B. Your road map lists all of the towns and cities that lie 
between these two points. By comparison, a schematic diagram lists 
all the components between a similar point A and point B in an elec-
tronic circuit. Nevertheless, both of these schematics indicate much 
more than mere points. You need to know more than which towns 
or cities lie between two fixed points to get an idea of the overall 
scheme of things. Indeed, you could easily write down the names of 
various towns or landmarks, in which case you would not have to 
resort to a road map at all. From an electronics standpoint, you could 
do the same thing by compiling a list of the components in a certain 
circuit, such as:
• 120-ohm resistor
• 1000-ohm resistor
• PNP transistor
• 0.47-microfarad capacitor
• 2 feet of hookup wire
• 1.5-volt battery
• Switch
This list tells us nothing about the circuit in a practical, put-together 
sense. We know all of the components that we would need if we 
wanted to build the thing, but we don’t know what it would be if 
we did! In fact, these components might go together in two or three 
different ways to make two or three different circuits with different 
characteristics.
A schematic drawing must indicate not only all components nec-
essary to make a specific scheme, but also how these components 
interrelate to one another. The road map connects various towns, 

4   What’s the scheme?
cities, and other trip components with lines that represent streets and 
highways. A line that indicates a secondary road differs from a line 
that represents a four-lane highway. With practice, you can learn to 
tell immediately which types of lines indicate which types of roads. 
Likewise, an electronic schematic drawing uses a plain, straight line  
to indicate a standard conductor; other types of lines represent cables,  
logical pathways, shielding components, and wireless links. In all cases,  
when you draw the interconnecting lines, you draw them in order to 
indicate relationships between the connected components.
Schematic symbology
A schematic diagram reveals the scheme of a system by means of 
symbology. On a map, the lines that indicate roadways constitute 
symbols. But of course, a single black line that portrays Route 522 in 
no way resembles the actual appearance of this highway as we drive 
on it! We need know only the fact that the line symbolizes Route 522. 
We can make up the other details in our minds. If people always 
had to see pictorial drawings of highways on paper road maps, those 
maps would have to be thousands of times larger than those folded-
up things we keep in our vehicle glove compartments, and they 
would be impossible for anybody to read.
Tip
Since the previous edition of this book was published in 1991, 
portable computers and the Internet have evolved so that, today, 
you actually can find and access road maps that show pictorial 
drawings of some roads and highways! You can look at photo-
graphs taken from satellites, aircraft, and sometimes even vehi-
cles that have driven along specific routes. Check out “Google 
Maps,” for example. These maps aren’t on paper; instead, they 
reside in cyberspace. You need a computer or tablet device to 
use such “supermaps,” but they do exist, and they’re getting bet-
ter every day.
On a decent road map, you’ll find a key to the symbols used. The 
key shows each symbol and explains in plain language what each 
one means. If a small airplane drawn on the map indicates an airport 
and you know this fact, then each time you see the airplane symbol, 

Schematic symbology    5
you’ll know that an airport exists at that particular site, as shown on 
the map. Symbology depicts a physical object (such as an airport 
outside a large city) in the form of another physical object (such as 
an airplane image on a piece of paper).
A good road map contains many different symbols. Each sym-
bol is human engineered to appear logical to the human mind. For 
instance, when you see a miniature airplane on a road map, you’ll 
reasonably suppose that this area has something to do with airplanes, 
so a detailed explanation should not be necessary. If, on the other 
hand, the map maker used a beer bottle to represent an airport, 
anyone who failed to read the key would probably think of a saloon 
or liquor store, not an airport! Because a map needs many different 
symbols, a good map maker will always take pains to make sure that 
the symbols make logical sense.
Pure logic will take us only up to a certain point in devising schemes 
to represent complicated things, especially when we get into the realm 
of electronic circuits and systems. For example, a circle forms the basis 
for a transistor symbol, a light-emitting-diode (LED) symbol, a vacuum 
tube symbol, and an electrical outlet symbol. Additional symbols inside 
the circle tell us which type of component it actually represents. A 
transistor is an active device, capable of producing an output signal 
of higher amplitude than the input signal. We can say the same thing 
about a vacuum tube, but not about an LED or an electrical outlet.
A circle with electrode symbols inside has been used for many years 
to represent a vacuum tube. Transistors were developed as active 
devices to take the places of vacuum tubes, so the schematic symbol 
for the transistor also started with a circle. Electrode symbols were 
inserted into this circle as before, but a transistor’s elements differ  
from a tube’s elements, so the transistor symbol has different markings 
inside the circle than the tube symbol does. The logic revolves around 
the circle symbol. Transistors accomplish many of the same functions  
in electronic circuits as vacuum tubes do (or did), so symbolically 
they are somewhat similar.
Inconsistencies arise in schematic symbology, and that’s a buga-
boo that makes electronics-related diagrams more sophisticated than 
road maps. A circle can make up a part of an electrical symbol for a 
device that doesn’t resemble a tube or transistor at all. An LED, for 
example, can be portrayed as a circle with a diode symbol inside and 
a couple of arrows outside. An LED is not a transistor or tube, and 
the electrode symbol at the center clearly reveals this difference. An 

6   What’s the scheme?
electrical outlet can serve as another example. It’s absolutely nothing 
like a tube, transistor, or LED! Yet the basis for the symbol is a circle, 
just like the circle for a tube or transistor or LED. You’ll learn more 
about specific schematic symbols in Chap. 3.
Schematic interconnections
To further explore how schematic diagrams are used, let’s consider a 
single component, a PNP transistor. This device has three electrode 
elements, and although many different varieties of PNP transistors 
exist, we draw all their symbols in exactly the same way. We might 
find a PNP transistor in any one of thousands of different circuits! 
A good schematic will tell us how the transistor fits into the circuit, 
what other components work in conjunction with it, and which other 
circuit elements depend on it for proper operation. A transistor can 
act as a switch, an amplifier, an oscillator, or an impedance-matching 
device. A single, specific transistor can serve any one of these pur-
poses. Therefore, if a transistor functions in one circuit as an ampli-
fier, you can’t say that the component will work as an amplifier only, 
and nothing else. You could pull this particular transistor out of the 
amplifier circuit and put it into another device to serve as the “heart” 
of an oscillator.
Tip
By knowing the type of component alone, you can’t tell what role 
it plays in a circuit until you have a good schematic diagram show-
ing all the components in the circuit, and how they all intercon-
nect. Rarely can you get all this information in easy-to-read form 
by examining the physical hardware. You need a road map—a 
schematic diagram—to show you all the connections that the 
engineers and technicians made when they designed and built 
the circuit.
Suppose that you plan to drive your car from Baltimore, Maryland 
to Los Angeles, California. Even if you’ve made the trip several times 
in the past, you probably don’t recall all of the routes that you’ll need 
to take and all of the towns and cities that you’ll pass along the way. 
A road map will give you an overall picture of the entire trip. Because 
all of the trip data exists in a form that you can scan at a glance, the 

Schematic interconnections    7
road map plays a critical role in allowing you to see the entire trip 
rather than each and every segment, one at a time. A schematic dia-
gram does the same thing for a “trip” through an electronic circuit.
Continuing with the road map and the coast-to-coast trip as an 
example, imagine that you have memorized the entire route from 
Baltimore to Los Angeles. Assume also that one of the prime high-
ways on the way is under construction, forcing you to take an alter-
nate route. Without a road map, you’ll have no idea as to what 
detours exist, which alternate route is the best one to take, and which 
detour constitutes a path that will keep you on course as much as 
possible and eventually return you to the original travel route with a 
minimum of delay and inconvenience.
An electronic circuit has many electrical highways and byways. Oc- 
casionally, some of these routes break down, making it necessary 
to seek out the problem and correct it. Even if you can visualize the 
circuit in your head as it appears in physical existence, you’ll find it 
impossible to keep in your “mind’s eye” all the different routes that 
exist, one or more of which could prove defective. When I speak 
here of visualizing the circuit, I don’t mean the schematic equiva-
lent of the circuit, but the actual components and interconnections, 
known as the hard wiring.
A schematic diagram gives you an overall picture of a circuit and 
shows you how the various routes and components interact with other  
routes and components. When you can see how the overall circuit 
depends on each individual circuit leg and component, you can diag-
nose and repair the problem. Without such a view, you’ll have to 
“shoot in the dark” if you want to get the circuit working again, and 
you’ll just as likely introduce new trouble as get rid of the original 
problem!
Fear not!
Look at the schematic of Fig. 1-1. If you’ve had little or no experi-
ence with these types of diagrams, you might wonder how you’ll 
ever manage to interpret it and follow the flow of electrical cur-
rents through the circuit that it represents. Fear not! By the time 
you finish this book, assuming that you already know some basic 
electricity and electronics principles, you’ll wonder how you 
ever could have let a diagram like this intimidate you. By the way, 
you’ll see this diagram again in Chap. 5.

8   What’s the scheme?
Visual language
It can prove difficult to explain schematic diagramming in detail to  
people who have just begun their study of electronics. It helps  
to think of this form of symbology as a language, that is to say, a 
system of symbols that helps us to communicate ideas. The English 
language (or whatever your native language happens to be) is a 
scheme with a system of symbology with which you’re familiar, of 
course, because you’re reading this book!
+
D1
D2
D3
D4
C1
L1
Q1
Q2
R2
C2
R3
C3
C4
Rx
Rx
Cx
Cx
R4
R1
D5
_ 9 V DC
R5
C5
R6
Frequency
setting
components
Key
Volume control
Headphones
T1
120 V AC
P1
F1
Fig. 1-1.  An example of a fairly complicated schematic diagram. By the time you 
finish this book, you’ll find it simple!

Visual language    9
Every word spoken in English or any other verbal language is 
a complex symbol made from simpler elements called characters. 
Let’s take the word “stop,” for example. Without a reference key, this 
sound means nothing. A newborn infant hears noise coming out of 
your mouth, that’s all! However, through learning the symbology from 
shortly after birth, this word begins to mean something because the 
child, who has begun learning to speak and understand, can compare 
“stop” to other words, and also to actions. We can even say that the 
word “stop” is a sort of symbology within symbology. The commu-
nicator’s intent, when using the word “stop,” can also be expressed 
by the phrase “Do not proceed further.” This phrase also constitutes 
symbology, expressing a mental image of a desired action.
If we could all communicate by mental telepathy, then we wouldn’t 
need language or the symbols that it comprises. Thinking happens 
a lot faster than speaking or writing or reading can go; and brain 
processes are the same from human to human, regardless of what 
language any particular individual employs when speaking, writing, 
or reading. A newborn baby speaks and understands no language 
whatsoever. However, whether that baby was born in the United 
States, South Africa, Asia, or wherever, thought processes take place.
The baby knows when it is hungry, in pain, frightened, or happy. 
It needs no language to comprehend these states. But the baby does 
have to communicate right from the start. For this reason, all newborns 
communicate in the same language (crying and laughing, mostly). As 
newborns comprehend more and more of their environment through 
improved sensory equipment (eyes, ears, nose, fingers), they collect 
more and more data. At this point the various languages come into 
play, with different societies using different verbal symbols to express 
mental processes. The human brain still carries on the same nonlin-
guistic thought processes as before, however, because thinking in 
terms of symbols would take far too much time and “brain storage.”
The brain helps a human to transpose complex thoughts into a lan-
guage, and vice versa, just as a computer translates programming lan-
guages into electronic impulses and vice versa. Imagine that a child 
is about to step in front of a speeding automobile. If the brain had 
to handle millions of data elements symbolically, we humans would 
spend all of our lives waiting for our brains to deliver the correct pro-
cessed information, and that child would probably get killed before 
we could even begin to react. Rather, the brain scans all the data 
received by the sensory organs in real time and then sums it up into 

10   What’s the scheme?
a single symbol for communication. A good audible (and hopefully 
loud) symbol in the above-mentioned case is “Stop!” You, seeing a 
child about to go out into heavy traffic, might shout that word and 
produce in the child’s brain the appropriate sequence of processes.
Not all languages involve the spoken word. Have you heard of 
sign language, whereby the arms and hands are used to communicate 
ideas? If you’ve done any amateur (or “ham”) radio communication, 
especially if you got your “ham” license back in the time when I got 
mine (the 1960s), you know about the Morse code as a set of com-
munications symbols. In most instances, an entire communicating 
language of visual symbols is not as efficient for us humans as one 
composed of words and visual symbols combined. Using the symbol 
“stop” again, we can utter this word in many different ways. The 
word in itself means something, but the way we say it (our “tone of 
voice”) augments the meaning. We can’t do all that with the printed 
or displayed characters S, T, O, and P all by themselves in plain text.
We humans have arrived at some universal methods of modifying 
visual symbols. To many of us, the color red denotes something that 
demands immediate attention. Often, however, this color is used in 
conjunction with the visual symbol for a spoken word. Think of a 
“stop” sign, for example. It’s red, right? Or think of a “yield” sign. It’s 
yellow, representing something that demands attention, but in a less 
forceful way than the color red does.
Tip
Schematic diagrams rarely include color. Look in the back of a 
technical manual for an amateur radio transceiver, for example. 
Does the schematic have color? I’ll bet you that it doesn’t. (A few 
good magazines, however, do put color into their schematics.) 
A technical manual’s schematic might not even have grayscale 
shading. Schematics resemble printed text or Morse code in this 
respect; we must convey a lot of information with a limited set of 
symbols, and we’re constrained even as to the way in which we 
can portray and read those symbols.
Schematics don’t lend themselves to any form of oral (audible) 
symbology either. When you see the symbol for, say, a field-effect 
transistor (FET) in a schematic diagram, you don’t hear the paper or 
computer say, “Field-effect transistor, for heaven’s sake, not bipolar 

Visual language    11
transistor!” You have to make sure that you read the symbol correctly. 
If you want to build the circuit and you mistakenly put a bipolar 
transistor where an FET should go—maybe because you didn’t look 
carefully enough at the schematic—you have no right to expect that 
the final device or system will work. Something might even burn out, 
so that when you recognize your error and replace the FET with a 
bipolar transistor, you’ll have to troubleshoot the whole circuit before 
you can use it!
Our senses along with our central processor, the brain, render 
us less than proficient at mentally conceiving all of the workings  
of electronic circuits by dealing with them directly. Therefore, we 
have to accept data a small step at a time, compiling it in hardcopy 
form (through symbology) and providing hardcopy readout. We can 
liken this method to the “connect-the-dots” drawings in children’s 
workbooks. Individually, the dots mean nothing, but once they are 
arranged in logical form and connected by lines, we get an overall 
picture. The dots’ relationships to each other and the order in which 
they are connected tell us everything that we need to know.
The remaining chapters in this book start with the symbols for indi-
vidual electronic components, then move on to simple circuits, and 
finally show you a few rather complicated circuits. Schematic symbols 
and diagrams are designed for human beings, so human logic consti-
tutes a prime factor in determining which symbols mean what. In that 
respect, the creation and reading of schematic diagrams resembles 
mathematics, and in particular, good old-fashioned plane geometry!
Tip
Schematic diagrams are encoded representations of circuits, 
while pictorials show us the physical objects, often proportioned 
according to their relative size, and sometimes rendered so as 
to look three-dimensional by means of shading and perspective. 
Schematic diagrams depict circuit components as symbols only, 
without regard to their real-world size or shape, and in two dimen-
sions (a flat piece of paper or computer screen), completely lack-
ing depth or perspective.

This page intentionally left blank 

2
Block diagrams
A block diagram portrays the general construction of an electronic 
device or system. A block diagram can also provide a simplified ver-
sion of a circuit by separating the main parts and showing you how 
they are interconnected.
A simple example
Figure 2-1 is a block diagram of a device that converts alternating cur-
rent (AC) to direct current (DC). The terminal at the left accepts the 
AC input. In sequence going from left to right, the electricity passes 
through the transformer, the rectifier, and the filter before arriving at 
the output as DC. In this case, the lines that connect the blocks do 
not have arrows because readers will naturally assume that the flow 
goes from left to right. The input terminal resides at the left-hand end 
of the diagram, and the output lies on the extreme right. In more 
complicated block diagrams, the interconnecting lines may include 
arrows to show which block affects which, or to indicate the general 
direction of signal flow when it might not otherwise be clear.
Functional drawings
Engineers and technicians employ block diagrams in various ways. 
Commonly, block diagrams indicate the interconnections between 
13

14    Block diagrams
small circuits in a larger device, or between diverse devices in a 
large system. When drawn as shown in Fig. 2-1, block diagrams can 
also be called functional diagrams because they reveal the basic 
functioning of the electronic circuit. The functional diagram offers a 
simplistic explanation of how the device operates; it can lead to more 
detailed information provided by a schematic diagram. 
Someone who wants to draw a schematic diagram for a com-
plex electronic circuit designed from scratch can start with a block 
diagram. This diagram will show all of the circuit sections (stages) 
needed to arrive at a functioning device, but none of the internal 
details of those stages. Then the designer will develop schematic 
diagrams of circuits that can fill each block and serve the appropri-
ate function in the overall system. The first block in the diagram will 
then be replaced by the schematic diagram of the circuit it represents. 
The engineer or technician will move through the blocks according 
to functional order, creating schematic diagrams that can be used to 
build each stage in the system. As soon as the final block has been 
filled in with a schematic for the applicable stage, the comprehensive 
schematic is complete, and a total (but so far only theoretical) system 
design is portrayed in detail.
Another way of using block diagrams starts with a finished sche-
matic diagram. Imagine that the schematic is complicated, and that 
the equipment whose circuit it represents does not work properly. 
Although schematic diagrams can describe the functioning of an elec-
tronic circuit, they are not as clear and basic as a functional block dia-
gram for that purpose. In the absence of a preexisting block diagram, 
a technician would have to start with the schematic, laboriously iden-
tify each stage in the system, and then draw the entire system dia-
gram in block form. When finished, the block diagram would reveal 
how each stage interacts with the others. Using this method, one or 
more stages could be identified as a possible trouble area. Then the 
technician would refer to the original schematic and conduct tests 
Transformer
Rectifier
Filter
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
AC in
DC out
Fig. 2-1.  Block diagram of an AC-to-DC converter. The electricity flows from left  
to right.

Functional drawings    15
in specific areas, based on his or her knowledge of how each stage 
works at the component level.
Tip
In practice, you’ll often encounter block diagrams. If presented  
without accompanying schematics, a block diagram describes 
the basic functional operation of an electronic device or sys-
tem. The block diagram can prove most useful when you don’t  
need to know the functions of individual components.
We can describe the operation of a specific type of wireless trans-
mitter, say an amplitude-modulated (AM) voice transmitter, such as 
the type found in Citizens Band (CB) radios, by means of a block 
diagram. This diagram will apply to most other AM voice radio trans-
mitters. Of course, no two transmitters built by different manufactur-
ers are exactly alike, but all of them contain the same basic circuit 
sections as far as functionality goes. One type of oscillator might 
work differently from another type, but they all do the same thing: 
generate a radio-frequency (RF) signal! When we need to know, or 
portray, individual differences between circuits that do essentially the 
same things, then we need schematic diagrams.
The block diagram in Fig. 2-2 illustrates the various parts of a strobe 
light circuit. Let’s go through the diagram block by block to under-
stand how it works. The input signal enters at the left; it’s utility AC, 
AC in
Fuse
Rectifier
Timing components
A
Adjustable timer
Transformer
T
K
Strobe
light
terminals
Fig. 2-2.  Block diagram of a circuit designed to provide power to a strobe light. 
Arrows show the direction of elecricity flow.

16    Block diagrams
such as we get from a standard wall outlet. In the United States and 
some other countries, this AC has a nominal voltage of 117 volts (V)  
and a frequency of 60 hertz (Hz), where “hertz” means “cycles per 
second.” (In some countries, the voltage is about 234 V, and in some 
countries, you’ll find a frequency of 50 Hz rather than 60 Hz.) The input  
AC goes to a fuse, and also to a combination of components that pro-
vide timing. The top path, where the fuse is located, leads to a diode- 
type rectifier, and the rectifier output passes directly to one terminal 
of the three-terminal strobe lamp. The rectifier also outputs to an 
adjuster that provides a variable flash rate for the lamp. The output  
from that adjuster goes to a transformer, which provides the remain-
ing two outputs required to operate the lamp.
Current and signal paths
Figure 2-3 shows a power supply that produces several different volt-
age outputs. As you go through this diagram from left (the input) to 
the bottom and the right (the outputs), note that the circuit is pow-
ered with 120 volts AC (120 VAC), quite close to the nominal 117 
VAC commonly found at utility outlets in the United States. The input 
Transformer
Transformer
Filter
Rectifier
Rectifier
Voltage
Regulator
3 VAC
16 VAC
+12 VDC
unregulated
+18 VDC
unregulated
Power "off"
detector
+12 VDC
regulated
120
VAC
in
Ground
Fig. 2-3.  Block diagram of a power supply with several different outputs.

Current and signal paths    17
AC goes through a filter and then splits into two paths. Part of the 
AC goes to the “lower” transformer that provides 16 VAC and 3 VAC 
output, along with a ground connection.
From the filter, the input voltage gets fed to another transformer that 
derives the voltages to be converted to DC electricity. One output of 
the transformer goes to a rectifier that provides 12 volts DC (12 VDC) 
without any voltage regulation. The other transformer output goes to 
a separate rectifier that provides 18 VDC, also unregulated. This trans-
former output also serves as a diagnostic detector for a power “off” 
condition. That line is further tapped to join with the output of the 
voltage regulator to provide 12 VDC with voltage regulation.
Tip
Block diagrams are comparatively easy to draw, comprising squares 
or rectangles along with interconnecting lines (sometimes with 
arrows). More sophisticated block diagrams also include triangles 
to represent circuit blocks built around specialized amplifiers con-
structed within integrated circuits  (ICs), also known as chips.
Figure 2-4 is a block diagram of an AM radio transmitter. The micro-
phone preamplifier stage goes to the input of the audio amplifier stage  
Crystal
oscillator
Radio-
frequency
amplifier
Tuning
network
Microphone
preamplifier
Audio
amplifier
Matching
network
Antenna
Microphone
input
Crystal
input
Fig. 2-4.  Block diagram of an amplitude-modulated (AM) radio transmitter.

18    Block diagrams
(note the direction of the arrow). The output of the audio amplifier goes 
to the matching network, which in turn goes to the RF amplifier sec-
tion. The crystal oscillator is also connected to the RF amplifier section,  
whose output leads into the RF tuning network. Only one connection 
exists between the audio section of the circuit and the RF section: the 
one between the matching network and the RF amplifier. This block 
diagram, with its arrows, tells us not only how the components of 
the system connect to one another, but also the sequence of events 
or direction of signal flow.
Flowcharts
Block diagrams can describe the functioning of electronic circuits, 
but in the world of computers, another form of diagramming is some-
times used to portray the functioning of a program. This system is 
called flowcharting. A flowchart resembles a block diagram, except 
that the symbology applies to the sections of a computer program, an  
intangible thing (as opposed to an electronic circuit, a tangible thing). 
A flowchart provides a graphic representation of the logical paths that 
a computer will take as it executes a particular program. Flowcharts 
are often prepared in conjunction with specifications, and are modi-
fied as the requirements change to fit within the constraints of the 
computer system.
For complex problems, a formal written specification might be nec-
essary to ensure that everyone involved understands and agrees on 
what the problem is, and on what the results of the program should  
be. To illustrate this concept, let’s suppose that a teacher wants to 
write a computer program that will determine a student’s final grade 
for a course by calculating an average from grades the student has 
received over a certain period of time. The teacher will supply the 
grades to the program as input. Only the average grade is needed as 
an output. Now, we can make an orderly list of what the program 
has to do: 
• Input the individual grades.
• Add the grade values together to find their sum.
• Divide the sum by the number of grades to find the average 
grade.
• Print out the average grade. 

Flowcharts    19
We can prepare a flowchart of the program, as shown in Fig. 2-5. 
As we can see, the flowchart graphically presents the structure of the  
program, revealing the relationship between the steps and paths. 
When the flow of control is complicated by many different paths that 
result from many decisions, a good flowchart can help the program-
mer sort things out. The flowchart can serve as a thinking-out tool to 
understand the problem and to aid in program design. The flowchart 
symbols have English narrative descriptions rather than programming 
language statements because we want to describe what happens, not 
Print average grade
Get grades from gradebook
and input them
Start
Add grades together
Have all grades
been added?
Divide sum of grades
by number of grades
to obtain average
Print average grade
End
Yes
No
Fig. 2-5.  Example of a program flowchart.

20    Block diagrams
how it happens. At a later stage, if formal flowcharts are required 
for documentation, the flowchart can contain statements in a pro-
gramming language. These flowcharts might prove helpful to another 
person who at some future time wants to understand the program. 
It takes a lot of time to conceive and draw up a formal flowchart, 
and modifying a flowchart to incorporate changes, once a program has  
been written and its flowchart composed, can prove difficult. Because 
of these limitations, some programmers will shy away from the use 
of a flowchart, but for others, it can provide valuable assistance in 
understanding a program. In order to promote uniformity in flow-
charts, standard symbols have been adopted, the most common of 
which are shown and defined in Fig. 2-6.
Start or Stop
Processing operations
Program modifications
Decisions
Input and output
Intermediate junctions
Prewritten programs
Off-page connection
Flow direction indicators
Fig. 2-6.  Common symbols for flowcharts intended to represent computer programs.

Flowcharts    21
Follow the flow
The normal direction of processes in a flowchart runs from top to 
bottom and from left to right, the same way as people read books 
in most of the world. Arrowheads on flow lines indicate direction. 
The arrows can be omitted if, but only if, the direction of flow is 
obvious without them.
Figure 2-7 is a flowchart for a program that duplicates punched 
cards, and at the same time prints the data on each card. Keep in mind  
that this particular “beast” is of historical interest only! (Were you born  
long enough ago to remember punch cards for inputting programs to 
computers? I recall using them, all the way back in the 1970s, when I 
attended the University of Minnesota. I guess that little factoid dates 
me, doesn’t it?)
Read a card
Punch a card
Print contents
A
A
Start
Fig. 2-7.  Flowchart for a program for duplicating punched cards. The circles 
labeled A represent the inflow and outflow points in the feedback loop shown  
by the dashed line.

22    Block diagrams
Let’s trace the flow of the program through Fig. 2-7. The program 
begins at the “Start” oval at the top and proceeds in the direction of 
the arrows. In the first box below “Start,” the program reads a card. 
Then the program punches the card’s contents (data) as holes in a 
blank piece of heavy paper and sends the data to a printer. The pro-
gram then goes back along the dashed line to the top and reads the 
next card. The circles marked A represent inflow and outflow points. 
In this case, they’re superfluous, but in complicated flowcharts, they 
can be useful when it would create a mess to include all the appli-
cable dashed lines. The program repeats itself as long as it has cards 
to read and punch.
In a sophisticated flowchart, we might see several different sym-
bols of the sort shown in Fig. 2-6, and maybe even all of them. Oval  
boxes show start or stop points. Arithmetic operations go in rectan-
gular boxes. Input and output instructions go in upside-down trap-
ezoids. If we want to show a program that someone wrote earlier 
within the context of a larger flowchart, we don’t necessarily have to 
draw the flowchart for the inside program. Rather, we might repre-
sent the entire program as a flattened hexagon. If a box indicates a 
decision, we use a diamond shape. A five-sided box portrays a part of 
the program that changes itself. A small circle identifies a processing 
junction point. Such a point in the program can go to several places. 
A small five-sided box, which has the shape of the home plate on 
a baseball field, shows where one page of a flowchart connects to 
the next, if the entire flowchart has more than one page. The inter-
mediate junction and off-page connection points are labeled with 
numbers and letters to let readers know that all like symbols with the 
same character inside are meant to be connected together. Arrows 
indicate the direction of the flow. 
Process paths
Returning to the flowchart for duplicating punched cards (Fig. 2-7), 
suppose that you want to change the card-punching program so that 
the computer skips blank cards and duplicates only those cards with 
some holes in them. Because the computer must make a decision 
about each card, you’ll need to include a decision block in the flow-
chart. Figure 2-8 shows the result.

Process paths    23
Follow the flow
Except for the decision block, Fig. 2-8 shows the same process 
as Fig. 2-7 does. The program begins in the “Start” oval at the top 
and then goes to the block marked “Read a card.” From there, the 
program moves on to the decision block labeled “Card blank?” 
If the answer is “Yes,” the program proceeds to the connection 
circle marked “A” and back to the top to read the next card. If the 
answer is “No” (the card has holes in it), the program instructs the 
hardware (the physical components of the computer) to punch 
a duplicate card and print its contents. Then the program goes to 
another circle marked “A” and back to the starting point.
Read a card
A
Punch a card
Print contents
A
A
Start
Card blank?
No
Yes
Fig. 2-8.  Example of a flowchart that includes a decision block (the diamond).  
The circles labeled A all represent a single junction point through which data flows 
in the directions shown by the arrows.

24    Block diagrams
Tip
Figure 2-8 is a simple flowchart, showing a process that uses only 
input and output devices and that does no calculations. Most pro-
grams and flowcharts involve more complicated processes.
The field of microcomputers uses many different types of diagrams 
that deal mostly with software (the operating systems and programs) 
rather than hardware (the physical components). From a purely elec-
tronic standpoint, functional diagrams abound and are usually more 
numerous than the schematic diagrams in the computer world. From 
an understanding standpoint, block diagrams can serve to display 
machine functions in general, but hardware maintenance and repair 
procedures require well-defined schematic drawings. Computers take 
advantage of the latest state-of-the-art developments in electronic 
components and are relatively simple from this standpoint, especially 
when you consider all they can do. However, from a pure electronics 
standpoint and as far as schematic diagrams are concerned, comput-
ers are highly complex; it would take many pages of schematics to 
represent even the most rudimentary computer. 
Summary
Block diagramming can help you understand the general functioning 
of electronic circuits. Block diagrams are easy to draw, usually requir-
ing only a marking instrument, some paper, and a straightedge (or a 
vector graphics computer program and a little bit of training on it). 
Schematic diagrams, in contrast, need more tools and can, in some 
cases, take many hours to render in a form that people can easily 
read and interpret.

3
Component symbols
On a road map, symbols illustrate towns, cities, secondary roads, pri-
mary roads, airports, railroad tracks, and geographical landmarks. The 
same rule applies to schematic drawings; symbols indicate conduc-
tors, resistors, capacitors, solid-state components, and other electronic 
parts. Every time a new component comes out, a new schematic sym-
bol is derived for it. Often, a new type of component is a modification 
of one that already exists, so the new schematic symbol ends up as a 
modification of the symbol for the preexisting component.
Tip
In this chapter, you’ll find most of the schematic component 
symbols commonly used in electricity and electronics. Appendix 
A contains a more complete listing in alphabetic, tabular form. 
You’ll find it in the back of this book.
Resistors
Resistors are among the most simple electronic components. As the 
term implies, they resist the flow of electrical current. The value or 
“size” of a resistor is measured in units called ohms; typical real-world 
resistors are rated from about one ohm up to millions of ohms. Less 
commonly, you’ll encounter resistors with values of less than an 
ohm, or hundreds of millions (or even billions) of ohms.
25

26    Component symbols
Regardless of the ohmic value, all fixed-value resistors are sche-
matically indicated by the symbol shown in Fig. 3-1. This is the most 
universally accepted symbol for a resistor. The two horizontal lines 
indicate the leads or conductors that exit from both ends of the physi-
cal component. (Sometimes the resistor contacts are not wire leads 
but more substantial metal terminals.) Figure 3-2 shows a “transpar-
ent” functional drawing of a carbon-composition fixed resistor with 
leads on both ends. Figure 3-3 shows pictorial drawings of two other 
types of resistors. Any resistor of the sort shown pictorially in Fig. 3-2 
or Fig. 3-3 is indicated schematically by the symbol in Fig. 3-1. 
A variable resistor has the ability to change ohmic value by means 
of a slide or rotary tap that can be moved along the resistive element. 
The variable resistor is usually set to one value, and it remains at this 
point until manually changed. The electronic circuit, therefore, “sees” 
the component as a fixed resistor. However, when a variable resistor 
is required for the proper functioning of a specific circuit, it is neces-
sary to indicate to any person who might build it from a schematic 
drawing that the resistor is actually a variable type. Figure 3-4 shows 
the schematic symbol for a variable resistor with two leads. Other 
types of variable resistors exist, and they have three leads (two end 
leads and a tap). Figure 3-5 shows two examples of schematic sym-
bols for a three-terminal variable resistor, known as a potentiometer 
or a rheostat depending on the method of construction. Notice that 
Fig. 3-1.  Standard schematic symbol for a fixed-value resistor.
Carbon
composition
Electrodes
Wire
Wire
Fig. 3-2.  Pictorial illustration showing the anatomy of a carbon-composition  
resistor.

Resistors    27
both examples use the standard resistor configuration, and indicate 
that it’s a variable type by means of an arrow symbol pointing to the 
zig-zag part.
Did you know?
Rheostats are in effect the same as potentiometers, but mechani-
cally they differ. A rheostat contains a wirewound resistance ele-
ment, while a potentiometer is normally of the carbon-composi-
tion type. Therefore, a rheostat’s value varies in small increments 
or steps, while a potentiometer’s value can be adjusted over a 
continuous range.
Wire
Wire
Insulating
material
Cap
Cap
Coil of
resistive
wire
Wire
Wire
Cap
Cap
Film-coated
cylinder
A
B
Fig. 3-3.  Pictorial illustrations showing the anatomy of a wirewound resistor (at A) 
and a film type resistor (at B).

28    Component symbols
Tip
In schematic drawings, an arrow often indicates variable proper-
ties of a component, but not always! Transistors, diodes, and some 
other solid-state devices have arrows in their schematic symbols. 
These arrows don’t have anything to do with variable or adjust-
able properties. Arrows can also sometimes indicate the direction 
of current or signal flow in complex circuits.
Figure 3-6 is a pictorial drawing of a variable resistor of the wire-
wound type, manufactured so that the resistance wire is exposed. A 
sliding metallic collar, which goes around the body of the resistor, 
can be adjusted to intercept different points along the coil of resis-
tance wire. The collar is attached by a flexible conductor to one of 
the two end leads. The collar, therefore, shorts out more or less of 
the coil turns, depending on where it rests along the length of the 
coil. As the collar moves toward the opposite resistor lead, the ohmic 
value of the component decreases.
Figure 3-7 shows a functional drawing of a rotary potentiometer 
(at A), along with the schematic symbol (at B). The symbol looks like 
Fig. 3-4.  Schematic symbol for a two-terminal variable resistor.
A
B
Fig. 3-5.  Alternate symbols for variable resistors, also known as potentiometers or 
rheostats (depending on the physical construction method). The device at A con-
nects one end to the tap; and the device at B uses a three-terminal arrangement.

Resistors    29
the variable resistor equivalent, but has three discrete contact points. 
Using the potentiometer control, the portion of the circuit that comes 
off the arrow lead can be varied in resistance to two circuit points, 
each connected to the two remaining control leads. Figure 3-8 shows 
a pictorial drawing of a typical potentiometer.
The variable resistor shown pictorially in Fig. 3-6 can be changed 
into a rheostat by severing the connection between the collar and 
Wire
Wire
Insulating
material
Cap
Cap
Coil of
resistive
wire
Sliding collar
Fig. 3-6.  Pictorial drawing of a wirewound variable resistor.
X
Y
Z
X
Y
Z
Wiper
A
B
Resistive
strip
Control
shaft
Fig. 3-7.  Simplified functional drawing of a rotary potentiometer (A) and its  
schematic symbol with corresponding connections (B).

30    Component symbols
the end. Now, the collar can be used as the third or variable contact. 
Likewise, a rheostat or potentiometer can be turned into a two-lead 
variable resistor by shorting out the variable contact point with the 
lead on either end.
The schematic symbol for a resistor, all by itself, tells us nothing 
about the ohmic value, or anything else about the component such 
as its power rating or physical construction, either. Various specifica-
tions for the component can be written alongside the resistor symbol, 
but these details might also appear in a separate components table 
and referenced by an alphabetic/numeric designation printed next to 
the schematic symbol (such as R1, R2, R3, and so on).
Tip
You can usually determine the ohmic value of a fixed resistor by 
looking at the colored bands or zones on it. Appendix B lists the 
resistor color codes that specify the ohmic values of fixed resistors.
Capacitors
Capacitors are electronic components that have the ability to block 
direct current (DC), while passing alternating current (AC). They also 
store electrical energy. The basic unit of capacitance is the farad 
(symbolized F). The farad is a huge electrical quantity, and most  
Connection
terminals
Pellet-shaped
housing
Control shaft
rotates through
approximately
270 degrees
Fig. 3-8.  Pictorial drawing of a full-size potentiometer, suitable for mounting  
on the front panel of an electronic device such as a radio receiver.

Capacitors    31
real-world components are, therefore, rated in tiny fractions of a 
farad—microfarads or picofarads. A microfarad (symbolized µF) 
equals a millionth of a farad (0.000001 F), and a picofarad (symbol-
ized pF) equals a millionth of a microfarad (0.000001 µF) or a tril-
lionth of a farad (0.000000000001 F).
Figure 3-9 shows the common schematic symbol for a fixed capac-
itor. On occasion, you might see alternative symbols, such as those in 
Fig. 3-10. Many different types of capacitors exist. Some are nonpo-
larized devices, meaning that you can connect them in either direc-
tion and it doesn’t make any difference. Others are polarized, having 
a positive and a negative terminal, and you must take care to connect 
them so that any DC voltage that happens to appear across them has 
the correct polarity. Most types of capacitors contain only two leads, 
although every now and then, you’ll come across one with three or 
more leads.
The basic capacitor symbol consists of a vertical line followed by a 
space and then a parenthesis-like symbol. Horizontal lines connect to 
the centers of the vertical line and the parenthesis to indicate the com-
ponent leads. The parenthesis side of a capacitor indicates the lead 
that should go to electrical ground, or to the circuit point more nearly 
connected to electrical ground. Unless the symbol includes a polar-
ity sign, it indicates a nonpolarized capacitor, which might be made 
from metal plates surrounding ceramic, mica, glass, paper, or other 
solid nonconducting material (and, in some cases, air or a vacuum). 
The material designation indicates the insulation, technically known 
as a dielectric, that separates the two major parts of the component. 
Fig. 3-9.  Standard symbol for a fixed capacitor. The curved line represents the 
plate (or set of plates) electrically closer to ground.
A
B
Fig. 3-10.  Alternate symbols for fixed capacitors. At A, air dielectric; at B, solid 
dielectric.

32    Component symbols
Physically, a typical fixed-value capacitor comprises two tiny sheets of 
conductive material close to each other but kept electrically separated 
by the dielectric layer.
Figure 3-11 shows the schematic symbol for a polarized or electro-
lytic capacitor. Notice that this symbol is the same as the one for the 
nonpolarized component, but a plus (+) sign has been added to one 
side. This sign indicates that the positive terminal of the component 
goes to the external circuitry. Occasionally, a negative (-) symbol will 
also appear on the opposite side. When you see the plus sign, you 
know that the component is polarized, and therefore, that you must 
connect it to the remainder of the circuit in observance of the proper 
polarity. That means the positive capacitor electrode must go to the 
more positive DC voltage point in the circuit, and the other electrode 
must go to the more negative DC voltage point in the circuit.
Tip
Polarized capacitors have external markings that tell you the 
polarity. Some have a plus sign, and some have a minus sign, and 
a few have both. Often, you’ll need a magnifying glass to resolve 
the symbols, so beware: You should never connect a polarized 
capacitor the wrong way around!
All the capacitors that we’ve seen so far have a fixed design. In 
other words, the components specified have no provision for chang-
ing the capacitance value, which is determined at the time of manu-
facture. Some capacitors, however, do have the ability to change 
value. These components are generally called variable capacitors, 
although some specialized types are known as trimmer capacitors or 
padder capacitors.
Figure 3-12 shows the most common symbol for a variable capaci-
tor. An arrowed line reveals the variable property; it runs diagonally 
through a fixed capacitor symbol. Figure 3-13 shows two alternative 
+
Fig. 3-11.  Schematic symbol for a polarized capacitor. The side with the plus sign 
(+) should carry a positive voltage relative to the other side.

Capacitors    33
ways of indicating this same component. Most of the time, the sym-
bol shown in Fig. 3-12 will indicate a variable capacitance, regardless 
of the physical construction details.
An air variable capacitor (one with an air dielectric) can tune 
many types of radio-frequency (RF) equipment including antenna 
matching networks, transmitter output circuits, and old-fashioned 
radios. A typical air variable has many interlaced plates, with the 
plates connected together alternately to form two distinct contact 
points. The set of plates that you can rotate is called the rotor ; the 
set of plates that remains stationary is called the stator. All variable 
capacitors are nonpolarized components, meaning that the external 
DC voltage you connect to them can go either way and it doesn’t 
make any difference.
Tip
In most air variables, the rotor should go to electrical ground. The 
rotor connects physically to the shaft that you turn. By grounding 
that shaft along with the rotor, you minimize external capacitance 
effects so that if you touch the shaft, the addition of your body 
into the system doesn’t upset the performance of the circuit. In 
addition, you’re protected against the risk of electric shock when 
the shaft that you touch goes directly to ground!
Fig. 3-12.  Standard symbol for a variable capacitor. The curved line represents the 
rotor, and the straight line represents the stator.
A
B
Fig. 3-13.  Alternate symbols for variable capacitors. At A, the stator is not distin-
guished from the rotor; at B, the rotor appears as a curved line with an arrow.

34    Component symbols
Sometimes, two separate variable capacitors are connected together  
or ganged in a circuit. In a ganged arrangement, two or more units 
are used to control two or more electronic circuits, but both compo-
nents are varied simultaneously by tying the rotors of the two units 
together. Figure 3-14 shows the schematic symbol for two variable 
capacitors ganged together. The minimum and maximum capaci-
tance values of the two components might be the same, but they 
don’t have to be the same. They will, however, always track together. 
In a ganged system, when one of the capacitors increases in value, 
the others all increase as well.
As is the case with most electronic components, the schematic sym-
bol for the capacitor serves only to identify it and to show whether 
it is fixed or variable, and if fixed, whether or not it is polarized. The 
component value might be written alongside the schematic symbol, 
or the component might be given a letter and number designation 
(for example, C1, C2, C3, and so on) for reference to a components 
list or table that goes along with the diagram.
Inductors and transformers
A basic inductor comprises a length of wire that is coiled up in order 
to introduce inductance into a circuit. Inductance is the property that 
opposes change in existing current; it acts in practice only while cur-
rent increases or decreases. Coils or inductors can range in physical 
size from microscopic to gigantic, depending upon the inductance 
Fig. 3-14.  Schematic symbol for two variable capacitors ganged together.

Inductors and transformers    35
value of the component, and on the amount of current that it can 
handle.
The basic unit of inductance is the henry (symbolized H), a large 
electrical quantity. Most practical inductors are rated in millihenrys 
(symbolized mH), where 1 mH = 0.001 H, or in microhenrys (µH), 
where 1 µH = 0.001 mH = 0.000001 H. Occasionally, you’ll see an induc-
tor whose value is specified in nanohenrys (nH), where 1 nH = 0.001  
µH = 0.000000001 H.
Figure 3-15 shows the basic schematic symbol for an air-core 
inductor. The two leads are designated by straight lines that merge 
into the coiled part. An air-core coil has nothing inside the windings 
that can affect the inductance. Some air-core coils are wound from 
stiff wire and support themselves mechanically, and their cores do, 
in fact, comprise nothing but air. In most cases, however, a noncon-
ductive and noninductive form made out of plastic, mica, or ceramic 
material serves as a support for the coil turns, keeping them in place 
and enhancing the physical ruggedness of the component.
Did you know?
In some old radio receivers, you’ll find air-core inductors wound 
around small waxed cardboard cylinders resembling short lengths 
of drinking straw. Some hobbyists even use waxed wooden dow-
els to support “air-core” coils!
Figure 3-16 shows the schematic symbol for a tapped air-core 
inductor; in this case, the coil has two tap points along its length. 
Fig. 3-15.  Standard symbol for an air-wound (or air-core) inductor.
Fig. 3-16.  Schematic symbol for an air-core inductor with two taps.

36    Component symbols
Whereas the fixed coil had only two leads, a tapped coil has three 
or more. When a coil is tapped, separate conductors are attached 
to one or more of the turns for intermediate connection. Maximum 
inductance is obtained from connecting the end leads to the external 
circuitry. A tapped arrangement allows for the selection of an input 
or output point that offers lower inductance than the full coil does.
As an alternative to taps, a coil might have a sliding contact that 
can be advanced along the entire length of the windings. This sliding 
contact allows adjustment of the inductance value, rather than hav-
ing a select fixed point with the tapping arrangement. A variable coil 
can be indicated by either of the symbols shown in Fig. 3-17. The 
arrow indicates that the component can be adjusted from a maximum 
inductance value to a minimum inductance value.
Figure 3-18 shows symbols for a fixed air-core coil (at A), a tapped 
air-core coil (at B), and an adjustable air-core coil (at C).
An inductor meant for low-frequency applications can consist 
of a coiled wire wound around a solid or laminated (layered) iron 
core. Here, the iron, which constitutes a ferromagnetic material, 
A
B
Fig. 3-17.  Schematic symbols for a variable air-core inductor. At A, arrow above 
coil symbol; at B, arrow passing through coil symbol.
A
B
C
Fig. 3-18.  Schematic symbols for fixed (A), tapped (B), and adjustable (C) air- 
core inductors.

Inductors and transformers    37
replaces the previous empty or air core. For example, a 60-Hz choke, 
intended for use in power-supply filters, will usually contain a single 
coil wound around a circular iron form. The ferromagnetic material 
greatly increases the magnetic flux density inside the coil windings, 
thereby increasing the inductance by a factor of many hundreds, or 
even thousands, of times compared with the inductance of an air-
core coil having the same physical dimensions. 
Figure 3-19 shows the schematic symbol for an iron-core inductor. 
Notice that it is the basic fixed coil discussed earlier, along with two 
close-spaced straight lines that run for its entire length. Sometimes the 
iron-core inductor is drawn as shown in Fig. 3-20, with the straight 
lines inside the coil turns in the symbol. (This is not the approved 
method of indicating an iron-core inductor, but you’ll still see it now 
and then.) Some iron-core inductors contain taps for sampling dif-
ferent inductance values, and some might even be adjustable. The 
equivalent schematic symbols for these types of components appear 
in Fig. 3-21.
At higher frequencies, solid-iron and laminated-iron cores aren’t 
efficient enough to function in inductors. Engineers would say that 
they have too much loss. At frequencies above a few kilohertz (kHz), 
a special core is needed if you want to increase the inductance over 
what you can get with nonferromagnetic core materials, such as 
air, plastic, ceramic, or wood. The most common substance for this 
purpose consists of iron material that has been shattered into myriad 
tiny fragments, each of which has a layer of insulation applied to it. 
After the fragmentation and insulation process has been completed, 
the particles are compressed to form a physically solid sample called 
Fig. 3-19.  Schematic symbol for an inductor with a solid or laminated iron core.
Fig. 3-20.  Alternate symbol for an inductor with a solid or laminated iron core.

38    Component symbols
a powdered-iron core. Figure 3-22 shows schematic symbols for pow-
dered-iron-core inductors.
Tip
The symbols for powdered-iron-core inductors are nearly iden-
tical to those for solid- or laminated-iron-core inductors, except 
that the straight lines are broken up instead of solid. These types 
of components, like all other types of inductors, can be tapped or 
continuously variable.
A transformer is made up of multiple inductors with the coil turns 
interspersed or wound around different parts of a single core. Figure 
3-23 shows the symbol for a basic air-core transformer. It looks like 
A
B
Fig. 3-21.  Symbols for a tapped coil (A) and an adjustable coil (B) with solid- or 
laminated-iron cores.
A
B
C
Fig. 3-22.  Schematic symbols for fixed (A), tapped (B), and adjustable (C) induc-
tors with powdered-iron cores.

Switches    39
two air-core coils drawn back-to-back. A transformer has the ability 
to transfer AC energy from one circuit to another at the same fre-
quency. Because transformers are made by combining inductors, the 
schematic symbols are similar. Figure 3-24 shows some transformers 
that contain iron cores. The ones at A and B have solid or laminated 
cores; the ones at C and D have powdered cores.
Switches
A switch is a device, mechanical or electrical, that completes or 
breaks the path of current. Additionally, a switch can be used to allow  
Fig. 3-23.  Schematic symbol for a transformer with an air core.
A
B
C
D
Fig. 3-24.  At A, a transformer with a solid- or laminated-iron core. At B,  
a transformer with a solid- or laminated-iron core and tapped windings.  
At C, a transformer with a powdered-iron core. At D, an adjustable  
transformer with a powdered-iron core.

40    Component symbols
current to pass through different circuit elements. Figure 3-25 shows 
the schematic symbol for a single-pole/single-throw (SPST) switch. 
This component can make or break a contact at only one point in a 
circuit; it’s a two-position device (on-off or make-break).
Figure 3-26 shows a different type of switch, designated as a single- 
pole/double-throw (SPDT) component. Symbolically, the pole coin-
cides with the point of contact at the base of the arrowed line. A 
throw is the contact point to which the arrow can point. The SPDT 
switch contains one pole contact and two throw positions; the input 
to the pole can be switched to either the upper or lower circuit point.
Some switches contain two or more poles. Figure 3-27A shows 
the symbol for a double-pole/single-throw (DPST) switch, while Fig. 
3-27B shows the symbol for a double-pole/double-throw (DPDT) 
switch. Some switches have even more elements. The one shown in 
Fig. 3-28 has five poles, each of which can be switched to two sepa-
rate positions. Engineers and technicians might call it a five-pole/
double-throw (5PDT) arrangement. 
This last designation can actually be covered under the heading of 
multicontact switches. This category takes in most switches that have 
more than two poles or two throw positions. For example, a rotary 
switch has a single pole and several throw positions; Fig. 3-29 shows 
an example. The arrow still indicates the pole contact. In this case the 
switch has 10 throw positions. Technically, then, it’s a single-pole/10-
throw (SP10T) device!
Fig. 3-25.  Schematic symbol for an SPST switch.
Fig. 3-26.  Schematic symbol for an SPDT switch.

Switches    41
Occasionally, you’ll encounter sets of rotary switches ganged 
together, much like two or more variable capacitors can be made 
to rotate in sync with one another. Figure 3-30 shows the schematic 
symbol for an arrangement that uses two rotary switches. The dashed 
line tells us that the two switches are ganged. The two arrowed lines, 
which indicate the throw positions, go around “in sync” with each 
other. So, for example, when the left-hand switch (or pole number 1) 
rests at throw number 3 (as is the case here), the right-hand switch 
(or pole number 2) also rests at throw number 3.
A
B
Fig. 3-27.  At A, symbol for a DPST switch. At B, symbol for a DPDT switch.
Fig. 3-28.  Schematic symbol for a five-pole double-throw (5PDT) switch.

42    Component symbols
In each case, every switch contact point (pole or throw) is repre-
sented by a tiny circle. The variable element or pole is indicated by 
an arrow. The symbols shown here are all standard. You’ll seldom 
see any significant variations.
Did you know?
Some amateur radio operators use a special switch called a Morse 
code key. This old-fashioned device, also called a hand key or a 
straight key, makes or breaks a circuit for the purpose of send-
ing Morse code manually. It’s an SPST switch with a lever and 
a spring, causing the device to return to the off position when 
the operator lets go of the lever. Figure 3-31 shows its schematic 
symbol. 
Fig. 3-29.  Schematic symbol for a rotary (or wafer) switch. This one has a single 
pole and 10 throws (SP10T).
Fig. 3-30.  Schematic symbol for two rotary switches ganged together. This one has 
two poles and 10 throws (2P10T).

Conductors and cables    43
Conductors and cables
Throughout this discussion, a straight line has always indicated a 
conductor, but most circuits contain a large number of conductors. 
When you draw a diagram of a complicated circuit or system, you’ll 
often find it necessary to have lines cross over each other, whether 
the represented wires actually make contact in the physical system 
or not.
Figure 3-32 shows two conductors that must cross each other in a 
diagram, but that are not connected to each other in the physical cir-
cuit (at least not at the point where they cross in the schematic). This 
diagram geometry does not imply that when you build the circuit, the 
conductors must physically cross over each other at that exact place. 
It simply means that in order to make the schematic drawing, you 
have to draw one conductor across another to reach various circuit 
points without introducing a whole lot of confusion and clutter, or 
resorting to three dimensions to make your drawing.
Aha!
A real-world circuit exists in three-dimensional (3D) space, but 
when you want to diagram it, you must do it on a two-dimensional 
(2D) surface. To carry off that feat, you must learn a few tricks to 
make sure that your readers see things right!
Fig. 3-31.  Schematic symbol for a Morse code key (hand key or straight key).
Fig. 3-32.  Schematic symbol for conductors that cross paths but are not electrically 
connected.

44    Component symbols
Figure 3-33 shows two ways of portraying a point where two wires 
cross and they are electrically connected at that point. In the drawing 
at A, one of the conductors is “broken in two” so that it appears to 
contact the other one at two different points. This geometry makes 
it clear that the two conductors (the “divided” vertical one and the 
“solid” horizontal one) connect to each other electrically. Black dots 
indicate electrical connection. In the drawing at B, the two conduc-
tors cross (at right angles in this example), and a single black dot is 
drawn at the junction. This dot tells us that the conductors connect at 
this point. The method shown at B might look better at first glance, 
but the neatness comes along with a problem: Some readers might 
overlook the black dot and think that the two conductors are not 
meant to connect. The method at A makes that potential misinterpre-
tation impossible.
Just as a reader might miss a black dot at a crossing point, as in 
Fig. 3-33B, another reader might see Fig. 3-32 and imagine a black 
dot when it isn’t there! Then the reader will think the two wires con-
nect when in fact they do not. This problem rarely occurs in well-
engineered schematics where the draftsperson makes sure to use 
big black dots and good quality printing presses. However, in some 
older schematics you will see nonconnecting, crossed wires shown 
as in Fig. 3-34. One of the wires has a half loop that makes it look 
like it jumps over the other wire to avoid contact. That trick (which 
should never have gone out of style, in my opinion) gets rid of any 
doubt as to whether the wires electrically connect at the crossover 
point or not.
A cable consists of two or more conductors inside a single insu-
lating jacket. In many cases, unshielded cables are not specifically 
A
B
Fig. 3-33.  At A, preferred symbol for conductors that intersect and are electrically 
connected to each other. At B, alternate symbol for the same situation.

Conductors and cables    45
indicated in a schematic drawing, but appear as two or more lines that 
run parallel to indicate multiple conductors. Shielded cables require 
additional symbology along with the conductors. Figure 3-35 shows 
examples of shielded wire, often used to indicate the use of coaxial 
cable in an electronic circuit. Coaxial cable contains a single wire 
called the center conductor surrounded by a cylindrical, conduit-like 
conductive shield. An insulating layer, called the dielectric, keeps the 
two conductive elements isolated from each other. In most coaxial 
cables, the dielectric material consists of solid or foamed polyethylene.
Tip
Figure 3-36 shows a symbol for coaxial cable when the shield con-
nects to a chassis ground, such as the metal plate on which an 
electronic circuit is constructed. The chassis ground might lead 
to an earth ground, but that’s not always the case. In a truck, for 
example, no earth ground exists, so the chassis of the trucker’s 
CB radio would go to the vehicle frame.
Fig. 3-34.  Archaic (but clear) representation of conductors that cross paths but are 
not electrically connected to each other.
A
B
Fig. 3-35.  At A, symbol for a coaxial cable with an ungrounded shield. At B,  
symbol for a coaxial cable with an earth-grounded shield.

46    Component symbols
In some cables, a single shield surrounds two or more conduc-
tors. Figure 3-37 shows the schematic symbol for a two-conductor 
shielded cable. This symbol is identical to the one for coaxial cable, 
except that an extra inner conductor exists. If more than two inner 
conductors exist, then the number of straight, parallel lines going 
through the elliptical part of the symbol should equal the number 
of conductors. For example, if the cable in Fig. 3-37 contained five 
conductors, then five horizontal lines would run through the elliptical 
part of the symbol.
Diodes and transistors
Figure 3-38 shows the basic symbol for a semiconductor diode. In 
this symbol, an arrow and a vertical line indicate parts of the diode, 
and the horizontal lines to the left and right indicate the leads. The 
symbol in Fig. 3-38 portrays a rectifier diode. The arrowed part of the 
symbol corresponds to the diode’s anode, and the short, straight line 
at the arrow’s tip corresponds to the cathode. Under normal operat-
ing conditions, a rectifier diode conducts when the electrons move 
Fig. 3-36.  Symbol for a coaxial cable with a chassis-grounded shield.
Fig. 3-37.  Symbol for a shielded two-conductor cable, in this case with a chassis 
ground for the shield.

Diodes and transistors    47
against the arrow, i.e., when the anode has a positive voltage with 
respect to the cathode.
Figure 3-39 shows the symbols for some specialized diode types. 
At A, we see a varactor diode, which can act as a variable capacitor 
when we apply an adjustable DC voltage to it. At B, we see a Zener 
diode, which can serve as a voltage regulator in a power supply. At 
C, we see a Gunn diode, which can act as an oscillator or amplifier 
at microwave radio frequencies.
A silicon-controlled rectifier (SCR) is, in effect, a semiconductor 
diode with an extra element and corresponding terminal. Its sche-
matic symbol appears in Fig. 3-40. In the SCR representation, a circle 
often (but not always) surrounds the diode symbol, and the control 
element, called the gate, shows up as a diagonal line that runs out-
ward from the tip of the arrow. In all cases, the lead that goes to the 
base of the arrow is the anode of the device, and the one connected 
to the short straight line at the arrow’s tip is the cathode.
Figure 3-41 shows the schematic symbols for bipolar transistors. 
The PNP type is shown at A, followed by the NPN variety at B. The 
only distinction between the two is the direction of the arrow. In 
the PNP device, the arrow points into the straight line for the base 
electrode. In the NPN device, the arrow points outward from the 
base. Occasionally, the circle that surrounds the base, emitter, and 
Fig. 3-38.  Symbol for a general-purpose semiconductor diode or rectifier.
A
B
C
Fig. 3-39.  Symbols for a varactor diode (A), a Zener diode (B), and a  
Gunn diode (C).

48    Component symbols
collector leads is omitted from the bipolar transistor symbol. Besides 
the bipolar variety, many other types of transistors exist. Figure 3-42 
shows the symbols for four of these devices, as follows:
• At A, we see an N-channel junction field-effect transistor (JFET).
• At B, we see a P-channel JFET.
• At C, we see an N-channel metal-oxide-semiconductor field-
effect transistor (MOSFET).
• At D, we see a P-channel MOSFET.
Tip
Transistors can be made from various types of semiconductor 
materials and metal-oxide compounds, but the schematic symbol, 
all by itself, tells us nothing about the elemental semiconductor 
material used in manufacture. The symbol merely indicates com-
ponent functionality.
Anode
Cathode
Gate
Fig. 3-40.  Symbol for a silicon-controlled rectifier (SCR).
A
B
Emitter
Base
Collector
Emitter
Base
Collector
Fig. 3-41.  Symbols for a PNP bipolar transistor (A) and an NPN bipolar  
transistor (B).

Electron tubes    49
Electron tubes
Although vacuum tubes aren’t used in electronics nearly as often as 
they were a few decades ago, many designs still exist that do employ 
them. When you want to create the symbol for a vacuum tube, you 
should start by drawing a fairly large circle, and then you should add 
the necessary symbols inside the circle to symbolize the type of tube 
involved. Figure 3-43 shows the schematic symbols for the various 
types of tube elements commonly used in schematic drawings.
Figure 3-44 shows the schematic symbol for a diode vacuum tube. 
This two-element device contains an anode (also called a plate) and 
a cathode. Just as with the semiconductor diode, the anode is nor-
mally positive with respect to the cathode when the device conducts 
current. The cathode emits electrons that travel through the vacuum 
to the anode. A hot-wire filament, something like a miniature low-
wattage light bulb, heats the cathode to help drive electrons from it. 
In Fig. 3-44, the filament has been omitted for simplicity, a common 
practice in all vacuum tube symbology when the filament and cath-
ode are physically separate, an arrangement known as an indirectly 
heated cathode.
C
D
Gate
Drain
Source
Gate
Drain
Source
A
B
Gate
Source
Drain
Gate
Source
Drain
Fig. 3-42.  At A, symbol for an N-channel JFET. At B, symbol for a P-channel JFET. 
At C, symbol for an N-channel MOSFET. At D, symbol for a P-channel MOSFET.

50    Component symbols
Tip
All tube elements are surrounded by a circle, which represents 
the tube envelope. Occasionally, the circle is omitted from some 
tube symbols in schematic drawings, but that’s not standard  
practice.
Figure 3-45 shows two versions of a triode vacuum tube, which 
consists of the same elements as the diode previously discussed, 
with the addition of a dashed line to indicate the grid. But there’s 
another difference, too, in drawing A. Can you see it? Look closely 
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
Fig. 3-43.  Symbols for tube elements and characteristics. A: Filament or directly 
heated cathode. B: Indirectly heated cathode. C: Cold cathode. D: Photocathode.  
E: Grid. F: Anode (plate). G: Deflection plate. H: Beam-forming plates. I: Envelope 
for vacuum tube. J: Envelope for gas-filled tube.
Fig. 3-44.  Schematic symbol for a diode vacuum tube with an indirectly heated 
cathode. Although a filament exists, it is often omitted to reduce clutter in symbols 
for tubes with indirectly heated cathodes.

Electron tubes    51
at the cathode. The tube at A has a directly heated cathode, in which 
the filament and the cathode are the very same physical object! We 
apply the negative cathode voltage directly to the filament wire; no 
separate cathode exists at all. In Fig. 3-45B, we see the symbol for a 
triode tube with an indirectly heated cathode. In this symbol, the fila-
ment is inside the cathode, which comprises a metal cylinder running 
along the central vertical axis of the tube.
Tetrode vacuum tubes have two grids. To represent one of them, 
we need an additional dashed line, as shown in the drawings of  
Fig. 3-46. In the tetrode, the upper grid, closer to the anode, is called 
the screen. Figure 3-47 shows symbols for the so-called pentode tube, 
which has three grids and a total of five elements. In the pentode, the 
second grid (going from the bottom up) is the screen, and the third 
grid (just underneath the plate) is called the suppressor. In both Figs. 
3-46 and 3-47, the left-hand symbol (at A) portrays a device with a 
directly heated cathode, while the right-hand drawing (at B) shows a 
device with an indirectly heated cathode.
A
B
Fig. 3-45.  Symbols for a triode tube with a directly heated cathode (A) and an 
indirectly heated cathode (B).
B
A
Fig. 3-46.  Symbols for a tetrode tube with a directly heated cathode (A) and an 
indirectly heated cathode (B).

52    Component symbols
Follow the flow
In all the vacuum tube symbols shown here, electrons normally 
flow from the bottom up. They come off the cathode, travel 
through the grid or grids (if any), and end up at the plate. Once in 
awhile you’ll see a vacuum tube symbol lying on its side. In that 
sort of situation, you can simply remember that the electrons go 
from the cathode to the plate under normal operating conditions.
Some vacuum tubes consist of two separate, independent sets of 
electrodes housed in a single envelope. These components are called 
dual tubes. If the two sets of electrodes are identical, the entire compo-
nent is called a dual diode, dual triode, dual tetrode, or dual pentode. 
Figure 3-48 shows the schematic symbol for a dual triode vacuum tube 
with indirectly heated cathodes.
In some older radio and television receivers, tubes with four or five 
grids were sometimes used. These tubes had six and seven elements, 
respectively, and were called hexodes and heptodes. These esoteric 
devices were used mainly for mixing, a process in which two RF 
signals having different frequencies are combined to get new signals 
at the sum and difference frequencies. The schematic symbol for a 
hexode is shown in Fig. 3-49A; the symbol for a heptode is shown 
A
B
Fig. 3-47.  Symbols for a pentode tube with a directly heated cathode (A) and an 
indirectly heated cathode (B).
Fig. 3-48.  Schematic symbol for a dual triode tube.

Cells and batteries     53
in Fig. 3-49B. Some engineers called the heptode tube a pentagrid 
converter. Both of these symbols show devices with indirectly heated 
cathodes.
Tip
You won’t encounter hexodes and heptodes in modern electron-
ics, but if you like to work with antique radios, you should get 
familiar with them. But take this warning: You’ll probably have 
a difficult time finding a replacement component, should one of 
these relics go “soft” on you!
Cells and batteries 
A cell or battery is often used as a power source for electronic circuits. 
Figure 3-50 shows the schematic symbol for a single electrochemical 
cell, such as the sort that you’ll find in a flashlight. A single-cell com-
ponent such as this usually has an output of approximately 1.5 V DC.  
Electrochemical batteries with higher voltage outputs comprise multi-
ple cells connected in series (negative-to-positive in a chain or string); 
A
B
Fig. 3-49.  At A, symbol for a hexode tube. At B, symbol for a heptode tube, also 
known as a pentagrid converter.
-
+
Fig. 3-50.  Schematic symbol for a single electrochemical cell.

54    Component symbols
the schematic representation for a multicell battery takes this design 
into account, as shown in Fig. 3-51.
The multicell battery symbol is simply a number of single-cell 
symbols placed end-to-end without any intervening lines. If a circuit 
calls for the use of three individual, discrete single­-cell batteries in a 
series connection, you might draw three cell symbols in series with 
wire conductor symbols between them (Fig. 3-52). Alternatively, if 
multiple individual cells are set in a “battery holder” designed for 
direct series connection, you can use a battery symbol to portray the 
whole bunch.
Standard practice calls for polarity signs to go with the symbols 
for cells or batteries. Unfortunately, some draftspeople neglect this 
detail. Then when you see the schematic, you’ll have to infer the 
polarity by scrutinizing the rest of the circuit.
Logic gates
All digital electronic devices employ switches that perform specific 
logical operations. These switches, called logic gates, can have any-
where from one to several inputs and (usually) a single output. Logic 
devices have two states, represented by the digits 0 and 1. The 0 digit 
is normally called “low” and the 1 digit is called “high.”
• A logical inverter, also called a NOT gate, has one input and one 
output. It reverses, or inverts, the state of the input. If the input 
equals 1, then the output equals 0. If the input equals 0, then 
the output equals 1.
• An OR gate can have two or more inputs (although it usually 
has only two). If both, or all, of the inputs equal 0, then the 
-
+
Fig. 3-51.  Schematic symbol for a self-contained multicell electrochemical battery.
-
+
-
+
-
+
Fig. 3-52.  Symbol for three single electrochemical cells connected in series to form 
a battery.

Logic gates    55
output equals 0. If any of the inputs equals 1, then the output 
equals 1. Mathematical logicians would tell us that such a gate 
performs an inclusive-OR operation because it “includes” the 
case where both variables are high.
• An AND gate can have two or more inputs (although it usually 
has only two). If both, or all, of the inputs equal 1, then the 
output equals 1. If any of the inputs equals 0, then the output 
equals 0.
• An OR gate can be followed by a NOT gate. This combination 
gives us a NOT-OR gate, more often called a NOR gate. If both, 
or all, of the inputs equal 0, then the output equals 1. If any of 
the inputs equals 1, then the output equals 0.
• An AND gate can be followed by a NOT gate. This combina-
tion gives us a NOT-AND gate, more often called a NAND gate. 
If both, or all, of the inputs equal 1, then the output equals 0. If 
any of the inputs equals 0, then the output equals 1.
• An exclusive OR gate, also called an XOR gate, has two inputs 
and one output. If the two inputs have the same state (either 
both 1 or both 0), then the output equals 0. If the two inputs 
have different states, then the output equals 1. Mathematicians 
use the term exclusive-OR operation because it doesn’t “include” 
the case where both variables are high.
Figure 3-53 illustrates the schematic symbols that engineers and tech-
nicians use to represent these gates in circuit diagrams.
A
B
C
E
F
D
Fig. 3-53.  Symbols for a logical inverter or NOT gate (A), an OR gate (B), an AND 
gate (C), a NOR gate (D), a NAND gate (E), and an XOR gate (F).

56    Component symbols
Summary
You’ll encounter lots of symbols in electronics other than the com-
mon ones shown in this chapter. Appendix A is a comprehensive 
table of schematic symbols. In addition to the ones already discussed, 
you will see symbols for jacks and plugs, piezoelectric crystals, lamps, 
microphones, meters, antennas, and many other electronic compo-
nents.
It might, at first thought, seem like a massive chore to memorize all 
of these symbols, but their usage and correct identification will come 
to you with practice and with time. The best way to begin the learn-
ing process is to read simple schematics and refer to Appendix A in 
this book whenever a symbol crops up that you can’t identify. Within 
a few hours you’ll be able to move on to more complex schemat-
ics, again looking up the unknown symbols. After a few weekends 
of practice, you should be thoroughly familiar with most electronic 
symbols used in schematic representations, so that when you see 
one in a diagram, you’ll recognize it without having to think about it.
Schematic symbols are the fundamental elements of a commu-
nication scheme, like the symbols in mathematical expressions or 
architectural blueprints. Most schematic symbols in electronics are 
based on the structure of the components or devices they represent. 
Schematic symbols often appear in groups, each of which bears some 
relationship to the others. For example, you’ll encounter many differ-
ent types of transistors, but they’re all represented in a similar fash-
ion. Minor symbol changes portray variations in internal structure, 
but all can be easily identified as some type of transistor. The same 
rule applies to the symbols for diodes, resistors, capacitors, inductors, 
transformers, meters, lamps, and most other electronic components.

4
Simple circuits
When it comes to teaching people how to read and draw schematic 
diagrams, two schools of thought prevail. One school feels that you 
should learn to read diagrams before you learn to draw anything. 
The other school feels that you should learn to read diagrams as part 
of the process of drawing them. Both sides of this issue have their 
merits, so let’s take advantage of them both! Certainly, you must start 
out by learning the basic component symbols. Then you should try to 
read as many schematic drawings as you can find. When this business 
starts to grow boring, you can draw your own simple diagrams. If you 
alternately read and draw schematics as the moods strike, you’ll get 
comfortable with them before long! I recommend that you devote half 
of your study time to reading and the other half to drawing. 
Getting started
This chapter deals with reading and drawing diagrams of some simple 
electronic circuits shown in pictorial and schematic form. Using this 
method, you can actually see the physical layout for a device, and 
then see how the schematic representation derives from it. Some com-
mercial schematics are produced in this manner. However, in most 
instances, a circuit is designed schematically first, and then built and 
tested from the schematic. If a circuit is experimental, some bugs 
will exist in the prototype, necessitating various component deletions, 
57

58    Simple circuits
substitutions, or modifications. When these changes are made to the 
test circuit, the results are noted, and the schematic is changed accord-
ingly. In the end, the finished and corrected schematic is a product of 
design theory, actual testing, and modification.
Figure 4-1 shows a simple circuit that everyone has used at one 
time or another. Basically, it’s a flashlight with the external case and 
the on/off switch removed. The device consists of a single electro-
chemical cell and an electric light bulb. This pictorial representation 
also shows the conductors, which attach to the light bulb and the 
battery. The conductors provide a current path between the battery 
and the light bulb.
Follow the flow
In the circuit of Fig. 4-1, electrons travel from the negative terminal 
of the cell through the bulb element and back to the positive termi-
nal of the cell, “leapfrogging” from atom to atom in the metal wire 
and the bulb filament. That’s how most electricians and engineers 
look at this situation. But some physicists will tell you that the cur-
rent actually goes from the positive cell pole to the negative cell 
pole. That’s called theoretical current or conventional current.
In order to draw a schematic diagram of the flashlight drawn in 
Fig. 4-1, you need to know three schematic symbols. These represent 
the electrochemical cell, the conductors, and the bulb, as shown in 
Fig. 4-2. Once you know the symbols, you can assemble them in a 
+
Wire
Wire
Electron flow
Single cell
Incandescent
bulb
Fig. 4-1.  Pictorial drawing of a flashlight circuit using a single electrochemical cell 
(or single-cell battery), some wire, and an incandescent bulb.

Getting started    59
logical manner based on the appearance of the circuit in the pictorial 
drawing. 
Start by drawing the cell symbol. You can think of the cell as the 
heart of the circuit because it supplies all of the power for the device; 
it “pumps the electrons” through everything! Next comes the symbol 
for the light bulb, which you can draw at any point near the cell. 
Using this example, you should try to make the schematic symbols 
fall in line with the way the pictorial diagram appears. This layout 
places the light bulb above the cell.
Now that you’ve drawn the two major symbols, you can use the 
conductor symbols (plain, straight, solid, black lines) to hook them 
together. Notice that the pictorial drawing shows two conductors. 
Therefore, the schematic diagram also has two conductors. Figure 
4-3 shows the completed schematic drawing, which is the symbolic 
equivalent of Fig. 4-1.
-
+
A
B
C
Fig. 4-2.  Schematic symbols for an electrochemical cell (A), an electrical  
conductor such as wire (B), and an incandescent bulb (C).
-
+
Fig. 4-3.  Schematic diagram of the single-cell flashlight.

60    Simple circuits
Figure 4-3 is by no means the only way that you can represent this 
simple circuit in schematic form. But any schematic representation 
will require the use of the same three basic symbols: cell, bulb, and 
conductors. The only changes that can occur involve the positioning 
of the component symbols on the page. Figure 4-4 shows two dif-
ferent alternatives for portraying the same circuit. All three of these 
diagrams (the one in Fig. 4-3 and the two in Fig. 4-4) are electrically 
equivalent, but they look somewhat different as a result of the rela-
tive positions of the components on the page.
Let’s change this circuit a little bit, in order to gain proficiency in  
reading and writing schematics. Figure 4-5 shows the same basic flash-
light circuit, but an additional cell and a switch have been added. This 
+
+
Wire
Wire
Incandescent
bulb
Two single cells in series
Switch
Electron flow (only when
switch is closed)
Fig. 4-5.  Pictorial drawing of a flashlight circuit using two single cells in series, 
some wire, a switch, and an incandescent bulb.
-
+
-
+
A
B
Fig. 4-4.  Alternative arrangements for the flashlight schematic. At A, cell and bulb 
“vertical;” at B, cell and bulb both on top.

Getting started    61
configuration is quite common for flashlights sold in the United States. 
By examining this pictorial drawing, you can see that any schematic rep-
resentation will need symbols for the cells, the conductors, the light bulb,  
and the switch. Figure 4-6 shows the symbols that you’ll need to produce  
an accurate and complete schematic drawing of this circuit. Again, 
you should draw the symbols in the same basic order as the com-
ponents are wired in the circuit. Figure 4-7 shows the resulting sche-
matic. Note that the two cell symbols are drawn separately, connected 
in series, with polarity markings provided for each one. In the series 
connection, the positive terminal of one cell goes to the negative  
-
+
A
B
C
D
Fig. 4-6.  Symbols for components in the two-cell switched flashlight: Cell (A), wire 
(B), bulb (C), and switch (D).
-
+
-
+
Fig. 4-7.  Schematic diagram of the two-cell switched flashlight.

62    Simple circuits
terminal of the other. The same two conductors are used from the cell 
terminals, but you need a third one to connect the switch to the light 
bulb, and you might also need a fourth one to connect the two cells 
together to form a battery (unless the cells rest directly against each 
other, a common state of affairs inside commercially manufactured 
flashlights). Figure 4-7 shows the switch in the off position.
Eureka!
Now you know what a common two-cell flashlight looks like 
when represented with schematic symbology. The next time that 
you switch one of those things on, you can imagine the switch 
symbol in Fig. 4-7 moving from the off (or open) position to the 
on (or closed) position.
Figure 4-8 is a pictorial representation of a device called a field-strength 
meter. Wireless communications engineers sometimes use this type of 
meter to see whether or not an RF electromagnetic (EM) field exists at 
a given location. You’ll find this little circuit quite handy if you enjoy  
amateur radio, or if you need to locate the source of something 
that’s causing RF interference. The circuit consists of an antenna, 
an RF diode, a microammeter (a sensitive current meter graduated 
in millionths of an ampere), and a coil. In order to draw this circuit 
0
25 50 75
100
Diode
Coil
Antenna
Micro-
ammeter
Fig. 4-8.  Pictorial representation of a field-strength meter circuit.

Getting started    63
A
B
C
D
A
µ
Fig. 4-9.  Schematic symbols for the components in the field-strength meter: 
Antenna (A), coil (B), microammeter (C), and diode (D).
schematically, you need to know the symbols for an antenna, a coil, 
a microammeter, and a diode, all of which appear in Fig. 4-9. Using 
the same method as before, you can draw the schematic by connect-
ing the symbols in the same geometric sequence as the components 
they represent appear in the circuit.
Figure 4-10 is a schematic of the field-strength meter shown pictori-
ally in Fig. 4-8. This drawing involves nothing more than substitution  
of the schematic symbols for the pictorial symbols. As before, the 
parts need not be physically placed in the same positions as the sche-
matic diagram suggests, but they must be interconnected precisely as 
indicated in the schematic. When you build a circuit from a schematic 
diagram that you trust, you should double-check and triple-check 
your actual component interconnections to make sure that they agree 
with the schematic. If you try to build the circuit shown in Fig. 4-10 
A
µ
Fig. 4-10.  Schematic diagram of the field-strength meter.

64    Simple circuits
and make a mistake in the wiring connections, you cannot expect it 
to work. In more sophisticated devices and systems, wiring mistakes 
can cause component damage and, once in awhile, give rise to dan-
gerous situations!
Follow the flow
In the circuit of Figs. 4-8 and 4-10, an EM field induces an RF cur-
rent in the antenna and coil. That current is high-frequency AC.  
The diode rectifies the AC wave by “chopping off” either the posi-
tive half or the negative half of every cycle (depending on the 
diode’s polarity) to produce pulsating DC like the output of a 
simple rectifier. The microammeter registers this current. As the  
strength of the EM field increases, the current increases, and  
the meter reading goes up.
Previously, we compared schematic drawings to road maps. A road 
map is supposed to indicate exactly what a motorist will experience  
in practice. The schematic drawing does the same thing. The high-
way lines that interconnect towns on a map correspond to the con-
ductor lines that interconnect components in a schematic. A road 
map shows the route that a motorist takes while driving from town 
to town on the earth’s surface, whereas a schematic diagram shows 
the route that a current or signal takes through the components in 
an electronic circuit.
Now let’s look at something that’s a little more complicated. Figure 
4-11 is a schematic diagram of a power supply that produces pure, 
battery-like DC from utility AC. As you read this diagram from left to 
right, you’ll see that a power plug goes to the transformer primary 
winding (the one to the left of the pair of vertical lines) through a 
fuse. At the top of the transformer secondary winding (the one on the 
right), a rectifier diode is connected in series. Following the diode, an 
electrolytic capacitor (note the polarity sign) is connected between 
the output of the rectifier and the bottom of the transformer second-
ary. A fixed resistor is connected in parallel with the capacitor. The 
DC output appears at the extreme right.
The physical size and weight of a real-world power supply, which 
you can build on the basis of Fig. 4-11, will depend on the volt-
age and current that you need to get from it. Because DC power  

Getting started    65
supplies have polarized outputs, positive and negative signs indicate 
the output voltage polarity. Any power supply that uses a single 
diode, capacitor, and resistor will have this same basic configuration. 
Whether the output is 5 V at 1 A or 5000 V at 50 A, the schematic 
drawing will look the same. Figure 4-11 says nothing about how 
many volts or amperes the transformer, diode, capacitor, and resistor 
are meant to handle. You could add special features, such as a volt-
age regulator, overcurrent protector, voltmeter, or ammeter to your 
circuit and insert the symbols at the proper points in the schematic; 
but all half-wave DC power supplies are built around “cores” whose 
diagrams look like Fig. 4-11.
Follow the flow
In the circuit of Fig. 4-11, utility AC appears at the plug on the left. 
The AC travels through the fuse and flows in the transformer pri-
mary. In the secondary, AC also flows, but the voltage across the 
transformer secondary might be higher or lower than the voltage 
across the primary (depending on the transformer specifications). 
The diode allows current to flow only one way; in this case the 
electrons can go only from right to left (against the arrow). As a 
result, pulsating DC comes out of the diode. The capacitor gets rid 
of the pulsations, called ripple, on the DC output from the diode. 
The resistor discharges, or bleeds, the capacitor when you unplug 
the whole device from the utility outlet.
+
+
_
Plug
Fuse
Diode
Transformer
Capacitor
Resistor
Fig. 4-11.  Schematic diagram of a simple DC power supply.

66    Simple circuits
Component labeling
Figure 4-12 is a schematic of the same circuit as the one shown in Fig. 
4-11, but in this case, each component has an alphabetic/numeric 
designation. These designators all refer to a components list at the 
bottom. Now you can see that this power supply uses a transformer 
with a primary winding rated at 125 V and a secondary winding that 
yields 12 V. The circuit has a diode rated at 50 peak inverse volts 
(PIV) and a forward current of 1 A; a 100-microfarad, 50-V capacitor; 
and a 10,000-ohm, 1-W carbon resistor. The fuse is rated at 0.5 A  
and 125 V.
The letters that identify each component are more or less standard. 
Notice that each letter is followed by the number 1. The designation 
T1, for instance, indicates that the component is a transformer (T) 
and that it’s the first such component referenced. If this circuit had 
two transformers, then one of them would bear the label T1 and the 
other one would bear the label T2. The numbers reference the posi-
tion or order on the components list; they serve no other purpose. 
The diode carries the reference designator D1, with D serving as the 
standard abbreviation for most diodes. Standardization is not univer-
sal, though! In some instances, the diode might bear the label SR1, 
where the letters SR stand for silicon rectifier. Some Zener diodes are 
labeled as ZD1, ZD2, and so on. This labeling makes little difference 
as long as you write the component designations next to the corre-
+
+
_
P1
F1
D1
C1
R1
18 V
DC
(peak)
T1
C1 - 100 microfarad electrolytic 50 V DC
D1 - 50 peak inverse volts at 1 ampere
F1 - 0.5 ampere at 125 volts
P1 - Male line plug
R1 - 10,000 ohm 1 watt carbon
T1 - 125 volt primary, 12 volt secondary, 1 ampere
Fig. 4-12.  Schematic diagram of the power supply with component designators and 
specifications.

Component labeling    67
sponding symbols. If you replaced the designation D1 with SR1, your 
readers would still know that the abbreviation went with the symbol 
for the diode, as long as you made sure to put the abbreviation close 
enough to the symbol.
In the situation of Fig. 4-12, you don’t have to include a number 
next to each component designation because only one of each com-
ponent is used to make up the entire schematic! You could simply 
write P for the plug, F for the fuse, T for the transformer, D for the 
diode, C for the capacitor, and R for the resistor. Or, if you had con-
fidence that your readers knew all the symbols, you could leave out 
designators altogether! Nevertheless, standard diagramming practice 
requires that you always include a letter and a number, even if only 
one of a certain component type exists in the whole circuit.
In complicated electronic systems, several hundred components 
of the same type (resistors, for example) might exist, many of which 
come from the same family. For instance, if you see the designation 
R101, then you know that the system contains at least 101 resistors. 
If you want to know the type and value of resistor R101, you will 
have to look up R101 in the components list to find its specifications.
Tip
You can use the schematic of Fig. 4-12 to build a power supply 
with a peak output of about 18 V DC. But before each component 
was referenced, the schematic had no practical use. Figure 4-11 
illustrates a generic half-wave power supply, but that schematic 
doesn’t give you any practical information other than the relative 
arrangement of the components.
Table 4-1 shows the standard letter designations for most types of 
electronic components that you’ll encounter in schematic diagrams. 
Some of these designations can vary in real-world documentation, 
depending upon the idiosyncrasies of the person making the draw-
ing or designing the circuit. You should find it easy to memorize (yes, 
that’s right, memorize!) the information in Table 4-1 because most 
of the designations merely comprise the first letters of the compo-
nent names. If the component has a complex name, such as silicon-
controlled rectifier, the first letters from each of the three words is 
used, so you get SCR1. A resistor is designated by R, a capacitor by 

68    Simple circuits
C, a fuse by F, and so on. Conflicts do arise, of course. If you want to 
designate a relay, you need to use some letter other than R because 
R indicates a resistor! The same thing happens if you want to label a 
crystal; you can’t use C because that letter refers to a capacitor. Look 
through Table 4-1 from time to time as you read and draw schematic 
diagrams, and eventually you’ll absorb all the information in there.
Table 4-1
Letter designations for components that commonly appear  
in schematic diagrams
Abbreviation
Full component name
ANT
Antenna
B
Battery
C
Capacitor
CB
Circuit board
D
Diode
EP
Earphone
F
Fuse
GND
Ground
I
Incandescent lamp
IC
Integrated circuit
J
Receptacle, jack, or terminal strip
K
Relay
L
Inductor
LED
Light-emitting diode
M
Meter
NE
Neon lamp
P
Plug
PC
Photocell
PH
Earphone
Q
Transistor
R
Resistor
RFC
Radio-frequency choke
RY
Relay
S
Switch or telegraph key
SCR
Silicon-controlled rectifier
SPK, SPKR
Speaker
SR
Silicon rectifier
T
Transformer
TP
Terminal or test point
U
Integrated circuit
V
Vacuum tube
Y
Quartz crystal
Z
Circuit assembly

Component labeling    69
The circuit of Fig. 4-13 has a full-wave bridge rectifier along with 
a better ripple filter than the simple capacitor used in the previous 
power supply. The inductor, L1, is a filter choke, which, along with 
capacitor C1, does an excellent job of “smoothing” out the DC so it 
resembles what comes from a 12-V battery (pure DC with no ripple).
Figure 4-14 shows a voltage-doubler power supply. The two capaci-
tors, C1 and C2, charge up from the full transformer secondary out-
put after the current goes through diodes D1 and D2. Because the 
two capacitors are connected in series, they act like two batteries in 
series, giving you twice the voltage. But there’s a catch! A voltage 
doubler power supply works well only at low current levels. If you 
try to draw too much current from one of these power supplies, 
you’ll “draw down” the capacitors and the voltage will decrease.
In Figs. 4-13 and 4-14, the letter designations are the same for each 
component type, but the numbers advance, one by one, up to the 
total number of units. So, for example, in Fig. 4-13 you see diodes 
_
+
+
Zener diode
Current-limiting resistor
D1
D2
D3
D4
C1
R1
D5
L1
T1
12 V DC
120 V AC
Fig. 4-13.  A power supply that uses full-wave bridge rectification (four rectifier 
diodes) and Zener-diode voltage regulation.
+
+
120 V AC
750 V DC
D1
D2
R1
R2
C1
C2
T1
Fig. 4-14.  A voltage-doubler power supply.

70    Simple circuits
D1 through D5 because the circuit contains five diodes. (The Zener 
diode to the right of R1 has the letter D just like the rectifier diodes 
have, but you can tell it’s a Zener diode because of the bent line in 
the symbol.) All the other components have only one of each type. 
In Fig. 4-14, you see two diodes, two capacitors, and two resistors, so 
the numbers for D, C, and R go up to 2. The transformer is all alone, 
so you see only the number 1 following the letter T.
Tip
Even though multiple components might all have the same value 
(820 ohms, for example, or 50 microfarads), they must neverthe-
less get separate numerical designations when two or more of 
them exist in a single circuit.
Schematics don’t reveal every physical detail of a device, the 
way a photograph or detailed pictorial would do. Schematics depict 
schemes, that’s all! The schematic diagram for a device allows engi-
neers and technicians to make the correct electrical connections 
when putting it together, and to locate the various components when 
testing, adjusting, debugging, or troubleshooting it. If you find all 
this talk overly philosophical, maybe a real-world example will clear 
things up. Remember that solid lines in schematic drawings repre-
sent conductors. However, a conductor doesn’t have to be a length 
of wire. It might be part of a component lead, or perhaps a foil run 
on a printed circuit board (the latter-day equivalent of a connecting 
wire). Whether or not a separate length of wire is needed to inter-
connect two components will depend on how close together those 
components are in the physical layout.
Examine the simple schematic of Fig. 4-15. The circuit contains 
three resistors, all of which go together in a parallel arrangement. 
R1
R2
R3
Fig. 4-15.  A simple circuit comprising three resistors in parallel.

Troubleshooting with schematics    71
Taking the schematic literally, a conductor connects the left-hand 
side of R1 to the left-hand side of R2. Another conductor goes 
between the left-hand side of R2 and the left-hand side of R3. Two 
other conductors connect the right-hand sides of the components. In 
practice, the connections might be made with wires attached to the 
resistor leads, but if the components are close enough together, the 
leads themselves can form the interconnections. Then Fig. 4-15 will 
represent the physical arrangement shown in Fig. 4-16.
Naturally, if you want to follow good engineering principles, you’ll 
want to make all of your electronic circuits as compact (and depend-
able) as possible by using a minimum amount of point-to-point wir-
ing and trying to make the component leads serve for interconnection 
purposes whenever you can. Of course, in the above example, if the 
three resistors had to go in different parts of the circuit separated by 
some physical distance, then you would need to use interconnect-
ing conductors between them. However, as you design the physical 
layout of a circuit, you should try to minimize the overall length 
(that is, the total length) of all the interconnecting wires or foil runs 
combined.
Troubleshooting  
with schematics
Engineers and technicians use schematic diagrams to create elec-
tronic devices, but these diagrams can also prove invaluable for  
troubleshooting equipment when problems develop. Knowing how 
to read schematic diagrams, however, is not enough. You also need to  
know what tasks the various components actually perform, as well 
R1
R3
R2
Fig. 4-16.  Pictorial diagram of three resistors in parallel with leads intertwined.

72    Simple circuits
as how the diverse circuits work together in a complete system. No 
matter how proficient you might get at electronics troubleshooting, 
seemingly simple repair jobs can explode into major headaches with-
out complete, accurate, and clear schematic representations of the 
hardware.
Remember!
Schematic diagrams clarify circuits. They present the circuit ele-
ments in a logical and easy-to-understand manner. They tell you 
very little, if anything, about the component layouts in actual 
devices.
When you build a circuit from a schematic drawing, the physical 
object rarely bears much physical resemblance to the schematic. It’s 
impractical to build a complex electronic circuit by placing the com-
ponents in the exact same geometrical relationship as they appear in 
the schematic. The diagrams purposely spread out the components on 
the page for easy reading. Schematic diagrams are two-dimensional, 
whereas real-world electronic components are three-dimensional. 
You need only to look inside of a major electronic device, such as a 
television set or computer, to realize the complexities that you’d face 
in troubleshooting a complex system without the help of a schematic 
diagram.
If you know a fair amount about electronic components and how 
they operate in various circuits, then you can use a schematic diagram 
to get a good idea (without any equipment testing) where a particu-
lar problem might occur. Then, by testing various circuit parameters 
at these critical points and comparing your findings with what the 
schematic diagram indicates should be present, you can make a quick 
assessment of the trouble. For example, if a schematic diagram shows 
a direct connection between two components in a circuit, and a check 
with an ohmmeter reveals a high resistance between the two, then 
you can assume that a conductor is broken or a contact has been 
shaken loose. If a schematic diagram shows only a capacitor between 
two components (with no other circuit routes around it) and a read-
ing with your ohmmeter shows zero ohms or only a couple of ohms, 
you can assume that the capacitor has shorted out and you’ll have to 
replace it. 

Troubleshooting with schematics    73
Beginners to electronics troubleshooting and diagram reading 
sometimes assume that a professional can instantly isolate a problem 
to the component level by looking at the schematic. This idealized 
state of affairs might prevail for a few simple circuits, but in complex 
designs the situation grows a lot more involved. Often, the schematic 
diagram allows a technician to make educated guesses as to where 
or what the trouble might be, but an exhaustive diagnosis will nearly 
always require testing. A particular malfunction in an electronic device 
will not necessarily have a single, easy-to-identify cause. Often there 
are many possible causes, and the technician must whittle the situ-
ation down to a single cause by following a process of elimination.
Suppose that a circuit will not activate, and no voltage can be 
detected through testing at any contact point indicated by the sche-
matic. Chances are good that no current is passing through the circuit 
at all. However, you don’t know from this observation exactly what 
has caused the failure. Has one of the components in the power supply 
become defective? Has the line cord been accidentally pulled from the  
wall outlet? Has a conductor broken between the output of the power 
supply and the input to the electronic device? Has the fuse blown?
In a scenario of this sort, you will almost certainly want to consult 
the schematic diagram as you go through all of the standard test pro-
cedures. You might wish to find the contact point that serves as the 
power supply output, indicated on the schematic. If you test the volt-
age at this point and it appears normal, then you can assume that the 
problem lies somewhere further along in the circuit. The schematic 
diagram and the test instrument readings allow you to methodically 
search out and isolate the problem by starting at a point in the circuit 
where operation is normal and proceeding forward until you get to 
the point where the circuit shows some abnormality.
Continuing with the same example, if no output comes from the  
power supply, you know that you must search backward toward  
the trouble point. You will continue testing until you reach a point 
of normal operation and then proceed from there. Using a schematic 
diagram, you’ll follow your progress and thereby narrow the problem 
area down to something between two points (the point farthest back 
from the output at which the problem exists, and the point furthest 
forward from the input where things test normal). Chances are good 
that this narrowing process will isolate the trouble to a single com-
ponent or circuit connection.

74    Simple circuits
Tip
You could follow all of the foregoing steps without a schematic 
diagram, although it would take you a lot longer to do it, and it 
would increase the risk of your making a mistake. As you become 
more experienced in the art of electronics troubleshooting, the 
information contained in schematic drawings becomes increas-
ingly valuable.
Go back and look again at the flashlight circuit of Fig. 4-7. Although 
the schematic diagram does not say so, the two batteries in series should  
yield a DC potential of 3 V because a typical flashlight cell provides 
1.5 V, and DC voltages add up in series connections. Some schematic 
diagrams provide voltage test points and maximum/minimum read-
ings that you should expect, but this simple example doesn’t.
Suppose that the flashlight has stopped working, and you decide 
to test the circuit with a volt-ohm-milliammeter (VOM), also called 
a multimeter, with the help of Fig. 4-7. First of all, you can measure 
the individual voltages across the cells. With the meter’s positive 
probe placed at the positive cell terminal and the negative probe at 
the negative terminal, you should get a reading of 1.5 volts across 
each cell. If both read zero, then you know that both cells have lost 
all their electrical charge. If one cell reads normal and the other one 
reads zero, then in theory you should only have to replace the  
one that reads zero. (In practice, it’s a good idea to replace entire 
sets of cells all at once, even if some of them still test okay). If both 
cells read normal, then you can test the voltage across the bulb. Here, 
you should expect a reading of 3 V under normal operation with the 
switch closed. If you do indeed observe 3 V here, then you can diag-
nose the problem by looking at the schematic. The bulb must have 
burned out! The schematic shows you that current must go through 
the light bulb if the bulb can conduct, so it must light up. If voltage is 
available at the base of the light bulb, then current will flow through 
the element unless it has opened up. But of course, if the bulb fila-
ment has broken apart, no current can flow through the bulb, so it 
won’t light up. In fact, with a burned-out bulb, no current will flow 
anywhere at all in the circuit.
On the other hand, let’s say that you get a normal reading at the 
batteries, but no reading whatsoever at the light bulb. Obviously, a 

A more complex circuit    75
break must exist in the circuit between these two circuit points. Three 
conductors are involved here: one between the negative terminal of 
the battery and one side of the bulb, another between the positive 
battery terminal and the switch, and another between the switch 
and the other side of the bulb. Obviously, one of the conductors has 
broken (or a contact has been lost where the conductor attaches to 
the battery), or maybe the switch is defective. While you keep an 
eye on the schematic, you can test for a defective switch by placing 
the negative meter probe on the negative battery terminal and the 
positive probe on the input to the switch. If you see a normal voltage 
reading, then the switch must be defective. If you still get no voltage 
reading, then one of the conductors has come loose or broken.
Admittedly, the scenario just described presents only a basic exam-
ple of troubleshooting using a schematic diagram—almost as simple 
as things can get! But imagine that the flashlight circuit is highly 
complex, one you know nothing about. Then the schematic diagram 
becomes an invaluable aid and a necessary adjunct to the standard 
test procedures with the VOM. This same basic test procedure will 
be used over and over again when testing highly complex electronic 
circuits of a similar nature. In most instances, no matter how com-
plicated the circuit design looks, it’s actually a combination of many 
simple circuits. But if you have to do a comprehensive troubleshoot-
ing operation, you might have to test each and every one of those 
circuits individually. 
A more complex circuit
Figure 4-17 shows a diagram for a somewhat more complicated, 
real-world electronic circuit presented in a form intended to assist 
a troubleshooting technician. The circuit has a single NPN bipolar 
transistor along with some resistors and capacitors. Note that test 
points (abbreviated TP) exist at three different locations: TP1 at the 
emitter of the transistor, TP2 at the base of the transistor, and TP3 at 
the collector of the transistor. If you need to troubleshoot this circuit 
(which happens to be a low-power amplifier of the sort you might 
find in a vintage radio receiver or hi-fi set), you’ll connect your VOM 
between chassis ground and each one of these three points, in turn. 
You’ll carefully note the meter readings and compare them with 
known normal values.

76    Simple circuits
Follow the flow
The circuit of Fig. 4-17 receives a weak input AC signal (such as the 
output of an ultrasonic pickup) and boosts it so that it can drive a 
device that consumes significant power (such as a switching cir-
cuit). The general signal flow goes from left to right. The original 
AC signal enters at the input terminals, passes through capacitor 
C2, and reaches the base (left-hand electrode) of transistor Q1. 
The base acts as an adjustable “current valve” that causes large 
current fluctuations through Q1 as the electrons flow from ground 
through R1 to the emitter (the bottom electrode), then onward to 
the collector (top electrode), and out through R4 to the positive 
power supply terminal. Capacitors C2 and C3 allow the AC signals 
to pass while blocking DC from the power supply so that the DC 
won’t upset the operation of external circuits. Capacitor C1 keeps 
the transistor’s emitter at a constant DC voltage while allowing the 
input signal to enter unimpeded. The resistors R2 and R3 have val-
ues carefully chosen to place precisely the right DC voltage, called 
bias, on the base of Q1, ensuring that the transistor will work as 
well as it possibly can in this application.
In many electronic circuits, actual voltages can deviate from design 
values by up to 20 percent; if this information is important, you’ll  
Input
Output
+12 V
+12 V
R1
R2
R3
R4
C1
C2
C3
Q1
TP1
TP2
TP3
Fig. 4-17.  Schematic diagram of an amplifier circuit that includes component des-
ignators and three test point (TP) locations.

A more complex circuit    77
usually find the error range at the bottom of the schematic drawing 
or in the accompanying literature. If the readings obtained are within 
this known error range (called the component tolerance), then you 
can tentatively assume that this part of the circuit is working prop-
erly. However, if the readings obtained are zero or well outside of 
the tolerance range, then you have pretty good reason to suspect a 
problem with the associated circuit portion, or possibly with other 
circuits that feed it.
Many schematic drawings that accompany electronic equipment, 
especially “projects” that you build from a kit containing individual 
components, include information that aids not only in troubleshooting, 
but also in the initial testing and alignment procedures that you must 
follow as soon as you’ve completed the physical assembly process. 
As a further aid, the literature might include pictorial diagrams that  
show you where each part belongs on the circuit board or chassis. 
That way, you can follow the circuit not only according to its electrical 
details, but along the physical pathways as they actually look.
According to standard schematic drawing practice, every compo-
nent should bear a unique alphabetic/numeric label to designate it, 
as you see in Fig. 4-17. However, a few alternative labeling forms 
are also acceptable. Figure 4-18 shows the same circuit as the one 
in Fig. 4-17, but the parts list has been eliminated and the diagram 
contains no alphabetic/numeric designations. Instead, the compo-
Input
Output
+12 V
+12 V
33k
330k
0.1
4.7
470
680
0.01
2N2222
Fig. 4-18.  Schematic diagram of the amplifier circuit from Fig. 4-17, but with com-
ponent values instead of sequential designators. All capacitances are in microfar-
ads (μF). All resistances are in ohms (Ω); k = 1000.

78    Simple circuits
nents are identified only by their schematic symbols along with value  
designations or industry standard part designations. Using the exam-
ple shown, we know that the transistor is a 2N2222 type, and that  
the resistors have values of 470, 33k (33,000), 330k (330,000), and 
680 ohms. The input capacitor has a value of 0.01 microfarad (μF) 
and the output capacitor has a value of 0.1 μF. The emitter capacitor, 
which goes across the 470-ohm resistor, has a value of 4.7 μF.
Tip
In situations like the one in Fig. 4-18, you’ll usually see a statement 
at the bottom of a schematic diagram that includes information 
about the units for the value designations. Such a statement might 
read “All capacitors are rated in microfarads (μF). All resistances 
are given in ohms (Ω), where k = 1000 and M = 1,000,000.”
Schematic/block 
combinations
Once in awhile, you’ll encounter a “hybrid” drawing that consists 
of a block diagram and a schematic diagram combined. Figure 4-19 
shows an example of this approach, which works well when you 
want to highlight and explain a particular circuit, and to clarify its 
relationship to other circuits in a system. The detailed schematic por-
tion of Fig. 4-19 shows a buffer amplifier of the sort you’ll find in a 
radio transmitter. An oscillator (which precedes the buffer) and an 
amplifier (which follows the buffer) are represented as blocks with 
labels inside.
This diagram serves two purposes. First, as you read the sche-
matic portion, you can study the actual component makeup of the 
buffer circuit. Second, you get a good idea as to the buffer’s place  
in the overall system relative to the other circuits. The block/sche-
matic representation in Fig. 4-19 clearly shows you that the buffer 
receives its input from a crystal-controlled oscillator, and also that  
the buffer sends its output to an amplifier. Another schematic dia-
gram and block diagram combination might describe another portion 
of this same device, which you might recognize as a simple radio 
transmitter.

Schematic/block combinations    79
Figure 4-20 is a schematic/block “hybrid” diagram in which the 
oscillator is portrayed in schematic detail, but the buffer and the ampli-
fier are represented only as blocks. This figure tells you that the oscil-
lator output goes to the buffer, which then sends the signal along to 
the amplifier. The only new information obtained here is contained in 
+12 V
C2
R2
Q1
Crystal
oscillator
R3
C1
R1
C3
Amplifier
Fig. 4-19.  A combination block/schematic diagram of an oscillator, buffer, and 
amplifier system, showing the schematic details of the buffer portion.
+12 V
C1
C2
R1
R2
R3
C4
Amplifier
Buffer
Q1
Y1
S1
Fig. 4-20.  A block/schematic diagram of the system from Fig. 4-19, showing the 
schematic details of the oscillator portion.

80    Simple circuits
the schematic representation of the oscillator. If you look at Figs. 4-19 
and 4-20 together, however, you can picture in your mind a diagram 
in which all of the system’s detail is included up to the point where 
the signal enters the amplifier. The oscillator portion of Fig. 4-20 also 
tells you that the oscillator is designed to generate Morse code signals 
because it contains a telegraph key!
Now let’s “shift gears” and recall the block diagram of the AC-to-DC 
converter that you saw all the way back in Fig. 2-1. Figure 4-21 shows 
the schematic representation of that device, along with a duplicate 
of Fig. 2-1 to save you the trouble of having to flip pages. As you 
compare the two diagrams, note that in the schematic (at A), all of 
the actual components are shown, rather than merely portraying the 
stages as labeled blocks (at B). Figure 4-22 is a more comprehen-
sive diagram that shows how the block diagram of this same device 
relates to the schematic diagram, while revealing all of the details 
originally present in both diagrams.
_
+
+
+
D1
D2
D3
D4
C1
T1
12 V DC
120 V AC
L1
C2
AC in
DC out
A
B
Transformer
Rectifier
Filter
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
AC in
DC out
Fig. 4-21.  Schematic diagram of an AC-to-DC converter (at A), such as the one 
portrayed in the block diagram all the way back in Fig. 2-1 (reproduced here at B).

Summary    81
Follow the flow
To briefly explain the AC-to-DC converter circuit, more commonly 
called a power supply, the input electricity enters at the extreme 
left-hand end of all versions of the diagram (Figs. 4-21 and 4-22). 
The AC goes to the transformer to set up the proper ratio for con-
version to DC. The four diodes in the diamond configuration con-
stitute the rectifier, which converts the AC to pulsating DC, making 
use of both halves of the cycle. The final stage, the ripple filter, 
acts to smooth out the pulsations in the DC after the conversion. 
The “smoothed-out” or “pure” DC then goes along to the output 
terminals at the right-hand end, where it appears as a voltage just 
like the electricity that you’d find at the terminals of a 12-V battery.
Summary
This chapter has provided a brief sampling of simple electronic cir-
cuits, showing how you can read diagrams to learn how circuits are 
put together, or draw diagrams on the basis of known circuit details. 
_
+
+
+
12 V DC
120 V AC
Stage 1:
Transformer
Stage 2:
Rectifier
Stage 3:
Filter
Fig. 4-22.  Here’s how the block diagram of Fig. 2-1 relates to the schematic  
diagram of Fig. 4-21. (Component designators have been omitted to avoid clutter.)

82    Simple circuits
After a bit more training, you should be able to view a simple sche-
matic and easily visualize what the finished circuit will look like, 
maybe even getting an idea of how you might go about arranging 
the components on a circuit board (even though the schematics or 
block diagrams don’t explicitly tell you what to do in that respect). 
You know that a roadway, as you drive along it in your car, does 
not look like the line that represents it on a map. You can visualize a 
secondary road or even a superhighway and do so whenever you see 
their symbols (although there’s nothing like traveling along a road in 
both directions to learn all about it). The same principle holds true 
when reading schematic diagrams. When you see a bunch of sche-
matic symbols in a diagram, you can visualize the component inter-
connections and perhaps make a few mental notes on the physical 
aspects of the circuit construction (although there’s nothing like look-
ing at, and using, a finished electronic device). Schematic symbology 
will become a new language for you—one in which you will eventu-
ally learn to think, just as you can think in terms of words, mathemati-
cal equations, musical scores, architectural blueprints, Morse code, 
or any other language.

5
Complex circuits
As you learn to read and draw schematic diagrams, you might get 
discouraged by the complexities that arise. You might think, “Oh sure, 
anyone can learn to read schematics of simple circuits, like those that 
have a transistor or two, a few capacitors, and a few resistors. But it 
must be impossible to decipher more complicated schematics without 
decades of experience.” That’s not true! You’ll have to put some effort 
into the learning process, but you can always break a large, compli-
cated system down into smaller, simpler circuits.
Identifying the  
building blocks
Even a circuit whose diagram looks overwhelming at first glance com-
prises multiple building blocks interconnected in an orderly, logical  
way. This principle never fails! Each building block represents a sim-
ple circuit. A device that contains six diodes, 10 inductors, 15 transis-
tors, and dozens of resistors and capacitors might break down into 15 
simple circuits, each containing a single transistor, a few resistors and 
capacitors, and a diode and inductor or two. If you look at the entire 
system schematic all at once, it’s like trying to eat a jumbo hamburger 
in a single swallow. With the burger, and with the diagram as well, 
you face a far easier job if you assimilate the thing in little bites or 
pieces.
83

84    Complex circuits
Tip
Nowadays, circuits of great complexity are etched onto semi-
conductor wafers and housed in integrated circuits ( ICs), also 
called chips, that come in packages that actually look like building 
blocks! As you examine a modern circuit board, you might imag-
ine that the whole system was designed and put together from 
a block diagram, not a schematic! When you see the complete 
schematic, it will contain rectangles representing the chips, along 
with a great many lines connecting them. In most real-world cir-
cuits, those lines represent foil runs on a printed circuit board.
Figure 5-1 shows a “crystal radio” receiver built with an antenna, 
a tapped air-core inductor, a variable capacitor, an RF diode, and a 
fixed capacitor. The term “crystal” comes from the original construc-
tion of RF diodes as they emerged in the early 1900s. In order to get 
a one-way current gate to act as a signal detector (or demodulator), 
radio experimenters placed a piece of fine wire called a cat’s whisker 
into contact with a piece of crystalline lead sulfide called galena. 
Today, semiconductor diodes do the same thing as those old “crystals” 
did, even though modern RF diodes don’t look anything like crystals.
You can’t call the circuit of Fig. 5-1 “complicated” by any stretch 
of your imagination, but it performs some sophisticated tricks nev-
ertheless! Aside from the antenna (an external component such as a 
wire running out your window to a tree) and a sensitive earphone or 
headphone that you can connect at the output terminals in order to 
L1
C1
D1
ANT
Tuning circuit
Detector
Output
Radio-frequency
bypass capacitor
C2
Fig. 5-1.  Schematic diagram of a “crystal radio” tuned circuit and detector stages. 
It produces an extremely weak audio signal.

Identifying the building blocks    85
hear radio stations (however faintly), this circuit contains only four 
components: the coil, the diode, and two capacitors.
You can connect an amplifier to the output of the “crystal radio” 
in order to boost the audio volume to the point where it can drive a 
headset to a comfortable listening level. (That’s the reason why Fig. 
5-1 doesn’t include a headset at the output.) To accomplish that feat, 
you’ll need another circuit, along with a battery or other source of 
DC power to make the output signal strong enough.
Follow the flow
In the “crystal radio,” RF energy from the antenna resonates 
(reverberates) in L1 and C1. The resonant frequency depends on 
the size of the coil and also on the setting of C1. That frequency 
determines which station you hear, if any. Diode D1 converts the 
signal to pulsating DC that contains both the RF and the audio 
from the original transmitter. Capacitor C2 shorts the RF part of 
the signal to ground, leaving only audio-frequency (AF) energy at 
the output. The position of the coil tap must be adjusted experi-
mentally for maximum output.
Figure 5-2 shows another fairly simple schematic diagram: an audio 
amplifier that makes use of a single NPN bipolar transistor. In addi-
tion, this circuit has four resistors and three capacitors for a total of 
eight components. It also needs a source of DC power, such as a 
battery, which provides 12 V. This circuit can accept low-level audio 
signals (the output of a “crystal radio,” for example) at the input 
terminals and boost the power to a level strong enough to make a 
nice loud sound come out of a headset. It might take an experienced 
engineer two or three minutes to draw the diagram, and a couple of 
hours to build and test the complete circuit, “tweaking” component 
values to get the best possible performance.
Because the circuit of Fig. 5-2 takes an extremely weak signal 
and boosts it to a reasonable (but not particularly powerful) level, 
it’s sometimes called a preamplifier. If you want to drive a set of 
speakers so that the students in a classroom, or the audience in an 
auditorium, can hear the output from the “crystal radio,” you’ll need 
more amplification. That extra audio boost can be provided by one 
or more additional circuits called power amplifiers connected to the 
output of the preamplifier.

86    Complex circuits
Follow the flow
In the circuit of Fig. 5-2, audio AC passes from the input through 
C2 to the base of Q1. The capacitor C2 keeps the power supply’s 
DC from affecting the behavior of the previous circuit (the “crys-
tal radio” set itself). The tiny current variations at the base of Q1 
cause larger current variations through the transistor. The ampli-
fied audio signal passes through C3 to the output. The resistors 
govern the current flowing through Q1, and must be chosen by 
experiment for optimum amplification. Capacitor C1 keeps the 
emitter at audio signal ground while allowing some DC voltage 
to exist there.
Figure 5-3 is a diagram of a circuit that looks, at first glance, more 
complicated than Fig. 5-1 or Fig. 5-2. But is it really? If you look at 
Fig. 5-3 for a minute or two, you’ll notice that it’s nothing more than 
the composite of the “crystal radio” and the audio preamplifier that 
we’ve just seen. The components are renumbered generally going 
from left to right, the direction of signal flow through the system. 
(You never want to duplicate a component designator in any sche-
matic.) In Fig. 5-3, the connection between the original “crystal radio” 
Input
+12 V
R1
R2
R3
C1
C2
Output
C3
Q1
+12 V
R4
Fig. 5-2.  An audio preamplifier circuit that can be used with the “crystal radio” to 
produce a signal strong enough to drive a headset (but not a loudspeaker).

Identifying the building blocks    87
and the preamplifier corresponds to the short, horizontal connecting 
line that goes from the dot above C2 to the left-hand side of C3.
Now that you can envision the two building blocks that make up 
the circuit of Fig. 5-3, the whole diagram looks less complicated, 
doesn’t it? You can follow the signal flow through the system by think-
ing of the signal going through the “crystal radio” and then through 
the audio preamplifier. Of course, the process goes so fast that it 
would seem instantaneous if you could actually see the RF and audio 
impulses. The whole process, from the signal arriving at the antenna 
to the audio appearing at the output, takes place in a minuscule frac-
tion of a second. Currents in electrical conductors, in general, travel 
at roughly 10 percent of the speed of light in free space. That’s 30,000 
kilometers, or 18,600 miles, per second!
The circuit of Fig. 5-3 has a low audio output power level, although 
it’s a lot louder than the feeble audio signal that comes from the 
“crystal radio” all by itself, which gets its power only from the signal 
current in the antenna! Nevertheless, even the amplified audio at the 
output of the circuit of Fig. 5-3 isn’t enough to provide a comfortable 
listening volume in a loudspeaker. In order to boost the audio power 
level some more, you’ll need an audio power amplifier. Figure 5-4 
shows a two-transistor circuit that will perform this task. It’s called a 
+12 V
R1
R2
R3
Q1
+12 V
R4
L1
C1
D1
ANT
C2
C3
Output
C5
C4
Fig. 5-3.  Combination of “crystal radio” and audio preamplifier circuits. Some of 
the component designators in the preamplifier stage are updated from Fig. 5-2.

88    Complex circuits
push-pull circuit. One of the transistors amplifies the “positive” half 
of the AC audio wave, and the other transistor amplifies the “nega-
tive” half. You might say that Q1 does the “pushing” and Q2 does 
the “pulling,” so that when you combine their outputs, you get an 
amplified version of the complete audio input wave.
The circuit of Fig. 5-4 will accept the output of a low-level audio 
amplifier and boost it. However, the output from the original “crystal 
radio” would not be enough to drive the power amplifier. When you 
hear the term power amplifier, you should remember that the circuit 
does exactly what its name implies. It takes an input signal with a 
certain amount of power and produces an output signal that has more 
power. If the original input signal contains little or no power, then the 
circuit of Fig. 5-4 won’t get enough drive (input power) to produce 
any output signal. In order to work properly, a power amplifier needs 
a signal that has a modest amount of power to begin with; otherwise 
it will simply “suck up” the feeble input signal and produce noth-
ing from it other than a tiny amount of heat in the components. The 
circuit of Fig. 5-3 (the audio preamplifier) provides enough output 
power to adequately drive a push-pull audio amplifier. The circuit of 
Fig. 5-1 (the “crystal radio” alone) doesn’t.
Input
Output
+12 V
C1
R2
Q1
Q2
R1
R3
T1
T2
Fig. 5-4.  Audio power amplifier circuit, suitable for driving a speaker or set of 
speakers.

Identifying the building blocks    89
Follow the flow
In the circuit of Fig. 5-4, the input signal goes through T1 and 
appears across its secondary. The details of the ensuing process 
get rather complicated, involving wave phase and transistor char-
acteristics—technical matters that go beyond the scope of this 
book. Basically, Q1 handles half of the signal cycle and Q2 han-
dles the other half, as the audio input AC flows alternately up 
and down through the secondary winding of T1. Transformer T2 
combines the two amplified cycle halves back into a complete AC 
audio wave that’s stronger than the wave that came in through 
T1, thanks to the transistors.
Now if you combine the circuits from Figs. 5-1, 5-2, and 5-4 
in cascade (one after the other), you get a complete amplitude- 
modulation (AM) radio receiver that will produce decent sound from 
a loudspeaker! Figure 5-5 shows the entire three-transistor AM radio 
receiver in a single schematic diagram. Again, some of the compo-
nent designators are changed from previous diagrams, so that they 
increase generally as you go from the original input at the antenna 
to the final output at the speaker.
So there!
If you were to have seen Fig. 5-5 at the start of this chapter, you 
might have experienced some major frustration. But now that  
you can see how the building blocks go together, you know  
that you don’t have to “choke down the whole burger in one 
gulp.” So it’s pretty simple after all, isn’t it?
The basic process used to make all electronic circuits breaks down 
into a sequence of combinations. First, the individual components 
(resistors, capacitors, diodes, and so on) combine to form simple cir-
cuits. Then, simple circuits combine to make more complex circuits. 
After that, complex circuits combine to form complete devices. Several 
different devices can combine to create a large system. An amateur 
radio station is a good example of such a system. It might consist of a 
transceiver (transmitter/receiver in a single box), an antenna tuner, a 
computer, an interface unit that goes between the computer and the 
transceiver, and a speech processor that goes between the microphone 

90    Complex circuits
+12 V
SPKR
C5
+12 V
R1
R2
R3
Q1
+12 V
R4
L1
C1
D1
ANT
C2
C3
C4
T1
T2
C6
Q2
Q3
R5
R7
R6
Fig. 5-5.  Complete radio receiver circuit. Some of the component designators in the 
audio power amplifier stage are updated from Fig. 5-4. The speaker is also shown.

Page breaks    91
and the transceiver. Each of these individual devices contains numer-
ous complex circuits, which in turn, comprise multiple simple circuits, 
which ultimately break down to the individual resistors, capacitors, 
diodes, transistors, and other components.
Page breaks
Figure 5-5 is a “respectably complicated” diagram. It requires us to draw  
the system in a “two-story” format with the detector and preamplifier 
on top, and the audio power amplifier on the bottom. A long, tortuous 
line, broken in the middle by C5, represents the connection between 
the preamplifier output and the power amplifier input. There’s noth-
ing technically wrong with this diagram, but some people might rather 
see it all on one level. In order to put Fig. 5-5 all on one level, we’d 
either have to make it horribly small, or else draw it sideways on the 
page. But there’s another option. We can produce it on a foldout page 
(the sort of thing that they do in those upscale print magazines when 
they want to show you something spectacular).
We have yet another alternative, though! We can split the diagram 
up among multiple pages. That approach isn’t necessary here, but 
when we get to truly complicated systems, such as amateur radio 
transceivers, television sets, or complete computers, it’s an option that 
engineers often use. Figure 5-6 shows how we can take advantage of 
this technique with the diagram of our radio receiver. Figure 5-6A puts 
the detector and the audio preamplifier right-side-up on a single page 
along with an output designator that appears as an X inside a wedge-
like arrow that points off the page toward the right. Figure 5-6B shows 
the audio power amplifier with an input designator comprising an X 
inside a wedge-like arrow that points off the page toward the left.
Tip
In Figs. 5-6A and 5-6B, the wedge-like arrows represent points 
meant to connect directly to each other. They take the place of 
the long, tortuous line in Fig. 5-5. In this case, we need only one 
set of arrows of this type. Some circuits need two or more, so 
we might label them as X, Y, and Z, for example. Then the two 
X’s would connect, the two Y’s would connect, and the two Z’s 
would connect.

92    Complex circuits
Let’s follow the signal through Fig. 5-6A. A radio wave causes 
current to flow in the antenna, and also through the inductor L1. 
Capacitor C1 causes the inductor/capacitor combination (called an 
LC circuit, where L stands for inductance and C stands for capaci-
tance) to resonate at the frequency of the radio signal that we want 
to hear. Diode D1 detects the RF signal, splitting the AF and the RF 
portions apart. Capacitor C3 passes the AF part of that signal along 
to the base of transistor Q1. Capacitor C2 shunts the RF portion of  
the diode’s output to ground because the circuit doesn’t need the 
RF energy anymore, and its presence would only cause trouble. 
Transistor Q1 acts as an amplifier for the extremely weak AF signal 
at its base. Resistors R1, R2, R3, and R4 ensure that Q1 gets optimum 
DC voltage (called bias), so that it will produce the greatest pos-
sible amount of amplification. Capacitor C4 keeps the emitter at AF  
signal ground, while allowing some DC voltage to exist there. The  
AF output signal, along with some DC from the power supply 
(+12 V), goes off the page through the rightward-pointing arrow 
marked X.
+12 V
R1
R2
R3
Q1
+12 V
R4
L1
C1
D1
ANT
C2
C3
C4
X
Tuner
Detector
Audio
pre-
amplifier
Fig. 5-6A.  Tuner, detector, and audio preamplifier stages in the radio receiver.  
The wedge X represents an extension to illustration B on the next page.

Page breaks    93
Now let’s look at Fig. 5-6B and follow the signal after it comes 
in from the previous diagram. The AF energy, along with some DC, 
appears at the leftward-pointing arrow marked X. Capacitor C5 blocks 
the DC so only the AF wave gets to potentiometer R8, which serves 
as a volume control. The full AF voltage appears across the entire 
resistance of R8, represented by its left-hand and right-hand termi-
nals. The slider “picks off” various AF voltages that can range from 
zero (all the way to the right-hand end of the zig-zag, at ground) to 
the full audio voltage (all the way to the left-hand end of the zig-
zag, at C5). This AF voltage goes to the primary of transformer T1. 
From there, the signal flows in precisely the same way as described 
in “Follow the flow” for Fig. 5-4. The only difference between this 
situation and that one lies in the numbering of the component desig-
nators. We continue going on upward in numbers from the previous 
part of the system. We also add a speaker to the output of T2, rather 
than simply labeling it “Output.”
+12 V
SPKR
T1
T2
C6
Q2
Q3
R5
R7
R6
C5
X
Volume
control
R8
Audio power amplifier
Fig. 5-6B.  Audio power amplifier and speaker in the radio receiver. The wedge X 
represents an extension from illustration A on the previous page.

94    Complex circuits
Tip
While looking at Figs. 5-6A and 5-6B, have you noticed that we’ve 
added labels to each stage to describe its function? You should 
do that whenever you draw diagrams of multistage systems such 
as this one, as long as you have enough room on the page. In Fig. 
5-6A we see the labels “Detector” and “Audio preamplifier;” in 
Fig. 5-6B we see the label “Audio power amplifier.”
Some more circuits
Figure 5-7 shows an antenna matching circuit known as an L network. 
Here, the letter L refers to the general layout of the components in the 
diagram, not the property of inductance. (Actually, to make the coil 
and capacitor in Fig. 5-7 actually take the shape of an L in the layout, 
you’ll have to rotate the page 90 degrees clockwise and then hold it 
up to a mirror! But you get the general idea, right?)
Figure 5-8 shows another type of antenna matching network, which  
consists of the circuit from Fig. 5-7 with an extra capacitor added at 
the input end. Engineers sometimes call this type of circuit a pi net-
work because its components, in the schematic layout, resemble the 
shape of the upper case Greek letter pi (Π). Both the L network and 
the pi network are commonly used in antenna tuning and matching 
circuits for radio transmitters at frequencies ranging up to around 
150 MHz.
Figure 5-9 shows a circuit that’s a little more complicated than the 
ones in Figs. 5-7 and 5-8, but in a certain sense, contains both of them 
Output
L1
C1
Input
Fig. 5-7.  An L network comprising an inductor and a variable capacitor.

Some more circuits    95
put together. When we follow a pi network with an L network, we 
get a so-called pi-L network. The advantage of a circuit like the one 
in Fig. 5-9, compared to those in the previous two diagrams, lies in 
its ability to make radio transmitters work with antennas that would 
otherwise not accept power very well. Those two extra components 
can go a long way!
Tip
The circuits of Figs. 5-7, 5-8, and 5-9 can all be made more versa-
tile by using variable inductors rather than fixed inductors. One 
type of variable inductor has become popular among radio ama-
teurs. It’s called a roller inductor. Just for fun, try an Internet 
search on “roller inductor” by entering the term in the phrase 
box of your favorite search engine. You should find some images 
of these components. They allow for precise adjustment of induc-
tance, and some of them have calibrated crankshafts so that you 
can easily reset them to any previous position.
Output
L1
C1
C2
Input
Fig. 5-8.  A pi network comprising an inductor and two variable capacitors.
L1
C1
C2
Input
Output
L2
C3
Fig. 5-9.  A pi-L network comprising two inductors and three variable capacitors.

96    Complex circuits
If you’re old enough, you’ll remember the days when you had to 
learn the International Morse code (often simply called “the code”) 
to get an amateur radio operator’s license. Those days have passed 
into history, but some radio amateurs still enjoy conversing in this 
mode. In order to do that, of course, you need to learn the code. To 
that end, you can build a code practice oscillator, such as the one 
diagrammed in Fig. 5-10. Basically, this circuit is an audio oscillator 
that you can switch on and off with a Morse code straight key or 
telegraph key, labeled “Key” in the figure. (Because a telegraph key 
technically constitutes an SPST switch, you could label it S1.)
When you first examine Fig. 5-10, you might wonder why an audio 
oscillator circuit has to be so complicated. Can’t you just build a sim-
ple audio amplifier, like the preamplifier or power amplifier dis-
cussed earlier, and feed some of the output back to the input? Well, 
yes, you can in fact do that; but if you want a decent audio tone to 
Output
-
+
9 V DC
Key
C1
R1
Q1
Q2
R2
C2
R3
C3
C4
Rx
Rx
Cx
Cx
R4
Frequency
setting
components
Fig. 5-10.  An audio code-practice oscillator using two PNP bipolar transistors. The 
values of Rx and Cx determine the frequency.

Some more circuits    97
come out of your code practice oscillator, you’ll get a lot better results 
with a circuit like the one in Fig. 5-10. This particular circuit is called 
a twin-T oscillator because of the T-shaped configurations including 
the resistors marked Rx and the capacitors marked Cx. The twin-T 
oscillator produces an AF tone that’s pleasing to the ears, and that 
also occurs at a predictable and stable pitch (frequency).
Follow the flow
The AF signal in the circuit of Fig. 5-10 goes around and around; 
that’s how oscillation happens. We can start pretty much any-
where and follow the signal back to the same point. If we begin 
at the key, the signal goes into the base of Q1, where it’s ampli-
fied and undergoes phase inversion (the wave is turned upside 
down). The output of Q1 comes from the emitter of Q1, rather 
than from the collector; that’s a matter of engineering choice 
because it provides a stable and reliable circuit. The signal then 
goes into the base of Q2, where it’s amplified and inverted again, 
so it comes out of Q2 in phase coincidence (reinforcing rather 
than opposing) with respect to the signal at the key. The signal 
emerges from the collector of Q2 and gets routed down to the 
twin-T network comprising resistors Rx and capacitors Cx, whose 
values determine the frequency of oscillation. From there, the sig-
nal goes back to the key, and gets ready for another round trip 
through the whole circuit! We take the output through C4, from 
the point between the two resistors Rx.
The circuit of Fig. 5-10 uses a 9-V battery as its power source. 
Note that the transistors are of the PNP type, so the collectors get a 
negative voltage, while the positive battery terminal goes straight to 
ground. This circuit, therefore, constitutes a positive-ground system. 
We might build a power supply designed to produce -9 V DC from 
the AC utility mains (about 120 V AC at 60 Hz in the United States), 
rather than relying on a battery. If we decide to do that, we’ll need 
to make sure that we design the power supply so that it produces a 
negative voltage, not a positive voltage, with respect to ground.
Figure 5-11 shows a power supply that will do a good job of pro-
viding a constant, pure −9V DC. It’s just about the same circuit as 
the one you saw back in Chap. 4 at Fig. 4-13. The basic component 

98    Complex circuits
layout is the same, except that all the diodes go in the opposite direc-
tion in Fig. 5-11 as compared to Fig. 4-13 (including the Zener diode), 
and the electrolytic capacitor polarity is reversed. And of course, the 
voltage of the power supply shown in Fig. 5-11 is lower than the 
voltage of the supply shown in Fig. 4-13.
Figure 5-12 shows a complete code practice oscillator system that 
will operate from the AC utility mains. It includes the power supply 
from Fig. 5-11 along with the oscillator from Fig. 5-10, all in one big 
schematic. As we did with the radio receiver circuit diagram of Fig. 
5-5, we have connected the power supply output to the oscillator in 
Fig. 5-12 with a single line, although not as long as the one in Fig. 5-5. 
We’ve also included a volume control and a pair of headphones at 
the output of the twin-T oscillator circuit.
We can apply the same general layout tactics to Fig. 5-12 as we 
used with Fig. 5-5. We might draw the diagram with the page tilted 
sideways (landscape orientation instead of portrait orientation), put-
ting the power supply on the left and the oscillator on the right. Or 
we might use a foldout page. However, an even better alternative (in 
my opinion) is to split the diagram up into multiple pages so we can 
draw everything in an uncluttered, right-side-up fashion.
Let’s take this business a step further. We can boost the output 
of the twin-T oscillator so that it will drive a loudspeaker, letting us 
_
+
+
D1
D2
D3
D4
C1
R1
D5
L1
9 V DC
T1
120 V AC
P1
F1
Fig. 5-11.  A regulated −9 V DC power supply that can be used with the code- 
practice oscillator. Note the positive ground in this supply, designed for use with 
PNP transistor circuits.

Some more circuits    99
send code to a classroom full of eager Morse-code students! (Finding 
enough people interested in learning the code to fill up a whole class-
room would constitute an entirely different challenge.) A push-pull 
audio amplifier, just like the one we used for the radio receiver (Fig. 
5-4) except with PNP rather than NPN transistors, will work here. 
Now we have a system with three essential circuits: a power supply, 
an oscillator, and an amplifier. Figures 5-13A, 5-13B, and 5-13C show 
how we can draw the complete schematic diagram of this system, let-
ting it spread across three different pages.
+
D1
D2
D3
D4
C1
L1
Q1
Q2
R2
C2
R3
C3
C4
Rx
Rx
Cx
Cx
R4
R1
D5
_ 9 V DC
R5
C5
R6
Frequency
setting
components
Key
Volume control
Headphones
T1
120 V AC
P1
F1
Fig. 5-12.  Combination of the regulated power supply and code-practice oscillator. 
Note the addition of the volume control and headphones.

100    Complex circuits
+
D1
D2
D3
D4
C1
L1
R1
D5
_ 9 V DC
Regulated power supply
X
T1
120 V AC
P1
F1
Fig. 5-13A.  Regulated power supply for a classroom code-practice system.  
The wedge X represents an extension to illustrations B and C on the next two  
pages.

Some more circuits    101
Q1
Q2
R2
C2
R3
C3
C4
Rx
Rx
Cx
Cx
R4
R5
C5
R6
Frequency
setting
components
Key
Volume control
X
Y
Audio
oscillator
Fig. 5-13b.  Twin-T audio oscillator for a classroom code-practice system.  
The wedge X represents an extension from illustration A on the previous  
page. The wedge Y represents an extension to illustration C on the next page.

102    Complex circuits
X
SPKR
T2
Q3
Q4
Y
C6
R8
C7
R7
R9
Audio power amplifier
T3
Fig. 5-13C.  Audio power amplifier for a classroom code-practice system. Note the 
PNP transistors, consistent with the negative power-supply voltage (positive-ground 
system). The wedge X represents an extension from illustration A on the page before 
last. The wedge Y represents an extension from illustration B on the previous page.

Some more circuits    103
Heads up!
As you examine Figs. 5-13A, B, and C, take careful note of the des-
ignators inside the arrows. The right-pointing arrow X in Fig. 5-13A 
goes to two places on subsequent pages: the left-pointing arrow X 
in Fig. 5-13B and also the left-pointing arrow X in Fig. 5-13C. The 
arrows marked Y apply only to Figs. 5-13B and C.
Figure 5-14 shows a simple inductance-capacitance (LC) circuit. 
Note its resemblance to the L network of Fig. 5-7. In this case, the 
inductor and capacitor have been reversed from their relative posi-
tions in the earlier case. In addition, this circuit has a different pur-
pose than the other one does. The circuit in Fig. 5-7 works mainly for 
the purpose of tuning an antenna system, or matching the output of 
a transmitter to the characteristics of a particular antenna. The circuit 
in Fig. 5-14 is designed to let signals pass through (or not) depend-
ing on their frequency. In this case, we have a so-called highpass 
filter because it lets signals go through more easily as the frequency 
increases. The exact frequency at which the transition from high 
attenuation (or lots of signal loss) starts to change over to low attenu-
ation (little or no signal loss) depends on the values of the capacitor 
and inductor.
Figure 5-15 shows a more complicated LC circuit that consists of 
two filters, one after the other. The first filter, made up of capacitor 
C1 and inductor L1, is the same highpass filter design as the one in 
Fig. 5-14. The second LC combination, made up of inductor L2 and 
capacitor C2, forms a lowpass filter. It works in the opposite manner 
from a highpass filter, letting signals through more easily as the fre-
quency goes down. When we follow a highpass filter with a lowpass 
filter, and if we choose the cutoff frequencies (or transition points) 
Output
L1
C1
Input
Fig. 5-14.  A simple frequency-sensitive filter circuit.

104    Complex circuits
so that the highpass filter’s cutoff frequency lies below the lowpass 
filter’s cutoff frequency, we can get a bandpass filter in which a sig-
nal can get through easily only when its frequency lies between the 
two cutoffs.
Tip
You’ll often find repetition of circuit configurations, one after 
another, in electronic system design. Sometimes you’ll see several 
identical or similar circuits connected together. Sometimes their 
components will all have the same values, and sometimes they 
won’t. Sometimes the circuits will be connected in series (end to 
end, like the links in a chain); sometimes they’ll be connected in 
parallel (across each other, like the rungs in a ladder).
If you know how one circuit in a repetitive system operates, then 
you know, by extension, how all of the circuits work. A problem 
that occurs in one circuit might also occur in any of the others, and 
you can use the schematic diagram to track down the problem. For 
example, if, through testing, you know that an oscillator has changed 
frequency because of a defective resistor in the base circuit, then 
if another oscillator of the same configuration develops the same 
malfunction, you can consult the schematic, locate the base resistor, 
and conduct some tests to see if it, too, has gone bad. Without the 
schematic, you’d have a hard time locating the proper resistor. This 
single miscreant component that costs a few pennies, could, all by 
itself, bring down a sophisticated system!
Breaking a massive system down into complex circuits makes it 
easier to determine which circuit might be creating the problem for 
L1
C1
Input
Output
C2
L2
Fig. 5-15.  A complex frequency-sensitive filter comprising two simple, but different, 
filters connected in cascade.

Some more circuits    105
the entire system. This complex circuit is then broken down into 
simple circuits, and a determination is made as to which simple circuit 
might be at fault. The simple circuit is further divided into separate 
components, which are examined individually for a possible fault. 
Through this systematic method of elimination (all done with the help 
of schematics), the equipment can be repaired with a lot less trouble 
than you’d experience if you didn’t have the schematics. The process 
of narrowing-down a problem zone from the system to a complex cir-
cuit, then to a simple circuit, and finally to an individual component, 
is called troubleshooting to the component level.
You’re hired!
If you can troubleshoot large electronic systems to the compo-
nent level, you’ll find yourself in high demand. All you’ll have to 
do is show up on time when someone calls you for service, do the 
job, and leave. When word gets around about your competence 
and reliability, you’ll have a job for the rest of your life.
Many failures in complex electronic systems arise from a problem 
with a single component. Sometimes this failure will cause other 
components to go bad as well, but the repair must start with the first 
failure. Occasionally, two simultaneously defective components will 
be discovered, but this sort of coincidence is a rarity. Certainly, you 
must become familiar with the equipment you intend to repair, but 
after you have studied and understood the system’s normal state of 
operation, you can use a schematic drawing to identify the general 
area of any future faults. By following this procedure, you can iden-
tify the most suspect individual component(s). Then all you have to 
do is find the suspect component(s) in the physical system, get into 
the equipment with the appropriate test instrument, and check the 
suspect component(s) one by one.
Tip
Even if you have good test equipment, you’ll find it difficult to 
quickly identify defective sections (and especially individual com-
ponents) without a schematic diagram because you probably 
won’t know where on the circuit board or chassis to look!

106    Complex circuits
Getting comfortable with large 
schematics
No matter how much you love electronics, you can’t expect to sit 
down as a rank beginner and read complicated schematics straight 
away. You’ve got to climb a learning curve. First of all, you must make 
certain that you know all of the schematic symbols that you expect 
to deal with. Complex schematics can serve as a great learning tool 
because they contain lots of symbols, some of which you probably 
won’t know. Although you can’t sit down with a complex schematic at 
the start and understand everything that happens in the circuit that it 
represents, you can use such diagrams to help you learn the symbols.
Once you feel comfortable with the individual symbols, put away 
the complex schematics and start looking over diagrams of basic, 
simple, widely used circuits. You’ll find lots of them in magazines 
geared to electronics enthusiasts. (You’ll find some simple projects 
and related diagrams in Electricity Experiments You Can Do at Home, 
published by McGraw-Hill, as well!) Don’t study only one type of 
schematic, such as those that portray only amplifiers. Check into 
oscillators, power supplies, solid-state switches, RF circuits, audio 
circuits, and anything else you can find. You’ll discover similarities 
between different types of circuits, sometimes with no major differ-
ences other than a few changes in the component values. When you 
can identify an amplifier or oscillator or detector circuit by looking at 
its schematic, then you’ll know you’re making progress.
Once you can comfortably identify simple electronic circuits from 
schematic diagrams, you should move on to more complex draw-
ings—but don’t go overboard here! If you try to move too quickly, 
you might grow frustrated and give up altogether. Your next step will 
include devices that combine a few of the simple circuits you have 
previously studied. Sometimes additional components are added to 
match the output of one circuit to the input of another. Select books 
and publications that offer both theoretical and practical discussions 
of the circuit that the schematic depicts. Even better, you can build 
some simple circuits in a workshop at home.
You’ll likely get a surprise when you see how your first “homebrewed”  
electronic circuit looks when compared with the schematic drawing.  
Your study will continue from this point by examining the functional 
circuit and noting the relationship of the physical components to those 

Getting comfortable with large schematics    107
in the schematic drawing. You can further your electronics knowledge 
by experimenting with these circuits (substituting different components,  
for example). You might find a way to improve the circuit operation. 
All improvements should be duly noted, and a new schematic can be 
drawn up indicating your changes. You might want to simply pencil in 
the changes on the schematic diagram you were building from.
When you feel comfortable building electronic circuits from simple 
schematic diagrams, you might want to combine two or more circuits 
to make a single, more sophisticated device. Take two schematic dia-
grams from a projects book and combine them on paper. You will 
have to draw your own schematic to serve as your plan for the build-
ing procedure. You might know enough by this time to design and 
build some additional circuits that can interface the two (connect the 
output of the first circuit to the input of the second one so they both 
work at their best). When you combine electronics circuit-building 
with the task of learning to read and create schematics, you can 
improve your electronics knowledge faster than you can by simply 
looking at and drawing theoretical diagrams.
Tip
Admittedly, you might start to grow bored as you pore over sche-
matic diagrams for hours on end. But when you can refer to a 
portion of a schematic drawing and then wire the components 
in place, much of the boredom will go away. If you’re lucky, or if 
you happen to be a budding technophile (technology lover), the 
stuff will get downright fascinating!
Before you know it, you’ll have obtained a solid basic knowledge 
of schematic diagrams and circuit-building. The circuits that you once 
imagined as complicated will soon seem familiar and elementary. 
Nevertheless, you should exercise some caution here. You might feel 
the temptation to stay with the sorts of circuits that you know best, 
and not venture into new territory. Don’t let that little bit of laziness 
get the better of you! As soon as you reach one stage of comfort, 
move on to diagrams that are more difficult and make you feel a 
little bit uncomfortable again. If you don’t “push yourself” this way, 
you’ll find yourself stuck at one stage of development for a long time. 
Try building more and more complicated devices. Admittedly, this 
practice can grow expensive if you overdo it; so if you can’t build 

108    Complex circuits
everything in sight, keep on reading schematics and deciphering the 
various and diverse circuit components anyway.
You’ll never cease to be amazed at what you know and what you 
don’t know. For instance, many people new to electronics feel that 
a commercial AM radio transmitter must constitute a highly complex 
system. Most electronics novices are astonished to learn that the AM 
transmitter is technically less complex than an old-fashioned transis-
torized pocket receiver that you might use to intercept the broad-
casts. A commercial radio transmitter is a rather simple system, even 
though it might have the size and mass of a full-sized refrigerator. 
The transmitter size is directly related to the component size, which 
in turn is directly related to the amount of power that the system con-
sumes. The power-supply transformer for a commercial transmitter, 
all by itself, might weigh as much as the aforementioned refrigerator! 
This and other components make the commercial broadcast trans-
mitter necessarily large. However, the power-supply transformer for 
a small amateur radio transmitter will likely weigh less than a kilo-
gram. Schematically, both transformers look the same in schematic 
diagrams. Circuit complexity bears no relation to the physical size of 
a component. Complexity depends on the number of components as 
well as on the number of circuits that the system has.
The massive pieces of equipment are rarely the most complicated 
ones, both electronically and schematically. The tiny units that can be 
held in the palm of your hand often take the prize for schematic com-
plexity when you break them down to the component level. A tablet 
computer is an excellent example. The integrated circuits (ICs or 
chips) inside a device like that contain millions of individual diodes, 
transistors, capacitors, and resistors. For this reason, the beginner to 
electronics and schematics should not shy away from any particular 
circuit, device, or equipment just because its size suggests complex-
ity. You might be wrong, but even if you’re right, every schematic 
diagram will contain portions that you can comprehend.
After you have passed the intermediate stage of learning schematics, 
then you can tackle complex circuits, devices, and systems. You can  
break them down into multiple-circuit stages or devices, and ultimately  
into simple circuits. Try to obtain schematics of a complex nature that 
also include a thorough explanation of how the circuits work.
Recall the block diagram of Fig. 2-2, the strobe light circuit that we 
saw in Chap. 2. Compare it to Fig. 5-16, a schematic that shows all of 

    109
+
+
120 V AC
F1
D1
D2
R1
C1
C2
R2
R3
Black
White
Green
S1
P1
A
T
K
Strobe
light
terminals
1
4
2
3
T1
SCR1
NE1
R4
Fig. 5-16.  Complete strobe light circuit originally shown in the block diagram of Fig. 2-2 (Chap. 2). In order to fit 
it on the page, the whole diagram is rotated 90 degrees.

110    Complex circuits
the individual components in the circuit. The whole diagram is tilted 
on its side, allowing it to fit on the page neatly. The circuit is powered 
with 120 V AC, which comes in at the left side of the schematic (after 
you’ve rotated the page). The three terminals of the 120 V AC line take 
three separate paths along color-coded wires. One wire goes to the 
fuse, another wire goes to the timing components, and the third wire, 
coming from the ground prong of the plug, goes to electrical ground. 
Following the top signal path, current passes through the fuse F1, 
assuming that the switch S1 is closed. Current then passes through 
the rectifier diodes D1 and D2 in one direction only. Conventional 
current travels with the arrows, and electron current goes against the 
arrows. From the diodes, one path goes all the way across the top 
wire to the A terminal of the strobe light, and the other path goes to 
the adjustable timing components comprising resistors R1 through 
R4, capacitors C1 and C2, and the neon lamp NE1. The adjustable 
timing components determine the frequency at which the light oper-
ates (how long it stays off between extremely brief flashes). The 
silicon-controlled rectifier SCR1 performs the switching operation for 
the strobe lamp. Resistors R2 and R3, besides assisting with the tim-
ing operation, provide a junction where the bottom portion of the 
circuit interacts with the top portion, sending the proper signal to 
the transformer T1 and finally to the strobe lamp terminals T and K.
Figures 5-17A and B show the same circuit as Fig. 5-16 does, 
except that the diagram is split between two pages so that it can all 
+
+
Y
X
Z
120 V AC
F1
D1
D2
R1
C1
C2
R2
R3
Black
White
Green
S1
P1
Fig. 5-17A.  Plug, fuse, and rectifier portions of the strobe light circuit. Wedges X, Y, 
and Z represent extensions to illustration B on the next page.

Summary    111
be presented right-side-up instead of sideways. The first part (Fig. 
5-17A) shows the power supply and part of the timing circuitry. The 
second part (Fig. 5-17B) shows the frequency-adjusting potentiome-
ter R4 along with the rest of the timing circuitry, the switching device, 
and the transformer that provides the strobe light with the voltage it 
needs to operate properly.
Summary
Reading and drawing schematic diagrams involves breaking down 
complex circuits into simple ones. The secret is to look at the system’s 
parts and how they relate to each other, rather than to regard the 
whole thing as a huge monolithic entity. As you systematically study 
a complex schematic drawing, the relationships between the circuits 
will get more and more apparent. Once in awhile, you’ll suddenly see 
all of a system’s “secrets” revealed at once: An “Aha” moment!
Tip
When you use schematics for electronics troubleshooting, you 
won’t always have to understand the function of every single sys-
tem element. In many cases, you’ll only have to worry about the 
circuits or components that represent potential trouble spots.
Y
X
Z
A
T
K
Strobe
light
terminals
1
4
2
3
T1
SCR1
NE1
R4
Fig. 5-17B.  Timing and transformer portions of the strobe light circuit. Wedges X, 
Y, and Z represent extensions from illustration A on the previous page.

112    Complex circuits
Learning to read and write schematic diagrams is a lot like learning 
to receive and send the old Morse Code. Morse Code is a language of 
audible symbols, just like schematic drawing is a language of printed 
symbols. Once you learn either language, you can use it to commu-
nicate; Morse code communicates words and sentences, while sche-
matics communicate principles and concepts. 
Using Morse Code as a further example, a long sequence of dots 
and dashes will mean nothing unless you can break the data down 
into words. As your proficiency increases, you’ll stop hearing mere 
dots and dashes (or, as some people say, dits and dahs) and hear 
letters of the alphabet instead. As you keep practicing with the code, 
you’ll start to hear entire words. Eventually, if you keep at it long 
enough (and especially if you get fond of the code for its own sake, 
communicating with it for hours on end, as I have done over the 
years as an amateur radio operator), you’ll hear whole phrases and 
sentences. It will have become a complete language for you.
Reading and writing schematic diagrams follows a similar pattern 
of development. At first you’ll see individual component symbols. 
Later, you’ll begin to see simple circuits hidden within complex cir-
cuits. Then you’ll be able to identify and decipher complex circuits. 
Finally, you’ll begin to envision entire systems. This knowledge will 
not come quickly, but your proficiency will improve every time you 
practice, if you keep pushing yourself (gently, of course) into new 
knowledge zones.

6
Let’s learn by doing
Earlier in this book, I mentioned a volume called Electricity Experiments 
You Can Do at Home. In this chapter, I’ve adapted a few of the experi-
ments from that book along with layouts and schematics. You should 
find these activities entertaining and informative in their own right. 
As you go, you’ll “automatically” bolster your proficiency in read-
ing and interpreting schematics. Let’s start with some setup details, 
including a parts list and the construction of a simple circuit-testing 
board. Then, if you want, you can do the experiments here. If you 
enjoy them, then you can buy Electricity Experiments You Can Do at 
Home and do a whole lot more!
Tip
You don’t have to buy all the parts, build the breadboard, and 
do the experiments described here, if you aren’t in the mood. I 
think you’ll have more fun and learn things better that way, but 
if you don’t want to spend money and time on “nuts and bolts 
stuff,” you can learn a fair amount by simply following along and 
conducting the experiments in your imagination.
Your breadboard
Every experimenter needs a good workbench. Mine consists of a piece 
of plywood, weighted down over the keyboard of an old upright 
113

114    Let’s learn by doing
piano, and hung from the cellar ceiling by brass-plated chains. Yours 
doesn’t have to be that exotic, and you can put it anywhere as long 
as it won’t shake or collapse. The surface should be made of a non-
conducting material such as wood, protected by a plastic mat or a 
small piece of close-cropped carpet (a doormat works great). A desk 
lamp, preferably the “high-intensity” type with an adjustable arm, 
completes the arrangement.
Before you begin any of the tasks described in this chapter, buy a  
good pair of safety glasses at your local hardware store. Wear the glasses  
at all times as you play around with the hardware. Get into the habit of 
wearing safety glasses whenever you work on electrical or electronic 
circuits, whether you think you need them or not. You never know 
when a little piece of wire will go flying when you snip it off with 
diagonal cutters, or a spark will fly right at one of your eyeballs!
Tip
Table 6-1 lists the items you’ll need for the experiments in this 
chapter. You can find many of these components at Radio Shack 
retail stores, or you can order them through the Radio Shack web-
site. A few of them are available at hardware stores and depart-
ment stores.
For the experiments described in this chapter, you’ll need a  
prototype-testing circuit board called a breadboard. I patronized a 
local lumber yard to get the wood for my breadboard. I found a length 
of “12-inch by 3/4-inch” pine in their scrap heap. The actual width of a  
“12-inch” board is about 10.8 inches or 27.4 centimeters, and the 
actual thickness is about 0.6 inch or 15 millimeters. They didn’t 
charge me anything for the wood itself, but they demanded a couple 
of dollars to make a clean cut so I could have a fine rectangular piece 
of pine measuring 12.5 inches ( 31.8 centimeters) long.
Using a ruler, divide the breadboard lengthwise at 1-inch (25.4- 
millimeter) intervals, centered so as to get 11 evenly spaced marks. 
Do the same going sideways to obtain nine marks at 1-inch (25.4- 
millimeter) intervals. Using a ball-point or roller-point pen, draw 
lines parallel to the edges of the board to obtain a grid pattern. Label 
the grid lines from A to K and 1 to 9, as shown in Fig. 6-1. That’ll give 
you 99 intersection points, each of which you can designate with a 
letter-number pair, such as D-3 or G-8.

Your breadboard    115
Table 6-1
Components list for simple electricity experiments. You can find these items at retail 
stores throughout the United States. Abbreviations: AWG = American Wire Gauge,  
A = amperes, V = volts, W = watts, and PIV = peak inverse volts.
 
Quantity
Store type or Radio 
Shack part number
 
Description
1
Lumber yard
Pine board, approx. 10.8 × 12.5 × 0.6 inches
1
Hardware store
Pair of safety glasses
1
Hardware store
Small hammer
12
Hardware store
Flat-head wood screws, 6 × 3/4
100
Hardware store
Polished steel finishing nails, 1-1/4 inches long
1
Department store
12-inch plastic or wooden ruler
1
Hardware store
Small tube of contact cement
1
Hardware store or 
Radio Shack
Digital multimeter, GB Instruments GDT-11 or 
equivalent
1
Hardware store
Diagonal wire cutter/stripper
1
Hardware store
Small needle-nose pliers
1
Hardware store
Roll of AWG No. 24 solid uninsulated (bare) copper 
wire
1
278-1156
Package of insulated test/jumper leads
4
Hardware store
Alkaline AA cells rated at 1.5 V
1
270-391A
Holder for four size AA cells in series
1
271-1111
Package of five resistors rated at 220 ohms and 1/2 W
1
271-1113
Package of five resistors rated at 330 ohms and 1/2 W
1
271-1115
Package of five resistors rated at 470 ohms and 1/2 W
1
271-1117
Package of five resistors rated at 680 ohms and 1/2 W
1
271-1118
Package of five resistors rated at 1000 (1 k) ohms and 
1/2 W
1
271-1120
Package of five resistors rated at 1500 (1.5 k) ohms and 
1/2 W
1
271-1122
Package of five resistors rated at 3300 (3.3 k) ohms and 
1/2 W
1
276-1104
Package of two rectifier diodes rated at 1 A and 600 PIV
2
272-357
Miniature screw-base lamp holder
1
272-1130
Package of two screw-base miniature lamps rated at  
6.3 V
1
272-1133
Package of two screw-base miniature lamps rated at  
7.5 V
Once you’ve marked the grid lines, gather together a bunch of 
1.25-inch ( 31.8-millimeter) polished-steel finishing nails. Place the 
board on a solid surface that can’t suffer any damage from scratching 
or scraping. A concrete or asphalt driveway will serve this purpose. 
Pound a nail into each of the grid intersection points shown by the 

116    Let’s learn by doing
black dots in Fig. 6-1 (53 nails in all). Make certain that the nails are 
made of polished steel, preferably with “tiny heads.” The nails must 
not have any coating of paint, plastic, or other electrically insulating 
material. Each nail should go into the board just far enough so that 
you can’t wiggle it around. I pounded every nail down to a depth 
of approximately 0.3 inch (8 millimeters), a distance amounting to 
halfway down through the board.
Using 6 × 32 flat-head wood screws, secure the two miniature lamp 
holders to the board at the locations shown in Fig. 6-1. Using short 
lengths of thin, solid, bare copper wire, connect the terminals of one 
lamp holder to breadboard nails A-2 and D-1. Connect the terminals 
of the other lamp holder to nails D-2 and G-1. Wrap the wire tightly 
at least twice, but preferably four times, around each nail. Snip off any 
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Lamp
holder
Lamp
holder
Holder for four
size AA cells
Fig. 6-1.  Layout of the breadboard for simple electricity experiments. I used a  
“12-inch” pine board (actually 10.8 inches wide) with a thickness of “3/4 inch” 
(actually about 0.6 inch), cut to a length of 12.5 inches. Solid dots show the  
positions of the nails. Grid squares measure 1 inch by 1 inch.

Wire wrapping    117
excess wire that remains. Glue the four-cell AA battery holder to the 
breadboard with contact cement. Allow the cement to harden. That 
process will need a few hours, so you can take a break for awhile!
When the contact cement has solidified, strip 1 inch of the insula-
tion from the ends of the cell-holder leads and connect the leads to 
the nails, as shown in Fig. 6-1. Remember that the red lead goes to the  
positive battery terminal, and the black lead goes to the negative 
terminal. Use the same wire-wrapping technique that you used for 
the lamp-holder wires. Place four brand new AA alkaline cells in the 
holders with the negative terminals against the springs. Now you 
have a 6-V battery, and the breadboard awaits your exploits.
Wire wrapping
The following breadboard-based experiments employ a construction 
method called wire wrapping. Each nail forms a terminal to which 
you can attach several component leads or wires. To make a connec-
tion, wrap an uninsulated wire or lead around a nail in a tight coil. 
Make at least two, but preferably four or five, complete wire turns, 
as shown in Fig. 6-2.
When you wrap the end of a length of wire, cut off the excess wire 
after wrapping. For small components, such as resistors and diodes, 
Polished steel
finishing nail
Breadboard
Wire or
component
lead
Fig. 6-2.  Wire-wrapping technique. Wind the wire or component lead at least 
twice, but preferably four or five times, around the nail. Extra wire should be 
snipped off, if necessary, using a diagonal cutter.

118    Let’s learn by doing
wrap the leads around the nails as many times as is necessary to use 
up the entire lead length. That way, you won’t have to cut down 
the component leads. You’ll be able to easily unwrap and reuse the 
components for later experiments. Needle-nose pliers can help you 
to wrap wires or leads that you can’t wrap with your fingers alone.
When you want to make multiple connections to a single nail, you 
can wrap one wire or lead over the other, but you shouldn’t have 
to do that unless you’ve run out of nail space. Each nail should pro-
trude approximately 1 inch above the board surface, so you won’t be 
cramped for wrapping space.
Tip
Again, you must make absolutely sure that the nails are made of 
polished steel without any coating. They should be new and 
clean, so they’ll function as efficient electrical terminals.
When you perform the experiments that follow, the exact arrange-
ment of parts on the breadboard is up to you. I’ve provided schematic 
and pictorial layout diagrams to show you how the components are 
interconnected. I recommend that you follow my layout suggestions, 
only because that way, you can focus on how the actual appear-
ance of the circuit compares with the schematic diagram, even if 
you haven’t bothered to build the breadboard and work with the 
hardware directly.
Small components such as resistors should always go between 
adjacent nails, so that you can wrap each lead securely around each 
nail. Jumper wires (also known as clip leads) should be secured to 
the nails so that the “jaws” can’t easily work their way loose. It’s best 
to clamp jumpers to nails sideways, so that the wires come off hori-
zontally. If you try to put one of these so-called alligator clips down 
on a nail vertically, there’s a good chance that it will pop off in the 
middle of a mission-critical operation!
Caution!
Please let me repeat: Wear safety glasses at all times as you per-
form these experiments, whether you think you need to or not.

Kirchhoff’s current law    119
Kirchhoff’s current law
In this experiment, you’ll construct a network that demonstrates one 
of the most important principles in DC electricity. You’ll need five 
resistors: two rated at 330 ohms, one rated at 1000 ohms (1 k), and 
two rated at 1500 ohms (1.5 k). You’ll also need four AA cells.
Mount the resistors on the breadboard by wire-wrapping the leads 
around the terminal nails, as shown in the layout diagram, Fig. 6-3. 
Test each resistor with your multimeter (set to work as an ohmmeter) 
to verify their ohmic values before you install them. Use a 5-inch 
length of bare copper wire to interconnect the three terminals I-1, 
J-1, and K-1. Do the same thing with I-3, J-3, and K-3, and also with 
I-5, J-5, and K-5. 
Jumper to
negative
battery
terminal
Jumper to
positive
battery
terminal
330
1000
1500
330
1500
Bare wire
Bare wire
Bare wire
I-1
I-2
I-3
I-5
I-4
J-1
J-2
J-3
J-4
J-5
K-1
K-2
K-3
K-4
K-5
Fig. 6-3.  Arrangement of resistors on breadboard for demonstration of Kirchhoff’s 
current law. All resistance values are in ohms. Solid dots indicate breadboard  
terminals. Solid lines show interconnections with bare copper wire. Dashed lines 
indicate jumpers.

120    Let’s learn by doing
Tip
Engineers symbolize current as a variable by writing an upper- 
case italic letter I. Amperes as units are abbreviated as an uppercase 
 nonitalic A. Voltage as a variable can be symbolized by an upper-
case italic E or an uppercase italic V. Volts as units are abbrevi-
ated as an uppercase nonitalic V. Resistance as a variable is sym-
bolized with the uppercase italic R. Ohms as units can be written 
out in full, although some texts use the uppercase nonitalic Greek 
letter omega (Ω).
Gustav Robert Kirchhoff (1824–1887) did research and formulated 
theories in a time when no one knew much about electrical current. 
He used common sense to deduce fundamental properties of DC 
circuits. Kirchhoff reasoned that the current going into any branch 
point in a circuit must always equal the current going out of that 
point. Figure 6-4 shows a generic example of this principle, known 
as Kirchhoff’s first law. We can also call it Kirchhoff’s current law or 
the principle of conservation of current.
Mathematically, the sum of the currents entering a branch point 
always equals the sum of the currents leaving that same branch point. 
In the example of Fig. 6-4, two branches enter the point and three 
branches leave it, so
I1 + I2 = I3 + I4 + I5
I1
I2
I3
I4
I5
Branch
point
Fig. 6-4.  According to Kirchhoff’s current law, the sum of the currents flowing into 
any branch point is equal to the sum of the currents flowing out of that branch 
point. In this example, I1 + I2 = I3 + I4 + I5.

Kirchhoff’s current law    121
Kirchhoff’s current law holds true no matter how many branches 
come into or go out of a particular point.
Connect your four-cell battery to the resistive network and mea-
sure the currents in each branch. Every test point should be metered 
individually, while all the other test points are shorted with jumpers. 
Figure 6-5 is a schematic diagram that shows the actual values of the 
resistors in my network (yours will be slightly different, of course), 
along with the value I got when I measured I1, the current through 
the smaller of the two input resistors.
As you measure each of the four other current values in turn, make 
certain that the meter polarity always agrees with the battery polarity. 
The black meter probe should go to the more negative point, and 
the red meter probe should go to the more positive point. That way, 
you’ll avoid getting negative current readings that might throw off 
your calculations. When I tested my four-cell battery to determine its 
-
+
6.32 V
I1 = 10.59 mA
I2
I3
I4
I 5
325
984
1467
1449
324
Fig. 6-5.  Network for verifying Kirchhoff’s current law. All resistance values are  
in ohms. The battery voltage, the current I1 , and the resistances are the values  
I measured. Dashed lines show interconnections with jumpers.

122    Let’s learn by doing
voltage, I got 6.32 V. When I measured I1 through I 5, I got the follow-
ing results, accurate to the nearest hundredth of a milliampere (mA):
	
I1 = 10.59 mA
	
I2 = 2.40 mA
	
I3 = 8.35 mA
	
I4 = 2.79 mA
	
I5 = 1.88 mA
It’s “mission critical” that all test points not undergoing current 
measurement be shorted out with jumpers. Otherwise, your network 
will be incomplete and your current measurements will come out 
wrong. After you’ve finished making measurements, remove all the 
jumpers to conserve battery energy.
Now you can input your numbers to the Kirchhoff formulas and 
see how close the sum of the input currents comes to the sum of the 
output currents. Here are my results for the sum of the currents enter-
ing the branch point:
	
I1 + I2 = 10.59 + 2.40
	
= 12.99 mA
When I added the currents leaving the branch point, I got
	
I3 + I4 + I5 = 8.35 + 2.79 + 1.88
	
= 13.02 mA
Tip
When you do experiments of this sort, you should expect a slight 
discrepancy. That principle explains the 0.03 mA current differ-
ence in the branch points in my test. An error of three hundredths 
of a milliampere at 13 mA amounts to well under 1 percent, which 
is acceptable.
Now compare!
Compare the layout diagram (Fig. 6-3) with the schematic diagram 
(Fig. 6-5) without the meter or jumpers.

Kirchhoff’s voltage law    123
Kirchhoff’s voltage law
In this experiment, you’ll construct a network that demonstrates 
another important DC circuit rule. You’ll need four resistors: one rated 
at 220 ohms, one rated at 330 ohms, one rated at 470 ohms, and one 
rated at 680 ohms. You’ll also need four AA cells.
According to Kirchhoff’s second law, the sum of the voltages across 
the individual components in a series DC circuit, taking polarity into 
account, always equals zero. We can also call this rule Kirchhoff’s 
voltage law or the principle of conservation of voltage.
Consider the generic series DC circuit shown in Fig. 6-6. According 
to Kirchhoff’s voltage law, the battery voltage E must equal the sum 
of the potential differences (voltages) across the resistors, although 
the polarity will be reversed. Mathematically, we can state this fact as
E + E1 + E2 + E3 + E4 = 0
If we measure the voltages across the individual resistors and the bat-
tery, one at a time, with a DC voltmeter and disregard the polarity, 
we should find that
E = E1 + E2 + E3 + E4
Check each of the four resistors with your ohmmeter to verify their 
actual values. Mount the resistors in the upper right-hand corner of 
your breadboard by wire-wrapping the leads around nails, as shown 
in Fig. 6-7. Connect the battery to the network as shown, and mea-
sure the voltage across each resistor. Figure 6-8 illustrates the actual 
values of the resistors in my network (yours will be slightly different), 
E
+
_
+
_
+
_
+
_
+
-
E1
E2
E3
E4
Fig. 6-6.  According to Kirchhoff’s voltage law, the sum of the voltages across the 
resistances in a series DC circuit is equal and opposite to the battery voltage. If we 
disregard polarity, then in this example, we’ll observe that E = E1 + E2 + E3 + E4.

124    Let’s learn by doing
along with the voltage I got for E2. I measured E = 6.30 V across the 
battery when it was connected to the resistors.
As you measure each voltage E1 through E4, the black meter probe 
should go to the more negative voltage point, and the red probe should  
go to the more positive point. That way, you’ll avoid getting negative 
Jumper to
negative
battery
terminal
Jumper to
positive
battery
terminal
220
330
470
680
G-1
H-1
I-1
J-1
K-1
G-2
H-2
I-2
J-2
K-2
Fig. 6-7.  Suggested arrangement of resistors on breadboard for demonstration  
of Kirchhoff’s voltage law. All resistance values are in ohms. Solid dots indicate  
terminals. Dashed lines indicate jumpers.
+
-
E1
E3
E4
E2 = 1.22 V
220
672
465
328
E = 6.30 V
Fig. 6-8.  Network for verifying Kirchhoff’s voltage law. All resistance values are in 
ohms. The battery voltage E, the voltage across the second resistor, and the resist-
ances are the values I measured.

A resistive voltage divider    125
readings that might throw off your calculations. When I measured the 
voltages across the individual resistors, I got
E1 = 0.82 V
E2 = 1.22 V
E3 = 1.75 V
E4 = 2.52 V
When you’ve finished making your measurements, remove one of 
the jumpers to take the load off the battery.
After you’ve double-checked and written down your voltage mea-
surements, input the numbers to the modified Kirchhoff formula
E = E1 + E2 + E3 + E4
and see how closely it works out. For the left-hand side of this equa-
tion, I measured
E = 6.30 V
In the right-hand side of the foregoing equation, I added my numbers 
to get
	
E1 + E2 + E3 + E4 = 0.82 + 1.22 + 1.75 + 2.52
	
= 6.31 V
That’s an error of only 0.01 V out of a net potential difference of 6.30 V,  
amounting to less than two-tenths of one percent error.
Now compare!
Compare the layout diagram (Fig. 6-7) with the schematic diagram 
(Fig. 6-8), and “follow the flow” through both versions.
A resistive voltage divider
You can use the components from the previous experiment to obtain 
several different voltages from a single battery. Keep the resistors 
on the breadboard in the same arrangement as you had them in the 
experiment for Kirchhoff’s voltage law.

126    Let’s learn by doing
When you connect two or more resistors in series with a DC power 
source, those resistors produce specific voltage ratios. You can tailor 
these ratios using specific resistances that “fix” the intermediate volt-
ages. This type of circuit works best when the resistance values are 
fairly small. Figure 6-9 illustrates the principle of a resistive voltage 
divider. The individual resistances are R1, R2, R3, ..., and Rn. The total 
resistance R is the sum
R = R1 + R2 + R3 + ... + Rn
If we call the power supply voltage E, then Ohm’s law tells us that 
the current I at any point in the circuit must be
I = E /R
as long as we express I in amperes, E in volts, and R in ohms. At 
the points P1, P2, P3, ..., and Pn, the voltages relative to the negative 
battery terminal are E1, E2, E3, ..., and En, respectively. The last (and 
highest) voltage En is the same as the battery voltage E. The voltages 
at the various points increase according to the sum total of the resis-
tances up to each point, in proportion to the total resistance, multi-
plied by the supply voltage. In theory, then, we should find that the 
following equations hold true:
+
-
P1
P2
P3
R1
R2
R3
Rn
E1
E2
E3
En
Pn
E
Fig. 6-9.  A voltage divider takes advantage of the potential differences across  
individual resistors connected in series with a DC power source. Note the use  
of italics and subscripts for the resistor designators!

A resistive voltage divider    127
E1 = E R1 /R
E2 = E (R1 + R2 )/R
E3 = E (R1 + R2 + R3 )/R
↓
	
En = E (R1 + R2 + R3 + ... + Rn )/R 
	
= E R /R
	
= E
Tip
Note the use of italics and subscripts for the resistor designators 
here! Instead of R1, R2, R3, and so on, we now write R1, R2, R3, 
and so on. This alternative notation hasn’t appeared previously 
in this book, but lots of engineers use it in schematics. Don’t get 
surprised when you encounter it. This notation is commonly used 
for capacitors, inductors, diodes, and other components as well.
During this experiment, I measured E = 6.30 V across the battery 
as it worked under load, as shown in Fig. 6-10A. This diagram shows 
the rated values of the resistors. Your actual values will differ slightly 
from the rated values. In my case, the actual values were
R1 = 220 ohms
R2 = 328 ohms
R3 = 465 ohms
R4 = 672 ohms
Set your meter to measure current in milliamperes (mA). Connect 
the battery to the resistive network through the meter, as shown in 
Fig. 6-10B, and measure the current. In theory, I expected the milliam-
meter to indicate a value equal to the battery voltage divided by the 
sum of the actual resistances, or
	
I = E /R
	
= 6.30/(220 + 328 + 465 + 672)
	
= 6.30/1685
	
= 0.00374 A
	
= 3.74 mA

128    Let’s learn by doing
Jumper to
negative
battery
terminal
220
330
470
680
Jumper to
negative
battery
terminal
Jumper to
positive
battery
terminal
220
330
470
680
To positive
battery
terminal
Milliammeter
A
B
G-1
H-1
I-1
J-1
K-1
G-2
H-2
I-2
J-2
K-2
G-1
H-1
I-1
J-1
K-1
G-2
H-2
I-2
J-2
K-2
Voltmeter
Fig. 6-10.  At A, arrangement for measuring voltages in a resistive divider. Here,  
the voltmeter is connected to measure the voltage E2 across the first and second  
resistors. All resistance values are in ohms. Solid dots indicate terminals. Dashed  
lines indicate jumpers. At B, arrangement for measurement of current through  
the network.

A resistive voltage divider    129
When I measured the current, I got 3.73 mA, a value comfortably 
within the limits of acceptable error.
Now measure the intermediate voltages E1 through E4 with your 
meter set for a moderate DC voltage range. The black meter probe 
should go directly to the negative battery terminal and stay there. The 
red meter probe should go to each positive voltage point in turn. First 
measure the voltage E1 that appears across R1 only. Then measure, in 
order, the following voltages, as illustrated in the schematic of Fig. 
6-11:
• The potential difference E2 across R1 + R2
• The potential difference E3 across R1 + R2 + R3
• The potential difference E4 across R1 + R2 + R3 + R4
Figure 6-11 illustrates the arrangement for measuring E2 to provide a 
specific example. When I measured each voltage in turn, my meter 
displayed these results:
E1 = 0.82 V
E2 = 2.04 V
E3 = 3.79 V
E4 = 6.30 V
After you’ve finished measuring all the voltages, remove one of the 
jumpers to conserve battery energy.
+
-
E1
E3
E2 = 2.04 V
E = 6.30 V
E4
220
328
465
672
I = 3.73 mA
Fig. 6-11.  Network for testing the operation of a resistive voltage divider. All resist-
ance values are in ohms. The battery voltage E, the voltage E2 across the first and 
second resistors, and the resistance values represent my measurements.

130    Let’s learn by doing
Now connect the meter across the combination R1 + R2. Run a cou-
ple of jumper wires to a load resistor located elsewhere on the bread-
board, as shown in the layout diagram of Fig. 6-12. This arrangement 
will make the voltage source E2 force current through the load resis-
tor, which we’ll call R L. Try every resistor in your repertoire in the 
place of R  L. If you obtained all the resistors in the parts list, you’ll 
have seven tests to do, using resistors rated at values ranging from 
220 to 3300 ohms.
Alternately connect and disconnect one of the jumper wires between  
the voltage divider and R L, so that you can observe the effect of the  
load on E2. As you can see, the external load affects the behavior of 
the voltage divider. As R L decreases, so does E2. The effect becomes 
R2
R3
R1
R4
To positive
battery
terminal
To negative
battery
terminal
Voltmeter
R L
H-1
I-1
J-1
G-2
K-2
Load resistance
(can be wrapped
to any two free
adjacent terminals)
Fig. 6-12.  Circuit for testing a resistive voltage divider under load. Dashed lines 
indicate jumpers. This diagram shows the arrangement for measuring variations  
in E2 as the load resistance RL is alternately connected and disconnected from  
the series combination of R1 and R2.

A resistive voltage divider    131
dramatic when R L becomes small, representing a “heavy load.” Table 
6-2 shows the results I got. Plot your results as points on a coordinate 
grid with R L on the horizontal axis and E2 on the vertical axis, and then 
“connect the dots” to get a characteristic curve showing the voltage 
as a function of the load resistance. Figure 6-13 is the graph I made. 
Table 6-2
Here are the voltages that I measured across various loads in a resistive voltage 
divider constructed according to Fig. 6-12. My network resistor values were  
R1 = 220 ohms, R2 = 328 ohms, R3 = 465 ohms, and R4 = 672 ohms. The load 
resistance values (left column) are the actual measured values for components rated  
at 3300, 1500, 1000, 680, 470, 330, and 220 ohms, respectively as you read down.
Load resistance (ohms)
Output voltage (volts)
3250
1.83
1470
1.63
  983
1.49
  671
1.32
  466
1.14
  326
0.96
  220
0.76
Load resistance in ohms
Output voltage in volts
100
300
600
(Reverse logarithmic scale)
No-load voltage = 2.04 V
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
10 k
6 k
3 k
1 k
Fig. 6-13.  My results for output voltage versus load resistance in the voltage divider. 
The dashed line shows the open-circuit (no-load) voltage across the combination  
of R1 and R2 in series. Open circles show the measured voltages under various loads. 
The solid curve reveals how the circuit behaves as the load resistance goes down.

132    Let’s learn by doing
I used a reverse logarithmic scale to portray R L, so that the values 
would be reasonably spread out. This graph scale allows for a graph 
that provides a clear picture of what happens as the conductance of 
the load increases.
Here’s a thought!
What do you think will happen to the voltage across the load if you 
use two, three, four, or five 220-ohm resistors in parallel, getting 
RL values of about 110, 73, 55, and 44 ohms respectively? Try the 
arrangements one by one, and see what happens! Your original 
package from Radio Shack has five 220-ohm resistors in it, right?
Tip
The results of this experiment suggest that when engineers build 
voltage dividers, they had better know what sort of external load 
the circuit will have to deal with. If the load resistance fluctu-
ates greatly, especially if it sometimes gets low, a resistive voltage 
divider won’t work very well.
A diode-based voltage 
reducer
Rectifier diodes can reduce the output voltage of a low-voltage DC bat-
tery or power supply, providing a better (or at least more predictable) 
way to obtain specific desired voltages than the resistive divider can 
do. For this experiment, you’ll need two diodes. The ones I obtained 
were rated at 1 A and 600 peak inverse volts (PIV), available at Radio 
Shack stores as part number 276-1104. You’ll also need at least one 
of each of the resistors listed in Table 6-1, along with some jumpers.
Figure 6-14 shows the schematic symbol for a simple rectifier diode, 
which is manufactured by joining a piece of P-type semiconductor 
material to a piece of N-type material. The N-type semiconductor, 
represented by the short, straight line, forms the diode’s cathode. 
The P-type semiconductor, represented by the arrow, composes 
the anode. Under most conditions, electrons can travel easily from 
the cathode to the anode (in the direction opposite the arrow), but 

A diode-based voltage reducer    133
not from the anode to the cathode (in the direction of the arrow). 
Conventional current, which always goes from positive to negative, 
moves in the same direction as the arrow points.
If you connect a battery and a resistor in series with a diode, cur-
rent will flow if the negative terminal of the battery faces the cathode 
and the positive terminal faces the anode, as shown in Fig. 6-15A. 
This condition is called forward bias. No current will flow if the bat-
Cathode
Anode
Fig. 6-14.  Schematic symbol for a semiconductor diode. The short line represents 
the cathode. The arrow represents the anode.
B
A
Forward bias:
current flows
+
-
+
-
Battery
Current-
limiting
resistor
Milliammeter
+
-
+
-
Current-
limiting
resistor
Milliammeter
Battery
Reverse bias:
current does
not flow
Fig. 6-15.  Series connection of a battery, a resistor, a current meter, and a diode. 
At A, forward bias causes current to flow if the voltage equals or exceeds the  
forward breakover threshold. At B, reverse bias results in no current through the 
diode, unless the voltage gets very high.

134    Let’s learn by doing
tery is reversed, as shown in Fig. 6-15B (except when the voltage is 
very high). This condition is called reverse bias. The resistor prevents 
destruction of the diode by excessive current under conditions of 
forward bias.
It takes a certain minimum voltage to cause current to flow through 
a forward-biased semiconductor diode. Engineers call this “threshold” 
the forward breaker voltage. In most diodes, it’s a fraction of a volt, 
but it varies somewhat depending on how much current the diode 
is forced to carry. If the forward-bias voltage across the diode’s P-N 
junction is not at least as great as the forward breaker voltage, then 
the diode will not conduct. When a diode is forward-biased and con-
nected in series with a battery, the voltage goes down to an extent 
approximately equal to the forward breakover voltage. Unlike the 
voltage reduction that takes place with resistors, the diode’s voltage-
dropping capability does not change much when the external load 
resistance goes up or down.
Although current won’t normally flow through a diode that’s 
reverse-biased, exceptions do occur. If the reverse voltage gets high 
enough (usually far greater than the forward breakover value), a 
diode will conduct current because of the so-called avalanche effect. 
Zener diodes, which are used to regulate voltages in power supplies, 
work according to this principle.
Did you know?
When you connect two or more identical rectifier diodes in series 
with their polarities in agreement, the forward-breakover voltages 
add up (give or take a little), so you can get stable and predictable 
voltage drops that come quite close to whole-number multiples 
of the forward breakover voltage of a single diode. This technique 
works as long as you connect a load in the circuit, so that the 
diodes are forced to carry some current.
You can set up a voltage reducer with two diodes in series and 
their polarities in agreement, as shown in Fig. 6-16, so that current 
flows through the load resistor R L if the forward bias is large enough. 
Figure 6-17 is a pictorial layout diagram showing an arrangement for 
mounting the components on your breadboard. Set your meter to 
indicate DC voltage in a moderate range, such as 0 to 20 V. Connect 
the meter across the load resistance, paying attention to the polar-
ity so you get positive voltage readings. As you did in the previous 

A diode-based voltage reducer    135
experiment, try every resistor you have for R L. Measure the voltage 
across R L in each case. You’ll have seven tests to do, with resistances 
ranging from 220 to 3300 ohms.
The load resistance R L affects the behavior of a diode-based volt-
age reducer, but in a different way than it affects the behavior of a 
resistive voltage divider. When you do these tests, you’ll see that as 
the load resistance R L decreases, the potential difference across it 
goes down, but only a little bit. The voltage across the load tends to 
drop more and more slowly as R L decreases. Contrast this behavior 
Voltmeter
RL
D
D
1
2
+
-
Battery
Voltage-reducing
diodes
Fig. 6-16.  Schematic diagram showing the method of voltage measurement across 
a load resistance RL in a two-diode voltage reducer.
Jumper to
negative
battery
terminal
Jumper to
positive
battery
terminal
Voltmeter
G-2
H-2
I-2
J-2
RL
D
D
1
2
Fig. 6-17.  Suggested breadboard layout for measurements of the voltages across  
the load resistance in a two-diode voltage reducer. Solid dots show breadboard 
terminals. Dashed lines indicate jumpers. Pay attention to the diode polarity! The 
cathodes should go toward the negative battery terminal.

136    Let’s learn by doing
with that of the resistive divider, in which the voltage drops off more 
and more rapidly as the load resistance goes down. Table 6-3 shows 
the results I got when I measured the voltages across various load 
resistances with this two-diode arrangement.
Plot your results as points on a coordinate grid with the load resis-
tance on the horizontal axis and the voltage across the load resistor on 
the vertical axis, and then approximate the curve as you did in the pre-
vious experiment. When I did this little exercise, I got the graph shown 
in Fig. 6-18. As before, I used a reverse logarithmic scale to portray R L. 
Compare this graph with Fig. 6-13 from the previous experiment.
Here’s a thought!
Repeat this experiment with only one diode. Then, if you’re will-
ing to make another trip to Radio Shack, get another package of 
diodes and try the experiment with three or four of them in series. 
You might also obtain some more resistors, covering a range of 
values of, say, 100 ohms to 100,000 ohms, and test the circuit 
using those resistors in the place of R L.
Caution!
Don’t use a resistor of less than about 75 ohms as the load here. 
In this arrangement, a 1/2-watt resistor of less than 75 ohms will 
let too much current flow, risking destruction of the resistor (and 
possibly the diodes as well, if you make the resistance really low).
Table 6-3
Here are the output voltages that I obtained with various loads connected to a diode-
based voltage reducer. The circuit consisted of two diodes rated at 1 A and 600 PIV, 
forward-biased and placed in series with a 6.30-V battery.
Load resistance (ohms)
Output voltage (volts)
3250
5.08
1470
4.99
  983
4.96
  672
4.91
  466
4.88
  326
4.84
  220
4.79

Mismatched lamps in series    137
Mismatched lamps in series
When two dissimilar incandescent lamps operate in series, they 
receive different voltages and consume different amounts of volt-
ampere (VA) power, as this experiment demonstrates. (Remember 
from your basic electricity courses that in a DC circuit, power in 
watts equals voltage in volts times current in amperes, hence the term 
volt-ampere for simple DC power.) You’ll need a 6.3-V lamp, a 7.5-V 
lamp, four AA cells, and some jumpers.
Your breadboard has two screw-base lamp holders. Position the 
board so that one holder lies on the left, and the other one lies to its 
right. Install a 6.3-V lamp in the left-hand socket, and a 7.5-V lamp in 
the right-hand socket. Connect a short length of bare wire securely 
between terminals D1 and D2, so that the top terminal of the left-
hand lamp holder goes to the bottom terminal of the right-hand lamp 
holder. Then connect jumpers between the free lamp socket termi-
nals and the battery terminals, so that the lamps are connected in 
series with each other. Both lamps should glow at partial brilliance.
Load resistance in ohms
Output voltage in volts
(Reverse logarithmic scale)
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
No-load voltage = 5.70 V
100
300
600
10 k
6 k
3 k
1 k
Fig. 6-18.  Output voltage versus load resistance for the diode-based voltage 
reducer. These are my results. The dashed line shows the open-circuit (no-load)  
voltage. Open circles show measured voltages under various loads. The solid curve  
approximates the circuit’s characteristic function.

138    Let’s learn by doing
Call the lamp that’s closer to the negative battery terminal “lamp N.” 
That will be the one on the left. Call the lamp that’s closer to the posi-
tive battery terminal “lamp P.” That’ll be the one on the right. Unscrew 
lamp N. At the instant the contact fails, lamp P will go dark. Screw lamp  
N back in, and then unscrew lamp P. Lamp N will go out. This phe-
nomenon is typical of the behavior of a series circuit. If any compo-
nent opens up, all the others lose power. A break at any point in a 
series circuit prevents current from flowing anywhere in that circuit.
Now short out lamp N with a jumper. Lamp N will go dark because 
it no longer has any voltage across it; lamp P will attain nearly full 
brilliance. Then disconnect the jumper from lamp N, and move the 
jumper so that it shorts out lamp P instead. Lamp P will go dark while 
lamp N glows at full brilliance. Again, this behavior is typical of series 
circuits. If any component shorts out, all of the others receive more 
power than they did before.
Set your meter to read DC volts. Connect the jumpers so that the 
lamps are in series and are both glowing at partial brilliance. Measure 
the voltage E­1 across lamp N, as shown in the schematic of Fig. 6-19 
and in the equivalent layout pictorial of Fig. 6-20. Then measure the 
voltage E2 across lamp P, as shown in the schematic of Fig. 6-21 and 
the equivalent layout pictorial of Fig. 6-22. When I performed these 
tests, I got the following voltages:
E1 = 2.20 V
E2 = 3.64 V
-
+
Voltmeter
Lamp rated
at 6.3 V
E1
Four AA cells in series
Lamp rated
at 7.5 V
Fig. 6-19.  Measurement of voltage E1 across the more negative of two dissimilar 
lamps in series (called N, rated at 6.3 V).

Mismatched lamps in series    139
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
-
+
Four AA cells in series
Jumpers
Lamp rated
at 6.3 V
Black
Red
Voltmeter
E 1
Lamp rated
at 7.5 V
Fig. 6-20.  Breadboard layout rendition of the schematic shown in Fig. 6-19.
Voltmeter
Lamp rated
at 6.3 V
-
+
Four AA cells in series
E2
Lamp rated
at 7.5 V
Fig. 6-21.  Measurement of voltage E2 across the more positive lamp (called P, rated 
at 7.5 V).

140    Let’s learn by doing
Tip
If you can’t get the exact same Radio Shack lamps as specified 
in the parts list for these experiments (Table 6-1), you can use 
lamps from another source, such as a hardware store or hobby 
store. This experiment will work as long as the lamps are rated for 
slightly different voltages or slightly different power levels, and 
both are rated between 6 V and 12 V.
Now determine the voltage E across the series combination of lamps, 
as shown in the schematic at Fig. 6-23 and the layout in Fig. 6-24. In 
theory, the reading should be
E = E1 + E2
When I put my numerical results into this formula, I predicted that I 
would see
	
E = 2.20 + 3.64
	
= 5.84 V
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
-
+
Four AA cells in series
Jumpers
Lamp rated
at 6.3 V
Black
Red
Voltmeter
E 2
Lamp rated
at 7.5 V
Fig. 6-22.  Breadboard layout rendition of the schematic shown in Fig. 6-21.

Mismatched lamps in series    141
Voltmeter
Lamp rated
at 6.3 V
-
+
Four AA cells in series
E
Lamp rated
at 7.5 V
Fig. 6-23.  Measurement of voltage E across the combination of two dissimilar 
lamps in series.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
-
+
Four AA cells in series
Jumpers
Lamp rated
at 6.3 V
Black
Red
Voltmeter
E
Lamp rated
at 7.5 V
Fig. 6-24.  Breadboard layout rendition of the schematic shown in Fig. 6-23.

142    Let’s learn by doing
My meter reading was E = 5.85 V, a value significantly lower than the 
6.30 V I started out with under no-load conditions. Evidently, these 
bulbs “tax” the four-AA-cell battery rather heavily. I also entertained 
the notion that because I’d been using the battery for a lot of other 
experiments besides the ones described here, my AA cells might 
have grown a little weak.
Set your meter for DC milliamperes, and connect it, as shown in 
the schematic diagram of Fig. 6-25 and in the equivalent layout picto-
rial of Fig. 6-26. That connection will allow you to measure the cur-
rent drawn by the series combination of lamps. I obtained a reading 
of 139 mA (or 0.139 A).
Now that you know the voltage across each lamp and the current 
going through the whole circuit, you can determine the VA power 
figures for the lamps individually and together. Let PVA 1 represent the 
VA power consumed by lamp N, and use the formula
PVA 1 = E1 I
When I plugged in my results, I got
	
PVA 1 = 2.20 × 0.139
	
= 0.306 VA
Lamp rated
at 6.3 V
-
+
Four AA cells in series
Milliammeter
I
Lamp rated
at 7.5 V
Fig. 6-25.  Measurement of current I drawn by the combination of two dissimilar 
lamps in series.

Mismatched lamps in series    143
Letting PVA 2 represent the VA power consumed by lamp P, the for-
mula is
PVA 2 = E2 I
My result turned out as
	
PVA 2 = 3.64 × 0.139
	
= 0.506 VA
Now let’s say that PVA represents the VA power consumed by both 
lamps operating together. In that case, theory predicts that
PVA = E I
Plugging in my experimental results gave me
	
PVA = 5.85 × 0.139
	
= 0.813 VA
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
-
+
Four AA cells in series
Lamp rated
at 6.3 V
Black
Red
Jumper
Milliammeter
I
Lamp rated
at 7.5 V
Fig. 6-26.  Breadboard layout rendition of the schematic shown in Fig. 6-25.

144    Let’s learn by doing
In theory, the VA power consumed by the lamp combination should 
also work out as the sum of the two VA power quantities taken 
individually:
PVA = PVA 1 + PVA 2
Adding my results of PVA 1 = 0.306 and PVA 2 = 0.506, I got
	
PVA = 0.306 + 0.506
	
= 0.812 VA
The error between my two results was a small fraction of one percent,  
a state of affairs that made me joyful indeed.
Summary and conclusion
When you want to design, build, debug, and troubleshoot electronic 
equipment, you’ll do best if you have a good schematic (or set of 
schematics) to work with. Pictorial diagrams, including layouts, can 
help you find your way too. But when it comes down to doing the 
work, you’ll never find any substitute for playing around with real-
world hardware. If you have both schematic and pictorial diagrams 
available, your job will be as easy as it can get.
If you did all the experiments in this chapter, you probably came 
up with results that differ slightly from mine. If you had to make major 
parts substitutions, for example with the lamps in the last experi-
ment, then some of your results doubtless came out a lot different 
than mine did. Whether you did the experiments or merely followed 
along as a spectator, you got a chance to see how schematics, layout 
diagrams, literal pictorials, graphs, and tables can work together! All 
of these tools belong in an engineer’s knowledge base.
Again, I’d like to make a “plug” for Electricity Experiments You Can 
Do at Home. You’ll get some good hands-on lab experience, com-
bined with some theory and some rather strange phenomena, from 
that book. If you want a more theoretical and exhaustive presenta-
tion of electricity and electronics, with plenty of schematics and just 
enough mathematics to keep a true geek from getting bored, I recom-
mend the latest edition of Teach Yourself Electricity and Electronics. 
Both books are published by McGraw-Hill, and you can find them at 
all major book retailers.

A
Schematic symbols
ammeter
	
amplifier, general
	
amplifier, inverting 
	
amplifier, operational	
	
AND gate
	
antenna, balanced
	
antenna, general
	
145

146    Schematic symbols
antenna, loop
	
antenna, loop, multiturn
	
battery, electrochemical 	
capacitor, feedthrough
	
capacitor, fixed
	
capacitor, variable
	
capacitor, variable,  
split-rotor
	
capacitor, variable,  
split-stator
	
cathode, electron-tube, 
cold
	
cathode, electron-tube, 
directly heated
	

Schematic symbols    147
cathode, electron-tube, 
indirectly heated
	
cavity resonator
	
cell, electrochemical
	
circuit breaker
	
coaxial cable
	
crystal, piezoelectric
	
delay line
	
diac
	
diode, field-effect
	
diode, general
	
diode, Gunn
	
diode, light-emitting
	
diode, photosensitive
	

148    Schematic symbols
diode, PIN
	
diode, Schottky
	
diode, tunnel
	
diode, varactor
	
diode, Zener
	
directional coupler
	
directional wattmeter
	
exclusive-OR gate
	
female contact, general
	
Ferrite bead
	
filament, electron-tube
	
fuse
	
galvanometer
	
grid, electron-tube
	

Schematic symbols    149
ground, chassis
	
ground, earth
	
handset
	
headset, double
	
headset, single
	
headset, stereo
	
inductor, air core
	
inductor, air core, bifilar
	
inductor, air core, tapped
	
inductor, air core,  
variable
	
inductor, iron core
	
inductor, iron core, bifilar
	

150    Schematic symbols
inductor, iron core, 
tapped
	
inductor, iron core,  
variable
	
inductor, powdered-iron 
core
	
inductor, powdered-iron 
core, bifilar
	
inductor, powdered-iron 
core, tapped
	
inductor, powdered-iron 
core, variable
	
integrated circuit, general
	
jack, coaxial or phono
	
jack, phone, 2-conductor
	
jack, phone, 3-conductor
	
key, telegraph
	

Schematic symbols    151
lamp, incandescent
	
lamp, neon
	
male contact, general
	
meter, general
	
microammeter
	
microphone
	
microphone, directional
	
milliammeter
	
NAND gate
	
negative voltage  
connection
	
NOR gate
	
NOT gate
	
optoisolator
	

152    Schematic symbols
OR gate
	
outlet, 2-wire, nonpolarized
	
outlet, 2-wire, polarized
	
outlet, 3-wire
	
outlet, 234-volt
	
plate, electron-tube
	
plug, 2-wire, nonpolarized
	
plug, 2-wire, polarized
	
plug, 3-wire
	
plug, 234-volt
	
plug, coaxial or phono
	

Schematic symbols    153
plug, phone, 2-conductor
	
plug, phone, 3-conductor
	
positive voltage connection 	
potentiometer
	
probe, radio-frequency
	
rectifier, gas-filled
	
rectifier, high-vacuum
	
rectifier, semiconductor
	
rectifier, silicon-controlled
	

154    Schematic symbols
relay, double-pole,  
double-throw
	
relay, double-pole,  
single-throw
	
relay, single-pole,  
double-throw
	
relay, single-pole,  
single-throw
	
resistor, fixed
	
resistor, preset
	

Schematic symbols    155
resistor, tapped
	
resonator
	
rheostat
	
saturable reactor
	
signal generator
	
solar battery
	
solar cell
	
source, constant-current
	
source, constant-voltage
	
speaker
	

156    Schematic symbols
switch, double-pole,  
double-throw
	
switch, double-pole,  
rotary
	
switch, double-pole,  
single-throw
	
switch, momentary-contact 	
switch, silicon-controlled
	
switch, single-pole,  
double-throw
	
switch, single-pole, rotary
	
switch, single-pole, single- 
throw
	

Schematic symbols    157
terminals, general,  
balanced
	
terminals, general,  
unbalanced
	
test point
	
thermocouple
	
transformer, air core
	
transformer, air core,  
step-down
	
transformer, air core,  
step-up
	
transformer, air core, 
tapped primary
	
transformer, air core, 
tapped secondary
	
transformer, iron core
	

158    Schematic symbols
transformer, iron core, step-
down
	
transformer, iron core, 
step-up
	
transformer, iron core, 
tapped primary
	
transformer, iron core, 
tapped secondary
	
transformer, powdered-iron 
core
	
transformer, powdered-iron 
core, step-down
	
transformer, powdered-iron 
core, step-up
	
transformer, powdered-iron 
core, tapped primary
	
transformer, powdered-iron 
core, tapped secondary
	
transistor, bipolar, NPN
	

Schematic symbols    159
transistor, bipolar, PNP
	
transistor, field-effect, 
N-channel
	
transistor, field-effect, 
P-channel
	
transistor, MOS field-effect, 
N-channel
	
transistor, MOS field-effect, 
P-channel
	
transistor, photosensitive, 
NPN
	
transistor, photosensitive, 
PNP
	
transistor, photosensitive, 
field-effect, N-channel
	

160    Schematic symbols
transistor, photosensitive, 
 field-effect, P-channel
	
transistor, unijunction
	
triac
	
tube, diode
	
tube, heptode
	
tube, hexode
	
tube, pentode
	

Schematic symbols    161
tube, photosensitive
	
tube, tetrode
	
tube, triode
	
unspecified unit or  
component
	
voltmeter
	
wattmeter
	
waveguide, circular
	
waveguide, flexible
	
waveguide, rectangular
	
waveguide, twisted
	

162    Schematic symbols
wires, crossing. connected
	
wires, crossing, not connected
	

163
B
Resistor color codes
Some resistors have color bands that indicate their values and toler-
ances. You’ll see three, four, or five bands around carbon-composition 
resistors and film resistors. Other resistors have enough physical bulk 
to allow for printed numbers that tell you the values and tolerances 
directly.
On resistors with axial leads (wires that come straight out of both 
ends), the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth bands are arranged as 
shown in Fig. B-1. On resistors with radial leads (wires that come off 
the ends at right angles to the axis of the component body), the col-
ored regions are arranged as shown in Fig. B-2. The first two regions 
represent single digits 0 through 9, and the third region represents a 
multiplier of 10 to some power. (For the moment, don’t worry about 
#1
#3
#5
#2
#4
Fig. B-1.  Locations of color-code bands on a resistor with axial leads.

164    Resistor color codes
the fourth and fifth regions.) Table B-1 indicates the numerals cor-
responding to various colors.
Suppose that you find a resistor with three bands: yellow, violet, 
and red, in that order. You can read as follows, from left to right, 
referring to the table:
• Yellow = 4
• Violet = 7
• Red = ×100
You conclude that the rated resistance equals 4700 ohms, or 4.7 k.
Table B-1
The color code for the first three bands that appear on fixed resistors. 
See text for discussion of the fourth and fifth bands
 
Color of band
Numeral 
(first and second bands)
Multiplier 
(third band)
Black
0
1
Brown
1
10
Red
2
100
Orange
3
1000 (1 k)
Yellow
4
104 (10 k)
Green
5
105 (100 k)
Blue
6
106 (1 M)
Violet
7
107 (10 M)
Gray
8
108 (100 M)
White
9
109 (1000 M or 1 G)
#1
#4
#3
#2
Fig. B-2.  Locations of color code designators on a resistor with radial leads.

Resistor color codes    165
As another example, suppose you find a resistor with bands of 
blue, gray, and orange. You refer to Table B-1 and determine that:
• Blue = 6
• Gray = 8
• Orange = ×1000
This sequence tells you that the resistor is rated at 68,000 ohms, or 
68 k.
If a resistor has a fourth colored band on its surface (#4 as shown 
in Fig. B-1 or B-2), then that mark tells you the tolerance. A silver 
band indicates ±10%. A gold band indicates ±5%. If no fourth band 
exists, then the tolerance is ±20%.
The fifth band, if any, indicates the maximum percentage by which 
you should expect the resistance to change after the first 1000 hours 
of use. A brown band indicates a maximum change of ±1% of the 
rated value. A red band indicates ±0.1%. An orange band indicates 
±0.01%. A yellow band indicates ±0.001%. If the resistor lacks a fifth 
band, it tells you that the resistor might deviate by more than ±1% of 
the rated value after the first 1000 hours of use.
A competent engineer or technician always tests a resistor with an 
ohmmeter before installing it in a circuit. If the component turns out 
defective or mislabeled, you can prevent potential future headaches 
by following this simple precaution. It takes only a few seconds to 
check a resistor’s ohmic value. If you skip that simple step, build a 
circuit, and then discover that it won’t work because of some miscre-
ant resistor, you might have to spend hours tracking it down!

This page intentionally left blank 

167
Frenzel, Louis E., Jr., Electronics Explained. Burlington, MA: Newnes/
Elsevier, 2010. 
Geier, Michael, How to Diagnose and Fix Everything Electronic. New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 2011.
Gerrish, Howard, Electricity and Electronics. Tinley Park, IL: 
Goodheart-Wilcox Co., 2008.
Gibilisco, Stan, Electricity Demystified, 2nd ed. New York:  
McGraw-Hill, 2012.
Gibilisco, Stan, Electricity Experiments You Can Do at Home. New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 2010.
Gibilisco, Stan, Electronics Demystified, 2nd ed. New York:  
McGraw-Hill, 2011.
Gibilisco, Stan, Teach Yourself Electricity and Electronics, 5th ed. 
New York: McGraw-Hill, 2011.
Gussow, Milton, Schaum’s Outline of Basic Electricity, 2nd ed. New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 2009. 
Horn, Delton, Basic Electronics Theory with Experiments and Projects, 
4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994.
Horn, Delton, How to Test Almost Everything Electronic, 3rd ed. New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1993.
Kybett, Harry, All New Electronics Self-Teaching Guide, 3rd ed. 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley Publishing, 2008. 
Suggested  
additional reading

168    Suggested additional reading
Miller, Rex, and Miller, Mark, Electronics the Easy Way, 4th ed. 
Hauppauge, NY: Barron’s Educational Series, 2002. 
Mims, Forrest M., Getting Started in Electronics. Niles, IL: Master 
Publishing, 2003.
Morrison, Ralph, Electricity: A Self-Teaching Guide, 3rd ed. Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2003.
Shamieh, Cathleen, and McComb, Gordon, Electronics for Dummies, 
2nd ed. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley Publishing, 2009.
Slone, G. Randy, TAB Electronics Guide to Understanding Electricity 
and Electronics, 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2000.

Index
A
AC-to-DC converter, 13–14, 
80–81
air-core inductor, 35–36
air-core transformer, 39
alligator clip, 118
AM radio receiver, 89–94
AM voice transmitter, 17–18
amateur radio station, 89
amplifier, 76–79, 85–94, 102
amplifier drive, 89
AND gate, 55
antenna, 63
antenna tuner, 89
arrows in flowcharts, 21
audio power amplifier, 85–89, 
93, 102
avalanche effect, 134
B
battery, electrochemical, 54
bipolar transistor, 47–48
block diagram:
definition of, 1–2
examples and uses,  
13–24
block- to schematic-diagram 
conversion, 14
breadboard, 113–117
buffer, 79
bulb, incandescent, 59, 61
C
capacitor:
fixed, 31–32
padder, 32
polarized, 32
trimmer, 32
variable, 32–34
cat’s whisker, 84
cell, electrochemical, 53–54, 59, 
61
characters, 9
chassis ground, 35–36
chip, 17, 84
choke, 37
clip lead, 118
coaxial cable, 45–46
code practice oscillator, 96–103
coil, 63
component labeling, 66–71
component tolerance, 77
components, letter designations 
for, 68
components for experiments, 
115
169

conductors:
crossing, connected, 44
crossing, not connected, 
43, 45
single, 59, 61
conservation of current, 120
conservation of voltage, 123
conventional current, 58
“crystal radio” receiver, 84–85
current, conservation of, 120
current, conventional or  
theoretical, 58
current law, Kirchhoff’s,  
119–122
cutoff frequencies, 103–104
D
decision block, 22–23
demodulator, 84
detector, 84
diode:
semiconductor, 46–47, 63
vacuum-tube, 49–50
directly heated cathode, 50
DPDT switch, 41
DPST switch, 41
drive, for amplifier, 88
dual triode vacuum tube, 52
E
earth ground, 45
electrochemical battery, 54
electrochemical cell, 53–54, 59, 
61
electron tube (see vacuum  
tube)
exclusive-OR gate, 55
experiments, components for, 
115
external capacitance effects, 32
F
farad, 30–31
ferromagnetic material, 37
field-effect transistor, 48–49
field-strength meter, 62–64
filament in vacuum tube,  
49–50
first law, Kirchhoff’s, 120
fixed capacitor, 31–32
fixed inductor, 35–38
flashlight:
single-cell, 58–60
two-cell, 60–62
flowchart, 18–24
flux density, magnetic, 37
forward bias, 133–134
forward breakover voltage,  
134
full-wave bridge rectification,  
69
functional diagram, 13–16
G
galena, 84
ganged capacitors, 34
Gunn diode, 46
H
hand key, 42–43
hard wiring, 7
hardware, 23
henry, 35
heptode vacuum tube, 52–53
hexode vacuum tube, 52–53
highpass filter, 103–104
I
incandescent bulb, 59, 61
indirectly heated cathode, 
49–50
170    Index

inductance-capacitance circuit, 
92, 103–104
inductor:
air-core, 35–36
fixed, 35–38
laminated-iron-core, 37
powdered-iron-core, 38
solid-iron-core, 37
tapped, 35–36, 38
variable, 36, 38
input and output programming 
symbol, 20
integrated circuit, 17, 84
interconnections, schematic, 
6–8
intermediate junction program 
symbol, 20
International Morse code, 96
iron-core inductor, 37–37
iron-core transformer, 39
J–K
jumper wire, 118
key for sending Morse code, 
42–43
Kirchhoff, Gustav Robert, 120
Kirchhoff’s current law, 119–122
Kirchhoff’s first law, 120
Kirchhoff’s second law, 123
Kirchhoff’s voltage law, 123–125
L
L network, 94
labeling of components, 66–71
laminated-iron-core inductor,  
37
laminated-iron-core transformer, 
39 
lamps, mismatched, 137–144
language:
sign, 10
visual, 8–11
LC circuit, 92, 103–104
letter designations for  
components, 68
load resistor, 130
logic gates, 54–55
logical inverter, 54–55
lowpass filter, 103–104
M
magnetic flux density, 37
microammeter, 63
microfarad, 31
microhenry, 35
millihenry, 35
mismatched lamps, 137–144
Morse code key, 42–43
multicontact switch, 40–42
multimeter, 74
N
N-type semiconductor, 132
NAND gate, 55
nanohenry, 35
nonferromagnetic material, 37
nonpolarized device, 31
NOR gate, 55
NOT gate, 54–55
O
off-page connection flowchart 
symbol, 20
ohm, unit of resistance, 25
OR gate, 55
oscillator, 79, 96–103
P
P-N junction, 134
	
Index    171

P-type semiconductor, 132
padder capacitor, 32
page breaks, 91–94
parallel resistors, 70–71
peak inverse volts, 132
pentagrid converter, 53
pentode vacuum tube, 51–52
phase coincidence, 97
phase inversion, 97
pi network, 94–95
pi-L network, 95 
picofarad, 31
pictorial diagram, definition of, 1
pictorial versus schematic  
diagrams, 11
polarized capacitor, 32
polarized device, 31
pole, switch, 40
positive-ground system, 97
potentiometer, 26–30
powdered-iron-core inductor, 
38
powdered-iron-core 
 transformer, 39
power amplifier, audio, 85–89
power supply, 16–17, 64–65, 
80–81, 97–100
preamplifier, 85–87, 91–94
prewritten program symbol,  
20
process paths, 22–24
processing operation program-
ming symbol, 20
program decision symbol, 20
program flowchart, 19–24 
program modification symbol, 
20
punched-card program  
flowchart, 21–22
push-pull circuit, 87–89
R
radio receiver, 89–94
rectifier diode, 46–47
resistor:
carbon composition, 26
film type, 27
fixed-value, 26–27
load, 130
variable, 28–30
wirewound, 27, 29
resistors in parallel, 70–71
resonant frequency, 85
reverse bias, 133–134
rheostat, 26–29
ripple, 65
roller inductor, 95
rotary switch, 42
rotor of variable capacitor, 33
S
schematic-and-block combina-
tions, 78–81
schematic diagram, definition 
of, 1–4
schematic interconnections,  
6–8
schematic symbology, purpose 
of, 4–6
schematic- to block-diagram 
conversion, 14–15
schematic versus pictorial  
diagrams, 11
second law, Kirchhoff’s, 123
sign language, 10
silicon-controlled rectifier, 47
single-cell flashlight, 58–60
software, 24
172    Index

solid-iron-core inductor, 37
SPDT switch, 40
speech processor, 89–90
SPST switch, 40
start programming symbol, 20
stator of variable capacitor, 33
stop programming symbol, 20
straight key, 42–43, 96
strobe light circuit, 15–16, 
108–111
switch:
DPDT, 40–41
DPST, 41
multicontact, 40–42
rotary, 42
SPDT, 40
SPST, 40, 61
T
tapped inductor, 35–36, 38
telegraph key, 96
test points, 75–76
tetrode vacuum tube, 51
theoretical current, 58
throw, switch, 40
tolerance, component, 77
transformers, all types, 39
transistor:
bipolar, 47–48
field-effect 48
trimmer capacitor, 32
triode vacuum tube, 50–51
troubleshooting, 71–75, 103
tube (see vacuum tube)
tuner, in radio receiver, 92–94
twin-T oscillator, 96–103
two-cell flashlight, 60–62
U–Z
vacuum tube:
diode, 49–50
dual triode, 52
heptode, 52–53
hexode, 52–53
pentode, 51–52
tetrode, 51
triode, 50–51
varactor diode, 46
variable capacitor, 32–34
variable inductor, 36, 38
visual language, 8–11
voice transmitter, 17–18
volt-ohm-milliammeter, 74
voltage, conservation of, 123
voltage divider, 125–132
voltage doubler, 69–70
voltage law, Kirchhoff’s,  
123–125
voltage reducer, 132–137
voltage regulation, 69
wire wrapping, 117–118
XOR gate, 55
Zener diode, 46, 134
	
Index    173

