www.allitebooks.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For your convenience Apress has placed some of the front 
matter material after the index. Please use the Bookmarks 
and Contents at a Glance links to access them. 
 
 
 
 
 
www.allitebooks.com

v
Contents at a Glance
About the Author .............................................................................................................xxiii
About the Technical Reviewers ........................................................................................ xxv
Acknowledgments .......................................................................................................... xxvii
Introduction ..................................................................................................................... xxix
Chapter 1: Introducing Windows 8.1
 
■
 .................................................................................1
Chapter 2: Finding Your Way Around Windows 8.1
 
■
 .........................................................17
Chapter 3: Getting Connected
 
■
 ..........................................................................................59
Chapter 4: Sharing with Family and Friends
 
■
 ...................................................................93
Chapter 5: Organizing and Searching Your Computer
 
■
 ...................................................135
Chapter 6: Printing and Managing Printers
 
■
 ...................................................................179
Chapter 7: Having Fun with Games, Photos, Music, and Video
 
■
 .....................................203
Chapter 8: Maximizing Your Productivity
 
■
 ......................................................................241
Chapter 9: Personalizing Your Windows Experience
 
■
 .....................................................271
Chapter 10: Making Windows 8.1 More Accessible and Easier to Use
 
■
..........................323
Chapter 11: Keeping You, Your Files, and Your Computer Safe
 
■
 ......................................343
Chapter 12: Maintaining and Backing Up Your Computer and Files
 
■
 ..............................377
Chapter 13: Advanced Conﬁguration and Customization
 
■
 ..............................................427
Chapter 14: Getting Started with Virtualization
 
■
 ............................................................487
Chapter 15: Installing Windows 8.1 on Your Computer
 
■
 .................................................519
www.allitebooks.com

■ CONTENTS AT A GLANCE
vi
Appendix A: Windows 8 Touch Gestures
 
■
 .......................................................................547
Appendix B: Windows 8 Shortcut Keys
 
■
 .........................................................................549
Appendix C: Advanced Query Syntax for Search
 
■
 ...........................................................553
Appendix D: Upgrading Your Computer
 
■
 .........................................................................561
Index .................................................................................................................................571
www.allitebooks.com

xxix
Introduction
When Microsoft released Windows 8 in October 2012 the reaction to such a ‘bold’ operating system was decidedly 
mixed. Windows 8.1 aims to rectify the criticisms and it is very successful in this. Ultimately though what is delivered 
to consumers and businesses is an operating system, so powerful, conigurable and in places complex that getting the 
very best out of it can prove a real challenge, especially when people might have no idea that Windows 8.1 is capable 
of doing X or Y.
hat’s where this book comes in. hink of it as your introduction, your getting the best out of and your masterclass 
all in the one volume. Everything you will need to harness the full power of Windows 8.1 is here, from getting started 
to maximizing your productivity to hacking the OS.
I have tried to include everything you don’t normally ind in a computer book. As such there’s a whole chapter 
on accessibility and making Windows 8.1 easier to use. his isn’t just for blind or disabled, but for those with less than 
perfect eyesight, color-blindness, motor problems and more.
I make no assumptions here about your level of technical ability, short of to say that by the time you reach the 
end of this book I hope you will ind yourself with a new conidence and an improved willingness to experiment and 
try new things that can help you get the very best out of using your PC.
I hope you enjoy the book.
www.allitebooks.com

1
CHAPTER 1
Introducing Windows 8.1
When Microsoft first began talking about “the next version of Windows” in January 2011, it used words such as “bold” 
and “risky” to describe both it and the venture that the company was undertaking. Microsoft was already some years 
behind the competition in the ever-expanding consumer tablet market and it needed desperately to catch up.
At the Windows BUILD developers’ conference that September, it was actually no surprise to discover the entirely 
new Microsoft tablet-centric interface based on its highly praised Windows Phone user interface. What did come as a 
surprise, however, was the beginning of a move toward a new user interface paradigm for Windows: the relegation of 
the traditional desktop (the default Windows interface in previous versions of the OS) to an app.
The truth isn’t anywhere near simplistic: Windows 8.1 is a far more detailed and complete OS than it was before. 
The new interface doesn’t replace the desktop, but it does offer new ways for both power and casual users get the very 
best out of the operating system (OS). Moreover, many of the administrative resources are now easier to access than 
ever before.
In this chapter, I’ll talk you through this version’s most significant changes to Windows and help you decide 
where this operating system fits within your digital world. I’ll cover the following:
How Windows 8.1 differs from its predecessors
•฀
Differences between the various SKUs (editions) and processor versions
•฀
New features in Windows 8.1 
•฀
How to use, customize, and configure the new Windows 8.1 lock screen
•฀
What Is Windows 8.1?
Windows 8 was the 2012 release of the popular Microsoft Windows OS. It is based around a small kernel called 
MinWin, which provides all the core OS functions. MinWin is also the basis for the Windows Server OS and possibly 
others in the future, including Windows Phone.
Having a single kernel powering the Microsoft OSs helps maintain compatibility across devices and platforms, 
reduces development time, and helps increase security. It is also what Apple does; its OS X desktop operating system 
and the iOS operating system on the iPhone and iPad are based on the same kernel.
Windows 8.1, like Windows 7 and Vista before it, is a modular operating system. This means that features can be 
switched on or off, and some features can be removed completely without affecting the resiliency of the whole system. 
It is what happens with the desktop and server versions of Windows: the features and modules differ while the kernel 
remains the same.
This modular approach helps Windows 8.1 maintain compatibility with older “legacy” software and hardware, 
while still being as customizable as previous versions of the OS.
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 1 ■ INTRODUCING WINDOWS 8.1
2
Microsoft released the free Windows 8.1 update a year later, which brought about many and significant changes 
to the OS. These changes included everything from the way the interface looks and how you interact with it, to how 
you change settings; and a couple of features were even jettisoned. Underneath, the improvements for business users 
were greatly expanded upon.
Windows 8.1 is available for all existing Windows 8.1 users in the Store (see page XREF for details of how to 
get started with the store and how to upgrade to Windows 8.1). It also comes preinstalled on all new PCs. So for the 
purposes of this book, I assume that you are already using Windows 8.1 on your computer.
What’s the Difference Between Windows 8.1 and Windows RT?
If you are using Windows on a desktop computer or a laptop, you are almost certainly using Windows 8.1. (I use a 
caveat here because we never know what imaginative new computing hardware will be released during the lifetime 
of this book.) If you are using a tablet computer, you could be using either Windows 8.1 or Windows RT. So what’s the 
difference between them?
The fundamental difference is the hardware they run on and the incompatibilities between the different 
processors used to power the device. Windows 8.1 runs on the same Intel chips of PCs of old, so it is backwardly 
compatible with all your existing hardware and software. Windows RT (Run Time for those of you who are interested 
in what it stands for) has been designed to operate on processors from ARM. These processors are much more  
power-efficient than Intel chips, and you will find them powering the world’s smartphones, iPads, Android phones, 
tablets, and probably your television as well. The software that runs on ARM chips is fundamentally incompatible  
with Intel chips, however.
The upshot is that although Microsoft and hardware vendors have done a remarkably good job of ensuring that 
your existing computing hardware, especially USB devices, will work with both platforms, your desktop software, 
which has been written for the Intel processors, simply can’t and won’t work.
Within the OS, there are small and relatively minor changes here and there. Many of the differences lie 
underneath the skin of Windows and aren’t seen unless you administer computers for a company. Where other 
changes exist, I will detail them at the appropriate points throughout this book.
How Windows 8.1 Differs from Windows 7 and Windows Vista
When you first start using Windows 8.1, the changes from Windows 7 are significant and very obvious. The biggest 
change is the use of the new user interface (UI) as the default method for interacting with software programs and apps 
(see Figure 1-1). The desktop has effectively been downgraded to an app, but it retains all the power and functionality 
of Windows 7.
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 1 ■ INTRODUCING WINDOWS 8.1
3
Windows 8.1 is also the very first version of Windows to feature a built-in antivirus as standard. The new Windows 
Defender software is not like the version in Windows XP, Vista, and Windows 7, in which it was a basic malware 
protection tool. In Windows 8.1, it is a fully rebadged copy of the free Microsoft Security Essentials software.
The final major change is the addition of the Microsoft Ribbon interface throughout the desktop, File Explorer, 
and other aspects of the OS. Other than some new features (as you would expect with any new version of an OS), the 
underlying base for Windows 8.1 is exactly the same as its predecessor. Microsoft hasn’t changed or tinkered with 
anything other than the Task Manager, which has had a major overhaul. What it has done is add a whole raft of new 
features over the top. This means that if you are familiar with using Windows 7, you won’t get lost because almost 
everything is where you would expect to find it—certainly when you drill down into the advanced features on the 
desktop. Some of the new features may come as a pleasant surprise, however, because they expand the core power 
and flexibility of Windows in new and exciting ways.
How Windows 8.1 Differs from Windows XP
If you’re moving from the “comfortable old shoe” of Windows XP to Windows 8.1, you’re probably in for a very 
pleasant surprise. That may surprise you, given the move away from the desktop as the default UI and the fact that 
software and hardware compatibility is no better in Windows 8.1 than in Windows 7.
This compatibility issue, however, is one that I will come back to several times in this book. It’s very common for 
us to have older software and possibly hardware that we’re either very comfortable using or that we have to use for 
work or to perform another specific task. I have an aging graphics package from Microsoft that was released more than 
Figure 1-1. The Start screen
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 1 ■ INTRODUCING WINDOWS 8.1
4
10 years ago, so not all the features work properly now in Windows 8.1. That said, the virtualization technologies built 
into Windows 8.1 Pro and Windows 8.1 Enterprise, as well as the Application Compatibility Wizard, address some of 
the issues. Overall, the way Windows has advanced to this version makes upgrading extremely worthwhile.
The simple fact remains that all support for Windows XP is ending in April 2014. After that, there will be no 
further security and stability patches for the OS, so it will become a big target for malware writers and criminals. 
Windows XP Mode in Windows 7, while good, is based on older Virtual PC technology and it, too, will no longer be 
supported after April 2014 (although Windows 7 will be supported until 2020). Conversely, the Hyper-V virtualization 
technology built into Windows 8.1 will continue to be supported for many years.
Windows 8.1 is the most secure OS that Microsoft has ever produced, especially with its first-ever built-in 
antivirus protection. Security was difficult to maintain in Windows XP, but doesn’t really need to be considered in 
Windows 8.1—as long as you are aware that criminals and malware writers will try to trick you into bypassing the  
OS’s built-in security. I will cover this issue later in the book.
I will talk more about security and virtualization in Chapters 11 and 14, respectively.
32-bit (x86) and 64-bit (x64) Explained
Windows 8.1 is reportedly the last version of the desktop OS to come in both 32- and 64-bit variants. The reason for 
this is to maintain compatibility with older hardware that might still be in use in some environments.
What do the terms “32-bit” and “64-bit” mean? Well, a bit is a binary digit. Binary is the mathematical number 
base that uses only the digits 0 and 1. The number zero is represented as 0, and the number one is represented as 1; 
but because there is no digit 2 in binary, representing the number 2 requires an additional digit, just as the number 10 
does in decimal. In binary, the number 2 is represented as 10, 3 as 11, 4 as 100, and so on.
A 32-bit number is represented by 32 digits and thus cannot be larger than 65,535. There are ways of getting 
around this limit using software, which involves using 2 or more 32-bit numbers together to achieve greater numbers, 
but this adds significant overhead and can slow down performance. With a 64-bit system, the largest number that 
can be processed is 18,446,744,073,709,551,616. This is significantly higher than any maximum value that can be 
processed by a 32-bit system. As a result, computers running 64-bit OSs can directly address vastly more memory  
(the limit with a 32-bit OS is 4 GB, including any graphics memory in the machine), and processing larger numbers 
means the computer can do more things simultaneously.
The main benefits of a 64-bit system being able to process larger numbers come not just in being able to address 
more memory but also in being able to perform operations in a single step. For example, if you were working with 
very large numbers in a 32-bit OS, let’s say the number 100 billion, performing a calculation on this would require 
multiple memory registers to be used simultaneously. With a 64-bit OS, memory is used more effectively because 
fewer memory registers are required to perform calculations on numbers. All new computing hardware from the last 
few years can run 64-bit OSs, but the Windows 8.1 installer tells you if there is a problem. Conversely, not all older 
hardware has 64-bit driver support; if you have older hardware in or attached to your computer, you should check for 
64-bit driver availability before changing to 64-bit.
If 64-bit compatible drivers for all the hardware in and attached to your computer exist, and you either already 
have or plan to upgrade to more than 4 GB of memory (including the memory on your graphics card), you should use 
the 64-bit version of Windows 8.1.
Windows RT is currently available only in a 32-bit version.
What’s New in Windows 8.1?
As I have already mentioned, Windows 8.1 presents the biggest change to the user interface since Windows 95 was 
launched. Underneath this new interface, however, are hundreds of additions and changes, small and large, which I 
will talk about in Chapter 2.
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 1 ■ INTRODUCING WINDOWS 8.1
5
Start Screen
First of all, what is this new UI? Why does it exist and how do you use it? The Start screen came about in Windows 
8.1 because of the need for Microsoft to get into the tablet computing market. It is based on a design created for the 
company’s Windows Phone OS and can be traced back in various forms to the Zune media player and even Windows 
Media Center before that.
The Start screen is based around a series of “live tiles,” each of which gives you real-time information from a 
particular app. For example, they can display the number of e-mails you have waiting, or the sender and subject of 
those e-mails. They can show you calendar appointments, currency exchange rates, stock market values, or the latest 
photographs in your collection.
I will talk a lot more about how to use and navigate Windows 8.1 in Chapter 2; for now, suffice it to say that the 
system is much more powerful, useful, and flexible than it might appear at first sight.
Refresh and Reset
Windows Vista first introduced “system image” backup, in which you could create an image of your entire Windows 
installation—including all your settings and installed software—and restore from this backup in the event of a 
catastrophe. With Windows 7, this feature was included in every edition of the OS.
Windows 8.1 still contains this feature, but it also adds two more. Refresh is a system that allows you to reinstall 
Windows if you encounter a problem—while maintaining all your settings, data, and apps (see Figure 1-2).
Figure 1-2. The Refresh and Reset options in Windows 8.1
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 1 ■ INTRODUCING WINDOWS 8.1
6
Tip
 
■
 Using Refresh to fix your computer retains all your apps, but it wipes out all the desktop software you have  
installed on your computer. You can create a custom refresh image, however. I cover how to do this in Chapter 12,  
in which I also discuss how it differs from a system image backup and why this is important.
When you use the Reset feature, all your files, settings, and apps are deleted, and your computer is returned to its 
factory default state. This process can be useful if you want to give away or sell your computer.
Windows To Go
The Windows To Go system allows you to create a bootable USB flash drive containing your copy of Windows 8.1 with 
its software and settings. It is compatible with both USB 2.0 and USB 3.0 drives, and on BIOS and UEFI motherboards.
Windows To Go sounds like a takeaway for a very good reason. No longer will people have to worry about 
finding mobile versions of apps or using cloud services. With Windows To Go, you really can carry around your entire 
Windows installation, safely and securely.
Windows To Go is an Enterprise-only feature in Windows 8.1, however, so it isn’t included in the standard and 
Pro editions of the OS or in Windows RT.
Hyper-V
Probably the most talked-about feature in Windows 8.1, after the new UI, is the inclusion of Microsoft’s Hyper-V 
virtualization software (see Figure 1-3). First released in 2008 as part of the Windows Server 2008 OS, it is a 
virtualization tool that allows other OSs—including earlier versions of Windows and GNU/Linux—to be run inside the 
main installed host OS, this being Windows 8.1.

CHAPTER 1 ■ INTRODUCING WINDOWS 8.1
7
Each virtualized OS runs effectively in a self-contained ISO disk image file. You can run multiple OSs side by side 
on a single Windows desktop.
Hyper-V is a Type-1 hypervisor, which means that it can communicate directly with your computer’s hardware 
and take full advantage of it. One advantage of this type of hypervisor is that it can be programmed to take full control 
of a specific processor core in a multicore chip. This maximizes processing efficiency and ensures that there is no 
latency while each running OS waits for processing resources to become available.
By contrast, older Type-2 hypervisors used the host OS to simulate the hardware of a computer, not allowing 
access to the actual PC’s hardware. This type included the now-aging Microsoft Virtual PC.
Storage Spaces
Storage Spaces is a feature that allows you to aggregate multiple hard disks into a single large storage location.  
For example, if you have a 750 GB HDD and a 2 TB HDD, you can pool them into a single 2.75TB drive. You can also 
use USB-attached disks with the feature.
Windows 8.1 manages the data distribution and can also create built-in resiliency with mirroring or striping of 
data across the various physical hard disks to prevent data loss.
Figure 1-3. Hyper-V in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 1 ■ INTRODUCING WINDOWS 8.1
8
SkyDrive Integration
Microsoft’s cloud backup and storage service SkyDrive is baked into Windows 8.1 with the OS automatically able to 
make a backup copy of your Documents, Music, Pictures and Videos libraries; Internet Favorites; and Windows settings 
there. This can be incredibly helpful, but the total amount of free storage you get with SkyDrive is 7 GB. With large files 
on PCs such as digital photographs it is easy to completely fill this space. You can buy additional storage with SkyDrive 
if necessary or you can turn off this backup feature in part or in full. I will show you how to do this in Chapter 12.
Secure Boot
One of the more controversial features of Windows 8.1 is Secure Boot, a feature that prevents any Unified Extensible 
Firmware Interface (UEFI)–equipped motherboard from booting an OS that is not signed with a security certificate. 
This feature, sometimes called Trusted Boot, is most commonly found on the computers you buy from manufacturers 
such as Samsung, HP, Dell, and so forth, in which it will be enabled by default.
The reason behind Secure Boot is to stop unauthorized firmware, OSs, or UEFI drivers from loading at boot time. 
This is to prevent the spread of malware and viruses that can attack the computer at boot time.
Note
 
■
 Secure Boot can be disabled, but UEFI systems vary across manufacturers. To disable it, you need to refer to 
the documentation for the system used on your computer.
What Else Is New?
There are many other new features in Windows 8.1, including new multimonitor support; drivers for new hardware 
types such as USB 3.0; an improved Task Manager, Microsoft Account, and SkyDrive integration; improved boot times 
that make use of hibernation; and a new security system for product activation.
Configuring the Windows 8.1 Lock Screen
The new lock screen in Windows 8.1 is much more useful than those of previous Windows versions in that it can display 
additional information about Internet connectivity, battery status (very useful), e-mail, appointments, and more.
You can also plug third-party apps into the Logon screen as they become available. But how do you do this?
Tip
 
■
 On a desktop PC or laptop, you can quickly open the Logon screen without having to swipe upward with your 
mouse. Just press any key on your keyboard—and the Logon screen opens.
You access the Logon screen settings using the new PC Settings in the interface. This is a multistep action. If you 
are using touch, swipe your finger in from the far right of the screen to bring up the charms (see Figure 1-4). I talk 
about charms in detail in Chapter 2 and discuss touch in Windows 8.1 later in this chapter.

CHAPTER 1 ■ INTRODUCING WINDOWS 8.1
9
 
1. 
Press WinKey+C on your keyboard or move your mouse to the bottom right of the Start screen.
 
2. 
Click the Settings charm.
 
3. 
Click Change PC Settings near the bottom right of the screen.
You are automatically taken to PC Settings, in which you see a Lock Screen tile (see Figure 1-5). You can change 
the wallpaper for the lock screen, and add and remove apps from it.
Figure 1-4. The charms, located on the right side of the Start screen or desktop in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 1 ■ INTRODUCING WINDOWS 8.1
10
Once in the Lock Screen settings page, you see the Lock Screen apps section, in which you can add and remove 
apps from the lock screen. To add an app, click one of the available + icons; you can have a maximum of seven apps 
on the lock screen. To remove an app, click or tap it; and from the context menu that appears, select Don’t display a 
quick status here.
Note
 
■
 You cannot change the order of apps on the lock screen by dragging and dropping. You need to unpin and  
repin apps in the order you want them displayed.
You can choose one app to display a detailed status at the bottom of the lock screen options. By default, this is set 
to the calendar; but you can remove it by clicking it and selecting Don’t show detailed status on the lock screen from 
the context menu that appears. You can also show an alarms app on the lock screen, which is useful if you’re travelling 
and using a Windows RT device such as a Microsoft Surface that has great battery life and can easily last a full day on a 
single charge, or several days (and nights) while on standby.
Figure 1-5. Accessing the lock screen settings from PC Settings

CHAPTER 1 ■ INTRODUCING WINDOWS 8.1
11
Not every app is capable of displaying detailed information, and only those that are will appear in this section,  
in the same way that only apps capable of displaying lock screen information will show in the main Lock Screen  
Apps options.
Additionally, you can change the lock screen wallpaper to a static image or a slide show. By default, a static image 
is shown, but you can click or tap the Slide Show switch to reveal additional options (see Figure 1-6). These options 
include being able to choose a specific folder on your computer or on SkyDrive where the pictures you want to display 
are stored, or just to use your Pictures folder and its contents. Bear in mind that your device needs to be connected to 
the Internet to access SkyDrive pictures.
There are additional options on this page, including how to control your slide show. You can, for example, disable 
the screen off feature after the device sits unused for a period of a few minutes. This allows you to use your lock screen 
as a digital photo frame, albeit quite an expensive one.
Using a Pin or Picture Password on the Lock Screen
It is always advisable to have a strong password, but if you log in to your copy of Windows 8.1 using a Microsoft 
Account ID (such as your Hotmail, Outlook.com, Live, or MSN e-mail address), you don’t always want to type a long 
string of 12 or more uppercase and lowercase letters, numbers, and symbols.
Figure 1-6. Setting a slide show on the lock screen

CHAPTER 1 ■ INTRODUCING WINDOWS 8.1
12
Windows 8.1 offers two alternatives, though it is up to each individual user to decide how secure they are. One 
is to unlock your computer with a four-digit PIN number (it is advisable to never use the same code you use for your 
credit card or alarm system), and the other is to use a picture password or to create a password if you do not currently 
have one assigned to your account (see Figure 1-7).
To access these options, go to PC Settings, as detailed earlier, and click or tap Accounts and then Sign-in Options. 
You see the options to create (or remove) a picture password and a PIN.
When creating a picture password, you are asked to select a photograph or picture from your Pictures library and 
to perform three actions on it. These can be taps, swipes, or a combination of both. Picture passwords are best used 
on touchscreens because the movement involved can be quite laborious with a mouse.
Changing Your Login Method
Creating a picture password or a PIN doesn’t automatically change the way you sign in to Windows 8.1. You are still 
required to use your password the next time you log in. Just underneath the sign-in password box, click the new link, 
Sign-in Options, which displays icons allowing you to switch to a picture password, PIN, or a fingerprint  
(if it’s configured on your computer).
Figure 1-7. Changing password options in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 1 ■ INTRODUCING WINDOWS 8.1
13
Your selection is remembered and used in the future. This is where security considerations come into play; you 
can switch back to a full password for extra security if you are taking your computer on the road, for example.
Note
 
■
 A strong password is always more secure than a PIN or a picture password. If your computer contains sensitive 
files or is used often in public locations, you might find it best to not have a PIN or picture password configured on your 
device at all.
Mastering Touch in Windows 8.1
Touch has assumed a central role in Windows 8.1. Not all Windows machines currently support touch, but the technology 
is moving more and more in that direction. In this section, I want to briefly talk about how to use touch in Windows 8.1.
The touch interface is remarkably intuitive and operates in a way that you might expect it to work on any other 
tablet or touch OS. The following are the main gestures:
•฀
Tap an item to open it in the new user interface.
•฀
Double-tap to open an item on the desktop.
•฀
Swipe either up, down, left, or right from the edges of the screen to bring up menus or options; 
or swipe on the screen to perform an action in an app or program.
•฀
Drag an item on screen by tapping and holding it, and then dragging it to move it.
•฀
Tap and hold to highlight an item on the screen.
•฀
Pinch inward to zoom out of a view.
•฀
Pinch outward to zoom into a view.
When you are swiping in from the edges of the screen, try to start on the actual screen bezel because doing so 
produces better results. For some screens, however, the bezel and screen might not be completely flat against each 
other. In this case, practice might be required to get the best results. See Appendix A for more information on using 
touch with Windows 8.1.
Note
 
■
 The Windows 8.1 Kinect sensor provided with the Xbox 360 and Xbox One isn’t compatible with Windows 8.1, as 
perfect as such a union might be. However, a separate Kinect for Windows is available that can be used with your PC for an 
immersive experience. Alternatives also exist, such as the highly innovative LeapMotion controller, www.leapmotion.com.
Using the Onscreen Keyboard in Windows 8.1
Windows 8.1 is very good at detecting when you have selected something with a mouse or with a keyboard. It pops up 
the onscreen keyboard if it detects a finger tap on an input field such as the password box.
There are several different keyboards you can choose from in Windows 8.1. I want to describe each one for you, 
as follows:
The 
•฀
default keyboard is a standard affair; you can see the QWERTY keyboard in Figure 1-8. 
The &123 key brings up numbers and symbols; and an Emoticon button brings up happy and 
sad faces for e-mail, social networking, and instant messaging. On the bottom right of the 
keyboard is a key that allows you to change your input method to one of the next four options.

CHAPTER 1 ■ INTRODUCING WINDOWS 8.1
14
•฀
Split keyboard splits the keys to the far left and right of the screen, making it much simpler to 
hold a tablet in both hands and type with your thumbs.
•฀
Written input allows those with a tablet stylus to input text, numbers, and symbols using 
Windows 8.1’s excellent handwriting recognition. This is useful for writing notes while 
carrying a tablet.
•฀
Full keyboard’s full keyboard option gives you all the keys you expect to find on a PC 
keyboard, including a number row across the top of the keyboard and access to function keys. 
You can switch on the full onscreen keyboard in PC Settings by clicking PCs & Devices then 
Typing and activating the switch for Add the standard keyboard layout as a touch keyboard.
•฀
Hide keyboard is the final option; it allows you to hide the onscreen keyboard.
The Maximize and Close buttons are located at the top right of the keyboard window when you are viewing it on 
the desktop. The Maximize button expands the keyboard to fill the width of the computer’s screen. It does not make 
the keys larger, but it does effectively put the keyboard in its own locked dock. Pressing the Maximize button again 
returns the keyboard to its normal mode.
Tip
 
■
 Tap and briefly hold a letter on the onscreen keyboard to display international variations for that letter, including 
accented letters.
In normal mode, the keyboard floats on the desktop and can be dragged around and placed where you want it. 
This is very useful if the keyboard is obscuring something that you need to see or read.
Tip
 
■
 The default onscreen keyboard doesn’t show the full PC keyboard layout with number, row, and page control 
keys. You can activate a full onscreen keyboard by searching for keyboard at the Start screen (see Figure 1-9).
Figure 1-8. The onscreen keyboard in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 1 ■ INTRODUCING WINDOWS 8.1
15
Privacy and Security for Personal and Business Data
Throughout this book, I highlight where privacy and personal or business data security are relevant. 
On the lock screen, an app showing detailed information can be displayed to anyone viewing your computer 
when it is locked and you are away from it. You should not leave an app showing detailed sensitive, private, or 
personal information on your Windows 8.1 lock screen. It is for this reason that the e-mail app displays only the 
current number of unread e-mails.
Summary
Windows 8.1 is very different from Windows 7, though it is built on the same code, and everything that is in Windows 7  
sits underneath the new UI. In the chapters that follow, I discuss all the features in the desktop and Start screen 
interfaces, and show you how you can maximize the best benefits in both. I also help you learn how to use Windows 8.1 
to get maximum enjoyment, maximum performance, and maximum productivity.
Figure 1-9. The full onscreen keyboard
www.allitebooks.com

17
CHAPTER 2
Finding Your Way Around Windows 8.1
The first thing that you notice when you use Windows 8.1 for the first time is the new interface. It is very much unlike 
anything that we’ve ever seen on the desktop, and on initial inspection, it seems very focused on tablet devices.
The new Start screen dates back to early versions of Windows Media Center, but perhaps in a more pronounced 
way, to Microsoft’s Zune HD media player, which was released in 2009.
The main purpose of the Start screen is to use the types of iconography that are commonly found in our daily 
lives to help us get information quickly and easily; the familiar signs and symbols that navigate us around roads, 
public transport systems, and in public spaces. Primarily, it involves transportation signage, which is designed 
specifically to give us relevant information quickly and simply.
The new user interface and the new Start screen in Windows 8.1 are aiming to do just that for OSs. The use of 
different shapes, sizes, colors, and iconography can help you quickly locate the information you need, and the live 
tiles on the Start screen can then provide better and more in-depth detail about a particular subject.
While the “traditional” desktop is still beneath this new interface and can be selected to display at startup, the 
Start screen is now the default way to interact with Windows and it’s more usable and powerful than you might 
first presume.
In this chapter, I show you how to get the very best out of the Start screen and all its new features by using either 
touch or a keyboard and mouse.
Using the Start Screen and Apps
The main elements of the Start screen are as follows:
Square and rectangular tiles for apps
•฀
Square tiles for desktop software
•฀
Live tiles for apps that show up-to-date information from within the app itself
•฀
A pop-up menu at the bottom of the screen with main options called the 
•฀
App bar
A pop-down menu at the top of the screen with additional options
•฀
Thumbnails of running apps that pop in from the left of the screen
•฀
The charms, which pop in from the right of the screen
•฀
By default, each app that runs in Windows 8.1 runs full screen, though it is possible to have two or more apps 
running side by side. When you run more than a single app at one time, the apps each occupies 50 percent of the 
screen, but you can change this by dragging the slider bar that appears between them, and larger screen resolutions 
can allow up to four apps to run side by side. This allows you to use a main app—perhaps the weather next to another 
app (see Figure 2-1).

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
18
To pin an app to the left or right of the screen, when the app is running, drag it away from the top center of your 
screen with the mouse or your finger, and it becomes a large thumbnail. Drag this thumbnail to the left or right side of 
the screen, and you will see a vertical bar appear to signify that the app will be docked left or right. With the keyboard, 
you can dock an app to the left or right of the screen with the key combination Win+ left cursor or Win + right cursor.
Tip
 
■
 To switch back to a single app on your screen, drag the vertical bar all the way to the left or right to swipe other 
apps off the screen.
When you run a third or even a fourth app (though you need a higher than HD screen for four apps), it appears 
as a thumbnail between the two currently docked apps (see Figure 2-2). It can at first appear confusing, but here’s 
how it works.
Figure 2-1. The side-by-side app view

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
19
When you drag this thumbnail left or right with your finger or mouse, you can drop it onto the left or right sides 
of your screen to replace the app that is running there. If you hold it between the running apps, you see the vertical bar 
expand outward to allow room to drop the new app in the middle of your screen. If the vertical bar does not expand, 
your screen resolution is not wide enough to support an additional app.
Tip
 
■
 You can quickly close an app by pressing the Windows key + down cursor or by touching the app at the top 
center of your screen and dragging it off the bottom center of the screen.
The Start screen is the hub of everything in Windows 8. It is where you launch not only apps and programs but 
also the desktop itself. In Windows 8, to reduce memory usage, the desktop doesn’t load unless you call it. Some say 
this is reducing it to another app, but it contributes to a memory-efficient operating system (OS) nonetheless.
When you first launch Windows 8, the Start screen already has apps and programs split into different groups. You 
can define and name these groups as you want. I will show you how to do this later in the chapter.
Tip
 
■
 On some higher-resolution displays such as those over full HD, Windows 8.1 can display more tiles vertically on 
the screen. To activate this feature, open the Charms menu and click Settings, and then at the top right of your screen, 
click Tiles. If your screen can support this feature, you see the Show More Tiles option.
Figure 2-2. Pinning more than two apps side by side

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
20
In a change to the way many of us are used to interacting with our computers, the tiles on the Start screen scroll 
left and right instead of the more customary up and down. When you install new apps or programs into Windows 8, 
their tiles appear on the far right of the Start screen, although they can be rearranged, as I will detail shortly.
Switching Between and Shutting Down Running Apps
There are two different ways to switch between apps and programs in Windows 8.1. If you are on the desktop, the  
well-known Alt+Tab key combination displays thumbnails of all your running programs and apps. You can switch 
between them, but you can’t shut them down from here.
To switch between your running apps, use the Win+Tab key combination. This displays all your running apps in a 
bar that runs vertically on the left of your screen. Keep pressing this key combination until you get to the app you want 
to use. You can switch to your last-used app by swiping your finger in from the left edge of the screen.
With touch and the mouse things are slightly different. Moving your mouse to the top left or bottom left of your 
screen, and then moving the mouse inward to the center, displays the same vertical bar showing running apps. With 
touch, you access this menu by swiping inward from the left of your screen and then, in the same movement, swiping 
back out again.
After you open the list of running apps in one of these ways, the list remains in place. You can now either  
right-click an app to close it (or indeed snap it to the left or right of your screen), or you can drag it with your mouse 
or finger down and off the bottom center of the screen. This will close the app.
Action
Keyboard
Mouse
Touch
Switch between running 
desktop programs
Alt+Tab
N/A
N/A
Switch between  
running apps
Win+Tab
Move to top-left or bottom-left 
corner of screen
Swipe in from left of screen
Close the currently  
running app
Alt+F4 (also works for 
desktop programs)
Drag app (or app thumbnail) off 
the bottom center of the screen
Drag app (or app 
thumbnail) off the bottom 
center of the screen
Locking the Computer and Signing Out
The word “Start” appears in the top left of the screen (see Figure 2-3), but it doesn’t do anything if you click or tap it.

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
21
Your username and avatar appear in the top right of the screen. You can click it to perform the following actions:
•฀
Change the Account Picture takes you to the Personalization options in PC Settings, in which 
you can upload a new profile picture; take a picture using a webcam, if you have one attached 
to your computer; or use an installed app, if one is compatible, to take or create a picture.
•฀
Lock is the option you choose to lock the computer without turning it off. It is useful if you are 
leaving your computer for a short break. You can also lock the computer the more traditional 
way by pressing Ctrl+Alt+Del on your keyboard and selecting Lock from the options; or you 
can press WinKey+L to lock the computer instantly.
Tip
 
■
 Use WinKey+L to lock your computer quickly.
Figure 2-3. The Start screen

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
22
•฀
Sign Out is the option to use if you are finished with your computing session and want to let 
somebody else use the computer with his own user account. This option does not shut down 
the computer.
With 
•฀
Switch users, other people who have accounts on this PC have their names listed here. 
You can click a person to switch to her account. This does not log you out, so any programs 
and apps you have running remain open until you are logged out or the PC is switched off.
Note
 
■
 There is no option to restart, shut down, hibernate, or sleep the computer directly from a menu on the Start 
screen. To do this, you need to access the charms (more on this shortly) and select Settings.
Controlling the Windows 8.1 Start Screen
The new interface is designed with touch in mind. You can control it with a keyboard and mouse, but this can create 
complexity due to several ways to operate and control various aspects of the screen, and in trying to find ways to 
mimic touch controls with a keyboard and mouse.
You control the Start screen by swiping left and right with your finger on a touchscreen or by moving your mouse 
left or right on the screen to scroll sideways. When you use a mouse, you also see a scrollbar appear at the bottom of 
the screen. You can grab this scrollbar and use it just like a scrollbar in a desktop program.
When the scrollbar is visible, you see a small (-) button in the bottom-right corner of the screen, as shown 
in Figure 2-4. Clicking it shows the Start screen zoomed out so that you can quickly find and locate a specific 
group of programs, apps, or links. If you are using a touch interface, you can zoom out with a pinch gesture. This 
“scemantic zoom” is also an action that’s available in many apps and also in Internet Explorer and Microsoft 
Office on the desktop.
Figure 2-4. The Zoom control next to the Start screen scrollbar
Tip
 
■
 Hold down the Ctrl key and use your mouse’s scroll wheel to zoom in and out of the Start screen to see all your 
app groups.
When you are looking at the zoomed-out Start screen, you can see buttons for individual apps, programs, and 
links. This helps you locate things that you may have difficulty finding should you have a lot of tiles or groups on your 
Start screen.

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
23
You cannot run any app or program directly from the zoomed-out view; however, clicking or tapping anywhere 
on that view zooms back into that place on the Start screen (see Figure 2-5).
Figure 2-5. The Start screen zoomed out
Tip
 
■
 In this zoomed-out view, you can also rearrange entire groups in the same way that you would move tiles on the 
Start screen: simply by dragging and dropping.
Context menus, known as the App bar, appear on the Start screen from the top and bottom of the screen, depending 
on the app or feature you are using. You can swipe downward from the top of the screen or upward from the bottom 
to bring up a context menu. If you are using a mouse, right-click in any unused space to bring up the context menus, 
as shown in Figure 2-6. When opening this menu from the keyboard, the combination WinKey+Z opens the context 
menus for you.
Tip
 
■
 Use WinKey+Z to open the App bar.

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
24
Controlling Apps and Live Tiles
You open (launch) an app or program (I’m going to make the distinction between apps that are downloaded from the 
Windows Store and programs that run on the traditional Windows desktop) from the Start screen with a single click or 
tap. This launches an app full screen or switches to the desktop to run a program. You want to be able to organize and 
perform additional actions on apps and programs, which includes running them as an administrator, resizing the live 
tiles, and so on. More importantly, you will want to arrange these tiles into groups that make it easy to find your  
most-used apps and programs, and hide the ones you don’t use as often.
Tip
 
■
 You can get back to the Start screen at any time by pressing the Windows key on your keyboard.
Figure 2-6. The App bar in Windows 8

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
25
Performing Functions on Apps and Live Tiles
The equivalent of a right-click in a tile in Windows 8.1 is still a right-click; but if you are using touch, you need to touch 
a tile and hold it for a second to perform the same task.
Tip
 
■
 You can deselect a tile or select multiple tiles by touching and holding or right-clicking. There is no need to hold 
the Ctrl or Shift keys when selecting or deselecting multiple tiles.
The actions you can perform on a tile vary depending on what you have selected:
•฀
Unpin from Start allows you to remove a tile from the Start screen. It is still available in the All 
Apps view (more on this shortly) and it can be launched from there. It is useful for programs 
and apps that you use only occasionally.
•฀
Pin to/Unpin from Taskbar is useful if you want quick access to desktop programs from the 
Windows desktop taskbar. This option adds or removes a button on the desktop taskbar for a 
particular program. Apps cannot be pinned to the desktop taskbar.
•฀
Uninstall is the option you use to uninstall both an app and a program from your computer. 
You can still manage and uninstall programs from Programs and Features, as with Windows 7, 
but this new quick method makes it easier to remove software from your PC.
•฀
Resize allows you to resize compatible app tiles between up to four sizes (depending on 
which sizes the app supports). For example, you may have a live tile for e-mail that gives you 
previews of the weather as a small square in which you only see limited information about the 
current weather, but as a large square you can see more information and details of the next 
day as well (see Figure 2-7). You may decide that you want to make some tiles smaller so that 
your organized groups on the Start screen take up less space or look more organized.
Figure 2-7. The four live tile sizes
•฀
Turn Live Tile Off deactivates the live component of a compatible tile. You may want a larger 
rectangular tile for e-mail to make it easier to find and open, but not have the tile display the 
subjects and senders of your most recent e-mails.

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
26
•฀
Open New Window allows you to open multiple instances of a program. Let’s say, for example, 
you have Internet Explorer open from the Start screen and you want to open a web site, but not 
in a new tab because you want to view two web pages side by side. This option on compatible 
apps and programs allows you to open a new instance of the app or program.
•฀
Open File Location works only on installed desktop programs and Windows desktop components. 
It opens a File Explorer window and navigates directly to the folder on your hard disk in which 
the program or link you have selected is located. (I discuss File Explorer in Chapter 5.)
•฀
Run as Administrator allows you to run the program or feature with full admin privileges.
•฀
Clear Selection cancels the current selection apps and/or programs.
Note
 
■
 Tiles for desktop programs can only be resized between small and medium squares.
Arranging Live Tiles into Groups
As I have already mentioned, you can arrange your tiles on the Start screen into customizable groups and rearrange 
them within those groups. This is something that can be used to bring your most commonly used programs to the 
beginning (left) of the Start screen and to group together related tiles such as Internet links or development software.
You do this by invoking the Start screen customization mode by tapping and holding or right-clicking a tile. In 
this mode, the tiles fade slightly and move farther apart to make them easier to work with but also as a visual identifier 
that you’re in this special mode.
Tip
 
■
 You can also invoke the Start screen customization mode by clicking Customize from the App bar  
(see Figure 2-8).
Figure 2-8. You can click Customize on the app bar to invoke the Start screen customization mode
You can rearrange tiles within a group or move one to a different group by dragging and dropping it using touch 
or the mouse. You can work with as many tiles as you want while in Customization mode.
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
27
Tip
 
■
 When you are finished arranging and performing other actions on Tiles, double tap or click in any blank space to 
lock your changes and finish. You can also lock your changes by pressing the Windows key on your keyboard.
When you move a tile between groups, a highlighted vertical bar appears between groups as you move from one 
to another. If you drop a tile onto this highlighted bar, a new group is created.
By default, the Windows 8 Start screen does not give names to groups, but it is possible to do this and you will see 
the words Name group appear above each group of tiles. You might want to name your groups, work, games, Internet, 
and so on (see Figure 2-9).
Figure 2-9. You can name groups on the Windows 8.1 Start screen

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
28
Hiding and Adding Apps and Tiles
When you customize and arrange your Start screen, you will want to hide tiles, which can be done by selecting one 
or several, and from the App bar selecting Unpin from Start. Having a lot of apps and programs pinned to the Start 
screen can create a very messy environment. You certainly want to remove unwanted and unused tiles from the 
Start screen.
But what if you want to restore some of these afterward? What if you want to restore all the Start screen programs 
that you weren’t previously using, but now want easier access to?
You can do this by opening the All Apps view. This is invoked either by swiping upward on the Start screen with 
your finger or by clicking the down arrow that appears near the bottom left of the screen when using a mouse  
(see Figure 2-10). This displays a screen showing all the apps and programs that are installed on Windows 8, including 
those tiles that are hidden from the Start screen or the desktop taskbar.
Figure 2-10. Opening the All Apps view with your mouse
On the left of this screen, which also scrolls left and right, you are first shown all the apps that are installed  
(see Figure 2-11). Further to the right, you find Windows features and all the software you have installed in Windows 8.1 
sorted into groups as they would appear in the Start menu.

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
29
You cannot edit this screen as you do in the Start menu, which allows you to drag and drop programs and 
Windows features between folders.
There are different ways to arrange the All Apps view and these are accessed by clicking the by name. link at the 
top of the screen.
The options here allow you to arrange the all apps view in four different ways:
•฀
By name is the default way, with all your apps listed alphabetically, followed by all your 
desktop programs listed alphabetically and arranged by program folder (publisher).
•฀
By date installed allows you to arrange your apps according to when they were installed, with 
the most recently installed apps (and programs) featured first in the list.
•฀
By most used lists your apps and programs according to how often they are used on your PC.
•฀
By category arranges your apps according to their Windows Store category (education,  
games, etc.) but it can also be used to display your desktop programs before your installed apps.  
(I will show you how to make this change in Chapter 9.)
Figure 2-11. The All Apps view

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
30
Tip
 
■
 You can pin an app or program back to the Start screen by selecting it and clicking Pin to Start in the App bar.
You can also zoom out from the All Apps view. This additional zoomed-out view (see Figure 2-12) shows apps 
arranged alphabetically. Software packages and Windows features are arranged by folder.
Figure 2-12. You can zoom out of the All Apps view to see programs and apps arranged into groups
With this view, you can quickly navigate to Microsoft Office, Windows Accessories, Windows System, or other 
folders and groups that appear in the All Apps view by simply clicking or tapping.
Using the Charms
The charms provide the central controls for interacting with apps and interacting with and configuring Windows. 
They include the Start button, also known as the Windows flag; search; and several features that are new to Windows 8.
You open the charms (see Figure 2-13) in several ways: by swiping your finger in from the bezel (the area around 
your touchscreen) on the right of your screen, by moving your mouse to the top left or bottom right of the screen, or 
by pressing Win+C on the keyboard. The charms open in both the Start screen and the desktop.

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
31
There are five charms:
•฀
Search allows you to search apps, settings, and files and the Internet, all from a central location.
•฀
Share is a new feature in Windows 8.1 that allows you to share text, images, and other items 
between apps, including sharing a photo with a social networking app to publish it there. You 
can use the Share charm to send somebody a screenshot from your PC or to save app or web 
content as a Reading list bookmark to view later. I will show you how to use Reading lists later 
in this chapter on page 35.
Figure 2-13. The charms

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
32
•฀
Start is now where the main Start button appears. In Windows 8.1, it has been redesigned 
with a new look. Pressing it, just as with pressing the Windows key on your keyboard, cycles 
between the Start screen and the most recently running app or program.
•฀
Devices is a quick way to access devices such as USB peripherals and secondary displays.  
This is also where you go to print content from apps (more on this in Chapter 6).
•฀
Settings is the new home for the touch-friendly Control Panel, now renamed PC Settings.  
It is also where you will find controls for connecting to networks and the Internet, and 
restarting and switching off your PC.
The charms are not configurable; you cannot manually add apps or hardware to the Share and Devices charms. 
You also cannot customize the Settings options or add extra charms. When Windows 8.1 detects apps and hardware 
that are compatible with the Share and Devices features, they are added automatically.
Tip
 
■
 There is a second Start button hidden in the bottom left of the Start screen that you can click with your mouse.
Share is a new feature that allows apps to share items, similar to the way that we copy and paste things between 
programs. This share functionality works with apps only, not with programs on the desktop.
Using the Desktop in Windows 8.1
Using the desktop in Windows 8.1 is the same as with any previous version of the OS. You can pin programs to the 
taskbar by right-clicking them on the Start screen or All Apps view, and selecting Pin to Taskbar from the App bar. 
Pinning programs to the taskbar offers a very quick and efficient way to open programs on the desktop without having 
to interact with or even see the Start screen.
There have been changes with the desktop since the first version of Windows 8, all of which I will detail in this 
chapter. These changes include the ability to start (boot) your PC directly to the desktop. You can also tweak the OS 
in other ways, too, including using the category view on the All Apps screen I mentioned on page 16 to display your 
desktop software before your modern apps. I will show you how to implement this change in Chapter 9.
All the usual desktop clicks, such as right-clicking with the mouse to bring up a context menu, still work. On a 
touchscreen, you can tap and hold to simulate a right click. This is the same way that touch has worked in Windows 
going back to Windows XP, and it’s also consistent with other touch-based OSs including Windows Phone and 
Android, which makes it intuitive and easy to use.
Start Button
Gone in Windows 8 and back in Windows 8.1, clicking the Start button doesn’t open a traditional Start menu, though 
in fairness you simply don’t need one any more with the ability to pin both programs and files to the taskbar (see the 
following section for instructions on how to do this) and also being able to program the Start button to display the All 
Apps view instead of the Start screen (this is detailed in Chapter 9). Clicking or tapping the Start button returns you to 
the Start screen, though it is possible to modify the behavior of this button so that it instead takes you to a customized 
All Apps view that prioritizes your desktop programs. I will show you how to make this change in Chapter 6.
Right-clicking the Start button also opens the Windows 8.1 Administration menu (see below) which provides 
additional options.

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
33
Windows Administration Menu
Although the Start menu has been removed from the desktop in Windows 8, it isn’t gone completely. On both the 
desktop and the Start screen, right-clicking with your mouse in the very bottom left of the Start screen or by right-clicking 
the Start button on the desktop (also accessible by pressing Win+X) brings up a menu of options typically found in the 
Start menu, such as the Run and Command prompt. This menu offers a great many administration options plus quick 
access to Restart, Shut down, and Sleep controls (see Figure 2-14).
Figure 2-14. The Win+X menu in Windows 8.1
One important thing to note in this screenshot is that the Command Prompt and Command Prompt (Admin) 
links have been replaced by Windows PowerShell. This is because you can switch these links in the WinX menu 
between the two different scripting environments. I will show you how to make this change in Chapter 9.
Using the Desktop Taskbar
The Windows 8.1 taskbar is the same as in Windows 7. You can pin programs that can be launched with a single click, 
or that on a click up-and-drag-upward motion (also on a right-click) opens a Jump List with additional options  
(see Figure 2-15). I will talk more about Jump Lists shortly. To pin a program to the taskbar, right-click (touch and hold) 
its icon on the Start screen or All Apps view, and from the App bar click the Pin to Taskbar option. Icons on the taskbar 
(including non-pinned but running programs) can be dragged left and right to change their ordering. This can be very 
useful for grouping similar or commonly used programs together.

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
34
On the right side of the taskbar sits the system tray (see Figure 2-16), the area in which you commonly see the 
time and date. The following list describes the other icons in the system tray:
The 
•฀
Keyboard icon brings up the onscreen keyboard. It appears by default when Windows 8.1 
detects a touchscreen interface attached to your computer, but it can also be switched on by 
right-clicking in a blank space on the taskbar and clicking Touch Keyboard from the Toolbars 
option that appears. Note that if your computer does not have a touchscreen, this option is not 
visible.
The 
•฀
system tray is represented by a small white up arrow. This is the bucket container for all 
the system tray icons that are hidden. I will show you how to customize the system tray  
in Chapter 9.
The 
•฀
Action Center is the central location for Windows messages, including those about 
antivirus, backup, problems, and errors. When there is a notification for you, the icon will 
change to display a small alert symbol superimposed on it. The irony that the icon for the 
Action Center is a white flag has never been lost on me!
The 
•฀
Battery icon shows only when you are running Windows 8.1 on a computer containing a 
battery. This icon gives you a visual representation of the battery’s charge level and overlays  
a Plug icon if your computer is currently connected to mains electricity.
The 
•฀
Network icon changes depending on whether you are connected to your network and the 
Internet by a physical Ethernet cable, Wi-Fi, or a mobile Internet connection such as 3G or LTE 
via a SIM card in your computer or via a dongle. This icon changes to an airplane if you have 
airplane mode switched on.
The 
•฀
Volume icon offers a quick way to turn the computer’s volume up or down, mute it and 
also to control your sound devices. If you click this icon, a volume control appears. I talk more 
about the additional functionality of this icon in Chapter 9.
Figure 2-15. The Windows 8.1 desktop and taskbar Jump Lists

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
35
The 
•฀
Date and Time format can be changed. I talk about how to customize and configure the 
Date and Time settings in Chapter 9. If you click the time and date in the system tray, a dialog 
box shows the current month’s calendar, the currently displayed clock(s), and any messages 
relating to Daylight Saving Time. I talk more about using this window shortly.
The 
•฀
Show Desktop button was a visible button on the Windows 7 taskbar, but it is hidden 
in Windows 8. Clicking over this button temporarily hides all open windows on the desktop. 
Clicking the far right of the taskbar, however, minimizes all the windows currently open 
on your desktop, showing just the desktop and any gadgets you may have on it. Clicking 
the button again restores all previously minimized windows (refer to Figure 2-14). It is also 
possible to switch back on the “Peek” functionality that was introduced in Windows 7  
(I will show you how to do this in Chapter 9).
Using the Date and Time Dialog Box
The Date and Time dialog box, which is viewable by clicking the date and time on the taskbar, is very powerful, and 
one of its best features is the calendar. (I explain how to configure the settings in Chapter 9.) At the top of the calendar 
are left and right arrows that navigate to either side of the current month (see Figure 2-17).
Figure 2-16. The system tray icons on the desktop taskbar
Figure 2-17. The date and time accessible from the taskbar
Clicking the month changes the display to show all the months in the current year. Clicking it again displays all 
the years in the current decade, and clicking it a third time displays all the decades in the current century. This makes 
it an excellent tool for quickly locating dates. You can also add up to two additional clocks to this view that will display 
graphically when you click the time and date on the taskbar, see Figure 2-18, or that will display as a pop-up when you 
hover your mouse over it. (Again, I will show you how to configure this in Chapter 9.)

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
36
Figure 2-19. Using live thumbnail previews on the taskbar
Figure 2-18. Using the calendar and additional clocks
Viewing Taskbar Thumbnails
When you hover your mouse over a button on the taskbar, a pop-up showing a live thumbnail image of the running 
program appears (see Figure 2-19). If that program is minimized, mousing over the thumbnail image temporarily 
brings that application to the foreground without having to restore it to the desktop. This is an excellent way to get a 
quick peek at what is going on in a program. Because the thumbnails are completely live, you can see any progress 
bars or motion in the thumbnail that is occurring in the window at that time. This is useful for keeping an eye on 
programs that you only want running in the background while they complete tasks.
Tip
 
■
 When you move your mouse over a thumbnail, a close button appears in its top-right corner. You can click it to 
quickly close the program.
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
37
Using Taskbar Jump Lists
I find Jump Lists to be one of the most useful features of Windows (see Figure 2-20). I use them all the time. They are 
pop-up menus that appear above program buttons on the taskbar. You display a Jump List by right-clicking a taskbar 
button, or by clicking it and dragging upward with your mouse or finger. Jump Lists can make all manner of actions 
with desktop programs simple, including include quick access to your commonly or recently used files, for opening 
multiple instances of a program and closing windows that may be hidden deep in the background of a busy working 
desktop environment.
Figure 2-20. A Windows 8.1 taskbar Jump List
Tip
 
■
 You can open multiple instances of an already open program with a single click by clicking the Taskbar icon  
with the center button on your mouse if you have one (sometimes pressing down on the mouse scroll wheel performs  
the same action).
Jump Lists can contain any of the following elements:
•฀
Recently opened files in a program for quick access
•฀
Pinned files that will always display in the Jump Lists for quick file access
•฀
Tasks that can be performed with a program
The 
•฀
Program Launch, which can be very useful if you want to start multiple instances  
of a program
The 
•฀
Unpin button for unpinning the program from the taskbar
The 
•฀
Close Window button for closing the program

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
38
Tip
 
■
 You don’t need to open a file to pin it to the Jump List for the associated program; just drag the file’s icon onto 
the Program’s icon on the taskbar to pin the file there.
Jump Lists are programmable, not only by software packages but also by web sites. You can drag the icon for a 
web site from the address bar in the desktop version of Internet Explorer and pin it to the taskbar by dropping it there. 
Many web sites, such as Facebook and Outlook.com, are programmed to provide quick links to specific parts of the 
site or specific features.
Managing Windows on the Desktop
When you have a lot of windows open on your desktop, things can get very muddled. You can use the taskbar 
thumbnails to give you previews or quick views of windows. But what if you want to clean away all but the current 
working window or work on two windows together?
Both of these tasks are easy in the Windows 8 Shake and Snap features. Shake allows you to grab and shake a 
window. This has the effect of automatically minimizing every window except the one you’re shaking. If you want to 
return the desktop to the way it was, just shake the window again, and all the minimized windows are restored.
Sometimes you will want to work on two documents side by side, perhaps to move data from one to another, or 
to compare two web pages or documents. You can do this by dragging windows to the far left or right of the desktop. 
When you do this, an outline appears, indicating that the window will fill exactly half the screen. You can use this 
feature to snap windows to both sides of the desktop screen, which can be useful for comparing documents, working 
on two windows simultaneously, or moving or copying from one location to another. I will show you how to get the 
best out of this functionality in Chapter 8.
Common Ways to Work with Windows Apps
Windows 8.1 comes with a large amount of preinstalled apps, with hundreds of thousands more available to download 
via the Windows Store. There are commonalities in the way you interact with apps, and I want to detail these here.
Tip
 
■
 You can quickly open the App bar at any time and in any app by pressing Win+Z in your keyboard.
These commonalities all focus on the charms, and some charms perform specific actions within apps.
•฀
Search: The Search charm adds search results from the currently running app to its main 
results panel (files, settings, Internet results). You can read more about search in Chapter 5.
•฀
Share: The Share charm allows you to share content and links from the running app directly 
with other apps you have installed on your PC. They can include mail, messaging, and social 
networking apps; as well as being able to save content to your Windows 8.1 Reading list. (More 
on this later in this chapter.)
•฀
Devices: The location in which you print from the running app if you have a printer installed. 
It is also from the Devices charm that you can play audio and video playlists that can be 
embedded directly into web pages and apps.
•฀
Settings: Displays in the top right of your screen options and settings for the running app. 
If you want to change a setting, such as adding an e-mail or social networking account, or 
changing the way the app displays information, you can always find these options by clicking 
or tapping the Settings charm.

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
39
Preinstalled Windows 8.1 Apps
There are a great many apps provided with Windows 8. Many are the standard apps that you now expect to find 
bundled with an OS or are there to showcase the capabilities of the system. I will discuss the apps with features that 
can genuinely aid productivity. I won’t detail all the included apps with Windows 8.1, partly because they may vary 
depending on where you bought your PC, but I discuss the most commonly used apps.
Note
 
■
 One of the biggest advantages of the default apps in Windows 8.1 is that they are more regularly updated than 
we previously experienced with desktop programs.
Alarm
The Alarm app is most useful on PCs that are always plugged in to mains electricity or that have long battery lives, 
such as Windows RT tablets (including the Microsoft Surface RT tablet). This app does exactly what you might expect, 
allowing you to set multiple alarm clocks on your PC (see Figure 2-21). Additionally the app includes timer and 
stopwatch functionality.
Figure 2-21. The Alarm app in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
40
Calculator
The Calculator app exists in Windows 8.1 as an additional option to the desktop Calculator program (see page 38).  
It is a simple and touch-friendly calculator with scientific and unit conversion functions (see Figure 2-22).
Figure 2-22. The Calculator app in Windows 8.1
Calendar
When you log in to Windows 8.1 using a Microsoft account linked to a Hotmail, MSN, Live, or Outlook.com account, 
Windows Calendar automatically syncs your appointments and shows any upcoming appointments on the lock 
screen. This is especially useful if you use a Windows Phone and manage your calendar there or if you log in using an 
ID linked to an Exchange server.
By default, the Calendar app shows several different calendars, perhaps birthdays and national holidays  
(see Figure 2-23). You can switch these individual calendars on and off by opening the Settings charm and clicking 
Options in the top right of your screen. You can also change the colors of displayed calendars here, perhaps to 
highlight differences between them.

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
41
It is also in these options that you can turn forward and back buttons for the calendar on and off. These buttons 
can make the app much easier to use with a mouse.
To add a calendar account to the app, open the Settings charm and then click Accounts in the top right of your 
screen.
Camera
The Camera app lets you take pictures and record video from your tablet, laptop webcam, or the webcam built into  
or attached to your desktop PC. This app is probably more useful on mobile devices, but eliminates the need for  
third-party software to do the same job.
Figure 2-23. Turning individual calendars on and off

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
42
In the options for the Camera app you can control important features such as whether the app is allowed to use 
location information and attach it to photos and videos (note that your PC no longer needs installed GPS for this to 
work, as the information can also be extracted from your IP address). Additionally here are controls for controlling the 
aspect ratio and mega-pixel density of pictures and video and also a very useful video stabilization feature.
The features that appear, such as flash, depend entirely on the hardware support in your PC. If your PC does not 
support a specific feature or doesn’t even have an installed camera, you do not see controls for that feature.
Maps
Maps is one of the most useful and powerful apps in Windows 8. It does everything you expect a standard mapping 
app to do, such as support both road and aerial views, but it also contains a quick and effective route planner with the 
ability to use an Internet connection to show traffic congestion and its built-in GPS (or location information obtained 
from your IP address) to pinpoint your location.
Music
Music as an app has been greatly improved since the first release of Windows 8. It now focuses on the music library on 
your PC while also enabling you to stream and purchase music from the Xbox Music store. You can also build custom 
“radio stations” based on your personal preferences for music.
Outlook
When you sign in to Windows 8.1 using a Microsoft account linked to an e-mail account or an Exchange server,  
your e-mail is automatically synced to Windows 8. There is no need to configure the account separately. The Mail app 
is basic e-mail software, however, with features that allow you to arrange mail by folder. It is a good package for very 
light usage and as a way to separate your home and work e-mail (work e-mail may be best read with Windows Live 
Mail or Outlook).
You can add e-mail accounts from the app by opening the Settings charm and you will see an Accounts link 
appear in the top right of the screen.
The options for the Mail app are slightly different from other apps as some options can be set on a per-account 
basis. To access these additional controls, see Figure 2-24. These include controlling when the Mail app checks for 
new e-mail, how much e-mail is downloaded, whether pop-up (toast) notifications are displayed on your screen when 
new e-mail arrives, and what (if any) your e-mail signature can be.

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
43
Note
 
■
 If the e-mail account you use in Mail has a calendar and contacts, those features appear in the Calendar and 
People apps.
Figure 2-24. Settings per-account options in the mail app

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
44
People
On the face of it, the People app doesn’t look very useful—maybe a bit like a stripped-down social network aggregator. 
It is actually more powerful than you might imagine. But before you can use it to its full effect, you need a Microsoft 
account to which you can connect third-party services.
To connect other services to your Microsoft Account, go on the web to account.live.com. After logging in, click 
the Permissions link followed by the Add accounts link (see Figure 2-25). There are links on this page to connect you to 
additional services, including social networking and messaging providers.
Figure 2-25. Connecting services to your account in Windows Live
You can also use the Manage Other Accounts and Manage Apps and Services links to modify permissions for and 
also remove services and apps to which your Microsoft account is already connected.
There are dozens of services that can be integrated into Windows Live, including Facebook, LinkedIn, YouTube, 
Flickr, and more. Linked services appear in your People app, making it much more useful and interesting.
Tip
 
■
 After you have connected services to your Microsoft account, you can also activate them within the People hub 
on a Windows Phone to see updates from your contacts on those networks while on the move.

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
45
Photos
The Photos app is a good way to organize and view the photos on your PC. This app also includes some of the more 
common editing controls such as cropping, brightness, and contrast.
Reading List
As you move between various pages and web sites online, and also within information from apps such as recipes and 
news, you might find yourself coming across an article that you simply don’t have the time (or perhaps the inclination) 
to read there and then. A new app in Windows 8.1 called the Reading List integrates with the Share charm to enable 
you to save this content for viewing later.
You can save a page of content in compatible apps (and many older apps are compatible by default with no need 
for updating) by opening the Share charm and from the sharing options that appear, clicking or tapping Reading List 
(bookmark for later). The item to be bookmarked is highlighted on the right of your screen, and you can confirm this 
action by clicking the circular Add Bookmark icon near the top right of your screen (see Figure 2-26).
Figure 2-26. Adding content to your Windows 8.1 Reading List

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
46
When you want to read content that you have bookmarked, open the Reading List app from the Start screen or 
the All Apps view and you will see all the content you have bookmarked listed there, along with appropriate imagery 
or subtitles (see Figure 2-27).
Figure 2-27. Viewing content in the Reading List app
You can click any item to open and view it in the original app. This opens a split screen view where your 
Reading List moves to a pane on the left of your screen while the appropriate app fills the rest of your screen with 
the saved content.
To delete an item from your reading list, right-click (touch and hold) it to either display a trash icon next to the 
item in the split-screen view, or to open the app bar when the Reading List is running full screen.
Note
 
■
 The Reading List app draws content live from the app or Internet and does not display anything if the content 
has been removed from the original source.
The Reading List app can be especially useful when researching a subject or subjects, such as for a school, 
college, or university student, or even when you’re undertaking a task at home that interests you such as tracing your 
family history or reading about the background to a current new story. I personally can see many occasions when the 
Reading List app will be invaluable in my own life, so it’s definitely worth trying.
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
47
Video
Video is a basic video-playing app that connects to other services such as Xbox video through a Microsoft account.
Preinstalled Desktop Programs
As you might expect to find with Windows, the bundled desktop programs are much more powerful than their app 
equivalents. Not much has changed in recent years, but improvements have been made, and some of the apps are 
indeed very powerful and flexible.
Calculator
If you are used to the basic Windows calculator from XP, you’re in for a surprise and a treat. The calculator in  
Windows 8.1 is extremely flexible. In addition to the default standard mode, there are scientific, programmer, and 
statistics modes available in the View menu (see Figure 2-28).
Figure 2-28. The calculator in Windows 8
You can also use the Windows calculator for unit conversions and date calculations, and there are additional 
worksheets integrated to help you figure out common calculations, including fuel economy.

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
48
Character Map
The Character Map allows you to view all available text characters from the installed fonts on your computer. You 
can copy these characters, many of which are not available via a keyboard combination, and paste them into your 
documents.
Tip
 
■
 You can get quick access to common international characters with the onscreen keyboard by pressing and  
holding the associated root letter. International variants then appear around it and can be individually selected.
Math Input
If you have a stylus for your computer or tablet, Math Input is useful for turning scribbled equations and formulas 
into text that can be inserted into your documents. It is extremely good at recognizing handwriting, as you can see in 
Figure 2-29 (it’s not easy writing on my laptop’s screen, honest).
Figure 2-29. The Math Input window
Notepad
Notepad is still here. The old favorite hasn’t changed at all. Why would you want it to? This basic text editor and note 
taker has always been a popular inclusion in Windows, especially with programmers.

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
49
Paint
If you have used Paint in Windows 7, you are familiar with the Ribbon interface. For basic graphics work, such as 
cropping images and light touchup work, it’s fine, too. I have used it extensively in creating the images for this book.
Snipping Tool
Although Windows 8’s new feature for automatically saving screen grabs using the Win+PrntScrn key combination is 
welcome (Win+VolDown on a Microsoft Surface tablet), sometimes you just want to capture a specific window or a 
part of the screen. This is where the Snipping Tool is useful. It can grab any part of your screen, in any shape, and save 
it as a file (see Figure 2-30).
Figure 2-30. The Snipping Tool
Sound Recorder
As a basic sound recording tool, the Windows Sound Recorder has always worked well. It records everything passing 
through the current sound device on your computer and is very good at what it does and has also been carried 
over from previous versions of Windows. I will show you how set and configure your current audio recording device 
in Chapter 9.
Sticky Notes
Sticky Notes were formerly gadgets on the Windows Vista sidebar, but in Windows 7, they made their way into the 
Start menu as a full program. Sticky Notes exist in Windows 8.1 as a useful way to put notes on your desktop without 
getting glue all over the screen (please don’t try that at home!).
Windows Fax and Scan
Despite the fact that every scanner and multifunction printer in the world comes with its own custom scanning 
software, the scanning software in Windows is extremely accomplished in its own right—with excellent configuration 
and management options as standard (see Figure 2-31). The app has full faxing capabilities too, including fax history, 
header pages, and more if you have a compatible modem installed in your PC and are connected to a phone line.  
See Chapter 6 for details of how to install and manage scanners and cameras in Windows 8.

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
50
Windows Journal
The Windows Journal is a note-taking app designed primarily for touchscreens. It is the “little brother” of the 
incredibly powerful and flexible Microsoft OneNote, a free app for which, OneNote MX, can be found in the Windows 
Store. The little brother hasn’t had a makeover in Windows 8, but for tablets and touchscreen laptops, it still exists as a 
free alternative to OneNote (see Figure 2-32).
Figure 2-31. Windows Fax and Scan

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
51
Windows Media Center/Windows Media Player
I’ll talk in-depth about Windows Media Center and Windows Media Player in Chapter 7, but they exist to allow you to 
view pictures and video, to listen to music, and to watch and record live TV.
WordPad
Unless you have bought a Windows RT tablet, which comes with full versions of Word, Excel, OneNote, PowerPoint, 
and Outlook preinstalled, your PC is unlikely to come with an Office package, with Office Starter from Windows 7  
having long since been retired in favor of Microsoft’s Office web apps (http://office.live.com). WordPad is 
bundled with Windows 8.1 though, and it is an effective basic word processor that comes with every version of 
Windows 8.1, including retail copies. It also supports the latest Microsoft Word file formats (see Figure 2-33).
Figure 2-32. Windows Journal

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
52
XPS Viewer
XPS has long been Microsoft’s alternative to Adobe’s PDF file format, and although it’s not as popular, it’s not going 
anywhere. Whereas Windows Reader is set as the default app for opening XPS views, the desktop XPS Viewer exists to 
open XPS files when you don’t want to use the app.
Installing and Uninstalling Apps and Programs
When you install an app onto Windows 8, you can’t get them from web sites as you can with desktop programs. 
Instead, you install them from the Windows Store. This makes it very simple to find, install, and update your apps. If 
updates are available, they will be automatically installed, although you can turn automatic updating off if you want. 
To do this, in the Store open the Settings charm; then click App Updates near the top right of your screen. On the 
settings page that appears, you can control whether apps are automatically updated (see Figure 2-34).
Figure 2-33. WordPad in Windows 8

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
53
Note
 
■
 If you manage your computers through Windows Server, you can deploy, manage, and remove apps and  
desktop programs and apps in Windows 8.1 using AppLocker. AppLocker is not available on Windows RT devices.
You can install Windows desktop software the same as always: by inserting a CD or DVD with the software 
installer or by running it from a USB flash drive or other external storage through File Explorer. You can’t install 
desktop software on Windows RT because of fundamental differences in the processors used to power Windows 8.1 
PCs and Windows RT devices. Attempting to install a desktop program in Windows RT produces an error  
(see Figure 2-35).
Figure 2-34. Updating apps in the Windows Store

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
54
Tip
 
■
 Always choose advanced options when installing software because many software packages also want to install 
third-party toolbars and utilities that you don’t need and may not want.
To uninstall software in Windows 8, you can access Programs and Features from the Control Panel. Here you 
find all the desktop software installed on your computer. You can click the column headers (Name, Publisher, 
Installed On, etc.) to sort and arrange the software to make it easier to organize (see Figure 2-36). You may want 
to arrange it by date, for example, to see the most recently installed software first; you can do this by clicking the 
column headers (Name, Publisher, Installed on, etc.,) to sort your programs in ascending (one click) or descending 
(two clicks) order.
Figure 2-35. You can’t install desktop programs in Windows RT

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
55
To uninstall apps (and desktop software) from the Start screen, right-click (touch and hold) an app and select 
Uninstall from the App bar (see Figure 2-37).
Figure 2-36. The Programs and Features page in Windows 8

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
56
Tip
 
■
 When uninstalling apps, you can select multiple apps from the Start screen or All Apps view before pressing 
Uninstall. Doing so uninstalls all the apps at the same time.
If you uninstall an app this way, it is uninstalled immediately. If you uninstall a desktop program this way, you are 
redirected to the Programs and Features page—from where you will need to select and uninstall it.
Windows 8.1.
Note
 
■
 Uninstalling an app might additionally ask you if you only want to uninstall the app from this PC (see Figure 2-38).  
This occurs if you are logged in to the PC with a Microsoft account and have that app installed on more than one PC. 
Checking this box uninstalls the app only from the PC you are using, but leaving it unchecked also uninstalls the app from 
every PC on which you use the same Microsoft account.
Figure 2-37. Uninstall software from the Start screen
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 2 ■ FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND WINDOWS 8.1
57
Summary
The Start screen is a completely new way of working with Windows. It offers its own challenges and its own learning 
curve. Some people will love and enjoy it, other people will prefer to use the desktop. In Windows 8, it is much easier 
to stay on the desktop than you might think, and with the exception of the Start menu, all the functionality from 
previous versions of Windows remains.
In the next chapter, you will look at how to get Windows 8.1 connected to your home and work networks, devices, 
peripherals, and the wider world via wired, wireless, and mobile broadband connections.
Figure 2-38. When uninstalling an app, you may be asked if you want to remove it from your other PCs

59
CHAPTER 3
Getting Connected
Windows 8.1 is the best-connected version of the Windows operating system (OS) yet. It includes support for new 
wireless standards such as 4G mobile broadband. With this added flexibility, however, come some pitfalls. Getting 
online and connecting to networks is now far more than turning on a connection and entering a password.
In this chapter, I want to take a holistic look at safely and securely connecting to networks and the Internet.  
You don’t want to worry about securely checking your e-mail. Worse still, you don’t want to worry about your business 
or personal data being open and available to hackers and drive-by Wi-Fi thieves.
I will give you the knowledge you need to use network and Internet connections safely and securely, whether 
you are at home, at work, or on the move. This is especially important as we keep more of our personal and business 
lives in digital files and in online cloud services. With all our precious photographs, music, documents, and business 
projects now stored digitally, we need to be certain that we’re protected on any device because everything is now 
interconnected in ways we’ve not previously experienced.
Getting Online with Windows 8.1
One of the very first things you do with a computer is connect it to the Internet. So much of what we do these days is 
online, with e-mail and social networking now part of the fabric of society. Long gone are the days when we might 
use an MSN or IRC chat client for a couple of hours on a weekend. Now it’s constant access to chat via PCs and 
smartphones; social updates across multiple platforms; and access to e-mail, even work e-mail, 24 hours a day.
There really is no getting away from the Internet wherever we go. If you are a web enthusiast, a gamer, an IT pro, 
at work, or running a business; or even just on your daily commute looking for something to occupy yourself with, 
odds are that you’ll be on a computer and that you’ll be online. Tablets recently out from major manufacturers offer 
features not seen in other tablet OSs, including multiuser setups. Use of Windows 8.1 will be more widespread than in 
the previous Windows editions that were used only on desktop PCs and laptops. We really do need to make sure that 
all our data is safe and secure.
Understanding Public and Home and Work Networks
When you connect to a network for the first time, Windows 8.1 asks you this question: “Do you want to find PCs, 
devices, and content on this network, and automatically connect to devices like printers and TVs?” (See Figure 3-1.) 
This question is asked because there are differences between home, public, and work networks that determine how 
the security on your PC should be set up. I want to spend a little time explaining the difference between these three 
types of networks.

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
60
Home Networks
Home networks are the types where you simply trust everything. You are, after all, in complete control of the network 
and all the hardware attached to it, including other computers, smartphones, tablets, game consoles, and maybe even 
storage attached to your home Wi-Fi router. What could possibly go wrong with all this?
Well, for starters, many people are confused by or simply don’t understand home network security. Why should 
they? As consumers, we’re used to home electronics being like a television, a microwave, or a Blu-ray player. It’s not 
true that all consumer electronics are simple to use. Take the new Internet-connected televisions, for example. Some 
of these TVs can take three-quarters of an hour to set up the first time you use them. They have myriads of menus 
controlling different tuners, movie and TV downloads, plug-in services, and 3D and surround sound. A friend of mine 
bought a new TV in 2011 that he couldn’t tune into at all. He simply couldn’t get a signal on it, so he called me to look 
at it. I figured out that both the digital and the old analog tuners had completely different onscreen menus, and they 
were accessed by pressing different buttons on the remote control. The reason he couldn’t get a signal was because 
he’d been using the wrong tuner in a place where the old analog signal had been switched off.
With home computer equipment, it can be even more complicated. The most common piece of hardware at fault 
is the router that connects your home to the Internet. While Internet service providers (ISPs) are much better than 
they used to be at programming individual Wi-Fi passcodes into devices, they still usually leave the administration 
password as the default.
Figure 3-1. Setting network sharing and security on first connect

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
61
When coupled with the fact that the name of your Wi-Fi network commonly includes the make and model of the 
router, it’s simple for a neighbor or a drive-by hacker to casually access the router and gain access to your network and 
the devices on it.
While this type of drive-by hack is rare, it is commonly blamed in file-sharing cases in which unsuspecting people 
are accused by the authorities and big movie studios of downloading the latest Johnny Depp movie.
The first thing to do with your own home network is make sure that you have unique passwords on both your  
Wi-Fi access and your router’s administration interface. How you do this depends on the make and model you have, 
but your ISP can talk you through it, and the router should come with a manual or help files.
You don’t always connect only to home networks in your own house; you may also connect to home networks at 
friends’ and family members’ houses. You have no control over their network or hardware, nor do you have any idea 
whether they have adequate antimalware protection on their network-connected computers and devices.
When you connect to their Wi-Fi, however, you know whether they have a strong password or even no password 
at all (be very careful when connecting to networks in which you don’t know whether any of the computers are 
infected with malware).
Home networks are really for use only in your own safe and secure environment, your little bubble in which you 
absolutely know the state of your security, and where you can implicitly trust the person who put it all together.
Work Networks
Workplace networks are inherently more trustworthy than home networks because they are managed by qualified 
personnel (mostly). In a work network, the other computers attached to the network can’t see the documents, 
pictures, music, or video you have shared in a HomeGroup (more on this in Chapter 4), but well-written malware can 
still infect network-connected computers.
Work networks are really only useful only in managed server environments in which a company is running its 
own Windows Server and you have access to shared storage. If you are connecting to a work network that’s run from 
a Windows Server system, for example, telling Windows that you want to be able to connect with other computers is 
essential to ensuring that all the relevant network systems in Windows 8.1 have permission to talk to the server and 
receive data back from it.
If you are in a workplace, however, in which you are using the network only for Internet access, and your 
computer is stand-alone or not connected to a server (for example, when you’re visiting a client), I don’t recommend 
turning on the sharing settings unless you really have to. The reason for this is that in your own company, you have 
to take it on trust that the IT department has set security appropriately on the network. You may even manage that 
network yourself. If it’s somewhere else, though, and especially if it’s a small business, you don’t have any reliable 
knowledge about how security is set on the network and the router.
Public Networks
For everywhere else, and for your peace of mind, there are public networks. It is what you should always use if you are 
in a public place such as a coffee shop, library, or even connected via a mobile dongle or SIM card.
When you tell Windows you do not want to connect to other PCs and devices, the OS throws up its full defenses 
against other computers and network nasties, not allowing file sharing or other sharing unless you explicitly permit it, 
and thus preventing people on other computers from getting access to your own PC and its files.
If you are ever uncertain about the network you are connected to or perhaps only need to get on the Internet,  
I recommend you tell Windows 8.1 not to find other PCs. This is the best way to avoid problems and security  
concerns.

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
62
Connecting to Networks in Windows 8.1
Connecting to networks in Windows 8.1 is slightly different from previous versions of the OS. If you are on the desktop, 
you can still click the network connection icon in the system tray area of the taskbar; but from the Start screen, you 
first need to open the charms and then click Settings. (You can open the charms with a touch swipe in from the right 
of your screen; by moving your mouse to the bottom right of the screen; or by pressing Win+I on your keyboard, which 
is a shortcut that opens the Settings charm.)
In Settings, your network connection button is in the group of six small buttons that pop out from the right of the 
screen. It is the first of the six, in the top left of the group.
When you click it, you are shown various options (see Figure 3-2). I want to talk about each of these in turn.
Figure 3-2. The network connection window in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
63
Airplane mode was first introduced on mobile phones because radio signals given off by the phones can 
cause interference with airplane computer systems during takeoff and landing; they can also interfere with other 
equipment, such as sensitive medical equipment in hospitals. You also find airplane mode settings on GPS-enabled 
equipment such as some digital cameras. The airplane mode feature is present in Windows 8.1 because people  
now commonly use laptops and tablets with mobile broadband while traveling. Switching on airplane mode in  
Windows 8.1 deactivates all communication signals, effectively cutting off all radio communication from being sent 
and received by the computer. You are reminded by signage onboard the aircraft or by the cabin crew with a polite tap 
on the shoulder when you need to activate airplane mode on your computer.
Mobile broadband networks are those you access through a SIM card in your laptop or tablet; through a USB 
mobile broadband dongle; or by sharing the data connection from your mobile phone, which is now the most 
common. There are data usage concerns with mobile broadband in Windows because of networks commonly 
capping data usage. I will talk more about this shortly.
Wi-Fi networks are standard home, workplace, or public networks. They have limited range and do not work 
when you move away from the router or base station.
When you choose a network to connect to, you are asked for the network password if there is one. (Remember 
to be extremely wary about networks that don’t because anybody with nefarious motives can connect and get access 
to any shared PCs.) There is a box that allows you to see the full characters of the normally hidden password. This is 
useful to make sure you are typing a complex password correctly. But don’t select this option if someone might be 
looking over your shoulder!
You are also asked if you want to always connect automatically to this network; this box is checked (selected) by 
default, but unless you want to connect to this network regularly, you should uncheck it. Just because you are fairly 
sure that a given network is safe, don’t assume that it will always stay secure into the future. All it takes is for a single 
setting to be changed.
Managing Mobile Broadband
As I mentioned earlier, one of the problems with network connections in Windows is that they can be set (deliberately 
or accidentally) to connect automatically whenever you are in range. I will show you how to manage your network 
connections shortly, but with 3G or 4G/LTE mobile broadband, this can be a problem, especially if your laptop or 
tablet has a built-in SIM card.
Mobile data packages regularly cap usage and impose heavy charges for additional data use, so it’s bad if your 
computer connects to such a network when you don’t specifically want it to. This can result in hefty data usage bills if 
you go over your allotted limit (or you may also find you can’t get a connection when you need to because you used 
up your allotment).
While you can set your mobile broadband connection to not connect automatically, the only way to be 
completely safe and secure is to switch it off when you don’t need it. Why do I recommend this? Simply because while 
we’re all used to uncapped Wi-Fi usage at home and at work, mobile broadband is still very expensive. Personally,  
I am not prepared to risk running up huge bills on my laptop and Windows tablet (both of which have a SIM card slot), 
so I always have mobile broadband switched off in Windows when I’m not using it.
You can independently switch mobile broadband and Wi-Fi on or off (they’ll be on by default) in the network 
connections panel (refer to Figure 3-2). Here you have switches to the right of the Mobile broadband and Wi-Fi 
headers that control these two network types independently of one another.
Connecting to Hidden Wi-Fi Networks
Wi-Fi networks that are hidden (usually to improve their security) don’t appear in the general network connections 
panel; you have to enter their settings manually. These are settings that you need to have provided to you by the 
people responsible for maintaining that network.

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
64
To connect to a hidden Wi-Fi network, follow these instructions:
 
1. 
From the desktop, right-click (or touch and hold) the network icon on the far right of the 
taskbar. From the pop-up that appears, click Open the Network and Sharing Center.  
You can also search for the Network and Sharing Center from the Search charm.
 
2. 
In the Network and Sharing Center, click the Set up a New Connection or Network link 
roughly in the middle of the page.
 
3. 
Click Manually Connect to a Wireless Network in the dialog that appears and click Next 
(see Figure 3-3).
Figure 3-3. Connecting to a hidden wireless network
 
4. 
On the next page, you are required to enter information that has to be provided by the Wi-Fi 
network manager. This information includes the name of the network, its security key, and 
its security encryption type.
You may find it helpful to also check the Start this Connection Automatically box, which autoconnects your PC to 
the hidden Wi-Fi network whenever you are in range of it. This is a different default behavior than if you connect to a 
network using the network connections panel from the Settings charm.

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
65
Connecting to a Mobile Broadband Network
When you connect your PC to a mobile broadband network, which you do in much the same way as when connecting 
to a Wi-Fi network, you are presented with an additional option: Roam Automatically (see Figure 3-4). You may want 
to leave it unchecked because checking it allows your PC to stay connected to the Internet even if you roam outside of 
your own mobile network, perhaps even on to one in a different country.
Figure 3-4. Connecting to mobile broadband
This can be a particular problem for people who live or work close to a country’s border where mobile signals 
from both countries can be detected, and where your phone or computer can become confused about the country in 
which it is located. Roaming charges, especially for data, can be considerable, and the ability to automatically prevent 
data roaming on your PC is a very helpful addition.
Note
 
■
 If you tell a mobile network to roam (or not), you can’t change this setting later without deleting the network 
and connecting again from the beginning. This process must be done from the Windows command prompt, so you may 
find it simpler to enable roaming if you want it occasionally, but disable the mobile broadband connections in the  
networks panel when you are close to a country’s border and do not want it to be used accidentally.

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
66
Connecting to a Company Workplace
If you use your Windows 8.1 laptop or tablet at work or have been provided with a Windows 8.1 PC by your employer, 
you probably need to connect to the company network (often called a domain). Sometimes, however, you want to 
use your own computer, so for this purpose Microsoft introduced a new feature called Workplace. This feature allows 
the IT department to grant certain network access permissions to computers and staff members who are not directly 
connected to the company domain.
 
1. 
To connect to a workplace, open the Settings charm (Win+I from the keyboard).
 
2. 
Click Change PC Settings in the bottom right of your screen.
 
3. 
When in PC Settings, click Network on the left of the screen.
 
4. 
Click Workplace on the left of the screen (see Figure 3-5).
When you’re in the Workplace settings, enter the ID provided by your company in the Enter your ID box, and the 
Join button becomes available to click. You may optionally be asked for a password at this point.
Below this, you see a box labeled Allow apps and services from IT admin. This is a feature that allows system 
administrators to remotely install apps and programs that are essential for your role in the workplace. This feature 
saves you having to install them manually and helps the IT department ensure that the correct versions are installed 
and updated in the proper manner. You may be asked by your IT department to click the Turn on button to activate 
this feature.
Connecting to a Company Domain
If your company doesn’t support the Workplace feature on your PC or if the PC is only used in the same workplace, 
you may need to manually join a company domain. Doing so gives your computer access to the company network 
and shared files and drives, and it also grants the IT department management control for your PC.
Figure 3-5. Connecting to a company domain

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
67
To connect to a company domain, follow these instructions:
 
1. 
Open System either by selecting it in the Control Panel or by searching for it with the 
Search charm.
 
2. 
In the System panel, click the Change Settings link in the Computer name, domain and 
workgroup settings section (see Figure 3-6).
 
3. 
In the dialog that appears, click the Change button.
 
4. 
In the next dialog, shown in Figure 3-7, change the Computer name if instructed to do so 
by your IT department.
Figure 3-6. Click the Change Settings link on the right side of the panel
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
68
 
5. 
Check the radio button for Member of Domain and in the box below, enter the name of the 
domain (e.g., thelongclimb.com), as instructed by your IT department.
 
6. 
The computer now attempts to connect to the domain, and you are asked to enter the 
username and password provided for your domain account.
 
7. 
When prompted, restart your PC.
The next time, and at all future times unless and until you change these settings again to once more make the 
computer part of a workgroup instead, you are presented with a login screen when starting your computer that 
requires your domain username and password credentials.
Connecting to Virtual Private Networks
By default, Windows 8.1 shows you only networks that are not hidden; it’s designed to make things as easy as possible 
for you. To connect to a workplace virtual private network, (VPN) perform the following steps. Note that if you are 
connecting to a VPN that has been set up for your company, you need settings that can be provided by your network 
administrator.
 
1. 
Open the Settings charm (Win+I from your keyboard).
 
2. 
Click Change PC Settings in the bottom right of your screen.
 
3. 
When in PC Settings, click Network.
Figure 3-7. Changing the domain settings

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
69
Note
 
■
 You can also connect to VPNs from the Network and Sharing Center. Right-click the network icon in the taskbar 
system tray and click Open the Network and Sharing Center. After this is open, click Set up a Connection or Network in 
the center of the panel.
 
4. 
In the Connections section of the network settings, click Add a VPN Connection. It should 
be visible right away.
 
5. 
You need the VPN details from your workplace to enter at the next screen (see Figure 3-8).
Figure 3-8. Network and Sharing Center in Windows 8.1
 
6. 
To connect to the company VPN, click Save.
The wizards to connect to hidden Wi-Fi networks and VPNs are very straightforward and easy to use, but you 
need specific information for them, such as the hidden network’s SSID name and security passphrase type, or the  
IP address of the VPN.

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
70
Managing and Deleting Wireless Network Profiles
Sometimes, perhaps because the settings for a Wi-Fi network have become corrupt or because the passphrase for the 
network has changed and you find yourself locked out, you might want to change or even delete and start again with 
one or more of your connections.
Alas, there’s no easy way to do this in Windows 8.1 because the Forget this Network feature was removed from 
Windows 8.1. It is still possible and relatively simple to manage and delete these network profiles, however:
 
1. 
Open the Command Prompt from the WinX menu (Press Win+X on your keyboard, right-click 
in the bottom left of your screen or search for Command Prompt from the Search charm).
 
2. 
In the Command window, type netsh wlan show profiles and press Enter. A list of your 
stored WiFi networks appears (see Figure 3-9).
 
3. 
Choose the wireless network you want to delete and type netsh wlan delete profile 
name=“ProfileName,” where ProfileName matches the name of the network you want to 
delete as it appears in the list; then press Enter.
The wireless network profile is now deleted, and the next time you connect to that network, it will be as if you 
never connected to it before on that PC.
Tip
 
■
 You can manage saved mobile broadband profiles in the same way by substituting wlan in these commands  
for mbn.
Figure 3-9. Wireless networks appear in the Command window

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
71
It is also possible to recover the password for a wireless network if you forget it and need it to connect another PC. 
To do this, follow these instructions:
 
1. 
Make sure that your PC is already connected to the wireless network.
 
2. 
Open the Network and Sharing Center by right-clicking the network icon in the system tray 
(on the right of the taskbar) or by searching for it using the Search charm.
 
3. 
In the Network and Sharing Center, click the name of the wireless network in the 
Connections section (see Figure 3-10).
Figure 3-10. You see the name of the currently connected network
 
4. 
In the dialog that appears, click the Wireless Properties button. If you do not see this 
button, you are connected to an Ethernet or 3G/LTE network for which these properties do 
not apply.
 
5. 
In the next dialog, click the Security tab.
 
6. 
Now check the Show characters box (see Figure 3-11); the passphrase for the wireless 
network is revealed.

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
72
Managing Network Connections
You also use the Network and Sharing Center for managing your main network connection hardware, whether 
Ethernet, Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, mobile broadband, or other connection types. You can access the Network and Sharing 
Center by either searching for it or navigating to the desktop and right-clicking the Network button, in which there is 
an option to open it.
To see the network hardware you have installed on your computer, click Change Adapter Settings in the left pane. 
The window that opens contains all the network connections that you have on your PC (see Figure 3-12).
Figure 3-11. You can display the passphrase for the current network

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
73
You can right-click these connections to perform various actions, but the following actions are also available on 
the toolbar at the top of the window:
•฀
Disable the connection so that you keep it in your network settings, but the network cannot  
be accessed.
•฀
Connect or Disconnect from the network.
Check the 
•฀
Status of the network, which is useful if you are having connection difficulties.
•฀
Diagnose a problem or a fault with the connection. This runs an automated troubleshooter 
that resets the connection to its default state.
Check the 
•฀
Properties of the connection. This is where you can change specific settings with 
the network adaptor. Use your computer to share this connection with other computers by 
turning your PC into a mobile hotspot, or turn on/off specific features that may be causing 
problems, such as IPv6.
There is no direct option to delete a connection or change its autoconnect or stored password 
•฀
settings. To delete a connection, highlight it and press the Delete (Del) key on your keyboard.
Note
 
■
 Windows 8.1 only allows you to select the status of a connected network or Internet connection. Sometimes it 
is simpler to delete the connection and have Windows rebuild it on a restart.
Network Management Best Practice
If you manage a network at home or at work, you should take a holistic view of security and network management, 
including consideration for who will be using the network.
It is worth the money, especially in a small business environment, to buy a router that allows you to set up 
multiple main and guest SSIDs. The advantage of doing this is that you don’t have to worry about visitors to your work 
environment having accidental access to your computers, the files stored on them, or any shared storage you have in 
the workplace.
Many high-end routers offer this functionality, and in the workplace I couldn’t recommend it more. It can also be 
useful in the home, especially if you have shared network storage, such as an NAS drive or a USB hard disk attached to 
your router, on which you keep backups and private files.
Figure 3-12. Managing network connections in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
74
You should always make sure that the router has two passwords on it: one for the administration interface and 
another for the Wi-Fi. These passwords should always be different. If you have a router that supports multiple SSIDs, 
each one should have its own unique password. This is the best way to guarantee—as much as is humanly possible, 
anyway—that you have excellent security on your network.
Tip
 
■
 To create a secure password, make sure it is at least 12 characters long and includes a mixture of uppercase 
and lowercase letters, numbers, and symbols. You can also use some numbers and symbols to represent letters,  
such as 5 instead of S, 1 instead of i or L, and & instead of A.
Securing Wi-Fi Networks
When you set up your Wi-Fi network, it can be difficult to decide which type of security to use on the password; after 
all, there are so many. Do you choose WEP, WPA-Personal, WPA2-Personal, WPA-Enterprise, or WPA2-Enterprise 
encryption? Because they are all combinations of letters and numbers, what does each one mean? There is a 
temptation to choose a basic encryption type such as WEP because it allows for the use of short passwords that are 
easy to remember. This makes it very insecure, however. The higher the level of encryption you add, the longer and 
more complex the default password requirement is.
Suffice it to say that WEP, WPA, and WPA2 can all be compromised, especially in the business space, by an 
experienced and determined drive-by hacker (a person sitting outside the building in a car or on a bench who hacks 
into a network from a laptop). So unless your router offers additional security options that can be used in conjunction 
with the key—such as AES encryption or a RADIUS authentication server—you are never completely protected.
Each type of secure encryption and authentication you add to a Wi-Fi network makes the password longer with 
requirements that are more stringent. On the upside, it has to be entered on each computer only once; but on the 
downside, it still has to be entered.
I bring this up because it’s a legitimate security concern, especially for business. On the other hand, you need to 
think about the likelihood of a drive-by hacker trying to crack your security.
What do you have on your network? How sensitive are your files and documents? Are you really a hacking 
target? Most enthusiasts and IT pros reading this have the same types of files on their networks as any consumer, but 
also have business files. Only if you store particularly sensitive data on your network—you work in the biochemical 
industry or for a government agency, for example—are you likely to be the target of drive-by hackers. And if the last 
few years have shown us anything, it is that data theft from governments is much more likely to come from within than 
from outside.
This isn’t to say hacking will never happen to you, but I want to present a balanced argument. For home users, 
I recommend WPA2 encryption. The minimum password length might be a bit long to remember, but it is always 
recommended by security professionals to have long passwords. You should keep the password written in a safe 
location—a desk drawer in your home or workplace, for example, is good because it is unlikely that someone will 
physically break into the building to access your Wi-Fi network. If they did, they could just plug a physical network 
cable into your router and bypass the passphrase anyway. WEP and WPA simply don’t offer enough security,  
so I recommend you avoid them.
Managing Mobile Broadband Data Usage
If you use your computer on a mobile broadband connection (3G/4G), you probably want to make sure that you don’t 
go over your usage limits.
Windows 8.1 can help you both monitor your usage and limit the amount of data used by displaying the amount 
of data you use in the network connections panel. When you connect to a mobile broadband network, Windows tells 
you the amount of data you have used so far. If you are on a monthly contract in which you have a fixed amount of 
data, you can reset the data counter every month by clicking Reset.

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
75
You need to switch this feature on for individual networks however (and can also switch it on for Wi-Fi networks) 
by following these steps:
 
1. 
Open PC Settings.
 
2. 
Click the Network settings.
 
3. 
Click the name of the network for which you want to display the data usage.
 
4. 
In the Data Usage section, turn on the switch called Show my estimated data use in the 
Networks list and, optionally, you can force Windows 8.1 to treat this network as a metered 
connection (see Figure 3-13). Setting a connection as a metered connection prevents Windows 
and your apps from sending and receiving too much data to avoid excessive charges.
Tip
 
■
 For mobile broadband networks, you also see an option here to protect your data connection with a PIN. You can 
use it to prevent unauthorized use of the network that can run up expensive bills, or even to prevent its accidental use 
when you are out and about.
Figure 3-13. Windows 8.1 helps you monitor your mobile broadband usage

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
76
The live tiles on the Windows 8.1 Start screen consume data every time they automatically update. You can limit 
the amount of data they consume, however, by doing the following:
 
1. 
From the Start screen, open the Settings charm (Win+I from the keyboard).
 
2. 
At the top right of the screen, click Tiles. Note that this option doesn’t appear if you open 
the Settings charm from the desktop.
The Tiles window (see Figure 3-14) allows you to specify the maximum amount of data that live tiles are allowed 
to use each month. Once this limit is reached, the live tiles no longer update over your mobile broadband connection.
Using Internet Explorer 11
Windows 8.1 comes with two different versions of the Internet Explorer web browser. One of these is an app run from 
the Start screen, and the other is the more traditional desktop program. Although these two browsers might appear 
completely separate, they do share favorites and stored information, such as web site usernames and passwords.
As you might imagine, however, the versions operate in different ways. The Internet Explorer 11 (IE11) app is 
a slimmed-down version containing just the controls most people need for everyday web browsing. The desktop 
version, on the other hand, is a full-featured browser with support for plug-ins, toolbars, and the more advanced 
features that many computer users like to have. In this section, I will talk you through the differences and show you 
how to get the best from each browser.
Figure 3-14. Control the amount of mobile data that live tiles use

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
77
Using the Internet Explorer 11 App
Life is usually complicated enough, but Windows 8.1 includes two versions of the Internet Explorer web browser. 
There are two fundamental differences between them.
IE11 in Windows 8.1 does not support any plug-ins, so web content written in languages such as Java simply do 
not display or work, although many web sites with Flash content still work because the Flash player software is built 
into Windows 8.1.
That said, it isn’t all bad news. For starters, the lack of plug-ins and a focus on the new HTML5 web standard 
makes the browser much more secure. This isn’t just a decision Microsoft made; it was Apple that first blocked 
browser plug-ins on the iPad and iPhone. The reasoning behind the move, which was deeply unpopular at the time, 
was that it made the browser more secure and prevented third-party plug-ins from slowing down the browser. Plus, 
with HTML5 web sites beginning to appear, there was a shrinking need for plug-ins.
Tip
 
■
 You can save pictures from web sites in the IE11 app by right-clicking (touching and holding) them and selecting 
Save to Pictures Folder from the options that appear.
If you want to use plug-ins and toolbars in Internet Explorer in Windows 8.1, the desktop version of the browser 
and some third-party web browsers continue to support them.
As with all apps, Internet Explorer runs fullscreen. A swipe upward from the bottom of the screen or down from 
the top brings up the App bar (see Figure 3-15).
Figure 3-15. Internet Explorer 11 in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
78
The controls in this version of Internet Explorer are limited. It is not as full-featured as its desktop counterpart is. 
On the App bar, you find the following features:
The 
•฀
Back button takes you back to the previous web page.
The 
•฀
address bar allows you to tap and enter a web address or a search term. The Refresh 
button reloads the current page.
The 
•฀
Add to Favorites button can be used to pin web sites to your Start screen.
The 
•฀
Settings button. The only available settings for IE11 are the following:
•฀
Find on Page, where you can search for text on the currently displayed web page.
•฀
View on Desktop opens the current page in the desktop version of IE11.
•฀
View Downloads lets you see files that you have downloaded to your PC.
The 
•฀
Forward button takes you forward one page if you have already moved back.
Tip
 
■
 When typing at the address bar in the IE11 app, tapping the Favorites button on the App bar displays all your 
Internet favorites, as shared with the desktop version of Internet Explorer. They are displayed as you have saved them, 
which include folders you can drill down in to. This is a very quick way to open previously saved web sites.
Above the controls, you see the following:
•฀
Thumbnail images of the open browser tabs; you can click one to display it fullscreen.
•฀
Plus (+) button to open a fresh tab.
A button with three dots with two more options:
•฀
•฀
New in Private Tab opens a tab in private browsing mode. In this mode, no history is 
stored of the web pages you visit, and no cookies or downloadable files from the web site 
are stored on the computer (this is useful when shopping for gifts).
•฀
Reopen Closed Tab allows you to easily reopen a tab if you have closed it accidentally.
All the usual touch-and-swipe gestures in Windows 8.1 work in Internet Explorer, including on the desktop, and 
have pinch gestures to zoom in and out of a page.
Tip
 
■
 IE11 may ask if you want to turn on flip ahead, which is a special mode that gets the IE11 app to guesstimate 
what the next page of a web site will be. When you swipe from the right of the screen inward, it moves to that page.  
You can also swipe at any time in from the left of your screen to move backward one page.
Using Favorites in Internet Explorer
You can display your favorite links in IE11 by clicking or tapping in the address bar. The screen changes to show your 
favorites, including all your frequently used ones and those that are pinned to the Start screen.
You can select a favorite to load by tapping or clicking it. If you want to open a favorite in a new tab or delete it, 
you can right-click it with your mouse (you can select only one at a time this way) or tap and hold to bring up the 
context menu with touch.

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
79
Unless you choose to turn off the Windows 8.1 syncing feature in the Sync Your Settings page of PC Settings, all your 
Internet Explorer favorites are automatically synced between computers that you log on to using a Microsoft account. 
It can also sync your tabs so you can have continuity in your browsing when you move from one Windows 8.1 PC to 
another. This is a tremendous timesaver because you can go to any Windows 8.1 computer, log in with your Microsoft 
account, and all your favorites in both versions of Internet Explorer—standard Windows 8.1 and desktop—are there.
Using Internet Explorer 11 on the Desktop
Unlike its slimmed-down cousin, Internet Explorer on the desktop is the fully featured version with all the trimmings. 
It is the same cosmetically as Internet Explorer 9, and if you are familiar with that browser in Windows 7, you will feel 
at home right away.
It is a very powerful browser (see Figure 3-16) and highly configurable, too, so I want to spend some time in this 
chapter showing you how to get the very best from it.
Figure 3-16. Internet Explorer on the Windows 8.1 desktop
One of the most useful features of the browser is in its toolbars and extras, which can be switched on by right-
clicking anywhere in the blank space at the top of the window (see Figure 3-17).

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
80
IE11 toolbars and extras include the following features:
The 
•฀
menu bar is the traditional drop-down menu with the typical Internet Explorer options 
displayed. There is really no need for this now because the options are all easy to get at and 
because almost nothing else in Windows 8.1 has drop-down menus. This is only a legacy 
feature.
The 
•฀
Favorites bar is a quick way to launch commonly used links to web sites. It is a far quicker 
way to launch web sites than the Favorites menu.
The 
•฀
Command bar contains tools now found in the Settings menu, including Print, Home, 
RSS, and Safety.
The 
•฀
Status bar sits at the bottom of the browser and gives feedback on loading and other 
aspects of the page.
The 
•฀
address bar offers extra display options. If you want a full-width address bar or if you 
want to place a toolbar next to the address bar, you can choose to Show tabs on a separate 
row, which moves the browser tabs below the address bar.
Tip
 
■
 If you unpin IE11 from the taskbar and then worry that you can’t find it in the All Apps view to re-pin, it don’t 
worry. You can select the Internet Explorer app, and a Pin to Taskbar option appears in the App bar.
To the left of the address bar are the 
•฀
Back and Forward buttons. Inside the address bar are 
buttons for Search, Compatibility (for a web site that doesn’t display properly in the browser, 
but worked in earlier versions of Internet Explorer), and Refresh (reloads the current page).  
To the far right of the tabs are buttons for Home, Favorites, and Settings.
Tip
 
■
 You can pin a web site to the Windows taskbar by dragging its button (found to the left of the address bar) onto 
the taskbar. Some web sites contain their own custom Jump Lists, enabling you to quickly access different pages or 
features within the web site.
Figure 3-17. Right-click the top of the IE11 desktop browser to display additional options

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
81
Managing Browser Tabs in IE11 on the Desktop
Web browser tabs in Internet Explorer 11 work in the same way as they have in previous versions of the browser and in 
other web browsers. Each tab, when you mouse over it, displays a Close button (represented by an ×) on its right. You 
can also drag and drop browser tabs to rearrange them in any order you want.
Tip
 
■
 You can drag a tab out of Internet Explorer to open it in its own Window and also drag tabs from other IE11  
windows to amalgamate them into a single window with multiple tabs.
Internet Explorer 11 Safety Features
Some features in the Settings menu may be familiar, but there are some that deserve special attention. The Safety 
options are chief among these because Internet safety is very important to us all (see Figure 3-18).
Figure 3-18. The Safety options in Internet Explorer
IE11 includes the following safety features:
•฀
Delete browsing history deletes all records of the web sites that you have visited in Internet 
Explorer. You may not want anyone else seeing the web sites you have visited because they 
appear automatically in the address bar when a user clicks in it or searches in it.
•฀
InPrivate Browsing is a special mode within Internet Explorer that doesn’t keep any record of 
the web sites you visit and that doesn’t allow those web sites to leave cookies or other tracking 
files on your computer. This mode is useful for gift shopping.
•฀
Tracking protection. Sometimes you visit web sites in which cookies are placed on your 
computer by third-party web sites, often through advertisements. Tracking protection is 
disabled in IE11 by default, but you can turn it back on here if you want.
•฀
Turn off Do Not Track requests. IE11 requests, politely of course, that web sites do not track it 
or your online activity. If you want to turn off this functionality, you can do so here.

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
82
•฀
ActiveX Filtering is a feature that blocks small programs, sometimes used to play video, from 
running in your web browser. ActiveX controls can be programmed to run malicious code on 
your computer when activated.
•฀
Webpage privacy policy displays the privacy policy, if available, of the web site that is 
currently displayed.
•฀
Check this website, which is available for some (but not all) web sites, enables you to check 
the web site against the Microsoft master list of known safe and unsafe sites to see whether 
there is a potential security risk. Fortunately, my own web site, shown in Figures 3-15 to 3-18, 
is known to be safe .
•฀
Turn off SmartScreen Filter. Microsoft SmartScreen, which I will talk about shortly, helps 
prevent malicious code from web sites from running on your PC. If you want to turn this 
feature off, perhaps because it interferes with a company intranet, you can do so here.
•฀
Report unsafe website is where you can report a web site to Microsoft and the relevant 
authorities that you know contains malware or that is being used for criminal purposes.
Using the SmartScreen Filter to Block Malicious Web Sites
The Windows 8.1 SmartScreen Filter runs in IE11 to help prevent malicious code from running on web sites that can 
infect your computer. Unless you turn it off in the Safety options, it automatically checks every web page you visit 
against a list of known malicious sites compiled in collaboration with other browser makers and security companies.
In the Safety menu, you can manually check a web site against the SmartScreen database. If you suspect a web 
site to be malicious, you can use this menu to manually report the web site as potentially unsafe to Microsoft.
You can manually configure Windows SmartScreen in the Action Center (or by searching for SmartScreen from 
the Search charm). When in the Action Center, click the Change Windows SmartScreen Settings link in the top left of 
the window. There are three settings you can choose with SmartScreen, as shown in Figure 3-19.
Figure 3-19. Changing Windows SmartScreen settings

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
83
 
1. 
The default setting is to Get administrator approval before running an unrecognized 
app from the Internet. Microsoft recommends this, and so do I. It offers the best level of 
protection while still giving you the choice of running a suspect app if you want to.
 
2. 
Warn before running an unrecognized app, but don’t require administrator approval allows 
Standard users on your PC to run suspect apps. This could pose a security risk to your PC and 
files, especially if the person running the app is inexperienced in such things, such as a child.
 
3. 
Don’t do anything (turn off Windows SmartScreen) isn’t a setting I recommend at all. 
It should be set only if you use your PC for work, and SmartScreen is blocking essential 
features of your company intranet.
Managing Add-ons, Toolbars and Search Providers in IE11
Toolbars and add-ons are incredibly useful in Internet Explorer, including the Flash Player and Java (though the Flash 
player is now built into IE11). Occasionally, however, they can get in the way, slow down your browser, or even be 
malicious and hijack your search submissions.
You can manage and remove toolbars from Internet Explorer 11 in the Settings menu by selecting Manage 
Add-ons. In the window that appears (see Figure 3-20), you can highlight an add-on or a toolbar; Enable and Disable 
buttons appear in the bottom-right corner of the window.
Figure 3-20. Managing add-ons and toolbars in IE11

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
84
Note
 
■
 Disabling an IE add-on or toolbar is not the same as uninstalling it from your computer. You can uninstall  
add-ons and toolbars in Programs and Features in the Control Panel.
I mentioned at the beginning of this section that abusive toolbars can hijack your search providers. Having this 
happen can be as annoying as having a problem toolbar, and disabling the toolbar won’t fix the problem, either.  
In the left column of the Manage Add-ons window, you can click Search Providers and it is here where you can remove 
problem search providers and even add in new ones, such as Google or Yahoo!.
Internet Explorer 11 Options and Configuration
The extensive Internet options in IE11 (see Figure 3-21) also need a mention. I want to talk you through some of these 
settings. You access Internet Options from the Settings button to the far right of the browser tabs.
Figure 3-21. The General tab in Internet Options

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
85
Note
 
■
 Windows 8.1 automatically syncs your browser tabs across different Windows 8.1 computers in the IE11 app.  
It can’t be controlled here, but it can be switched on and off in PC Settings. I will show you how to do this in Chapter 9.
The first tab to appear in Internet Options is the General tab (see Figure 3-21). Under this tab, you can set a single 
or multiple (write each one on a different line) home pages for your web browser. You can also set IE to automatically 
reload all the pages from your last browsing session when you start it. Note that this is something the IE11 app does 
automatically.
The Tabs options are interesting. When you open a tab from another browser tab, IE color-codes them 
automatically. It also opens all new tabs next to the existing one. These are features that some people find irritating.  
It is here where they can be switched off.
You can also turn off tabbed browsing completely if you want, forcing each new web site to open in its own window.
Tip
 
■
 You can completely delete your web browsing history in the Settings panel by clicking the Delete button.  
Optionally, you can force Windows to delete your browsing history every time you close your browser by checking the 
Delete browsing history on exit check box.
Managing Safety and Privacy in Internet Explorer 11
Two things that concern people greatly these days, especially parents whose children use the Internet, are safety and 
privacy. Internet Explorer 11 comes with built-in options to help with this. Click the Settings button near the top right 
of the window and select Internet Options from the menu.
The Safety options, also selected from the Settings button in IE11, block potentially unsafe web sites or allow 
web sites that IE11 blocks by default. These settings can be further customized, but unless you have real reasons for 
changing this control, you will probably find that it proves more of a hindrance than a help because all manner of 
useful and perfectly legitimate web sites are blocked if you turn the settings up.
The Security tab (see Figure 3-22) allows you to set general rules for your Internet security, such as whether to 
allow or block certain types of cookies, which are small tracking files placed by web sites on your computer to permit 
actions such as remembering login passwords.

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
86
Of more interest are the Privacy options (see Figure 3-23), which allow you to block tracking and other cookies 
from web sites, depending on your own criteria. The feature also allows you to import whitelists and blacklists from 
third parties (perhaps parental or privacy groups).
Figure 3-22. The Security tab in Internet Options

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
87
In the Location Services section of this tab, you can block web sites from being sent to your physical location.  
This is useful not just because computers now come fitted with GPS systems but also because your location can often 
be determined from your PC’s IP address.
It is also on this tab that you can turn Internet Explorer’s built-in pop-up blocker on and off. It is turned on by 
default, but if it interferes with your company intranet, for example, you can deactivate it.
The Content tab (see Figure 3-24) is commonly of interest to parents. Windows 8.1’s Family Safety can be 
accessed from here. It is also where you can manage the AutoComplete settings whereby IE11 remembers passwords, 
usernames, and more from your browsing history. Individual components in AutoComplete can be switched on and 
off here.
Figure 3-23. The Privacy tab in Internet Options

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
88
Recovering Lost Web Site Usernames and Passwords
While I’m on the subject of stored usernames and passwords, this is a good time to tell you that Windows 8.1 can show 
you your usernames and passwords for web sites if you forget them. You can do this by searching for credentials and 
running the Manage web credentials settings.
The Web Credentials panel lists all the web sites you have stored usernames and passwords for (see Figure 3-25). 
You expand the details for a web site by clicking the down arrow to the right of its name. Then details such as your 
username and whether the credentials are permitted to roam (i.e., if they are be synched between Windows 8.1 PCs) 
are displayed.
Figure 3-24. The Content tab in Internet Options

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
89
By default, the password is blanked out, but you can click the Show link next to a password to display it. If you 
have a password on your Windows 8.1 user account, you are asked to enter it here as authorization.
If you want to remove the credentials for a certain web site, you can click the Remove link; they are deleted from 
stored memory in the Credential Manager.
What is InPrivate Mode?
I want to insert a quick note about InPrivate mode here because it is relevant to your privacy online. This mode, which 
can be easily activated in both the desktop and app versions of IE11, as I have detailed earlier, is a special mode that 
prevents the web browser and web sites you visit from collecting any information about you.
This mode is useful for a wide range of activities, including shopping for secret birthday presents and for 
communication inside a country where Internet activity can be monitored. (Some regimes have mechanisms in 
place that track you anyway, and additional software such as a mobile browser or Tor, www.torproject.org, may be 
required for complete anonymity.) Generally speaking, and especially for present shopping, InPrivate Mode is a great 
way to hide what you’ve been doing from the people who use your PC and user account.
Figure 3-25. Recovering usernames and passwords for web sites in the Credential Manager

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
90
Staying Safe Online
Staying safe online is a challenge these days. Criminals are everywhere, ready to infect our computers with malware or 
steal our credit card information or identities. So when we increasingly spend our time on online social networks and 
Internet shopping sites, how can we know that we are safe and secure?
I want to discuss online threats; how you can spot them; and how you can protect yourself, your friends, and your 
family against them.
Internet Threats Explained
There are several major types of Internet threats.
•฀
Malware is malicious software that infects a computer to steal information, steal or encrypt 
files, or simply corrupt a machine and delete things. It can come from various sources, 
including macros (small programs than run inside files, usually word processor or spreadsheet 
files); keyloggers that record everything you type, including credit card information and bank 
logins; and browser plug-ins that pretend to be something that you need, such as a codec 
required to view a video online.
•฀
Phishing e-mails try to trick you into revealing sensitive information, such as passwords, by 
pretending to be from a reputable bank or business institution.
•฀
Compromised web sites may look perfectly legitimate, but they ask for sensitive information 
that can be used to hijack your account or that are programmed to download and run infected 
files to your computer.
Tip
 
■
 No legitimate web site will ever e-mail you asking you to confirm your security details. If you notice the web site 
that you regularly use has changed and is asking for additional login information, e-mail abuse@companyname.com  
(where companyname.com is the web address of the company) to report it.
Identifying Safe and Unsafe Web Sites in IE11
Internet Explorer is great at telling you whether a web site is safe. It displays a padlock in the address bar that indicates 
the site is a known, secure web site. Also, the address bar is green when the URL is a safe web site, and it is red when it 
is known to be used by criminals (see Figure 3-26).
Unfortunately, these features are best highlighted in the desktop version of IE11 because the address bar is 
hidden from normal view in the IE11 app. If you are doing financial transactions or shopping on a laptop or desktop 
PC, I recommend you use the desktop version of IE because it gives you more and better feedback about web sites.
The web site safety reporting in Internet Explorer, or any web browser for that matter, is not infallible and is only 
as good as its last update.
Figure 3-26. IE11 desktop version highlights a safe web site

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
91
Making the Desktop Version of IE11 Your Default Browser
When you install Windows 8.1, the default browser (the one all web links open in) is the IE11 app. If you want to 
change this to the desktop version of IE11, it’s easy to do:
 
1. 
Open Settings in the desktop version of IE11 by clicking the Settings icon in the top right of 
the window.
 
2. 
In the options panel that appears, click the Programs tab.
 
3. 
In the Choose how you open links section at the top of the panel, change the drop-down 
option from Let Internet Explorer Decide to Always in Internet Explorer on the desktop  
(see Figure 3-27) and then click OK to confirm the change.
Figure 3-27. Changing the default browser in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 3 ■ GETTING CONNECTED
92
Summary
Windows 8.1 offers new ways to connect to the Internet and these new ways also bring challenges (the worry that 
comes from being accidentally connected to your 3G or LTE network and using expensive data, for example).
There are also challenges with staying safe on the Internet. Internet Explorer does an excellent job of keeping 
you safe, but the weak link is always the user. Malware writers and criminals will prey on you, trying to trick you into 
entering sensitive information on the pretense that it’s perfectly safe to do so.
On my web site (www.TheLongClimb.com), I write and make tutorial videos about regularly maintaining your 
security and privacy online. You can always find more information there.

93
CHAPTER 4
Sharing with Family and Friends
Windows 7 introduced the concept of HomeGroup, enabling us to share our files, music, photos, and video easily 
within small networks. Windows 8.1 is taking sharing to the next level with built-in sharing for apps of all descriptions.
With Windows 8.1, apps that send or receive information, such as pictures, don’t need to be programmed to 
import and export files to and from other programs. Windows 8.1 now handles it all. This opens new opportunities for 
sharing, but some of the traditional methods of sharing files, folders, and network hardware still exist. In this chapter, 
I’ll show you how to share a wide variety of hardware, file types, and data libraries in Windows 8.1.
Working with User Accounts
One of the traditional strengths of Windows has been its support of multiple users. On the face of things, this may seem 
relatively minor, but when you work from home, do schoolwork, or just want some privacy, the usefulness of this feature 
steps up to another level. At the time of writing, handling multiple user accounts on a tablet device is still something few 
non–Windows 8.1 devices are capable of doing, straightforward as you might think it would be. This is a major feature of 
Windows 8.1, and you’ll be pleased to hear that the operating system handles user accounts admirably.
Windows 8.1 practically begs users to log on with a Microsoft account—the same ID you use to log on to a Live, 
Hotmail, Outlook.com, or MSN e-mail account. When you do this, much of the system is automatically set up for 
you, including the Windows Store and the e-mail and calendar apps. This presents issues for multiple user systems, 
however, because you might not want other people in your household or workplace reading your e-mail.
There is also the matter of file security. We generally trust the people we live with, but accidents do happen.  
If somebody doesn’t know the importance of a particular file or Internet favorite, it can be deleted all too easily.
The ability to set up Windows 8.1 so that each user has his or her own account is a benefit. It is also a task that’s 
simpler than ever to perform.
Setting Up Users
In Windows 8.1, Microsoft has removed the need to navigate through the full Control Panel to add users. This task was 
often seen as complicated and off-putting. Now you simply add users through the PC Settings panel, with the whole 
process clearly detailed.
To create a local user account, follow these instructions:
 
1. 
Open the charms and select Settings.
 
2. 
At the bottom right of the screen, click More PC Settings.
 
3. 
In PC Settings, click Accounts.
 
4. 
In the Accounts section, click Other Accounts (see Figure 4-1).

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
94
Tip
 
■
 If you are creating an account for another person using a Microsoft account ID, she doesn’t need to be  
present. Just enter her e-mail address and you’re done. The PC won’t ask for the password until the first time she 
logs in to the PC.
 
5. 
Next, click Add a user, which opens the screen shown in Figure 4-2.
Figure 4-1. Creating a new user account in PC Settings

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
95
Note
 
■
 So what difference does it make to you whether you create a local account or a Microsoft account? A local  
account has advantages if you use only one PC in which everything is stored locally, so there’s nothing in the cloud if 
you’re concerned about privacy. However, you can’t use the Windows Store to purchase apps and your Internet favorites, 
and other settings won’t be synched to other Windows 8.1 PCs.
 
6. 
To create a local account, click Don’t want this user to sign in with a Microsoft account? 
to open the screen shown in Figure 4-3.
Figure 4-2. Adding a new user

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
96
 
7. 
Click the Local account button. You are asked for a username and (optionally) a password 
for the new user (see Figure 4-4).
Figure 4-3. Windows 8.1 tells you the difference between a Microsoft account and a Local account

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
97
 
8. 
Enter the name of the user and, optionally, a password and password hint (in case you 
forget the password). When you are finished, you are asked if you want to turn on Family 
Safety to get reports of what a child does online (see Figure 4-5).
Figure 4-4. It is not necessary for local accounts to have a password, which is especially helpful for young children

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
98
Note
 
■
 The “Using Family Safety” section, which appears later in this chapter, covers this topic. When you check this 
option, that user will be notified when they log in to the PC that the activity is being monitored. This is a privacy feature to 
prevent people from using this tool to spy on other PC users.
 
9. 
The local account is created. Click Finish to complete the process.
Creating a Password Reset Drive
If you have a local account on your PC, you can create a Password Reset drive to help you if you ever forget the password 
to the computer. To create it, you need a blank USB flash drive (any size will do, so it’s a good use for an old one) already 
plugged into the PC. Search for Password Reset from the Search charm and run Create a Password Reset Disk from the 
options that appear.
This displays a wizard that will quickly walk you through creating a password reset system on the USB flash drive.
Figure 4-5. The account is created

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
99
If you forget your password at logon, insert your password reset flash drive into a USB port and then click the 
Reset Password link below the password input box (see Figure 4-6).
Figure 4-6. You can reset your password using a password reset disk
The password reset wizard will appear and ask which port or drive you have inserted your password reset disk 
into. It will use this to reset your password, enabling you to log in to the computer again.
Resetting Your Microsoft Account Password
If you log in to your PC using a Microsoft account, you don’t have the option to create a password reset disk. Instead, 
you will be pointed at the Microsoft account password reset web page at http://account.live.com/password/reset 
(see Figure 4-7). You need to do this on a PC or account you can log in to, or perhaps on a smartphone.

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
100
Here you are prompted to enter the e-mail address associated with your Microsoft account and to confirm the 
security captcha code that displays. You are then asked if you want Microsoft to e-mail you a temporary password  
(if you have set up a backup e-mail address in your Microsoft account) or send you a text message by phone 
(assuming that you have a current mobile phone number registered to your Microsoft account).
If these are not suitable for you, you are asked to enter an alternative e-mail address that somebody from 
Microsoft can contact you about. They typically contact you within 24 hours, which is a good incentive to set up an 
alternate e-mail address or a mobile phone on your account! I will show you how to manage your Microsoft account 
online later in this chapter.
Tip
 
■
 If you have another administrator account on the PC you can log in to, your password can be reset in the User 
Management panel; see the following for details of how to do this.
Managing User Accounts
There are two types of users in Windows 8.1: administrators, who have authority to make any changes to the 
operating system and computer’s files that they want to; and standard users, who can make only changes that affect 
their own user account. Typically, a PC has one administrator, the account that was set up when Windows 8.1 was 
first installed or activated, and all accounts created after this will be standard users. For general use, this is the most 
secure way to run the operating system (OS), but you might find that a second user needs to install software and 
needs the administrator password to do so. Under this circumstance, you may want to consider having more than one 
administrator account on the PC.
The first user account created when you start using Windows 8.1 will always be an administrator, but any 
accounts you create for the computer after that will be standard users unless you specify otherwise. As we just saw in 
the preceding section, you create a new user account in the Users panel of PC Settings.
Figure 4-7. Resetting a Microsoft account password

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
101
There are two ways to manage user accounts: one in which you can simply change the account type in PC 
Settings, and another with more controls in the full Control Panel. To do this, you first need to be logged in to the PC 
as an administrator; then in PC Settings, click Accounts and then Other accounts. When you click Other accounts on 
the PC, an Edit button appears (see Figure 4-8). Clicking this button enables you to change the account type between 
administrator, standard user, and child.
Figure 4-8. You can change the account type in PC Settings
Figure 4-9. Managing user accounts in Windows 8.1
Tip
 
■
 You can also remove user accounts in the Other accounts section of PC Settings.
When you need more control over user accounts, you need to open the full Windows 8.1 Control Panel, which 
you can do by searching for control at the Start screen. Managing user accounts is done from the User accounts 
section of the Control Panel. When you load this panel, you are first shown your own user account (see Figure 4-9). 
Here you can perform various actions, as follows.

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
102
•฀
Change your account type: You can change from standard user to administrator (or vice 
versa). This might be useful to upgrade a user to an administrator.
•฀
Manage your credentials: You can view, edit, and delete the stored password for Windows, 
Windows software, and web sites that are associated with your account. This can be useful if 
something has become corrupt, and Windows or Internet Explorer gets confused when you 
change your password.
•฀
Create a Password Reset Disk (not seen): This option appears only for local user accounts 
and allows you to create a USB flash drive that can be used to reset your password if you  
forget it.
•฀
Manage your file encryption certificates: This option allows you to back up and restore any 
Encrypting File System (EFS) encryption keys associated with this account. For more on this, 
see Chapter 12.
•฀
Change advanced user profile properties: This option is used if your user account has been 
created as part of a Windows Server domain.
•฀
Change my environment variables: This option allows you to change certain aspects of your 
profile, such as where your user and temporary files are stored by default.
•฀
Manage your fingerprint data (not seen): This option appears if your computer has a 
biometric fingerprint reader.
Tip
 
■
 If you have friends or family members using your computer occasionally, but you don’t want to configure specific 
user accounts for them or have them use your account, you can turn on the Guest account by clicking Manage Another 
Account in the User Accounts panel. The Guest account gives you a quick and secure way to allow other people to use 
your computer and is a basic standard user account.
If you click Manage Another Account, you are shown a list of the other user accounts on your computer. Clicking 
an account allows you to change the settings for that user (see Figure 4-10).

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
103
The options found for managing other users include the following:
•฀
Change the account name.
•฀
Create a password for the account if it doesn’t have one. If it does, you will see options to 
change or remove the password.
•฀
Set up Family Safety allows you to place the Family Safety feature on the account.
•฀
Change the account type from standard user to administrator (or vice versa). All secondary 
users are standard users by default.
•฀
Delete the account gives an alert that the user has files on the computer and gives the 
opportunity to save these files to a desktop folder before the account is deleted.
Tip
 
■
 If you log on to someone else’s computer with your Microsoft account, but you don’t use that computer very often,  
be aware that Windows 8.1 might have downloaded your Internet Favorites or other personal files to the computer. Obviously, 
you don’t want them to remain on someone else’s computer, so you can remove them by performing a few steps. When logged 
on as another user, open User Account in the Control Panel; otherwise, open Manage Another Account. Click the name of the  
account you want to delete. Next, click Delete the Account and, when prompted, click Delete Files. This process removes the 
files, but you should make certain by checking the C:\Users folder. If a folder still exists for that user account, delete it manually.
Figure 4-10. Managing another user account

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
104
Managing a Microsoft Account Online
The management tools for your Microsoft account can be found online at http://account.live.com. Here you can 
control all aspects of your account: display name, date of birth, billing and credit card information for the Windows 
Store; and your alternate e-mail address and mobile phone number if you forget your password or for some other 
reason, such as being hacked, you become locked out of your account.
There are a great number of options to be found on this web site, and even if you have had your Microsoft 
account for some time, it can be well worth looking through the options here to ensure everything is as it should be 
and that all the correct account permissions have been set.
Using Family Safety
With children using the Internet at ever-younger ages, it’s more important than ever before to shield them from 
inappropriate games, web sites, and images. Windows 8.1 comes with an excellent suite of tools that enables you to 
do this and more, including determining when children can use their PCs, and it all comes with a reporting tool with 
which parents can monitor children’s Internet usage.
Figure 4-11. You manage your Microsoft account at http://account.live.com

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
105
When you create a new user account in Windows 8.1, you are asked if the user you are adding is a child  
(see Figure 4-12). Checking this option activates Family Safety activity reports, which is accessed through the Family 
Safety page. You can specify that an account is for a child by checking the Is this a child’s account? box after you 
input the name and other details about the new user.
Figure 4-12. You can specify if a new user is a child
Family Safety is very powerful and flexible in Windows 8.1 and includes web filtering for the first time. The 
activity report is a very helpful addition to these controls because they show you the types of activities your child is 
participating in online and which web sites they visit.
You access the activity report from the main Family Safety page. To open it, search for family safety from the 
Search charm. When you have opened the Family Safety controls, on the right side of the window, you can View 
activity reports of your child’s time on the computer (see Figure 4-13). Your child cannot see these reports; they are 
visible only to administrators on the computer, but the child is informed when logging in to the PC that the account’s 
activity is being monitored. This is a privacy and safety feature to prevent unwanted snooping.

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
106
Although the content filtering in Internet Explorer is useful, it is much easier to use the Windows 8.1 Family 
Safety (see Figure 4-14). You find it by searching for the word family from the Search charm. There is more about 
searching in Chapter 5.
Figure 4-13. The Family Safety page

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
107
At the main Family Safety screen, select the user you want to set controls for. You can set Family Safety only 
for standard users because administrators have permission to perform whatever actions they want, including 
deactivating Family Safety controls.
Note
 
■
 You need to have a password on your main user account to use Family Safety in Windows 8.1.
After you select which user you want to set Family Safety for, you are taken to the main Family Safety page  
(see Figure 4-15).
Figure 4-14. Windows 8.1 asks you for which user you want to have Family Safety controls

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
108
On the Family Safety page, you have several options:
Turn the controls on or off for a particular user.
•฀
Set 
•฀
Web Filter parameters to decide which web sites are suitable for your children.
Set 
•฀
Time Limits on when children are allowed to use the computer.
Choose what types of 
•฀
Windows Store and Game Restrictions are suitable for your children.
Choose which 
•฀
App Restrictions will be required for your children.
I want to spend a little time discussing each of these settings in detail. Web filtering in Family Safety (see Figure 4-16) 
is much simpler than it is in the Internet Explorer 10 (IE10) Content Advisor page. In Family Safety, you can choose from 
five web category types:
Allow list only (in which you can manually specify which web sites to allow)
•฀
Designed for children
•฀
Figure 4-15. The main Family Safety options

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
109
General interest
•฀
Online communication
•฀
Warn an adult
•฀
Figure 4-16. Choose the web sites that are suitable for your child
Each category has a clear description of what it is, so you can feel certain that your children are seeing only 
appropriate web sites. You can also block Internet downloads, which helps protect your computer from malware.
Additionally, if you click the Allow or Block Websites link in the left panel, you can choose specific web sites 
to permit or completely block (see Figure 4-17). You might want to allow your child to view web sites in the Online 
Communication category, but you want to block Facebook and Twitter until she is slightly older. This is a very useful 
feature because the white and black lists of web sites maintained by Microsoft are not completely perfect for every 
parent and child; they could block a school web site, for example. A parent might also want to block access to a web 
site even if Family Safety has deemed it suitable for the child.

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
110
The Time Restrictions page is extremely useful (see Figure 4-18). Here you can set the times your child is allowed 
to use the computer. There are two options: you can set how many hours the PC can be used each day, and you set 
the number of hours for each day of the week independently, perhaps to allow more time on weekends. You can also 
set a curfew and, by filling in blocks of time, you can specify the earliest and latest times each day the PC can be used, 
which is useful for enforcing bedtimes. This again can be set independently for each day.
Figure 4-17. You can allow and block specific web sites in Family Safety

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
111
Not all apps and games come with ratings, and there is no guarantee that inappropriate games won’t slip 
through. Parents may find, however, that the age ratings system on games is a great indicator for which games are 
suitable for their children (see Figure 4-19).
Figure 4-18. Family Safety can block children from using the computer at specified times

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
112
Select a maximum game rating, and all ratings below that are automatically included in your selection. These 
ratings map to the standard ratings system for games in your own country, which makes them easy to understand. 
This means that you can block games rated as more mature from running on your computer.
The last section of options, App Restrictions, relates to the desktop software on the PC, some of which, when 
installed, is automatically set up for use by all the users on the PC (see Figure 4-20). On this page, you can choose the 
software that your child is allowed to use.
Figure 4-19. Parents can choose the games suitable for their children

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
113
The App Restrictions feature is at its most useful when you use a computer for both home and work, and want to 
stop children from accessing your work programs.
Sharing Files and Folders with HomeGroup
HomeGroup was introduced in Windows 7 as a means of sharing documents, pictures, music, video, and printers 
across small, protected home networks. Think of a HomeGroup as a quick way to share files between your 
home computers. This is because Windows knows which environment you’re sharing things in, and as a result, 
automatically sets all the correct permissions and parameters on the files, folders, and networking settings for you, 
minimizing your configuration.
HomeGroup still exists in Windows 8.1. It’s easy and straightforward to set up and configure. HomeGroup is in 
PC Settings (see Figure 4-21), which is available by opening the charms on the right side of the screen and selecting 
Settings. Once in PC Settings, click Network and then click HomeGroup.
Figure 4-20. Parents can select the programs and software their children are allowed to use

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
114
If a HomeGroup has already been set up on another computer, you are asked to enter the password. You may 
have a Windows 7 computer on which you have previously set up and configured a HomeGroup, for example.
If a HomeGroup does not exist, or if Windows 8.1 can’t detect one on the network, you are asked if you want to  
set one up.
Note
 
■
 HomeGroup works only over Wi-Fi for networks on which you have said you want to find other PCs and devices. 
It is automatically disabled and blocked on work and public networks to help maintain your file and PC security.
Once you are connected to a HomeGroup, the HomeGroup page in PC Settings gives you controls for sharing files 
and devices, including documents, pictures, music, videos, printers, and devices such as USB attached storage and 
external hard disks (see Figure 4-22).
Figure 4-21. The HomeGroup page in PC Settings

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
115
Next, however, is a very interesting option. Do you want to allow your TVs and other devices, such as game 
consoles, to share the media on your home network? HomeGroup allows you to use your computers as Universal Plug 
and Play (UPnP) devices.
UPnP devices can share media, commonly pictures, music, and video over a network. They are used by media 
streamers to play music from your PC on your Hi-Fi or video from your laptop on your television. You can use this, 
for example, to share your media with your Xbox 360 or Playstation 3 to view on a big screen or to listen to an Internet 
radio station in the garden.
There are security concerns to take into account, however. With a HomeGroup, you have a secure password, 
which is also shown in the HomeGroup page in PC Settings, but when you share media via this setting, all that is 
required is access to your network. You need not worry about having a very secure password on your Wi-Fi router 
because media connectors and modern routers have a pairing button on them, usually called WPS, which connects 
secure devices without the need to enter complex passwords using awkward interfaces.
If you do not have a password on your Internet router, you should create one right away. Unsecured routers 
provide outsiders with access to your home Internet connection and the shared files on your computers and devices.
Media shared on a HomeGroup cannot be deleted from your computer, and they don’t include your documents. 
It is always wise to know who has access to what before you share it, however.
Figure 4-22. The HomeGroup settings in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
116
Tip
 
■
 You can still manage a HomeGroup from the full Control Panel, but the management options in PC Settings are so 
much better that I wouldn’t bother.
Sharing Files and Folders on a Network
There are several ways to share files and folders across a network in Windows 8.1. First, I want to discuss why you 
might want to share files and folders, and in what environments you should do it.
In the home environment, by far the simplest way to share files and folders is in a HomeGroup, as I have detailed 
already. HomeGroup gives you easy ways to share devices such as printers, which means you save money from not 
having to buy expensive new Wi-Fi printers.
You may have set up a HomeGroup and decided to share your pictures, music, and video, but not your 
documents. You may decide to keep your documents private, but want to share a folder or two’s worth of documents 
with another person in the family.
HomeGroup can sometimes have connection difficulties, however, and you may want to share only a particular 
folder with another person or persons. Let’s say, for example, that you are collaborating with another individual in a 
home office or at work, and you want to be able to share the resources and workflow documents.
In a Windows Server environment, you have all this managed by System Center Configuration Manager, 
SharePoint, or a similar or alternative service such as Microsoft Office 365; but many small businesses can’t afford 
their own server system and don’t have an Office 365 cloud-services subscription. This is where the built-in sharing in 
Windows 8.1 is very useful.
Again, in an office environment, you may want to set up a computer as a file store. I’ve done this myself, placing 
project documents and resources—in my case, teaching resources, lesson plans, schemes of work, and contractual 
paperwork—on a single machine (with a backup kept on another). I provided network access to the main PC with a 
desktop shortcut to the shared files to make it easy for everyone to access them.
Sharing with Individuals
Let’s say several people use the same computer in your home, and you want to be able to share files such as 
household documents, bills, legal documents, and perhaps homework assignments. File Explorer and Microsoft have 
made this type of sharing simpler than ever.
In File Explorer, navigate to and highlight the folder you want to share. Then, in the Ribbon, click the Share tab; 
you see a section called Share With. Here, you highlight to share file(s) and/or folder(s) and click the name of the 
person(s) with whom you want to share. Windows 8.1 automatically and silently sets the sharing permissions.
If you want to choose a specific user, perhaps because he doesn’t appear on the list, or if you want to choose the 
privileges for users, select Specific People to display a full list of the users on your computer (see Figure 4-23).

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
117
This dialog comes in handy when you want to choose specific privileges for a user, such a Read Only, so that files 
can be accessed but not modified—and, crucially, not deleted!
Caution
 
■
 Be careful giving others access to files and folders that you do not want changed or deleted.
For most sharing scenarios within a home with one PC, this is all you need; but many homes now have multiple 
computers to share across. In a business environment, it is rare for several people to use the same PC, except in 
instances of small businesses in which people need only occasional access to a computer.
Sharing with Groups of People
If you have a multicomputer setup and don’t want the risk that comes with sharing absolutely everything in your 
Documents folder, you will want finer control over sharing. Windows 8.1 offers finer control in an easy-to-manage way.
This is managed by right-clicking a folder and selecting its properties. A Sharing tab contains all the controls  
(see Figure 4-24). There are only three, the first of which takes you to the settings dialog similar to the one I talked 
about in the last section.
Figure 4-23. Sharing with individuals in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
118
Click the Advanced Sharing button to get access to the settings for sharing a folder across a network. There is 
a simple check box to turn sharing on and off, making it simple to rescind sharing at a later stage, perhaps when a 
project has completed and you want to archive the folder. You can also give the shared folder a custom name. By 
default, sharing gives others permission to read files within the folder, but nothing else. This means that although 
others can access the files in a folder and read them, if they modify a file, they can’t save it back to that folder. They 
also can’t create or copy new files into the folder.
To change these settings, click the Permissions button. You are offered a variety of permissions options for 
separate user lists:
•฀
Full Control enables you to create new files, and copy files to and delete files from a folder. 
This is something you should be aware of when setting full control on any shared folder.
•฀
Change allows people to make changes to files that already exist in the document; for 
example, opening, working on, and saving the updated copy of the file in the folder.
•฀
Read Only grants permission to only open and read the contents of a folder.
Note
 
■
 If you want to share folders from a computer running Windows 7 or Windows Vista with a Windows 8.1  
computer, the sharing setup works the same way as described here.
Sharing with Non-Windows Computers
Setting the advanced sharing properties for folders is also useful if you want to share with non-Windows computers, 
such as Apple computers or PCs running GNU/Linux, for example if one person in your household has an Apple 
iMac computer. These network shares are accessible, although additional configuration may be required on the other 
computer to deal with minor incompatibilities that can arise from time to time.
Figure 4-24. Setting advanced file and folder sharing in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
119
Caution
 
■
 Be cautious about sharing files with a computer running Windows XP unless you are certain that the  
security on that computer is properly maintained. Any files hosted on an XP machine are far more vulnerable to malware 
than those in Windows Vista, Windows 7, and Windows 8.
Sharing Files with Windows 8.1 and RT Tablets, Ultrabooks,  
and Laptops 
ou should never consider any mobile computer as being completely secure because they are so prone to opportunist 
theft or sudden loss. Although some laptops (and perhaps even a few tablets such as Microsoft Surface and Surface RT 
and ultrabooks) come with Trusted Platform Module (TPM) security chips onboard to support full-disk encryption 
via BitLocker, most do not. These chips store encryption and keys for your hard disks in their firmware, and as such 
are very secure. I talk more about TPM chips and encrypting your files and computer in Chapter 12.
If you are carrying volumes of data around, it probably includes personal and sensitive information; and the 
simple fact remains that tablets, ultrabooks, and laptops are highly desirable items for thieves.
The next consideration is what you will actually be able to do with those files on these portable devices. Do you 
want Word, Excel, and PowerPoint documents? Do you want your entire photo or music library when you’ll likely only 
ever access a small portion of it when you’re on the move? One advantage is that Windows 8.1 is capable of synching 
mobile devices with your SkyDrive account, and keeping a local copy of files once you’ve accessed them once. I will 
show you how to use this effectively in Chapter 8.
I believe it is folly to assume that any portable device is completely secure, even when it is encrypted properly 
with a TPM chip and a technology such as BitLocker. There are just too many variables associated with carrying 
around your entire libraries of documents, photos, and more to justify carrying it around when in unfamiliar places.
The final consideration is whether the computer is properly password protected. You may have a local account 
on your tablet (or other device) that doesn’t require a password, which means that anyone picking up your device has 
complete access to all your files.
Alternatively, you may have a Microsoft account that you use to log on to your device. This could be a long, 
super-secure password containing a mixture of uppercase and lowercase letters, numbers, and symbols at least 10 
characters long. But there’s a temptation to create a PIN or picture password for Windows 8.1 access because you 
won’t want to have to enter such a long password every time you start your device.
A PIN code instantly reduces a secure multicharacter password to a simple, four-digit numeric code, which isn’t 
anywhere near as secure; and although a picture password might be more secure if presented with a photo of three 
or more people, the temptation would be to poke the first three people on the nose or draw circles around their faces. 
Is this what you would do? Is this what you might consider for a picture password? Although web enthusiasts and IT 
pros are generally more security aware than consumers are, a great many people think that a “plonk, plonk, plonk” 
approach to picture passwords in a pattern that’s a bit fun would also be secure. Believe me, it isn’t any more secure 
than having a password that’s the name of your dog.
Windows 8.1 and SkyDrive File Backup
Microsoft’s cloud backup and sync service, SkyDrive, comes built into Windows 8.1, and the implementation can 
really help you gain access to your files and documents when you’re using devices with small amounts of storage, 
such as tablets and ultrabooks.
It works by downloading pointers and thumbnail images for all the files you have stored in SkyDrive already and 
storing them on your PC’s hard disk. These files consume almost no space, so even if you have 100 GB of files stored in 
SkyDrive, you can store the pointers on your PC.

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
120
These files appear in the SkyDrive link in File Explorer and are accessible when you click SkyDrive storage from 
the SkyDrive app, see Figure 4-25.
Figure 4-25. You can access SkyDrive apps in File Explorer or from within apps
Tip
 
■
 Some apps that allow you to access the files on your PC also provide access to SkyDrive.
When you open a file in SkyDrive, it is quickly and silently downloaded from the cloud and stored on your PC 
as long as you have an active Internet connection. The file is then kept on your PC so that any changes you make are 
synced back to the cloud. This is a great way to avoid filling your valuable storage on low-storage PCs with files you 
won’t open on it.
You can turn on SkyDrive file save (and sync) in PC Settings by opening SkyDrive and then Files. Here you can 
turn on the switch for Save documents to SkyDrive by default. This activates the full sync feature with SkyDrive, and 
from this point on any file you create on or save to your PC will be auto-synced to the cloud as well, creating a secure 
file backup.

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
121
For the more technical of you, Windows 8.1 SkyDrive sync works by switching the default file save location on 
your PC from the C:\Users\[Username]\ folders to the C:\Users\[Username]\SkyDrive folders, which is where it 
downloads its pointer files. There is no facility to move this file location from within PC Settings or the Control Panel, 
so it won’t let you store the files you want to back up to the cloud anywhere else, such as on a different partition or 
hard disk. However, there is a workaround, and I will show you how to hack SkyDrive to allow for the moving of this 
folder in Chapter 13.
If you take photographs using your Windows 8.1 PC, there is also an option in the SkyDrive ➤ Files section 
of PC Settings that allows you to switch on or off automatic uploading of those photos to SkyDrive. This works 
independently of the full file sync and includes three different options for the quality you want for uploading  
the photos.
Downloading SkyDrive Files to Your PC
You can force SkyDrive in Windows 8.1 to download and sync files directly to your PC, useful if you have a good 
sized hard disk or if there are files you want to carry with you and have access to even when you won’t have an active 
Internet connection. You can do this in File Explorer by opening the SkyDrive folder in the left pane of the window 
and then right-clicking the file(s) or folder(s) you want to keep offline. You can also change this setting back so that 
files and folders are kept only online (in the cloud); see Figure 4-27.
Figure 4-26. Turning on SkyDrive file save

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
122
Using Microsoft SkyDrive to Share Files
Sometimes you might want to share a file that you have stored in SkyDrive with other people. You can do this at the 
SkyDrive.com web site. Right-click the file(s) or folder(s) you want to share with other people and click the Sharing 
link at the top of the screen. A dialog then appears, asking who you want to share the files with and what permissions 
you will give them (see Figure 4-28).
Figure 4-27. You can tell Windows 8.1 to download files or whole folders from SkyDrive

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
123
Caution
 
■
 You can also right-click a file in File Explorer and select Share with followed by SkyDrive to open a SkyDrive 
browser window.
Be careful what permissions you grant people when sharing your files. You might, for example, not want to give them 
permission to delete the file(s) because accidents can very easily happen.
Sharing Content Within Apps
One of the best new features in Windows 8.1 is the capability to share content directly from one app to another. This is 
done without the apps having to know how it is done and without the developers having to add any code into the app 
other than support for the sharing service because the sharing mechanisms are part of Windows 8.1.
How this will actually be used over time remains to be seen as industrious app developers will no doubt 
constantly find new and innovative ways to use the feature. At its most basic, however, it is a way to share photos vie 
e-mail or with photo-sharing services such as Flickr, Facebook, and PhotoBucket.
Figure 4-28. Sharing files from SkyDrive

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
124
You can also highlight text, perhaps on a web page, and share it between apps; you can share any type of content, 
really. This is where it will be fascinating to see how app developers use this feature. There’s not really been anything 
quite like it in an operating system before, so anticipating how it will be used over time is impossible to guess right now.
You can share in Windows 8.1 by highlighting the item or items you want to share, opening the charms, and 
clicking Share or just opening the Share charm to share a whole page or article. All compatible apps for that type of 
content appear (see Figure 4-29). Click the app you want to share the content with, and the content is transferred to 
the other app for sharing without kicking you out of the app you are currently using.
Figure 4-29. Sharing via Windows 8.1
Of course, this sharing feature comes with risks. The easier it is to share content with apps, web sites, and the like, 
the easier it becomes to accidentally put content where you didn’t intend for it to go, or for it to go on web sites where 
your privacy settings mean that it is generally accessible to the whole world. I always recommend, strongly in fact, that 
you make sure your privacy settings on web sites are set to automatically block all content from those you have not 
deliberately invited to view it.

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
125
Sharing Optical Drives
One of the biggest challenges facing users of Windows tablets and ultrabooks is the lack of an optical drive. Sure, you 
can install software (and even Windows 8.1) from a USB flash drive or the Internet, and Windows 8.1 will allow you to 
mount ISO files; but there will be occasions when you’ll need an optical drive.
One solution is to buy a USB optical drive, but this isn’t always a practical solution. Indeed, I bought one the 
other year for my Windows tablet and then promptly left it at a Microsoft research event in Cambridge, where it isn’t 
doing me much good.
A better solution is to share the optical drive on another computer. To do this in both Windows 8.1 and Windows 7 
(because the instructions are the same), do the following:
 
1. 
On the host computer (the one with the optical drive), open File Explorer (Windows 
Explorer in Windows 7) and click Computer in the left pane.
 
2. 
Right-click the optical drive you want to share. From the options, click Share With ➤ 
Advanced Sharing (see Figure 4-30).
 
3. 
In the dialog, click the Advanced Sharing button (see Figure 4-31). 
Figure 4-30. Select an optical drive to share

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
126
 
4. 
Check the Share This Folder box and then give the share an appropriate name, such as 
DVD Share (see Figure 4-32).
Figure 4-31. Select the Advanced Sharing settings

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
127
Figure 4-32. Share the drive and give it a name
 
5. 
Click OK. You are shown the full network name of the share, in this case  
\\HYPER-VDVD-Share (see Figure 4-33). You also see a small share icon in the bottom left  
of the drive’s icon in File Explorer to indicate it has been shared.

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
128
Note
 
■
 For the drive to be visible on other computers, you need to have File and Printer Sharing turned on in the  
Advanced Sharing Settings of the Network and Sharing Center. Users of other computers may also need the username 
and password of the host computer to gain access to the shared drive.
This optical drive is now accessible to people on other computers when they are attached to the same network 
and the computer containing the optical drive is switched on; this includes those using ultrabooks and tablets.
Streaming Music and Video to Devices and Computers
At the beginning of the chapter, I showed you how to set up a HomeGroup to share your documents, music, pictures, 
and videos with other Windows 8.1 and Windows 7 computers. Among the HomeGroup settings was one to “Allow 
devices such as TVs and games consoles to play my shared content.”
Activating this feature turns your computer, when it is switched on anyway, into a Universal Plug and Play (UPnP) 
server. Many devices support this feature, including Internet radios, MP3-playing hi-fi systems, external network-attached 
storage (NAS) and USB hard disks, game consoles, and even devices you wouldn’t normally expect to work happily 
with Windows, such as smart TVs.
Figure 4-33. The full share name of the drive

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
129
Not only can Windows 8.1 (and previous versions of Windows) share content in this way, it can also stream 
content from other UPnP devices that are connected to your home network. UPnP devices are found in the Network 
section of File Explorer (see Figure 4-34).
Note
 
■
 Microsoft does not include DVD and Blu-Ray playback support as standard in Windows 8.1. Instead, it has 
made it a chargeable extra. You can use Add Features to Windows in the Control Panel to purchase and upgrade to  
Windows 8.1 Pro with Media Center. Doing this adds these features, but only within Windows Media Center, not through 
the Video app or Windows Media Player.
Here you can check whether Windows 8.1 is sharing your content properly and also, I think somewhat crucially, 
to check that nothing is being shared by accident.
Windows 8.1 shares only media files such as pictures, music, and video; you can be sure that your documents will 
not be shared with media devices. This comes in particularly handy if you have downloaded movies or TV shows onto 
your computer and you want to watch them on your TV, perhaps through your Xbox 360.
Figure 4-34. Displaying network media devices in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
130
Changing the Advanced Sharing Settings in Windows 8.1
Sometimes you may have trouble with network sharing in Windows, which could be caused by something switched 
off in the Advanced Sharing Settings page. Alternatively, you may want to deliberately switch something off if you no 
longer want a certain type of sharing to take place from a specific computer.
You can access the Advanced Sharing Settings page from the Network and Sharing Center, itself accessible from 
either the Ribbon in the Network view of File Explorer, or by right-clicking the Network icon on the desktop taskbar.
Once in the Network and Sharing Center, there is a link to Change Advanced Sharing Settings in the left pane.
There are a great many options in the Advanced Sharing Settings page (see Figure 4-35), and some are very 
important and significant.
Figure 4-35. Changing Advanced Sharing Settings in Windows 8.1
The network settings are separated into three groups: Private, Guest or Public, and All Networks. The sharing 
settings for Public networks are understandably different from those for Private networks. The following describes the 
main settings:
•฀
Network Discovery is the setting to go to when your computer can’t be found on a network or 
you can’t see any other computers and devices. There is a switch here to automatically turn on 
setup for network connected devices. You may not want this on, however, if you are commonly 
in environments in which networked devices such as storage might be prone to malware 
infection and distribution.
•฀
File and Printer Sharing is the main switch for sharing all your files, documents, pictures, music, 
and videos on networks. Printer sharing affects only printers physically attached to the computer.

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
131
•฀
HomeGroup Connections is a useful setting if you want to choose between Windows 
automatically managing user access from computers in HomeGroup and finer control with 
specific user accounts and passwords required.
•฀
Public Folder Sharing isn’t what you might first believe. It’s not about sharing your files and 
folders with the public. Instead, it is about the public folders that Windows has always set up 
in user accounts to aid the sharing of files. These folders are not commonly used, however.
•฀
Media Streaming controls the options for live broadcasting of pictures, audio, and video over 
a network to UPnP devices. Uncheck this if you do not want your music, videos, and pictures 
to show up on your network as shared media.
•฀
File Sharing Connections is the setting for controlling the amount of encryption used on the 
network when sharing files. This should not ever be changed from the default unless you are 
requested to do so by a company IT administrator because making changes can potentially 
compromise your PC’s security.
•฀
Password Protected File Sharing is something that you shouldn’t normally change; however, 
if you do not have a password on the computer from which you use to share files, you will find 
that you can’t access those files from another computer unless you turn this setting off.
Connecting to Network Shared Storage
These days, most networked shared storage automatically appears in the Network section of File Explorer. This is the 
case whether you’re on a home or a work network, and can include NAS boxes, file servers (though you may need to 
log in to access these), and USB hard disks plugged into compatible routers.
In Windows 7, you can view a full network map through the Network and Sharing Center to locate devices. You 
can no longer do this in Windows 8.1, but the operating system is much better at connecting to network resources 
than its predecessors.
Unfortunately, with the removal of the network map, the option to automatically log in to the network storage 
administration interface is also gone. In Windows 8.1, if you want to change a configuration option, you have to know 
the IP address of the device, which you can get through your router or through the Devices and Printers page.
Note
 
■
 The default IP address of a router is normally 192.168.0.1 or 192.168.1.1. You can type this into your web 
browser address bar to gain access.
Why You Might Not See Network Storage on Your Computer
Sometimes network resources fail to appear. This is usually a problem caused by your router. A typical home router 
provided by your ISP can be unreliable at simultaneously managing multiple devices on the network.
In my own home, for example, I regularly have a desktop PC, a laptop (perhaps even a second laptop),  
an Xbox 360, a Windows phone, and an NAS drive on at the same time—so six devices plus the router. I regularly find 
that Windows starts with a message that it has detected an IP address conflict. This is where the router has incorrectly 
assigned the IP addresses of the computers and devices on the network, and one device thinks it has a different IP 
address from the one the router has assigned it.
In practice, however, Windows is very good at sorting out these types of problems on its own. It is very rare that 
you are completely unable to see a networked device.

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
132
You can manually set the IP addresses for computers and devices on your router, but the facility to manually set 
IP addresses in Windows has been removed from previous versions. If a device still fails to appear, then restarting that 
device (and the router) normally rectifies the problem.
Another thing that can prevent your computer from seeing network storage is a firewall that has settings that are 
too aggressive. I have found that some security suites have this problem with the default configuration. The solution 
depends on your security suite and the way its configuration options work. It is always worth checking if you experience 
problems. You can best check by temporarily switching the firewall off. After you are successfully connected to your 
network storage, you can turn the firewall back on again without interrupting the connection in the future.
Viewing the Status of Network Drives
When you use the Network page in File Explorer, it’s simple to view and access other hard disks and attached storage 
on your network. The ability to see the amount of remaining storage is more difficult. There’s no point in performing  
a backup to a network drive; for example, if you don’t know that you first need to clear some space.
You can do this by connecting your computer to a folder on the drive; any folder will do, but it’s usually a good 
idea to create a root folder on the disk into which you put everything else. This way, when you open the shared drive, 
you can to see and work with all its contents.
To do this, follow these instructions:
 
1. 
Open File Explorer and click Network in the left pane.
 
2. 
Double-click the network drive you want to attach to your computer.
 
3. 
Right-click a folder within that drive. From the options, click Map network drive  
(see Figure 4-36).
Figure 4-36. Connecting a network drive

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
133
 
4. 
In the dialog, choose any free drive. If you want Windows to automatically connect to this 
drive every time you start your computer, make sure that Reconnect at Logon is checked. 
If the mapped drive is on another computer, you may need to log in to it with different 
credentials; they will be the username and password for the host PC (see Figure 4-37).
 
5. 
Click Finish when you are done.
The network drive now appears in File Explorer in the Network Location section of the Computer window.  
It displays the total size of the drive along with the amount of available free space (see Figure 4-38). As you can see 
from this screen shot, it’s good that I checked.
Figure 4-37. Map Network Drive options

CHAPTER 4 ■ SHARING WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS
134
Tip
 
■
 Sometimes your network drives don’t show up in File Explorer, perhaps because they’re on a subnetwork such 
as a powerline system in your home or office. You can manually connect to them in the Address bar by typing \\ followed 
by the name of the network drive; for example, \\N3 to connect to the drive called N3.
Summary
There are more ways to share documents, media, and network resources in Windows 8.1 than ever before offered in 
a Windows operating system. The new sharing integration with apps is something that I am personally excited to see 
developers use to push sharing in new directions.
Of course, there are security considerations. You should always make sure that you have up-to-date antivirus 
protection.
The Devices and Printers page is far more powerful than it first appears to be. The networking settings for sharing 
are also very powerful. When it comes to sharing media files and printer access, Windows 8.1 is a great operating 
system to use, especially with its helpful wizards—something Microsoft has always been good at—walking you 
through each step.
Despite the removal of a couple of Windows 7 features that I personally found very useful, it is still very possible 
to robustly work with network resources.
Figure 4-38. Viewing a mapped drive in File Explorer

135
CHAPTER 5
Organizing and Searching Your 
Computer
Our computing devices—be they desktop PCs, laptops, tablets, smartphones, or new ultrabooks—are all about 
content. We either make it or consume it, but we all have ever-growing quantities of it. You may store it on a network 
share, in the cloud, on an external hard disk, or on the computer’s hard disk or solid-state drive (SSD)—but there will 
probably be a lot of it wherever it is stored.
Of this content, you’ll likely have an ever-ballooning collection of digital photographs, a big music Library, and 
possibly a growing video collection. These files take a lot of space to store and can make finding exactly what you’re 
looking for problematic, especially with photos.
At the other end of the file-size scale are all your Microsoft Word, Excel, PDF, and other file types, which you have 
for personal, household, work, and school purposes. Although they may not take up large amounts of space, these 
files can be equally difficult to find and organize.
Traditionally, the way to organize files and documents was to use a folder structure. I remember using software 
such as XTree on the first IBM PCs to perform this task (see Figure 5-1).
Figure 5-1. XTree on the original IBM PC

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
136
Folders aren’t always a suitable way to organize our files and documents because some have crossovers between 
categories; and as the volume of files, music, pictures, and videos we collect expands, even the most organized folder 
structure can become unwieldy and difficult to navigate.
For many years now, Windows has tried to help us organize our files through user folders, My Documents, and so 
forth. They still exist, but there are much more powerful ways to help you organize. In this chapter, I’ll show you how 
to optimize file organization and access.
Using File Explorer
Before moving into newer features, the place to start a discussion about organizing your files is File Explorer, 
sometimes referred to in Windows 8.1 as This PC. In Windows 8, it has been significantly overhauled with the 
inclusion of the Ribbon interface, which was first introduced in Microsoft Office 2007.
Note
 
■
 The Ribbon interface is minimized by default in Windows 8.1, appearing only when you click a tab header. You 
can show or hide the Ribbon at all times in File Explorer by clicking the small arrow on the right of the Ribbon headers 
(see Figure 5-2).
File Explorer in Windows 8.1 is split into several different sections, and some can be used with great effect to aid 
productivity or save time when searching for and working with files. At the very top left of the File Explorer, there is 
a File Explorer button that can be clicked to perform various actions on the program, including minimizing it and 
closing it.
Tip
 
■
 Clicking a program button in the top left of its window first displays a menu of window controls; with a second 
click, the program closes.
Quick Access Toolbar
The Quick Access Toolbar remains next to the program button at the top of the window (see Figure 5-3). This area 
allows you to single-click access to commonly used commands. It is customizable too, with the Down arrow to its 
right bringing up a list of additional buttons that you can add to the toolbar, including Undo, Delete, and Rename. 
Figure 5-2. File Explorer in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
137
You can add and remove items from the Quick Access Toolbar by selecting and deselecting them in the toolbar 
options menu.
The Address Bar
Just below the Ribbon, which I will talk about in depth shortly, is the address bar, sometimes known as the 
breadcrumb bar. On the left of it are buttons to move backward and forward in the current view. These buttons 
remember where you have been and allow you to return to locations, even if they are out of the current folder tree  
(see Figure 5-4). 
Next to these buttons is an up arrow that takes you one level up in the current folder hierarchy. To the right of 
the address bar is a search box that allows you to search for any type of file or text within a file. By default, the search 
prioritizes the contents of the current folder. For example, if you are looking at pictures, those pictures are prioritized 
in your search results over other types of documents.
The address bar is so called because it offers you ways back in the current folder tree that provide easy access to 
other parts of that tree (see Figure 5-5). Each of the two folder names has a small black arrow separating them.
Figure 5-3. The Quick Access Toolbar in File Explorer
Figure 5-4. The address bar in File Explorer

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
138
Tip
 
■
 The address bar displays a list of recent places on your PC and your network that you have visited when you 
start using it. You can clear this history from the File tab on the Ribbon by clicking Delete History and then clicking 
 Address bar History. Similiarly, deleting the Recent Places List clears the recent places history for the Recent Places link 
in the Favorites bar in the Navigation Pane (see Figure 5-5).
If you click one of the arrows between folders, you are given quick links to jump to any other folder in that part of 
the tree. This can make it extremely quick and easy to navigate to different parts of your hard disk(s) and find what it is 
you are looking for.
Tip
 
■
 To find out the exact current folder location or to manually type a folder address into the address bar, click the 
button located on the far left of the address bar. The exact current folder address will appear, highlighted, so you can  
immediately start typing a new folder address; you can also press Ctrl+C to easily copy it while its highlighted.
The Navigation Pane
To the left of the window is the Navigation pane, which is split into different categories. In the first, Favorites, you can 
drag and drop folders (not files) that you want quick one-click access to, perhaps because you use them often. 
Tip
 
■
 You can pin Favorite Links, folders, and files to the Start screen by right-clicking them and selecting Pin to Start.
Figure 5-5. Using the address bar in File Explorer

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
139
Beneath the Favorite Links in the Navigation Pane are quick, expandable groups for the following:
•฀
SkyDrive displays if you log in to your Windows 8.1 PC using a Microsoft account. It displays 
all the files and folders you have stored on SkyDrive and gives you quick access to them. If you 
are syncing your PC’s files with SkyDrive, this duplicates the user folders in This PC.
•฀
HomeGroup, which I discuss in detail in Chapter 4, provides access to documents, pictures, 
music, and video that is shared on your home network using the HomeGroup feature.
•฀
This PC, formerly known as Computer in File Explorer, displays all the hard disks and attached 
storage on your computer in addition to your user folders for your Desktop, Documents, 
Downloads, Music, Pictures, and Videos.
•฀
Network displays all available attached network locations, networked computers, and 
network storage.
Customizing the Navigation Pane
You can customize the Navigation Pane by clicking the Navigation Pane button on the View tab in the Ribbon,  
see Figure 5-6. The options available include
Turning the 
•฀
Navigation Pane off altogether
Displaying a folder list underneath the clicked item in the Navigation Pane that automatically 
•฀
Expand[s] to [the currently] open folder
•฀
Show[ing] all [the] folders on your PC in a traditional tree view (yes, this is where you can find it!)
•฀
Show [the] Libraries that are hidden by default in Windows 8.1 but still exist. Libraries, which 
I will show you how to use later in this chapte,r can be extremely useful.
•฀
Show [the] Favorite links section at the top of the Navigation Pane
Status Bar and Folder Options
Running along the bottom of File Explorer is the Status bar. It gives basic information about the current folder of the 
currently selected items, such as the number of files. Unlike with Windows 7, this Status bar doesn’t contain details 
about files; they have been moved to a Details pane, which I will talk about shortly. 
Figure 5-6. You can customize the Navigation Pane in File Explorer

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
140
You can turn the Status bar off in the Folder Options for File Explorer. It can be accessed by clicking the Options 
button under the View tab on the Ribbon and then clicking Change folder and search options. In the options that 
appear, you find the Folder Options under the View tab (see Figure 5-7).
In this list, you find a check box for Show status bar. Other controls are also very useful and include being able to 
uncheck the option to Show Drive letters for your hard disks; showing compressed NTFS drives in color; or unhiding 
protected operating system files, which can prove useful if you need to troubleshoot and repair a problem with Windows.
Another useful feature in the Folder Options is the Apply to Folders button that you can use to make all the  
folders on your PC (for general and mixed document types) look the same as the current folder. I will show you how  
to customize the views in File Explorer later in this chapter.
Tip
 
■
 At the far right of the Status bar are buttons to quickly access two of the most common views in File Explorer: the 
Details view and the Thumbnail view. Clicking these buttons immediately changes the File Explorer view of the current folder.
Figure 5-7. The Folder Options for File Explorer

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
141
Main Explorer View
In the main File Explorer pane, you see all your files and folders, which can be arranged in a great many ways. You can 
also select files in the main view in several ways, including the following:
•฀
Right-click: You can right-click a file or folder with your mouse to bring up a context menu of 
the actions you can perform on it.
•฀
Tap and hold: You can tap and hold a folder or file to bring up the actions context menu.
•฀
Hover the mouse: You can hover your mouse over a file or folder to bring up a check box to 
select the item. You can use this method to select multiple items if you want.
Tip
 
■
 To select multiple files and/or folders with your mouse and keyboard, you can use one of these options. To select 
everything between two items, click the first item, hold down the Shift key, and then click the item at the end of the list. 
To select multiple, randomly placed items, hold the Ctrl key while clicking the items you want to select.
Hiding Picture File Names
One very useful feature that has not made it into the Ribbon is the ability to hide the file names of pictures in File 
Explorer. If you are looking at holiday photos or similar, why do you need to look at reams of DSCxxx file names 
anyway?
You can hide the file names for pictures by right-clicking in any blank space; then in the View menu,  
select Hide file names (see Figure 5-8).
Figure 5-8. Hiding file names in picture views

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
142
File Explorer Ribbon
I have left the Ribbon until last because I want to spend a little more time on it and talk about each tab.
By default, the Ribbon in File Explorer is hidden, and you display it by clicking one of the tabs at the top of the 
window: File, Home, Share, and View. Other tabs can appear, however, such as Computer, Library, or Picture. These 
extra tabs contain functions specific to those file types. When the Ribbon is open, a pin icon appears on the right of 
the window. You can click this to lock the Ribbon so that it is always displayed. 
I won’t discuss every Ribbon function in depth here, but I do want to concentrate on the Ribbon functions that  
I think are most useful, most interesting, or most likely to give you a valuable productivity boost.
You may find that the Ribbon is hidden in File Explorer and you can see only the tab names. If you click one of 
these, the Ribbon appears temporarily, but you can show and hide the Ribbon by clicking the small up/down arrow 
(this changes depending on whether the Ribbon is currently displayed or hidden) that appears next to the Help button 
on the far right of the tab name on the right of the window.
File Tab
The main file tab, which is blue—a different color from the other tabs—is where you find options such as Open or 
Open in a New Window. As well as having options for deleting your File Explorer history a list of your frequently 
accessed folders appear here. You can click the pin icon to the right of them to pin any to this Frequent Places list  
(see Figure 5-9).
Computer Tab
The Computer tab is accessible from the This PC or network main drive (see Figure 5-10). The Computer tab provides 
context-sensitive options to perform actions such as adding a network location to File Explorer. You also get easy 
access to the Windows 8.1 Control Panel and the Programs and Features panel, in which you can uninstall desktop 
programs.
Figure 5-9. You can perform general File Explorer options from the File tab

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
143
Home Tab
The Home tab (see Figure 5-11) is where you find all the common options associated with files and folders in 
Windows. These options include Cut, Copy, Paste, Move, and Delete. You can also create new folders and files in the 
New section of the Ribbon. Of particular interest are the History button and the Selection buttons.
Tip
 
■
 You can perform cut, copy, and paste actions in Windows using the Ctrl+X (Cut), Ctrl+C (Copy), and Ctrl+V (Paste) 
hot keys.
Windows 8.1 includes a better file versioning system than what was included in Windows 7. I discuss how to use 
the feature in depth in Chapter 12, but if you have a single file selected, the History button brings up the versioning for 
that file, including any previous versions of the file that Windows 8.1 has backed up.
Also, the Open section has a Properties button that you can click to quickly bring up the Properties dialog for 
any file, folder, or a selection of files and/or folders. In the Properties dialog for files, you can change or update 
information about a file, including artist and track information for music, as well as tags and ratings.
In the Selection section, very handy buttons for Select all, Select None, and Invert Selection have been included. 
It can be very helpful when you want to work with some files, perhaps to change their properties, and then need to 
perform another action on all the other files in the same folder.
Note that if you select a location such as a DVD or non-hard-disk location, the options on the Home tab change 
to better reflect the actions you can perform with that device.
Share Tab
The Share tab (see Figure 5-12) contains the tools and utilities you need to share and back up your files and folders. 
These options include syncing and backing up to Microsoft’s SkyDrive service, sending files via e-mail, creating a 
zipped archive file, burning files to disc (CD/DVD/Blu-ray), and printing or faxing files.
Figure 5-10. Computer tab
Figure 5-11. The Home tab in File Explorer

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
144
If you are sharing files on your computer or across a network, or would like to, you can set who you want to share 
files with by using this tab.
View Tab and Customizing File Explorer
In the View tab (see Figure 5-13), you can customize File Explorer to look and work the way you like.
There are different panes that can be switched on and off in File Explorer. The Navigation Pane has a button to 
switch it off or to customize it. There is no way to turn on the traditional folder view, not that you were necessarily 
used to it in earlier versions of Windows anyway, but turning on Show All Folders in the Navigation Pane displays  
the same result in the This PC section.
The Preview and Details panes are slightly different, though they can be confused with one another. Both these 
panes appear on the right side of the Explorer window and cannot be displayed simultaneously. If you turn on the 
Preview pane, a live image of the file appears, which you can review (this will work for the most common file types, 
but won’t work for custom or less common files). This includes being able to scroll through an entire Word, Excel,  
or Acrobat document.
Tip
 
■
 Grouping, which is a great way to clearly organize your files and folders in File Explorer, can be activated for  
a folder by clicking the [■฀] button in the Current View section. It seperates the content of a folder by a category that you 
specify, such as the size or file type. When you group items in File Explorer, each group is separated by a horizontal line. 
You can click this line to select all the items in the group or right-click the line to display an option to hide the group  
(or all the groups). This makes folders that contain many files easier to navigate.
The Details pane in File Explorer gives you detailed information about a file that you select. The information 
presented in the Details pane is editable, meaning that you don’t have to bring up the separate Properties dialog to 
edit information such as Author, Track Number, or Rating.
Figure 5-13. The View tab in File Explorer
Figure 5-12. The Share tab in File Explorer

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
145
In the Layout section of the Ribbon are some very useful tools for customizing the current view:
The 
•฀
Small, Medium, Large, and Extra Large buttons change the default thumbnail size in the 
current view.
•฀
List displays all items in view as a simple list, such as was the case in the very early versions  
of Windows.
•฀
Details is a very common view. It can also be accessed from a button on the Status bar at the 
bottom right of the window. This view displays extra information about files and folders that 
many people find useful, such as the file size and the date/time the file was created and last 
modified.
•฀
Tiles and Content present files and folders in much friendlier ways than the default view, in 
my opinion. Tiles is an upgraded thumbnail view. Content presents more details about files in 
a way similar to the Details view.
In the Current View section are tools to help you sort and group content in different ways. You may want,  
for example, to sort items by Date Modified or Created By. Grouping files and folders is an excellent way to keep 
yourself organized so that you know exactly what you have and where. Grouping files and folders by Type, for 
example, groups all the folders together, all the Word documents together, all the PNG images together, and so on.
Tip
 
■
 At the bottom of the Sort By and Group By drop-down menus is a Choose Columns option. If you select it, many 
more sort and group options appear, including album artist or rating for music or EXIF data for digital photographs.
In the Show/Hide group are two functions previously hidden to many Windows users: the ability to show and 
hide file extensions. These are hidden by default for all known file types. The second option is to show and hide 
hidden files. This option is extremely useful if you need to drill down into the Windows system folder or your User 
folder to find specific information or a specific hidden file.
Tip
 
■
 In the Ribbon, you can set all folders to display in the same way as the current folder by clicking  
Options ➤ Folder and Search Options ➤ View ➤ Apply to Folders.
Copying and Moving Files in File Explorer
The feedback you get when copying and moving files in Windows 8.1 has significantly improved. There is more 
feedback and more control when duplicate copies of files are found. The copied file dialog is shown in Figure 5-14. 

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
146
One of the most significant improvements to copy and move file operations is that all operations now appear in 
the same window. This means that if you have several copy or move operations running simultaneously, you now only 
have one window on your screen that contains them all.
The other significant improvement is the addition of a Pause button to the dialog. You can now pause, copy, 
and move operations if you need to do something else or put your computer to sleep at the end of the day. When you 
return to Windows, you can continue with the operation by unpausing it.
When you click More Details on a copy or move file dialog, you are shown a graph of the copy or move operation. 
This graph gives you live feedback on the current speed of the copy, the number of megabits per second being copied, 
and a filled graph showing how the speed of the copy has changed. This is useful for diagnosing problems with copy 
or move operations when something else is happening in the background.
The Replace dialogs have also been upgraded in Windows 8.1 (see Figure 5-15), as you will notice when you copy 
or move files into a folder or onto a drive where another copy already exists.
Figure 5-14. The improved copy/move file dialog in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
147
The Replace or Skip Files dialog is now much simpler with choices to replace or skip all the files, or to choose 
which ones you want to keep in the destination folder.
If you want to choose which files you want to keep or overwrite, this dialog has improved as well. You still have  
a check box to select everything to keep or replace, but each individual file is more easily identifiable.
Tip
 
■
 To keep all the source and destination files in a copy or move operation, check the Files From and Files Already  
In check boxes at the top of both the left and the right columns (see Figure 5-16).
Figure 5-15. The improved Replace or Skip Files dialog

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
148
Pictures have a thumbnail image, but other file types just display the associated program’s icon. This new dialog 
makes it much easier to decide which files to keep and which to replace than with Windows 7, in which you were 
given only text information such as the date and time stamps.
Managing Files and Folders from Apps
Managing files and folders in Windows 8.1 apps is a much simpler affair, and you can get easy access to files across 
your network or stored in SkyDrive (see Figure 5-17). However, the new interface can make it difficult to manage large 
volumes of files or to perform complex actions because the commands available in the App bar are not as extensive as 
in the desktop File Explorer.
Figure 5-16. You can easily select files to overwrite in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
149
To select any file in an app on which you want to perform an action, tap and hold it. You can also right-click it 
with a mouse. You can select multiple files, but the options available for working with those files in the App bar may 
change depending on the app in which you are currently working.
Using Libraries in Windows 8.1
The common view of Windows 7 users is that Libraries are the same as the shell user folders—those folders with  
“My” in front of their names. Libraries actually are aggregated storage for many locations. They are customizable for 
specific types of content. They’re actually very powerful with the way that content can be displayed.
By default, Libraries aren’t displayed in Windows 8.1, although you can turn them on by clicking the Navigation 
Pane button on the View tab in the Ribbon and selecting them there. They then appear in the Navigation Pane as 
in Windows 7 and 8; additionally opening File Explorer now takes you directly to your Libraries (see Figure 5-18). 
However, if you still want to see This PC as the default File Explorer view, I will show you how to do this in Chapter 13.
Figure 5-17. You can easily find files in different locations from within apps

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
150
By default, there are Libraries of documents, music, pictures, and videos; although if you install other software 
(such as the Microsoft Zune player), others (such as Podcasts) may be added.
You can create your own Libraries to view and arrange content in specific ways; for instance, you might want one 
for your work or school documents, and so on.
Creating a Library
You can add new folders to an existing Library (I show you how to do this shortly), but you can also create your own 
custom Libraries. I have one for Photos, in which where all my pictures are arranged by their tags. You might want a 
separate Library for your school, work, or household documents. You can have a Library for anything, and it’s a great 
way to organize files.
Tip
 
■
 You can add SD cards and other removable media to Libraries in Windows 8.1. This is useful if your ultrabook  
or tablet comes with a memory card shot for additional storage. To add these file locations, right-click them; from the 
context menu that appears, click Include in Library. From the list that appears, click the Library in which you want to 
include the folder.
To create a new Library, perform the following steps:
 
1. 
Open File Explorer on the desktop.
 
2. 
Click Libraries in the left pane.
 
3. 
Right-click (or tap and hold with your finger) any blank space in the main Explorer 
window (see Figure 5-19).
Figure 5-18. Accessing Libraries in File Explorer

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
151
 
4. 
From the context menu, select New and then Library. You are presented with a new empty 
Library to which you need to give a name.
 
5. 
Once the Library is created, double-click it to open it.
 
6. 
Click the Include a Folder button and choose a folder to display in the Library (see 
Figure 5-20). You can add additional folders later (I will show you how to do this shortly).
Figure 5-19. Creating a new Library
Figure 5-20. Including a folder in a Library

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
152
Changing the Way a Library Displays Files
You now see your folder listed in the Library, but it just looks like an ordinary explorer Window. It is now that the  
full flexibility of Libraries can be used because they can display content in ways that the normal Explorer folder  
view cannot.
 
1. 
To change the view, right-click (or tap and hold with your finger) in any blank space in the 
main window (see Figure 5-21).
Figure 5-21. Changing the way a Library is displayed
 
2. 
From the context menu, click Arrange By and then your preferred choice by which to 
arrange the contents of the Library (see Figure 5-22). This action can be performed only  
by a right-click, not from the Ribbon. It is different from the Ribbon’s Sort By and Group  
By views.

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
153
You see that the Library is now arranged as you want it. In Figure 5-23, I have arranged a Photo Library by tag. 
Regardless of what folder the photographs are stored in, I can view all pictures of Brighton Pier (for example) just by 
opening the tagged group. A nice benefit.
Figure 5-22. Choosing how to arrange files in a Library

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
154
These Brighton Pier photos may reside in a dozen or more different folders on my hard disk, but because they all 
have the same tag, they are all displayed together in the Library when I arrange the files by tag.
Note
 
■
 Within Libraries, you can arrange files by type, which display the files as stacked groups for Word documents, 
PDFs, and so on. Sadly, you cannot specify just a single file type to be shown in a Library, only complete folders.
Managing Libraries
When you are viewing a Library, a Manage tab appears on the Ribbon (see Figure 5-24). This Library Tools tab 
contains tools for managing the library, including which folders are included within it, what type of content the 
Library is optimized for (to aid in displaying that content correctly), and whether the Library is displayed in the 
Navigation Pane. Here you can also change the icon for the Library to one of the standard Windows icons or to a 
custom .ico file of your choosing.
Figure 5-23. Viewing photos by tag in Libraries
Figure 5-24. You can manage a Library from the Ribbon in File Explorer

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
155
The folders included by default in the standard Windows 8.1 Libraries are the default folders found in  
C:\User\[Username]. In addition to the default folders, you can include other folders and remove folders in  
a Library. To add or remove folders from a Library, click Manage Library on the Manage tab in the Ribbon.
Tip
 
■
 Although Libraries don’t allow you to add external hard disks and network locations, it can still be done through 
an easy cheat. See “Adding Network Locations to Libraries,” later in this chapter.
Clicking the Manage Library button on the Ribbon brings up the Photos Library Locations dialog with its simple 
Add and Remove buttons for Library locations. You must have at least one location for a Library, but you can specify 
as many as you want (see Figure 5-25).
Tip
 
■
 You can also add local folders on your PC and SD card storage to Libraries by right-clicking them and selecting 
Include in Library from the menu that appears.
Figure 5-25. Adding and removing folders to Libraries

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
156
Changing the Default Save Location
A question mark can be raised about where the default save locations for Documents, Music, Pictures, and Video will 
be when you add new folders to a Library. After all, when you save a file, where does it go? Into your Users folder on 
the C:\ drive? Into the Library somewhere? Into a specific folder in the Library?
In Chapter 12, I talk about how and why you should move your files away from Windows and onto a separate 
hard disk or partition to safeguard them, but one way to do it is to change the default save location for a Library.  
You can do this from the Library Tools tab on the Ribbon in File Explorer when a Library is being viewed.
On the left of the Ribbon, there is a Set Save Location button, which offers a drop-down menu of the folders 
contained within that Library. To change the default save location, simply click the relevant folder that you want  
all new files saved to (see Figure 5-26).
Adding Network Locations to Libraries
It’s fairly well known and established that you can’t add network locations to Libraries in Windows 8.1, as was the case 
with Windows 7 . . . or can you? In fact, it’s always been possible to add network locations to your Music, Pictures, and 
Videos Libraries. You do it in two ways in Windows 8.1.
The first way is to create a symbolic link between the Library and the folder on your network that contains the 
files you want to include:
 
1. 
Create a folder in your C:\Users\[Username] folder named after the folder you want  
to include.
 
2. 
Add this new folder to your Library.
 
3. 
Delete the folder from C:\Users\[Username], but do not delete it from the Library.
 
4. 
Open the Command Prompt window from the Win+X menu.
 
5. 
Type MKLINK /D C:\Users\Username\FolderName \\NetworkLocation, substituting 
the correct paths to the folders.
Figure 5-26. Setting the default save location for Libraries

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
157
This process adds the network location to the Library, but does not add it to the index, which means that the Library 
may be slow to refresh when you open it. (I will talk more about the Windows index later in this chapter.) A friendlier 
way to add a folder to a Library can be done using Windows Media Center. Note that in Windows 8.1, Windows Media 
Center is no longer a standard feature in the operating system, but is available as a chargeable add-on for Windows 8.1 
Pro and brings with it DVD and Blu-ray playback. You can purchase an upgrade by clicking Add Features to Windows 
in the Control Panel.
Open Windows Media Center to add network locations containing Pictures, Music, and Video (but not 
Documents). From the main menu, click Settings ➤ Media Libraries.
You are presented with a wizard that allows you to add or remove folders to/from the Libraries. When asked 
where the files are located, select On Another Computer (see Figure 5-27). This displays network drives and allows 
you to add these locations to the Libraries.
All available network locations, including other computers on your network (that are switched on), appear in a 
collapsible list (see Figure 5-28). You can check and uncheck media folders to add to the Library. This is a fantastically 
simple workaround to what is otherwise a missing functionality in Windows Libraries.
Figure 5-27. Using Media Center to add network locations to Libraries

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
158
Using Tags and Ratings to Organize Files
Tags and Ratings are two of the best ways to organize and categorize files. Tags are labels that help you find relevant 
documents. For example, you might have documents tagged as “work,” “school,” “household,” or “auto.” Thus, tags 
might help you locate documents related to your car quickly and easily.
If you have a lot of photos, you might label them “vacation,” “children,” or “Germany” to help you find them 
quickly for display to friends and family (this is, after all, why you took them in the first place).
You might already be familiar with tags called metadata with your music files, where the artist, album name,  
track number, track name, and more are all tags. They are labels used to help you identify the contents of a file.
You don’t need to be limited to a single tag per file, either. You can stack multiple tags together so your recent 
vacation photos in Orlando might be tagged “vacation,” “Orlando,” “Disney,” “Janell,” and “Lidia.”
Ratings are slightly different but easier to understand. Ratings in Windows 8.1 use one to five stars that indicate 
how significant the file is. In your music, you probably already use 4- and 5-star ratings to identify your favorite tracks; 
you may have been doing this for years. If you use the Like tag for music tracks in the Zune Desktop software, for 
example, it automatically adds a 5-star rating to each file you like.
You can view the tags and ratings for any file or files in File Explorer by clicking the Details pane button on the 
Ribbon under the View tab (see Figure 5-29). This opens a pane on the right side of the windows, showing all manner 
of information, which changes from file type to file type. Tags and Rating are always at the top of the list.
Figure 5-28. Viewing network drives to add to Libraries in Media Center

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
159
To add a tag or multiple tags to a file or a selection of files (remember you can press Ctrl+click to select multiple 
individual files, and click followed by Shift+click to mark a selected group), click next to Tags in the Details pane and 
type as many as you like, each one separated by a semicolon (;). When you have finished adding tags, click the Save 
button to finish.
You can add a rating or change a rating by clicking the appropriate number of stars. Click Save when you  
are done.
Tip
 
■
 You can remove all the metadata in a file by opening the file’s properties (right-click and select Properties from 
the menu that appears) and under the Details tab click the Remove Properties and Personal Information link at the bottom 
of the properties panel.
Simplify Adding Tags and Ratings with Windows Photo Gallery
It can be a laborious process adding tags and ratings to files, but the important thing to remember is that you need to 
do this only once. There are tools that can make the process much easier for you as well. Windows Photo Gallery, part 
of the Windows Essentials suite, can be downloaded for free from download.live.com. In the View tab on the Ribbon, 
you have the option to view files by tag (see Figure 5-30).
Figure 5-29. The Details pane in File Explorer

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
160
The View tab features a button to open the Tag and Caption Pane (the button is on the far right of the Ribbon). 
This pane offers a great way to simplify the addition of tags to photos and pictures because it lists all your photos by 
tag category, and shows all the photos that are not tagged. You can select these photos for tagging, making it much 
easier to know which pictures are already tagged.
When you import new photos to Windows 8.1 from your digital camera or memory card, the default import 
utility, the Photos app, doesn’t permit adding tags. You can add tags automatically when you import photos to your 
PC however by doing this from within Photo Gallery. This is a good time to do it because all the photos are probably 
related, and having Windows automate the process of adding tags makes things much simpler.
You can also remove and amend tags and ratings later in Windows Live Photo Gallery using simple controls.  
The options for this appear in the right pane when a photo or photos are selected.
You can import photos from your camera or digital memory card by clicking the Import button under the Home 
tab on the Ribbon.
You will first be asked to identify the media you are importing your photos from and you can then click Add Tags 
and type your tags (see Figure 5-31). This automatically adds the tags you enter to all your imported photos. You may 
want to use general tags such as “vacation,” “family,” or “Germany.” I talk more about importing photos and videos  
in Chapter 7.
Figure 5-30. Tagging photos in Windows Live Photo Gallery

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
161
Tip
 
■
 Most music players help automate adding tags to your music by finding the correct album from an extensive 
online database.
Managing Folder Options
Folder Options offers a huge amount of control over File Explorer and the way files and folders are viewed.
The first tab in this window, General, gives you the option to open files and folders with a single-click instead  
of a double click. This is especially useful for people using a Windows 8.1 tablet (see Figure 5-32).
Figure 5-31. Tagging photos on import from a camera

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
162
The option to show all folders in File Explorer’s Navigation Pane may be the most popular. If you aren’t a fan of 
the new Favorite Links pane, either you can switch it off completely in favor of the legacy folder view (see Figure 5-33) 
or you can combine the two. You can also set File Explorer to automatically expand the folder view of the currently 
viewed folder.
Figure 5-32. Changing the general folder view options

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
163
The View tab gives you extra control over the way files and folders are viewed and organized (see Figure 5-34). 
At the top of this window are buttons to Apply [the current folder view] to [all] Folders or to Reset [all] Folders to 
their default view. This enables you to decide the way you want your folders to look. If you want your folders tiled with 
items grouped by file type, for example, you can apply this quickly and easily to all the folder views on your computer.
Figure 5-33. Showing the folder view in File Explorer

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
164
Brief descriptions of some of the more noteworthy options follow:
•฀
Display the full path in the title bar forces the address bar to display the full drive and folder 
location at all times.
•฀
Hidden files and folders allows you to show or hide all hidden folders on your computer.
•฀
Hide empty drives in the Computer folder is checked by default. It hides empty USB flash 
drives or memory card drives that you might want to copy files onto.
•฀
Hide extensions for known file types is checked by default, but some users want to know the 
file extensions for all their files.
•฀
Hide protected operating system files can be unchecked to display hidden system files that 
you may need to work with.
Figure 5-34. Changing advanced folder view options

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
165
•฀
Show drive letters shows the legacy drive assignments (C:, D:, and so on) on File Explorer 
views. Uncheck to remove the ability to see the drive letters.
•฀
Show encrypted or compressed NTFS files in color highlights files in blue when an 
encryption service such as EFS is turned on. Many people like to uncheck this option.
The last tab, Search, contains options for searching files and folders. For example, by default, Windows 8.1 
doesn’t search the content of compressed ZIP, CAB, or RAR files. You might want to turn on this option if you work 
with compressed files often (see Figure 5-35).
Using Search in Windows 8.1
It seems that with each new version of Windows, the methods by which we search for programs, settings, and files 
changes again. Windows 8.1 is no exception. In its simplest terms, basic search has been greatly improved since 
Windows 7. In Windows 7, you open the Start menu and simply type a search result; whereas in Windows 8, you just 
start typing at the Start screen.
Figure 5-35. Changing folder search options

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
166
Windows 7 always contextualizes your searches, so a search in the Start menu always prioritizes programs and 
settings. Windows 8.1 searches by default for files, settings, and apps; and also searches online at the same time. 
Searching directly in File Explorer, however, still prioritizes the type of content displayed in that window.
Searching from the Start Screen
You can now search in Windows 8.1 directly from the Start screen by simply typing. Whatever it is you are doing,  
as long as you are looking at the Start screen (even if you have right-clicked on a tile), you can begin typing, and the 
search results instantly appear. You can also search directly from the Start screen or the Windows desktop by pressing 
the Win+S key combination.
When you begin a search in Windows 8.1, the search results display relevant results, be they files, settings or apps, 
with Internet search results (provided by Bing.com) underneath (see Figure 5-36).
Figure 5-36. Searching from the Start screen in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
167
If you press the Enter key or the Search button to the right of the search box, then a full screen results page 
appears, containing many more contextualized results (see Figure 5-37). These results are displayed in columns,  
and underneath is a See all link that, when clicked, expands that section if more results are available.
Note
 
■
 Sometimes when you search, the first item in the Search pane results list is highlighted because Windows 8.1 
believes this to be exactly what you’re looking for. Pressing Enter here opens that selected item, not the full search panel. 
If you see a highlighted item, click the search button to the right of the search box to open the full results panel instead.
Search is intelligent, so it does not search for the words literally as you type them. A search for Control, for example, 
brings up relevant Windows features, including the Device Manager, Remote Assistance, and Accessibility options.
This means that you do not have to know the exact name of the feature in Windows you are looking for. When you 
are searching for apps and desktop programs (for which the results appear in the Apps results), the results depend 
more on how the developer has described and programmed it, but generally the search facility in Windows 8.1 is 
excellent.
Figure 5-37. You can get very detailed and contextualized search results

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
168
Searching in File Explorer
File Explorer contains its own context-sensitive search box. In some ways, using it is a more efficient way to search for 
files and documents in Windows 8.1 than using the Start screen.
The search box prioritizes the content. It might be prioritized by documents, pictures, music, video, a specific 
disk drive (internal or external), a network location, or something else (see Figure 5-38). In this way, it is flexible and 
more dynamic than the Start screen search.
When searching in File Explorer, a Search tab appears on the Ribbon. It contains tools and buttons to make 
search even more powerful and useful, especially for people who are less familiar with search syntax.
The Search tab on the Ribbon (see Figure 5-39) allows you to filter your search by
The current folder and all subfolders
•฀
Libraries, e-mail, notes, or the Internet
•฀
When the file was last modified (opened)
•฀
The type of file
•฀
The file size
•฀
File names
•฀
Specific folders
•฀
File tags
•฀
These options cover just about any search you will undertake in Windows 8.1. The Search tab on the Ribbon 
appears automatically the moment you type anything in the search box in File Explorer.
Note
 
■
 The Search tab on the File Explorer Ribbon allows you quick access to recent searches you have made, so that 
you can repeat them.
Figure 5-39. The Search tab on the Ribbon
Figure 5-38. File Explorer has its own search box

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
169
When you search from an Explorer window, you can also use Advanced Query Syntax (AQS) to narrow your 
searches (see Figure 5-40). I detail the full AQS in Appendix C, but some of the most useful search syntax options 
include Kind, Datemodified, Type, and Name. as shown in Tables 5-1 through 5-4.
Figure 5-40. Using AQS to search in an Explorer window
Table 5-1. Kind (to Search the Properties of a Document Type)
Option
Example
Kind:=email
Jake Webster kind:=email
Kind:=task
Meeting kind:=task
Kind:=note
project kind:=note
Kind:=document
Apress kind:=document
Kind:=music
Metallica kind:=music
Kind:=song
Equinoxe kind:=song
Kind:=folder
Book kind:=folder
Kind:=program
paint kind:=program
Table 5-2. Datemodified (to Search by the Date a File Was Modified)
Option
Example
Datemodified:MM/DD/YYYY
Report datemodified:10/22/2012
Datemodified:MM/DD/YY
Report datemodified:7/4/12
Datemodified:MM/DD/YY..MM/DD/YY
Report datemodified:7/4/12..10/22/12
Datemodified:yesterday
Orders datemodified:yesterday
Datemodified:lastweek
Orders datemodified:lastweek
Datemodified:pastmonth
Orders datemodified:pastmonth

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
170
Typing type: initially displays a drop-down list of all the file types on your computer (for example, DOC or PDF), 
as shown in Table 5-3. If, for example, you continue by typing type:image, you can filter your search by various image 
types or search for all image types. You also can use other file types, such as type:document, type:audio, type:video, 
type:presentation, and so forth.
As you begin to type a search filter in File Explorer, a drop-down list (with all the supported filter options) is 
displayed. Clicking the appropriate one for your search helps you find what you are looking for more quickly. If you 
are searching for dates, a calendar assists you.
Expanding Libraries with Saved Searches in Windows 8.1
One of the criticisms of Libraries is that you can add only folders to them; you cannot specify that a Library should 
contain only one or two file types, say Word and Excel files. Nor can you specify that Libraries should contain only 
documents created by “Rory” or tagged as “college”.
This is where the true power of search in Windows 8.1 comes into play. It’s such a cool feature that it will probably 
save you countless hours of lost productivity all on its own!
After you complete a search, you can save it by clicking the Save Search option on the Search tab on the File 
Explorer Ribbon. Saving a search adds a quick link, named whatever you want, to the Favorite Links pane in File 
Explorer (see Figure 5-41).
Table 5-3. Type (to Search by File Type)
Option
Example
Type:
Type:image
Type:image jpeg
Type:.doc
Type:.pdf
Table 5-4. Name (to Search by File Name or by a Property Name of a File)
Option
Example
Name:
Name:vacation
Name:wedding
Name:budget

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
171
Figure 5-41. Saving searches in Windows 8.1
The upshot of this is that you can create those custom-aggregated folders whenever you want, and each one is 
automatically and dynamically updated whenever you open it.
Let’s say, for example, that you search for type:.pdf in the search box when looking at your Documents Library. 
This brings up a list of all your PDF document files in your Documents Library and all subfolders. Saving this search 
creates something that looks and behaves like a Library consisting entirely of PDF files, which you can use whenever 
you need. Each time you open this saved search, the search is re-run (it literally takes a fraction of a second if the 
locations being searched are part of the Windows index), and the contents are updated automatically.
You can further sort, organize, and group the contents of this search however you want, perhaps by the date they 
were created or the tags associated with them.
I simply cannot overstate how powerful and useful this feature is, especially when used with properly tagged files. 
As a way of organizing home or work documents, it is a true time-saver!
Harnessing the Full Power of Saved Searches
Let me give you an example of how powerful I believe saved searches really are. In Figure 5-42, I searched for *.ppt? 
authors:mike halsey, which displays all PowerPoint files created by Mike (and optionally) Halsey.

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
172
Saving these search results creates dynamically updated folders in which you can quickly and easily find the 
information you need. Having a saved search for all documents relating to a project name, for example, enables you to 
keep track of all the documents related to the project at a single and always up-to-date location.
Saving and Sharing Your Saved Searches
Once you have created a saved search, you can create a copy of it to back it up or perhaps to share with a friend or 
colleague. You can do this by right-clicking the saved search in the Favorites pane in File Explorer and selecting Open 
Folder Location from the context menu.
You now see the saved search(es) listed and you can create copies in the same way you would with any other file 
on your computer. They can be backed up or shared with other computers. Note, however, that if drive assignments 
are different on the other computers, the search may not function correctly because searches work with drive letters 
and folders that all have absolute references on your computer.
Tagging Files in Microsoft Office
I’ve talked about adding tags to documents as you create them to help find them later on, but how do you do this? 
Obviously, the method by which you can add tags to documents as you save them varies considerably from one 
software package to another, and it can be expected that many software packages won’t support this feature at all.
Figure 5-42. Expanding saved searches in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
173
Microsoft Office has supported tags for some time, however, and if you use Office 2007 or later, it is a simple 
matter to add tags to documents as you save them.
When you first save a document in Microsoft Office (or select Save As), you have the option to Add a Tag  
(see Figure 5-43).
You can add other details here, including authors and title, although the software will probably automatically add 
some information.
All Microsoft Office programs and many programs from other software vendors support adding tags to your files 
when you save them. In Microsoft Office, the Save dialogs for Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and so forth, allow you to add 
tags in the same way. You can also add information such as subjects and project managers to make files easier to find.
With other software, you need to check whether tags can be added when the file is saved. If not, you can always 
add tags afterward in the Details pane in File Explorer.
Managing the Search and File Index in Windows 8.1
The reason why search works very quickly in Windows 8.1, at least for internal storage on the computer, is that details 
about the files are all stored in an index database. By default, this database stores information on anything in your user 
folders and default Libraries. You can move, add, or remove folders (or even entire hard disks) to or from the index.
You can find the Indexing Options in the Search tab on the Ribbon in File Explorer, but you need to perform a 
search for the tab to appear. A simpler approach is to type Index at the Start screen and run Indexing Options from the 
Settings search results.
In the main Indexing Options are all the indexed drive and folder locations and their current indexing status  
(see Figure 5-44).
Figure 5-43. Adding tags to documents in Microsoft Office

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
174
You may find that not many files are indexed, perhaps because you have a relatively new Windows 8.1 installation 
and a great many files, it can take some time initially for Windows to build its index. In that case, the results you expect 
won’t appear in the search results. You might see that some critical or important folders don’t appear in the index.
Adding Folders to the Index
You can add (or remove) folders to the index by clicking the Modify button on the Indexing Options screen. It displays 
a folder list of all the drives on your computer. The current folder locations are checked (see Figure 5-45).
Figure 5-44. Managing the search index in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
175
To add or remove folders or entire drives to the index, simply check or uncheck their boxes. You can expand and 
collapse folders by clicking the chevrons next to folder names. When you press the OK button, the index is refreshed to 
include or exclude the folders you have updated.
Note
 
■
 It can take some time for Windows 8.1 to index the contents of your hard drive, and the process slows when 
you are using the computer. If you need the index built quickly, leaving the computer switched on overnight can speed up 
the process significantly.
Figure 5-45. Adding folder locations to Indexing Options

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
176
Changing the Advanced Indexing Options
Clicking the Advanced button in the Indexing Options pane brings up several additional options that you may want to 
consider (see Figure 5-46). Chief among these, especially if you work in a business environment, is the option to index 
encrypted files. By default, Windows 8.1 doesn’t index files that you have encrypted with either Microsoft’s Encrypting 
File System (EFS) or third-party software. This is because the key searchable contents of the files contained within the 
index aren’t encrypted.
For most scenarios, it is perfectly acceptable to tick this box. If you work in a governmental, financial, medical,  
or research and development organization, you should seek advice, although the choice will probably be made for 
you, and Indexing Options will not be available.
Figure 5-46. Modifying the advanced index options

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
177
Note
 
■
 The Windows 8.1 automatic indexing of encrypted files does include hard disks in the computer encrypted with 
BitLocker if you are a user who has access to those drives because this is a full disk encryption system. It is assumed 
that if you are successfully logged in to a Bitlocker-encrypted PC, you will have permission to access its files.
The next option in the File Settings section enables you to turn off Windows 8.1’s automatic correction feature  
to accommodate the different (albeit correct) spellings of words and the oddly spelled word.
In the Index location section is an option to change the default location of the index. I’d like to discuss why 
you might want to do this and what the benefits are. The most obvious reason to do this is to increase the speed of 
your hard disk or to improve the resilience of an SSD. If you have a large number of files to index, this is the only 
circumstance when it’s possibly worthwhile to move the index.
If you have an SSD in your computer (the number of maximum write operations is finite over the life of the disk), 
you may want to move the index. On modern SSDs, it shouldn’t make a difference because the overall lifespan of the 
disk should be more than adequate. But you may have an older SSD or perform duties that involve huge amounts of 
file work and modification every day.
To change the location, type the new location of the index into the empty box with its full drive assignment  
(e.g., D:\Index\) and click the Select New button.
Note
 
■
 When you move the index, it is rebuilt from scratch when you restart your computer. Also, you cannot reuse an 
existing index when you reimage your computer; it rebuilds when you restart your computer.
Searching Network Locations in Windows 8.1
When you add extra folders and drives to the Windows 8.1 index, the system does not allow you to add network or 
other locations to the index. If you are a manager in a small office in which files are shared on a network attached 
storage (NAS) drive, for example, and you want to create a saved search to monitor the progress of a project, you 
cannot add this location to the index. While they also won’t be indexed, you can also add network locations to 
Libraries by creating a symbolic link between the two locations. I described how to do this in the Adding Network 
Locations to Libraries section on page XREF earlier in this chapter.
However, you can open a network location in File Explorer from Network in the Navigation Pane. When you are  
at the correct location, you can then perform a search and save that search.
Searches of network locations can take longer than searches of files on your own computer because the search 
system has to read each file every time instead of referring to its information in the index.
If you are logged in to a domain on a Windows Server system, the index usually allows you to add mapped server 
locations to the index.
Using Search Syntax in Internet Explorer
In the science fiction book The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy (Pan Books, 1985), author Douglas Adams wrote, 
“Space is big. You just won't believe how vastly, hugely, mind-bogglingly big it is. I mean, you may think it’s a long way 
down the road to the shops, but that’s just peanuts to space.” As a quote, this is an excellent analogy for the Internet.
The problem is how to find what you are looking for online when there are usually millions and sometimes 
billions of search results. After all, the major search engines, Bing, Google, and so forth, do a reasonable job of filtering 
the results for you. How do you know, though, that you’re getting the correct results for what you type? Surely you’re 
just getting the most popular generalized results.

CHAPTER 5 ■ ORGANIZING AND SEARCHING YOUR COMPUTER
178
This is where you can use search syntax options that are commonly supported by all online search engines:
•฀
“Enclose a few words in double quotes” to search for those words as a complete sentence.  
By default, typing the words without quotes returns search results that include one or more  
of all the words; it does not treat them as a combined whole.
Use a plus (
•฀
+) symbol at the front of a word (e.g., +halsey) to guarantee that this word must 
appear in the search results. You can also use a plus symbol in front of a string of words (see 
preceding bullet).
Use a minus (
•฀
–) symbol to exclude a particular word or string from the results. You may want 
to exclude the word -buy or -shopping if you are looking for technical details of a product and 
want to exclude shopping and price comparison sites from the results.
Search only a specific web site for a term by typing 
•฀
site:sitename.com. You may want to search 
for “windows 8.1” site:thelongclimb.com, for example.
Use 
•฀
* and ? wildcard operators. The asterisk represents a selection of letters, and the question 
mark represents only a single letter; for example, you want to search for “Mike H*” or Hals?y  
if you are unsure of a spelling.
Include Boolean operators 
•฀
OR, AND, and NOT in your search to narrow down the results. 
Adobe software 2011 OR 2012, for example.
There are other search operators that are specific to individual search engines. The ones I listed here I find to be 
the most useful and the easiest to remember. I personally only ever use double quotes and the plus and minus signs, 
for example, and I get search results that I am happy with.
Appendix D features a full list of the AQS options that you can use for Windows 8.1 searches.
Note
 
■
 You can use these operators directly from the Start screen when searching for things online.
Summary
Search in Windows 8.1 is incredibly powerful, but the full features can be hard to remember. I believe that by far the 
best feature for searching is the saved search, which allows you to search by subject, workflow, author, contributors, 
file type, location, and more. It also allows you to search for multiple parameters simultaneously. This truly powerful 
feature can help you get the best out of file management and organization in Windows 8.1.
Elsewhere, however, the ability to search from the Start screen by simply typing is very welcome. We can expect 
both Microsoft and third-party providers to plug some extremely useful functionality into this feature in the coming 
years. It’s not quite as powerful and flexible as search in File Explorer, however.
Libraries are also significantly more powerful than you might first believe, with saved search and Windows Media 
Center able to extend their functionality considerably. I have long argued that Libraries should be more flexible by 
default, but the ability to create flexibility through simple workarounds greatly increases their usefulness.

179
CHAPTER 6
Printing and Managing Printers
In these days of external hard drives, flash drives, TV tuners, graphics tablets, HD webcams, cordless headphones,  
and more, it is always a printer that is commonly the first and most important peripheral that we purchase for  
our computers.
These days, wireless printers are becoming so common that you no longer need to have the machine physically 
connected to your computer. It can easily be shared between multiple computers and hidden out of sight where it 
isn’t noticeable when you’re relaxing.
Network printers in the workplace have already been common for years now, and you’ll be pleased to hear that 
setting up and managing printers in Windows 8.1 is as straightforward as ever.
Installing Printers in Windows 8.1
Windows 8.1 performs a very neat trick that no other version of Windows has ever done before with printers  
(and other network devices). If these devices exist, and Windows 8.1 sees them on the network, it automatically 
installs them for you.
This means that the first time you try to print a document, you’ll probably find that your network printer 
is already listed. Windows 8.1 searches Windows Update for a driver and installs these devices quietly in the 
background. So ordinarily, you simply plug in your printer, and Windows 8.1 takes care of the installation.
It is unlikely, however, that Windows 8.1 can install printers with drivers not included in Windows 8.1 or not 
available on Windows Update. If this is the case, you have to uninstall and reinstall the printer. There are two main 
ways to install printers and other devices in Windows 8.1, the simplest of which is using PC Settings. Open the PC 
Settings panel and navigate to PCs and Devices and then Devices. A list of all the devices that are currently installed is 
displayed, but at the top of the screen is an Add a Device button. Clicking or tapping this button starts the Windows 8.1 
auto-detect for new hardware (see Figure 6-1).

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
180
If you want more control over your printer installation, or if a printer isn’t being detected in PC Settings, you 
can open the Devices and Printers panel (see Figure 6-2). Type devices at the Start screen and you see Devices and 
Printers listed in the search results.
Figure 6-1. You can install new printers in PC Settings

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
181
Tip
 
■
 To uninstall a printer or another device in the Devices and Printers panel (perhaps because the driver is not  
properly installed), right-click the device and then select Remove Device from the options.
There are two main ways to add printers to Windows 8.1 using Devices and Printers. On the toolbar at the top of 
the window, you can select the link to Add a device or you can choose the Add a printer, both of which will work.
Initially, as you see in Figures 6-3 and 6-4, these options operate in exactly the same way, though they look 
slightly different. Both options search for network printers and other devices and then display them for you. Where 
they differ most is in the driver installation for the hardware.
Figure 6-2. Devices and Printers window

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
182
Figure 6-3. Adding Devices and Printers to Windows 8.1 in the Add a Device dialog
Figure 6-4. Adding a printer to Windows 8.1 using Add Printer

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
183
In the Add a Device dialog (see Figure 6-3), Windows 8.1 simply installs what it thinks is the best available 
driver for that piece of hardware. If Windows 8.1 has previously found your printer on its own and installed it with an 
incorrect driver, it reinstalls the same incorrect driver.
If the printer isn’t found automatically, which is common in business environments, the Not finding what you’re 
looking for? link simply opens a Help window with a note telling you how the problem may be fixed.
It is the Add Printer dialog (see Figure 6-4) that you will find helpful for all but the hardest to install printers.
If the printer is not automatically found, you can click The printer that I want isn’t listed to bring up additional 
installation options for the device (see Figure 6-5).
Figure 6-5. Manually adding a printer
In the Add Printer window, you have the following options:
You can add a printer by its name on the network (if you know it; it is usually provided by your 
•฀
IT department).
You can add it by its IP address (more on finding this in a minute).
•฀
You can add a Bluetooth printer, if you have one.
•฀
You can choose to manually configure the printer depending on which port it is located.
•฀

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
184
Tip
 
■
 If you need to discover the IP address of a wireless printer, it is commonly available within the settings for the 
printer on its own display. You should refer to your printer owners’ manual for the exact way to retrieve the IP address 
because it changes from one printer to another.
All things being equal, you probably don’t know the IP address or the network name of a printer. One quick way 
around this is to check how the printer is configured on another computer. You can do this in Devices and Printers  
(in Windows 7 and Windows 8.1). Right-click the printer and select Printer Properties. Under the Ports tab, you should 
see the address of the printer (see Figure 6-6).
Figure 6-6. Checking the address of a printer

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
185
Tip
 
■
 Let’s say you want to add an older parallel device to Windows 8.1. Choosing the Add a local printer or network 
printer with manual settings allows you to select the LPT port that the printer is plugged into.
On a home or small business network, finding a printer’s IP is relatively straightforward, though the actual 
method varies, depending on the make of your router. The following steps provide a general approach that you should 
be able to tweak for your own setup:
 
1. 
Open Internet Explorer.
 
2. 
Access your router login by typing 192.168.0.1 (sometimes 192.168.1.1 or 192.168.2.1) and 
pressing Enter.
 
3. 
Log in to your router with your username and password (if these are still admin and 
password, you should change them!).
 
4. 
Find the LAN settings.
 
5. 
Look for the Ethernet settings.
 
6. 
Look for the name of your network printer; its IP address is listed as shown in Figure 6-7.
Figure 6-7. Finding a printer’s IP address on the network

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
186
Note
 
■
 If you have to reset your router, perhaps because your Internet connection has gone down, the IP address of 
your printer might have changed. This requires that you uninstall and reinstall the printer on all your computers because 
Windows locks the driver to a specific IP address. To get around this problem, you can set the printer to a static IP 
 address in your router setup. Consult your manual or your ISP for details on how to do this.
Setting Default Printers for Different Places
If you use the same computer in different places, perhaps both at home and at work or in different office locations, 
you don’t want to spend time setting and resetting the default printer whenever you want to print a document.
Windows 8.1 allows you to set the default printer, depending on the network that you are connected to at the 
time. In Devices and Printers, select a printer and then click the Manage Default Printers on the toolbar at the top of 
the window.
In the dialog (see Figure 6-8), you can set a different default printer for each network you connect to. The networks 
and installed printers are all listed by name and are available from drop-down menus with the defaults showing in the 
main pane of the dialog.
Figure 6-8. Setting different default printers for different networks

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
187
Using this feature, you can set Windows to automatically change the default printer on your computer the 
moment you connect to a different network. So if you have been on this network before and have already installed  
the printer driver(s), you can be sure that whatever you print is sent to the correct printer.
Managing Printers in Windows 8.1
Long gone are the days when printers did only a single thing: accept an input and print it onto paper. Now printers 
come with a huge number of options for controlling every aspect of that output and the hardware. This, coupled with 
new ecoprinting features intended to save both ink and paper, can make printers very difficult to manage.
Printers and their driver software differ by make and model, but most of the functionality across devices is the 
same. Thus, you may find that some of the following screen shots don’t match up exactly with what you see on your 
own computer. Windows 8 does a good job of standardizing the settings for printers, however.
You can manage your printer in Devices and Printers by right-clicking the printer and selecting Printer Properties 
from the options.
In the main printer properties dialog under the General tab (see Figure 6-9), you find the name of the printer  
(which you can change by simply typing a new name). You can also input comments about the machine’s physical location 
as well as other notes (perhaps about how to insert paper for double-sided printing if there is no duplex unit installed).
Figure 6-9. Working with general printer properties

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
188
The Preferences button opens the printing preferences, which I discuss in the “Managing Printing in Windows 8.1” 
section later in this chapter. You can also print a test page here to check that the printer is working.
Note
 
■
 The configuration and options in the printer dialogs vary according to the make and model of the printer.
On the Sharing tab, you can choose whether you want to share the printer over your network (the computer that 
is sharing the printer needs to be left on for the printer to be accessible) and you can give it a name (see Figure 6-10). 
Figure 6-10. Working with Sharing printer properties

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
189
Tip
 
■
 Earlier, I discussed finding a printer by its name. A printer with a simple name is easier for people to find and 
remember. Easy names may include a floor number, room number, and/or printer type.
Shared printers may be accessed by computers running other versions of Windows, such as Windows 7,  
Windows Vista, or Windows XP. If this is likely, click the Additional Drivers button to choose drivers that automatically 
load from your computer as needed.
You probably don’t want to change anything in the Ports tab (see Figure 6-11), but if you have had to reset your 
router, the IP address of the printer may have automatically changed. Thus, after resetting a router, you may find 
that you can no longer print to a particular printer—and you have to reinstall it, though you will often find out that 
Windows 8.1 can often automatically rectify the problem on its own.
Figure 6-11. Working with printer ports

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
190
The Ports tab is also useful if you are using older parallel or serial printers, which are very complicated to install 
and configure correctly, but are still in use in some business environments.
There are many useful options available in the Advanced tab (see Figure 6-12), including the following:
•฀
The ability to specify that a printer is only accessible between certain hours: This option is 
useful if you are trying to cut down on waste.
•฀
The ability to choose how the printer prioritizes print jobs that are sent to it: You might 
want to set this option on a shared printer to spool a job only after the previous one has 
finished (if the printer doesn’t have much internal memory). Generally, you should not need 
to do this because Windows 8.1 is excellent at managing print jobs.
Figure 6-12. Working with advanced printer properties

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
191
Tip
 
■
 Setting printers to be available only between certain hours of the day is not just a great way to cut down on 
printing waste but also a useful way to avoid causing inconvenience to others. My own printer is located in my home 
office, which is next to my guest bedroom. When in use, this printer can be heard through the wall and can inadvertently 
wake somebody up. Setting available from and to times can prevent accidental annoyance for other people.
The Color Management options (see Figure 6-13) allow you to set a color profile that matches your monitor. 
This is especially useful if you have a carefully calibrated screen for color accuracy. (I will talk more about color 
management shortly.)
Figure 6-13. Working with printer color management

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
192
The options on the Security tab allow you to specify who can control what on the printer (see Figure 6-14).  
Here you may want to make changes, including giving users computer permissions to manage print jobs (such as 
deleting stuck jobs).
Figure 6-14. Working with printer security
To change permissions, select the appropriate users in the top pane. You can then change their options by 
checking the boxes in the bottom half of the tab. These basic controls are all you need to grant and deny users access 
to a printer. If you require more control over access to printers, such as printer availability time and which users can 
print and how often, click the Advanced button.
It is now common for printer manufacturers to add a custom tab that provides extra information, such as ink and 
toner status, and links to purchase official consumables and accessories online.

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
193
Managing Color Profiles for Printers and Displays
Sometimes you absolutely must have color accuracy, perhaps if you are a photographer or graphic artist. To help with 
this, you can load specific color profiles into Windows 8.1 for both printers and displays. Open the Color Management 
window by searching the word color at the Start screen and running Change Advanced Color Management from the 
Settings results.
In Color Management (see Figure 6-15), you can load specific color profiles for both printers and displays if they 
have the correct manufacturer profile file. The file formats are Color Device Model Profile (*.cdmp), Color Appearance 
Model Profile (*.camp), Gamut Mapping Model Profile (*.gmmp), and ICC (*.icm).
Figure 6-15. Managing color profiles in Windows 8.1
Choose the device in which you want to view the current color profile from the drop-down menu at the top of the 
window. To add a color profile to the currently selected device, check the Use my settings for this device box. You can 
then select an installed color profile.
You can add a profile from the All Profiles tab, in which you find the currently installed color profiles. Click the 
Add button at the bottom of the window to load a new color profile.
There are controls and options on the Advanced tab that enable you to further specify the way your color profiles 
are used for different types of images and art. You can also run a tool that helps calibrate the brightness, color, and 
contrast settings for your monitor so that what you see on screen are faithful representations of true color.

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
194
Managing Shared Printers in Windows 8.1
In the previous section, I talked a little bit about managing the security of a shared printer, which you can do directly 
from the Devices and Printers window. When a printer is selected, you can open Print Server Properties from the toolbar.
You can also manage security properties for the printer in the Print Server Properties dialog (see Figure 6-16), 
which offers additional security options, such as whether users can edit the print queue or change the print settings.
Figure 6-16. Managing print server properties
Managing Printing in Windows 8.1
Although there are many options for managing your printer(s), there are usually even more for managing printing. 
These features differ from one printer to another, but the general printing preferences are the same.

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
195
Tip
 
■
 To print from an app in Windows 8.1, click the Devices charm and then the Print button. Your available printers 
are listed, and you can click/tap the one you want to print to. Note that not all apps support printing.
When you want to print from within an app in Windows 8.1 open the Devices charm and click the Print option. 
Your available printers are listed in the top right of your screen. Once you click the printer you want to print to, a page 
preview appears, along with basic controls for determining how the page is to be formatted (see Figure 6-17).
Figure 6-17. You can control your printing from within apps

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
196
You can tap the Use these settings in all applications switch after setting your print settings to the way you want 
them to make those settings the default for all in-app printing in the future. Additionally, you can also click the 
More settings link to open more-advanced settings for your printer (see Figure 6-18). Note that these settings vary, 
depending on your printer’s model and features.
Figure 6-18. Advanced print settings are available within apps

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
197
When you are printing from the desktop, you can’t do so from the Devices charm because it is not supported. 
You print from within your desktop program, either from a File menu or a dedicated Print button. To access the 
print options for your printer, however, perhaps to set the global printing preferences, you can most easily access the 
printing preferences by right-clicking a printer in the Devices and Printers window and selecting Printing Preferences 
from the options.
On the first tab in this dialog, which may vary in name (see Figure 6-19), are the most common options, including 
the default page size, page orientation, and whether the printer uses single- or double-sided printing by default  
(you need an internal duplexing unit to take advantage of this).
Figure 6-19. Working with basic printing preferences
Tip
 
■
 Once you know whether your printer’s duplex unit flips the paper on the long or short edge of the paper,  
I recommend writing this information on a label and sticking it to the printer so that it is easy for others to use  
double-sided printing on their own computers.
The options on the Paper tab allow you to choose the default paper size, collation of multipage print jobs (a very 
useful option in an office), and the printer’s default source tray.

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
198
Tip
 
■
 If you want to change the default printing options for the printer, perhaps to set it to print only in black draft mode 
to save ink or toner, you can do it in the Advanced settings. Every time someone prints from that printer (and on that 
computer) afterward, these are the default print options (unless changed manually for just one job).
If you want finer control over the printer’s settings, click the Advanced button (see Figure 6-20), which displays a 
list of all the controls.
Figure 6-20. Working with paper preferences
Tip
 
■
 If you are printing photographs, you want to make sure that eco and draft features are switched off so that you 
get the best quality prints.

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
199
Working with Wireless Printers in Windows 8.1
I mentioned earlier in the chapter that resetting your router may also reset the IP address on your network  
wireless printer.
If this happens, the best option is to uninstall and reinstall the printer. Although you can set the printer to have 
a static IP address, not all routers support this functionality. Check the router’s manual or consult your ISP’s support 
department.
Sometimes it is difficult to figure out how to connect a wireless printer to your network. If you have a wired 
printer, it’s easy enough to just plug the printer into the router or switch panel with an RJ45 Ethernet cable.
To connect a wireless printer to your network, you need to find the WPS buttons on both the router and the 
printer. These buttons allow you to pair the two devices wirelessly without a password.
 
1. 
Press the WPS button on your router.
 
2. 
As soon as you can (within 30 seconds), press the WPS button on the printer.
These two devices should now pair. Occasionally, however, a router refuses to see a printer, even when the WPS 
buttons have been pressed. In this event, you should contact your ISP’s support department or consult the router 
manual to find the best way to pair the router with a wireless device.
Tip
 
■
 You can also pair computers, printers, and other devices by pressing the WPS button on your router if the 
computer—normally tablets or laptops—or device also has a WPS or similarly labeled button. Check the documentation 
that came with the device to see if this function is supported.
Obtaining the IP Address of a Network Printer
The Devices and Printers page panel (see Figure 6-21) is a very useful way to manage network resources that your 
computer can see. You can best access it by searching for devices on the Start screen and running it from the search 
results, which you will find in Settings. All printers and other network devices that Windows 8.1 can see are displayed 
here. You can use the information provided to find the IP address of a device.

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
200
Perform the following two steps to find the IP address of a device in the Devices and Printers page:
 
1. 
Right-click the printer you want to find the IP address for.
 
2. 
Click the Hardware tab in the window that appears.
The IP address is commonly listed in the location information at the bottom of the window. If you don’t see 
the IP address listed here, check the onscreen display on the printer. The IP address is usually available through its 
settings menus, although the exact method of retrieving the IP address from the printer varies, depending on the 
manufacturer and model.
Note
 
■
 Windows may display the IPv6 address for a device. If this happens, you can get the numeric IP address from 
your router.
Figure 6-21. The Devices and Printers panel

CHAPTER 6 ■ PRINTING AND MANAGING PRINTERS
201
Top Printing Tips
There are some great ways to get a little more out of your printer’s ink and toner. They begin with purchasing the right 
printer. When purchasing a printer, follow these tips:
If you can afford it, buy a printer with in-built duplexing (double-sided printing). This saves 
•฀
paper.
Check the cost of full-price consumables (ink cartridges and toner) and compare it against 
•฀
prices for similar printers by other manufacturers.
Do some research online about the printer’s TCO (total cost of ownership). This information 
•฀
may be provided in a magazine review or in a product group test.
Find out if you can use cheaper compatible ink and toner cartridges. Some printers have 
•฀
“chipped” cartridges that require you to use official manufacturer ink.
To get more life out of your ink cartridges and toner, there are a few things you can do to prolong their life.
If you are not going to use your printer for a while, keep the ink cartridges in a cool, dry place 
•฀
(you can even wrap them in plastic film and put them in the refrigerator). This prevents the 
ink from drying up. This does not apply to toner, which does not dry out.
When your toner cartridge is low, you can shake the cartridge to loosen up more toner, which 
•฀
results in a longer lifespan. If you do this, you must read the following cautionary note!
Think about if you 
•฀
really need to print something. Most of the people I know don’t actually use 
most of the printed material they create.
Caution
 
■
 When shaking a toner cartridge, you should always make sure your arms are fully covered, that you are 
wearing disposable gloves, and that you do not breathe in any waste toner. Some laser printer toners are carcinogenic. 
You should always wash your hands thoroughly after handling cartridges, especially refillable ones.
Summary
Working with and managing printers is always something people ask me about because these peripherals are 
generally used more than other devices. The one piece of eco advice I give on using printers is to first ask yourself the 
question, “Do I really need to print this document?” By far the best way to save paper, ink, and money is to not print a 
document or picture.
The controls for installing and managing printers in Windows 8.1 are excellent, although some of the most useful 
ones are hidden. These controls include the ability to autoset the default printer at different locations and networks; 
and the color management tools, which are essential to creative professionals and very useful to anybody printing 
high-quality photographs at home.

203
CHAPTER 7
Having Fun with Games, Photos, 
Music, and Video
Despite the business origins of the PC, Windows has always been a gaming platform. Despite predictions on the death 
of PC gaming in favor of consoles, Windows 8.1 brings some new features to the mix that put gaming front and center 
of the PC for the first time.
There is new integration between Windows 8.1 and other Microsoft platforms such as the Xbox that will be built 
upon and expanded in coming years, such as the ability to start a game on one device and then continue it on another.
With gaming on a PC comes some responsibility, especially if you are a parent. Controlling the games your 
children play is becoming increasingly difficult because the Internet provides access to games, entertainment, and 
content that may not be suitable for children.
When it comes to nongaming fun, Windows 8.1 is as good as any version before it—with excellent photo, music, 
and video playback and editing facilities, and Media Center for watching and recording live TV.
Finally, there is what will probably become the perennial Windows 8.1 gaming platform: tablets. With their 
sensors and accelerometers, these devices are perfect gaming platforms.
In this chapter, I’ll talk you through how to have fun with your PC: integrating your PC with your Xbox 360; 
enjoying the latest gaming technologies, including 3D; and viewing your photos and videos.
Managing Games in Windows 8.1
If you’ve used the Games Center in Windows Vista or Windows 7 to manage, launch, and update your games,  
you’ll find that it’s gone in Windows 8.1. It has been replaced by the new apps.
The reasons for this change include a shift toward apps on the part of Microsoft, but also the rise of game 
management and delivery platforms—such as Steam—that are central locations for purchasing, updating, and 
managing your games, your account, and other things. These platforms provide central locations for purchasing, 
updating, and managing games, player settings, and achievements.
Microsoft has also expanded its own Xbox Live service to cover the Windows Phone platform, Windows 8.1,  
and Windows RT.
Note
 
■
 If you install a Windows game that is not managed by Steam, Xbox Live, or another management service,  
you need to update the game manually. Updates are posted on the web site of the game’s publisher.
One of the biggest issues for gamers is updates, which is primarily why platforms such as Steam and Origin have 
taken off in such a big way. Through these platforms, users no longer have to manually find, download, and install 
sometimes complicated updates.

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
204
The Games App
Windows 8.1 comes with a Games app (see Figure 7-1), in which you can buy games for your PC and also manage and 
maintain gamer scores and other attributes associated with your Xbox Live account.
In Chapter 2, I said that Windows Store alerts you when updates are available for your downloaded apps and 
games. The Games app also alerts you when updates are available for your games.
Although Microsoft wants the Games app to be a hub for Xbox games that run in Windows 8.1, these are not  
the only games that can be bought there. All Xbox Live–branded PC games are available and there are thousands  
of non-Xbox-branded games available.
Xbox SmartGlass
Although the Xbox Games app is a central location to buy and manage games and to manage your account, the Xbox 
SmartGlass app is a tool for remotely controlling your Xbox console and for providing companion experiences for 
select Xbox games.
Figure 7-1. Buying games in Xbox Games

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
205
With this downloadable app, which you can find in the Windows Store, you can control many aspects of your 
console from your PC. This includes the ability to remotely control your games without having to use the dedicated 
Xbox controller (see Figure 7-2).
You need to be logged in to the Xbox SmartGlass app to use it, Windows 8.1, and your Xbox console on the same 
Live ID. You must also have SmartGlass enabled on your Xbox console. So if you are playing a game that is logged in to 
the Live ID of another user, for example, the Xbox SmartGlass app won’t connect to the console.
Managing Game Ratings for Children
One of the biggest concerns for parents is the suitability of the games their children play in Windows. With the 
Windows Vista introduction of the Games Center, you could set age ratings for games so that children could play  
only games that were appropriate.
In practice, however, this worked only with games that had bought into the Games for Windows branding, which 
few did. With the removal of the Games Center, this facility is gone, but not completely. Windows 8.1 Family Safety 
provides all the facilities you need to block unsuitable games (see Figure 7-3).
Figure 7-2. Using your Windows 8.1 PC as a remote Xbox console controller

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
206
I showed you how to set up Family Safety in Chapter 3. It is a fully featured way to manage your children’s game 
playing. I recommend it. With these controls, you can choose which games your children are allowed to play, the types 
of web sites they can visit, and the times they can use the computer.
To use this facility, each user must have an account on the computer. If you use local accounts rather than signing 
in with a Microsoft account, you need to create specific accounts for your children. This is most likely if you have very 
young children who do not need access to services such as e-mail.
Note
 
■
 The desktop games from Windows 7 have gone in Windows 8.1, indeed this new operating system (OS) doesn’t 
come with any games at all, but Microsoft has substitutes for many of the common ones, Minesweeper, Solitaire, and so on, 
which are available in the Windows Store and from the Games app.
Figure 7-3. Managing game age ratings in Family Safety

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
207
Configuring Windows 8.1 for the Latest Games
Casual gamers will have little trouble playing the latest games from the Windows Store or Games app on Windows 
8.1 and RT computers and tablets. Indeed, for some years now, games have been far more popular on tablets than 
on desktop computers because of the new and fun ways in which we can interact with them and because the lower 
hardware specification of tablets means that game companies have had to create simpler games overall.
But what if you’re an enthusiast? How can you configure your computer to run the latest first-person shooters?
I won’t recommend specific graphics cards and other hardware because they change so often that anything  
I write is quickly be out of date. There are some things you can look for when purchasing a new computer or computer 
parts, however, which I discuss in the next section. There are also things that you can do with Windows 8.1.
So how can you configure Windows 8.1 to run the best and newest games? One of the first considerations is your 
antivirus software. Windows Defender, which is installed by default in Windows 8.1, is an excellent choice for games, 
primarily because it is lightweight but also because it doesn’t do any major scanning when you use the PC for other things.
Some third–party antivirus solutions also detect when games are running—usually by detecting something 
running fullscreen—and hibernates their scanning engines.
As a power user, I find Windows Defender perfectly adequate, so I don’t use third–party antivirus software.  
If you are a gamer, however, this is something you should think about if you are considering purchasing a third-party 
package.
The amount of software you have running in the background can also make a difference. For example, you might 
have Microsoft’s SkyDrive software running in the background, keeping a cloud backup of your files; or perhaps you 
have an alternative such as Google Drive, Dropbox, Mozy, and so on. They can slow down your Internet connection.  
If you are gaming, you might want to switch them off if there’s a lot of network traffic going on in the background.
Tip
 
■
 The upload speed on your Internet connection is as important for gaming as your download speed. If you have  
an older ADSL connection with a healthy download speed of 5 Mbps but only a 0.6 Mbps upload speed, for example,  
it can result in being kicked from servers. One player’s slow connection adversely impacts the other players’ experience 
(see Figure 7-4). The reason for this is that when you are gaming online, you are sending almost as much data as you  
are receiving.
Figure 7-4. You can test your Internet connection speed using services like http://www.speedtest.net

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
208
Do the following to close an app with the keyboard and mouse:
 
1. 
From the Start screen, move your mouse to the top left of the screen.
 
2. 
When the thumbnail for the most recent running app appears, move the mouse downward 
to reveal all the running app thumbnails.
 
3. 
Right-click the app you want to close. Select Close from the options that appear.
Do the following to close an app with touch:
 
1. 
Swipe inward and then immediately outward from the left edge of the screen to display the 
running apps list.
 
2. 
Touch the thumbnail of the app you want to close and drag it out of the list.
 
3. 
Drag the thumbnail image of the app off the bottom center of the screen to close it.
Do the following to close a desktop task:
 
1. 
From the desktop, click the Show Hidden Icons arrow in the far right of the taskbar. This 
is the small up arrow next to the system tray. If you don’t see this arrow, there are no 
minimized programs running in the system tray.
 
2. 
Right-click the program you want to terminate (hovering over an icon tells you what the 
program is).
 
3. 
Select Exit or Close from the options that appear.
You may also have software and driver updaters running in the background that are slowing down your 
computer. You may be able to shut these down from the desktop in the same way, but perhaps you don’t need them 
running to begin with.
Some of these updates can be very useful and are very important indeed, including the updaters from Adobe, 
which are used to fix security flaws that are very commonly exploited by malware. There may be other programs 
that you don’t need, however, including quick launchers for your scanner, printer, or Blu-ray software. Auto-running 
software also includes utilities that came preinstalled on your computer, such as a quick launcher for media files.
To shut down these programs so that they don’t autostart with Windows, do the following:
 
1. 
Press Win+X on your keyboard.
 
2. 
From the options that appear, select Task Manager (it can also be launched by  
right-clicking the taskbar).
 
3. 
Click the Startup tab in the Task Manager (see Figure 7-5).

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
209
 
4. 
Click the program you don’t want to run at startup.
 
5. 
Press the Disable button.
You should repeat steps 4 and 5 for all other software you want to disable at startup.
Note
 
■
 Once you configure your Startup programs, you should not need to switch off programs when you are gaming.
Choosing and Upgrading Your Gaming Hardware
Building a good gaming PC is a challenge, not least because the hardware can be extremely expensive for the best 
kit. But it is possible to choose or build a PC specifically for gaming on a budget. I want to talk you through what to 
look for and what to purchase. This applies not just to traditional “tower” desktop PCs but it’s also very relevant when 
you’re choosing a desktop all-in-one or a laptop PC to purchase.
Figure 7-5. Managing Startup programs in the Task Manager

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
210
Motherboard
When choosing a motherboard, it is best to select one that can run the highest overall speeds (in GHz), even if 
it makes the board capable of running much faster than the hardware you plug into it. This is to ensure that the 
motherboard is upgradable in the long-term. It will save you money and give you greater flexibility when it comes  
to upgrading.
Try to choose a board that offers the new SATA 600 ports so that you can attach the new generation of high-speed 
solid-state drives (SSD)—more on these shortly. Also, try to choose a board offering support for either Crossfire 
(AMD) or SLI (nVidia). I will talk more about this shortly.
Processor
The processor is probably the least important consideration when it comes to choosing or building a gaming PC 
because most of the gaming processing is done by your graphics card. The important considerations here are the 
clock speed (again in GHz) and, most importantly, having a processor with the same socket type as your motherboard.
A computer can run only as fast as its slowest component, so if you have chosen memory that runs faster than 
your processor, its overall speed throttles to match that of the processor. The same applies to the motherboard. If it has 
a slow clock speed, nothing can run faster than it can. Bear in mind, especially if you are buying a gaming laptop, that 
a more powerful processor negatively affects your overall battery life, sometimes dramatically.
Memory
With your computer’s memory, it’s long been established that if you don’t have enough memory installed on your 
computer for Windows and your installed programs, the computer does not run as quickly as it otherwise could.  
This is certainly true of a low-end laptop or desktop PC upgraded from 1 or 2 GB of RAM to 4 GB.
Above the 4 GB level, the speed benefits decrease significantly. You can still get noticeable speed increases on 
some machines by installing 6 GB or even 8 GB of RAM, but there is no need to install more than this unless you are 
also using your computer for very memory-intensive applications such as mega-multipixel digital photo editing, 
video creation, or computer-aided design. When purchasing RAM, you need a type that’s compatible with your 
motherboard.
Note
 
■
 If you are using the 32-bit version of Windows 8.1 on your PC, your computer can “see” only a maximum of 
4 GB RAM, including any memory on your graphics card. If you have 2 x 2 GB memory cards and 1 Gb graphics card 
memory, Windows 8.1 ignore  one of the 2 GB memory cards completely because it only sees complete cards.
Hard Disk
If you can afford it, put your money into a fast SSD, preferably (if your motherboard supports the standard) one 
running on the new SATA 600 sockets. However, purchasing SSDs is more complicated than traditional hard drives 
because manufacturers’ memory chip speeds vary wildly. It is wise to seek up-to-date reviews of SSDs online before 
you buy. You can normally find them on computer magazine web sites.
Having an SSD as your main hard disk can significantly improve the speed of Windows 8.1 and your games.  
You need to make sure, however, that the main hard disk is of a suitable size. This is where the cost can rise sharply.  
In Appendix D, I will show you how to best determine the size of the hard disk you need.

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
211
Graphics Card
Some motherboards come with onboard graphics that can handle HD video and nondemanding gaming. You might 
find that you want a separate graphics card, however, perhaps for online gaming or video editing. Earlier in this 
chapter, I spoke about SLI and Crossfire. These are technologies—by nVidia and AMD, respectively—that allow you 
to connect two or three graphics cards so that they can be used in parallel. This doesn’t actually double or triple the 
graphics processing power—each extra card adds about an extra 50 percent of the overall computing power of the first 
card. You need to choose your motherboard carefully, however, because you are locked into using cards from  
a specific company if you use the multicard feature.
Some laptops come with switchable graphics, effectively giving you two graphics cards: a low-end one suitable 
for general work and watching movies that are part of the motherboard chipset, and a second one for gaming that 
either auto-switches when needed or that can be manually turned on. This is a great way to extend the battery life  
of a laptop; if you are buying a new gaming laptop, it’s worth looking for.
If you want to use only a single graphics card on your computer, whether the motherboard supports SLI or 
Crossfire doesn’t matter—you can use an nVidia or AMD card as you desire.
Some people have strong preferences regarding AMD and nVidia graphics cards. There is tremendous brand 
loyalty to one or the other. The overall quality and speed of the cards, especially in the price/performance mid-range, 
does vary quite substantially—with different companies pulling ahead periodically with new, faster, and more powerful 
hardware, only to lose ground to a competitor’s innovation.
Before you choose a graphics card, or even a motherboard in this respect, it can be well worth checking out the 
online test reviews of graphics cards by PC magazines and other gaming web sites.
Working with Gaming Peripherals
Sometimes you have USB gaming hardware attached to your PC, which could include a joystick or paddle controller. 
To access the controls for managing them in Windows, search for game at the Start screen and select Set up USB 
game controllers from the Settings results to run the Game Controllers dialog (see Figure 7-6).
Figure 7-6. Managing game controllers in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
212
In this dialog, you can manage and change the properties of gaming controllers, such as inverting the horizontal 
and vertical axis of a joystick (see Figure 7-7).
3D Gaming on Windows 8.1
Three-dimensional gaming is relatively new to PCs. Windows 8.1 requires third-party drivers for it to work, although 
some graphics cards are increasingly coming with their own 3D drivers and controls.
To take advantage of 3D gaming on your computer, you need a screen capable of displaying double the number 
of normal frame rates, upping the standard frequency from 60 Hz to 120 Hz. You also need a graphics card that 
supports 3D.
To use 3D gaming on your computer, you will commonly launch your existing games through a 3D game 
management program or app into which you probably have to download individual profiles for your games.
There are downsides to 3D gaming on PCs, however. First and most importantly, stable 3D profiles may not be 
released until well after the launch of the game. Also, 3D has a darkening effect on the image, especially in first-person 
shooters, which can make distances more difficult to see. Finally, the 3D effect can cause headaches when used for 
more than 30 minutes.
That said, I’ve used a 3D-equipped gaming laptop and have played several 3D games on it. The effect can be 
extremely immersive and this can add, if you’ll excuse the pun, a whole new depth to your existing games titles.
Figure 7-7. Managing gaming hardware such as joysticks

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
213
Viewing and Editing Photos in Windows 8.1
The new Photos app is your default software for viewing photographs. The old Windows Photo Viewer is gone forever. 
This doesn’t mean that there aren’t many other options for viewing and editing your digital photographs, and there 
are many apps of this type in the Windows Store, including those by big-name companies.
Adobe, for example, first showed how powerful touch photo-editing apps can be on Android tablets. For 
everyone who doesn’t want to use an app or who wants finer control over their photos, there are other options, 
including the excellent Windows Live Photo Gallery from Microsoft.
The Photo App
The Windows 8.1 Photos app is a relatively basic way to view your photos and pictures. By default, it has a view that 
shows thumbnail images of the pictures and photos on your PC. It separates the different folders on your computer  
in which you store your pictures and also includes some basic photo editing features (see Figure 7-8).
Figure 7-8. The Windows 8.1 Photos app

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
214
You can share photos and pictures by clicking the Share charm. Windows 8.1 tells you which installed apps you 
can share the picture with (see Figure 7-9).
The editing facility in the Photos app has been greatly expanded since the first release of this app, and includes  
a full range of the most basic and commonly found controls. They will no doubt be expanded upon in future releases 
of the app, but, as I mentioned earlier, there are plenty of third-party photo editing apps available for Windows 8.1. 
You can find them in the Photo category of the Windows Store.
When you are viewing a single photo in the Photos app, there are options you can display in the App bar  
(see Figure 7-10). These options include making a photo your Windows 8.1 lock screen image or setting it as the 
default picture for the Photos app live tile, which cycles through all your pictures by default. From here, you can  
also display a photo slide show.
Figure 7-9. Managing photos in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
215
Windows Photo Gallery
Microsoft’s free Windows Photo Gallery software is part of the company’s Windows Essentials suite, which you can 
download from download.live.com. It is based around the company’s Ribbon interface, so it is instantly familiar to 
users of Microsoft Office 2007 and above (see Figure 7-11).
Figure 7-10. The App bar contains options for working with photos and pictures

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
216
The package allows you to perform many actions on your photos and pictures, such as the following:
Managing your photo library with drag-and-drop actions between folders
•฀
Uploading photos and videos to cloud services, including Flickr and YouTube
•฀
Basic editing (including automatic editing) of photographs
•฀
In Chapter 5, I discussed adding tags and ratings to your photo library to make individual images easier to find. 
I’ll talk about this in more detail shortly when I show you how to import photos and video from a digital camera,  
but Windows Photo Gallery offers excellent, easy-to-use methods for adding tags and ratings to photos.
Windows Photo Gallery also includes excellent face recognition software that can help tag friends and family, 
making it much easier to find photographs of specific people.
Other Third-Party Photo Editing Packages
There are many other photo management and editing apps, programs, and cloud services available. You may already 
have your favorite. I want to highlight three that I think are especially noteworthy.
Figure 7-11. Windows Photo Gallery

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
217
Adobe Photoshop Express
Photoshop Express is available as an app in the Windows Store, and it’s proven extremely popular since its launch. 
Offering more control than the Windows 8.1 photos app, and with some additional controls available through in-app 
purchases, this is a great tool for basic photograph editing on a tablet or other touchscreen PC.
Adobe Photoshop Elements
Adobe’s Photoshop software has long been the king of desktop photo editing, but the full package is extremely 
expensive and very complex. It’s really only for creative professionals. At the lower end of the price range, however,  
is Photoshop Elements, which you can download from http://www.adobe.com. It is an excellent desktop program  
that provides a significant amount of power and flexibility while still being very easy to use.
Pixlr
If you want something closer to the full version of Photoshop—but without its high price—I have never found a cloud service 
better than http://ww.pixlr.com. It is an extremely powerful, flexible, and (best of all) free cloud-based photo-editing 
service that offers many of the features you find in the full desktop version of Adobe Photoshop (see Figure 7-12).
Figure 7-12. Pixlr.com

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
218
Importing Digital Photographs and Videos from a Camera
When you insert a memory card from your digital camera or camcorder into your computer, you are asked if you want 
to import photos and video from the device.
There are several advantages of allowing Windows 8.1 to import photos and video rather than manually copying 
the files using Windows Explorer. The first advantage is that the import wizard allows you to add tags to the files. 
The second advantage is that Windows 8.1 is fantastic at determining the correct “up” position for photos and 
automatically rotates them for you.
To import photos or video, follow these instructions:
 
1. 
Insert your memory card, card reader, or camera into your Windows PC.
 
2. 
The photo import wizard appears (see Figure 7-13). Click Import to import all the photos 
to your computer. You can select or deselect images by clicking with your mouse or 
dragging down with your finger.
Figure 7-13. The Windows 8.1 photo import wizard

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
219
You can also specify a folder for the photos to be imported to. By default, this folder is named after the  
current date.
Sometimes you want more control over importing images. Let’s say, for example, that you have been on vacation 
and visited several different places or countries. You might not want all your photos stored in the same folder.
You can use Windows Photo Gallery to import photos from your digital camera or camcorder. To do this in 
Windows Photo Gallery, click the Import button on the far left of the Home tab.
With the Import Photos and Videos Wizard (see Figure 7-14), you can simply choose to import all the items on 
the memory card or to first review, organize, and group items to import. I’ll show you how to do this in a moment,  
but if you want to import all items now, you can click Add tags to include descriptive tags with the images.
These descriptive tags, which you separate with a semicolon (;), help you find and organize photos on your 
computer and enable you to search for files. For example, you can search for “Dusseldorf” or “Gilbert” to bring up all 
the related files and images in the Files search results after tags have been set (see Figure 7-15). For more information 
on using tags to organize files and photos, see Chapter 5.
Figure 7-14. The Windows 8.1 Import Photos and Videos Wizard

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
220
The Import Photos and Videos Wizard in Windows Photo Gallery also includes an option to Review, organize 
and group items to import. It brings up a page in which you can see photos and videos on the disk and select which 
ones you want to import (see Figure 7-16).
Figure 7-15. Searching for images is easier when they are tagged

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
221
A slider near the bottom right of this window is particularly useful when it has been a while since you 
downloaded photos and videos from your camera. Let’s say, for example, that you have been on vacation for  
2 weeks, during which time you visited several European cities (Amsterdam, Dusseldorf, and Cologne).
Using this slider, you can separate the photos by the date they were taken. You can then tag photos as 
“Amsterdam; Netherlands”, “Dusseldorf; Germany”, and so on.
Clicking More Options on either of the import pages offers storage locations for the imported items, the ability 
to batch-rename imported items, and automatic rotation of photographs. If you want, Windows 8.1 can delete items 
from the device or memory card after they have been imported (see Figure 7-17).
Figure 7-16. You can choose the photos to import

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
222
Manually Adding a Scanner to Windows 8.1
When you add a scanner to your PC, either one that’s built in to your printer or one that is separate, Windows 8.1 does 
a great job of automatically detecting and installing it. There might be some situations in which this doesn’t happen, 
however, and you need to install the scanner manually. You can do this by searching for scanner with the Search 
Charm and clicking View Scanners and Cameras from the results.
This panel (see Figure 7-18) allows you to manually install a scanner using the driver software that was provided 
by the scanner’s manufacturer.
Figure 7-17. There are additional import options available

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
223
Once a scanner is installed, you can click the Scan Profiles button to manage the resolution at which it scans 
images and the file type used to save your scanned images.
Playing and Enjoying Music and Video in Windows 8.1
Windows 8.1 also ships with Music and Video apps and Windows Media Player (note that Windows Media Player isn’t 
available in the ARM version of the operating system). Unlike Windows Media Player, in which you play and manage 
your music and video libraries all in the same place, the Music and Video apps in Windows 8.1 are separate from one 
another, but both operate in the same way.
When you load the app, you are taken directly to the music and video you have stored on your PC (see Figure 7-19), 
though it may take a few minutes on first loading to index all your files.
Figure 7-18. You can install scanners manually using the Show Scanners and Cameras panel

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
224
In the top left of the app are links to play music from Xbox Music Radio or to Explore new music and video that 
you can buy online from the Xbox Music service.
The music and video players in Windows 8.1 are rather good, having clearly evolved from Windows Media Center. 
They feature large onscreen controls that are simple to use with both touch and mouse; and, as with all apps, they can 
be docked to the left or right of the screen.
Creating and Managing Playlists in the Music and Video Apps
You can create music and video playlists in Music and Videos apps by selecting the artists, tracks, videos, or genres 
you want by clicking the New Playlist button on the left of the screen (see Figure 7-20). If you already have playlists 
created, they appear here as well, so you can add items to any of them with a single click.
Figure 7-19. Scroll left in the Music and Video apps to see your own content

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
225
You manage playlists in the main My Music or My Videos view, in which a link to your playlists is on the left of 
the screen. Clicking it displays your current playlists. Click to open one and you can select tracks to remove from the 
playlist (see Figure 7-21).
Figure 7-20. Adding music and video to playlists in the Music and Video apps

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
226
Audio and Video Codecs in Windows 8.1
Windows 8.1 comes with excellent audio and video support. Out of the box, it supports more music and video file 
types than any other version of Windows before it. There are three notable exceptions, however: the popular MKV 
video format (an open-source video codec) and support for both DVD video and Blu-ray video discs.
The MKV codec can be added using a codec pack such as the popular shark007.net, which is the only one  
I recommend. Adding the Blu-ray and DVD codecs requires an upgrade to Windows 8.1 Pro and purchasing  
Windows Media Center.
There are free third-party programs that can provide you with DVD and perhaps even Blu-ray playback codecs. 
Probably the best and most widely used is the VLC player, which you can download from http://www.videolan.org.
Windows Media Center
Windows Media Center doesn’t come with Windows 8.1 as standard unless it is included by the manufacturer of your 
computer. It can be added to Windows 8.1 Pro, however, through purchasing the Media Center add-on that you can 
get by clicking Add Features to Windows in the Control Panel. If you don’t have Windows 8.1 Pro, you can upgrade the 
standard Windows 8.1 to this version here as well. After you purchase Windows Media Center, an icon for it appears 
on the Start screen.
Visually and functionally, Windows Media Center has not changed from the Windows 7 version except that it now 
supports Blu-ray disc playback. The interface, which is a precursor to the one now used for the Start screen (yup, that’s 
where it all began!), operates on a four-directional crosshairs system (up, down, left, and right) and supports viewing 
pictures, music, video, and live television if your computer has a compatible TV tuner (see Figure 7-22).
Figure 7-21. Managing playlists in the Music and Video apps

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
227
Note
 
■
 The DVD and Blu-ray codecs provided with Windows Media Center allow playback only within the Media Center 
software, not through any other app or program. You can add additional DVD and Blu-ray codecs to support playback 
through video players obtained from third parties. Your computer may have been provided with software that plays  
DVD videos and Blu-ray discs.
You can also purchase a separate remote control and sensor (if your computer did not come with one) 
specifically for use with Media Center in what is commonly known as the 10-foot interface. It is great for viewing 
across a room and has made the all-in-one PC with TV tuner popular in student dorm rooms worldwide.
Organizing Your Media Libraries in Media Center
Your Windows Media Center Media Libraries automatically include all the pictures, music, and video that are in 
your File Explorer libraries. Crucially, Windows Media Center allows you to do something that’s impossible with File 
Explorer: add network locations and external hard drives to these libraries.
Any network and external file locations that you add to the Media Libraries in Windows Media Center are 
automatically added to the main libraries in Windows 8.1. This is a great workaround for a missing feature in the 
operating system.
Manage the Media Libraries in Media Center by clicking Settings on the main menu. It is listed at the bottom  
of the main Settings screen (see Figures 7-23 and 7-24).
Figure 7-22. Windows Media Center

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
228
Figure 7-24. Adding media to libraries in Windows Media Center
Figure 7-23. Managing the Media Libraries in Windows Media Center

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
229
Setting Up, Watching, and Recording Live TV
If you have a compatible television tuner card built into your computer or attached via USB, you can set up Live TV 
from the main menu. After it confirms the country and region that you live in, Windows Media Center scans for  
TV channels automatically (see Figure 7-25).
Tip
 
■
 Windows RT supports almost all the USB hardware that’s compatible with Windows 8.1, which includes many 
USB Television Tuners.
Windows Media Center supports a wide variety of television tuners, including cablecard, digital terrestrial, and 
digital satellite.
The automatically updating electronic program guide (EPG) is where you set programs to record. To record a 
television program, click the Record button on your remote control or right-click the program name. Press the Record 
button twice to record the entire series.
As with the very best digital TV recorders, Media Center is clever in that if you miss a program that was set to 
record (perhaps because you switched the computer off instead of putting it to sleep), it looks for a repeat of the 
program; if one exists, it records it.
In the TV section of the main menu, you can also search for television programs by name, genre, or other filters, 
such as actor or director.
Figure 7-25. Setting up Live TV in Media Center

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
230
Tip
 
■
 MillieSoft provides a Windows Media Center plug-in called TunerFree MCE, which gives you access to 
 on-demand Internet television services around the world (provided that those services are available in your country), 
including the BBC iPlayer and the complete Hulu catalog. It also provides live streams from organizations, including  
NASA and TWiT (This Week in Tech) podcasts (see Figure 7-26). You can download TunerFree MCE from  
http://www.milliesoft.co.uk.
Managing Windows Media Center
The main Settings screen in Media Center, shown in Figure 7-27, allows you to control all aspects of the software:
You can determine the way Windows Media Center starts up and appears onscreen; for 
•฀
example, whether it runs fullscreen, whether the Media Center window is always on top of 
other windows, and whether it runs automatically when you turn the computer on.
You can add a pin code so that children can’t view programs with an inappropriate rating.
•฀
You can edit the EPG to remove unwanted channels or that have a poor reception.
•฀
You can control how and when subtitles appear in programs.
•฀
You can control the default language and subtitle options for DVD and Blu-ray discs.
•฀
You can set up an Xbox 360 console in another part of the house to work as a Media Center 
•฀
extender, including the broadcast of live television to that extender if you have a compatible 
TV tuner in your computer.
Figure 7-26. Using TunerFree MCE

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
231
Figure 7-27. You control Windows Media Center through its Settings
Tip
 
■
 By default, subtitles appear onscreen when you mute the sound while watching live television in Windows  
Media Center.
Using Xbox 360 to Access TV, Music, Video, and Pictures from Windows 8.1
You can use your Xbox 360 console to stream music, video, and pictures from your PC if it has Windows 8.1 Pro with 
Media Center. You can do this through the Add Features to Windows 8.1 link in the Control Panel.  Note that the Xbox 
One console cannot be used as a media Center Extender.
To do this from the Xbox 360 dashboard, select Media Center in the apps section to launch the connection 
wizard. The PC hosting the video and other content has to be switched on and logged on to.
As a part of the setup process, you are given a Setup Key. Enter your Setup Key by clicking Add Extender from the 
main Windows Media Center menu. Once you have done this, you can add the Xbox 360 console to Media Center on 
your PC by clicking Add Extender in the Tasks section of the main menu. The process is simple and wizard-driven  
(see Figure 7-28).

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
232
Once you have successfully paired your Xbox 360 console and PC, you can launch Windows Media Center on the 
Xbox 360 console to stream music, video, and pictures whenever the PC is switched on.
Converting Recorded TV to DVR-MS Format
When you record a television program using Windows Media Center, the video file is captured in a Windows TV 
(.wtv) format. Not every video editor opens WTV files, although the free Windows Live Movie Maker does. So if you 
want to edit the program, you can convert it in Windows 8.1 to the widely supported DVR-MS video format used with 
Windows Media Center in Windows XP.
To convert recorded TV WTV files to DVR-MS format files, Windows Media Center must be the default playback 
program for your recorded television. You may find that this isn’t the case even with Windows Media Center installed, 
so you can change this by right-clicking a WTV file and clicking Choose Default Program from the options that appear 
(see Figure 7-29).
Figure 7-28. Connecting an Xbox 360 to Windows Media Center

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
233
When Windows 8.1 prompts you to choose the default playback program for this file, click Windows Media 
Center (see Figure 7-30).
Figure 7-29. Changing the default program to play back live TV

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
234
The file starts playing automatically, but you can close it. When you want to convert your recorded television 
programs to the DVR-MS format, you can right-click them and select Convert to .dvr-ms Format in the options that 
appear (see Figure 7-31).
Figure 7-30. Select Windows Media Center from the options

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
235
This procedure doesn’t delete the original WTV file—you are still left with it—but it does create an additional 
video file that can be edited. My favorite free editing programs for recorded TV are DVREdit and DVR-2-WMV, which 
need to be used together for the best results. Although the official download sites for these software packages are long 
gone, you can still easily find them available for download through a quick search online.
The good news is that if you don’t want to use or can’t find these tools, you can also edit your WTV and  
DVR-MS files in Windows Live Movie Maker, which is available for free download as part of the Live Essentials Suite  
at download.live.com.
Recording Audio Directly to Your PC
Sometimes you want to be able to record audio on to your PC. The good news is that Windows has had, for many years 
now, its own tool to enable you to do this. Called the Sound Recorder, this tool has been refined over the years and is 
now a very capable audio recorder (see Figure 7-32).
Figure 7-31. Converting recorded TV to DVR-MS format

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
236
This little desktop utility records automatically using the default recording device in your PC, and I will show you 
how to change the default audio devices soon. The Sound Recorder in Windows 8.1 also now includes an equivalent 
app for the first time. Both the app and the desktop program save audio files to your My Music folder.
Changing the Default Audio Devices on Your PC
Sometimes you find that you have no sound or microphone on your PC. This commonly occurs when the wrong device 
is incorrectly assigned as the default because you might have several on your PC. You can access the Sound devices 
panel by searching for Sound from the Search charm or right-clicking the sound icon on the desktop system tray and 
selecting Playback Devices from the options that appear (though the recording devices link opens the same panel).
In the Sound panel (see Figure 7-33), you have tabs across the top for Playback, Recording, Sounds, and 
Communications. It is under the Playback and Recording tabs that you find the options for setting the default speakers 
and microphone.
Figure 7-33. Sound devices panel
Figure 7-32. The Sound Recorder in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
237
To set the default, click the item you want to make the default and then click the Set Default button. Sometimes, 
however, you might want different audio devices for music and for communications, such as Skype. You can set 
different systems, such as speakers and a headset, to be just the default audio device for communications by clicking 
the chevron to the right of the Set Default button. From the options that appear, click Default Communication Device.
Burn CDs and DVDs Directly from the Desktop
Although USB Flash drives are inexpensive and readily available, people still want to want to burn CDs and DVDs 
directly from their PC. In Windows 8.1, you can do this from the desktop but only with data CDs and DVDs. The 
difference with these is that they are intended to be read by other PCs and don’t play in a standard CD or DVD player.
To burn content to a disc, follow these instructions:
 
1. 
Put a blank disc in your computer’s optical drive.
 
2. 
Select it in File Explorer (you don’t need to select every file at once).
 
3. 
Right click the file(s); from the menu that appears, click Send to and then click the name of 
the optical drive.
 
4. 
A panel appears, asking whether you want to create a disc like a USB Flash drive (which 
you can add more files to after it’s burned) or a standard CD/DVD that can’t be added to 
later (see Figure 7-34). Make your choice and click Next.
 
5. 
The files are copied to a temporary store, and a new File Explorer window opens, into 
which you can add additional files. Remember, however, that a CD has a maximum 
capacity of 650 MB, and a DVD has a maximum capacity of either 4.7 or 9.5 GB, depending 
on whether it is single- or double-layered.
 
6. 
When you’re ready to burn your disc, click the Finish Burning button under the Drive Tools 
tab on the ribbon (see Figure 7-35).
Figure 7-34. You can create fixed and multisession discs in Windows

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
238
Burn Audio CDs in Windows Media Player
If you want to burn audio CDs, you can do this in Windows Media Player. In the top right of the Windows Media Player 
window are three tabs: Play (for creating custom playlists), Burn (for burning audio CDs), and Sync (for copying music 
to a compatible MP3 player), as shown in Figure 7-36.
You can burn music that is already in your music library to an audio CD by dragging it from the main music 
details panel in the middle of the Windows Media Player window onto the Burn tab. You see how much time is left on 
the CD, enabling you to properly manage the amount of music that will fit on the disc.
When you have added all your music to the Burn panel and are ready to burn the CD, click the Start burn button 
near the top right of the window.
Figure 7-36. You can burn audio CDs in Windows Media Player
Figure 7-35. Drive Tools tab on the File Explorer ribbon

CHAPTER 7 ■ HAVING FUN WITH GAMES, PHOTOS, MUSIC, AND VIDEO
239
Summary
Windows 8.1 is a very consumer-oriented OS and has some great apps for photos, music, video, and more. The finer 
control is still available in tools such as the Import Photos and Videos Wizard.
If you’re an enthusiastic gamer, you might find Windows 8.1—with Xbox Live and Xbox console remote control 
built in for the first time—to be just the platform for you. With support for gaming technologies such as 3D gaining 
ground, it will be interesting to see the innovative uses for this operating system.
The new Music and Video apps are excellent and can be easily docked to the side of the screen while you work. 
Although you now have to pay extra for Windows Media Center and DVD/Blu-ray playback, it is a fantastic addition 
that allows you to customize the Windows 8.1 libraries in ways that are otherwise impossible.

241
CHAPTER 8
Maximizing Your Productivity
Windows was born into the business space. It was the original IBM PC, equipped with software such as Lotus 123 
or WordPerfect, that was the powerhouse of the “modern” office in the 1980s. The introduction of the Windows 
user interface and the Microsoft Office suite solidified the PC’s position as the productivity tool of choice. It was the 
flexibility of PCs that eventually brought them into homes, and now we take it for granted that we’ll have access to our 
own PC at work. Many people expect to be provided a laptop—and a smartphone as well—and others have begun 
using their personal PCs, tablets, and smartphones at work.
Despite all this, the computer is probably the biggest barrier to productivity in the workplace. Enormous barriers 
occur during a power outage or when the Internet connection goes down. There are ways to keep working in these 
circumstances, however, some of which are cleverer than buying laptops.
Some 90 percent of all e-mail is spam. There are alternatives to the spam mountain, though, and some people 
argue that the days of e-mail are numbered and that instant messaging is the way forward.
As computers become more ubiquitous and we all get older, the ever-higher pixel densities on our screens can 
make text and other information difficult to read. Couple this problem with the barriers encountered by the disabled 
and people with fine motor control problems. Windows 8.1 includes some excellent tools to include everybody in a 
computing life. There is also excellent support to be found elsewhere.
These topics are just a few of the ones that I’ll cover in this chapter, the aim of which is to help you maximize your 
productivity with the operating system.
Managing and Arranging Running Apps
One of the features (some might say “limitations”) of the new interface is that apps are designed to run full-screen, 
with only the in focus app displaying on your screen at any given time. On a small tablet screen, this isn’t a problem, 
but you still might want to have a second window open showing e-mail or messaging.
You can open up to four apps side by side in Windows 8.1, though this number will vary from two to four, 
depending on the resolution of your screen. Some people can find the multiapp approach in Windows 8.1 confusing 
at first, but I will explain in this section how easy it is to use.
Think of your running apps in Windows 8.1 as a stack of playing cards from which the Start screen is excluded. 
The card on the top is the one you are currently looking at. The card directly under this one, the most recently used 
card, is the one you can bring alongside if you want.
There are several ways of displaying two applications side by side: by touch and with the keyboard. The easiest 
method is to drag the app downward from the top center of your screen by using either a mouse or touch. It becomes 
a large thumbnail as you approach the center of the screen and can then be dropped on the left or right of the screen 
to dock it.
Another method is with the current app displaying on your screen: drag inward from the bezel on the left side of 
your screen, and the previously running app slides in from the side of the screen as a card.

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
242
Windows 8.1 then signifies that it is ready to dock that card to the first quarter of the screen. Separating the 
apps is a vertical bar with three dots on it. You can drag this bar left and right of the screen to change the primary 
focus from the main app to the side app. For example, if you have an app locked to the left quarter of the screen and 
you then drag the bar separating the two apps to the right side of the screen, the app that was on the left side now 
occupies the left three-quarters of the screen. The app that previously filled most of the screen now resides in the 
right quarter.
Note
 
■
 You can also select a running app by swiping inward from the left of the screen and then outward again to 
display the running apps list. You can then drag app thumbnails out from this list and dock them on your screen.
In Figure 8-1, the desktop counts as an app insofar as viewing two apps side by side is concerned. This means you 
can view the desktop in most of your screen while also seeing an app pinned to the left or right side.
Figure 8-1. Two apps side by side in Windows 8.1
There is one way to snap any running app to the left or right side of the screen, regardless of where it sits in your 
stack of running apps. If you move your mouse to the top left of your screen (note that this cannot be done by touch), 
thumbnails of all running apps appear. You can right-click any running app and select an option to snap it to the left 
or right side of your screen.

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
243
To add a third or even a fourth app if your screen resolution supports it, you can add the additional app in 
the same way as you added the second. It appears on your screen as a large thumbnail (see Figure 8-2). When you 
drag this thumbnail to the left or right sides of your screen, the thumbnail indicates that if dropped it replaces the 
app running on that side. If you move the thumbnail over the vertical bar separating the running apps, however, a 
gap opens, into which you can drop the additional app. If this gap doesn’t appear, your screen resolution isn’t wide 
enough to support an extra app, and you can drag the thumbnail off the bottom of the screen to close and discard it.
Figure 8-2. You can have three or four apps on screen at any one time
When you have two or more apps onscreen, you can drag the vertical bar separating them left or right to change 
the size or the apps. This can be useful for having one app in a thin bar along one side of the screen while the other 
fills the rest of the space or for having two apps the same size. Not all apps are compatible with varying sizes, however, 
and might not display the way you want.
Switching Between Running Apps
You can switch between any of your running apps by using the Win+Tab keyboard shortcut. In Windows Vista and 
Windows 7, it displayed the Flip 3D view, in which you could switch between running desktop apps in a  
three-dimensional stack. Flip 3D is not a part of Windows 8.1.

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
244
Note
 
■
 It is important to note that Win+Tab, which is used to switch between apps, doesn’t allow you to select a  
running desktop program. To do this, you should use the Alt+Tab keyboard shortcut.
You can also use a mouse to switch between running apps from the Start screen. To do this, move your mouse 
cursor to the bottom left or top left of the screen; you see the Start button at the bottom of the screen and thumbnails 
at the top of the screen.
You can mouse up or down in this view to select the app to switch to and then click it.
Tip
 
■
 You can shut down an app in this view by right-clicking it and selecting Close. You can also snap any app to the 
left or right side of the screen in this right-click menu.
To switch between running apps with touch, you can drag apps in from the left of the screen. Start your swipe 
gesture on the left screen bezel, and the apps appear one at a time in reverse order from when they were last used. 
Swiping an app inward makes it run full-screen. You can then continue swiping, one app at a time, until you reach the 
app that you want. This is one of the features in Windows 8. Alternatively, swipe inward from the left of the screen and 
then out again to display the running apps list. You can then tap the thumbnail image of the app you want to switch to.
You can snap the current window to the left and right of the screen using the keyboard combinations Win+right 
and left cursor keys. The reason to refer to these key combinations in this way is to remind you that there is no need to 
hold down the Shift key.
The next app you launch from the Start screen then automatically fills the remaining space, leaving your snapped 
app where you put it.
Arranging Two Apps Side by Side
Working with side-by-side apps is straightforward; you can have up to four onscreen at once. This view is called 
split-screen and it enables you to have one app in a side bar docked to either the far left or far right of the screen, while 
another app takes up the remaining space on your screen (see Figure 8-3).

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
245
Tip
 
■
 You can snap an app to one side of the screen using a mouse. Click the top of the app and drag it from the top of 
the screen toward the left or right of the screen, where the dock bar appears.
There are several ways to get apps to display side by side. It depends on whether you’re using a touchscreen or a 
keyboard and mouse. To run side-by-side apps using touch, perform the following steps:
 
1. 
Open the app you want to pin to a side pane.
 
2. 
Grab the top center of the app and drag it to the left or right side of the screen. A vertical 
bar appears, indicating that the app will be docked.
 
3. 
Return to the Start screen.
 
4. 
Open the app you want to pin in the rest of your screen. This app opens to fill the 
remaining space.
You can drag the vertical bar separating apps from the left to the right of the screen to change the focus between 
the two running apps.
Figure 8-3. Side-by-side apps 

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
246
To arrange split-screen apps using a keyboard and mouse, perform the following steps:
 
1. 
Run the app you want to pin in a sidebar.
 
2. 
Press Win+right cursor key on your keyboard to pin this app to the right of your screen.
 
3. 
Return to the Start screen and run the second app.
 
4. 
Move your mouse to the top left of your screen to display app thumbnails.
 
5. 
Click the app you want to run in the main part of the screen.
Another way to snap apps to the left or the right of the screen is from the thumbnails of running apps.
 
1. 
Move your mouse to the top left of the screen to display the thumbnails of running apps.
 
2. 
Right-click the app you want to snap to the left or right of the screen.
 
3. 
From the context menu, click Snap Left or Snap Right.
Working with Multiple Programs on the Desktop
Some people argue that running two apps side by side can be limiting, but this is what I tend to do on the desktop, 
with everything else minimized. So how can you maximize your desktop window productivity?
Hiding and Restoring All Windows on the Desktop (a.k.a. Boss Mode)
If your desktop is getting really cluttered and you’re struggling to concentrate, there is a quick and easy way to 
minimize all the windows open on your desktop. On the far right of the taskbar, click the blank space to the right of the 
clock (see Figure 8-4). There is a hidden button here that automatically minimizes all the Windows on your desktop.
Figure 8-4. The hide-all-windows button is on the far right of the taskbar
Tip
 
■
 The best way to find the Minimize All Programs button is to press Win+M on your keyboard, however you can 
also click in the far right of your taskbar.
Clicking this button again restores all the windows to their previous positions onscreen. This feature is sometimes 
referred to as boss mode because if you’re having a moment of downtime at work and the boss walks past, he doesn’t 
have to see that you’re playing a game on Facebook or shopping on Amazon.
Note
 
■
 Some laptops come with a feature that allows you to run your fingers downward on the trackpad (usually four 
fingers) to automatically minimize all windows.

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
247
Minimizing and Restoring Windows Using Shake
Another way to minimize and restore all the windows on your screen is to shake your mouse. Doing this minimizes 
everything; another shake restores everything. It is useful for many people, but for those who have fine motor control 
problems, this feature can prove annoying. You can switch it off in the accessibility options (see Chapter 10).
Snapping Two Windows Side by Side
One of the most useful features in Windows, which I use all the time, is Snap. It allows you to view two windows on 
the desktop side by side, with each occupying exactly 50 percent of the screen. You can use it by dragging windows to 
the very left or very right of your screen, or by pressing the Windows key + the left or right cursor keys. As you drag a 
window to the left or right of your screen, a ghost outline of the program appears onscreen to show you that when you 
release the window, it will snap to one half of the screen.
This feature is useful for many scenarios, including moving or copying files from one location to another, 
comparing two documents side by side, or working with two Internet Explorer windows side by side (see Figure 8-5).
Figure 8-5. Snap in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
248
Peeking at and Closing Windows from Thumbnails
Another extremely useful way to arrange Windows on the desktop is through the use of taskbar thumbnails.  
When you move your mouse over the taskbar button of an open program, thumbnail images of that program appear.  
There are several actions you can perform here:
Hovering your mouse over a thumbnail for about 1 second displays that window in the main 
•฀
screen, even if the program is minimized. It shows only that program and temporarily hides all 
others that are open.
You can select this window to bring to the foreground by clicking the thumbnail.
•฀
You can close a window by clicking the Close button in the top right of the thumbnail  
•฀
(see Figure 8-6).
Figure 8-6. You can view thumbnails of running desktop programs from the taskbar
Pinning Programs to the Desktop Taskbar
You can pin a program to the desktop taskbar in Windows 8.1 by right-clicking its tile in either the Start screen or the 
All Apps view, and selecting Pin to Taskbar from the App bar (see Figure 8-7).

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
249
Tip
 
■
 You can select multiple programs on the Start screen or All Apps view and pin them to the taskbar together, 
which is a good way to save time if you have many programs you want to pin.
Once you have your programs pinned to the taskbar, you can rearrange them by dragging and dropping them so 
that they are in the order that best suits you. My advice is to use the taskbar to pin all the programs that you use on a 
regular basis because it makes it much easier to launch them.
You can still access lesser-used utilities when you need them because they are always available on the All Apps 
view, but the aim is to keep the taskbar relatively uncluttered by showing only the program tiles that you genuinely use 
on a regular basis.
Tip
 
■
 It is possible in Windows 8.1 to not just start your computer directly to the desktop but also to show the All Apps 
view when you press the Start button and display your desktop programs first in that view. I show you how to make these 
changes in Chapter 9.
Figure 8-7. You can pin programs to the taskbar from the Start screen

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
250
Maximizing Productivity with Jump Lists
Jump Lists, first introduced in Windows 7, are a great way to organize the files you work with on a regular basis or for a 
current project. You can open a Jump List from the taskbar in one of two ways:
Tap and push up with your mouse or finger.
•฀
Right-click with your mouse.
•฀
Jump Lists show the files or places that have been opened most recently in a program. By default, it’s the ten most 
recently opened documents.
You can pin documents, as many as you like, to Jump Lists by clicking the Pin button that appears next to the 
document name when you mouse over it. Pinning a document to a Jump List ensures that it always appears at the top 
of the list (see Figure 8-8). This makes access to commonly used files extremely quick and simple.
Figure 8-8. Pin and unpin recently accessed files to Jump Lists
Jump Lists commonly also provide quick access to certain features within programs, including quick links to 
specific features and controls, in which links to the main sections of Microsoft Outlook can be found in the program’s 
Jump List (see Figure 8-9).

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
251
Using Microsoft SkyDrive with Windows 8.1
Microsoft’s SkyDrive cloud storage service is built into Windows 8.1 in a significant way, and in Chapter 1 showed you 
how to use the built-in SkyDrive file backup and sync feature. Windows 8.1 easily provides access to the files you have 
stored in SkyDrive when in any compatible app that works with files (see Figure 8-10). It allows you to view and open 
any files you have stored in Microsoft’s cloud backup service. It can be very helpful on tablets and ultrabooks, where 
local storage space is at a premium, or if you want to access the same file on multiple computers.
Figure 8-9. You can get quick access to a program’s features from Jump Lists
Figure 8-10. Viewing your SkyDrive folders and files in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
252
Additionally, any files you have stored in SkyDrive is immediately available if you log in to Windows 8.1 using the 
same Microsoft account regardless of whether you want to sync files locally to the PC. This can be extremely useful for 
low-storage devices such as tablets and ultrabooks, in which you want occasional access to files without the storage 
problems (and associated security concerns) of keeping a local copy all the time.
Tip
 
■
 You can change the location of the SkyDrive folder in Windows 8.1 by right-clicking the SkyDrive link in the left 
panel of File Explorer. From the menu that appears, select its Properties. Then in the window that appears, click the  
Location tab and then click the Move button. You can now select a different folder location for your SkyDrive sync folder.
To access files from SkyDrive from the desktop on your Windows 8.1 PC, click the SkyDrive link in File Explorer; 
you see all your files and folders right away (see Figure 8-11).
Figure 8-11. You can access all the files you have stored in SkyDrive, even if they’re not synced to your own PC
When you open a file on the PC that is stored in SkyDrive it will be downloaded and a local copy kept and synced. 
This allows you to work on and make changes to the document or file locally on the PC and know that when you save 
it, the changes are automatically synchronized back to the cloud.
Sometimes, however, you will want to force Windows 8.1 to keep, or not to keep, a local copy of SkyDrive files, or 
even entire folders. You can do this through a simple right-click, where you will find a Make available offline or online 
command (see Figure 8-12).

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
253
By default, a SkyDrive account gives you 7 GB of free storage, which is plenty for a lot of people. You can expand 
this amount, however, at the SkyDrive web site by purchasing additional space for reasonable rates.
SkyDrive is a good service to use with Windows 8.1, primarily because the amount of free storage you get is quite 
generous, but also because it is easily accessible by other Microsoft products, such as Windows Phone.
Using the Windows 8.1 Spell Checker
Windows 8.1 comes with a built-in spell checker so that this facility is available to you most of the time (the spell 
checker doesn’t work in every program), even when filling in web forms in Internet Explorer. When Windows 8.1 
detects a work that is incorrectly spelled, it underlines it for you to highlight it. You can then click the word to either 
correct it from a list of options, ignore it, or add it to the dictionary (see Figure 8-13).
Figure 8-12. You can force your PC to keep individual files and whole folders online or offline

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
254
You can turn the spell checker on and off in Windows 8.1 through the PC Settings panel. Navigate to PC & Devices 
and then click the Typing link in the left panel. Two options for controlling the spell checker then appear at the top of 
your screen. The first enables or disables the autocorrect, which is where Windows 8.1 automatically correct a word 
for you if it believes you’ve misspelled a very common word; the second option turns the spell checking on and off 
completely (see Figure 8-14).
Figure 8-13. The Windows 8.1 spell checker works both in desktop programs and apps

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
255
Sometimes, however, you might find that you added a word or words to the custom dictionary in Windows 8.1 
that you didn’t mean to, perhaps because they are also misspelled. This isn’t a problem, though. In a File Explorer 
window, click in the address bar, type %AppData%\Microsoft\Spelling\, and press Enter. This process opens the file 
location for the custom dictionary (see Figure 8-15).
Figure 8-14. Managing the spell checker in Windows 8.1
Figure 8-15. The custom dictionary can be edited in Windows 8.1
The file you want to edit is one of the default text document files (usually the one with the largest file size, and 
if you can see its file extension, it is called default.dic). This file opens in Notepad as a plain text list of the words that 
have been added to the dictionary and in the order they were added. You can simply edit or delete items from this list 
to change the custom dictionary.

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
256
Tip
 
■
 If you work in an environment with many custom dictionary words, such as engineering or the legal profession, 
they can be added by system administrators by injecting a dictionary file into a custom Windows installation image.
Taking Screen Shots in Windows 8.1
Sometimes you need to get a captured image of what you can see on your PC screen, and this is where the Windows 8.1  
useful screen shot features come in handy. You might be surprised to hear this, but there are actually four different 
ways to capture screen shots in Windows 8.1, and the ones you use vary, depending on what device you are using.
Opening the 
•฀
Share charm from the desktop displays a list of programs with which you can 
share a screen shot. You can’t share anything else from desktop programs, so whichever 
program you select here, a screen shot is shared with instead. From within apps, a drop-down 
list appears on the top right of your screen when you open the Share charm. This drop-down 
includes an option to take a screen shot, which can then be shared with whatever app you 
click next (see Figure 8-16).
Figure 8-16. You can share screen shots from the Share charm
You can use the 
•฀
Windows key + Prnt Scrn key combination to take a screen shot that will be 
saved to a Screenshots folder in your Pictures library.
On tablet devices you can commonly press the 
•฀
Windows button on the bezel of the device while 
holding down the Volume down key. It saves a screen shot to your Pictures ➤ Screenshots folder.
You can use the 
•฀
Snipping tool to capture screen shots of specific windows or partial screens, 
(see the following section).

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
257
Using the Snipping Tool
You can run the snipping tool by searching for it at the Start screen or running it from the All Apps view. There are four 
different ways you can snip: a free form, in which you draw around an object, a rectangular snip, a window snip to 
capture a whole window, and a full-screen snip (see Figure 8-17).
Figure 8-17. The snipping tool is a flexible screen capture utility
After creating a snip, an editing window appears, in which you can annotate, highlight, or erase parts of the 
snip. It is also in this editing window that you save the image, and there are a wide variety of file formats that can 
be used.
Tip
 
■
 Your productivity can be boosted further by searching for a program’s real file name instead of its long name 
when you want to run it. Here is a list of some of the most common. iexplore (Internet Explorer), explorer (File Explorer), 
calc (Calculator), wmplayer (Windows Media Player), control (Control Panel), regedit (Registry editor), msconfig (System 
Configuration Panel), and gpedit.msc (Group Policy Editor).
Windows Mobility Center
The Windows Mobility Center (see Figure 8-18) is designed to help keep you productive on devices such as laptops, 
ultrabooks, and tablets. The easiest way to find it is to type mobile or mobility at the Start screen; you’ll find it in the 
search results. I want to discuss the areas of the Mobility Center by the type of tasks you want to perform.

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
258
Tip
 
■
 You can access the Windows Mobility Center by right-clicking the battery button on the taskbar or through the 
Win+X administration menu.
Managing Battery Life on Laptops, Ultrabooks, and Tablets
Battery life is critical on laptops, ultrabooks, and tablets. Although many computer reviews and manufacturers now claim 
that some devices manage 8 hours of life on “light use,” the definition of light use means not really using the machine the 
way you want to in an average day. There are several tools you can use in the mobility center to optimize your battery life:
•฀
Brightness is a simple slider to adjust the brightness of your screen. Lower levels of brightness 
prolong battery life.
•฀
Battery Status provides a quick indication of the amount of power your battery has remaining. 
It also provides a drop-down menu that includes a power-saving mode to prolong battery life.
For more information on battery power management in Windows 8.1, see Chapter 9.
Maintaining Productivity Without Electricity/Internet Access
If you have ever been in a workplace during a power outage or when the Internet connection fails, you know that it 
commonly results in work stoppage and card playing.
The absence of electricity or an Internet connection doesn’t need to mean that you can’t get any work done. 
There are ways around these problems. Most obviously, if you have a laptop, it can continue to run as long as its 
battery lasts, which is often long enough to wait out a power outage.
You can also install Uninterruptable Power Supplies (UPS) in your workplace, which keeps computers, and even 
the Internet connection, running smoothly. Remember that your broadband line comes through a phone cable that is 
on its own external power circuit. Having a UPS plugged into your router (and perhaps a switch box if required) keeps 
your Wi-Fi and network online.
PCs plugged into UPS boxes can keep running for an hour or more in the event of a power outage. This means 
that you should have plenty of power to continue working while you wait for the electricity to come back on.
Figure 8-18. Windows Mobility Center

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
259
Sharing a Mobile Broadband Connection
When your Internet connection goes down, you don’t have to do without web access. If you have a laptop containing  
a mobile broadband (3G or 4G/LTE SIM card), you can share this connection through the laptop (or even an  
Intel-based tablet) and with other computers in the office.
There are two ways to share a mobile broadband connection in Windows 8.1, the simplest of which resides in PC 
Settings. To access it, open PC Settings, then click Network, click Connections, and finally click the name of the mobile 
broadband connection you want to share.
If your connection can be shared, a Share your mobile broadband button will be clickable. As shown in Figure 8-19, 
it isn’t always the case because this facility can be disabled by your mobile network. Sharing a connection in this way 
sets up an ad hoc Wi-Fi network with its own name and access code to which you can connect up to ten devices of any 
type. By this I mean that you’re not limited to connecting only other Windows 8.1 PCs. Any device that can connect to 
the Internet via Wi-Fi can share this connection.
Figure 8-19. You can share a mobile broadband connection in PC Settings

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
260
You can also share a mobile broadband connection in the Network and Sharing Centre, which you can access 
from the desktop.
Tip
 
■
 Many modern smartphones, including Windows Phones, can be set up as mobile Wi-Fi hotspots so that their 
connection can be shared with other computers and devices. This feature may be called tethering on your smartphone. 
You should check with your carrier to see whether this feature is supported on your tariff because not all carriers permit 
tethering, and you may incur additional data charges.
To share a mobile broadband connection from the desktop, perform the following steps:
 
1. 
In the Control Panel, open the Network and Sharing Center.
 
2. 
In the left pane, click Change Adapter Settings.
 
3. 
Right-click the Mobile Broadband connection and select Properties from the context 
menu.
 
4. 
Click the Sharing tab in the dialog (see Figure 8-20).
Figure 8-20. Sharing a mobile broadband connection in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
261
 
5. 
Select the check box to Allow other network computers to connect through this 
computer’s Internet connection.
 
6. 
Set the Home Networking Connection type to Wi-Fi.
Other computers in the vicinity can now get online using the mobile broadband connection of the host laptop.
Note
 
■
 Be aware that mobile data can be costly, and you should not use metered mobile broadband connections for 
Internet activities that are bandwidth-intensive.
Mobile operators sell 3G and 4G/LTE Wi-Fi mini routers that act in the same way as a standard DSL router in 
the home or workplace. Also, some standard DSK and cable routers include SIM card slots as a backup connection. 
They can usually be set to automatically switch the data connection if the main Internet connection stops working.
Working with Secondary Displays
When you are a road warrior, you are often working with projectors or secondary displays. You can normally access 
them in the Charms menu on the Start screen under Devices. But if you are presenting, perhaps using PowerPoint, 
you are using the desktop.
In the Mobility Center, you have options to connect to and manage an external display, as well as to rotate the 
orientation of your screen (perhaps if you are working on a tablet or a vertically aligned screen).
Note
 
■
 What is Presentation mode? This option, found in the Presentation settings, disables all Windows, e-mail, 
and other notifications when you are using your computer for a presentation. It also disables Sleep mode during a  
presentation. This prevents the machine from switching itself off to save power (remember to have a main power 
adapter handy). It also prevents e-mail pop-ups from appearing so that your audience doesn’t see that a friend just 
tagged you in a picture on Facebook.
Synchronizing Files with Other Computers and Devices
The Windows Mobility Center contains a quick link to the Windows Sync Center. It is here that you manage any 
ActiveSync devices that your computer or Windows Server domain account is linked to. These devices include 
smartphones and tablets. If you have a device managed through ActiveSync, it is commonly set up by your systems 
administrator through Microsoft Exchange.
The Sync Center allows you to manage your synced devices (see Figure 8-21). You may have a hardware device 
that you want to sync with your computer, but you can also use the Sync Center to keep an offline version of server 
files so that you can work on the move.

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
262
On the Sync Setup page, you can view your current sync partnerships and any conflicts that you might have.  
To check that everything is up to date, you can also get the current status of synchronization with devices.
Click Set up new sync partnerships to synchronize files with another device on Windows 8.1. Note that the other 
device needs to be connected to your computer to set up the partnership. When you select a sync partnership in the 
Sync Center, buttons to force a Sync and to set the sync Schedule appear across the top of the list of partnerships.  
You can click them to manage the partnership sync settings.
If you are using the Sync Center to keep offline copies of files from a Windows Server, click Manage offline files to 
control your settings for the sync partnership.
In the Offline Files dialog (see Figure 8-22), you can control the current state of the partnership, including the 
ability to specify the amount of hard disk space on your computer that is available for syncing. You do this on the 
Disk Usage tab. The more space you make available, the more files you can sync with your computer and  
store locally.
Figure 8-21. Sync Center

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
263
This dialog also allows you to make sure that offline files are automatically encrypted. This option is very useful if 
you keep offline versions of files on a laptop that you travel with.
Setting Up and Using Work Folders
If your company uses the new Work Folders feature in the latest version of Windows Server, this is often a simpler and 
easier to manage system for maintaining offline versions of files for the user. You can find Work Folders in the Control 
Panel. Click Set up Work Folders to get started and you are asked for your work e-mail address or the URL of the work 
folder on the company server.
Once the first file sync has taken place, the Work Folders panel changes to display a status of the current file sync 
with the server (see Figure 8-23). This panel can then be used to control how the file sync works, such as whether files 
should also sync over mobile broadband connections. You also turn Work Folders off here.
Figure 8-22. Offline Files dialog

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
264
The synced work folders then appear in the This PC view of File Explorer (see Figure 8-24), and can easily be opened 
and accessed from here. In many ways, this makes Work Folders a significantly more friendly and powerful alternative 
to the older ActiveSync feature, though it does require a specially configured server that ActiveSync does not require.
Figure 8-23. Work Folders are new to Windows 8.1 and Windows Server
Figure 8-24. Synced work folders appear in the This PC view of File Explorer

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
265
Working with Multiple Screens and Desktops in Windows 8.1
Many people like to use multiple monitors with their computers. Laptops especially might have a secondary monitor, 
or you might work in a financial or design environment in which multiple displays are commonplace. In this section,  
I show you how to manage multiple displays in Windows 8.1, and how you can get the best from those displays 
through the use of multidesktop wallpapers and new taskbar options.
Managing Multiple Displays in Windows 8.1
You can manage multiple displays in Windows 8.1 in one of two ways. From the charms, you can select Devices; 
management of secondary displays is located here. If you are using multiple monitors, however, you will most likely 
use the Windows desktop.
To manage multiple displays from the desktop, right-click anywhere in free desktop space (see Figure 8-25).  
From the context menu, select Screen Resolution.
Figure 8-25. Managing multiple displays from the desktop

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
266
Note
 
■
 You can’t span the Windows 8.1 Start screen across more than one display; it always appears on the primary 
display. The Start screen always displays on the monitor last used to display an app.
The Screen Resolution window shows each monitor connected to your computer. Here you can drag and drop 
the monitor displays to the left and right, and even up and down to organize them. You also have several other 
options, including whether to duplicate or extend the main display onto the secondary screen.
You can also select to make a screen your main display (I’ll explain why you might want to do this shortly). Simply 
select the display icon that represents the one that you want to be your primary display and then check the box  
Make this my main display.
Several very useful new multimonitor tools in Windows include the ability to display the Start screen and the 
desktop on separate monitors simultaneously, though you can’t stretch the Start screen across multiple displays.
Tip
 
■
 Many laptops now come with a new feature called Wi-Di (wireless display) or its companion technology 
Miracast, both of which allow you to project your screen to a compatible projector or screen that also supports 
the Wi-Di technology. If you use this feature, the wireless display may now appear on the Screen Resolution page. 
There are two ways to activate the wireless display: press Win+P (project to a second screen) or click Project in the 
Devices charm.
There are also some new tools for managing the taskbar in Windows 8.1. For example, on some screens 
there is no system tray shown; it is shown only on one screen. If you want to move the system tray to another 
screen, you can do this by right-clicking the taskbar on the target screen and from the context menu, click  
Make this my main taskbar.
You can also manage the taskbar in other ways when you have multiple monitors attached. By right-clicking  
the taskbar and selecting Properties, you see a dialog that shows additional multimonitor controls (see Figure 8-26).

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
267
In taskbar properties, you can uncheck the box to automatically display the taskbar on all displays. If you do this, 
you see the taskbar only on your primary screen. Here are other options that you might find useful:
Show taskbar buttons on 
•฀
all taskbars shows all your pinned buttons for both open and 
inactive programs on every screen.
Show taskbar buttons on 
•฀
main taskbar and taskbar where window is open shows all the 
pinned application buttons on your main display, but only the buttons for open programs 
residing on the secondary display(s).
Show taskbar buttons on 
•฀
taskbar where window is open shows all your pinned buttons, but 
open programs are indicated on the screen only where they are actually open.
You may want to show the taskbar only on a single display, however, because it enables you to use the whole of 
each secondary screen for programs without a (likely empty) taskbar getting in the way.
Note
 
■
 You can take screen shots of multiple monitor displays in Windows 8.1 by pressing Win+PrntScrn (see Figure 8-27).
Figure 8-26. Managing the taskbar on multiple screens

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
268
Using Multimonitor Wallpapers in Windows 8.1
Windows 8.1 now supports widescreen desktop wallpapers that can be spanned across multiple displays. Windows 
8.1 also allows you to set different wallpapers on different screens. You select your multiscreen wallpaper in the usual 
way: by right-clicking a blank space on the desktop and selecting Personalize, or by right-clicking an image and then 
selecting Set as desktop wallpaper.
It is in the Personalization options that you choose the new Span option. It sits in the Picture Position drop-down 
box (see Figure 8-28). Windows 8.1 now gives you the option to span your wallpaper across several different screens.
Figure 8-27. Take multiple monitor screen shots in Windows 8.1
Figure 8-28. Desktop wallpapers can be set to span multiple screens

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
269
Note
 
■
 Spanned wallpapers really work only when all the attached screens are running at the same resolution. If they 
are not, you may see areas of black.
Creating a Windows To Go Drive Without Windows To Go
Windows To Go is a feature of Windows 8.1 Enterprise that allows system administrators to provide people with 
USB flash drives containing a copy of Windows 8.1 and required work software. You start any USB-bootable PC 
from this drive and be using your own copy of Windows 8.1 and your own software, anywhere, any time, and on any 
PC. I won’t explain how to use Windows To Go here because as an enterprise feature, any Windows To Go drives 
you use are provided to you by your system administrator. However! It is still possible to create a Windows To Go 
drive yourself—after a fashion, anyway.
Creating a bootable USB flash drive in this way, although not the same as Windows To Go, also gets around the 
limitation that Windows To Go has of working with only a select few supported drives. This method works on any USB 
flash drive of 16 GB or more, though a larger capacity and fast USB 3.0 drive enables you to get the best experience.
Note
 
■
 Unlike when using Windows To Go, you need a spare and valid product key for the copy of Windows you want 
to install to the USB flash drive and also for any software you want to install onto it.
 
1. 
Plug your USB flash drive into the PC.
 
2. 
Press Win+X to open the Administration menu (you can also right-click the Start button 
on the desktop).
 
3. 
Open Command Prompt (Admin) and click through the UAC warning.
 
4. 
In the Command window, type diskpart and press Enter.
 
5. 
Type list disk and press Enter to display a list of available drives in your PC. Make a note of 
the number (0, 1, 2, etc.) for the USB flash drive which will be identifiable best through its 
capacity.
 
6. 
Type select disk 2 where the number represents the disk number for the USB flash drive 
and press Enter.
 
7. 
Type clean and press Enter to prepare the drive for formatting.
 
8. 
Type create partition primary and press Enter.
 
9. 
Type format fs=ntfs quick to format the USB flash drive. This erases everything from it.
 
10. 
Type active and press Enter.
 
11. 
Type assign letter=e and press Enter. This assigns a drive letter to the USB flash drive. 
Make sure that the letter you want to use isn’t already in use.
 
12. 
Type exit and press Enter.
 
13. 
Mount a Windows 8.1 ISO file on your computer by right-clicking it in File Explorer and 
clicking mount or inserting a Windows 8.1 installation DVD on your computer. Make a 
note of its drive letter; you will need it.

CHAPTER 8 ■ MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
270
 
14. 
Back at the Command window, type dism /apply-image /imagefile=f:\sources\install.
wim /index:1 /applydir:e:\ and press Enter, where e is the letter for your USB flash drive 
and f is the drive letter for your mounted ISO file or DVD. It copies the installation files 
from the Windows 8.1 installer to the USB flash drive.
 
15. 
Type bcdboot.exe e:\windows /s e: /f ALL and press Enter to set the USB flash drive as 
bootable.
You can now restart your PC and start it from the USB flash drive from the boot menu (usually F12 or Esc at 
startup). The initial install can take some time, especially on slower USB 2.0 drives. It is also a good idea to run this 
installation process, if possible, on the PC you will most often be using the drive with to ensure hardware driver 
compatibility. This is because in my own tests the drive worked and identified itself as Windows To Go on two PCs 
with the older BIOS motherboard software, but on two UEFI firmware machines it would start only on the PC for 
which it has driver compatibility.
Once you have installed Windows (see Chapter 15 for full details on how to do this), you should then install on 
the USB flash drive all the software you want to use on the flash drive because when you use it on other computers,  
it identifies as Windows To Go and doesn’t allow you to install software. Any and all software should be installed when 
the USB flash drive is started on the same PC it was installed with.
Summary
Windows 8.1 contains volumes of productivity tools and ways to make the operating system, your programs, and 
documents easier to use. The mobility features also help squeeze more life out of your laptop’s battery.
There are other productivity tools that I discuss later in this book, including the new Hyper-V virtualization 
software. As a guide to help you maximize your time with Windows 8.1, this chapter has covered what most people 
need to know.

271
CHAPTER 9
Personalizing Your Windows 
Experience
Windows has always been one of the most customizable operating systems available, which is one of the things 
that has made it so popular over the years. Indeed, a whole industry of third-party products is well established with 
companies providing ever more imaginative ways for you to personalize your copy of Windows.
Windows Vista introduced the Aero Glass interface. Here was something that had a much nicer appearance than 
the Teletubby blue of XP or the battleship gray of Windows of old, so fewer people felt the need to customize their 
Windows installation.
When Aero Glass was further refined in Windows 7, changing the look of Windows to a metallic or movie-style 
theme, it became even less likely that people would personalize the desktop.
Windows 8.1 has the new Start screen and apparently fewer personalization options than the desktop. There are 
fewer wallpaper and color options, and a sea of colored squares and rectangles.
So how can you personalize your copy of Windows 8.1? What options exist to allow you to change the desktop 
in imaginative ways? What hacks and third-party software exist to change the look of Windows 8.1 by perhaps 
customizing the taskbar or even bringing back the Start menu?
You’ll be pleased to hear that Windows 8.1 is just as customizable as its predecessors. In this chapter, I’ll show 
you how to give it a look and feel that best suits you.
Personalizing Windows 8.1
Again, Microsoft doesn’t really allow a great deal of personalization with the new user interface (UI). When you first 
install Windows 8.1, you’re asked to choose a color for the background—but there are other ways you can make the 
Start screen your own.
The main personalization options for the Start screen are in the PC Settings’ Personalize section. Here you have 
three tabs across the top of the page: Lock Screen, Start Screen, and Account Picture. In the following sections, you’ll 
look at these primary options and other ways that you can personalize Windows 8.1.
Personalizing the Lock Screen
You personalize the lock screen in PC Settings by clicking PC & Devices, and the Lock Screen settings will be 
highlighted straight away. You might also see Lock Screen in the Top Settings section when you enter PC Settings. You 
can change the main background picture on the lock screen, but there’s much more you can do with it besides, and I’ll 
show you what else you can do shortly.
Figure 9-1 shows a selection of standard photographs you can choose from for your lock screen image. You can 
also click the Browse button to choose an image from your computer or network attached storage.

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
272
You can also turn your lock screen into a picture slide show. To do this, activate the Slide Show switch and then 
you can add multiple picture folders to the slide show. The options here are quite comprehensive, allowing you to let 
Windows decide which pictures to display (sort of a shuffle mode), when the lock screen photo slide show appears, 
and whether it turns off. If you have a low-power PC such as a Surface, this option enables you to use the PC as a 
digital photo frame.
More interesting are the lock screen apps. You can choose from installed apps that are capable of displaying live 
information on the lock screen. Not every app is capable of this, but those that are greatly increase the functionality of 
the lock screen.
To examine just how useful this can be, let’s have a look at earlier Windows versions and the way we use our 
computers. In every earlier version of Windows, the lock screen didn’t provide any information except which user was 
logged on.
With Windows 8.1, the lock screen always provides the time and date. It can also show additional information, such 
as the number of unread e-mails, the number of instant messages you have received, the current weather, and much 
more. You can also have an alarm app shown on the lock screen, and Windows 8.1 ships with such an app. This makes 
low–power Windows RT devices suitable as alarm clocks as they will wake from sleep to sound your morning alarm.
Tip
 
■
 At the bottom of the lock screen options is one to allow the camera to be used with a downward swipe on the 
screen (as opposed to the upward swipe to unlock the PC). This enables you to use the camera quickly without having to 
unlock the PC.
Figure 9-1. Personalizing the Windows 8.1 lock screen

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
273
As I mentioned earlier, not every app is compatible with the lock screen, and some are capable of displaying 
only limited data. This includes the e-mail app because you don’t necessarily want people who are walking past your 
computer to be able to read the names of the senders and the subjects of the e-mails you have waiting.
You can add up to seven apps to the lock screen in Windows 8.1. They always display in the bottom left of the 
screen under the date and time.
Some apps provide much more information, including the calendar. It is very useful for providing details about 
your afternoon schedule, seeing what your friends are doing on social networks, or informing others that you’ll be at 
the dentist for the next hour—so that they can mess around with your computer.
You can only have one of the seven apps display additional information (this is optional). If you want to turn off 
this feature so that you see only the basic apps, click the Detailed Status app and select Don’t display detailed status 
on the lock screen.
Tip
 
■
 You can remove any or all of the apps from the lock screen by clicking them in the Personalize page and  
selecting Don’t show quick status here from the options.
Personalizing the Start Screen
There are a great many ways to personalize the Windows 8.1 Start screen. Changing the color and background picture 
are just two. Depending on how you use Windows, you may want to use the Start screen in one of several ways, so I’ll 
show you how to configure it for different scenarios. Let’s begin with the color and background.
To access the personalization options for the Start screen, open the Settings charm (see Figure 9-2). You see a 
personalization option near the top right of your screen; click it.
Figure 9-2. You access the personalization options for the Start screen from the Settings charm

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
274
The main options are to select a background image. In the top of the personalization panel are the background 
images from which you can choose; notice that the last of these is your desktop wallpaper. This option isn’t quite 
as animated as some of the standard Start screen backgrounds, but it can make the transition between the Start 
screen and desktop less jarring. These images are specially designed to pan sideways as you scroll around a crowded 
Start screen, and some of them include animations. Beneath the images are the color options. As you change the 
background image and color options, a live display shows you exactly how the new image/color combination will look 
(see Figure 9-3).
Figure 9-3. Changing the appearance of the Start screen
The Background color and Accent color options give you a tremendous amount of control over the way Windows 8.1  
looks, and they can also make things very easy to see for people who need high-contrast color schemes. The accent color 
is the color that highlights items on your screen and in apps. There is no need to press an OK or Apply button—just  
clicking a background object and moving the color slider is enough to apply your selections.
So what are these mythical Start screen scenarios of which I spoke, and how can you personalize the Start screen 
to make it suitable for both app and hard-core desktop users? To examine this in greater detail, let’s split it into 
specific scenarios. For this scenario, I assume that a person is happy to use both the apps and the Windows desktop, 
and to switch between them.

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
275
The Switcher
The Start screen offers compelling new ways to use Windows. If you have a touchscreen laptop or a professional-grade 
tablet, you might want to use both the apps and the desktop programs. This would make you a switcher, someone who 
wants to use both Windows 8.1 interface types equally.
The Start screen allows you to arrange your tiles and icons into groups that you can name. Tiles and icons can be 
moved around the Start screen by simply dragging and dropping. If you want to create a new group, move slowly when 
you are between two groups (or at the very left or right of the Start screen), and a vertical colored bar appears. If you 
drop an icon onto this bar, you create another group.
To name a group, you need to zoom out of the Start screen, either with a pinch-out touch gesture or by 
clicking the bottom right of the Start screen. In this zoomed-out view, you can right-click (or tap and drag 
downward) on a group; from the App bar, an option to name the group appears. Naming groups can prove 
handy, as seen in Figure 9-4.
Figure 9-4. The switcher’s Start screen

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
276
The Intensive Desktop User
Let’s say you’re not especially fussy about apps because you use your computer for work and you have enough desktop 
software anyway. In Windows 8.1, you can start the operating system directly to the desktop, and I will show you how to 
do this later in this chapter. However, the Start screen offers some advantages, not the least of which is being able to pin 
a great many more programs to it than you can to the taskbar and to group them more effectively and make them larger 
and easier to click. You can hide any app or program from the Start screen by right-clicking it or touching and holding it  
(you can select multiple apps this way, too). On the App bar, you will see an option to unpin the app from the Start screen.
Tip
 
■
 Don’t forget that you can bring up the All Apps view by clicking the small down arrow near the bottom left of the 
Start screen or touching and dragging upward anywhere in a blank space on the Start screen. From All Apps, you can 
repin apps and programs to the Start screen or just run software you don’t use very often.
By unpinning your apps, you can turn the Start screen into a very organized alternative to the former Windows 
Start menu, with all your programs and software organized into groups (see Figure 9-5). You may also want to name 
these groups to make programs easier to find using the method I described for switchers.
Figure 9-5. An intensive desktop user’s Start screen

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
277
The Light Desktop User
Many people don’t use very many desktop programs, so their Start screens might look quite barren and dark. If you 
are one of these people and you’re not really interested in using apps, you can scale up everything on the Start screen 
to make things easier to see and click, and so that your desktop software icons take up more space.
To do this, you need to go into PC Settings and turn on one of the usability settings. Under the PC’s & Devices and 
then Display controls, turn on the option to Change the size of apps on displays that can support it (see Figure 9-6). 
Note, however, that this option works only on screens with larger resolutions, such as full HD.
Figure 9-6. Changing the size of tiles on the Start screen
The advantage of this is that it affects only the Start screen, not your desktop, on which you scale up everything 
separately. As you can see from Figure 9-7, it has quite a profound effect on the Start screen.

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
278
The Work/Life Balance User
One of the most compelling things that the new Start screen offers people who use their computers for both home 
and work is a unique way to separate the two. By using the desktop for work and the Start screen for leisure time, you 
can completely ignore all your desktop programs, such as Microsoft Outlook and Microsoft Excel, and just use the app 
equivalents for play.
This makes sense in a lot of ways because apps are extremely different from their desktop equivalents—especially 
the Mail and Calendar apps, which can be set up for different e-mail accounts from your desktop e-mail software if 
you use an Exchange account for work.
You also have access to different photo viewers, video players, and music players. You might be surprised at 
how it feels as if you’re using a completely different computer in the evening from what you’re using during the 
day at work.
To set this up, you’ll want to make the desktop tile the very last thing on your Start screen because you don’t 
want to click it by accident when you’re not at work (see Figure 9-8). It’s fine at the far right of the Start screen anyway 
because it’s extremely easy to remain working on the Windows 8.1 desktop all day without ever having to see the Start 
screen (something I will talk about later in this chapter).
Figure 9-7. The Start screen of a desktop-only light user

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
279
The Widget Dashboard
There are those who really don’t want to know about the new UI, don’t want to use the apps, and aren’t interested 
in the Start screen, but who are interested in some of the new features in Windows 8.1, such as Windows  
To Go or Hyper-V.
It’s possible to turn the Start screen into a widget dashboard—reminiscent of the widget dashboard in Apple’s OS 
X desktop operating system (see Figure 9-9).
Figure 9-8. The work/life balance user

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
280
To turn the Start screen into a widget dashboard, you first need to remove all the tiles and icons from the Start 
screen that you won’t use or that can’t give you live information. You can then scale up the Start screen using the 
display scaling feature that I described for light desktop users.
This will turn the Start screen into a dashboard with live widgets that can provide you with information on 
everything from e-mail and calendars, to foreign currency exchange rates, stock market figures, the local weather, 
and more.
Tip
 
■
 Even if this type of user is unlikely to be much interested in apps, it’s a good idea to look in the marketplace  
occasionally to see what new apps are available that have Live Tile displays.
Displaying Administrative Tools on the Start Screen
The Windows 8.1 Start screen doesn’t show any of the administrative tools. Sure, you can access most of them by 
pressing Win+X to bring up a menu, but there is another way to display them on the Start screen.
To display the administrative tools on the Start screen, open the Settings charm from the Start screen (it doesn’t 
work from the desktop). You see Tiles at the top right of the screen; click it.
Figure 9-9. The widget dashboard

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
281
Figure 9-10. Displaying the administrative tools on the Start screen
You see an option to show the administrative tools (see Figure 9-10). Turning it on automatically displays a 
wide range of new icons to the All Apps view (see Figure 9-11), and if you don’t want them all, you can still right-click 
individual tiles (and groups of tiles) to hide them. Here if you want any displayed on the Start screen you can select 
them. From the App bar, click Pin to Start.

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
282
Managing Notification “Toasts”
Toasts in Windows 8.1 are the notifications that pop up in the top right of your screen. Depending how many apps 
you have installed, they can become intrusive, but there are several ways to manage them in Windows 8.1. The first 
method is to temporarily silence them. Open the Settings Charm and in the bottom right of the screen click the 
Notifications icon. Here you can hide toasts for 1, 3, or 8 hours.
If you want to silence some or all toasts completely, in PC Settings navigate to Search & Apps and then 
Notifications. Here you have several options (see Figure 9-12).
Figure 9-11. The full display of administrative tools

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
283
 
1. 
The first option, Show app notifications, allows you to silence all toasts altogether. If you 
don’t want to do this, additional options exist such as turning off notification sounds and 
disabling notifications on the lock screen.
 
2. 
Perhaps of more interest is the Quiet Hours feature, which allows you to automatically 
silence all notifications between certain times of the day, such as at night if you use your 
PC as a bedside alarm or during work hours if you simply cannot afford to be disturbed 
(like I was when writing this book).
 
3. 
Below this is a list of all the apps you have installed; here you can disable toasts from 
individual apps one at a time, allowing you to very selectively decide from which apps you 
want to receive notifications.
That Syncing Feeling
Windows 8.1 includes a facility that can synchronize many of your settings, configuration options, and more besides. 
You need to be logged in to the PC with a Microsoft account for this to happen, and it’s very controllable if you don’t 
want settings to be synced (for example, to separate home and work PCs). You access these settings in PC Settings 
under SkyDrive and then Sync Settings (see Figure 9-13).
Figure 9-12. There are several ways to silence toasts

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
284
The different settings type that can be synced are as follows:
•฀
Personalization, which are your settings for the look and feel of both the Start screen and the 
desktop, including the locations of live tiles—though not desktop and taskbar icons.
•฀
App settings, which are the specific configuration options you have set for apps.
•฀
Other settings including your Internet Explorer favorites and open tabs (more on this shortly), 
your passwords, ease of access, and other settings.
Each one can be individually turned on and off so you can, for example, choose not to synchronize your Start 
screen tiles layout between your Surface tablet, which has a low resolution screen and a three–row tile layout,  
and your new 4 KB display with considerably more rows of tiles.
Syncing Internet Explorer Tabs
I mentioned that you can synchronize your web browser tabs between different Windows 8.1 computers, but in use 
you might not notice this working because when you return to a PC, the tabs will be just as you left them and won’t 
have changed. When you open the address bar and tabs view in Internet Explorer, you see the word Tabs on the left 
of your screen. Clicking it displays a drop-down menu of all your Windows 8.1 PCs and you can select another PC 
to work with the tabs from that PC (see Figure 9-14).
Figure 9-13. You can syncronize lots of settings in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
285
Personalizing the Windows 8.1 Desktop
If you’ve been using Windows 7, you’re already familiar with the Windows 8.1 desktop personalization options 
because little has changed. The Start button is gone, but I’ll talk about alternatives later in this chapter. Everything else 
is accessed in the same way.
The main desktop personalization options are accessed by right-clicking (or touching and holding) any empty 
space on the desktop and then selecting Personalize from the options that appear.
There have been a few changes, including the themes that change the color of your windows to complement your 
desktop wallpaper.
Personalizing the Desktop Wallpaper
As with Windows 7, you can choose themes with desktop backgrounds. You can also manually select several 
backgrounds and have Windows rotate them at a set frequency. Windows 8.1 can also change the color of the 
surrounding Windows furniture to match.
There are two ways to do this. The easiest way is to go to the Personalization page and click a theme that is 
overlaid by a color swatch (see Figure 9-15). A foldout card shows a range of colors overlaid onto the background 
image(s) of the theme.
Figure 9-14. You can access browser tabs from other PCs

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
286
I’ll come back to this automatic color-changer shortly, but first let’s have a look at changing the background image.
You can change the desktop wallpaper by clicking Desktop Background at the bottom of the Personalization 
page. This brings up a new page that has several different elements to it.
In the main part of the window are the currently available wallpapers. By default, you see all the wallpapers that 
ship as standard with Windows 8.1, including those that are for dual-screen setups.
In the Picture Location section, you can choose from several commonly or recently used picture locations. You 
can also click the Browse button to search for any picture (or pictures) on your computer to use as wallpapers.
At the bottom of the window is an option that changes how the wallpaper fills your screen (see Figure 9-16). The 
default option is to have the wallpaper fill the screen so that you don’t have any areas of black. There are other options 
to consider, however, especially if you are using a 4:3 ratio screen.
Figure 9-15. The desktop Personalization options

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
287
If you have multiple wallpapers selected, you can decide how often you want Windows 8.1 to change the desktop 
wallpaper. The options range from every ten seconds to once per day. You can check the Change picture every: box  
to randomize the order in which they appear.
Tip
 
■
 Graphics can adversely affect your battery if you are using a laptop or other portable device. If you have your 
desktop wallpaper set to change regularly, there is an option at the bottom of the Desktop Background screen to pause 
the changing of the desktop when running on battery power.
Personalizing the Window Color
I mentioned that Windows 8.1 can automatically change the color of the windows on your desktop to complement the 
color of your desktop wallpaper. Clicking Window Color and Appearance on the Personalization page displays these 
options.
The Window Color and Appearance page features a color swatch and cards in various colors. This signifies that 
the window color will be changed and managed automatically by Windows 8.1.
Figure 9-16. Changing the desktop wallpaper

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
288
Elsewhere in these options are 15 other window colors, each of which can be modified by sliding the color 
intensity slider. If you can’t find the color you want (perhaps you are after a rich brown, for example), you can 
click Show color mixer to create your own custom color by setting hue, saturation, and brightness levels  
(see Figure 9-17).
Figure 9-17. Changing the window color
Personalizing Sounds in Windows 8.1
It’s much less common for people to personalize the sounds in Windows. There are modifications you might like 
to make, however, especially if you’ve never been a fan of the critical-error “donk!” sound, or if you want to turn the 
Windows startup sound on or off.
You can most easily access the sounds in Windows 8.1 by right-clicking the volume icon on the far right of the 
desktop taskbar and selecting Sounds from the options. You can also go to the Personalization page to display the 
Sound dialog (see Figure 9-18).

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
289
You can easily and quickly turn off all Windows sounds by selecting No Sounds from the Sound Scheme  
drop-down list or you can modify any individual Windows sound in the list.
You can even use your own sounds in place of the standard sounds any type of playable sound file can be used, 
including MP3s. After you choose your sounds and create your own customized sound scheme, click the Save As 
button. You can share your personalized sound with friends and family as well as keep a copy as a backup.
Choosing a Screen Saver
The screen saver options are last on the Personalization page. Unlike earlier versions of Windows, Windows 8.1 
does not use a screen saver as the default setting, but instead turns off the display after ten minutes (see Figure 9-19) 
because screen savers are necessary only for older CRT monitors (a fuller explanation follows).
Figure 9-18. Changing the sound options

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
290
Some screen savers come with additional settings. You can preview the screen saver before turning it on by 
clicking the Preview button.
There is also an option to control the amount of time the computer is inactive (i.e., not using the keyboard, 
mouse, or touchscreen) before the screen saver switches on.
By default, Windows 8.1 returns you to the desktop when you return to the PC, but for extra security, you can 
check the option to instead return you to the logon screen.
Note
 
■
 Do you need a screen saver? Screen savers are necessary for older cathode ray tube (CRT) monitors, in which 
a beam of electrons is fired at a phosphor layer inside the screen glass to display a picture. If a single electron beam fires  
for too long at the same patch of phosphor, the image could end up physically burned into the phosphor layer—an effect 
called phosphor burn in. Modern flat-panel monitors do not suffer from this because they use individual pixel lights instead  
of an electron gun, so Windows 8.1 is set by default to simply turn off the screen instead. This saves a considerable  
amount of power over the lifetime of your computer.
Figure 9-19. Choosing a screen saver

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
291
Changing the Desktop Icons
In the top left of the Personalization page is the option to Change desktop icons. To be honest, I love the argument 
about whether people have icons on their desktop or not. Many people like a desktop with icons and folders scattered 
over it, whereas other people, including myself, like a clean desktop. Frankly, this is why some of the arguments 
surrounding the new Start screen have been so intense.
So let me be fair here. The Desktop Icon Settings dialog is where you can both turn on and off desktop icons in 
Windows 8.1. You can turn on and off the icons for the computer, your user folder, your network, the recycle bin, and 
the Control Panel (see Figure 9-20).
Figure 9-20. Changing the desktop icons
You can also restore default icons or prevent desktop themes from automatically changing the icons to 
custom icons.

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
292
Changing the Mouse Pointer
Also in the Personalization page is the option to Change mouse pointers, which opens the Mouse Properties dialog. 
The mouse properties options, including those for mouse pointers (see Figure 9-21), are much more useful than you 
might think. I want to look at each tab in this window to explain what it does.
Figure 9-21. Changing the mouse options
•฀
Buttons tab: Used for left-handed people to switch the left and right mouse buttons. It also 
swaps the buttons on a laptop trackpad. You can slow down or speed up the double-click 
speed, which is extremely useful for people who can’t click as quickly. ClickLock allows you to 
avoid having to hold down the mouse button to drag items around the screen. These last two 
features are excellent for people with weaker motor skills.
•฀
Pointers tab: Includes options to change the mouse pointer to a variety of high-visibility 
options, which is excellent for people who have difficulty seeing or reading the computer 
screen. There is more information about this in Chapter 10, in which I show you how to 
change the mouse and keyboard options in detail.
•฀
Pointer options: Allow you to turn on useful features such as mouse trail so that you can 
see the mouse moving across the screen more easily. You can also display the position of the 
mouse by pressing the Ctrl key on your keyboard. You can slow down the mouse speed  
(or speed it up for gaming). You also set the mouse to automatically snap to the closest button. 
This is a great feature for those with weaker motor skills.

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
293
•฀
Wheel tab: Contains the vertical and (if your mouse supports it) horizontal scrolling options 
for Windows 8.1. If you do not have a wheel on your mouse, you might not see this tab.
•฀
Hardware tab: Allows you to view information on the hardware driver and driver settings for 
your mouse.
Tip
 
■
 If you find Windows 8.1 difficult to use because of challenges with eyesight or motor skills, changing your mouse 
settings can help make Windows 8.1 more accessible and usable.
Personalizing the Taskbar
I would imagine your biggest question about the taskbar is how to get the Start menu back. Okay, I’ll get to that,  
but I want to talk about other ways to personalize the taskbar first.
Access the taskbar personalization options (see Figure 9-22) by right-clicking the taskbar and selecting Properties 
from the options.
Figure 9-22. The Taskbar and Navigation properties dialog

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
294
The options allow you to automatically hide the taskbar so that you can take full advantage of your screen when 
running programs. You can also lock the taskbar to prevent toolbars (if you use any) from being moved around, and 
you can change how icons appear on the taskbar.
The Navigation tab includes options for changing the Windows 8.1 startup behavior and more. I will explain these 
features later in this chapter.
Tip
 
■
 Aero Peek was a feature in Windows 7 that would hide all your windows when you moved your mouse to the  
bottom right of your desktop. This feature is turned off by default in Windows 8.1, but you can turn it back on in the  
Taskbar and Navigation properties dialog.
Tweaking the Taskbar
The three views available of the taskbar are useful, but I’ve always felt there was something missing—the ability to 
have separate buttons for running instances of a program without the text labeling (see Figures 9-23 and 9-24).  
It’s possible to add this feature, however, with a simple registry change.
Figure 9-23. Combining buttons into stacks (with labels hidden)
Figure 9-24. Never combining buttons
One thing to note is that whenever you make a change to the Windows registry, you should create a backup copy 
of the registry first. You can do this in the registry (from the File menu) by clicking the Export option. If a problem 
occurs, you can later restore this backup by clicking Import from the File menu in the Registry Editor.
 
1. 
Right-click the taskbar and select Properties.
 
2. 
In the pane that appears, make sure the Taskbar buttons option is set to Never combine 
and then click OK.
 
3. 
Open the Registry Editor by searching for regedit at the Start screen.
 
4. 
Navigate to Computer ➤ HKEY_CURRENT_USER Control Panel ➤ Desktop ➤ 
WindowMetrics (see Figure 9-25).

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
295
 
5. 
Right-click in the right pane. From the options that appear, click New.
 
6. 
Click String Value.
 
7. 
Name the string value MinWidth and press Enter.
 
8. 
Right-click MinWidth. From the options, select Modify.
 
9. 
Change the value data to 54 and press OK.
 
10. 
Close the Registry Editor.
You should restart the computer. Your taskbar buttons are now separated for different instances of a program, 
and the text labels are gone.
Personalizing Jump Lists
If you click the Jump Lists tab in the Taskbar and Navigation properties dialog, you can change the number of recent 
items that appear in Jump Lists for taskbar buttons. This is useful if you share your computer (and the same user 
account) with others and you want your file activity to remain private.
Figure 9-25. Personalizing the taskbar using the Registry Editor

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
296
Completely hiding icons and notifications is useful if you find a particular piece of software annoying, but 
showing icons and notifications makes the system tray more like the one in Windows XP (if you like that sort of thing).
Perhaps you really want to minimize things on the desktop and don’t want to even see the standard notification 
icons or the clock. You can turn these icons off completely by right-clicking in the notifications area or on the clock 
and selecting Properties from the options. The System Icons screen shown in Figure 9-27 appears.
Personalizing the System Tray
By default, Windows 8.1 hides all your system tray icons and their notifications. Some people want to be able to see 
the tray icons, however, and you can turn them on or further hide icons. Click the small white up arrow to open the 
system tray. Click Customize (you can also click Notification Area Icons in the Control Panel). You can also right-click 
near the system tray or on the clock and select Customize notification icons from the options.
In the Notification Area Icons window (see Figure 9-26), you can change the options for all the installed software 
for which a system tray icon already appears. The options are these:
Show icon and notification
•฀
Hide icon and notifications
•฀
Only show notifications
•฀
Figure 9-26. Customizing the system tray

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
297
Figure 9-27. Turning the system icons on or off
Bear in mind, however, that if you turn off the icon for the Action Center, you won’t be alerted when security 
issues arise. Also, turning off the laptop battery indicator could leave you running low and needing a recharge without 
realizing it.
Tip
 
■
 You can rearrange the order icons appear in the system tray by simply dragging and dropping them.
Setting the Date and Time
In the Date and Time dialog, you can quickly change the time and date on your computer, use time-syncing services 
on the Internet to automatically keep your time and date correct, change your time zone, and control automatic 
adjustment for daylight saving time (see Figure 9-28). You can also get to the Date and Time dialog by right-clicking 
the clock on the taskbar.

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
298
You also have the ability to add extra clocks to Windows! They appear when you click the date and time on the 
Windows taskbar. You can add up to two for different time zones, each with a custom name (see Figure 9-29).
Figure 9-28. Changing the date and time
Figure 9-29. Adding clocks to Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
299
Enabling Recycle Bin Warnings
When you delete a file in Windows 8.1 you don’t get the “do you really want to delete this file” warning of Windows 
versions of old. This is because with the recycle bin combined with the File History feature (which I shall show you 
how to use in Chapter 12), it’s very easy to recover accidentally deleted files. You can turn this feature back on if  
you want to, though, by right-clicking the recycle bin icon on your desktop and selecting Properties from the menu  
that appears.
The Recycle Bin Properties panel includes some simple controls, including being able to bypass the recycle bin 
altogether and just permanently delete everything. At the bottom of this dialog (see Figure 9-30) is a check box for 
Display delete confirmation dialog; you can turn this back on if you want these warnings re-enabled.
Figure 9-30. You can re-enable recycle bin warnings
Start Windows 8.1 Directly to the Desktop
Earlier in this chapter, I wrote about how you can modify the taskbar, unless you’ve skipped all of the book so far 
and turned directly to this page in excitement, and something that’s changed from the first release of Windows 8.1 is 
the addition in the Taskbar properties of a Navigation tab. If you’re a serious desktop user, there are controls in here 
aplenty that are really very clever and powerful.
You access these controls by right-clicking on the taskbar and then clicking Properties from the menu that 
appears. When the Taskbar and Navigation properties panel pops up on your screen, click the Navigation tab quickly 
because it’s exciting!

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
300
Tip
 
■
 Windows PowerShell is a powerful scripting language and an excellent alternative to the old DOS command 
language if you want to learn it. Although people have become used to using DOS over the last 30 years, you can  
replace the Command Prompt link in the Win+X menu with PowerShell.
The controls you have under the Navigation tab, see Figure 9-31, are the following:
•฀
Corner Navigation includes
A control for turning off the charms when you move your mouse to the top-right corner  
•฀
of your screen (you need to open them with the Win+C control instead)
The ability to switch between running apps when you click the top-left corner of your screen
•฀
Replacing the Command Prompt in the Win+X menu with Windows PowerShell
•฀
Figure 9-31. You can now start Windows 8.1 directly to the desktop

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
301
The 
•฀
Start screen navigation includes the following:
•฀
Boot to the desktop! If you want your PC to always start directly to the desktop, check the 
Go to the desktop box.
•฀
Show my desktop background on Start is another way to force that Start screen to  
use the desktop wallpaper, in addition to the method in the Personalization options  
I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter
If you are using multiple monitors the 
•฀
Always show Start on my main display when I press 
the Windows logo key if checked will force the Start screen to display on the screen with the 
currently selected window, instead of the default behavior which is the primary display.
•฀
Show the Apps view automatically when I go to Start forces the Start button and 
Windows key to take you to the All Apps view by default. You can swipe downward from 
this view to display the Start screen if you want it.
•฀
Search everywhere instead of just my apps appears if you check the Show the apps view 
automatically. This changes the behavior of the Search charm on the All Apps view to 
match that of the Start screen
•฀
List desktop apps first in the apps view when it’s sorted by category displays your 
desktop programs before your apps in the All Apps view. To enable this, you also need to 
change how the All Apps view is organized and you can do this by clicking the by name 
link in the top left of the screen, see Figure 9-32.
Figure 9-32. You can change how the All Apps view displays programs and apps

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
302
Changing the Default File Explorer View
If you activate the Libraries in Windows 8.1 (see Chapter 5 for how to do this), opening File Explorer always then 
takes you to your Libraries. But what if you don’t want this and instead want File Explorer to default to the new  
This PC view?
You can do this by creating a new shortcut for File Explorer on the Windows 8.1 taskbar:
 
1. 
Right-click in a blank space on the desktop and from the context menu that appears, click 
New and then click Shortcut.
 
2. 
In the Type location of the item box to %SystemRoot%\explorer.exe /e,::{20D04FE0-
3AEA-1069-A2D8-08002B30309D} and click Next.
 
3. 
Name the shortcut This PC and press Enter.
 
4. 
Drag the shortcut from your desktop onto the taskbar to pin it there.
 
5. 
Delete the shortcut from your desktop (if you want to). You can then optionally unpin the 
original File Explorer icon.
You can also change this target to anything you like; for example, you can put a folder location in there instead. 
If you click the icon on the far left of the address bar, the text in the address bar changes to display the current folder 
location. It can be copied and pasted into the Target box (see Figure 9-33).
Figure 9-33. Copying the current folder location from the address bar
Changing and Customizing Your Region Settings
The Region settings in both PC Settings (available in the Time & Language section) and the Control Panel allow you to 
do much more than tell Windows the country in which you are located. You can customize the time, date, and numerical 
systems in Windows so that, for example, you can change the digit grouping symbol from a Western comma (,)  
to an Arabic point (.) or change the negative number format from a minus sign (–) to having the digit appearing in 
parentheses (). You can control these options by clicking the Additional Settings button.
Perhaps of more use is the ability to change the default date and time display options. These are two options 
I always change. I set the time to h:mm tt (single-digit hour:minutes seconds) and make the AM and PM labels 
lowercase text.

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
303
Figure 9-34. You can change some region settings in PC Settings
Additionally, you can display the full day of the week by adding dddd to the date options or the first three letters 
of the day of the week (see Figures 9-34 and 9-35).

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
304
Working with Multiple Languages in Windows 8.1
If people who speak different languages use your computer, or if you are an interpreter or language student, you can 
add additional languages to Windows 8.1 by opening Time & Language in PC Settings and then clicking the Region 
and Language options, or by clicking Language from the Control Panel (see Figures 9-36 and 9-37). You can click  
Add a Language on the main Language page to add languages to Windows, as well as change other regional settings,  
such as number and date formats, which may be applicable to a certain language. The options link appears when you 
select a language.
Figure 9-35. Customizing region options

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
305
If you click Advanced Settings in the left pane of the main Language page, you find additional options, including 
the option to turn on or off the language bar. This helpful tool, which can be docked to the taskbar, enables you to 
quickly and easily swap between installed languages on your computer.
Tip
 
■
 Clicking the options for a language allows you to change the handwriting recognition options from freehand to 
single characters. This is useful for pictographic languages such as Chinese.
Figure 9-37. Adding languages to Windows 8.1
Figure 9-36. You can manage languages in Windows 8.1 from PC Settings

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
306
Personalizing the Power Management Options
It doesn’t matter if you’re using a laptop, ultrabook, tablet, or even a powerful desktop computer, you still probably 
want to customize the power options for your Windows 8.1 computer. So why would desktop users want or need to 
change the default power settings? After all, the default settings of turning off the display after 10 minutes and putting 
the computer to sleep after 30 minutes must be pretty perfect, right?
Well, by default, when Windows 8.1 turns off the display, touching the keyboard or mouse returns you to the 
workspace you were at when you left the computer. Instead, you might want Windows 8.1 to return to the logon 
screen. This is especially useful if you are using your computer for work or perhaps don’t want other people easily 
seeing your e-mail correspondence or your social networking (especially if they’re mischievous like my friends are).
When you put your computer to sleep, it also keeps drawing power. Many people say that the average power draw 
for a Windows 8.1 PC in sleep is tiny. Multiply that by millions of machines, however, and you quickly see how this can 
balloon into a very considerable sum. When Windows 8.1 is capable of booting to the logon screen from a cold start in 
just 10 seconds, do we still need sleep at all?
In this section, I want to look at the power options thoroughly and holistically, so that you can select the best 
options for you.
Changing the Power Plan
You can access the main power settings by clicking Power Options in the Control Panel. You get quick and easy access 
to the power plans, which are preconfigured options for your screen, shut down, sleep, and more; as well as the 
default plans added by PC manufacturers. Basic power plan options are available in PC Settings in the PC & Devices 
section and then by clicking Power & Sleep (see Figure 9-38).
Figure 9-38. You can change some power settings in PC Settings

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
307
Figure 9-39 shows a Dell laptop—on which this book was written—that has two default power plans; three is the 
normal standard for Windows. Your laptop or tablet may come with more, however, because hardware manufacturers 
may add their own power plans.
Figure 9-39. The Power Options page
The following are the default power plans:
•฀
Balanced: The computer balances performance with energy consumption.
•฀
Power Saver: Energy consumption is given top priority to extend battery life.
•฀
High Performance: Battery life isn’t an issue and you want the maximum performance from 
your PC (shown as an optional setting in the figure).

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
308
You may have additional power plans, such as Quiet or Cool. In the pane on the left of the page is the option to 
create your own power plan. It displays a wizard from which you can base your plan on one of the three default plans, 
but you can also choose from four more options: dimming or turning off the display, putting the computer to sleep, 
and the overall screen brightness.
You can choose a plan by clicking it. Each one can be modified by clicking Change plan settings.
Controlling the Power Button, Power Options, and Password Wakeup
You might want more control over the power options. Click Require a password on wakeup to take you to the System 
Settings screen (see Figure 9-40).
Figure 9-40. Changing the power button options

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
309
You can determine what the physical power and sleep (if you have one) buttons on your PC’s case and keyboard 
do, as well as any actions that happen when you close the laptop lid. For example, if you set the close-the-lid action to 
Sleep, but the battery dies because you thought the computer was actually turned off, you will lose unsaved work.
On the main Power Options page, you can also click Choose when to turn off the display or Choose when the 
computer sleeps in the left pane and you are shown the Edit Plan Settings options, which control the amount of time 
the computer remains idle before turning off the screen or putting the computer to sleep (see Figure 9-41). Note that if 
you have a desktop computer that does not have a battery, you will see a slightly different screen.
Figure 9-41. Changing the display and sleep options
If the computer is sleeping and Windows detects that the battery is very low, it will change to hibernate mode, in 
which the contents of memory are saved to the disc. This can prevent unsaved work from being lost, but it is always 
wise to check that your work is saved before you step away from your computer.
Alternatively, if you use your laptop with an external keyboard, mouse, and monitor, you may not want it to sleep 
when you close the lid. You can change this setting. I do not personally recommend that you use a laptop with the lid 
closed, however, because this can cause some models to overheat.
Caution
 
■
 Remember that if you set a PC to shut down instead of sleep, you lose any work that hasn’t been saved.

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
310
Many of the options on this screen are grayed-out and you cannot change them. To change these options, click 
Change settings that are currently unavailable at the top of the screen. Some of the additional options can be 
extremely useful:
•฀
[Don’t] Require a password has Windows 8.1 return automatically to the logon screen after 
returning from sleep or hibernation, or if the screen saver is on or the screen is turned off. If 
you share your computer or keep it in a room shared by other people, you might want to leave 
this setting turned on. But if the computer is not physically accessible to others, you may find 
this setting unnecessary. 
•฀
The shutdown settings allow you to turn on and off the sleep and hibernate functions on your 
computer. It also permits you to turn off the new Fast Startup feature of Windows 8.1, which 
allows Windows 8.1 to boot to the lock screen from a cold start in just 10 seconds. It does so by 
hibernating the kernel (the core OS) so that it doesn’t have to load everything from scratch; it 
just opens the hibernation file and reads it back into memory.
Some computers, especially older machines, have trouble with sleep and/or hibernation, 
and some don’t support these features at all. If you are having trouble getting Windows to 
sleep, hibernate, or start quickly, you can turn off these settings.
Tip
 
■
 There was a proof-of-concept attack on Microsoft’s BitLocker security system a few years ago, when it was 
proven that the encryption key could be retrieved from a hibernating (or sleeping) computer because Windows keeps 
the key in memory while you are working. This key is readable from a hacked computer in sleep or from an extracted 
hibernation file. It can be used to gain access to BitLocker-encrypted computers. At the time of writing, there is no word 
on whether this vulnerability has been fixed with Windows 8.1. So it is best to assume that it still exists.
You can also turn off the display of your logon picture on the lock screen. This is most useful if you have chosen a 
really embarrassing photo of yourself.
Controlling Sleep and Hibernation
You can choose the sleep and hibernation options for your computer by clicking either Choose when to turn off the 
display or Change when the computer sleeps on the Power Options page. You probably have seen these options 
available in other sections of Power Options; they remain the same.
What is the difference between sleep and hibernation? When you put your computer to sleep, it retains its 
memory by drawing a very small electric charge. This means that when you turn the computer back on, you are up 
and running extremely quickly at exactly the point at which you put the computer to sleep because nothing needs to 
be read into memory. It’s already there. 
Hibernation writes the contents of memory to a file on the hard disk. This means the computer can be shut down 
without requiring any power to keep the memory live, but it won’t restart quite as quickly.
Tip
 
■
 You can restore the Hibernate command to the main power menu in Windows 8.1 by clicking Change what the 
power buttons do at the main Power Options screen and then clicking Change settings that are currently unavailable. At 
the bottom of the screen, you now see a Shutdown Settings section, and Hibernate now displays as an option that can be 
checked. Doing this restores the Hibernate function to the main PC shutdown controls and also to the Win+X menu.

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
311
Changing the Advanced Power Settings
When you are viewing the sleep options, you see the option to Change the advanced power settings. Here you have 
many more options (click Change settings that are currently unavailable to edit them all). Figure 9-42 shows the 
advanced power settings.
Figure 9-42. Changing the advanced power settings
I want to talk about some of these settings and look at how they can be useful.
•฀
Hard disk: Why might you want to turn off the hard disk? Hard disks unnecessarily consume 
a lot of energy when not in use. Perhaps you have multiple hard disks on your computer, and 
most of the time they are used only for file storage (perhaps files you don’t often access) or for 
backups. Setting Windows 8.1 to turn off the hard disks on drives you are not using reduces 
overall power consumption on your computer. On any hard disk in use, the power remains. 
Remember that when you want to access a mechanical hard disk that is powered down, there 
is a slight delay as the disc spins up.
Tip
 
■
 If you want to set any timings in the advanced power settings to Never, change the default time to 0 (zero).

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
312
•฀
Wireless Adapter Settings: Wi-Fi and mobile broadband are a huge power drain for a laptop, 
ultrabook, or tablet because they turn your computer into a radio transmitter and receiver. If 
you change the default setting for locations in which you have a strong signal, you still get a 
good signal, which means that the computer uses less electricity to power the Wi-Fi system.
•฀
Sleep: You can turn sleep and hibernate off completely if they cause problems on your 
computer.
•฀
USB Settings: If your computer is connected to USB devices that draw power from the PC—
perhaps an external hard disk or optical drive—you can enable a setting that will cut power 
to the devices when they are not in use. This can dramatically extend the life of a portable 
computer such as an ultrabook.
•฀
Display: While the main power options allow you to choose when to dim your computer’s 
display to save power, these options give you finer control over exactly how much the display 
dims and how bright it is when plugged in. If your computer comes with a built-in light-meter, 
you can turn on the Adaptive Brightness, which automatically changes the brightness to 
match the available lighting.
•฀
Battery: The battery options allow you to control what Windows 8.1 sees as low and critical 
battery levels. If you know that your battery is generally excellent and you don’t want to be 
nagged, you could lower the low battery alert by 10 percent. If you often step away from your 
computer while it is running on batteries, however, you might want to set Windows 8.1 to 
automatically hibernate when the battery runs low.
Maximizing Battery Life on Mobile Devices
If you are using a laptop, ultrabook, or tablet on the go and want to maximize your battery life, there are certain things 
you can do that will help.
 
1. 
Dim your screen brightness as much as you can. The less power needed to display an 
image, the longer your battery will last. Your screen is a real power hog.
 
2. 
Turn off your backlit keyboard (if you have one) because this will save power as well.
 
3. 
Set the screen to turn off after two minutes of inactivity and perhaps set the computer to 
sleep after 10 minutes.
 
4. 
Turn off your Wi-Fi, cellular (3G/4G/LTE) or Bluetooth connections if they’re not needed. 
On a laptop or tablet, you might want to set the screen to turn off after only a couple of minutes—until you touch 
the screen, keyboard, or mouse to wake it up. The screen on a mobile device is the most power-hungry component. 
Having the screen switch off when not in use greatly extends battery life.
You might also want to turn off features such as 3G and GPS, both of which consume power through broadcasting 
and receiving radio signals.
Also, have Windows 8.1 cut power to any attached USB devices that can also drain the battery on your computer.
Adding Power Buttons to the Start Screen and Taskbar
Although the main Shut down, Restart, and Sleep options for Windows 8.1 might be hidden away in the Settings 
charm, it’s still possible to add them to the Start screen and the taskbar.
 
1. 
Right-click a blank space on the desktop and from the options that appear, click  
New ➤ Shortcut (see Figure 9-43).

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
313
 
2. 
In the window that appears, type shutdown.exe –s –t 00 and then click Next  
(see Figure 9-44).
Figure 9-43. Creating a new shortcut from the desktop

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
314
Tip
 
■
 To create a Restart shortcut, type shutdown –r –t 00. To create a Sleep shortcut, type rundll32.exe powrProf.
dll,SetSuspendState 0,1,0. To create a Hibernate shortcut, type rundll32.exe powrProf.dll,SetSuspendState. To create 
a Lock Computer shortcut, type rundll32.exe powrProf.dll,LockWorkStation.
To enable sleep from a RUNDLL32 command, you also need to disable hibernation on the computer. To do this, open  
a Command Prompt (Admin) window and run (type) the powercfg.exe /hibernate off command. You can use the  
powercfg.exe /hibernate on command to switch it back on. Note that disabling hibernation on a laptop or tablet can 
result in the battery running to empty, and you will lose work on unsaved files and documents.
 
3. 
Give the shortcut an appropriate name and then click Finish (see Figure 9-45).
Figure 9-44. Setting the shortcut code

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
315
 
4. 
Right-click the newly created shortcut and then select Properties from the options.
 
5. 
In the Shutdown Properties dialog, under the Shortcut tab, click the Change Icon button 
(see Figure 9-46). You are told that icons for this shortcut don’t exist. This is fine—just click 
through it.
Figure 9-45. Giving the shortcut a name

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
316
 
6. 
Choose an icon from the Change Icon dialog, and then click OK (see Figure 9-47).
Figure 9-46. The properties for the shortcut

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
317
Note
 
■
 If you add an icon to a Sleep, Hibernate, or Lock icon, double-click the Shell32.dll file at the next view to 
display icons.
 
7. 
Right-click your new power shortcut icon in File Explorer. Select Cut from the options. 
 
8. 
In File Explorer, click the icon to the left of the address bar. Navigate to C:\ProgramData\
Microsoft\Windows\Start Menu\Programs (see Figure 9-48).
Figure 9-47. Adding an icon to a shortcut

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
318
Note
 
■
 You can also use your own .ico icon files. Many custom icons can be created from web sites, including the 
excellent www.iconarchive.com, which I used for the icons in the screen shots here.
 
9. 
Paste the shortcuts into this folder.
 
10. 
At the Start screen, open the All Apps view.
 
11. 
In the All Apps view, find the shortcut(s) you have created. Right-click it/them to open the 
app options for each shortcut. Here you can pin it/them to the Start screen (if they are not 
already pinned there) and to the taskbar (see Figure 9-49).
Figure 9-48. The C:\ProgramData\Microsoft\Windows\Start Menu\Programs folder

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
319
Note
 
■
 Sometimes these shortcut links won’t work because of security that Windows 8.1 puts in place to prevent 
malware from shutting down your computer. If this happens, reopen the C:\ProgramData\Microsoft\Windows\Start Menu\
Programs folder and right-click each shortcut, selecting its properties. With each shortcut, re-paste the command  
(e.g., shutdown.exe –s –t 00) into the Target field and then click OK. The shortcut should now work.
Creating a Power Buttons Toolbar
If you pin the power buttons to your taskbar, you probably don’t want them right next to your program buttons, where 
they’re far too easy to click by mistake. You can create a custom toolbar for the taskbar to keep the buttons on the far 
right of the screen, next to the system tray.
 
1. 
Right-click in a blank space on the taskbar and then uncheck Lock the taskbar in the 
options.
 
2. 
Right-click the taskbar again and then select Toolbars ➤ New Toolbar (see Figure 9-50).
Figure 9-49. Pinning your power icons to the Start screen and the taskbar

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
320
 
3. 
Create a new folder for the toolbar. Copy your power shortcut files into it. When you create 
your folder, select it and then click the Select Folder button (see Figure 9-51).
Figure 9-51. Creating a folder for the toolbar
Figure 9-50. Creating a new toolbar on the taskbar

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
321
 
4. 
Your toolbar now appears on the taskbar. Drag the vertical bars to the left of it to resize it.
 
5. 
You can also right-click within the new toolbar to select different options (see Figure 9-52). 
They include turning off the toolbar’s text title and labels, and changing the View options 
so that it displays large buttons.
Figure 9-53. A power toolbar on the taskbar
Figure 9-52. Changing toolbar options
Your finished toolbar displays on the right of the taskbar, keeping the power buttons safely away from your 
program buttons (see Figure 9-53).

CHAPTER 9 ■ PERSONALIZING YOUR WINDOWS EXPERIENCE
322
Summary
Despite many of the initial reactions to Windows 8.1 when it was unveiled to the public and press, this operating 
system is extremely customizable. Even the new Start screen can be customized in a variety of ways to suit many 
types of users. This includes turning the Start screen into a very useful widget view. You can turn the Start screen off 
completely with third-party software, if you choose.
Being able to personalize your computer is important to many computer users and it is a mainstay of the 
Windows operating system. Personalization options go far beyond what is included in this chapter. Chapter 10 shows 
how these options can be configured further to assist people who have difficulty using computers.
This all helps make Windows 8.1 the customizable operating system you want, while at the same time still 
affording you all the cool new features it brings, such as Hyper-V and better multimonitor support.

323
CHAPTER 10
Making Windows 8.1 More  
Accessible and Easier to Use
User accessibility is one of the biggest challenges facing companies that make computers, operating systems, and 
software. Accessibility is particularly important for touch-controlled systems, which improve computer use for people 
who have difficulty using a keyboard and mouse.
Who are Windows’ accessibility features for? People of all ages, from all walks of life, and of all abilities can 
benefit from them. Perhaps you need text to be larger, perhaps you’ve never used a computer, perhaps you’re  
left-handed, or perhaps you find it difficult to stare at a screen for a long period of time.
There are several ways to access the settings that can make Windows 8.1 considerably easier to use. The options 
available on each page vary, depending on what is likely to be required for the interface, Start screen, or desktop.
Making Windows 8.1 Easier to Use
You can access the Windows 8.1 Ease of Access settings through the charms by selecting Settings ➤ Change PC 
Settings and then clicking Ease of Access (see Figure 10-1). Most of the settings for making Windows easier to use can 
be found here, and most people find that there’s no need to visit the full Ease of Access Center on the desktop (more 
on this in a moment).

CHAPTER 10 ■ MAKING WINDOWS 8.1 MORE ACCESSIBLE AND EASIER TO USE 
324
Note
 
■
 You can launch and switch to programs on the taskbar by pressing the Windows key + a number (1 to 0), 
where the number corresponds to the position of the icon on the taskbar.
The following lists the options listed in Ease of Access.
•฀
Narrator turns on a facility whereby items onscreen are read to you by your PC.
•฀
Magnifier makes the entire screen much larger and treats your monitor (and mouse) as a 
magnifying glass that moves across it.
•฀
High contrast changes the default Windows color scheme to make the difference between 
background and foreground items much clearer and easier to see.
•฀
Keyboard and Mouse include controls for making your keyboard and mouse easier to use.
•฀
Other options includes additional controls such as the cursor thickness and whether the 
background wallpaper is displayed.
Figure 10-1. The Ease of Access settings in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 10 ■ MAKING WINDOWS 8.1 MORE ACCESSIBLE AND EASIER TO USE 
325
The Ease of Access Center
So far, I’ve discussed how the Ease of Access options affect the way you interact with Windows 8.1. If you use the 
desktop, however, there are many more options available to you. This is because of the differences between the 
desktop and standard Windows 8.1 interfaces, and the added complexity of desktop software.
You can access the full Ease of Access Center through the Control Panel on the desktop. In the main part of the 
page are clear and large controls for turning on the Magnifier, Narrator, onscreen keyboard, and high-contrast color 
scheme (see Figure 10-2).
Figure 10-2. The full Ease of Access Center
Below this, you see Not sure where to start? Get recommendations to make your computer easier to use. This 
option activates a wizard that asks you simple questions. The wizard automatically sets the Ease of Access Center 
settings according to the answers that you provide.

CHAPTER 10 ■ MAKING WINDOWS 8.1 MORE ACCESSIBLE AND EASIER TO USE 
326
Tip
 
■
 If you have motor problems, you can turn off the snap and shake effects on the desktop, which snap windows 
to the sides of your screen and minimize all your programs when you shake the mouse, by searching the Start screen for 
shake and clicking Turn off automatic windows arrangement. At the bottom of the window that appears check Prevent 
windows from being automatically arranged when moved to the edge of the screen.
The following are the full Ease of Access Center options:
•฀
Use the computer without a display optimizes the PC for use by the blind or partially sighted. 
It reads instructions aloud to help guide you through the settings.
•฀
Make the computer easier to see contains many options, including turning on  
a high-contrast color scheme, making the cursor thicker, and turning on the Magnifier.
•฀
Use the computer without a mouse or keyboard includes settings for permanently turning 
on the onscreen keyboard and also for using speech recognition with your computer.
•฀
Make the mouse easier to use switches the mouse buttons (if you are left-handed). It also 
offers other functions, including the ability to use the numeric pad on your keyboard as a 
mouse substitute.
Tip
 
■
 As muscular problems such as repetitive stress syndrome (sometimes known as repetitive strain injury [RSI]) 
become more commonplace, it is becoming easier to find and purchase mice designed to help people continue to use 
their computer when a standard mouse and keyboard are uncomfortable to use. To find these devices, search online for 
RSI or RSI mouse.
•฀
Make the keyboard easier to use turns on sticky keys so that you don’t have to press two keys 
simultaneously when performing Ctrl+ actions, among other functions.
•฀
Use text or visual alternatives for sounds activates visual clues, such as flashing the desktop, 
on occasions when Windows 8.1 would ordinarily play a warning sound.
•฀
Make it easier to focus on tasks turns off background images and animations. This option is 
useful for people who find background images distracting.
•฀
Make touch and tablets easier to use offers the Windows key + Volume Up button options.
In the left navigation pane of the Ease of Access Center is an option to Change Sign-in Settings. It is here that you 
find additional options to automatically turn on Ease of Access features at Windows logon. This includes the onscreen 
keyboard, the Magnifier (so that you can see where to enter your password), and the Narrator (see Figure 10-3).

CHAPTER 10 ■ MAKING WINDOWS 8.1 MORE ACCESSIBLE AND EASIER TO USE 
327
Making Text and Windows Easier to Read
If you find the Windows desktop text and buttons difficult to see and read, there are several options you can select and 
features you can activate to help. These include the ability to scale up everything on the desktop to a maximum of 150 
percent its normal size. Windows can do this without distorting anything on the screen.
To access this feature, right-click anywhere in a blank space on the desktop. From the context menu, select 
Screen Resolution. Next, click Make text and other items larger or smaller for scaling options (see Figure 10-4).
Figure 10-3. Changing the Ease of Access sign-in settings

CHAPTER 10 ■ MAKING WINDOWS 8.1 MORE ACCESSIBLE AND EASIER TO USE 
328
This option makes everything on the screen proportionally larger without causing blurring, which is a common 
side effect of lowering the PC’s screen resolution. You may want to scale up only certain types of text, however; 
perhaps even greater than the 150 percent offered. If you use multiple monitors you can choose the scaling for your 
current screen by using the slider control or you can set the scaling options for all your screens by checking the Let me 
choose one scaling level for all my displays.
Below the main scaling options is an additional option to individually specify the size of a variety of text items on 
the screen. You can change the Title bars on windows, menus, message boxes, palette titles, items, and tooltips. What 
this option doesn’t allow you to do is further scale up the main text within windows and programs; but many software 
packages—including Internet Explorer and Microsoft Office—allow you to do this anyway, as I will detail shortly. Also 
with this option, you can specify that items always appear in bold to help them stand out.
In the left navigation pane, you see an option to Adjust ClearType Text. ClearType is a system that Windows uses 
to make text more legible onscreen. There are many different types of screens, however, and people see in different 
ways, so the default settings may not be best suited for an individual user.
Clicking Adjust ClearType Text displays a wizard in which Windows shows you different blocks of text. At each 
stage, you click the one that is most legible, and Windows automatically adjusts the ClearType settings accordingly, so 
that the text onscreen is at its most legible for you.
It is also possible to scale web pages and some document types. Not only does this make text easier to read but it 
also makes some web sites easier to navigate because buttons and links become larger.
Figure 10-4. Scale items on your desktop to make them larger

CHAPTER 10 ■ MAKING WINDOWS 8.1 MORE ACCESSIBLE AND EASIER TO USE 
329
In Internet Explorer 11, you can zoom in and out of web sites by pressing the Ctrl++ and Ctrl+- keys and also by 
holding down the Ctrl key and moving the mouse scroll wheel. These controls are also found in IE10 settings  
(see Figure 10-5). When you are using IE11 with touch, you can zoom in and out with pinch zoom gestures.
Figure 10-5. Zooming web pages
Figure 10-6. Scaling documents
Some document types allow zooming. For many years, Microsoft Office has offered a tool that is located on the 
bottom right of the Open window (see Figure 10-6). With this tool, you can zoom in and out of a document by using 
the slider or clicking the current percentage.
Many Windows 8.1 apps support pinch-touch gestures to zoom in and out. You can take advantage of them if you 
have a touchscreen on your computer.

CHAPTER 10 ■ MAKING WINDOWS 8.1 MORE ACCESSIBLE AND EASIER TO USE 
330
Tip
 
■
 You can zoom in and out of many apps and desktop programs in Windows 8.1 by pinch-zooming outward with  
a touch gesture. Some laptops come equipped with multitouch trackpads that support pinch-zoom gestures if you do not 
have a touchscreen.
Zooming in and out of documents and the desktop may not be sufficient enough. A high-contrast color scheme 
may be required if you are colorblind or visually impaired. To access this option from the desktop, right-click 
anywhere in a blank space on the desktop and from the context menu, click Personalization (see Figure 10-7). You can 
also turn on high-contrast color schemes from the Ease of Access options in PC Settings.
Figure 10-7. Choosing a high-contrast color scheme

CHAPTER 10 ■ MAKING WINDOWS 8.1 MORE ACCESSIBLE AND EASIER TO USE 
331
In the Personalization window, there are several high-contrast color schemes for you to choose from. 
Alternatively, if you don’t need a high-contrast scheme but have trouble with the look of Windows, you can switch to  
a different Windows color scheme, which makes some parts of the window furniture—such as the Minimize, 
Maximize, and Close buttons—much easier to see.
There are also high-contrast desktop themes available to help with issues varying from poor eyesight to 
colorblindness. These are also from the main Personalization page. Some public and charitable organizations provide 
additional themes for Windows. They can advise on the best combination of options for your specific circumstances.
If the scaling options and high-contrast themes don’t make it easier for you to see in Windows 8.1, you can turn 
on the Magnifier from the Ease of Access Center. By default, this tool zooms everything on your screen. You can click 
the magnifying glass icon near the top left of the screen to access additional Magnifier controls (see Figure 10-8).
Figure 10-8. The Magnifier displays a magnifying glass that you can click for more control
The main controls for the Magnifier allow you to zoom in and out, as well as display the Magnifier in different ways:
The Magnifier can be 
•฀
Docked to the top of the screen to display a larger version of the portion 
of the screen where your cursor is located.
A 
•฀
Lens follows your cursor around the screen, zooming in on that small portion of the screen.
All options are selected by clicking the magnifying glass icon to reveal the full Magnifier options (see Figure 10-9).

CHAPTER 10 ■ MAKING WINDOWS 8.1 MORE ACCESSIBLE AND EASIER TO USE 
332
Tip
 
■
 If you are stuck in Magnifier view and are unsure how to disable it, look for the magnifying glass and click it  
(see Figure 10-8). It changes to the panel shown in Figure 10-9, in which you can click the close button.
Clicking the Cog button displays a menu of options for the Magnifier, including inverting screen colors to 
improve contrast and automatically jumping to text input boxes.
You can make the mouse cursor easier to see independently of the desktop theme as well. In the Ease of Access 
Center, click Make the Mouse Easier to Use. It displays some high-contrast options for the mouse, complete with 
images of what the cursor will look like with each option selected (see Figure 10-10).
Figure 10-10. Making the mouse easier to use
Figure 10-9. Clicking in the magnifying glass reveals the full Magnifier controls

CHAPTER 10 ■ MAKING WINDOWS 8.1 MORE ACCESSIBLE AND EASIER TO USE 
333
By turning on Mouse Keys, you can also use the keyboard as a mouse, either as a replacement to or in 
conjunction with your regular mouse. This feature allows you to use the arrow keys on your computer’s number pad 
(if your keyboard has one) to move the mouse cursor. It can also be useful if you have trouble using the mouse for long 
periods of time.
Other useful features include making a window active simply by hovering over it with your mouse. If you have 
difficulty with mouse buttons, you might find this option helpful.
Using the Narrator to Read Text Aloud
The Narrator tool assists those who are blind, are partially sighted, or simply have trouble reading the computer 
screen. This feature reads out text and other items on your screen as you mouse over, touch, or click it. It also reads 
text in panels, such as web sites and Windows alert messages. As an item onscreen is read, it is highlighted by a blue 
box. This helps people who are partially sighted track what is being read. The Narrator is most easily switched on by 
pressing the Windows key to return to the Start screen, typing narrator, and pressing the Enter key.
Controls are available both from Control whether Narrator starts when I sign in and from the sign-in screen  
(in the bottom-left corner) to make sure the Narrator is automatically turned on when you sign in to your computer.
There are also a significant number of keyboard shortcuts that you can use to control the Narrator. You can 
display a complete list of them at any time by pressing the Caps Lock+F1 key combination. Most of the Narrator 
commands use the Caps Lock key because it isn’t used for any other purpose. While the Narrator is on, you need to 
use the Shift key for capital letters.
Windows 8.1 enhancements to the Narrator include the welcome ability to speed up and slow down the 
narrator’s voice. In the Voice section of the Narrator Settings window, there are slider controls that adjust the speed 
of the voice, which by default is set at 50 percent; the volume of the voice, which is set at maximum by default; 
and the pitch of the voice, which is set at 50 percent. There are also a variety of voices that you can select. The 
commands available for reading web sites have also been expanded to ensure that more items on a web page can 
be read aloud.
The main Narrator Settings window is shown in Figure 10-11.

CHAPTER 10 ■ MAKING WINDOWS 8.1 MORE ACCESSIBLE AND EASIER TO USE 
334
Windows 8.1 Narrator enhancements include ways to assist people with using touchscreen devices, including 
sounds to accompany actions that are performed with touch. These actions audibly confirm that your touch gesture 
was successful. The Narrator can also read text under your finger as you move it across the computer’s screen.
It is important to note that if you want to use the Narrator with a touchscreen, the screen needs to support four 
or more touch points because some of the Narrator touch gestures use three or four fingers. If you are buying a new 
touchscreen computer on which you want to use the Narrator, it is important to be aware of this.
Controlling the Narrator with Touch
When you use the narrator with a touchscreen, it reads aloud anything that you swipe your finger over, or you can 
tap an item to have it read individually. There are additional controls you can use, however, that directly control the 
Narrator (see Table 10-1).
Figure 10-11. The Narrator in Windows 8.1X

CHAPTER 10 ■ MAKING WINDOWS 8.1 MORE ACCESSIBLE AND EASIER TO USE 
335
When you are using the Narrator on a web site, additional controls are available, and as you flick up and down 
you will hear the PC read the following phrases. This is what they mean:
•฀
Heading view speaks the headline and then highlights the previous/next one with  
a left/right swipe.
•฀
Item view speaks and highlights the previous or next item on a page with a left/right swipe.
•฀
Paragraph view speaks and highlights the previous or next paragraph with a left/right swipe.
•฀
Line view speaks and highlights the previous or next line to text with a left/right swipe.
•฀
Word view speaks and highlights the previous or next work with a left/right swipe.
•฀
Character view speaks and highlights the previous or next character of text with  
a left/right swipe.
•฀
Table view highlights and reads the previous or next table on the web site with  
a left/right swipe.
•฀
Link view highlights and read the previous or next link of the page with a left/right swipe.  
It can then be activated with a double-tap.
Controlling the Narrator with the Keyboard
If you are using the Narrator with a keyboard, there are controls that you can use (see Table 10-2).
Table 10-1. Narrator touch gestures
Effect
Action
Stop Narrator
Single, two-finger tap
Read all current window
Swipe up with three fingers
Click
Double-tap
Double-click
Triple-tap
Show or hide Narrator window
Tap with four fingers
Move to next or previous item
Flick left or right with one finger
Drag an item
Tap with three fingers
Scroll the window
Swipe up, down, left, or right with two fingers
Tab forward and backward
Swipe left or right with three fingers
Table 10-2. Narrator keyboard commands
Effect
Action
Click the selected item
Spacebar or Enter
Move the cursor around the screen
Tab + cursor keys
Read item
Caps Lock + D
Read entire document
Caps Lock + H
(continued )

CHAPTER 10 ■ MAKING WINDOWS 8.1 MORE ACCESSIBLE AND EASIER TO USE 
336
Making Your Keyboard and Mouse Easier to Use
It is common for people to have trouble using devices like the mouse. Windows features such as Shake, although 
perhaps very useful for some people, might prove to be hugely irritating for others. Shake is a desktop feature that 
minimizes all the windows on the screen when you shake the mouse; it is not very useful if you have difficulty in 
using a mouse.
To turn off Shake and Snap (they can only be switched off together), follow these instructions:
 
1. 
Open the Ease of Access Center from the Control Panel.
 
2. 
Click Make the mouse easier to use.
 
3. 
Check the box Prevent windows from being automatically arranged when moved to the 
edge of the screen.
Additional settings for the mouse are located in the Control Panel or by searching for mouse at the Start screen. Some 
of these functions are extremely useful (see Figure 10-12).
Effect
Action
Read last read item
Caps Lock + V
Read entire window
Caps Lock + W
Move to previous/next item
Caps Lock + left or right cursor
Adjust volume
Caps Lock + Page Up or Page Down
Adjust reading speed
Caps Lock + Plus (+) or minus (-)
Turn Caps lock on or off
Press Caps Lock twice quickly
Stop reading
Ctrl
Exit Narrator
Caps Lock + Esc
Table 10-2. (continued )

CHAPTER 10 ■ MAKING WINDOWS 8.1 MORE ACCESSIBLE AND EASIER TO USE 
337
The 
•฀
Double-Click Speed of the mouse can be modified to suit you. If you find that you can’t 
double-click the mouse at the speed Windows wants, you can slow it down.
•฀
ClickLock is a feature that makes it easier to drag items on the screen. With this feature 
activated, you don’t need to hold down the mouse button to drag. Click the mouse button 
once to select an item and then click it again to drop it. This feature works with both the 
mouse and the trackpad.
Windows 8.1 includes several different schemes to modify the mouse 
•฀
Pointers, including the 
option for large and high-visibility pointers.
The 
•฀
Pointer Speed can be modified in Windows so that the mouse moves more slowly.
•฀
Snap To is a useful feature that moves the mouse pointer automatically onto a button when 
you get close to it.
•฀
Pointer Trails can be displayed so that you can more easily see where the mouse is on the screen.
The ability to 
•฀
highlight the location of your mouse pointer on the screen is particularly useful. 
It is made available when you press the Ctrl key on your keyboard.
Figure 10-12. The Mouse Properties dialog box

CHAPTER 10 ■ MAKING WINDOWS 8.1 MORE ACCESSIBLE AND EASIER TO USE 
338
Tip
 
■
 Left-handed computer users can switch the mouse buttons in the Mouse Properties settings.
In the Ease of Access Center, you can turn on various additional features for the computer’s keyboard by clicking 
Make the keyboard easier to use. A feature called Sticky Keys is particularly useful.
Sticky Keys allows you to use the keyboard one key at a time. If you need to press a keyboard combination 
involving the Shift, Ctrl, Alt, or even the Windows key (it is supported even though the Sticky Keys options don’t 
specify it), just press one of these keys, wait to hear a tone while pressing the key, and then press the letter associated 
with that keystroke (for example Ctrl+C).
Filter Keys is a useful feature that prevents repeated instances of a letter, number, or other character when  
a particular key is pressed.
Using Text or Visual Alternatives for Sounds
There may be times when you can’t hear an alert or other sound on your computer; or to hear, you need the volume 
turned up to a level where other people complain about it. To help with these issues, Windows 8.1 offers visual cues  
to alert you when it would normally use a sound.
From the Ease of Access Center, click Use Text or Visual Alternatives for Sounds. The options include a flashing 
caption on the screen or flashing the whole desktop to alert you that something needs your attention. Alternatively, 
Windows can speak the caption (this is useful if you hear voices well but have difficulty with other sounds).
Making It Easier to Focus on Tasks
To help navigate through the many and varied options in the Ease of Access Center, there is a clickable option to Make 
It Easier to Focus on Tasks. This page includes many of the common accessibility controls, such as Sticky Keys, the 
Narrator, and Filter Keys. You can also turn off the desktop background image in this option.
Training Windows 8.1’s Handwriting Recognition
Windows 8.1’s handwriting recognition is pretty good but you might find that for you it could use some extra training. 
You can do this by opening the Language options from the Control Panel, highlighting the language you want to train, 
and clicking the Options link to its right.
In the window that next appears, click the Personalize handwriting recognition link (see Figure 10-13).

CHAPTER 10 ■ MAKING WINDOWS 8.1 MORE ACCESSIBLE AND EASIER TO USE 
339
The training window now appears (see Figure 10-14). Here you can choose whether to retrain Windows where it 
makes specific errors with your handwriting or to train it more generally. Note that this second option can take some 
time to complete.
Figure 10-13. Accessing the handwriting recognition training

CHAPTER 10 ■ MAKING WINDOWS 8.1 MORE ACCESSIBLE AND EASIER TO USE 
340
Using Speech Recognition with Windows 8.1
Windows 8.1 allows you to control your PC using speech, either through a microphone built into a tablet, laptop, or 
ultrabook; or through a headset. You can access the speech recognition by searching for speech from the Start screen 
and when you run it, you will be asked which audio device you want to use.
You are asked a series of questions, after which you are invited to take a tutorial. Doing so helps train the speech 
recognition software, and it is always advisable to spend some time training Windows 8.1 to understand your voice.
There is a reference card that you are invited to view; printing this card can be extremely helpful for remembering 
the different voice commands for the speech recognition software. When it’s running, the speech recognizer floats on 
your desktop and can be docked to the top or bottom of the screen (see Figure 10-15).
Figure 10-14. You can traing Windows 8.1’s handwriting recognition
Figure 10-15. The speech recognizer floats on your desktop

CHAPTER 10 ■ MAKING WINDOWS 8.1 MORE ACCESSIBLE AND EASIER TO USE 
341
Generally speaking, the speech recognition software in Windows 8.1 is excellent; indeed this section of the book 
was written by using it, which was rather handy as I had a fractured wrist at the time.
Full controls for his speech recognizer can be accessed easily by right-clicking the speech recognizer window. 
These controls include options to continue the speech recognition training and to configure both the speech 
recognizer and your microphone.
Common Speech Recognition Controls
Although it is a good idea to keep a copy of the reference card handy there are some commands that you will often use:
•฀
Start and the name of a program, for example Calculator, Word, or Excel, starts the program
•฀
Switch to and the name of a program switches to that program if is already running.
You can control programs that have drop-down menus by speaking the name of that menu 
•฀
and then speaking the name of the option you want to select from it. This also works for 
Ribbon controls in Windows 8.1, Microsoft Office, and other programs that use it.
•฀
Show numbers displays numbers overlaid on a program’s controls that can then be spoken to 
activate that control (see Figure 10-16).
Figure 10-16. You can activate a program’s controls with the speech recognizer
On a web page, you can select links by saying their name; for example, 
•฀
Contact us.
You can activate clicks on an item by saying 
•฀
double-click or right-click for a specific item; for 
example, Double click Recycle bin.
•฀
Start Listening/Stop Listening turns the speech recognition system on or off.
•฀
What can I say? Will display help prevent the speech recognition system.
•฀
Show speech options displays the list of options for the speech recognizer; it is also available 
via a right-click.
•฀
Show speech recognition/Hide speech recognition minimizes the speech recognizer to the 
system tray or returns it to the desktop.
If at any time the speech recognizer does not recognize something you have said, it displays an Alternatives 
Panel that contains its best guesses for what it was you said (see Figure 10-17). You can make a choice from this panel 
by saying the number to the left of the correct item. This also has the added benefit of helping to train the Windows 8.1 
speech recognition system. 

CHAPTER 10 ■ MAKING WINDOWS 8.1 MORE ACCESSIBLE AND EASIER TO USE 
342
Figure 10-17. The speech recognition system lets you know if it is unsure of what you say
Finding Accessible Apps in Windows 8.1
With the new Windows Store, Microsoft is making it easier for customers to find accessible apps and for developers to 
write apps that are accessible. The tools for creating apps that support Windows accessibility are now much simpler 
for app developers to use.
To find accessible apps, open the Windows Store. Then open the charms to click the Settings charm. In the top 
right of the screen, a Preferences option, when clicked, displays a switch to make it easier to find accessible apps. With 
this selected, the Windows Store displays only apps that support accessibility features.
Where to Find Accessibility Help and Support
Many of the option pages in the Ease of Access Center offer you the option to Learn about additional assistive 
technologies online. Clicking this link directs you to the Microsoft web site at www.microsoft.com/enable. Here you 
can read more about the accessibility features in Windows 8.1, as well as view video and other tutorials on their use.
This web site also contains links to third-party help, support, and commercial web sites where you can find 
advice and products designed to help make your computer more accessible and easier to use.
Summary
The accessibility features in Windows 8.1 are extensive and make Windows 8.1 the most accessible operating 
system available today. I recommend starting at the desktop Ease of Access Center Wizard. Run it by clicking Get 
recommendations to make your computer easier to use. The wizard asks you a series of questions about how you 
use your computer and where you find it difficult to use. It then makes recommendations for settings that you can 
select to make Windows 8.1 easier to use.

343
CHAPTER 11
Keeping You, Your Files, and Your 
Computer Safe
Despite Windows’ history of being very insecure and a hotbed for malware and viruses, this really isn’t true any 
more. It’s also not true that the security systems in Windows 8.1 are annoying, or lacking in flexibility, or difficult  
to use.
By default, Windows 8.1 is actually very good at taking care of itself. It needs to be. Most users don’t want to worry 
about updates to Windows and antivirus software. They certainly don’t want to have to change firewall settings to 
allow a game through a port.
If anything, the default settings for security in Windows 8.1 really are perfectly all right for general computer 
usage. If anything will be exploited, it’s the soft, squidgy thing sitting at the keyboard, vulnerable to criminals who get 
them to click something that allows malware through the already excellent security in Windows 8.1.
Windows 8.1 includes more than just antivirus software and security features, though, because there are also 
government–level file and disk encryption technologies that can be as simple to set up and use as a fresh user account.
In this chapter, I’ll talk you through all the security features in the operating system, explain what they do, and 
show you how you can customize them to meet your own individual needs.
How Secure Is Windows 8.1 Really?
Windows 8.1 is arguably the most secure version of Windows in the history of the operating system due to the 
inclusion of antivirus security software. It builds on previous security features, including User Account Control (UAC), 
which was first introduced in Windows Vista.
Some security researchers claimed that Windows 7 is even more secure than some UNIX-based operating 
systems; they will no doubt applaud Windows 8.1 as well. This is security is primarily due to the proactive approach 
that Microsoft takes to patching security flaws as they are discovered.
However, you cannot rely on an operating system to be secure on its own. Every time you install a program or 
app, you open the possibility of compromising your security. When you go online or check your e-mail, you open the 
possibility that someone, somewhere might attempt to trick you into installing malware.
It is important to look at Windows 8.1 security in a holistic way, not in isolation. In this chapter, I’ll show you how 
to make sure that Windows 8.1 is completely secure. This chapter also sometimes refers to Chapter 3, in which  
I showed you how to stay safe when you are connected to the Internet.

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
344
Maintaining Security When Using Windows 8.1 with Other 
Windows Versions
Windows 8.1 is secure, and Windows 7 and Windows Vista are also secure, at least when all precautions and safeguards 
are put in place and when features such as UAC remain turned on at their default setting.
Computers are commonly used in a networked environment with other Windows PCs, not all of which run the 
same version of Windows. It is possible that some of these PCs are running Windows XP. All security and update 
support ends (or ended, depending on when you are reading this) for Windows XP in April 2014. This means that 
after this date, there will no longer be updates or patches to fix security or other vulnerabilities. If you are using 
your Windows 8.1 computer in an environment in which there is an XP machine, you should not share files and 
folders with it.
The reason for this is that Windows XP is still widely used in the developing world and some countries in 
Asia. The arrival of Windows 8.1 is unlikely to change this situation much in the near future, so after April 2014, the 
Windows XP operating system will be a huge target for malware writers and hackers. After 12 years of patches and 
updates, there really shouldn’t be any security flaws left, but you can be certain that some will still exist and be the 
targets of criminals.
You should also be wary of sharing files and folders with Windows 7 and Windows Vista, which is the main way 
that malware spreads on a home or work network. This is because you may not know how the other computers on that 
network are managed or what their security is like. You may be using your Windows 8.1 computer in a workplace in 
which all computers are managed the same way. Here you can be confident that the environment is enclosed with an 
SEP field1 and is the responsibility of the IT department.
Maintaining Security When Using Windows 8.1  
with Non-Windows Operating Systems
If you are using Windows 8.1 in an environment in which there are other operating systems, people’s views might 
differ. If the other computers were Apple iMacs, for example, then some would argue that they’re more secure than 
Windows. In fact, I would argue that the opposite is true because Apple doesn’t adopt the same stringent policy for 
maintaining security that Microsoft does. As a result, Apple can be slow to respond to threats such as the malware 
attack in early 2012 that infected some 600,000 Apple Mac computers.
Computers running Linux are unlikely to pose a threat to your own computer security because the overall market 
share for this operating system isn’t large enough to get the attention of malware writers.
This brings us to tablets, where Apple’s iOS operating system and Windows 8.1 are perfectly secure—but 
Google’s Android is anything but. This is because Google does not vet programs submitted to its app store in the 
same way that Apple and Microsoft do. As a result, any tablets or computers running Android should always be 
treated with caution.
1In฀the฀comedy฀science-fiction฀book,฀Life,฀the฀Universe฀and฀Everything฀by฀Douglas฀Adams฀(Pan฀Macmillan,฀1982),฀an฀SEP฀field฀is฀
described฀as฀“something฀we฀can’t฀see,฀or฀don’t฀see,฀or฀our฀brain฀doesn’t฀let฀us฀see,฀because฀we฀think฀that฀it’s฀somebody฀else’s฀
problem฀...฀The฀brain฀just฀edits฀it฀out,฀it’s฀like฀a฀blind฀spot.฀If฀you฀look฀at฀it฀directly฀you฀won’t฀see฀it฀unless฀you฀know฀precisely฀what฀
it฀is.฀Your฀only฀hope฀is฀to฀catch฀it฀by฀surprise฀out฀of฀the฀corner฀of฀your฀eye.”
The฀technology฀involved฀in฀making฀something฀properly฀invisible฀is฀so฀mind-bogglingly฀complex฀that฀999,999,999฀times฀
out฀of฀a฀billion฀it’s฀simpler฀just฀to฀take฀the฀thing฀away฀and฀do฀without฀it.฀The฀“Somebody฀Else’s฀Problem฀field”฀is฀much฀simpler,฀
more฀effective,฀and฀“can฀be฀run฀for฀over฀a฀hundred฀years฀on฀a฀single฀torch฀battery.”
This฀is฀because฀it฀relies฀on฀people’s฀natural฀predisposition฀not฀to฀see฀anything฀they฀don’t฀want฀to,฀weren’t฀expecting,฀or฀฀
can’t฀explain.

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
345
The Myth of Mac and iOS Security
 
■
 Although it’s true that, historically, Apple’s Mac computers have been almost  
invulnerable to virus attacks due to the way the security of the operating system’s UNIX-base was designed, this is sadly 
no longer the case. In recent years, malware writers, primarily in response to improved security in Windows but also 
because of the popularity of the iPhone and iPad, which share the same core OS, have focused more on tricking the Mac 
user into installing and permitting malware. This—along with Apple’s slow response to some malware threats, as well as 
the rapid market growth for Apple computers—has greatly increased the threat to the platform.
Windows Defender
I started this chapter by saying that Windows 8.1 is the first version of Windows to come with built-in security 
software. Some of you may balk at the suggestion that Windows Defender, a rebadged version of Microsoft’s free 
antivirus solution, Security Essentials, is actually effective at defending against malware at all.
In truth though, so long as you’re aware of the online threats, Windows Defender is a perfectly good antivirus 
package and is all the malware protection you need on your computer.
It is based on Microsoft’s award-winning Forefront antivirus package for Windows Server and it is very effective. 
When you look at the quarterly reports for the effectiveness of all the major antivirus packages, there is always some 
fluctuation in the brand rankings, depending on the threats that have been found in the previous 6 months and how 
effectively the manufacturers dealt with them.
There is no reason not to use Windows Defender, however. I never recommend installing any software that 
duplicates functionality that’s already in Windows because this adds layers of complexity that can lead to problems. 
Shortly, I will detail some of my recommended alternatives if you want to use something else.
Configuring and Updating Windows Defender
One of the problems for Windows 8.1 users is that Windows Defender (see Figure 11-1) is very difficult for casual 
users to find. It doesn’t appear in the PC Settings window; it is hidden on the desktop. You can most easily find it by 
searching for defender at the Start screen.

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
346
Note
 
■
 Never assume that because you have antivirus software, SmartScreen, and a firewall on your PC that 
you’re immune from malware. The people who write and distribute malware know that PCs are quite safe these days 
and use all manner of trickery, from fake web sites to telephone calls, to exploit the inexperience and ignorance of 
users and to convince them to install the malware themselves, with the user authorizing the install through security 
features such as UAC.
Windows Defender has quite a simple interface with just four tabs: Home, Update, History, and Settings.
The 
•฀
Home tab provides details on the current update and scanning status of the software.  
It allows access to perform quick, full, and custom scans. A custom scan includes scanning  
an external hard disk, for example.
The 
•฀
Update tab provides information on when the software was last updated. The large 
Update button updates the software. It really is that simple.
Figure 11-1. Windows Defender

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
347
The 
•฀
History tab allows you to view reports of any suspicious or dangerous files.
The 
•฀
Settings tab contains advanced settings for the program. It is here that you can exclude certain 
files (perhaps a program is being reported as malware when you know it isn’t) and you can also 
join the Microsoft Active Protection Service and report details of suspicious files back to Microsoft.
Note
 
■
 Real Time Protection should remain switched on. If you deactivate it, Windows Defender can’t scan new files or 
web sites as you open them.
This does mean that Windows Defender isn’t as configurable as some other packages, but why do we need 
antivirus software to be configurable anyway? I would argue that the whole point of antivirus software is to always 
provide complete protection while staying out of the way.
Staying out of the way is something that Windows Defender does extremely well because it runs scans and 
downloads updates only when you’re not using the computer. This means that if you’re working, gaming, or doing 
some other intensive job on your PC, Windows Defender doesn’t hog processor cycles or memory trying to update 
itself or run a full scan.
Note
 
■
 Windows Defender is updated through Windows Update, so it is extremely important not to switch this service off.
You can configure Windows Defender in the options under the Settings tab. Here you can exclude certain 
file locations. For example, perhaps you work in computer security or for a computer magazine and have a drive 
containing viruses so that you can test antivirus products (in which case, you made a good choice using Windows 
Defender, I might add). You can also exclude certain file types.
Note
 
■
 You can set Windows Defender to automatically create a Restore Point when it scans. This can slow your 
computer slightly, but if you have a fast PC, you won’t notice. It can improve resiliency if virus removal causes Windows to 
become unstable. Using System Restore might also risk restoring the virus!
To be honest, I wouldn’t recommend using either of these two settings unless it is absolutely necessary. The next 
setting, which excludes certain processes, is of much more use. You can use this feature to exclude some programs 
from scans if they cause conflicts or report as malware (see Figure 11-2).

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
348
Figure 11-2. Configuring Windows Defender
It is actually more common than you might believe for programs to register as malware when they’re not. These 
are called false-positives. It might be because the software has to perform the same type of actions on your computer 
that malware would, perhaps as a diagnostic tool. If you have software installed that registers as malware when it is 
not, you can exclude it here.
The Advanced settings (shown in Figure 11-3) offer some excellent features that you may want to turn on. They 
include the full scanning of USB-attached drives when a scan is in operation (remember that malware loves to infect 
USB flash drives because it’s a great way to propagate). You can also set Windows Defender to automatically create a 
Restore Point when removing a virus. I thoroughly recommend this in case something does indeed go wrong.

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
349
Tip
 
■
 It is well worth turning on the Scan Removable Drives and Create a System Restore Point options in Windows 
Defender. They provide extra security and reliability.
Finding and Installing Third-Party Antivirus Software
So what other antivirus packages are available? Which should you choose? I recommend four that I believe are worthy 
of consideration because they have consistently scored highly in antivirus scanning tests over the last few years:
•฀
AVG Anti-Virus Free (http://free.avg.com) has long been considered one of the best 
packages available. There is a free version, though in recent years it’s become rather obtrusive 
with annoying ads encouraging you to upgrade to the full paid suite.
•฀
Norton AntiVirus and Norton 360 (http://www.symantec.com) provide some of the finest 
malware scanning available. It isn’t free, but is well worth considering. It has a friendly, simple 
interface and is extremely effective at protecting your computer.
Figure 11-3. Windows Defender advanced settings

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
350
•฀
Trend Micro Titanium (http://www.trendmicro.com) is another highly effective antivirus 
package. It isn’t free.
•฀
Kaspersky Anti-Virus (http://usa.kaspersky.com) is an extremely configurable security 
package. For the power user who wants a fine level of control, it is a very suitable option.  
This is not a free product.
It is not as easy to recommend McAfee’s antivirus products because they have been known to cause problems in 
recent years. Also, McAfee’s scanning and protection capabilities are not anywhere near as good as they used to be.
Disabling Windows Defender
If you choose not to use Windows Defender because you are using third–party antivirus software instead, you can 
switch it off. This is done under the Settings tab, in the Administrator section (see Figure 11-4).
Figure 11-4. Disabling Windows Defender
If you are using a third–party antivirus product, you should turn Windows Defender off. I never recommend 
having two antivirus packages running concurrently because one can interfere with the operation of the other.

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
351
Offline Antivirus Scanners
There are some very effective offline virus scanners that start your computer from a USB flash drive to scan for and 
remove malware.
Regardless of what I said earlier about McAfee, it is difficult to criticize the quality of its offline offerings  
(www.mcafee.com/us/downloads/free-tools), which include the malware removal tools GetSusp and Stinger.
Microsoft also has an offline antivirus package called Microsoft Safety Scanner  
(http://www.microsoft.com/security/scanner), which scans your computer for malware and remove it.
You should download these tools only as required. Do not use older versions. This ensures that the software 
version you use includes the most up-to-date malware data.
Using the Windows Firewall
Unlike Windows Defender, the Windows Firewall could be described as having a split personality. On initial 
examination, it’s no more complicated to use than its antivirus brother is, but the number of configuration options are 
huge under the surface.
Configuring and Maintaining the Windows Firewall
The basic Windows 8.1 Firewall window, which you can open by searching for firewall at the Start screen, doesn’t offer 
many features and certainly doesn’t offer a large Turn the Firewall Off button. It gives you information about the network 
you are currently connected to and shows you the current state of the firewall as it pertains to that network (see Figure 11-5).
Figure 11-5. The basic Windows 8.1 firewall

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
352
There are many additional options, however, even for the basic firewall. You access these options through the left 
navigation. I want to talk you through each of them individually.
Allow an app or feature through Windows Firewall allows a program that has been blocked by Windows 8.1 
because of suspicious activity (which is known to happen with older programs especially) or because you accidentally 
denied it permission.
It’s not just simply allowing a program or app to install, however. You first have to click the Change Settings 
button to confirm to Windows that this is something you really want to do. This prevents malware from automatically 
coming through if you have inadvertently allowed it to install through UAC.
If a program or app doesn’t appear in the list, you can click the Allow Another App button to manually browse for 
and permit a program or app (see Figure 11-6).
Figure 11-6. Allowing a program or app through the firewall
Tip
 
■
 If you are having trouble with your firewall, you can click Restore Defaults in the Windows Firewall window to 
reset it to its default configuration.

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
353
Click the Change settings button in the top right of the window to allow or block a program or app through the 
firewall. Doing so allows you to check and uncheck the Private (such as home and work) and Public (such as cafes 
and libraries) network settings. You might want to set these individually if, for example, you have a file sync program 
such as SkyDrive or Dropbox that you want to block when connected to Public networks to minimize the risk of any 
transferred files being intercepted by hackers.
If you do not see the program that you want to let through the firewall listed, you can add it manually. Click the 
Allow another app button, and a new window appears again with a complete list of your apps and installed programs 
(see Figure 11-7). This shouldn’t be any different from the main Allowed apps screen list, but there might be changes, 
depending on whether you have any custom software installed.
Figure 11-7. You can manually allow a program through the firewall
You can click the Browse button to add any desktop software that isn’t included in this list. You can’t add apps  
this way because they are stored in a hidden and protected folder on the PC to which even full Administrators can’t 
get access.
When you select the program to add, click the Network types button to select which networks (Public and Private) 
you want to allow the program to connect to and finish by clicking the Add button.
In the main Windows Firewall window, the Change notification settings and Turn Windows Firewall on or off 
links allow you to turn off the firewall if you really want to. Both links take you to the same place (see Figure 11-8).  
I recommend using these options only if you are using a third-party firewall that you’re happy with.

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
354
What’s more, you can choose to have the firewall switched off in private networks, but remain on in public 
networks. But why would you want to do this? You might be a gamer and the firewall interferes with your online 
gaming at home, or you might be an office worker whose IT department asks you to switch off Windows Firewall 
because it conflicts with something on its system.
On a laptop, however, you still want to have the protection of the firewall when you’re out and about. This is 
where you can leave the firewall turned on for public networks.
There is also a check box for blocking all incoming connections, which provides better security, especially on 
public networks, but you might find that some programs or apps don’t work because they require this feature to be 
switched off.
Restore defaults resets Windows Firewall to its default setting. This option is very useful if you made advanced 
changes and can’t remember what they were to undo them.
Using the Advanced Firewall
From the main firewall window, clicking Advanced Settings takes you to a different management console  
(see Figure 11-9), in which you can set specific rules for both inbound and outbound traffic; and perform other 
operations, such as opening and blocking specific connection ports.
Figure 11-8. You can turn off the Windows Firewall

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
355
The main pane in the center displays the current firewall status, but there are two other panes here that you need 
to be familiar with. On the left side is a tree showing different options within the firewall: inbound and outbound 
rules, connection security rules, and firewall monitoring. (I will discuss each of these shortly.) On the right side are 
controls, including options to create and manage rules for the firewall.
To create a new firewall, first click Inbound Rules, Outbound Rules, or Connection Security Rules in the left pane; 
then click New Rule in the right pane to open the New Rule Wizard (see Figure 11-10).
Figure 11-9. The advanced firewall settings in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
356
Inbound Rules and Outbound Rules allow you to monitor and set rules for individual programs. You can click 
New Rule in the right pane to create a new rule for a program, or to allow or block a port on your computer. Table 11-1 
shows a list of the common ports on your PC.
Figure 11-10. All rules settings are done through helpful wizards

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
357
Port opening and blocking is common with applications such as gaming and file sharing, in which 
communications ports that are not normally used are blocked by firewalls by default.
Here you can set, for example, certain programs or ports to operate only if the data connection is secure. 
If you use your computer for work and perhaps work in an industry such as security, government, research, or 
pharmaceuticals, you might want your work applications to transmit and receive data only when you are connected 
to a secured and properly encrypted network. Here you can set specific programs or apps to operate only under these 
circumstances (see Figure 11-11).
Table 11-1. What Port Does What on Your PC
Port
Service
7
Echo
21
FTP
22
SSH
23
Telnet
25
SMTP
42
Name Servers/WINS
43
Who is/Nickname
53
DNS
79
Finger
80 (also 8080)
HTTP
81
Kerberos
101
Hostname
110
POP3 (email)
119
NNTP
143
IMAP (email)
161
SNMP
162
SNMP Trap
3389
Remote Desktop
5631
PCAnywhere
5632
PCAnywhere
5900 and above
VNC
6881 to 6990
Torrents

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
358
On the issue of secure connections, even if you only connect to your company through a virtual private 
network (VPN), you might be asked to set specific connection security rules so that your computer can be 
authenticated. You do this in the Connection Security Rules section, which specifies the type of connection you 
want (there are descriptions to assist you) and the type of authentication required by both computers before the 
connection is allowed.
When setting this up, you will likely have specific settings to input from your company or organization, and they 
will be specific to them alone.
One very useful feature is to create a custom connection rule whereby you can set—either with or without 
encryption or authentication—connections between two or several specific computers on specific IP addresses  
(see Figure 11-12).
Figure 11-11. Setting connection rules

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
359
If you have a closed connection in an office and only want computers in the payroll department (for example) to 
be able to see and connect to other payroll computers, you can set their IP addresses here. However, you need to set 
both inbound and outbound rules, as well as rules to clock all other IP address connections to the computer.
Note
 
■
 If you are only allowing connections from your computer, you need to make sure that the permitted computers 
have static IP addresses set in your router.
User Account Control
First introduced with Windows Vista, UAC is your main line of defense against unwanted software being installed on 
your computer, or unwanted changes being made to your copy of Windows or your computer’s settings.
Figure 11-12. The rules options are easy to follow

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
360
When a change is made to your computer that can affect other users, potentially allow the installation of 
malware, or cause the computer to become unstable, UAC changes the desktop to a secure mode (the same one used 
when you log on to your computer) and displays only the UAC prompt on the screen. Unlike Windows 7, you don’t see 
anything else.
In this mode, no software is permitted to act, so malware can’t automatically click itself through. You have to 
choose a yes or no option, though Windows 8.1 can give you additional information about what is happening—and 
sometimes it is useful and written in plain language.
Tip
 
■
 The best rule to follow is that if a UAC prompt appears at a time when you personally are not installing software 
or changing a Windows setting, you should always click No.
You can change the setting for UAC by searching for uac at the Start screen, in which you will find it in the settings 
results (see Figure 11-13). I always recommend that you leave UAC with its defaults setting because it offers the best 
security without the feature becoming annoying. 
Figure 11-13. Changing the UAC settings

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
361
There are four settings for UAC that vary from off to annoying.
•฀
Never notify me turns UAC off completely. I recommend never using this setting.
•฀
Notify me only when apps try to make changes to my computer (do not dim my desktop) 
is another setting I don’t recommend. Although this setting allows you to make whatever 
settings changes you want to Windows 8.1 without being bothered by UAC, it doesn’t switch to 
the secure desktop mode when software is installed. This may permit malware to autoclick the 
UAC prompt for you.
•฀
Notify me only when apps try to make changes to my computer is the default setting.  
I strongly recommend you leave it as is.
•฀
Always notify me is otherwise known as “annoying mode.”
So what is the difference between the default and the annoying modes? Some Windows 8.1 controls have a 
UAC shield icon next to them. This is to alert you that whatever you’re doing here can affect other users or how the 
computer behaves.
In the default mode, Windows allows you to make changes that only affect your own user account, without 
popping up a UAC prompt. It is only when you’re installing software or making changes that can affect other users  
(if you have only a single-user account, it assumes that more could be added later) that a UAC prompt appears.
Conversely, when in annoying mode, UAC gives you a security prompt for everything that can affect your own 
user account as well. This is much more secure but … well, it is plain annoying.
Encrypting Files, Folders, and Drives
On your Windows 8.1 computer—be it a desktop, laptop, or tablet—you can encrypt your data and the entire 
hard disk. But should you? I want to carefully look at and consider the usefulness of each of the three encryption 
technologies in Windows 8.1.
Encrypting Files and Folders Using the Encrypting File System
The question of whether to use a Windows encryption technology applies especially to the Encrypting File  
System (EFS). This system can be used to encrypt individual files or folders in Windows. It has been with us since 
Windows 2000. It uses 256-bit keys and a mix of several encryption systems based around Advanced Encryption 
Standard (AES) to provide overall security.
You can encrypt an individual file or folder (or a selected group) by following these instructions:
 
1. 
Right-click the item(s) to be encrypted. Select Properties from the options that appear.
 
2. 
Click the Advanced button in the Attributes section.
 
3. 
Check the Encrypt contents to secure data box (see Figure 11-14).

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
362
 
4. 
Click OK to begin the encryption.
The encryption process could take some time, depending on the number of files and folders that you are 
encrypting. You should not cancel the dialog box that appears onscreen because it cancels the encryption process.
You can decrypt files in the same way by following the same instructions and unchecking the Encrypt 
contents box.
How EFS Works
EFS is tied to your Windows user account. Whenever you log on to Windows using this account, you can automatically 
read, write, and modify EFS-protected files. If you log on to your computer using another account, however, or even if 
you have to reinstall Windows 8.1 and then log on using the same username and password you used before, you can’t 
access these files until you import your EFS key. After you import the appropriate EFS key, you can read the files again.
Backing Up and Restoring Your EFS Key
When you have encrypted files or folders using EFS Windows, a desktop Taskbar alert will prompt you to back up your 
EFS key. It is extremely important that you back up this key and keep it in a safe location away from the computer.
You are asked to set a password for your key, which prevents anyone from importing it onto their computer or 
user account and opening your files.
You can manually back up and restore EFS keys in Windows 8.1 by searching for encrypt at the Start screen 
and then clicking Manage file encryption certificates in the Encrypting File System window that starts the wizard 
(see Figure 11-15).
Figure 11-14. Encrypting files and folders using EFS

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
363
This is a wizard-based tool and it’s extremely simple and easy to use. You can also set the EFS system to grant 
access to files only if used in conjunction with a smart card (assuming that your computer has a reader).
If you change your EFS key—let’s say you’ve moved to a different computer—you can update the cipher used to 
encrypt the files to the new key on the new computer as well.
Working with EFS-Encrypted Files
In practice, there are several reasons why I can’t recommend using EFS. The first and probably the most important is 
that although it encrypts the contents of files, it still allows people to drill down into your files and folders and view all 
the file names, which can give away important information (e.g., P. Grant Disciplinary 2012-08-21.docx).
EFS also has what I personally consider a significant flaw. It lost my files on both occasions that I’ve used it. 
Because it encrypts individual files and folders, not a whole disk, those files and folders are still encrypted when you 
copy them elsewhere.
If you have an automated backup solution that copies your files to an external hard disk or network attached 
storage (NAS) drive, the backed-up files will also be encrypted. “Great!” you say. This is exactly what you want.
Figure 11-15. Backing up and restoring an EFS key

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
364
Unfortunately, EFS requires NTFS–formatted hard drives in order to work, but some external hard disks, 
especially NAS appliances, are often formatted using different methods. In such cases, you may find that your backups 
are completely scrambled and unreadable when you try to restore them.
Using EFS from the Command Line
If you’re a command-line user in Windows, it’s possible to manage the EFS there as well. This uses the cipher 
command in the format cipher [/switch] [\folder-or-file-1] [\folder-or-file-2].
What follows is a list of the more common cipher switches, though more are available with the /? Switch.
Table 11-2. Switches for the cipher Command
Switch
Action
/D
Decrypts the specified file or folder.
/E
Encrypts the specified file or folder.
/H
Displays a list of all files in a folder including hidden and system files.
/K
Creates a new encryption certificate for the currently logged-in user. This switch 
must be used on its own.
/N
Can only be used with /U. Lists every encrypted file without updating the user’s 
encryption key.
/R
Generates an EFS recovery key and certificate in the form of a .pfx file and a .cer 
file containing only the certificate.
/S
Performs the operation on all files and subfolders subordinate to the specified folder.
/U
Updates the currently logged-in user’s encryption key on every encrypted file.
/W
Wipes any unused space on the drive.
/X filename
Backs up the currently logged-in users’ certificate and encryption keys.
/ADDUSER username
Adds a specified user to an encrypted file.
/REMOVEUSER username
Removes a specified user from an encrypted file.
/REKEY
Updates files to use your current EFS key.
Encrypting Drives with BitLocker
A much better encryption solution is BitLocker, which is a full-drive encryption system that was first introduced 
with Windows Vista. It uses a 128-bit AES cipher and can combine a Trusted Platform Module (TPM) chip on your 
motherboard with a pin and/or a USB flash drive to enhance security.
The main advantage of this method is that the encryption is tied to a chip on your motherboard, which contains 
the decryption cipher; not even the removal of the hard disk allows people to read your encrypted files. The downside 
is that you need a TPM chip on your motherboard for BitLocker to work on your computer’s hard drive(s), and it’s 
uncommon for desktops to come with one fitted.
TPM chips are much more common on laptops, but they can push up the price, so they are most commonly 
found only on high-end business and workstation laptops.
This is disappointing because modern data protection regulations around the world demand that data is 
protected securely—and BitLocker is an absolutely brilliant way of achieving it.

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
365
Note
 
■
 BitLocker is available only in Windows 8.1 Pro and Enterprise and Windows RT.
Because BitLocker provides full disk encryption, any files that you copy from your computer are decrypted 
automatically. Although this might sound like a disaster, it does mean that backups are always readable (you do need 
to keep them safe, however) and that nobody can read any of the file names on your computer without unlocking the 
drive(s) with the appropriate key.
Preparing Your TPM Chip
Before you can use Bitlocker on your computer with a TPM chip, you need to activate the chip. You can do this by 
clicking the TPM Administration link in the bottom left of the main BitLocker window (see Figure 11-16). The main 
TPM administration page (see Figure 11-15) shows the status of your Trusted Platform Module chip. Before you can 
use BitLocker, however, you need to turn on the TPM chip on your motherboard.
Figure 11-16. Managing your TPM chip in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
366
If you do not have a TPM-enabled computer, you can’t encrypt your hard disk. If your computer is TPM-enabled, 
however, you will see options to prepare the TPM and more. For example, you can turn off TPM (be certain that you 
have no encrypted drives when you do this—see “When to Decrypt Your Hard Disks” later in the chapter) or clear the 
TPM of all its stored ciphers completely. If the TPM chip has locked you out of your computer (more on this later),  
you can reset a lockout after you gain access.
To use BitLocker, you need to prepare the TPM, which requires rebooting your computer because settings are 
changed in the BIOS or UEFI firmware (you can also turn it on there). If you need to manage the TPM later on,  
this page provides all the controls to do so.
Activating BitLocker
Once your TPM chip is enabled, use the main BitLocker page to turn the feature on (see Figure 11-17), which you 
access from the Control Panel. You can encrypt all the hard drives on your computer, but you must complete the 
encryption of the drive on which you have Windows 8.1 installed. In order to encrypt any extra drives with BitLocker, 
your Windows 8.1 drive must also be encrypted.
Figure 11-17. Managing BitLocker in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
367
Note
 
■
 BitLocker does not work with dual-boot systems! If you have or are planning to have a dual-boot system on 
your computer, BitLocker locks you out of your computer each time you try to start it.
Unlike EFS, BitLocker encrypts your hard drive in the background, and it is perfectly fine for you to shut down 
your computer during the process because BitLocker simply continues when you next log on. This is useful because  
it can take many hours to encrypt a large hard disk that is already full of files and folders.
You can also turn off BitLocker on protected drives. This is where decrypting drives is slightly easier than 
encrypting them. If, for example, you have two or more physical hard disks or partitions on your computer and you 
want to encrypt several of them, you must first complete the encryption of your Windows 8.1 drive before you can 
manually start encryption of the others. When decrypting drives, however, you can start all the jobs at the same  
time—and Windows 8.1 happily continues if you shut down the computer occasionally.
Backing Up and Restoring Your BitLocker Keys
When BitLocker has encrypted your hard drive, you are automatically prompted to back up your BitLocker key.  
There are three locations where you can do this:
•฀
A file on your computer?: Do not save the key to a drive that has been encrypted with 
BitLocker, or else you might not be able to read it again.
•฀
A USB flash drive: I strongly recommend you save your key. I will explain the reasons in the 
next section.
•฀
Microsoft SkyDrive: This cloud service is a secure location. I recommend that you store a 
copy of your key on a cloud service like this, but it’s no good for your main backup.
Starting a BitLocker-Encrypted Computer
The reason I recommend you keep a copy of your BitLocker encryption key on a USB flash drive is because if 
something happens to make BitLocker unhappy, such as boot change, you will be completely locked out of your 
computer until you can input the key.
You can type the encryption key, but it is a very long and complex string of characters. You can insert a USB flash 
drive containing the key, however, and the Windows boot loader will recognize it and grant you access again.
Surely, you say, this defeats the purpose of having an encrypted computer. I argue that if you never keep your 
computer and the USB drive containing the unlock key in the same place (there is a separate key for each encrypted 
hard disk or partition). If you are traveling, however, you don’t need BitLocker locking you out. It might be some time 
before you can get to another Internet-connected computer to download the backup.
Therefore, I always recommend that you keep a copy of the backup key(s) on a USB flash drive in a safe 
location—because you never know when you might need it.
Using BitLocker After a Reinstall of Windows 8.1
If you are using BitLocker on a computer in which it has been used before—perhaps because you reinstalled Windows 8.1  
or performed a clean install to upgrade from Windows 7 (you should never upgrade an operating system encrypted with 
BitLocker), you will probably be asked to enter the owner password for your TPM chip (see Figure 11-18). This is set 
when you activate BitLocker. It is stored in the chip.

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
368
You need to do this only if you still have BitLocker-protected drives on the computer, which I don’t recommend 
because you never know what might go wrong, such as electricity surges or laptop drops that cause hard disk 
corruption. What you can do, however, is clear the TPM chip completely and start afresh, which is the best option if 
you have no BitLocker-encrypted drives in the computer.
You might be prompted to enter the owner password when restoring from a backup—if that backup was made 
before you encrypted your hard drives with BitLocker. Which brings me to the next section.
When to Decrypt Your Hard Disks
There are times when you should turn off BitLocker—purely to prevent disasters from occurring, as always happens 
with security technologies. These times include the following:
When upgrading your copy of Windows or when installing a new operating system, such as 
•฀
migrating from Windows 7 to Windows 8.1
When moving a hard disk from one computer to another
•฀
When sending a computer out for repair (I always recommend wiping the data drive in this case)
•฀
When you restore your computer from a backup, your drives won’t be encrypted. You will have to  
re-encrypt them.
Figure 11-18. Clearing the TPM

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
369
Using BitLocker To Go
The BitLocker To Go feature doesn’t require a TPM chip. This is a full-disk encryption system for USB and other 
attached flash drives and external hard disks. Unlike BitLocker, it is compatible with a variety of drive formats, 
including FAT32, exFAT, and NTFS—making it perfect for USB drives.
You encrypt an attached USB or other device with BitLocker To Go through the main BitLocker window. Again, 
there is the same on/off control as there is for your internal hard disks (see Figure 11-19). BitLocker To Go only 
requires that you set a password, which is entered when you want to read or access the disk on another computer.
Figure 11-19. Using BitLocker To Go
Note
 
■
 You cannot create Bitlocker To Go Drives in Windows RT.
When using a BitLocker To Go encrypted drive on another computer, there are limits to what you can do.  
For example, in versions of Windows that support the same version of BitLocker, namely Windows 7, you can get full 
access to the drive.

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
370
On Windows Vista and Windows XP, however, you have the BitLocker To Go Reader, which is software that, when 
you enter your password, allows you to read the contents of the protected drive, but doesn’t allow you to write files 
back to it.
This is an important consideration when using BitLocker To Go. You should ask yourself, “Am I going to want to 
edit these files on another computer?” If the answer is yes, as long as the computer is running Windows 7 or Windows 
8.1, you will be fine. If not, then you will have more difficulty.
Because you can open and read files, however, there is nothing to stop you from saving a copy of that file locally 
and e-mailing the modified file to yourself once you have edited it. This is really the only way to edit files on a 
protected drive in Windows Vista or Windows XP.
Encryption Best Practice
BitLocker is an incredibly useful technology, and there are many situations in which you will want to use it. Having a 
password on your computer is not normally enough protection because a hard disk can be removed from a computer 
and read on another device.
If you are using a tablet or an ultrabook, you do have an advantage because the hard disk is a slim sliver of circuit 
board that requires specialized equipment to read it if it is removed. Even so, unless you store all your documents 
and files on a cloud service such as SkyDrive or Dropbox and access them only over a live Internet connection, you 
probably have files on your computer that contain personally identifiable information (PII) about yourself or others.
Even the contacts database in your e-mail account is valuable because it can contain not only names, addresses, 
and e-mail addresses but also dates of birth and other information that can be used to clone a person’s identity.
If you are using an office laptop for work, you have tougher data protection rules governing how you use and 
protect the data of individuals. If you lose your laptop or it is stolen, you can face considerable fines or jail time if the 
laptop contains unencrypted data on individuals. This is on top of the damage done to your reputation or business,  
if it is discovered that you have lost sensitive and important information. If you travel abroad on business, you can also 
face penalties from data protection authorities in the country that you are in.
For these reasons, I recommend that you buy a laptop that comes equipped with a TPM chip, if you can afford 
it, so that you can take advantage of BitLocker. It is true that it is commonly just the high-end laptops that come with 
TPM chips, but if you shop around, you can normally find other laptops, ultrabooks, and tablets containing the chip. 
For businesses, a TPM chip is an essential business expense. For consumers, it can be a very worthwhile addition.
If you are on the road, it is a good idea to carry—separate from your laptop—a USB flash drive containing the 
BitLocker keys for your computer. The system has been known to lock users out at the most inopportune moments.
Permitting and Blocking File and Folder Access with NTFS 
Permissions
Whenever you open a file or a folder on your PC, it is because you have permission to do so. These permissions are 
managed on a file and folder level and can be controlled to allow (or prevent) specific users or groups of users from 
being able to open them.
To change the permissions on a file or a folder, right-click it; from the menu that appears, click Properties 
(see Figure 11-20).

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
371
In the dialog that appears, click the Security tab and you will see the users and user groups who currently have 
permission to use the file or folder and, in the bottom part of the dialog, the individual permissions they have. These 
permissions are easy to understand: Full Control, Modify, Read & Execute, List Folder Contents, Read, and Write.
You can edit the permissions for any of the users or groups listed by clicking that user or group and then clicking 
the Edit button. The check boxes in the lower part of the window then become editable. If you do not see a user or 
group already listed, however, click Edit. In the next dialog, click the Add button.
A new dialog displays in which you can type a username (or just a partial name) and click the Check name button 
to search for a specific user or group of users (see Figure 11-21).
Figure 11-21. You can add user permissions to files and folders
Figure 11-20. You can change permissions for individual files and folders

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
372
After you add users or groups in this way, they will be added to the main options (refer to Figure 11-20).
Clicking the Advanced button in the security properties dialog for a file or folder displays additional controls 
(see Figure 11-22). This includes the place from which permissions are inherited. Let’s say, for example, that you give 
somebody access to your Documents folder. Every folder under this will also be open to them, and the permissions 
will have been inherited from the parent, the main Documents folder. At the bottom left of the dialog is a Disable 
inheritance button that is used to prevent the automatic inheritance of security and other sharing properties from the 
parent for the currently selected file or folder.
Figure 11-22. Advanced permissions options are also available
If you want to view in a verbose manner the full permissions a user or group of users has for the currently selected 
file or folder you can click the Effective Access tab. This will display a clear list of all the permissions that the chosen 
user or group has for that item, see Figure 11-23.

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
373
Using Biometric Devices with Windows 8.1
Encryption isn’t the only way to secure your computer. There are a variety of biometric devices available for 
computers. They require third-party tools because they are not normally controlled by Windows, but Windows 8.1 
does contain controls, which you access through the Control Panel, for working with biometric devices installed on 
your computer (see Figure 11-24). This is a central location from which you can manage devices such as smart card 
readers and fingerprint scanners.
Figure 11-23. You can view full permissions information under the Effective Access tab

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
374
You will probably find that when you open the management options for a particular biometric device from the 
Control Panel, it starts a third-party security utility rather than a Windows 8.1 wizard.
This is very common for biometric devices, but it is useful for Windows 8.1 to have a central location to  
manage them.
Note
 
■
 Biometric devices use features unique to human physiology to identify a user. This commonly includes  
fingerprints, but can also include retinal scanners, voice and facial recognition, handwriting, and anything else that’s 
noninvasive for the user.
Some companies offer software with webcams (or the Kinect controller) that use technologies such as facial 
recognition to lock and unlock your computer. One example is a webcam that automatically locks the computer when 
it can no longer see your face.
Figure 11-24. Managing biometric devices in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
375
Unless these security devices appear in the Biometrics page in the Control Panel or are listed as security devices 
in the Device manager, you should treat the actual security they offer with caution. For example, software that comes 
with a webcam is unlikely to prevent anyone who wants to hack into your computer from doing so (your photograph 
might be enough to fool a webcam, which can see only in two dimensions anyway).
Don’t assume that because your computer comes with a facility like this that it is secure. It doesn’t necessarily 
work that way.
If you have a fingerprint sensor in your PC, an easy way to use your fingerprint with Windows 8.1 is directly 
through PC Settings, which now allows you to use your fingerprint to log in to Windows. You can find this setting in 
Accounts and then Sign in Options under the Fingerprint section. Clicking the Add [fingerprint] button opens an  
easy-to-use wizard that will scan your fingerprint (see Figure 11-25). A fingerprint option then appears on the 
Windows 8.1 login screen.
Figure 11-25. Windows 8.1 allows you to use your fingerprint to log in

CHAPTER 11 ■ KEEPING YOU, YOUR FILES, AND YOUR COMPUTER SAFE
376
Summary
When it comes to security, Windows 8.1 is very good at taking care of itself. With the default settings left unchanged 
for Windows Defender, User Account Control, and Windows Update, the operating system installs all the updates  
it requires as they become available.
Sometimes you may want to customize settings, perhaps to hide updates or to custom-configure the firewall. 
Some third-party antivirus vendors will tell you that in order to get full and flexible control of antivirus software and 
a firewall, you need their software. This simply isn’t the case. Windows Defender is really quite flexible for a small 
lightweight package, and Windows Firewall is very powerful and flexible, indeed.
I never recommend changing the default settings in Windows. Making them tougher only makes life difficult for 
you, and turning them down takes away the protection that you need. These are parts of Windows 8.1 that you are 
wise to leave well alone.
When it comes to encryption, you have several options, and if you carry personal or sensitive files on your laptop 
or tablet, I strongly recommend that you purchase a device with a built-in TPM chip, allowing you to use BitLocker. 
If you are using a Windows RT device, device encryption technology is built into the operating system. It works in the 
same way as BitLocker and is just as secure, but it doesn’t require the TPM.

377
CHAPTER 12
Maintaining and Backing Up Your 
Computer and Files
Once you are using your new Windows 8.1 computer, the most important consideration is keeping it running 
smoothly to avoid downtime. Sometimes, despite all your best efforts, problems arise. If they do, visit my web site 
(http://www.theLongClimb.com), which has articles and videos to help you through problems.
So how can you set up Windows to maintain trouble-free use? And how can you set up backups to help you 
return to work quickly and easily if something goes wrong?
Maintaining a Healthy Computer
Why is it important to maintain a healthy operating system and have backups in place? Surely, Windows 8.1 is the 
most reliable and robust version of the operating system Microsoft has ever released. It comes with more tools for 
diagnosing and mitigating problems than any version of Windows before it.
I have long found it ironic that as Windows becomes increasingly stable and reliable, the number of diagnostic 
and repair tools provided as part of the operating system also increases.
The simple fact remains, however, that your computer is not a domestic appliance, and with the exception of 
Windows ARM–powered tablets, which have the operating system embedded on a chip, every single file that makes up 
Windows can potentially be changed, deleted, or become corrupt.
What Causes Computers to Become Unstable
I want to talk about why computers become unstable, crash, and fail to boot. There are actually many causes for these 
problems including the following:
•฀
Spikes, surges and interruptions to the electricity supply can cause Windows files to 
become corrupt. You should always have your computer plugged in to a surge protector  
(as well as an uninterruptable power supply if you live in an area with an unreliable electrical 
supply). The power lead coming loose in the computer and the dog leaning against the power 
button are also causes. (I’ve suffered this many times, though it is very amusing when he 
switches on the Xbox and can’t figure out why the floor makes a noise when he lies down.)
Any interruption in the electrical supply can come at a time when a Windows file is being 
amended; it happens quite a bit. This problem can also cause the partition table—the 
database listing the physical location of each file on your hard disk—to become scrambled 
if the power is cut when it’s being written to.

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
378
•฀
Poorly written software and drivers are a very common cause of Windows failures. Don’t 
assume for a moment that drivers delivered through Windows Update will always give you 
trouble-free operation; I’ve seen many a Blue Screen of Death happen this way. The problem 
here is that there is no way to predict or accommodate for the truly limitless variations in 
hardware and software on a specific machine.
This is one of the reasons why Apple computers are reliable. As the manufacturer of both 
their operating system and all their hardware, they have complete and very tight control 
over the quality of drivers for the platform. It is the same with the App Store. Don’t think 
that these app stores are just money-making schemes for Apple or Microsoft—they are,  
in fact, ways to ensure that the correct development tools are used, which encourages apps 
to be written in the right way.
With the anticipated withdrawal of the x86 versions of Windows in Windows 9 (expected  
in 2015), Microsoft is expected to move to a strict signed-driver model in which all 
hardware drivers must be officially tested and signed off by Microsoft. At the moment,  
it is recommended but isn’t mandatory, and because it can be expensive, many hardware 
manufacturers choose not to pay for it.
•฀
Malware and viruses sneak onto the computer by taking advantage of the user. These 
malicious programs can cause all manner of havoc on a machine before you even know  
what’s happened.
•฀
Installing too many programs and temporary files causes a computer to fail over time.  
The more you try to do with your computer, the greater the risk that something will go wrong; 
and the more unnecessary files you have, the slower the computer will become over time.
How is Windows RT Different?
Windows tablets with ARM processors run a modified version of the Windows 8.1 operating system—called Windows 
RT—written onto a silicon chip instead of written file-by-file onto a hard disk. This offers greater speed because 
operating system files can load as quickly as they can from the fastest solid-state drive (SSD) in a desktop or laptop PC, 
and it’s far less likely that a sudden power surge will corrupt any files (and the fact that tablets are much less likely to 
be in use when plugged into main electricity).
You also cannot install desktop software on Windows RT tablets; you can only download apps from the Windows 
Store. This reduces the chance of poorly written software causing problems and is because desktop apps are 
incompatible with the different processor architecture of ARM chips.
However, this does not extend to hardware because Microsoft has done an excellent job of making sure that you 
can still use existing USB and other hardware on these tablets in the way that you can with desktop PCs, laptops, and 
professional-grade tablets.
Using the Windows 8.1 Action Center
The Action Center (see Figure 12-1) is the central location in Windows for all important system messages and help 
tools. You access it by clicking the white flag icon on the far right of the Windows taskbar.

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
379
The Action Center is split into categories for Security and Maintenance, and warnings and alerts are 
automatically highlighted in amber or red.
Although the collapsible Security and Maintenance lists provide you with a great deal of useful and helpful 
information about Windows 8.1, you may want to customize the messages that you receive. The reason for this is that 
the Action Center will still alert you about backing up your files, for example, even if you have a third-party backup 
solution installed on your PC.
Managing Action Center Messages
To customize the messages you receive in the Action Center, click Change Action Center Settings in the top of the left 
pane. This opens a settings window with check boxes that allow you to turn on or off messages for all the alerts in  
the Action Center (see Figure 12-2).
Figure 12-1. The Action Center

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
380
Tip
 
■
 I do not recommend turning off any of the alerts for Security Messages in the Action Center.
Using the Automatic Maintenance System in Windows 8.1
Windows 8.1 includes an automatic maintenance system that helps keep your computer running happily and 
healthily. These settings are in the Maintenance section of the Action Center. Click Change maintenance settings or 
search for maintenance at the Start screen.
The automatic maintenance includes deleting temporary and other unwanted files (such as those used by 
Windows Update), defragmenting of your hard disks, and checking for and installing updates for the operating system.
You can configure how and when you want this tool to run (see Figure 12-3) by choosing the time of day you want 
it to run or whether you want it to run at all. The time of day selection is important because if you are using a laptop or 
a tablet, Windows 8.1 will wake from sleep to perform the maintenance. It doesn’t wake the computer if it is switched 
off, however.
Figure 12-2. Changing the Action Center settings

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
381
If you think your computer will be switched off at the time maintenance is due to be performed, you can choose 
the time that maintenance is performed.
You can run these tools independently as Disk Cleanup and Defragmenter, both of which are available by 
searches from the Start screen. I will show you how to use these tools and the additional options they provide in 
Chapter 13 if you want finer control over the automatic and manual maintenance options in Windows 8.1.
Using the Automated Troubleshooters
In the Action Center, you can run Windows 8.1’s automated troubleshooters by clicking Troubleshooting (see Figure 12-4). 
There are many troubleshooters for almost every aspect of Windows, including networking and drivers.
Figure 12-3. Changing the Automatic Maintenance settings in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
382
Note
 
■
 The automated troubleshooters resets Windows components and drivers to their default state. This is often 
enough to fix many problems, but if the issue is caused by a conflict with another driver or software package, the  
troubleshooters are unlikely to fix the problem. You can visit my web site (http://www.theLongClimb.com) for more 
troubleshooting help.
The troubleshooters are wizard-based and give clear information. They can be run easily by users of any 
technical ability. They are split into handy categories covering Programs, Hardware and Sound, Network and Internet, 
and System and Security. Each troubleshooter is explained in plain language.
Tip
 
■
 You can also access the automated troubleshooters by clicking Troubleshooting in the Control Panel.
You can change settings for the troubleshooters by clicking Change Settings in the left pane (see Figure 12-5).  
I do not recommend changing any of these settings, however.
Figure 12-4. The automated troubleshooters

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
383
The Windows 8.1 Task Manager
The Windows Task Manager has been given its first significant overhaul in 20 years, and the new look provides more 
helpful information about Windows than we’ve seen before. By default, you just see a list of running programs with an 
End Task button in the bottom right of the window. It can be used to forcibly close troublesome programs and apps, 
but clicking the More Details button expands the window (see Figure 12-6).
Figure 12-5. Changing the troubleshooting settings

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
384
When you click the More Details button, the Task Manager expands to display not just more information but 
also a wealth of data about your running programs, apps, services, processes, hardware, and connections. The first 
thing you see is the Processes tab, which provides a heat-mapped display of the current processor, memory, disk, 
and network usage for all your running apps and desktop programs. This means that if something is hogging huge 
amounts of memory, for example, you can see it straightaway (see Figure 12-7). 
Figure 12-6. The simplified Task Manager in Windows 8.1 with a More Details button

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
385
To close a program in the Task Manager, highlight the program and click the End Task button in the bottom right 
of the window.
Tip
 
■
 If you are unsure about which programs and processes you can shut down, the Task Manager offers several 
ways to find out. If you right-click a process, you can select options to view its Properties or open its File Location. Both 
reveal information about the process. You can also search online for this process from the context menu, which provides 
even more detailed information about the process.
There is a great deal you can now do with the Task Manager in Windows 8.1. The Performance tab now provides 
live graphs similar to the Performance Monitor, but with general overviews of performance information rather than 
the extremely detailed metrics offered by its big brother.
Figure 12-7. Monitoring software in the Task Manager

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
386
The App History tab is a great way to determine if the apps you are using in Windows 8.1 are well written and fit 
for purpose. Let’s say, for example, that you are finding that something is chewing through your mobile broadband 
allowance. On the App History tab, you can see the total amount of data that your apps have used, even when those 
apps are not running (see Figure 12-8).
Figure 12-8. The App History tab
It includes the ability to see the amount of data consumed by the Live Tile for an app, if appropriate. Probably 
less useful is the processor time taken by an app. This chart doesn’t take into account how much you use one app 
compared to another. Metrics that are more relevant are gained through the Processes tab when an app is running or 
through the Performance Information and Tools page.
Tip
 
■
 You can open the Task Manager by pressing Ctrl+Alt+Del on your keyboard and selecting Task Manager from the 
options, by right-clicking the taskbar, or from the Win+X administration menu.

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
387
The Details tab is more like the traditional Task Manager, if you prefer that look and usage (see Figure 12-9).  
Here you see a complete list of every program, app, and process running in Windows 8.1. It works the same way as the 
old Task Manager in that you can right-click a program to shut it down. 
It is interesting that only through the Details tab can you shut all the dependencies for a program. This means 
that when you shut down the program, all the processes and other programs that rely on it are also shut down 
automatically.
Tip
 
■
 You can shut down all the dependencies for a program under the Details tab by right-clicking the program or 
process and selecting End Process Tree from the options.
Figure 12-9. The Details tab gives very detailed information

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
388
Customizing the Task Manager
When you click the Performance tab in the Task Manager, you are presented with a series of live graphs displaying 
the current status of your PC’s processor (CPU), memory, hard disk(s), networking (Ethernet) and Wi-Fi, and other 
network connections if applicable. This view can be customized in a great many ways, just some of which can be seen 
in Figure 12-10.
Figure 12-10. You can customize the Task Manager’s Performance data in many ways
You customize these views by right-clicking any of the graphs, both in the left pane and in the main view, and it’s 
worth spending a few minutes playing with these views because they not only provide a great deal of valuable (and 
additional) information but they can also become useful widgets for leaving on your screen if you are troubleshooting 
a problem and want to keep one eye on something such as your network connection. These miniwindows can also be 
resized to make then smaller (or larger), making them even easier to leave running on your desktop, though you can 
only have only one open at a time.
Managing Startup Programs
The Task Manager is where you manage the programs that run at Windows startup. Not only does it make this feature 
simpler for nontechnical users but it also adds a very helpful Startup Impact column, which tells you—in simple low, 
medium, and high terms—how long the program slows down your computer when you turn it on (see Figure 12-11).

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
389
You can disable programs by highlighting them and then clicking the Disable button in the bottom right of the 
window. You can also re-enable programs the same way because disabled programs are not removed from the list.
You don’t see Windows 8.1 apps here because they can’t be set to run at startup, and any Live Tiles are 
automatically enabled unless you disable them by right-clicking the tile and selecting Disable Live Tile from the  
App bar.
Using Windows Update
Like Windows Firewall, Windows Update in Windows 8.1 has a split personality that is controllable through PC 
Settings and from the full Control Panel. Windows Update keeps your PC up to date with not just the latest security 
and stability patches and updates but also includes updates and improvements for both Windows and other Microsoft 
software you have installed, such as the Windows Essentials Suite and Microsoft Office.
Figure 12-11. Managing startup programs

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
390
Managing Windows Update Settings in Windows 8.1
The easiest way to use Windows Update is in PC Settings, where it can be found in the Update & Recovery section.  
It is a very simple affair. Windows Update automatically installs all critical, important, and recommended updates 
for a computer. There’s very little the user has to do. In many ways, especially with regard to safeguarding people’s 
personal privacy and security, it’s exactly what the average nontechnical computer user needs (see Figure 12-12).  
More–technically savvy users, however, may prefer the added control that comes with the full Windows Update 
desktop settings, which are covered in the following section.
Figure 12-12. Windows Update basic settings
You can also use PC Settings to configure Windows Update: from the Start screen, search for update and then 
click Choose whether to automatically install Windows updates. The options display (see Figure 12-13) that allow you 
to configure Windows Update without having to visit the desktop. The settings include how Windows Update gets 
updates and whether additional and updates are included.

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
391
Managing Windows Update on the Desktop
If you want to control Windows Update from the desktop, access is on the desktop through the Control Panel. The 
features here are instantly recognizable to anyone who has used Windows Vista or Windows 7 and do include features 
not available in PC Settings.
The main control (see Figure 12-14) is color-coded to show at a glance your computer’s current update status. 
There is a large green, amber, or red icon to alert you.
Figure 12-13. You can configure Windows Update in a friendly way

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
392
Beneath this are details on when you or Windows 8.1 last checked online for updates, the updates received, and 
when they were installed.
Tip
 
■
 Windows Update on the desktop can check for updates to other Microsoft software, including Office and the 
Windows Essentials suite. You can turn this feature on from the main Windows Update screen.
When you are looking at the list of updates for your PC, if you’re not sure what an update is, or what it will mean 
for your PC and your software, you can click it; and further information, including support links, appear in the right 
panel of the window (see Figure 12-15). This information also informs you if your PC is likely to need restarting after 
the update is installed, though it won’t be required for two days.
Figure 12-14. Windows Update on the desktop

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
393
When you install an update that requires a restart, you will be prompted when you log into your PC and also 
when you put it to sleep and shut it down (see Figure 12-16). Please note, however, that just because an update has 
been downloaded, it will not be installed until you restart your PC.
Figure 12-15. You can get additional information about updates
Figure 12-16. Windows notifies you politely if it needs to restart to install an update

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
394
In the left pane of the main Windows Update page are the options you may want to change. In Change Settings, 
you can decide when and how Windows 8.1 installs updates. First, it’s important to note that Windows 8.1 has many 
fewer restarts than earlier versions of the operating system, waiting a good two days before forcing a restart in the 
hopes that during that time you’ll shut your computer down anyway. This means that there is less of a requirement to 
change the autoinstall settings in Windows 8.1 by clicking Change Settings in the left navigation pane to open the full 
Windows Update controls (see Figure 12-17), though I personally recommend that they be left in the default state.
Figure 12-17. Changing the settings for Windows Update
The following are the four Change Settings options for Windows Update:
•฀
Install updates automatically (recommended by both Microsoft and me)
•฀
Download updates, but let me choose whether to install them
•฀
Check for updates, but let me choose whether to download and install them
•฀
Never check for updates
Additionally, you have controls to allow Windows 8.1 to install recommended updates in the same way as it 
receives important updates. Recommended updates can include new features to the operating system.

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
395
You can also choose if you want to receive more updates through Windows update, including the following:
•฀
Recommended updates: Include stability and feature updates that aren’t deemed critical
•฀
Microsoft Product Updates: Include software such as Microsoft Office, the Windows 
Essentials suite, and the Bing Bar for Internet Explorer
Hiding and Restoring Updates
On occasion, you may want to hide certain updates so that they don’t appear and don’t install. You might want to do 
this, for example, when Microsoft offers additional language packs that you don’t want or need, or if a hardware driver 
issued through Windows Update is causing your computer to crash or the hardware to misbehave.
You can hide any update by right-clicking it in the main updates screen and then selecting Hide Update from the 
options. This process prevents the update from appearing again (see Figure 12-18).
Figure 12-18. Hiding Windows Updates
Note
 
■
 If you restore Windows 8.1 from an image backup or by using the Refresh option, all the hidden updates in 
Windows Update are visible once again. You have to re-hide them.
You can also select a group of updates to hide. To select multiple consecutive updates, click the first one and then 
hold the Shift key while clicking the last update in the series. To select nonconsecutive updates, hold the Ctrl key while 
clicking the updates you want to select.
To unhide all the updates you have hidden (you can’t do just a few), click Restore Hidden Updates in the left pane 
of the main Windows Update screen.
Managing Hardware Drivers and Rolling Back Windows Update
I mentioned that some updates, especially drivers, occasionally cause Windows to become unstable. If this happens to 
you, be aware that Windows 8.1 creates a System Restore point whenever it runs Windows Update, so you can  
roll back to the last restore point to undo the driver change.
To do this from the Start screen, search for system restore and (though this might seem odd) select Create a 
Restore Point from the settings results. In the dialog, click the System Restore button.

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
396
You can now restore Windows to the way it was before the update was installed, and when you run Windows 
Update again, you can hide the offending update so that it doesn’t bother you (see Figure 12-19).
Figure 12-19. Using System Restore to roll back Windows Update
Getting Updates from the Windows Store
Updates for your purchased and downloaded apps don’t come through Windows Update, even if you have Microsoft 
Update turned on and the apps are written by Microsoft. All updates for anything downloaded from the Windows 
Store come through the Windows Store.
When you install Windows 8.1, all apps from then on are automatically updated when new versions become 
available and you won’t be notified. You can control this, however, and turn it off by opening the Settings charm from 
within the Store app and then clicking the App update link near the top right of your screen. This displays the updates 
panel (see Figure 12-20), which includes the update controls.

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
397
Major updates to Windows now also come from the store, and if you upgrade from Windows 8 to Windows 8.1,  
this is how the update is delivered. For more detailed information on how you get the Windows 8.1 update,  
see Chapter 15.
Installing Major Windows 8 Updates and Service Packs
About once per year, Microsoft releases a Windows service pack or a major update, such as Windows 8.1. Back in 
the days of Windows XP, some service packs, including the now famous XP SP2, included many new features for 
the operating system. For example, XP SP2 brought with it the new security center and many new security features. 
Indeed, there was so much in it that some commentators said that Microsoft could have sold it as a completely new 
version of Windows. Windows 8.1 picks this up again with a major overhaul of the operating system and the inclusion 
of many new features.
This makes some power users quite excited about these major updates, with some even wanting to download 
and install the beta of the service pack.
Depending on the type of update, they could come either through Windows Update or through the Windows 
Store, and it’s too early yet to tell what Microsoft’s long-term strategy will be (though I would guess that eventually 
all updates will be delivered through the Store, and Windows Update will be retired).Windows does a good job of 
notifying you when a major update is available (see Figure 12-21), and although the methods for informing you might 
vary, you are likely to be informed by a pop-up toast on your screen.
Figure 12-20. You can disable automatic updating of apps

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
398
Protecting and Repairing Windows
Although it is simple and straightforward to keep your copy of Windows 8.1 running smoothly and in a healthy state, 
it can also be simple and straightforward to rescue the OS in the event something goes wrong. In this section, I’ll show 
you what the various options are and how they work.
Creating a Recovery Drive
A recovery drive is a USB flash drive containing the tools required to repair Windows and get to options such as 
Startup Repair, Refresh, Reset, and System Restore if your copy of Windows 8.1 can’t start.
You create a recovery drive from the Control Panel by clicking Recovery (in the large or small icons view, it will 
not appear in the Category view of the Control Panel). You initially see options to refresh and reset the PC, but if you 
click Advanced Tools, an option to Create a recovery drive will appear (see Figure 12-22).
Figure 12-21. Major updates are now beginning to be delivered through the Windows Store

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
399
Tip
 
■
 If you have a recovery partition on your computer that was preconfigured by the manufacturer, you can check a 
box to add this image to the recovery drive. This substantially increases the size of the recovery drive files, however, and 
is suitable only for USB flash drives of 32 GB capacity and higher, but it gives you a valuable extra option for rescuing 
Windows if a disaster occurs.
Once the recovery drive is created, you can start your computer from it to access the recovery options.  
Note, however, that booting from USB needs to be turned on in the BIOS or UEFI firmware on your motherboard.
Caution
 
■
 If you are using a Windows RT tablet such as Microsoft Surface, you should always create a recovery drive 
containing a backup copy of the system image. There is no way to reinstall Windows RT other than from a recovery drive, 
so if complete disaster strikes, the only other option available to you would be to return the PC to the manufacturer for 
reimaging, which can take time and could incur a charge. You can create a recovery drive with a full system image of 
Windows RT on a USB flash drive as small as 4 GB in size.
Figure 12-22. Creating a recovery drive

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
400
Backing Up and Recovering Your Windows 8.1 Installation
Back in the days of Windows XP, it was common to have to completely reinstall the operating system and all your 
software every time something went wrong. Now there are several ways to secure your installed copy of Windows  
and restore it in the event of a crisis. In this section, I will show you how to do just that.
Note
 
■
 Windows 8 included a full system image backup facility that could be found in the Windows 7 File Recovery  
option in the Control Panel. This feature has been removed in Windows 8.1, as has the ability to restore one of these 
images. The alternative is Windows 8.1’s Refresh feature, and I will show you how to get the best out of this and create 
custom Refresh images in the next section.
Repairing Windows 8.1 Quickly Using Refresh
With Windows 8.1, Microsoft has introduced a new way to create a backup image that, unlike its System Image 
Backup, is implemented so simply that users of any technical ability can use it. This new Refresh option creates a 
backup of the operating system that is easily and quickly restored from PC Settings or from the startup settings for the 
OS such as seen when you start your PC from a Recovery Drive.
There is one critical difference between the older System Image Backup and Refresh that affects power users,  
IT pros, and system administrators. Although you can create a custom Refresh image that will restore all your installed 
desktop software, it doesn’t back up any of your settings for those programs. This means that software such as 
Microsoft Outlook will be returned to its installation settings and you will need to reconfigure e-mail accounts in it, 
and the settings and preferences in all your other desktop software.
Many users won’t be bothered by this, however, and indeed Windows 8.1 syncs a great many of its settings, 
including for the desktop, and Microsoft Office 2013 can also synchronize its settings between different PCs.
Refresh is also an excellent utility for anyone who supports friends or family and gets calls in the middle of the 
afternoon about a problem “that will only take a minute.”
You can access the Refresh from PC Settings by selecting Update and Recovery and then clicking the Recovery 
option in the left navigation pane (see Figure 12-23).

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
401
Refresh is the first option at the top of your screen and there is an explanation of what it will do. When you are 
ready to refresh your computer, click the Get Started button. The process is completely automated from that point.  
You will need to restart your computer several times.
When you want to refresh your copy of Windows, Windows 8.1 explains what the Refresh process will do and  
asks you to confirm that you want to refresh the computer. Click OK when you are ready to begin the process, which 
can take between 15 and 60 minutes, depending on whether you have created a custom Refresh image or not  
(see the next section).
You can also refresh your PC from Windows 8.1 Startup, and the details for how to this works can be found in the 
“Understanding Windows 8.1 Startup Menus” section a little later in this chapter. There are several ways to get to this:
 
1. 
If your PC doesn’t start three times, Startup Repair runs. If this can’t repair your computer, 
it offers you advanced repair options that include Refresh. (For more on this, see “Using 
Startup Repair” later in this chapter.)
 
2. 
You can start your PC using a recovery drive; note that you may need to access the boot 
device options on your PC (usually F12 or Del) to tell the PC to boot from a USB flash drive.
 
3. 
You can start your PC from a Windows 8.1 installation DVD. At the Install screen, click the 
Repair your PC link instead to take you to the repair options.
Figure 12-23. Activating Refresh from PC Settings

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
402
Creating a Custom Refresh Image
You can create a custom Refresh image. You may want to do this because, by default, this feature refreshes your copy 
of Windows 8.1 while keeping your files and apps intact, but it will wipe out all your desktop software.
Creating a custom Refresh image turns this into a snapshot of your PC as it is then, complete with all your desktop 
software installed.
Note
 
■
 Remember that restoring from a custom Refresh image resets all your desktop software, so you will need to 
set up programs again unless their settings are automatically synced between PCs, such as can be done with Microsoft 
Office 2013.
Perform the following steps to create a custom Refresh image:
 
1. 
Press Win+X to open the Administration menu.
 
2. 
Select Command Prompt (Admin) to run the command prompt as an administrator.
 
3. 
Type recimg -CreateImage C:\Folder, where C:\Folder is the location in which you want 
the backup to be stored. This backup location can also be on a different partition or hard 
disk in your PC, and creating a Refresh image away from your Windows installation can 
add extra resiliency if your copy of Windows 8.1 becomes scrambled or wiped.
Windows 8.1 creates your custom Refresh image, which is restored using the Refresh feature.
Creating an Image Backup of Windows 8
Windows Vista was the first version of Microsoft’s operating system to include image backup functionality. Windows 7  
brought this excellent and very useful feature to all editions of the operating system. It remains in Windows 8 largely 
unchanged, though there is a new interface for restoring an image backup.
I always recommend that the backup image be from a relatively clean installation in which you have only made 
essential changes and all temporary files have been deleted. It’s a good idea to run Windows utilities such as the 
Disk Cleanup Wizard, which you can find by searching clean at the Start screen, and clicking Free up disk space by 
deleting unnecessary files in the Settings search results.
Access the Windows Image Backup creation utility by clicking File History in the Control Panel, where you have 
the option to Create a System Image Backup in the bottom left corner of the window (see Figure 12-24).

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
403
Figure 12-24. Windows 7 File Recovery page
Click System Image Backup to start the wizard, which guides you through creating a backup image of Windows 8. 
The backup image will be a complete snapshot of your PC at that time, including all of your installed software, their 
configuration settings and customized Windows settings, and all of your user accounts.
You will be asked where you want to store the image backup (see Figure 12-25). You can choose another hard  
disk or partition in your computer, one or more DVDs (though bear in mind these can degrade over time), or a 
network location.

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
404
If your computer always connects to your network via Wi-Fi, you should not choose a network location. This is 
because the image is restored from the Windows boot menu where no Wi-Fi drivers are loaded. When restoring from a 
network location, the computer needs to be connected to the network via a physical cable.
Note
 
■
 If you have several hard disks or partitions in your computer, you will be asked if you want to add any of them 
to the image backup.
Before creating the backup, Windows 8 shows you what you’re backing up and where the backup will be stored 
(see Figure 12-26). Click the Start Backup button when you are ready to begin.
Figure 12-25. You can save your backup in different locations

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
405
You cannot restore a System Image Backup from within Windows 8.1 in the way you can with a Refresh image, 
you need to start your computer from the F8 boot menu, a USB Recovery Drive or the Windows 8.1 installation DVD.  
When you do this the options to restore the System Image Recovery can be found in the Advanced Options menu in 
Startup Repair, and I will show you how to access this shortly.
Tip
 
■
 While you can create a System Image Backup in File History you can also create one from the Command Line using 
the Windows PowerShell Utility. You create it by opening a PowerShell (Admin) window and using the command wbAdmin 
start backup -backupTarget:D: -include:C: -allCritical –quiet, where –backupTarget is the hard disk (or network location) in 
which the image is to be stored and where –include is the drive letter of the disk on which Windows 8.1 is installed.
For network locations, you might optionally need to insert the commands -user:username -password:userPassword just before 
the –allCritical switch. You can also specify more than one hard disk to be stored in the backup with the switch –include:C:,D:,E:.
This image backup can then be restored using a recovery drive or installation disc for Windows 8.1, and you find a  
System Image Recovery option in the Troubleshoot ➤ Advanced page. Although it is technically possible to create a 
system image backup in Windows RT, the restore option is not available in that version of Windows.
Figure 12-26. Windows shows you the drives it will back up

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
406
Safe Mode and Diagnostic Startup Mode
With Safe Mode removed from the new boot menu, how do you get to it? You can see the older boot menu by pressing 
Shift+F8 when starting Windows. Here you have the same familiar options, including Safe Mode and Safe Mode with 
Networking (see Figure 12-27). You can access these settings from the boot options by clicking Troubleshoot, then 
clicking Advanced Options, and then clicking Startup Settings. You are prompted to restart your PC, and the Safe Mode 
option is then available.
Note
 
■
 Safe Mode is not available from the boot menu in Windows RT.
Not all computers allow you to press F8 or Shift+F8, however, especially ones that start up really quickly. If you 
need to get into Safe Mode in this case, you can do so from the Windows System Configuration page, in which Safe 
Mode comes with a whole variety of additional and useful options.
You access the System Configuration dialog by searching for msconfig at the Start screen. Under the Boot tab, 
there is an option to turn the computer on in Safe Mode the next time it starts.
Figure 12-27. Starting Windows 8.1 in Safe Mode

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
407
The most interesting option is under the General tab. Although Safe Mode is very useful, it is also extremely 
limiting and doesn’t allow you to perform many actions.
Under the General tab, there is the option to turn on a diagnostic startup (see Figure 12-28). It is equivalent to 
Safe Mode+ in that, in addition to loading the bare operating system, it also loads some system drivers, such as for 
your graphics, and it allows you to perform the full range of Windows 8.1 configuration operations.
Note
 
■
 When you switch these options on in the System Configuration dialog, they remain on until you run msconfig 
again and switch them off.
Using Startup Repair
If Windows 8.1 fails to start three times, and the System Reserved partition isn’t damaged, Windows launches Startup 
Repair. This is an automated system that resets Windows components to their default settings in an attempt to get 
things working again.
If Startup Repair can’t repair Windows, it offers you advanced repair options, which are the menus shown in 
Figures 12-29 through 12-32. A refresh might be the best option to get Windows 8.1 working again.
Figure 12-28. Turning on diagnostic startup mode

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
408
Figure 12-29. Windows 8.1 can self-repair when it can’t start
Figure 12-30. The main Windows 8.1 startup menu

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
409
Figure 12-32. The advanced troubleshooting menu
Figure 12-31. The startup troubleshooting menu

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
410
Understanding the Windows 8.1 Startup Menus
The startup menus in Windows 8.1 have changed considerably to accommodate the mouse and graphical systems 
that were not supported on older computer systems.
This isn’t to say that you can’t access the previous DOS–type startup menu (it is still available with the Shift+F8 
key press at startup), but the standard F8 key now takes you to the new graphical system if your hardware supports it.
At the first screen, you have three options: continue to start Windows 8.1, turn off your computer, or troubleshoot 
the machine (see Figure 12-30). Note that on some devices, you might also see a Use device option here. It allows you 
to restore a Refresh image from a USB flash drive on which you have created a recovery drive image if you need to.
The Troubleshooting options are quite basic, offering only the new options to refresh and reset your computer. 
You might expect to find the Startup Repair option here, for example, but it has been moved into the Advanced 
Options (see Figure 12-31).
All the remaining options are found in the Advanced Options. Here you have access to the command prompt, in 
which you can perform actions such as manually repairing the boot options, performing a CHKDSK (check disk), and 
more. You can also change the Windows Startup Settings, which allows you to turn off the new graphical menu and 
have Windows 8.1 use the traditional DOS menu instead (see Figure 12-32).
Restoring Windows 8.1 to Factory Settings
If you are selling your computer or giving it away, you can use the Reset option to restore Windows 8.1 to its factory 
settings. Doing this wipes out all your user accounts, files, settings, apps, and programs.
Remove Everything and Reinstall Windows is in PC Settings under Update & Recovery and then Recovery  
(see Figure 12-33). Make sure that you have backed up all your files before performing a reset because they will be 
deleted from the PC.
Figure 12-33. You can retsore your PC to factory settings using Reset

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
411
Tip
 
■
 Reset does not securely erase your files, so they can be recovered later on using a file recovery program. If you 
want to securely erase deleted files and data on your hard disk, there are many third-party utilities that can do this, but 
the excellent—and free—CCleaner (http://www.piriform.com/ccleaner) does this job along, with providing other 
useful cleanup and maintenance tools for Windows.
Backing Up Files and Folders 
Nothing is more important on your computer than your files and documents. Once you lose those precious family 
photographs of baby Gilbert’s birth or last year’s vacation in the Maldives, they’re gone forever—and you have nothing 
but your memories from then on.
It is critical that you safeguard your files on your computer. I’ll show you how to do this later in this chapter.  
It is very important that you make backups and keep them in safe and sensible places.
Where to Store Backups
Choosing where to store backups of your files is critical because choosing to store your backups in the wrong location 
can often be as bad as having no backups at all. So where can you store your backups, and what are the pros and cons?
Tip
 
■
 Many Internet routers allow you to plug a USB hard disk into them to share on the network as storage. This can 
be an excellent local backup location.
•฀
A second hard disk on your PC is the fastest and least difficult way to store backups because 
an automated system can update the backup every time you change a file. However, an 
electrical spike through the PC could fry the original data and the backup. A theft or a fire will 
destroy both copies.
•฀
Network attached storage (NAS) is a great way to store backups in your home or workplace. 
NAS drives are hidden in inaccessible places. They are still vulnerable to fire, however.
•฀
CD/DVD/Blu-ray discs aren’t advisable for backups any more. Partly because, with the 
exception of Blu-ray, the discs don’t have large enough capacities for our ever-growing 
collections of digital photographs and home videos. Also, these discs degrade—and there’s 
little way to tell whether it will be 3 months or 30 years before they become unreadable.
•฀
USB hard disks are probably the best option because they can be stored offsite in the home of 
a friend or family member, or at the home of the person responsible for backing up your vital 
business data.
•฀
USB flash drives are of a size and price that you can consider storing backups on them. 
Bear in mind, however, that they are relatively easily broken (e.g., sat on, put in the washing 
machine, or chewed by the dog). If you store one on your key chain, you might never find  
it again.
•฀
Cloud storage is becoming ever more popular and there are a lot of services to choose from, 
including Microsoft’s SkyDrive, Google Drive, Carbonite, Mozy, Amazon S3, and many more. 
The problem here is the initial upload can be tens if not hundreds of gigabytes, and unless you 
are on a super-fast broadband connection, it can take weeks or even months to upload.

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
412
Tip
 
■
 I always recommend using two backup solutions. I store backups locally on a NAS drive for quick restoration,  
but I also use Microsoft’s SkyDrive service for cloud backup.
Remember to Encrypt Business Backups
You can normally consider your workplace relatively secure. You control who has keys and access to the building and 
the room(s) containing your computers. If you store business backups offsite, however, which is highly recommended, 
you should make sure that those backups are either encrypted or kept in a very safe location.
Sending unencrypted backups home with a senior staff member is one thing, but given that you have no control 
over this person’s home security presents a data protection risk. The only safe strategy with business data—and the 
one the data protection regulators are most likely to endorse—is a virtual private network (VPN) or cloud-based 
encrypted solution designed specifically for business.
Caution
 
■
 Beware of synced network and cloud backups! If you use a service such as SkyDrive that syncs the files on your 
computer with those in the cloud or a backup solution that keeps files in sync by deleting the file on the backup destination 
when that file is removed from the computer, you could find that your backup is wiped completely if you accidentally delete 
the files from your computer. To avoid this problem, stop your backup software from running until you can restore the files.
Backing Up Your Files in Windows 8.1
There are two ways to back up your files in Windows 8.1. The first method is to use Microsoft’s SkyDrive cloud sync 
and backup service. You can set this up in PC Settings in the SkyDrive section, and it lets you know how much space 
you have available for file backups and make it easy for you to purchase additional space (see Figure 12-34).
Figure 12-34. Microsoft’s SkyDrive service is built into Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
413
Figure 12-35. Windows 8.1 File History
You set up the SkyDrive file backup in the Files section of the SkyDrive controls and then, assuming that you have 
enough space in the cloud to accommodate all your files, they will be backed up (although the first backup could take 
several days or even weeks, depending on the speed of your Internet connection).
If you want to keep a local backup copy of your files, Windows 8.1 comes with a new file backup and versioning 
tool called File History, which keeps backup copies of files as you make changes to them so that if you accidentally 
make a change to a file that you didn’t intend to make, the file can be restored.
File History can be incredibly useful if you use your computer for work and change files (such as Office documents) 
frequently. It can roll back accidental or unapproved changes.
File History is accessed from both PC Settings and the Control Panel. You can use local internal hard disks, 
USB attached drives, and network attached drives (though the latter two don’t work if they’re not plugged in or are 
inaccessible). Figure 12-35 shows the File History options in PC Settings.
The File History options in PC Settings automatically detects any USB attached hard disks or additional internal 
hard disks on your PC, but (as I mentioned earlier in this section), you can use networked locations as well. They 
include NAS drives and USB hard disks that are plugged into your Internet router. If you want to select one of these 
locations as the storage for your backups click the Select a different drive link.
You can get considerably more control over File History by accessing it from the Control Panel. It provides much 
finer control over the feature, such as drilling down into network locations or hard disks so that you can store your 
backup in a specific folder rather than just the root of the drive (see Figure 12-36).

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
414
Tip
 
■
 If you use a USB hard disk plugged into your Internet router for backups, why not use it for File History as well?
The first time you run File History, it creates a full and complete backup of your Libraries (Document, Music, 
Pictures, and Video), and if you want to back up additional files you should add them to your Libraries. This initial 
backup can also take some time, depending on how many files you are backing up and your connection speed.  
You don’t need to worry about leaving the PC on, however, because if you need to put the PC to sleep or shut it down, 
the backup pauses and resumes when you switch it on next.
File History also keeps copies of files that have been deleted and changed, helping you recover older copies of 
documents that were accidentally deleted or modified when they shouldn’t have been. It also includes every minor 
change that’s made to a file when it is opened. Every time you open a file such as a picture or an MP3, the file is 
changed to update the Last Accessed timestamp. You could find that your File History is full of MP3s and nothing else.
Note
 
■
 When you use File History, both PC Settings and the File History controls in the Control Panel display the status 
of your backup.
You can rectify this from the File History pane by clicking Exclude Folders on the left of the page. Here you  
can exclude the drives containing file types that are likely to change only when the Last Accessed marker is set  
(see Figure 12-37). These file types include music, pictures, and video. Bear in mind, however, that this also excludes 
these files and folders from the backup, so you need to ensure that you have a backup copy of them elsewhere.
Figure 12-36. You can get finer File History options in the Control Panel

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
415
If you want to change the location of the File History drive, you can do it in the left pane by clicking Change Drive. 
File History then moves all its backed-up files to the new location. Clicking Advanced Settings in the left pane gives 
you more control over how File History operates (see Figure 12-38):
You can choose how often it saves copies of files. Remember that it doesn’t do it automatically 
•฀
when a file is saved. You can also choose from periods as low as 10 minutes. If you use your 
Windows 8.1 computer for work, a shorter period may offer you more reassurance if you work 
on files that change regularly, such as Word documents.
You can also select how much of the available hard disk space is reserved for an offline copy 
•฀
of your documents. This is a local copy of changed and deleted files that’s kept on your own 
PC so that they can be restored even when you are separated from USB–attached or NAS File 
History backups.
You can also choose the amount of time a version is kept. The Forever option is a little 
•฀
misleading because it is the same as the Until Space Is Needed option. Keeping files until 
space is needed is probably the best option, however. 
Figure 12-37. You can exclude files and folders from File History

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
416
Tip
 
■
 If you are running short of hard disk space on the drive in which you keep your File History or if you just have too 
many old versions of files stored, you can click Clean Up Versions to delete older versions of files from the disk.
Note
 
■
 If you are using a laptop or tablet that has only a single hard disk, you might not be able to keep File History 
versions locally on the computer because Windows 8.1 doesn’t support keeping versions in the same location as the 
original files. Many Internet routers have USB ports so that you can plug in a hard disk to use as network storage. This is 
an excellent location for backups and File History versioning.
You can restore earlier versions of files using Restore Personal Files in the left pane of the File History page.  
It brings up a window showing you all the previous versions of documents that have been saved, along with their 
time and date. You can restore individual files or groups of files.
Figure 12-38. The advanced file versioning options

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
417
Restoring Backed up and Deleted Files with File History
File History is used to restore your files under four different circumstances: you had to reinstall Windows on your PC; 
you need to move your files to a new PC; you accidentally deleted a file or files and you need to recover them; or you 
accidentally made a change to a file that you didn’t intend to make.
It is these last two scenarios I want to show you first. When you are in File Explorer and are looking at a specific 
folder, or indeed have a file highlighted, you will see a History button under the Home tab on the ribbon (see Figure 12-39). 
Click this to open the full File History restore window.
Figure 12-39. You can restore files from File Explorer
In the window that opens, you have several different sets of controls (see Figure 12-40). The back button and 
address bar at the top of the window operate in exactly the same way as they do in File Explorer, and typing a folder 
location into the address bar takes you to the corresponding backup.
Figure 12-40. The main File History restore window

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
418
At the bottom of the window are back and forward (in time) buttons that move backward and forward through 
the different dates and times that changes were made to files. These buttons help you find the right version of a file to 
restore. Between these buttons is a large, green Restore button.
To restore files, select the file (or files) you want to restore and then click the green Restore button. It really 
couldn’t be simpler to restore your files.
In the main File History controls, accessed from the Control Panel, there is a Restore personal files link in the top 
left of the window (see Figure 12-41). Click it to open the File History restore window (see Figure 12-40).
Note
 
■
 If you are restoring your files from File History after reinstalling Windows, you need to set up File History again 
and point it at the same backup location you used before. You can then restore all your files to your PC.
Safeguarding Your Personal Files and Folders
One of the problems with Libraries is the uncertainty of where files are stored. If your files and data are stored on the 
same partition as your Windows installation, and you are forced to reformat the hard disk and reinstall the operating 
system from scratch, you could lose everything.
Although changing the default save location for Libraries is one way to do this, I prefer to move the user folders 
wholesale over to a new partition or hard disk in the computer.
A hard disk is a physical storage area in which everything is put in the same place, including your copy of 
Windows and all your files (see the left image in Figure 12-42). This means that if something goes wrong with 
Windows, you can face the possibility of losing all your files as well. 
Figure 12-41. Restoring files from the main File History window

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
419
If you split your hard disk into several partitions, you are splitting that physical hard disk into several logical ones. 
File Explorer sees each partition as a different disk drive.
The image on the right in Figure 12-42 is my recommended setup. It has three partitions: one for Windows 8.1,  
a big one for files, and a third one for a backup copy of the operating system.
If you have a second hard disk in your computer, you might want to use it for files and backups. If something goes 
wrong with the hard disk on which Windows is installed, and this hard disk will see the most mechanical activity, your 
files and your backup copy of Windows will still be intact.
To create new partitions on your hard disk for files, perform the following steps, though you should always be 
extremely careful when managing partitions on your PC. If they are not managed correctly, all manner of things can 
go wrong, including wiping out your copy of Windows 8.1 and all your files:
 
1. 
Press Win+X to display the Administration menu.
 
2. 
Click Disk Management.
 
3. 
To create a new partition, you need to make space by shrinking an existing one. In the Disk 
Management window, right-click the hard disk partition you want to shrink (usually the 
C:\ drive containing your Windows 8.1 installation).
 
4. 
From the options, select Shrink Volume (see Figure 12-43). Note that “Volume” is the 
terminology used here to describe both disks and partitions.
Figure 12-42. An unpartitioned disk and a partitioned disk

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
420
Figure 12-43. Shrinking a partition
Note
 
■
 How big should you leave your Windows partition? For general light usage, 50 GB is a good size (enter 51200  
in the size box). An enthusiast might want 100 GB to 200 GB (102400 or 204800), but a gamer might want up to  
300 GB (307200).
 
5. 
Choose the amount by which you want to shrink the disk. You’ll need to leave enough 
space for all your files and an image backup. On a larger hard disk (1 TB or more), I suggest 
shrinking the drive down to 25 percent of its current size (e.g., 250 GB). 
 
6. 
In the unallocated space remaining after shrinking the partition, right-click with your 
mouse (see Figure 12-44). 

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
421
Figure 12-44. You need to create a new partition in the unallocated space
 
7. 
From the options, select New Simple Volume.
 
8. 
Create a partition of the appropriate size for files. I recommend 50 percent of the original 
volume size. Give it a name and drive letter (see Figure 12-45).

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
422
 
9. 
Repeat steps 6 to 8 for an Image Backup drive. Note that if you are using a professional-grade 
tablet or an ultrabook that does not have a large hard disk, you might not have enough 
space for an image drive.
Note
 
■
 Many computers come with a backup partition containing a factory system image of Windows 8.1. If your  
computer didn’t come with a Windows 8.1 installation disc, I recommend leaving it and creating your own secondary 
backup partition as well because you never know when the factory image might come in useful.
Now we need to move the user folders and files to the new files partition.
 
1. 
Open File Explorer.
 
2. 
Click the small arrow in the File Explorer Address bar at the far left of the current address 
location.
 
3. 
From the drop-down location options, click your username (see Figure 12-46).
Figure 12-45. Creating new partitions

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
423
 
4. 
Select the user folders you want to move, which are usually Downloads, Documents, 
Music, Pictures, and Videos (see Figure 12-47). Your Internet Favorites are automatically 
backed up and synced by default in Windows 8.1.
Figure 12-46. Selecting your user folders
Figure 12-47. Selecting your user folders to move
 
5. 
Right-click the selected folders.
 
6. 
From the menu, click Cut. (It is very important that you do not click Copy!)
 
7. 
In File Explorer, navigate to the new partition in which you want your files to reside.

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
424
 
8. 
Right-click in a blank space.
 
9. 
Select Paste from the options that appear.
Taking Ownership of Files and Folders
You can change security options with any selected file(s) or folder(s). Go to the Share tab on the Ribbon to launch 
Advanced Security Settings (see Figure 12-48). By default, when a new user account is created in Windows 8.1, that 
user is given full permission to read, write, and modify the files in her user folders (Documents, Music, and so forth).
Figure 12-48. Setting advanced file security in File Explorer
At times, you might find that you have permissions set on files and folders from another user or another version 
of Windows. This is especially true if you have upgraded your system from an earlier version of Windows or if you 
store your files and folders on a separate partition or hard disk for added security and peace of mind.
When you try to access a folder for which you do not have permission, Windows 8.1 normally asks you if you want 
to take ownership of the folder; if you say yes, it automatically changes the permissions on its contents.

CHAPTER 12 ■ MAINTAINING AND BACKING UP YOUR COMPUTER AND FILES
425
Sometimes, however, you need to do it manually by following these steps:
 
1. 
In the Owner section of the Advanced Security Settings dialog, click Change.
 
2. 
In the Enter the Object Name to Select section, type the username of the user you want to 
make the owner.
 
3. 
Click the Check Names button.
 
4. 
If the names are correct, they appear. Click the OK button to complete the ownership 
changes on the files/folders.
Summary
Because Windows has always been a very flexible and adaptable operating system, the options and features available 
to help you ensure that it keeps running properly and in a healthy way are very refined and advanced. It’s ironic that 
the number of options to safeguard, troubleshoot, and repair increases at the same rate the number of problems and 
issues associated with the operating system decreases.
That said, by using the tools available to you—and you should never need a third-party tool—you can create  
a very robust and resilient system.

427
CHAPTER 13
Advanced Configuration  
and Customization
Windows has always been renowned for being a very configurable operating system (OS). Despite the new look, 
Windows 8.1 offers an immense number of ways to customize the OS, tweaked from within the OS itself and with 
third-party software.
The ability to configure Windows extends to the computer’s internal and external hardware as well. In this 
chapter, I will show you even more Windows 8.1 configuration and customization options. These options enable you 
to customize your Windows 8.1 installation in myriad ways, from simple changes to more complex customization that 
can help you build your computer skills.
PC Settings
When Windows 8 was first released, the new Control Panel replacement was somewhere you would visit for a small 
number of user controls, such as changing your logon settings and adding a new user to the PC. In Windows 8.1, 
however, PC Settings has been significantly enhanced. Although it doesn’t offer the full features of the Control Panel 
(which I will discuss later in this chapter), it includes every feature a casual or nontechnical PC user will need.  
So let’s take a look at the new PC Settings in detail, where there are a few new gems and treats in store.
Front Screen
The new front screen to PC Settings contains quick links to the settings you are likely to use most often (see Figure 13-1. 
At the top of the screen are quick icons to get you into controls for your lock screen, account picture, and password. 
Below them are additional links to settings that you may use most often. It’s a neat solution, both for providing  
a useful front end for PC Settings and for helping people get quick access to the settings they may need the most.

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
428
PC & Devices 
The PC & Devices panel contains all the settings you need to control the hardware on your PC and the ways that you 
interact with Windows 8.1: 
•฀
Lock screen contains the settings you need to control the main lock screen, including 
what apps (if any) are allowed to display live information on the lock screen and whether 
the background image treats your lock screen as a digital photo frame. At the bottom of the 
controls is a switch to allow the PC’s camera to be activated with a swipe down movement on 
the lock screen, as opposed to the swipe upward, which you use to unlock the PC.
•฀
Display is where you directly control the monitor(s) attached to your PC (see Figure 13-2). 
This screen shows you a graphic that shows any displays attached to your PC in proportionate 
sizes, so you can see the resolutions they are set to and the positions they have. You can drag 
these graphics around to place them where you want. Below this is a slider that allows you to 
control the screen resolution. It works independently for each monitor. More options provides 
additional controls for very high-resolution displays (e.g., vertical resolutions of 1440 pixels 
and above). 
Figure 13-1. The new front screen for PC Settings

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
429
•฀
Bluetooth provides controls for turning your Bluetooth connection on and off (turning it 
off can save power if you don’t have any Bluetooth devices to connect) and also for making 
your device discoverable. A quick note here is that if you use your PC in public locations, 
you should not make your PC discoverable because it can pose a potential security risk with 
people wanting to interface with your PC. Finally, in this panel appears a list of available and 
currently connected Bluetooth devices. You can tap a device to remove it. 
•฀
Devices is the PC Settings version of the Control Panel’s Device Manager, which lists all the 
main hardware devices attached to your PC, separated by category. As with the Bluetooth 
devices, you can remove a device from your PC by clicking it (see Figure 13-3). You can also  
tell Windows 8.1 whether to download drivers over metered (3g/4G/LTE) connections 
because the data charges on these connections are often expensive. 
Figure 13-2. The options available in PCs & Devices are extensive

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
430
Tip
 
■
 If you use a Windows tablet or ultrabook in which you are using a plug-in card (e.g., Micro SD) on which to store 
some files you can use the Default Save Locations setting under the Devices tab to automatically save some new content 
types to this storage instead of the internal hard disk on your PC (see Figure 13-3). 
•฀
Mouse & touchpad contains basic controls for the mouse, such as switching the left and right 
buttons, and scrolling controls. 
•฀
Typing includes settings for Windows 8.1’s built-in spell checker and autocorrect, which can 
be switched off if you don’t want to use them.  
Tip
 
■
 If you use the onscreen keyboard and want the full PC layout—including the function buttons and others such  
as Home, End, and the Pg Up/Down buttons—you can switch it on with the Add the standards keyboard layout as a touch 
keyboard option control. You can read more about this in Chapter 1.
Figure 13-3. You can automatically save new content to external storage by default

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
431
•฀
Corners & edges controls how the hot corners and swipe controls in apps work in Windows 8.1.  
These include allowing the swipe from left gesture to switch to the last running app and 
whether moving your mouse to the top left or top right of the screen displays the running apps 
list or the charms. 
•฀
Power & sleep are the basic controls you need to help conserve power on your PC (refer to 
Chapter 9 for more information). 
•฀
AutoPlay is where you decide what happens when you plug removable storage into your 
PC, be this a memory card, optical disc (CD/DVD), or USB storage device. You can also turn 
AutoPlay off completely, which can greatly increase your PC’s security by preventing any 
malware on removable devices form running on your PC automatically. 
•฀
PC info is where you find information about your PC that you may need if you are on the 
phone to a support person. You can find the PC name and other details such as its processor, 
memory, and operating system type. You can also ascertain the activation status of Windows 
in this panel. 
Accounts
The three main sections of the Accounts settings are the following (I discussed this section of PC Settings and how  
to set up user accounts in Chapter 4):
•฀
Your account is where you control settings such as your account picture; you can also connect 
or disconnect your account from a Microsoft account here.
•฀
Sign-in option is where you set a password; PIN; picture password; or, if your hardware 
supports it, a fingerprint login. You can also specify how long you need to be logged out for 
before Windows 8.1 asks for your password again.
•฀
Other accounts is where you can add and remove other users from the PC. You can also 
click a user and select Edit to change the account type between Child, Standard user, and 
Administrator. 
SkyDrive
You can read all about these settings in Chapter 4, but the main control sections are as follows:
•฀
Storage space shows you how much free space you have available on your SkyDrive (if you are 
logged in to the PC using a Microsoft account). The standard amount of free space you get with 
a new SkyDrive account is 7 GB, but you can purchase additional storage here to expand it. 
•฀
Files is where you turn SkyDrive file sync and backup on or off. You can also choose whether 
(and at what quality) any photos you take with your PC’s camera are automatically uploaded 
to SkyDrive and whether SkyDrive operates over metered (3G/4G/LTE) connections.
Tip
 
■
 You can move the default SkyDrive folder in Windows 8.1 by right-clicking the SkyDrive link in the left panel of 
File Explorer and from its properties clicking the Location tab. Here you can Move the SkyDrive sync and backup folder  
to a different location.

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
432
Figure 13-4. You have control of the settings that are synced on your PC
•฀
Sync settings is where you can control what settings on your PC are automatically synced 
with your other Windows 8.1 PCs, including a master control switch for turning syncing off 
completely. These controls can be very useful because you might find, for example, that it is 
difficult to arrange tiles on a Start screen on a small Windows tablet and also have those tiles 
display as you want them on a larger screen desktop PC. Additionally you might find that your 
desktop options for a Windows RT device, on which you can use only Microsoft Office, might 
be very different from your main Windows 8.1 PC.
Note
 
■
 In the Sync settings controls, you can also specify what is synced between the web browsers on your PCs, 
including your browser tabs, Internet favorites, usernames, and passwords.
Search & Apps
The search system in Windows 8.1 has been greatly improved and now includes searches garnered from the Internet 
as well as just from your own PC. This does mean however that you will be served advertisements alongside search 
results. You can control these in the Search and Apps settings (see Figure 13-5). 

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
433
•฀
Search is where you control all aspects of the search system in Windows 8.1, including 
clearing your search history (useful if you share your PC and have been looking for birthday 
or holiday presents). You can also turn off Internet searches (from Bing) being included 
in your PC searches; and optionally changing the Search experience settings can disable 
advertisements from appearing in the results. Finally, the Safe search settings can help filter 
offensive or pornographic content out of search results.
•฀
Share is where you control how the Share charm works in Windows 8.1 and which apps are 
and are not allowed to use it. All the installed apps that support the sharing functions in 
Windows 8.1 are displayed here, and you can switch individual apps on or off. 
•฀
Notifications is where you can control how to receive pop-up “toast” notifications in  
Windows 8.1 and whether they appear on your screen at all; at the bottom of the page, is a 
full list of all the installed apps you can receive notification from, which can be a lot! You can 
switch notifications on and off for specific apps here. Perhaps of more interest is the Quiet 
hours feature. 
Figure 13-5. You can manage Internet search in PC Settings

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
434
Tip
 
■
 The Quiet Hours feature in Windows 8.1 is a great way to stop your PC from pestering you with notifications and 
calls between certain hours; for example, when you’re not at work, when you want to relax, or at night (see Figure 13-6). 
You can set the hours when you are not to be disturbed and you will never receive any notifications (and optionally calls) 
during these times. 
•฀
App sizes is a reporting tool that tells you how large the apps you have installed on your PC 
are. This can be a useful tool if you are using a tablet or ultrabook with limited storage and you 
need to clear some free space. 
•฀
Defaults is where you can choose the default programs and apps that open your files. One of 
the most annoying aspects of PCs for some people is files opening in the wrong program (for 
example, a PDF file or photograph opens in an app instead of on the desktop where you want it).  
Here you can change these programs along with having additional useful controls such as 
choosing your default photo viewer (see Figure 13-7). 
Figure 13-6. The Quiet Hours feature can be used to stop your PC pestering you when you want to relax

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
435
Privacy
The privacy options control how apps are allowed to interact with your personal information and what certain 
hardware in your PC is allowed to do: 
•฀
General is where you choose whether apps are allowed to access your personal information, 
though it can sometimes be very useful for the app functionality. The Turn on SmartScreen 
filter to check web content (URLs) that Windows Store apps use is a very helpful security feature 
that can prevent a seemingly innocent app from trying to install malware on your PC. In this 
panel you can also change your Microsoft advertising preferences.
•฀
Location is where you decide whether apps can use your location; you can set it on an  
app-by-app basis. You don’t need GPS hardware in your PC for this to be possible either  
as your location can be fairly accurately determined by the IP address assigned by your 
Internet service provider (ISP).
•฀
Webcam is where you can determine which apps are allowed to use your PCs webcam,  
if you have one installed.
Figure 13-7. You can change the apps and programs that open different types of files in PC Settings

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
436
•฀
Microphone settings are the same as those for the webcam, but for any microphones you have 
installed in or attached to your PC.
•฀
Other devices is where other hardware in or attached to your PC that can collect data and 
information about you, such as biometric security devices, appear. 
Network
You can connect to Wi-Fi and other networks directly from the Settings charm (as I discussed in Chapter 3),  
but it is from the Network settings that you can control those networks on your PC: 
•฀
Connections displays a list of all the available Wi-Fi, mobile broadband, and virtual private 
networks (VPNs) for your PC. You can tap or click a network here to get more information 
about it and to turn on or off the estimated data usage display that will appear in the main 
network connections list from the Settings charm.
•฀
Radio devices is used to manage and control any radio receivers built in to or attached  
to your PC.
•฀
Proxy is used if you need to connect your PC to a network via a Proxy server, perhaps because 
your company has one set up or because you want to maintain your privacy when online.
•฀
Homegroup is where you can join, manage, and delete a HomeGroup on your PC (for more 
on this feature, see Chapter 4).
•฀
Workplace is a new feature that allows you to synchronize files with compatible business 
networks. (For more information on this feature, see Chapter 8.)
Time & Language
Although the full time, language, and region settings are extensive and can be found in the Control Panel  
(see later in this chapter), you can set many of the common controls here:
•฀
Date & time allows you to control whether these settings are set automatically, what your time 
zone is, and what your chosen date and time formats are.
•฀
Region & language allows you to set your current location in the world. You can also install 
new languages for Windows, although you may need an active Internet connection to do this. 
Ease of Access
The Ease of Access features in Windows are discussed in full in Chapter 10. 
Update & Recovery
The update and recovery settings contain everything you need to keep Windows 8.1 up to date and restore it from  
a backup if something goes horribly wrong.
•฀
Windows update is where you can check for security, stability and feature updates to your 
copy of Windows. You can also click the links View your update history and Choose how 
updates get installed to get additional information and controls (see Figure 13-8). 

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
437
•฀
File History (which is discussed in full in Chapter 12) is a file backup and rescue utility that 
comes with Windows 8.1. You can control File History from PC Settings, although you can get 
much finer control from the full Control Panel. 
•฀
Recovery contains quick links to Refresh (if something go horribly wrong with Windows) 
and Reset (if you are selling or giving away your PC) if you need them. You can also get quick 
access to the Windows Recovery Environment (Advanced startup) settings here. I discuss 
these features in Chapter 12. 
Control Panel
The Control Panel is where the full range of Windows controls and configuration options are found. Although 
throughout this book I’ve shown you how you can use various Control Panel options to configure specific features 
within Windows 8.1, there is much more to the Control Panel, including advanced and administrative tools. 
The Control Panel is most easily accessed in Windows 8.1 by clicking the Settings charm from the desktop, which 
reveals a Control Panel link in the top right of your screen or by searching for control at the Start screen. There have 
been a few changes since Windows 7, and some Control Panel options aren’t where you might expect to find them.
Figure 13-8. You can control how and when updates are installed in PC Settings

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
438
Tip
 
■
 You can find any Control Panel item by using natural language search in the search box at the top right of the  
Control Panel window (and from the Search charm). This means you don’t need to know the exact name of a control but 
you can instead search for words such as password or files to display a list of all the controls that are relevant to that word.
Customizing the Control Panel
By default, the Control Panel appears in the Category view, in which all the Control Panel items are organized into 
groups, such as network and Internet controls (see Figure 13-9).  
In the top right of the Control Panel window is a View By drop-down list, in which you can choose to display the 
Control Panel items as either large or small icons. The icon views simply list all the options available to you in the 
Control Panel (see Figure 13-10). 
Figure 13-9. The Control Panel Category view

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
439
Your list of Control Panel items might differ from those seen in Figure 13-2 in that they might show fewer or slightly 
different controls. If you don’t have biometric devices on your computer, for example, you don’t see the Biometric 
controls, and if you don’t have a touchscreen, you probably don’t see the Tablet PC or the Pen and Touch settings. 
The Control Panel shows only the controls that relate to your specific computer, and no more. This ensures that 
you’re not distracted by controls that won’t do anything.
I won’t discuss every Control Panel item, but I do want to talk about the most important ones and show you how 
you can use them to configure your copy of Windows 8.1.
Tip
 
■
 You can create a folder on your desktop that contains a link to every individual Control Panel item. This folder, 
which many people call “God Mode,” can be created by right-clicking in any blank space on your desktop and creating  
a New ➤ Folder that you rename as GodMode.{ED7BA470-8E54-465E-825C-99712043E01C}
Choosing AutoPlay Options
Sometimes the AutoPlay options in Windows can be annoying. Do you really want Windows Media Player popping up 
every time you insert a CD or for File Explorer to appear whenever you insert a USB flash drive?
Figure 13-10. The full Control Panel items list

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
440
The AutoPlay options to select which program or app opens for a particular media or device are incredibly well 
laid out (see Figure 13-11). It’s also very easy to stop Windows from asking you what you want to do with a device 
every time you insert it. 
It includes all removable drives for all types of media—including pictures, music, and video; storage cards for a 
camera (you might want to choose between the custom software that came with your camera or Windows importing 
the images); and DVDs, CDs, Blu-ray disks, and software.
At the bottom of this page is a Reset button to return all the settings to default, in case you make changes that you 
later decide you want to reverse.
Note
 
■
 When you insert some USB flash drives, you are asked if you want to use it to speed up your system using  
a Windows feature called ReadyBoost, a useful feature primarily for older computers with slower hard disks and small 
amounts of physical memory. It uses the flash drive as cache memory to speed up access to commonly opened Windows 
files. The speed improvements come with flash memory being much faster than a mechanical hard disk drive.
Figure 13-11. Choosing the AutoPlay options

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
441
Setting Default Programs
There are four options in Default Programs:
Set your default programs
•฀
Associate a file type or protocol with a program
•฀
Change AutoPlay settings (discussed in the “Choosing AutoPlay Options” section)
•฀
Set program access and computer defaults
•฀
Set Default Programs lists all the software installed on your computer. Clicking a program in the left pane displays 
how many of its file defaults are set (see Figure 13-12). This means that the program will open a certain number of file 
types. The Windows Disc Image Burner, for example, just opens ISO files, but Microsoft Word opens many more files, 
including RTF, DOC, and DOCX. Windows Media Player opens even more file types.
Figure 13-12. Choosing default programs in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
442
Here you have two options. You can Set this program as default, which sets the program as the default for all the 
file types it can open. Otherwise, you can Choose defaults for this program, which takes you to the Associate a file 
type or protocol with a program options.
Associat[ing] a file type or protocol with a program offers finer control over the program or app that opens with 
a particular file type by displaying a long list of every file type Windows can open. You have the option to associate a 
single or multiple file types with a certain program or app (see Figure 13-13). 
Tip
 
■
 File types can be set only one at a time. However, if you enter this page from Set Default Programs, you have 
check boxes that make it simpler to associate file types with programs.
Another way to control the default programs in Windows is through Set Program Access And Computer Defaults, 
which allows you to easily change the default programs for browsing the Internet, e-mail, media playback, and instant 
messaging (see Figure 13-14). 
Figure 13-13. Associating individual file types with programs or apps

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
443
Managing Fonts in Windows 8.1
Windows 8.1 doesn’t have a dedicated font manager, but the Fonts page is generally an excellent alternative.  
It shows thumbnail previews of letters and characters in the installed fonts (see Figure 13-15). 
Figure 13-14. Choosing the default web browser, e-mail client, and media player

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
444
Tip
 
■
 You do not need to be in the Fonts page to install a font. You can install a font from any location by right-clicking 
it and selecting Install.
If you want to view more of a font’s characters, you can double-click it to open it. Some fonts first open into a font 
group, but each font shows you more characters, although not the complete character set (see Figure 13-16). 
Figure 13-15. Managing fonts in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
445
Using Location Settings and Other Sensors
In Location Settings, you can turn on (or off) settings that allow apps and other programs to use GPS and other 
location-aware sensors on your computer. You may not want apps to know your physical location, for example. 
Managing Pen, Touch, and Tablet Settings
If your computer supports touch, the Pen and Touch and Tablet PC Settings are visible in the Control Panel. They 
are separate options, but they are linked in many ways. The Pen and Touch options apply only to using touch on the 
Windows desktop; you can’t change the default controls for the Start screen and apps. 
Of particular note, however, are the Flicks controls. They allow you to customize flick gestures on the screen  
to perform navigational and a variety of other actions, including editing controls such as copy and paste.
Figure 13-16. Viewing fonts in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
446
The Customize button edits flicks as well. There are plenty of options to choose from, including cutting and 
pasting, which can be extremely useful on professional-grade Windows tablets (see Figure 13-17).
Tablet PC Settings allows you to tell Windows if you are left- or right-handed. And, if the calibration on your touch 
panel is out of alignment, you can recalibrate the touch layer on the display (see Figure 13-18). 
Figure 13-17. Using flicks

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
447
Configuring the Windows 8.1 Advanced System Settings
When you click System in the Control Panel, you are shown information about your computer. The System Properties 
page is where you find the type of processor and the amount of memory you have, as well as which edition of 
Windows 8.1 you are using. This information is useful when you need to describe your PC to a support professional.
Clicking Advanced System Settings in the left navigation pane brings up the System Properties dialog, which has 
settings that you may want to change (see Figure 13-19). 
Figure 13-18. Changing the Tablet PC settings

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
448
In the Advanced tab of this dialog, there is a page with three sections: Performance, User Profiles, and Startup 
and Recovery.
To open Performance, click the Settings button. In the Performance Options dialog, the first tab is Visual Effects, 
which allows you to control some of the ways the Windows 8.1 desktop is displayed (see Figure 13-20). Some of the 
changes you can make here are purely cosmetic. For example, some people believe that removing shadows under 
windows makes the desktop look cleaner. 
Figure 13-19. Changing the advanced system settings

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
449
If you have an older computer, you can adjust the look of the Windows desktop to get the best possible 
performance. Stripping the visual look of the desktop back to basics can improve the overall responsiveness  
of the computer.
Managing Virtual Memory Settings
The Virtual Memory settings are under the Performance Options’ Advanced tab. Virtual memory is a file on the hard 
disk that your computer uses when it runs out of physical computer memory. This is much less of an issue than it used 
to be because computers ship with increasingly more memory, but you still may want to manage your Virtual Memory 
settings manually. The reason for this is that the virtual memory (sometimes known as the swap file or paging file) 
default settings have this file automatically increase and decrease in size. This can lead to disk defragmentation, which 
ultimately may cause the mechanical hard disk to slow down in accessing your files. If you use a solid-state disk in 
which hard disk space is at a premium, you may want to reduce the overall size of the paging file. To do this, click the 
Change button on the Advanced tab. The Virtual Memory dialog appears, as shown in Figure 13-21. 
Figure 13-20. Adjusting the visual effects

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
450
To manage virtual memory manually, uncheck the box at the top of the Virtual Memory dialog and instead select 
the Custom Size option. At the bottom of the dialog, Windows 8.1 suggests minimum and recommended sizes for 
virtual memory. If you have large amounts of physical memory, however, such as 8 GB or more and run Windows 
from a solid-state drive (SSD), you may want to set virtual memory to the minimum settings. Otherwise, Windows 8.1 
suggests a recommended amount for the virtual memory. Setting both values in the Custom Size fields to the same 
amount prevents the virtual memory file from shrinking, expanding, and ultimately fragmenting your hard disk.
In the drives view on the dialog, you can also move the paging file to a different physical hard disk or partition  
if you want. 
Managing Data Execution Prevention
Data Execution Prevention (DEP), accessed from the Performance Options dialog, is a feature that prevents certain 
viruses and malware from damaging your Windows installation. On occasion, it can also prevent particular games  
or other software from running.
If you find that a program isn’t running properly, you try allowing it through DEP. To do this, first select  
Turn on DEP for all programs and services except those I select and click the Add button (see Figure 13-22). 
Figure 13-21. Changing virtual memory

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
451
Now you can navigate to the folder on your hard disk in which the program is located and select it to allow it 
through DEP. It is possible that this will rectify the problem. You can’t turn off DEP completely. 
Configuring and Managing System Protection
System Restore allows you to roll back changes to Windows settings if something goes wrong on your computer.
In System Properties, you can turn on System Protection for other drives and add them to the System Restore 
feature. You can also specify how much space on the disk is allocated to System Restore so that you can increase  
space if you have plenty available or reduce it if you are using a small SSD (see Figure 13-23). 
Figure 13-22. Managing DEP settings

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
452
Let’s have a look at these two options to see what they do:
•฀
System Restore keeps copies of critical operating system files when a major change, such as 
software installation or an update, takes place. This information is kept in the System Volume 
Information folders on your hard disk (if you ever wondered what they were for). You can run 
System Restore to restore system files to an earlier point in time if a recent change has made 
your computer unstable.
•฀
System Protection keeps version-controlled copies of the operating system and other files so 
that they can be reinstated if an unwanted change is made to a file. This system works closely 
with System Restore. 
Using and Configuring Storage Spaces
Storage Spaces is a feature new to Windows that allows you to aggregate, or pool, several hard disks onto a single large 
storage drive. This pooled storage then appears on your computer as a single drive that you can expand by adding 
extra hard disks, as you require.
Figure 13-23. Managing system protection

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
453
The advantages that Storage Spaces bring include ensuring that Windows automatically keeps a backup 
(mirrored) copy of your files in case a hard disk fails. This should not be considered an alternative to a good backup 
policy, however.
Hard disks that are connected to your computer by SATA, SAS, and USB links can be joined to the Storage Spaces 
(note that if you remove a USB drive at any time, you lose temporary access to the files stored on it). This means that 
you can use external hard disks to expand the storage of an all-in-one PC.
Note
 
■
 Hard disks that are added to Storage Spaces need to be formatted by Windows. They will be wiped of all data. 
You will then need to copy files back to them.
When you first set up Storage Spaces on your computer, you are shown a list of compatible hard disks.  
Windows tells you which hard disks are suitable for use with Storage Spaces, and you can choose which drives  
to add (see Figure 13-24).
There are three different types of storage layout from which you can choose for storage spaces (see Figure 13-25): 
•฀
Basic Space: The assembled hard disks are aggregated into a single hard disk.
•฀
Mirror Space: At least two copies are kept of your files and data on separate physical disks. 
•฀
Parity Spaces: Saves parity information about the data stored. This information can be used 
to reconstruct data in the event of a disk failure.
Figure 13-24. Using Storage Spaces

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
454
Storage spaces are configured via a helpful wizard that allows you to choose the storage layout that best suits  
you. Windows 8.1 explains what a particular layout does and how it can help protect your data. You can also choose  
a name for the new pooled drive and assign a drive letter to it.
Consider Storage Spaces to be a software equivalent of a redundant array of independent disks (RAID),  
which is a collection of physical hard disks in a computer that are configured so the user sees them as a single,  
large drive. Storage Spaces is very useful in computers that have no RAID system or where storage can be added  
only via USB-attached hard disks. 
Tip
 
■
 Unlike many RAID systems, you can add hard disks of any size to Storage Spaces.
Working with Hardware Devices
Whatever you do with your copy of Windows 8.1, there is no escaping hardware drivers. These pieces of code interpret 
the signals between your computer and both internal and external hardware, and enable everything to communicate.
Earlier in this chapter, I spoke about how some hardware can be added through PC Settings. Indeed, Windows 8.1 
is excellent at recognizing and installing hardware with network-attached hardware such as Wi-Fi printers.
Figure 13-25. Configuring storage spaces

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
455
Drivers can cause problems, however, so I want to talk you through the process of installing, managing,  
and repairing troublesome drivers.
Device Manager
The Windows 8.1 Device Manager (see Figure 13-26) hasn’t changed since earlier versions of the operating system.  
It contains some extremely useful tools that are commonly hidden. 
By default, it shows the hierarchical view of all the computer’s attached and installed hardware devices, grouped 
into collapsible sections. If there are any devices that are not properly installed, have not been correctly configured, 
or have been disabled, they are highlighted in the list with a small yellow warning triangle. If a device is not working 
properly, it may have a warning icon superimposed on it.
There are other useful views in the Device Manager that can give you all sorts of additional information about 
your computer. From the View menu, you have several options. Looking at the resources on your computer provides 
information such as I/O ports and interrupt requests (IRQs). These are the cycles on which information is exchanged 
with the processor. If you are experiencing problems, it is useful for determining whether too many devices are set to 
communicate with the processor at any one time (see Figure 13-27).
Figure 13-26. Device Manager

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
456
What types of problems might you have with your hardware that you can use the Device Manager to help resolve? 
The most common are faulty or incompatible drivers, which can come from any source directly downloaded from the 
Internet or provided through Windows Update. (I will show you how to resolve problems with faulty drivers in a short 
while.) You can use the custom views to see whether conflicting drivers are trying to use the same Windows Resources 
simultaneously. This problem is very uncommon and always caused by sloppily written drivers. Another rare problem 
is a driver inadvertently loaded twice by Windows. By looking at the way drivers are interactive with Windows, such 
as viewing IRQ requests, you can see whether multiple instances of a driver have been loaded. A restart normally 
rectifies this problem. 
You can also view hidden devices on your computer. These are commonly Windows system drivers that don’t 
relate specifically to a piece of hardware. However, some hardware can also install hidden devices, and you will want 
to check whether this hardware is causing a problem (see Figure 13-28). 
When you want to install a driver for a piece of hardware that isn’t visible, select Scan for Hardware Changes from 
the Action menu in the Device Manager.
You will need to perform actions on hardware drivers when using Windows 8.1, including installing, removing, 
and updating them. The following sections describe how you to perform these actions.
Figure 13-27. Viewing resources in the Device Manager
Figure 13-28. Viewing hidden devices

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
457
Installing Device Drivers
Windows 8.1 commonly detects hardware and tries to install a driver for it. If the hardware came out after the release 
of the operating system, it may be unable to find a driver using Windows Update. If this happens, right-click the driver 
and click Update Driver Software (see Figure 13-29). 
You will be asked if you want Windows to search for drivers or if you want to install the driver manually. If it is 
hardware that Windows 8.1 has already failed to correctly install, you should choose the Browser my computer for 
driver software option (see Figure 13-30). 
Figure 13-29. Manually installing or updating a driver

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
458
Here you have two options.
•฀
Search automatically for updated driver software searches the preconfigured driver folders 
that come with Windows 8.1. If you have an active Internet connection, it also searches 
Windows Update. It also looks for drivers on any optical disc or USB-attached drive on  
your computer. 
•฀
Browse my computer for driver software gives you additional control. It allows you to 
manually specify the location(s) on your hard disk(s) or optical drives where the driver 
might be found. You can browse to a location on your computer, on an attached hard disk or 
flash drive, or on a network location. You can also choose from a very long list of drivers that 
Windows 8.1 comes equipped with (see Figure 13-31). 
Figure 13-30. The device driver wizard

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
459
When might you want to choose which hardware driver to install? It might be useful if you are using older 
“legacy” hardware for which you know drivers exist because it’s been out for years, but that perhaps Windows 8.1 
doesn’t recognize.
If you choose the Browse my computer for driver software option, Windows will try to identify the hardware for 
you. It may not get it right, but if it does, select the correct option from the list and then click the Have Disk button to 
point Windows 8.1 at the correct driver (see Figure 13-32). 
Figure 13-31. Manually choosing a driver

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
460
If you don’t see your hardware in the list, uncheck the Show compatible hardware box. You are presented with 
a long list of hardware by various manufacturers. These are drivers that Windows 8.1 ships with, and if you find your 
hardware in the list, choose the manufacturer and product name that correctly matches the hardware you are trying  
to install (see Figure 13-33). 
Figure 13-32. Finding compatible hardware

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
461
Uninstalling and Repairing Device Drivers
Sometimes Device Drivers causes problems and needs to be uninstalled or reinstalled. When you uninstall most  
(but not all) of the hardware on your computer, you are given the option to also completely Delete the driver 
software for this device (see Figure 13-34).
Figure 13-33. Selecting hardware from Windows 8.1 default drivers
Figure 13-34. Uninstalling device drivers

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
462
Checking this option will completely remove the driver software from your PC. This can prevent a faulty driver 
from being automatically reinstalled by Windows. If you need to repair a driver, you can now reinstall it from Windows 
Update or another source, such as the original driver disc that came with your hardware. 
Also, if an updated device driver and is misbehaving, you can roll it back to the previous version of the driver 
software. You do this in the device driver properties window, as described next.
Tip
 
■
 You can disable hardware you don’t need to use or that causes problems by right-clicking it and selecting Disable.
Working with Device Drivers
In addition to uninstalling drivers, you can roll a driver back to a previously installed driver (if it has been updated 
through a service such as Windows Update) by right-clicking the driver and selecting its Properties.
As shown in Figure 13-35, if an earlier version of the driver is available, the Roll Back Driver button is highlighted. 
A driver’s Properties dialog provides a lot of information about it, but there’s nothing here you can change  
or modify. The General tab is where Windows tells you whether the driver is working correctly.
Figure 13-35. Rolling back device drivers

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
463
Manually Connecting to Networks
Clicking Set up a new connection or network in the main pane of the Network and Sharing Center allows you to 
manually connect to a network. You might want to do this if you need to connect to a hidden Wi-Fi network,  
a virtual private network (VPN), or a dial-up Internet connection (see Figure 13-36). 
Whichever option you choose, Windows opens a wizard to guide you through the process, including manually 
entering the SSID of a hidden Wi-Fi network and setting the type of encryption it uses.
Choosing the Connect to the Internet option might be required for some broadband ISPs that require you to log 
on from your computer to gain access. If you must enter a username and password before getting online, click through 
Set up a new connection anyway and at the next screen select Broadband (PPPoE), as shown in Figure 13-37. 
Figure 13-36. Connecting to networks manually

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
464
You are prompted to enter the username and password that your broadband provider has assigned to you. This is 
required only if you must log on from your computer, not from your router, to get a connection. This probably applies 
only if you have an ISDN connection.
Windows 8.1 Administrative Tools
So what are the Windows Administrative Tools (see Figure 13-38) and how do you get the best out of them? In this 
section, I’ll focus on the tools that allow you to get the maximum benefit and performance out of your  
Windows 8.1 PC. 
Figure 13-37. Manually connecting to dial-up or cable Internet

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
465
Computer Management Console
The Computer Management console provides access to other Administrative Tools, but it is probably most commonly 
used to access the Disk Management tools. Here you can partition drives; grow and shrink partitions; and change, 
assign, and remove drive letters. 
Tip
 
■
 You can also open a dedicated Computer Management window from the Win+X Administration menu.
The main Computer Management window is split into a text details pane at the top and a graphical representation  
of your hard disks and partitions at the bottom (see Figure 13-39).
Figure 13-38. Windows 8.1 Administrative Tools

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
466
You can right-click any hard drive or partition to perform a series of actions on it. These actions include  
the following: 
•฀
Change Drive Letter and Paths: If you have two disks that have the same drive letter 
assignment (perhaps one is an external drive), or if a disk does not appear to have a drive 
letter, you can change or assign it here. Another task you can perform is to turn the disk or 
partition into a folder within another disk.
Tip
 
■
 Some third-party software is available to help fix a USB–attached hard disk to a specific drive letter.  
They can be especially useful if you use a USB hard disk for backups and your backup software can be set to work  
only with a specific drive letter. One of the best in my opinion is USB Drive Letter Manager, which can be downloaded 
from http://www.uwe-sieber.de.
Figure 13-39. The Disk Management console

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
467
•฀
Extend Volume and Shrink Volume: These are used to resize the partition. Windows 8.1 
has a fairly basic partitioning tool that may not be prepared to shrink a partition as much as 
you want. If this happens, try using the Defragmenter and then running the partitioning tool 
again. There is a simple wizard for partitioning and I’ve never known any reports of Windows 
corrupting partitions. That said, it is always a good idea to keep an up-to-date backup of all 
your files. 
Create a 
•฀
New Volume and Delete Volume: These are tasks that you can perform in blank 
space on disks or on existing partitions. You can use this to create RAID arrays as well as 
simple partitions, with Windows 8.1 supporting spanned, striped, mirrored, and RAID-5 
arrays (see Figure 13-40). I will show you how to work with partitions in Chapter 14. 
Figure 13-40. Creating RAID arrays in Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
468
Defragment and Optimize Drives
The Disk Defragmenter helps keep file access on your computer quick by making sure that all parts of files are stored 
together on your hard disk. This also helps maintain file integrity and prevents files from becoming corrupt.
By default, it’s set to automatically defragment all your hard disks once a week and it automatically adds new 
hard disks to the defragmentation schedule as well (see Figure 13-41). 
There are some hard disks that you might want to exclude from the automatic defragmentation process, however. 
These disks include SSDs, in which there is no speed advantage to be gained from keeping files together because the 
drives are random access, anyway.
Defragmentation also puts significant strain on mechanical hard disks, so if you have a disk in which the  
contents do not tend to change, such as for installers or for an image backup, it is worth excluding it from the 
defragmentation cycle.
Disk Cleanup
The Disk Cleanup tool removes temporary files from your computer. These files fill up space on a small SSD or 
generally slow programs down, including Internet Explorer. It’s a very simple tool to use and as a basic alternative to 
more advanced freeware like CCleaner (http://www.piriform.com/ccleaner), it is worth running once in a while. 
Figure 13-41. Using the Disk Defragmenter

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
469
Event Viewer
No major event happens on your computer without being logged. These events include warnings and critical errors, 
including Blue Screen of Death errors.
You can view errors by type in the Log Summary to get additional information for clues as to what caused the 
error—so that you can rectify it. This can include error codes, descriptions, and details of the driver, program,  
or service that failed (see Figure 13-42). 
Errors are grouped by importance. For example, each event type can be opened with a double-click to display 
more information such as the error code, description, and any associated system file. You can look up these details 
online to get more detailed information about what this means, helping you to diagnose and repair the problem.  
You can find more information about Windows 8.1 troubleshooting on my web site (http://www.theLongClimb.com).
Local Security Policy
You probably won’t need to worry about local security policies unless you are a systems administrator, in which case 
you will be administering group and security policies over a domain. There are a few settings here, however, that small 
business owners might be interested in.
Figure 13-42. Event Viewer

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
470
You can set password expirations and rules governing the strength and length of passwords chosen by users.  
If needed for additional security, you can also lock out users after a specified number of failed logon attempts. 
If you choose to turn on this feature, however, there must be several administrator accounts on the computer; 
otherwise, Windows 8.1 might be completely locked out to you (see Figure 13-43).
Performance Monitor
The Performance Monitor provides live graphs that show literally hundreds of metrics about Windows and your 
hardware. Are you concerned about your Wi-Fi traffic or your hard disk’s write capability? To add data to the live 
graph, click the green + icon on the toolbar and choose the metrics to add from a Category view (see Figure 13-44). 
Figure 13-43. Setting the Local Security Policy

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
471
These additional metrics provide valuable real-time information on the processes happening both inside and 
external to your computer. For example, you can see whether all your processor cores are indeed working or whether 
there are any bottlenecks with your networking.
Each counter is sensibly labeled, and if you’re not sure what counter to add, you can add a whole stack of related 
counters with a single click of the Add button. 
When you are viewing the live data in the Performance Monitor, the graph could become confusing. You can turn 
a specific graph on and off in real-time by checking or unchecking the box next to its label at the bottom of the page.
Resource Monitor
The Windows 8.1 Resource Monitor provides even more detailed information about processes running on your 
computer, including the drivers, programs, apps, and Windows’ services.
It works with tabs across the top of the page that give quick access to a general overview of your computer and 
more specific information about your CPU, memory, disk, and network. 
Each of these sections contains collapsible panes with huge amounts of real-time information about your 
computer (see Figure 13-45).
Figure 13-44. Performance Monitor

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
472
In the top pane of each tab, each item has a check box next to it. Checking one or more of these boxes filters the 
graph information on the right of the pane to show information only about those particular processes. For example, 
you might be interested in the amount of data that your SkyDrive app is sending and receiving to diagnose whether  
it is connecting correctly to the Internet. 
Services
Services are programs that perform specific functions in Windows, such as running the print spooler or the firewall. 
Occasionally, you will want to disable a Windows or third-party service that you either don’t need or that misbehaves. 
You can do this in the Services page by right-clicking a service. From there, you can start, stop, pause, resume,  
or restart the service (see Figure 13-46).
Figure 13-45. Resource Monitor

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
473
It was common in the days of Windows XP and especially Windows Vista to completely disable services running 
in the background that you didn’t need. With Windows 7, this was sorted so that only the services that you actually 
need are running at any one time.
You can disable a service, though, by selecting its Properties and setting its Startup Type to Disabled. Sometimes 
a service fails, however, especially if it is part of poorly written third-party software or a hardware driver. From this 
context menu, you can stop and restart services. Sometimes this can be useful if you find that a service is hung up  
and doesn’t respond. 
System Configuration
The System Configuration page is most commonly known to Windows users as MSConfig. It has been used in 
previous versions of Windows to disable unwanted startup programs. This is now managed through the Task Manager, 
but MSConfig is not without its uses. 
The Boot tab allows you to manually set the computer to start in Safe Mode. This can be useful if you have a UEFI 
firmware system that doesn’t allow access to the F8 and Shift+F8 boot menu. 
Figure 13-46. Services page

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
474
On the General tab are options that allow you to start the computer in a special Diagnostic Startup mode. This 
offers more functionality than Safe Mode in that it gives you more access to Windows features and controls, and it 
loads a few more hardware drivers. Diagnostic Startup is a great way to diagnose and repair problems with Windows 
8.1 (see Figure 13-47). When you check this option, however, Windows continues to boot into this new mode until you 
return to MSConfig and change the option back to Normal Startup.
I do not recommend that you change the options under the Boot tab, especially not the advanced boot options. 
On the face of things, controlling the number of processor cores, which is an option here, might look like a tempting 
way to save electricity when using a high-power computer for lightweight tasks. In reality, though, these features are 
strictly for IT pros because changing something here can render your copy of Windows 8.1 unbootable.
System Information
The System Information page provides extremely detailed information about your hardware, installed software and 
devices, running processes, and more. This information can be exported to a file through the File menu if you need  
to send comprehensive information about your computer to a support person. 
Task Scheduler
The Task Scheduler can be used in several ways. First, you can use it to launch programs such as the Disk Cleaner on  
a set schedule, such as once a month. 
Figure 13-47. MSConfig System Configuration panel

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
475
You can also set custom tasks that can be triggered in specific events, such as a driver failure. The Task Scheduler 
can then perform a series of tasks, including popping an alert window onscreen to inform the user that a problem has 
occurred, to running a Command Line or PowerShell script automatically.
The controls for setting up tasks are found in the right pane, in which you can either create tasks or import them 
from another computer (see Figure 13-48). 
Windows Memory Diagnostic
For many years, Windows has included a very useful and well-hidden Memory Diagnostic Tool (see Figure 13-49) that 
you can use if you suspect that your computer’s physical memory has developed a fault. 
Figure 13-48. Task Scheduler

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
476
You can access the tool by searching for memory at the Start screen. It scans your computer’s memory, which can 
take considerable time so be prepared to walk the dog or have a coffee break. The tool will report any errors it finds.
Further Customizing Windows 8.1
Because of the way that Windows 8.1 is designed, it’s possible to customize the operating system in an almost 
limitless number of ways. My mailbag regularly swells with questions about this. I’ll discuss some of the more popular 
customizations. I should point out, however, that you should always be very careful making these kinds of changes 
to Windows. You should create a restore point, make sure that you have an up-to-date image backup of the operating 
system, and follow instructions very carefully because you could be making changes to the core OS. (See Chapter 12 
for information on creating backup images and restore points.)
Tip
 
■
 Metro UI Tweaker is a great little utility for changing various aspects of the Start screen and Windows 8.1  
interface. It also provides an easy way to add power buttons to the Start screen. You can download it at  
www.technobuzz.net/windows-8-metro-ui-tweaker.
Disabling the Windows 8.1 Lock Screen
The new Windows 8.1 lock screen provides valuable information over and above that available in previous versions  
of Windows, including the number of e-mails and messages received and appointment details.
Opening the lock screen is another step you need to go through to log on to Windows 8.1. You may want to 
disable it completely and have Windows 8.1 start directly with the logon screen. 
Figure 13-49. Windows comes with a memory diagnostic tool

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
477
The lock screen can be disabled if you are using Windows 8.1 Pro or Enterprise, which includes the Group Policy 
Editor. To open it, search for gpedit.msc at the Start screen.
Once in the Group Policy Editor, you need to navigate to Computer Configuration ➤ Administrative Templates ➤ 
Control Panel ➤ Personalization (see Figure 13-50).
Here you will see an option labeled Do not display the lock screen. You should right-click it, select Edit from the 
options, and change the setting to Enabled in the next dialog. The lock screen will no longer appear on the computer. 
Automatically Logging on to Windows 8.1
You may want to have Windows 8.1 automatically log on every time you start the computer. After all, if you are the 
only person using the computer and you log on with your Microsoft account—bringing the benefits of automatically 
syncing your e-mail and calendar, and allowing you to buy apps, music, and video from the Windows Store—why 
would you need to type your password every time you start your computer? 
It is very simple to do and requires unchecking only a single box. Search for netplwiz at the Start screen. In 
the User Accounts dialog that appears, click your main user account (it is the one labeled Administrator) and then 
uncheck Users must enter a user name and password to use this computer (see Figure 13-51).
Figure 13-50. Disabling the lock screen in Group Policy

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
478
You are asked to confirm your password to provide authorization. Afterward, Windows 8.1 will no longer ask you 
for your password at logon. 
Tip
 
■
 If you want to restore the Windows 7-style Start menu in Windows 8.1, you need third-party software to do it. 
Solutions include ViStart (http://www.lee-soft.com/vistart), Start8 (http://www.stardock.com/products/start8), 
and Classic Shell (http://classicshell.sourceforge.net).
Bring Back the Start Menu with a Toolbar
It is possible to use the desktop taskbar’s toolbar feature to reinstate a Start menu of sorts. To do this, right-click 
anywhere in a blank space on the taskbar; from the menu that appears, click Toolbars and then click New Toolbar. 
Navigate to the folder C:\ProgramData\Microsoft\Windows\Start Menu\Programs and select it. 
Figure 13-51. Automatically logging on users to Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
479
You now have a toolbar on the right of the taskbar that simulates a mini-Start menu. You can change the options 
for this toolbar by right-clicking the taskbar and unlocking it. This displays additional options for the toolbar when 
you right-click it, including the View change for Large icon if you want and the ability to turn off its Text and Title. 
Useful Windows Registry Hacks
One of the best things about the Windows registry is how easy it is to edit, and how much control you can get over 
Windows by doing so. I’d like to share some of my favorite registry hacks. As with any work in the Windows registry, 
be very careful adding, deleting, or changing settings; and always make sure that you have both a backup copy of the 
registry and a backup image of your copy of Windows. Each registry change for a feature within Windows requires you 
to restart the computer; for registry changes involving programs, restarting the program is normally enough. 
Backing Up the Windows Registry
The registry is a database of all the settings and configuration options for Windows, your hardware, and all your 
installed software. It’s the main file (actually a series of files) that tells the operating system what’s what and what’s 
where. If you’re making changes to the registry, you should make a backup copy of the files.
You can do this from within the Registry Editor. Search for regedit at the Start screen to find it. Then, from the  
File menu click Export and save your backup of the registry file in a safe place (see Figure 13-52). 
If you need to restore your backed–up registry keys, open the Registry Editor and from its File menu, click Import. 
You are asked which file you want to import and then asked to confirm that you do want to add this key to the registry. 
Adding a backed-up key overwrites any changes made to that key. 
Figure 13-52. Backing up the Windows registry

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
480
Add Copy To/Move To Options to the File Explorer Context Menu
Although it’s useful for the File Explorer context menu to include Cut and Copy commands when you right-click a file 
or folder, it’s also possible to add Copy To Folder and Move To Folder options to this context list (see Figure 13-53). 
Here’s how to add the Copy To Folder command:
 
1. 
Open the Registry Editor by searching for regedit at the Start screen.
 
2. 
Navigate to the key HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT\AllFilesystemObjects\shellex\
ContextMenuHandlers.
 
3. 
Right-click the ContextMenuHandlers key and add a New Key with the name  
Copy to folder.
 
4. 
Double-click this new key’s Default value and change its value to  
{C2FBB630-2971-11D1-A18C-00C04FD75D13}.
To also add a Move To Folder item to the context menu, repeat these steps but create a new Move to folder  
key with the default value {C2FBB631-2971-11D1-A18C-00C04FD75D13}.
Figure 13-53. Adding Copy To Folder and Move To Folder options to File Explorer

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
481
Add/Remove Options to the Send-To File Explorer Menu
When you right-click a file or folder in File Explorer, one of the options that appears is Send To, which allows you to 
send that item to a particular program, piece of hardware or location. You can add and remove items from this menu 
by navigating to C:\Users\[Username]\AppData\Roaming\Microsoft\Windows\SendTo in File Explorer, in which 
you can paste or delete shortcuts to devices, network locations, and more. 
Add Defragment to the File Explorer Context Menu
You can add a Defragment option to the context menu in File Explorer when you right-click a hard disk (see Figure 13-54). 
This starts a command-line version of the Defragment tool. 
Figure 13-54. Add Defragment to the File Explorer context menu

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
482
Follow these steps to add Defragment:
 
1. 
Open the Registry Editor by searching for regedit at the Start screen.
 
2. 
Navigate to the key HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT\Drive\shell.
 
3. 
Create a new key under this called runas.
 
4. 
Double-click Default Value to open it and set its default value to Defragment.
 
5. 
Create a subkey under runas called command.
 
6. 
Double-click the Command subkey and change its default value to defrag %1 -v.
Add Command Prompt to the File Explorer Context Menu
You can also easily add the command prompt to the right-click menu in File Explorer.
 
1. 
Visit the Registry Key HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\Software\Classes\Folder\Shell.
 
2. 
Create a new key called Command Prompt.
 
3. 
Double click the Default setting for this key and change its value to Open Command 
Prompt or similar text if you want something different.
 
4. 
Create a subkey of Command Prompt called Command.
 
5. 
Double click the Default value for Command and change it to Cmd.exe /k pushd %L.
Here the /k switch leaves the Command window open on your screen, rather than executing this one command 
and closing it. The pushd control contains the name of the current folder, and the %L switch opens the Command 
window in that folder.
Show Drive Letter Before Volume Name in File Explorer
You might want to turn off the display of driver letters in File Explorer, which you can do by selecting Options and then 
opening the View tab. Select Change folder and search options and then uncheck Show drive letters. 
You can also have File Explorer display the drive letter before the drive volume name:
 
1. 
Open the Registry Editor by searching for regedit at the Start screen.
 
2. 
Navigate to the following key: HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\
Windows\CurrentVersion\Explorer.
 
3. 
Right-click and create a new Dword (32-bit) Value called ShowDriveLettersFirst.
 
4. 
Double-click the new addition to open it and change its value from 0 to 4.
Add an FTP Location to File Explorer
If you maintain a web server, you can add a direct link to your FTP service directly to File Explorer. Doing so enables 
you to manage files on the server as though they were on your own PC, being able to drag and drop files into the FTP 
site as well as delete them without the need for separate FTP software. 
 
1. 
In a File Explorer window, click the Computer tab on the Ribbon.
 
2. 
Click the Add a Network Location button.

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
483
 
3. 
Click Next in the window that appears.
 
4. 
Click Choose a custom network location and then click the Next button.
 
5. 
Enter the name of your FTP site in the format ftp://ftp.contoso.com and click Next
 
6. 
If you log in to your FTP site with a username and password, uncheck the Log on 
anonymously box and enter your username; then click Next.
 
7. 
Give your FTP site a name and click Next.
 
8. 
Leave the Open this network location box checked and click Finish.
 
9. 
In the window that appears, enter your password for the FTP site and optionally check the 
Remember my password box.
You now have direct access to your FTP site from directly within File Explorer every time you log in to your PC.
Change Taskbar Program Previews
With a simple registry tweak, you can change the size of the preview thumbnails for running programs in the  
Windows 8.1 taskbar: 
 
1. 
Open the Registry Editor by searching for regedit at the Start screen.
 
2. 
Navigate to the key HKEY_CURRENT_USER\Software\Microsoft\Windows\
CurrentVersion\Explorer\Taskband.
 
3. 
Right-click and create a new Dword (32-bit) Value called MinThumbSizePX.
 
4. 
Double-click this new entry and change its value to the size (in pixels) you want your 
thumbnails to be. For example, you might want huge thumbnails that are 500 pixels across 
(change the number to 500) or you might want tiny thumbnails of 50 pixels (change the 
value to 50).
There are other registry Dword 32-bit Value keys you can create to control thumbnail images:
NumThumbnails (the number of thumbnail images)
•฀
MinThumbSizePX (minimum thumbnail size)
•฀
MaxThumbSizePX (maximum thumbnail size)
•฀
TextHeightPX (thumbnail title text height in pixels)
•฀
TopMarginPX (top margin in pixels)
•฀
LeftMarginPX (left margin in pixels)
•฀
RightMarginPX (right margin in pixels)
•฀
BottomMarginPX (bottom margin in pixels)
•฀
ThumbSpacingXPx (horizontal spacing between thumbnails in pixels)
•฀
ThumbSpacingYPx (vertical spacing between thumbnails in pixels) 
•฀

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
484
Modifying the Taskbar Using Group Policy
Although there are many controls for modifying the taskbar available from the simple right-click and opening the 
taskbar’s Properties, additional controls are available to users of Windows 8.1 Pro, Enterprise, and Windows RT.  
They exist in Group Policy, which can be opened by searching for gpedit.msc at the Start screen. 
Once in the Group Policy Editor, navigate to User Configuration\Administrative Templates\StartMenu and 
Taskbar, in which you see a great menu with additional options available, including being able to turn off balloon 
notifications and hiding the notification area completely.
Disable the ShutDown Command
Sometimes you might not want a PC to be switched off; for example, if it is running as a file or other server type,  
or performs a critical task. You can disable the Shutdown options in the charms. 
 
1. 
Find the registry key HKEY_CURRENT_USER\Software\Microsoft\Windows\
CurrentVersion\Policies\Explorer. 
 
2. 
Create a new DWORD and call it NoClose. 
 
3. 
Give this DWORD a value of 1.
This process doesn’t prevent people from shutting down the PC by pressing the physical power button,  
but it does prevent them from shutting down the PC in the normal manner.
Unlock the Hidden Super-Administrator Account
Although main users on a PC are always set up as Administrator, which enables them to make whatever changes they 
need to the computer, there is also a hidden super-administrator account available if you ever need it. This super 
account isn’t hamstrung by such things as the User Account Control (UAC) and has permissions to do things to files  
in Windows that you may need, but that are denied to you for reasons of stability and safety in the operating system. 
To unlock this account, from an existing Administrator account open Command Prompt (Admin) from the 
Win+X menu and type the following command: net user administrator /active:yes. When you log out, the new 
Administrator account is available to you. You can disable it when you finish with the /active:no switch.
Hiding Unused Items from the Control Panel
The Control Panel in Windows 8.1 can get very messy, with all manner of controls listed that you might either never 
want to use or not want other people who use your computer to see. Fortunately it is possible to remove some of these 
controls if you want: 
 
1. 
Search for regedit at the Start screen and open the Registry Editor.
 
2. 
Navigate in the Registry Editor to HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\
Windows\CurrentVersion\Control Panel\don’t load.
 
3. 
Here you will see a list of Control Panel items that are already hidden (see Figure 13-55). 
To hide an additional item, create a new String value with the .cpl name for the control that 
corresponds to Table 13-1. 

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
485
Table 13-1. Control Panel Applet Names
Control Panel Applet
Name
Accessibility Options
access.cpl
Add New Hardware Wizard
hdwwiz.cpl
Display Properties
desk.cpl
Game Controllers
joy.cpl
Internet Options
inetcpl.cpl
Mouse Properties
main.cpl
Network Connections
ncpa.cpl
ODBC Data Sources
odbccp32.cpl
Phone and Modem Options
telephon.cpl
Power Options
powercfg.cpl
Programs and Features
appwiz.cpl
Figure 13-55. You can hide Control Panel applets
(continued)

CHAPTER 13 ■ ADVANCED CONFIGURATION AND CUSTOMIZATION 
486
Summary
Windows has traditionally been highly configurable, and Windows 8.1 is no exception with its sheer volume of 
settings. This chapter could turn into an entire book on its own by just discussing how to configure every setting.
I hope this chapter has given you a good overview of what the settings do, how you can change them, and why 
you might want to do so. There are some settings, such as changing the virtual memory, that I always recommend  
you change, but generally speaking, Windows 8.1 is fine out of the box. Tweaking Windows 8.1, on the other hand,  
is something entirely different.
Control Panel Applet
Name
Region
intl.cpl
Sound
mmsys.cpl
Speech
sapi.cpl
System
sysdm.cpl
Time and Date
timedate.cpl
User Accounts
nusrmgr.cpl
Table 13-1. (continued)

487
CHAPTER 14
Getting Started with Virtualization
Each new release of Windows, whether major or minor, brings not just new features and new ways of working, but 
also fresh challenges. One of those challenges is maintaining compatibility with the older software that we’ve used for 
years and that are as comfortable as an old shoe.
I am not excluded from this scenario. I have used the same graphics package, Microsoft PhotoDraw, for more 
than a decade. I love it—it does everything I want and it’s extremely easy to use. Why should I change?
Sadly, with upgrades to Windows come software incompatibilities. The biggest change came with the move from 
Windows XP to Windows Vista. The whole core of the operating system was rewritten from scratch. It included some 
major restructuring, such as removing, replacing, or rewriting features. With PhotoDraw, I found that although most 
of the package still worked, some features treated me to only an annoying “donk!” noise when I tried to use them.
There are also times when you want to be able to use or try a different operating system on your computer, 
such as Linux or even the prerelease of the next version of Windows. Setting up a dual-boot system can be extremely 
complex, especially because Windows 8.1 usually needs to be installed last (see Chapter 15 for notes on this). A good 
option is to install the second operating system in a virtual machine (VM).
When Windows 7 was launched with the accompanying Windows XP Mode virtualization client, I was delighted. 
At long last I could use PhotoDraw again on the desktop without worry or problems.
The bad news is that Windows XP Mode is no longer supported and it isn’t a feature of Windows 8.1 because all 
support for Windows XP ends (or ended, depending on when you’re reading this) in April 2014, before the release  
of Windows 9.
It’s not all bad news, though. Windows 8.1 Pro and Enterprise editions contain a feature called Hyper-V. This is 
Microsoft’s latest virtualization client ported from Windows Server. It’s more than powerful enough to get your legacy 
software working again.
Virtualization isn’t just about maintaining compatibility with older software, however, because it also 
has important roles to play in testing stability in software and updates for deployment, and also for providing 
customizable working environments for users. In this chapter, I’ll show you how to set up and maintain Hyper-V  
for all these roles.
Note that using virtualization is an advanced feature and something that less-technical Windows users will likely 
avoid. You can’t do anything to harm or damage your current Windows installation, but if you want to use Hyper-V 
and you’re not completely comfortable with computers, you should follow the instructions in this chapter very 
carefully to ensure the best results.
Note
 
■
 Hyper-V is available only in the 64-bit versions of Windows 8.1 Pro and Enterprise if running on compatible 
hardware.

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
488
What Is Virtualization?
Virtualization allows any operating system to run inside another in a specially configured environment that simulates 
the hardware of a full PC. Think of it a bit like the “virtual world” as it appeared to people trapped in the Matrix in the 
popular film trilogy. Virtualization effectively tricks the virtualized operating system into thinking that it’s running on 
its own hardware. Older VMs that simulated the hardware were very slow because every hardware action had to be 
re-created in software.
Newer VMs, including Hyper-V, enable the virtualized operating system to access your computer’s own hardware. 
They manage the sharing of that hardware between the host OS and the virtualized OS on the machine to make sure 
that conflicts don’t occur. This means that Hyper-V acts on your computer and your network as if it’s just another 
computer attached to that network.
The main benefit of virtualization is that the hardware management allows VMs to harness the full power of 
modern computers with multiple processor cores and large volumes of memory. For example, if you have a quad-core 
processor and 8 GB of memory in your computer, a good VM can assign each of three operating systems a single 
processor core and 2 GB of memory, each with the host OS using the remaining core and memory—thus maximizing 
the computer’s potential and reducing overall costs.
When Should You Use a Virtual Machine?
There are several scenarios in which the use of a VM is helpful, including keeping your older legacy software working. 
If you really must use software that worked fine in Windows XP but doesn’t work in Windows 8.1, installing a copy of 
Windows XP into a VM is a way to continue using that software.
VMs are also commonly used for testing scenarios. Let’s say you want to roll out a patch or software upgrade 
across your computers, but you’re unsure of how it will interact with the existing software that you use. You can test it 
first in a VM so that you are certain that all works fine beforehand and avoid the risk of any downtime.
You might also use virtualization to provide custom working environments. On one machine, you could set up 
VMs for design, accounting, or other purposes that provide workers with the tools and environment they need to be 
productive, while also making the environment easy to transport between computers in different locations.
I used Hyper-V while writing this book so that I could install a clean copy of Windows 8.1. There are all manner of 
scenarios in which it is useful to have a VM running.
Note
 
■
 You need a valid license (product key) for each operating system you install in a VM using Hyper-V.
Why You Should “Sandbox” Windows XP
For those who want to run Windows XP on a VM, I want you to examine whether you should really continue using 
Windows XP to run your legacy software. Although there is one scenario in which it’s perfectly safe to run Windows XP 
(I’ll come to it shortly), there are a couple of very good reasons why you should not.
Windows XP, although very well-liked by many people, is an extremely insecure operating system. After shipping 
with Internet Explorer 6, it was responsible for many major security scares in the decade after it was released.
Those problems have never gone away. In countries such as China, Windows XP usage was still very high when 
Windows 8.1 was released. Malware writers and criminals still want to target the OS and its vulnerabilities to steal 
personal data from users.
At the end of extended support for Windows XP, all patches and updates for the operating system stop forever; 
any vulnerabilities that still exist, or any new vulnerabilities created through third-party software or malware,  
will be left unpatched. You can be certain that when Windows XP support ends, malware for any remaining 
vulnerabilities—the ones that the criminals have identified but not yet exploited—will be released.

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
489
Tip
 
■
 Always make sure that Windows Updates is turned on and that antivirus software is installed on any operating 
system in a VM with Internet access.
I do not recommend that anyone continue using Windows XP, either on its own or within a VM, in Windows 7 or 
Windows 8.1. There is one scenario however, in which it might be considered okay to use Windows XP in a VM: when 
you use software in Windows XP that never requires Internet access. You can set up the VM with no networking or 
Internet support.
This “sandboxed” VM is completely isolated from your network and the Internet, with no traffic able to get in or 
out. You can still give it local file storage access so that you can work with files on your computer; but without direct 
ability to contact the Internet, the only way it can succumb to virus infection is if the host PC or the files on it are 
already infected.
Note
 
■
 Although Windows XP Mode in Windows 7 enabled you to pin Windows XP–installed software to the Windows 7  
taskbar and use it on the Windows 7 desktop, Hyper-V does not support this. To use this functionality, you need to use 
Microsoft Enterprise Desktop Virtualization (MED-V), which is part of the Microsoft Desktop Optimization Pack (MDOP).  
It is available to businesses only through Software Assurance volume licensing. There is a way to “sort of” get Windows 
XP-mode running on the Windows 8.1 desktop using Oracle VirtualBox. HowToGeek.com has published a guide at  
http://www.howtogeek.com/howto/12183/how-to-run-xp-mode-in-virtualbox-on-windows-7/.
Can’t Find Hyper-V on Your PC?
Hyper-V exists in the Pro and Enterprise versions of Windows 8.1, but it is commonly hidden in Windows 8.1 Pro.  
You can activate it, however, by searching for programs and features at the Start screen, which is the Control Panel 
applet you use for uninstalling desktop programs. This panel contains a link on the left of its window called  
Turn Windows feature on or off and you should click it.
The new window that then appears (see Figure 14-1) contains a full list of all the Windows 8.1 features that can 
be either enabled or disabled. Hyper-V appears in this list. To activate it, check the box to its left, click OK, and then 
restart your PC. Hyper-V now appears in your All Apps view.

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
490
Installing an Operating System in Hyper-V
How do you install an operating system into Hyper-V and what types of operating system does it support? You can 
install any version of Windows or other Intel (x86 and x64)–based operating systems into Hyper-V, including  
GNU/Linux, by following these steps:
 
1. 
Find Hyper-V in Windows by searching for Hyper at the Start screen.
 
2. 
Click Hyper-V Manager. The Hyper-V Manager (see Figure 14-2) looks and operates much 
like the other administration windows in Windows 8.1. Your main controls are in the  
right pane.
Figure 14-1. Enabling Hyper-V in Windows 8.1 Pro

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
491
 
3. 
Click New ✞ Virtual Machine to create a new VM.
Tip
 
■
 When you set up your first VM in Hyper-V, it has no networking available to it, either local or Internet. You might 
want to jump ahead in this chapter to the “Setting Up Networking in Hyper-V” section to configure it before creating the VM.
 
4. 
Click the Next button at the bottom of the New Virtual Machine Wizard (see Figure 14-3) to 
set up your own VM.
Figure 14-2. Hyper-V Manager

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
492
 
5. 
Give your VM a name and a store location (see Figure 14-4). By default, Windows 8.1 
suggests storing it on the same hard disk on which Windows is installed. You may want to 
specify a different hard disk, however. Click Next.
Figure 14-3. New Virtual Machine Wizard

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
493
Tip
 
■
 Storing your VM on a different disk or partition to Windows 8.1 excludes it from any custom Refresh image you 
make, thus bringing down the overall size of that backup. If you always want to use the VM with your installed copy of 
Windows, however, keeping it on the same hard disk as Windows (and therefore included in backup Refresh image) might 
be the best choice.
 
6. 
One of the improvements made to Hyper-V in Windows 8.1 includes a new type of VM 
container file that supports features such as different boot types (see Figure 14-5). This 
Generation 2 VM type is fully compatible with Windows 8 and Windows 8.1 as well as 
Windows Server 2012, but it doesn’t work on Hyper-V installations on earlier operating 
systems such as these. If you think you will want to use your VM on computers running 
Windows Server 2008, for example, you should choose the Generation 1 option to 
maintain full compatibility.
Figure 14-4. Specifying a name and store location for the VM

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
494
 
7. 
Assign the amount of memory you want to dedicate to the VM (see Figure 14-6). The amount 
depends on the type of operating system is running in the VM and how much physical 
memory your PC has.
Figure 14-5. There are now several types of VM you can create

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
495
For example, you might be installing Windows XP into the VM, which means you would 
need only 512 MB of RAM. If you plan to do graphics work in the VM, however, more 
memory would be required. If your PC has only 4 GB of memory, you should probably not 
specify more than 1 GB for the VM; if you have 8 GB, you could dedicate a healthier 2 GB of 
memory to the VM.
There is also the option to use Dynamic Memory. This feature allows the VM to 
automatically assign additional memory through Hyper-V if it is required and if there is 
available memory on your PC. You may find this option useful because it is used only 
when required. Click Next.
 
8. 
Configure the networking options for the VM by choosing from a drop down-list of the 
preconfigured networks you have set up for Hyper-V (see Figure 14-7) and click Next.
Figure 14-6. Specifying a memory size for the VM

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
496
If you want a completely sandboxed operating system with no local computer, network,  
or Internet access, there is no need to configure a network adaptor to work with the VM. 
This isolates the VM completely from the outside world, but it also means that you can’t 
access the files and documents on the host computer and that you don’t have access to the 
VM using Remote Desktop.
Note
 
■
 You may not be able to add networking options at this time because networking in Hyper-V must be configured 
independently of any individual VM. VMs can share individually configured networks to give them Internet access, access 
to the local computer, or access only to other VMs. If this is the case, you need to install Integration Services into the VM 
when it is installed, and set up a virtual switch. I show you how later in this chapter.
 
9. 
Connect the VHD. This wizard page lets you specify the size of the VM’s hard disk  
(see Figure 14-8). It suggests a size, though you can change this if you require the VM to  
be larger or smaller. An alternate option is to reattach an existing VHD. Click Next.
Figure 14-7. Configuring networking for the VM

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
497
 
10. 
Install an operating system (see Figure 14-9). You can do this from a virtual floppy disk, 
CD, DVD, USB flash drive, or ISO file.
Figure 14-8. Specifying virtual disk properties

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
498
 
11. 
Confirm all the details you have entered (see Figure 14-10). Click Finish when you are done.
Figure 14-9. Installing the OS into the VM

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
499
 
12. 
Start the VM. In the Hyper-V Manager, you now see your VM listed in the top-center pane 
(see Figure 14-11). Click it. In the bottom half of the right pane, click Connect to connect to 
the VM.
Figure 14-10. Confirming the VM details

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
500
 
13. 
Open the Action menu and select Start to launch the VM (see Figure 14-12).
Figure 14-11. Running a VM

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
501
After you start the VM, you see a window with the virtualized OS running inside it.
When you start a VM, you see a connection options dialog (see Figure 14-13) that asks at what screen resolution 
you want to run the VM, and the slider goes all the way up to your full-screen resolution. This makes it simple to run 
the VM as different resolutions depending on what you’re doing with it without having to change the resolution within 
the display properties of the VM every time. At the bottom of this dialog is a Show options button that includes more 
settings, including audio for the VM.
Figure 14-12. Launching a VM
Figure 14-13. You are presented with additional options when launching a VM

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
502
Setting Up Networking with Hyper-V
By default, all Hyper-V VMs are sandboxed and completely isolated from the computers and networks around them. 
When you want a VM to interact with other VMs, your physical computers, the network, and the Internet, you need to 
create a virtual switch. You can do this from the main Hyper-V Manager, in which you click Virtual Switch Manager in 
the right pane.
You need to decide what type of virtual switch you want to create. The Virtual Switch Manager gives you a text 
description of each type of switch (see Figure 14-14).
Figure 14-14. Creating a virtual switch

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
503
If you want your VM to see and access files on the host PC and on your network, you need to select External, 
which is also the option that gives the VM access to the Internet (so be careful with it if using Windows XP).  
The Internal and Private options allow Hyper-V VMs to communicate only with each other.
After you highlight the option you want, click the Create Virtual Switch button.
You now need to configure the options for your virtual switch (see Figure 14-15). It is important to determine 
which network adapter in your computer you attach it to. You may have both wired and wireless network adapters  
in your computer; you need to choose the right one.
Figure 14-15. Setting virtual switch options

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
504
Tip
 
■
 Let’s say that you want a VM to access files on the host PC, but you do not want it to have access to the network 
or the Internet. If your PC has wired and wireless connections, connect the switch to the one that you don’t use to get 
online. If you don’t have a physical network cable plugged into the PC, choose the non–Wi-Fi connection. This gives the 
VM access to the host PC only and helps isolate it from malware and attack.
After you create your virtual switch, you need to attach it to your VM. Click the appropriate VM in the top-center 
pane in the Hyper-V Manager. Then in the bottom-right pane, click Settings, which brings up the settings for the VM 
(see Figure 14-16).
Figure 14-16. Connecting a VM to a virtual switch

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
505
Click Network Adapter option in the left pane. If you do not see this option, click Add Hardware to add a network 
adapter. A useful feature is Bandwidth Management, which ensures that whatever the VM does, it can’t use more than 
a specified amount of your network bandwidth. This throttling control is a useful way to ensure that the VM has the 
network connection it requires without becoming a bandwidth hog.
Where you choose the virtual switch at the top of the Network Adapter settings, select the switch you created and 
press OK. No further configuration should be necessary. Your VM now has network access.
Although other options can be changed in the VM Settings, some settings that are set when you first create the 
VM can’t be changed. To change these settings, the VM needs to be switched off.
Saving VM Checkpoints
When a major change is made to Windows 8.1, such as the installation of a desktop program or a Windows Update,  
a System Restore point is kept. It keeps copies of critical operating system files such as the Windows registry from just 
before the change was made. Thus if something then goes wrong, this change can be rolled back to revert your copy of 
Windows to its earlier state. In Hyper-V, this procedure can be a pain, however, because you first have to start the VM 
and then run System Restore from within it. This process can be annoying and time-consuming.
Hyper-V gets around this annoyance by having a feature called Checkpoints, each of which is a snapshot of the 
VM taken at a specific time. You can create a checkpoint at any time by selecting the VM you want to create one for 
in the top center of the Virtual Machines panel of the Hyper-V Manager and then clicking the Checkpoint link in the 
bottom right of the management window.
Created checkpoints are then listed in the center of the Hyper-V Manager (see Figure 14-17), and you can  
click one to either apply it (to roll the VM back to that point), export it (more on exporting VMs in the next section),  
or delete it.

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
506
Importing and Exporting Virtual Machines in Hyper-V
You may want to create VMs that are to be used on other PCs or that you want to keep copies of. Just creating a VM 
and then opening that VM file after copying it to another computer doesn’t work for importing VMs in Hyper-V, which 
is why a special import and export option is available. To export a VM, select it in the Hyper-V Manager. In the bottom 
right of the Hyper-V Manager window, the Export option displays (see Figure 14-18). Click it and you are asked which 
folder you want to store your exported VM in. The export process is both invisible and fairly quick.
Figure 14-17. Checkpoints are to Hyper-V what System Restore is to Windows

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
507
 
1. 
You can import previously exported VMs into Hyper-V by clicking the Import virtual 
machine link in the top right of the Hyper-V Manager window (see Figure 14-19) when no 
VM is currently selected.
Figure 14-18. You can export VMs from the Hyper-V Management console
Figure 14-19. VMs are also imported using the Hyper-V Management console

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
508
 
2. 
The Import Virtual Machine Wizard opens, which first asks you to specify which folder 
(not which file) has the stored VM (see Figure 14-20).
Figure 14-20. The import wizard first asks where your VM is stored
 
3. 
Next you are shown the name of the VM along with details of when it was created  
(see Figure 14-21). If this is the correct VM, click Next.

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
509
 
4. 
You are now asked how you want to import the VM (see Figure 14-22). The three options 
are as follows:
•฀
Register the virtual machine is used when you are performing a straight import, the VM 
is still in the same folder location it was exported to, and you want to leave it there.
•฀
Restore the virtual machine is used if the VM is not in the same folder location it was 
exported to; for example, if it is a copy taken from a master image on a server.
•฀
Copy the virtual machine is used if you want to create a local copy of an existing VM, 
leaving the “master” VM intact for importing later on this or another PC if required.  
This option is also used if you want to create a copy of an already imported VM.
Figure 14-21. You are shown the name of the VM and when it was created

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
510
Note
 
■
 If you import a VM without making a copy of it, any changes you make to the VM and any problems that occur 
with it become part of it, and you effectively lose your clean master copy.
 
5. 
If you choose to create a copy of the VM, you are asked where you want to store it in your 
PC (see Figure 14-23).
Figure 14-22. You are asked if you want a straight import or a copy

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
511
 
6. 
The last step is for Hyper-V to confirm all your chosen settings with you (see Figure 14-24) 
before it completes the VM import process.
Figure 14-23. You can choose where to store the VM copy

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
512
Integrating Additional Services into a VM
Some operating systems, especially earlier versions of Windows, won’t give you network access or other features at 
this point. This is where you need to plug extra features into the VM. You must do this with the VM running.
These additional features, which are required for some operating systems, include the ability to move your  
mouse cursor freely between your main desktop and open VMs without having to first unlock it from the VM window. 
They also include networking and USB support for some operating systems.
From the Action menu, click Insert Integration Service Setup Disk. This loads an ISO file containing software that 
enhances the functionality of the VM.
Using Virtual Hard Disks
You can also use virtual hard disks (VHDs) within Windows both as file containers and as boot drives for the operating 
system. You can create a VHD within Hyper-V, but also from the Windows 8.1 Disk Management console (available by 
using the Win+X keyboard shortcut).
On their own, VHDs are of limited use because you need to manually reattach them to Windows 8.1 when 
the computer is restarted. It is in booting from a VHD that they become useful. Let’s say you have a laptop that you 
repurpose for different roles within a company, such as sales, accounting, or management, for example. Rather than 
having a complicated multiboot system that is difficult to maintain, you can create a series of VHDs and copy the 
correct one to the laptop when you need to assign the laptop a different departmental role.
Figure 14-24. Hyper-V confirms all your choices before importing the VM

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
513
Creating a VHD in Windows 8.1
Create a VHD from the Disk Management console (press Win+X to open options). From the Action menu, click Create 
VHD (see Figure 14-25).
Figure 14-25. Creating a VHD

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
514
A dialog allows you to specify the VHD size and the hard disk location for VHD storage (see Figure 14-26).
Figure 14-26. Choosing VHD options
When you choose the location for the VHD, you also specify its name. The size options are interesting, however, 
because you can specify a fixed size or you can have the VHD expand in size dynamically as and when you need  
more space within it. Note than when specifying a size for the VHD the size drop-down list offers megabytes (MB),  
gigabytes (GB) and terabytes (TB). Don’t accidentally choose the wrong one; they’re all very different.
When the VHD is created, you can attach it to Windows 8.1 in the Disk Management console by selecting Attach 
VHD from the Actions menu.

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
515
Booting Windows from a VHD
Creating a VHD doesn’t let you install an operating system in it or boot from it. To do this, you need to start your 
computer from your original Windows 8.1 installation media. After you select your installation language, perform the 
following steps:
 
1. 
Press Shift+F10 at the installation screen to open a Command window.
 
2. 
Type diskpart and press Enter.
 
3. 
To use an existing VHD, type Select vdisk file=C:\Path1\Path2\disk.vhd, substituting the 
path and disk names for the location on the disk of the VHD and its name.
 
4. 
To create a new VHD, type Create vdisk file=C:\Path1\Path2\disk.vhd 
maximum=20000 type=dynamic, again substituting the path and disk names with 
where you want the VHD to be created and what you want it to be called (the path folders 
must already exist). Also, substitute the number of megabytes and create either a fixed or 
dynamic disk.
 
5. 
Type Select vdisk file=C:zPath1\Path2\disk.vhd and press Enter to attach the VHD if you 
have just created one.
 
6. 
Type attach vdisk and press Enter.
 
7. 
Type exit and press Enter.
 
8. 
Type exit again and press Enter.
 
9. 
Click Install ➤ Custom: Install Windows Only (Advanced).
 
10. 
Locate the newly attached VHD in the hard disk pane in which you want to install 
Windows. This is Disk 1 if you have only one hard disk in your computer. You can identify it 
by its size. Click Next when you are ready to install Windows onto the VHD.
You can install Windows 7 Enterprise and Ultimate, Windows 8.1 Pro and Enterprise, and Windows Server 2008 
and 2012 into a VHD.
Note
 
■
 Each operating system and software package you install into a VM needs to have its own license and,  
if  necessary for that product, its own product key. Some versions of Windows are not licensed for use inside a VM.  
You can find out more about licensing for your particular copies of Windows and other Microsoft software at  
http://www.microsoft.com/About/Legal/EN/US/IntellectualProperty/UseTerms.
You now need to add the VHD to the Windows boot menu:
 
1. 
Press Win+X to open the Administration menu.
 
2. 
Click Command Prompt (Admin).
 
3. 
Type bcdedit /v in the Command window. Press Enter.
 
4. 
Locate the VHD you installed and make a note of its globally unique identifier (GUID) 
code. It is a long string of numbers and letters in the Identifier section for the OS  
(see Figure 14-27).

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
516
 
5. 
Type bcdedit /set {GUID} description “OS Name,” substituting the actual GUID for the 
OS for the letters GUID and assigning the OS its proper name. Press Enter.
 
6. 
Optionally, you might want this VHD to be the OS that loads by default. Set this by typing 
bcdedit / default {GUID}. Press Enter.
You can now boot your computer from the VM in the same way that you boot into your normally installed copy 
of Windows. In fact, you won’t even be able to notice the difference. Most people booting into a VM have no idea that 
they’re not using an operating system that’s installed onto the computer’s hard disk.
Note
 
■
 The Secure Boot feature in Windows 8.1 on UEFI-equipped motherboards might prevent some VHDs from  
booting. You should check in the UEFI firmware settings to see if this feature can be turned off on your computer.
Figure 14-27. Locating the GUID for an installed OS

CHAPTER 14 ■ GETTING STARTED WITH VIRTUALIZATION
517
Summary
The virtualization options in Windows 8.1 are powerful, but remember that they are available in only the Pro and 
Enterprise editions.
I have shown you how it is also possible—as long as you have two network adapters in your PC—to isolate a VM 
from the Internet while still giving it access to your own PC. It can really be done only if you connect to the Internet 
via Wi-Fi and do not have a physical network cable plugged into your computer. Doing so helps to protect an older 
Windows XP installation from viruses and other malware infections.

519
CHAPTER 15
Installing Windows 8.1  
on Your Computer
Whether you get your copy of Windows 8.1 with a shiny new PC, off the shelf from your local store, or on a software 
subscription package from Microsoft, you have to install it at some point—either to replace an earlier version of 
Windows on your computer or when something goes wrong.
Installing Windows 8.1 is something that can be done fairly simply and without fuss. In fact, it’s the least fussy 
version of Windows ever. It allows you to upgrade from an earlier version of the operating system or wipe out an 
existing one while keeping all your files intact.
Back Up Your Files and Documents First!
When you install Windows 8.1 onto an existing computer, make sure that you keep all your files and documents intact. 
To guarantee this, you should always make an up-to-date backup of all your files and documents beforehand.
Although the Windows installation process is generally very robust, there’s no knowing when and how something 
might go wrong. Problems could be due to a power outage, a driver failure, or simply forgetting that you had some 
important files in a different folder that Windows 8.1 doesn’t save because it doesn’t know it needs to do so.
The best place to keep a files backup is on an external USB hard disk, but if you have a second physical hard 
disk or a hard disk that’s split into several different partitions on your computer, you can keep your files there. Bear 
in mind, though, that a proper backup should be one that’s external to the computer, which covers you in case of fire, 
theft, or hard-disk failure. (See Chapter 12 for information on performing backups.)
Windows 8.1 Edition Differences
There the several editions, (sometimes known as flavors or stock-keeping units (SKUs) of Windows 8.1. Be aware that 
some are available only to certain customers and in certain ways:
•฀
Windows 8.1 is the general consumer version and comes preinstalled on most new PCs. It is 
also available through retail purchase.
•฀
Windows 8.1 Pro is the version aimed at IT professionals and enthusiasts. It comes 
preinstalled on some PCs and is available for purchase.
•฀
Windows 8.1 Enterprise is available only to business volume-licensing customers.

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
520
•฀
Windows RT (Runtime) is the ARM version of Windows 8.1. It is available only to Microsoft’s 
hardware partners. It is not available through retail purchase and cannot be installed on a 
blank tablet by the end user.
•฀
Windows 8.1 Pro with Media Center isn’t actually an official version of Windows 8.1, but it is 
sold by some hardware partners or preinstalled on some media and entertainment-focused 
PCs. It is available for purchase only by upgrading Windows 8.1 or Windows Pro through the 
Add Features to Windows option in the Control Panel.
Deciding How to Install Windows 8.1 on an Existing Computer
One of the perennial questions asked in computing circles when migrating from one version of Windows to another is 
whether to perform an upgrade over an existing copy or completely wipe the old installation and start from scratch.  
So what are the pros and cons of both?
Upgrade pros:
Upgrading is much faster and easier overall, especially if you have a lot of software on your 
•฀
computer, because it saves reinstalling everything afterward.
Performing an upgrade leaves your files intact if your files and documents are on the same 
•฀
hard-disk partition as your old copy of Windows and you don’t have an external backup (more 
on this shortly because it’s very important).
Upgrade cons:
Any problems associated with your software or Windows installation might be carried forward 
•฀
into Windows 8.1.
Upgrading does not guarantee that your software will work properly afterward, and some 
•฀
software programs might need to be uninstalled and reinstalled.
Clean install pros:
Your new installation is fresh and clean with no problems associated with it.
•฀
There are no bugs and incompatible software.
•฀
Clean install cons:
Installation and configuration can be time-consuming, especially if you have a lot of software.
•฀
You need to have an up-to-date external backup of your files and documents.
•฀
In truth, you might not have a choice but to perform a clean installation, at least as far as the Windows 8.1 
upgrade options go, because Windows 8.1 might not be able to migrate your software.
Now let’s look at the process of actually upgrading to Windows 8.1. Once you have physical media for installing 
Windows 8.1, be it a DVD or a USB flash drive, you can set about the process of installing the operating system (OS) 
on your computer. If you want to upgrade from a version of Windows other than Windows 7, you have to reinstall your 
software, as I will explain shortly.
When Is an Upgrade Also a Clean Install?
Each and every upgrade path to Windows 8.1 allows you to move Just [the] personal files for each user on the 
computer. Is this a clean install and is it a clean installation alternative? The answer to this question depends on the 
version that you’re upgrading from and the setup that you have in place.

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
521
When Windows performs an upgrade, it copies your old Windows installation, complete with programs, into a 
Windows.old folder. You can then recover any files from the installation that you need to—such as Internet Favorites 
from Windows XP, which weren’t stored in a separate User folder and weren’t considered part of the user’s files.
All new folders are thus created for the new operating system containing all new files. You essentially have a clean 
installation because there’s nothing left over from your old Windows installation that can cause problems, malware 
infection, or incompatibilities.
When You Should Perform a Clean Install
So when shouldn’t you choose Upgrade to perform a clean installation? There are a few scenarios in which you should 
just choose to perform a completely clean installation, formatting your hard disk and starting from scratch:
•฀
You already store your files and documents on a different physical hard disk or partition 
to your copy of Windows: I always recommend storing your files on a separate partition 
of Windows for data security, and there is simply nothing to be gained from creating the 
Windows.old folder. In this circumstance, it’s best to reformat the Windows drive, which 
removes any trace of doubt that the former installation might cause problems.
•฀
Your Windows disk isn’t large enough to store both Windows 8.1 and your old Windows 
installation in a Windows.old folder: If there isn’t enough space on your hard disk to upgrade 
Windows, the installer informs you before the upgrade process begins.
•฀
You are upgrading from Windows XP: You should always reformat your hard disk because 
Windows 8.1 (as with Windows 7) wants to create a System Reserved partition at the beginning 
of your primary hard disk (Disc 0) in which it places its startup and system repair files. This 
partition contains the boot information for Windows and, crucially, all the rescue tools and 
utilities for when the operating system doesn’t start. If the Windows installer can’t create this 
partition, you lose valuable Windows 8.1 features.
•฀
You have UEFI firmware on your computer: Windows 8.1 might create support and rescue 
partitions in addition to the System Reserved partition. If you have a Windows 7 computer that 
you are upgrading to Windows 8.1, performing a format and clean installation is the only way 
to create these additional troubleshooting and rescue partitions.
Acquiring Windows 8.1
Windows 8.1 is the first version of the operating system that you can purchase online direct from Microsoft. You have 
the choice of downloading the operating system or ordering it on a DVD. You can purchase the operating system as 
a download on an existing computer that is running another version of Windows. There is no requirement, however, 
to install the downloaded copy of Windows 8.1 on the computer you download it to; you can install it on another 
computer if you want.
If you choose to purchase a packaged DVD product, you can skip ahead to the “Preparing to Install Windows 8.1” 
section in this chapter.
Downloading Windows 8.1
The Windows 8.1 Upgrade Assistant is at http://www.microsoftstore.com. It helps you through the process of 
downloading and paying for your new copy of Windows 8.1. At the end of the process, it presents you with several 
options (see Figure 15-1).

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
522
When you download Windows 8.1, you should keep a copy of the installer because you never know when you 
might need to reinstall it. When you are prompted to Install by creating media, this is exactly the option you should 
choose because it gives you physical media that you can safely store in case you need it.
You can create this media on a USB flash drive or an ISO file that can be burned to DVD (see Figure 15-2).  
I strongly recommend that you choose the ISO file option to create an installer file that can be used later because the 
ISO file can later be burned to a DVD or copied to a USB flash drive (I will show you how to do this shortly). If you 
create a USB flash drive, you can’t ever use that flash drive for anything else unless you want to delete the copy of the 
Windows 8.1 installer that is on it. The ISO image file is saved to your computer for later use.
Figure 15-1. Using the Windows 8.1 Upgrade Assistant to purchase Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
523
The other important part of this purchasing process is to keep a safe record of your Windows 8.1 product key, 
which is displayed in the Windows 8.1 Upgrade Assistant. You should always keep a record of it in a safe place with 
your installation media.
Once the installation media is created, you can install Windows in place or from a restart. I will show you how to 
do this later in this chapter.
Creating Bootable Media from a Windows 8.1 ISO File
Once you have created your Windows 8.1 ISO file, you will want to create bootable media from it by using either a 
DVD or a USB flash drive. The easiest way to do this—the way that’s supported in every edition of Windows—is  
by downloading the Windows 7 USB/DVD Download Tool. You can search for it online or get it directly from  
http://www.microsoftstore.com/store/msstore/html/pbPage.Help_Win7_usbdvd_dwnTool.
This tool allows you to burn a DVD of an ISO image file or copy it to a USB flash drive (see Figure 15-3). It first 
asks you to select the ISO image file you have downloaded and then it prompts you to create an installer on a USB 
device or a DVD.
Figure 15-2. Choosing where to create your bootable installation media

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
524
If you are using Windows 7 and want to burn a DVD of your Windows 8.1 installer, you can double-click the  
ISO file in Windows Explorer to open a dedicated DVD burning tool. This option might be quicker and easier for  
some people.
Preparing to Install Windows 8.1
After you download or buy a retail copy of Windows 8.1, or if you need to reinstall it, the process varies, depending on 
whether you are upgrading an existing Windows installation or performing a clean installation. If you are upgrading, 
the process depends on the version of Windows from which you are upgrading.
The options that present themselves to you therefore can vary quite considerably, so in this section, I’ll show you 
what those options are and how the installation will vary depending on how you choose to perform it. I’ll also help 
you make sure that the installation you perform is stable and reliable.
Upgrading from Windows XP
Unlike Windows 7, Windows 8.1 does support a direct upgrade path for users of Windows XP, although you can’t 
transfer your programs, user accounts, and settings. The upgrade process only enables you to migrate your personal 
files and documents to the new operating system (see Figure 15-4).
Figure 15-3. The Windows 7 USB/DVD Download Tool

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
525
The reason you can’t upgrade your full Windows XP installation to Windows 8.1 is because Windows XP and 
Windows 8.1 are based on completely different core code (the OS kernel) and are largely incompatible. When 
Microsoft migrated Windows to a new kernel with Vista, many Windows XP features became obsolete as they were 
replaced by newer, faster, and more efficient features. This is the primary reason for software incompatibilities with XP 
software. If you want to upgrade from Windows XP to Windows 8.1, you have to reinstall all your software afterward.
Note
 
■
 Some software packages never run happily in Windows 8.1, not even in compatibility mode. To use older 
 software in Windows 8.1, you may need to install it in a  (VM). I show you how to do this in Chapter 14.
Upgrading from Windows Vista
If you are upgrading to Windows 8.1 from Windows Vista, you may be surprised to see that you still can’t migrate your 
software to the new OS. Why not? After all, I did state in the last section that Microsoft moved to a new core kernel 
with Windows Vista and that this is what makes XP software incompatible.
Figure 15-4. Upgrading from Windows XP

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
526
This limitation may seem all the more unusual because you could migrate software when upgrading from Vista 
to Windows 7. However, parts of the core kernel changed during Windows 7’s tenure, and those changes have carried 
over into Windows 8.1. To avoid any risk of problems due to software trying to call Windows Vista functions, Microsoft 
has disallowed software migration from Vista to Windows 8.1.
In Figure 15-5, the upgrade path from Windows Vista allows you to migrate your personal files and Windows 
Settings. This makes the process of configuring Windows 8.1 simpler and quicker.
Figure 15-5. Upgrading from Windows Vista
Upgrading from Windows 7
It is only when upgrading from Windows 7 that you can actually migrate all your software to the new OS. Windows 7 
and Windows 8.1 are similar in many ways, but this doesn’t mean that software incompatibilities don’t appear. I have 
encountered a couple of software packages that worked fine in Windows 7, but that were buggy or produced errors 
when ported to Windows 8.1.
As you can see in Figure 15-6, the Windows 8.1 installer gives you the options when upgrading from Windows 7 to 
migrate all your Windows settings, personal files, and apps (for this, read desktop software) or just your personal files.

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
527
Moving from 32-bit (x86) to 64-bit (x64)
If you are currently running a 32-bit (x86) version of Windows, either because you’re using Windows XP (in which the 
64-bit version was withdrawn some years ago), or you’re using the 32-bit version of Vista or Windows 7 and you want 
to upgrade to the 64-bit version of Windows 8.1, there are some things you should know.
First and most important, you simply can’t upgrade any 32-bit version of Windows to the 64-bit version, not with 
XP, Vista, or even Windows 7; the installer simply doesn’t support it (see Figure 15-7).
Figure 15-6. Upgrading from Windows 7

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
528
You can’t upgrade because the differences between the 32-bit and 64-bit versions of Windows are very 
pronounced, not the least of which is with the hardware driver support, for which the x86 and x64 drivers are very 
different from one another.
This means that if you want to move to a 64-bit version of Windows 8.1, perhaps because you have already 
upgraded the memory in your computer to more than 4 GB (including your graphics memory), you have to reformat 
your hard disk and perform a clean installation of Windows 8.1.
This 4 GB memory limit is important because it does include your graphics memory. Let’s look at an example. 
Your computer has three 1 GB memory cards installed, and your graphics card has a memory standing at just 512 MB 
(0.5 GB). In this situation, the 32-bit version of Windows happily sees all 3.5 GB of your memory.
If you upgrade the graphics card, though, to one with 2 GB of installed memory, you have a total of 5 GB. Windows 
discards your memory in chunks of entire memory cards, so the total amount of memory your PC sees is only two of 
the three 1 GB memory cards on your motherboard (in some configurations, it might see only one of them!)
In this circumstance, the only way to see above the 4 GB memory ceiling is to install the 64-bit version of 
Windows 8.1, which can see all your installed memory.
Figure 15-7. You can’t upgrade from a 32-bit version of Windows to a 64-bit version

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
529
Windows 8.1 Minimum Hardware Requirements
If you have an older computer, you might wonder whether Windows 8.1 will run on your computer. The good news is 
that the minimum hardware requirements for Windows 8.1 are very low, meaning that it runs on most computers:
•฀
Processor: 1 GHz or faster
•฀
Memory: Minimum 1 GB (32-bit) or 2 GB (64-bit)
•฀
Hard Disk: 16 GB free (32-bit) or 20 GB free (64-bit)
•฀
Graphics: DirectX 9 with WDDM 1.0 or higher driver
•฀
Resolution: 1024×768 pixels for Start screen and apps
Bear in mind that these are the minimum requirements. You should not expect the full Windows 8.1 experience 
to run on older hardware as well as it does on a newer computer.
Installing Windows 8.1 on Netbooks
It is very important to carefully consider whether to install Windows 8.1 on your netbook. Windows 8.1 Start screen 
and apps don’t work on screens with a vertical resolution of fewer than 768 pixels. Many netbooks, especially older 
ones that originally shipped with Windows XP, have a vertical resolution of only 600 pixels.
Tip
 
■
 You can check the vertical screen resolution on your netbook in Windows XP by right-clicking in an empty space 
on the desktop and then clicking Properties in the options. Then click the Settings tab and check whether the second 
number in the Screen Resolution section is 768 or higher. In Windows Vista, right-click in an empty space on the desktop, 
select Personalize from the options, and click Display Settings. Check whether the second number in the current  
resolution is 768 or higher. With Windows 7, right-click in an empty space on the desktop and select Screen Resolution  
to show the current resolution of your monitor.
Upgrading to Windows 8.1
There are several ways to upgrade Windows 8.1, but you might find that you upgrade Windows 8 from the Windows 
store. This will happen if you are already using Windows 8 on your PC. You will be alerted when an update such as 
Windows 8.1 is available for your PC when you visit the store (see Figure 15-8. Installing Windows 8.1 in this way 
doesn’t remove any of your apps, user accounts, settings, or desktop programs. Everything remains exactly as it was 
before the upgrade.

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
530
Clicking the Store tile for the Windows 8.1 update displays information about the OS update and what it means 
for you and your PC (see Figure 15-9).
Figure 15-9. The Windows Store tells you what the upgrade will involve
Figure 15-8. Windows 8.1 is installed from the Windows Store on existing Windows 8 systems

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
531
The installation of Windows 8.1 occurs as it would with any app (see Figure 15-10), though if you are installing 
Windows 8.1 on an ultrabook, laptop, or tablet PC, make sure that it is plugged into the main electricity before 
committing to the installation because it can take some considerable time.
Figure 15-10. Windows 8.1 installs from the store like any app
You can also upgrade to Windows 8.1 from a DVD or USB flash drive, or through a digital download. All operate 
in the same way once started, except that if you choose to download your copy of Windows 8, this download  
(between 3.5 GB and 4.5 GB) has to complete before the upgrade process can begin. When the download completes, 
you are asked if you want to make a bootable DVD or USB flash drive from it, and you need to supply this item yourself. 
You can install Windows 8.1 directly, but I always recommend making a backup copy of the installer onto a DVD or a 
flash drive because you never know when you will have to reinstall Windows 8.1 or need to perform a clean installation. 
You can later capture it as an ISO file for backup using software such as WinISO (http://www.winiso.com).
 
1. 
When you first start the upgrade process from a DVD or USB flash drive, you are asked 
if you want to get updates to the installer online. This is important and very worthwhile 
because it includes stability updates and new hardware drivers that can make the 
installation process more stable and robust (see Figure 15-11).

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
532
 
2. 
After this process completes, you are asked to enter your product key for Windows 8.1 and 
accept the license agreement.
 
3. 
Next, you are asked what you want to keep from your previous installation. As I showed 
you earlier, you can choose files, settings, and apps (programs); only files and settings; 
only files; or if you want a clean installation, nothing at all (see Figure 15-12). This screen 
varies, depending on the version of Windows you are upgrading from.
Figure 15-11. Getting the latest updates to the Windows 8.1 installer

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
533
 
4. 
The Windows 8.1 upgrade advisor runs automatically as part of the installer and informs 
you of any incompatible software and hardware (see Figure 15-13). As part of the upgrade 
process, it might recommend that you uninstall some hardware or software, that some 
hardware of software might need manual updating after the upgrade, or that some 
software or hardware might not function correctly or work at all.
Figure 15-12. Choosing what to keep from your previous installation of Windows

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
534
Note
 
■
 Don’t be concerned if the upgrade advisor says you should uninstall your antivirus software. Windows 8.1 
includes antivirus software by default.
Note that the Windows 8.1 installer might not let you proceed with the upgrade unless certain tasks that it deems 
important have been completed, such as uninstalling software identified as incompatible with Windows 8.1.  
The installer helps you uninstall this software.
Once these steps are complete, Windows 8.1 installs. You can’t use your computer during this time, and the 
computer might restart several times during installation.
Performing a Clean Install
To perform a clean installation of Windows 8.1, you need to start your computer from the boot media that you created 
(either a DVD or USB flash drive) or from your retail copy of Windows 8.1 (note that you don’t receive an installation 
disc with a new computer that has Windows 8.1 preloaded onto it). You may need to enter the boot menu of your 
computer (normally F12 when you start the PC, though this may differ on your computer) to tell the PC to start from 
the media that you have inserted.
 
1. 
When the Windows installer starts, you are asked to enter the country and language you 
want to install (see Figure 15-14). Click Next when you have selected the appropriate options.
Figure 15-13. The Windows 8.1 upgrade advisor

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
535
Note
 
■
 The Windows 8.1 installer fully supports touch interfaces to make it easy to install on tablet computers.
 
2. 
The next screen is important. Because you are installing Windows 8.1, click the Install Now 
button in the center of the screen (see Figure 15-15). In the bottom right of the screen, 
notice Repair Your Computer, which can be useful if you later need to rescue and repair a 
faulty Windows 8.1 installation.
Figure 15-14. Installing Windows 8.1 from bootable media

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
536
 
3. 
At the next screen you can upgrade your current copy of Windows to Windows 8.1 through 
the bootable installer. This feature is most useful when rescuing a faulty installed copy of 
Windows 8.1 because it creates a completely new and fresh (i.e., without your software and 
apps installed) installation of Windows 8.1. It also places your old installation, complete 
with all your files, in a Windows.old folder so that you can save them.
To perform a clean installation of Windows 8.1, click Custom: Install Windows Only 
(Advanced), as shown in Figure 15-16.
Figure 15-15. Click Install Now to install Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
537
 
4. 
You are presented with a list of hard disks and partitions in your computer on which you 
can install Windows 8.1 (see Figure 15-17). On most computers, you likely see only a 
single disk listed, which is where you will install Windows 8.1. You should choose to install 
Windows 8.1 on Disc 0 (zero) because this is where the System Reserved partition with 
the OS boot files will be placed. If you have UEFI firmware in your computer, the Windows 
8.1 installer will possibly create other startup and rescue partitions as well). The installer 
always places them on Drive 0 (zero).
Figure 15-16. You can also upgrade to Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
538
 
5. 
The installation process is completely automated from here. You aren’t required to 
do anything with your computer until Windows 8.1 is completely installed. When this 
happens, you are asked to choose the color scheme for Windows and to either log in to the 
computer with a Microsoft account or to create an account.
Best Practices for Installing Windows 8.1
Installing your copy of Windows on Drive 0 is important because in computers with more than one physical hard disk, 
you might find that your second hard disk, which contains your files, might read as Drive 0 in the drives list (because of 
the motherboard socket you plugged it in to), and your Windows drive might read as Drive 1.
Tip
 
■
 In a tower PC with more than one physical hard disk, unplugging all but the Windows disk drive before installing 
Windows 8.1 mitigates any problems associated with the Windows and System Reserved partitions ending up on different 
disks. It ensures that the System Reserved partition is on the correct disk.
Figure 15-17. Choose what hard disk on which you want to install Windows 8.1

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
539
The problem arises when you come to create a system backup of your computer. With the System Reserved 
partition always residing as the first partition on Drive 0, if that hard disk already has files on it, Windows will insist 
that you back up the entire files disk as part of your Windows image backup.
Note
 
■
 Windows Vista and Windows 7 created a System Reserved partition of 100 MB in size. Windows 8.1 contains 
more tools and creates a System Reserved partition of 350 MB in size. If you have a System Reserved partition that is too 
small, Windows might not allow you to create an image backup.
The upshot is that your image backup file can be huge, and when you restore it, it is an older copy of your files, 
wiping out all your new and updated files.
You should also make sure that you install your copy of Windows 8.1 onto Drive 0. With the System Reserved 
partition always on Drive 0, if your Windows installation is on another hard disk—let’s say Drive 1—removal or failure 
of Drive 0 (where the boot menu resides) will result in a Windows installation that won’t start and that will be very 
difficult to repair.
In the bottom half of the Where Do You Want to Install Windows? page is Drive Options (Advanced), which 
provides the basic partitioning and formatting tools you need to create a clean installation of Windows 8.1  
successfully (see Figure 15-18).
Figure 15-18. Disk management tools

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
540
Using these tools, you can perform the following actions:
•฀
Delete an existing partition on a hard disk
•฀
Format a partition or disk
Create a 
•฀
New partition on a physical hard disk
Join partitions to create an 
•฀
Extended partition
Sometimes, however, your hard disks don’t appear in the drives list in the Windows installer. This happens if 
your computer contains RAID drives, but you can specifically load the driver required for the Windows 8.1 installer to 
be able to work with those disks if they don’t appear in the drives list by clicking Load Driver. You need a copy of the 
driver on CD, DVD, or a USB flash drive.
My best recommendation is to always delete your existing Windows partition and create a new one where one 
already exists (i.e., if you used another version of Windows on the computer). You should do this because the boot and 
system partitions that Windows 8.1 creates are different from the ones used by Windows 7 and Windows Vista, and if 
you are upgrading from Windows XP, you don’t have these partitions—but you do need them.
On some computers, the Windows 8.1 installer might create four of these partitions, and you need to make 
sure that there is space for them. The reason you want these partitions is because they contain all the tools you need 
to troubleshoot and repair Windows 8.1 when it doesn’t start. If you don’t allow the installer to create them, the 
troubleshooting and repair tools might not work when you need them.
If you have enough hard disk space, I also recommend that you create two (preferably three) partitions so that 
you can keep your Windows installation and your files (and optionally a backup copy of Windows) separate. Moving 
your files away from Windows 8.1 in this way helps make sure that if something goes wrong with Windows 8.1 and you 
need to reinstall it, there is no question about the integrity of your files.
I recommend that you create partitions. The size of your main Windows partition varies, depending on how you 
use your PC. The following are some recommended Windows 8.1 partition sizes for different types of users:
•฀
General business user: 50 GB (enter 51200 in the partition size box)
•฀
General home user: 50 GB to 100 GB (51200 to 102400)
•฀
Power user: 100 GB to 200 GB (102400 to 204800)
•฀
Developer: 100 GB to 200 GB (102400 to 204800)
•฀
Gamer: 100 GB to 300 GB (102400 to 307200)
If you create a separate backup partition for a Windows image backup, it should be the same size as your 
Windows 8.1 partition, or double the size if you want to keep both a System Image Backup and a custom Refresh 
image. You should also add any additional space you need for a backup copy of the hardware drivers and software 
installers for your computer, perhaps an extra 5 GB.
Finally, the files drive should occupy all the remaining space. Obviously, this setup is suitable only for computers 
with very large hard disks of at least 1 TB, and preferably 1.5 TB or more. You might be installing Windows 8.1 on a 
tablet or ultrabook with precious little storage space, perhaps just a 64 GB or 128 GB solid-state drive (SSD). If this is 
the case, you can install Windows 8.1 into a 30 GB partition and save the rest for files, or you can simply create one big 
partition that occupies the entire hard disk. If you do this, however, you should make sure that you keep regular  
up-to-date backups of all your files and documents.
Note
 
■
 Many enthusiasts and power users keep a copy of their hardware drivers handy on a hard disk, either internal 
or USB-attached. You can install all the hardware drivers in this folder at one time, as long as all the files are in the same 
folder and not located in subfolders through a Command Prompt (Admin) control. Type pnputil –a <DriversFolder>/*.inf 
in the command window.

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
541
Transferring Files and Documents from an Old Computer
The Windows 8.1 install disc contains a tool called Windows Easy Transfer (see Figure 15-19) that is used to transfer 
files and settings from one physical computer to another. This tool is extremely useful if you bought a new computer 
with Windows 8.1 preinstalled.
Figure 15-19. Windows Easy Transfer
Put your Windows 8.1 install DVD or USB flash drive into your old computer running Windows XP, Vista, or 
Windows 7. From its Support/MigWiz folders, run the migsetup program.
This tool allows you to easily transfer files and settings from your old computer in a variety of ways (see Figure 15-20):

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
542
•฀
A dedicated Easy Transfer cable: You can buy these cables at computer stores and online. 
It is a physical cable that connects the two computers, requiring them to be physically close 
together.
•฀
Transfer your files over a home or work network: Bear in mind that this is significantly faster 
when both computers are connected to the network with a physical cable than it is over Wi-Fi.
•฀
Via an external hard disk or USB flash drive: This option has the added benefit of giving you 
a backup copy of your files.
After you select your preferred transfer option, you need to specify whether it is the old PC or the new 
(destination) PC (see Figure 15-21).
Figure 15-20. Select how you want to transfer your files

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
543
If you are transferring files and settings across your home or work network, you are given a code and asked to 
run Windows Easy Transfer on your new Windows 8.1 computer (see Figure 15-22). You can find it by searching for 
transfer at the Start screen. You need to specify on the Windows 8.1 computer that you are receiving files over your 
network and input the code provided on the old computer.
Figure 15-21. You need to specify which PC you are using
Figure 15-22. You can transfer your files over a network connection

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
544
Click Next. You are then asked what you want to transfer and are told how much space is required (see Figure 15-23). 
This space requirement could run to many gigabytes, so a USB hard disk is a good idea if you have one handy because 
it is a much faster way to transfer files than across a network.
Figure 15-23. You can choose what to transfer
Windows Easy Transfer now begins the process of copying your files. To accept imported files on your new 
Windows 8.1 computer, you have to be running Windows Easy Transfer on that computer. Search for transfer at the 
Start screen to find it.
When you are running Windows Easy Transfer on the destination PC, you are asked whether you have already 
created a files backup (see Figure 15-24). If you click No, Windows Easy Transfer terminates; if you click Yes, a dialog 
opens and asks you to specify the location for the files. This works differently than if you are transferring your files 
across a network

CHAPTER 15 ■ INSTALLING WINDOWS 8.1 ON YOUR COMPUTER 
545
Figure 15-24. You are asked if you have already created a files backup
The files transfer process is then automated, but might take some time if you have a great many files to transfer. 
For this reason, if you are transferring from or to an ultrabook, laptop or tablet, you should make sure it is plugged into 
mains electricity during the process.
Summary
Migrating from an earlier version of Windows, even Windows XP, is simpler with Windows 8.1 than with any other 
version of the operating system, and moving your files and documents is relatively straightforward, even from a 
completely different computer.
Microsoft worked hard with Windows 8.1 to make the installation experience as straightforward as possible and it 
has succeeded with Windows 8.1 in ways that make moving to this OS a joy.
When it comes to the choice between performing an upgrade or a clean install, it’s relevant only when migrating 
from Windows 7 or reinstalling Windows 8.1. This is because you can’t bring your software and hardware drivers from 
Windows XP or Windows Vista, and you also can’t bring any problems associated with them.
Some tools are relatively hidden—such as Windows Easy Transfer, which is an excellent tool that supports new 
features, including the transfer of files across a network.
Then there are the advanced administrator tools, such as Unattended Setup and SysPrep. These tools, especially 
when coupled with the Windows Automated Installation Kit, make very powerful ways to deploy Windows 8.1. If you 
are interested in learning about Windows deployment, this is a great next read for you. And you can find out about 
creating unattended Windows 8.1 installations at technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ff699026.aspx.
As for this book, I have covered all you need to be able to really come to grips with the power that lies under the 
surface of Windows 8.1, from ways to customize the look and feel of the OS to hidden tools and utilities that can make 
you more productive.
I hope you have found this book useful and informative.
—Mike Halsey

547
APPENDIX A
Windows 8 Touch Gestures
For many people, touch will be new to their Windows experience. In many ways, such as with tapping and double-
tapping, touch operates in the same way you would expect a mouse click to work.  Table A-1 contains a complete list of 
the touch gestures you can use with Windows 8. Those who already have been using touch will be pleased to hear that 
the gestures haven’t changed. Some new gestures have been added, though, and those are included in the table.
Table A-1. Windows 8 Touch Gestures
Touch Gesture
Command
Action
Tap
Click
Tap the screen with your finger.
Double tap
Double-click
Tap the screen twice in the same place with your 
finger.
Drag vertically
Scroll
Touch the screen and vertically drag your finger 
upward or downward.
Drag horizontally
Drag selection
Touch the screen and horizontally drag your finger 
left or right.
Press and hold
Right-click
Touch and hold the screen with one finger while 
tapping it briefly with another finger.
Zoom
Zoom
Move two fingers apart (zoom in) or toward each 
other (zoom out).
Rotate
Rotate
Move two fingers in a circular motion.
Two-finger tap
Programmable in some apps
Tap the screen with two fingers.
Flick
Pan up, down, back, forward
Flick your finger up, down, left, or right on the screen.

APPENDIX A ■ WINDOWS 8 TOUCH GESTURES
548
Narrator Touch Gestures
The Accessibility features in Windows have long been a strength of the operating system, but with Windows 8, they 
have been extended to add support for touch gestures that work with the Narrator. To use Table A-2, the touch gesture 
listed in the left column will execute the corresponding command in the right column.
Table A-2. Narrator Touch Gestures
Touch Gesture
Command
Tap or drag
Read aloud the item under your finger.
Double tap
or
Hold with one finger and tap with a second finger
Activate an item (equivalent to a single mouse 
click).
Triple tap
or
Hold with one finger and double-tap with a second finger
Select an item.
Flick left or right
Move to the next or previous item.
Hold with one finger and two-finger-tap with additional 
fingers
Drag an item.
Two-finger tap
Stop the Narrator speaking.
Two-finger swipe
Scroll.
Three-finger tap
Show or hide the Narrator settings window.
Three-finger swipe up
Read the current window.
Three-finger swipe down
Read from the current text location.
Three-finger swipe left or right
Tab forward and backward.
Four-finger tap
Show all commands for current item.
Four-finger triple tap
Show the Narrator commands list.
Four-finger swipe up or down
Enable/disable semantic zoom(semantic zoom 
provides a view of large blocks of content; on a 
web site, for example).

549
APPENDIX B
Windows 8 Shortcut Keys
Table B-1. Keys with No Modifier
Key
Function
Space
Select or clear active check box.
Tab
Move forward through options.
Esc
Cancel.
NumLock
Hold for 5 seconds: ToggleKeys.
Del
Delete file (File Explorer).
Left arrow
Open previous menu or close submenu.
Right arrow
Open next menu of open submenu.
F1
Display help (if available).
F2
Rename item.
F3
Search for next instance in a search.
F4
Display items in active list.
F5
Refresh.
Table B-2. Windows Logo Key Combinations
Windows Logo Key+
Function
No other key
Toggle Start screen/last app.
PrtScr
Capture screenshot (saved in Pictures as screenshot.png, 
screenshot(1).png, screenshot(2).png, etc.).
C
Open the charms.
D
Show desktop.
E
Open File Explorer.
F
Open files in Search charm (+Ctrl to find computers on a 
network).
(continued)

APPENDIX B ■ WINDOWS 8 SHORTCUT KEYS
550
Windows Logo Key+
Function
H
Open Share charm.
I
Open Settings charm.
J
Switch focus between snapped and larger apps.
K
Open Devices charm.
L
Switch users (lock computer if on a domain).
M
Minimize all windows (desktop).
O
Change lock-screen orientation.
P
Open the second screen and projection options.
Q
Open Search charm.
R
Open Run dialog box.
T
Set focus on taskbar and cycle through running desktop 
programs.
U
Open the Ease of Access Center.
V
Cycle through notifications (+Shift to go backward).
W
Go to Settings in the Search charm.
X
Quick-link power-users’ commands (opens Windows 
Mobility Center, if present).
Z
Open the App bar.
1-9
Go to the app at the position on the taskbar.
+
Zoom in (Magnifier).
-
Zoom out (Magnifier).
, (comma)
Peek at the desktop.
. (period)
Snap an app to the right (+Shift snap to the left).
Enter
Narrator (+Alt to open Windows Media Center, if installed).
Spacebar
Switch input language and keyboard layout.
Tab
Cycle through app history (use Ctrl to use arrow keys).
Esc
Exit the Magnifier.
Home
Minimize nonactive desktop windows.
PgUp
Move Start screen to left monitor.
PgDn
Move Start screen to right monitor.
Left arrow
Snap desktop window to the left (+Shift to move to left 
monitor).
Table B-2. (continued)
(continued)

APPENDIX B ■ WINDOWS 8 SHORTCUT KEYS
551
Windows Logo Key+
Function
Right arrow
Snap desktop windows to the right (+Shift to move to right 
monitor).
Up arrow
Maximize desktop window (+Shift to keep width).
Down arrow
Restore/Minimize desktop window (+Shift to keep width).
F1
Open Windows Help and Support.
Table B-2. (continued)
Table B-3. Ctrl Key Combinations
Ctrl+
Function
Mouse wheel
Desktop: Change icon size, Start screen: Zoom in/out
A
Select All
C
Copy
E
Select search box (Explorer)
N
New window (Explorer)
R
Refresh
V
Paste
W
Close current window (Explorer)
X
Cut
Y
Redo
Z
Undo
Esc
Start screen
NumLock
Copy
Left arrow
Previous word
Right arrow
Next word
Up arrow
Previous paragraph
Down arrow
Next paragraph
F4
Close active document

APPENDIX B ■ WINDOWS 8 SHORTCUT KEYS
552
Table B-5. Shift Key Combinations
Shift+
Function
No other key
Five times: Sticky keys
Tab
Move backward through options
Esc
Open Task Manager
NumLock
Paste
Left arrow
Select a block of text
Right arrow
Select a block of text
Up arrow
Select a block of text
Down arrow
Select a block of text
Table B-7. Alt + Shift Key Combinations
Alt + Shift+
Function
PrtScr
Left Alt + Left Shift + PrtScr: High contrast
NumLock
Left Alt + Left Shift + NumLock: Mouse keys
Table B-6. Ctrl + Alt Key Combinations
Ctrl + Alt+
Function
D
Toggle Docked mode (Magnifier)
I
Invert colors (Magnifier)
L
Toggle Lens mode (Magnifier)
Tab
Switch between apps using arrow keys
Table B-4. Alt Key Combinations
Alt+
Function
D
Select Address bar (Explorer)
Enter
Open Properties dialog box
Spacebar
Open Shortcut menu
Tab
Switch between apps
Left arrow
Move to previous folder (Explorer)
Up arrow
Go up one level (Explorer)
F4
Close active item or app

553
APPENDIX C
Advanced Query Syntax for Search
In addition to the search methods that I detailed in Chapter 5, there is a large volume of Advanced Query Syntax 
options that you can use when searching (especially for files) in Windows 8. These options are available both at the 
Start screen and in File Explorer.
Data Store Location
Table C-1. Data Store Location
Restrict Search by Data Store
Use
Example
Desktop
desktop
Gilbert store:desktop
Files
files
Mike store:files
Outlook
outlook
Jed store:outlook
A Specific Folder
foldername or in
foldername:MyDocuments or in:MyVideos
Table C-2. Common File Kinds
Restrict Search by File Kind
Use
Example
Calendar
calendar
kind:=calendar
Communication
communication
kind:=communication
Contact
contact
kind:=contact
Document
document
kind:=document
E-mail
email
kind:=email
RSS Feed
feed
kind:=feed
Folder
folder
kind:=folder
Game
game
kind:=game
(continued)
Common File Kinds

APPENDIX C ■ ADVANCED QUERY SYNTAX FOR SEARCH
554
Properties by File Kind
Restrict Search by File Kind
Use
Example
Instant Messenger conversations
instant message
kind:=instant message
Journal
journal
kind:=journal
Link
link
kind:=link
Movie
movie
kind:=movie
Music
music
kind:=music
Notes
note
kind:=note
Picture
picture
kind:=picture
Playlist
playlist
kind:=playlist
Program
program
kind:=program
Recorded TV
tv
kind:=tv
Saved Search
saved search
kind:=saved search
Task
task
kind:=task
Video
video
kind:=video
Web History
web history
kind:=web history
Table C-2. (continued)
Table C-3. Properties by File Kind
Property
Use
Example
Title
title, subject or about
title:“Windows 8”
Status
status
status:pending
Date
date
date:last week
Date modified
datemodified or modified
modified:last week
Importance
importance or priority
importance:high
Deleted
deleted or isdeleted
isdeleted:yes (no)
Is attachment
isattachment
isattachment:yes (no)
To
to or toname
to:mike
Cc
cc or ccname
cc:chris
Company
company
company:Microsoft
Location
location
location:“office”
Category
category
category:pilot
(continued)

APPENDIX C ■ ADVANCED QUERY SYNTAX FOR SEARCH
555
Filter by Size
Property
Use
Example
Keywords
keywords
keywords:“pending”
Album
album
album:“equinoxe”
File name
filename or file
filename:Report
Genre
genre
genre:metal
Author
author or by
author:“Mike Halsey”
People
people or with
with:(jed or gilbert)
Folder
folder, under or path
folder:downloads
File extension
ext or fileext
ext:.txt
Table C-3. (continued)
Table C-4. Filter by Size (Note that the NOT and OR operators here must be in uppercase.)
Size
Use
Example
0KB
empty
size:empty
0 > 10KB
tiny
size:tiny
10KB > 100KB
small
size:small
100KB > 1MB
medium
size:medium
1MB > 16MB
large
size:large
16MB > 128MB
huge
size:huge
> 128MB
gigantic
size:gigantic
Boolean Operators
Table C-5. Boolean Operators (Note that the NOT and OR operators here must be in uppercase.)
Keyword/Symbol
Use
Function
NOT
draft NOT edition
Finds items that contain draft, but not edition.
–
draft –edition
Finds items that contain draft, but not edition.
OR
draft OR edition
Finds items that contain draft or edition.
Quotation marks
“draft edition”
Finds items that contain the exact phrase draft edition.
Parentheses
(draft edition)
Finds items that contain draft and edition in any order.
(continued)

APPENDIX C ■ ADVANCED QUERY SYNTAX FOR SEARCH
556
Boolean Properties
Keyword/Symbol
Use
Function
>
date:>10/23/12
Finds items with a date after October 23, 2012.
size:>500
Finds items with a size greater than 500 bytes.
<
date:<10/23/12
Finds items with a date before October 23, 2012.
size:<500
Finds items with a size less than 500 bytes.
..
date:10/23/12..10/11/12
Finds items with a date beginning on 10/23/12 and 
ending on 10/11/12.
Table C-5. (continued)
Dates
Table C-6. Boolean Properties
Property
Use
Function
is:attachment
draft is:attachment
Finds items that have attachments that contain draft. 
Same as isattachment:no (yes).
isonline:
draft isonline:yes (no)
Finds items that are online and that contain draft.
isrecurring:
draft isrecurring:yes (no)
Finds items that are recurring and that contain draft.
isflagged:
draft isflagged:yes (no)
Finds items that are flagged (Review or Follow up, for 
example) and that contain draft.
isdeleted:
draft isdeleted:yes (no)
Finds items that are flagged as deleted (Recycle Bin or 
Deleted Items, for example) and that contain draft.
iscompleted:
draft iscompleted:yes (no)
Finds items that are not flagged as complete and that 
contain draft.
hasattachment:
draft hasattachment:yes (no)
Finds items containing draft and having attachments.
hasflag:
draft hasflag:yes (no)
Finds items containing draft and having flags.
Table C-7. Dates
Relative to
Use
Function
Day
date:today
Finds items with today’s date.
date:tomorrow
Finds items with tomorrow’s date.
date:yesterday
Finds items with yesterday’s date.
(continued)

APPENDIX C ■ ADVANCED QUERY SYNTAX FOR SEARCH
557
Attachments
Table C-8. Attachments
Property
Use
Example
People
people
people:gilbert
Relative to
Use
Function
Week/Month/Year
date:this week
Finds items with a date falling within the current week.
date:last week
Finds items with a date falling within the previous week.
date:next month
Finds items with a date falling within the upcoming week.
date:last month
Finds items with a date falling within the previous month.
date:this year
Finds items with a date falling within the current year.
date:last year
Finds items with a date falling within the next year.
Table C-7. (continued)
Contacts
Table C-9. Contacts
Property
Use
Example
Job title
jobtitle
jobtitle:author
Instant messaging address
imaddress
imaddress:mike@MVPs.org
Assistant’s phone
assistantsphone
assistantsphone:555-1234
Assistant’s name
assistantname
assistantname:Darren
Profession
profession
profession:designer
Nickname
nickname
nickname:Gilby
Spouse
spouse
spouse:Victoria
Business city
businesscity
businesscity:Seattle
Business postal code
businesspostalcode
businesspostalcode:96487
Business home page
businesshomepage
businesshomepage:www.thelongclimb.com
Callback phone number
callbackphonenumber
callbackphonenumber:555-555-2345
Mobile phone
mobilephone
mobilephone:555-555-2345
Children
children
children:Gilbert
(continued)

APPENDIX C ■ ADVANCED QUERY SYNTAX FOR SEARCH
558
Property
Use
Example
First name
firstname
firstname:Jed
Last name
lastname
lastname:Halsey
Home fax
homefax
homefax:555-555-1234
Manager’s name
managersname
managersname:Tom
Business phone
businessphone
businessphone:555-555-1234
Home phone
homephone
homephone:555-555-1234
Mobile phone
mobilephone
mobilephone:555-555-1234
Office
office
office:sample
Anniversary
anniversary
anniversary:1/8/11
Birthday
birthday
birthday:1/8/11
Web page
webpage
webpage:www.thelongclimb.com
Table C-9. (continued)
Communications
Table C-10. Communications
Property
Use
Example
From
from or organizer
from:Jed
Received
received or sent
sent:yesterday
Subject
subject or title
subject:“Editing Report”
Has attachment
hasattachments, hasattachment
hasattachment:true
Attachments
attachments or attachment
attachment:presentation.ppt
Bcc
bcc, bccname or bccaddress
bcc:Gilbert
Cc address
ccaddress or cc
ccaddress:mike@MVPs.org
Follow-up flag
followupflag
followupflag:2
Due date
duedate or due
due:last week
Read
read or isread
is:read
Is completed
iscompleted
is:completed
Incomplete
incomplete or isincomplete
is:incomplete
Has flag
hasflag or isflagged
has:flag
Duration
duration
duration:> 50

APPENDIX C ■ ADVANCED QUERY SYNTAX FOR SEARCH
559
Calendar
Table C-11. Calendar
Property
Use
Example
Recurring
recurring
recurring:yes (no)
Organizer
organizer, by or from
organizer:Rory
Documents
Table C-12. Documents
Property
Use
Example
Comments
comments
comments:“needs final review”
Last saved by
lastsavedby
lastsavedby:mike
Document manager
documentmanager
documentmanager:mike
Revision number
revisionnumber
revisionnumber:1.0.3
Document format
documentformat
documentformat:MIMETYPE
Date last printed
datelastprinted
datelastprinted:last week
Table C-13. Presentations
Property
Use
Example
Slide count
slidecount
slidecount:>20
Presentations

APPENDIX C ■ ADVANCED QUERY SYNTAX FOR SEARCH
560
Table C-14. Music
Property
Use
Example
Bit rate
bitrate, rate
bitrate:192
Artist
artist, by or from
artist:Lacuna Coil
Duration
duration
duration:3
Album
album
album:“shallow life”
Genre
genre
genre:metal
Track
track
track:12
Year
year
year:> 2006 < 2013
Table C-15. Pictures
Property
Use
Example
Camera make
cameramake
cameramake:sample
Camera model
cameramodel
cameramodel:sample
Dimensions
dimensions
dimensions:8×10
Orientation
orientation
orientation:landscape
Date taken
datetaken
datetaken:yesterday
Width
width
width:1600
Height
height
height:1200
Table C-16. Video
Property
Use
Example
Name
name, subject
name:“Family holiday in Germany”
Ext
ext, fileext
ext:.avi
Music
Pictures
Video

APPENDIX D
Upgrading Your Computer
A PC isn’t just for Christmas, it’s for life. You’ll want to make sure that your computer lasts for as long as possible 
because, let’s be honest, these things are expensive and you can’t afford to be buying a new one before the current 
machine is out of its warranty period.
In this appendix, I’ll talk you through not only the options for upgrading your copy of Windows 8 and its features, 
but also upgrading your entire PC—and even buying a new one. It’s most likely you’ll get Windows 8 with a new 
computer because it is the cheapest way to buy a copy of the operating system.
Choosing a New Windows 8 Computer
I went through the specific hardware requirements for Windows 8 in Chapter 15, but most computers you buy today 
can run Windows 8 with no problems whatsoever. This makes it more important to know what you need to buy, so 
that you don’t get ripped off by unscrupulous salespeople when choosing and paying for a new computer.
I’ve split this section into three categories: desktop PCs (including all-in-ones), laptops, and ultrabooks and 
tablets.
Do You Need a New Computer?
So do you need a new computer anyway? Well, if you are using a computer that’s running a copy of Windows Vista 
or Windows 7, then you probably do not need a new one because the hardware requirements for Windows 8 are the 
same and it’ll run fine.
The only considerations you need to think about here are
1. 
Do you want to take advantage of the new multitouch technology in Windows 8?
2. 
Is your current computer more than four years old?
If the answer to either one of these is yes, then it could be the right time to buy a new computer. Any computer 
more than four years old is more prone to failure than you might like, and the new touch technology in Windows 8 
enhances usability considerably. Also, if you have a laptop more than three years old, I recommend replacing it.
Remember that if you buy a new PC, your copy of Windows 8 is effectively free. That $500 budget-computer the 
salesman tried to steer you away from will probably be perfectly good for years to come.
Choosing the Right Desktop PC
When it comes to buying either a desktop PC, by which I mean a separate tower and monitor, purchasers have 
traditionally had the hardest time avoiding over-zealous salespeople. “You want to edit photographs? Then you’ll 
benefit from having the fastest processor. . .” commonly goes the line.
561

APPENDIX D ■ UPGRADING YOUR COMPUTER
562
The first decision to whether you want a desktop PC or an all-in-one. Both have their advantages and 
disadvantages. 
Desktop PC pros
More easily upgradable by the user
•฀
If one part fails, the entire PC doesn’t need to go for repair
•฀
As you upgrade the PC, old parts can be sold secondhand
•฀
More powerful than all-in-ones, making them more suitable for some tasks
•฀
Desktop PC cons
Can look big and unsightly in the home
•฀
Can be noisy
•฀
All-in-One pros
Stylish and won’t look unsightly in the home
•฀
Commonly very quiet computers
•฀
Only one power lead is required, reducing overall power consumption
•฀
All-in-One cons
If one part fails, the entire PC needs to go out for repair
•฀
With computer parts changing so rapidly these days, you’ll commonly find that all you can ever do with a tower 
is add more memory, add a second hard disk, and change the graphics card. You might be surprised how big a 
difference these changes can make, so if you want a tower case, even a small one, ask to see how easy it is to work with 
the components inside.
Does it have any spare memory sockets? Does it have a spare hard disk bay? If/when the internal power supply 
fails, how easy is it to replace? Is it a custom-made unit (common in small towers) or a standard, big-box PC PSU 
(power supply unit)? Does the PC have any expansion ports, and can these take a graphics card?
Never let the salesperson dictate to you what type of processor you must have to get the maximum benefit. These 
things change often, but Intel’s Core series (which should be around for a few years yet) provide us with a good guide.
If you only want a PC for light e-mail, web browsing, and basic photo editing, then an inexpensive Core i3 is 
a great option. If you want to watch HD video but don’t need a separate graphics card, you’ll want a Core i5 with 
integrated graphics. That leaves the faster Core i7 processors for enthusiasts and those doing design, animation, HD 
video editing, and gaming.
You’d be hard-pressed to find a modern PC with less than 4GB of RAM, but do you need any more than this? For 
very light duties, such as e-mail and Internet browsing, this amount of memory is fine. Hard-core gamers and people 
using their computers for the other intensive tasks I mentioned need more RAM. You might need more if you want to 
edit your digital photos and videos. Go for the fastest speed memory you can get, such as 2 GHz instead of 1,333 MHz, 
because this is where the benefits are.
Next, do you need a solid-state (SSD) hard disk? These are expensive and do not yet come in big capacities at 
an affordable price. If you are a gamer, then you’ll certainly benefit from the extra speed; but with modern games 
occupying 24GB or more or space, and Windows itself requiring up to 40GB with software and temporary files taking 
up room, you won’t get more than two games on an average SSD before filling it up. This doesn’t give you space for 
any of your files and documents.
If you use a mechanical hard disk, try to get a 7,200 rpm (revolutions per minute) drive, which operates faster 
than the 5,400 rpm hard disks.
You should only buy a dedicated graphics card if you have to do thoroughly intensive work such as HD video 
editing, gaming, or graphic design. For general use, including watching Blu-Ray discs, the onboard graphics of a 
modern PC are perfectly adequate.

APPENDIX D ■ UPGRADING YOUR COMPUTER
563
When it comes to choosing between a tower and an all-in-one it’s worth considering where the computer will 
live. If it’s in a home office or a work office, then a tower is fine; but in your living room you may want something less 
intrusive and with a smaller overall profile.
Finally, does the monitor have a touchscreen or a built-in Kinect sensor? With Windows 8, these are two options 
well worth having.
Choosing the Right Laptop or Ultrabook
Many of the considerations for choosing a desktop or an all-in-one PC are the same for laptops and ultrabooks. One 
of the main differences is that whereas you can upgrade the memory and the hard disk in a laptop, you can never 
upgrade an ultrabook. What you get is what you’re stuck with!
There is the consideration of how you will use a mobile computer. If you want to do serious work, storage is 
probably important and thus you should choose a laptop. Ultrabooks are perfect for light use if you enjoy working at 
the local coffee shop or if you want something that you can put in a bag and easily carry.
Get a touchscreen if you can, though it can make some smaller and lighter laptops topple over backward. A big 
factor is in the build quality. Poke the back of the screen to see if you can distort the picture).
Test the keyboard too. Is it genuinely comfortable to type on? Are all the keys a sensible size and in a sensible 
place? Is the touchpad usable? Does the touchpad have additional functions, such as multitouch? A keyboard with a 
backlight is a welcome addition.
More importantly with laptops and ultrabooks is the length of the battery life like and whether the battery be 
changed by the user.
Choosing the Right Tablet
With Windows 8 tablets there is a simple choice: Intel/AMD or ARM? On Intel and AMD chipsets, you’ll have the 
advantages of the full version of Windows, with the full desktop, probably the same power as a modern laptop but 
with poor battery life and a high price.
With an ARM-based tablet, you’ll get fantastic battery life but the machine won’t have anywhere near the power, 
storage, or memory of an Intel/AMD machine, and you won’t be able to install desktop software—ever!
There’s also an argument on what size screen to get with a tablet. With a professional-grade tablet, a screen 
around 12 inches should be the maximum, otherwise it’s far too big to hold and your arm will tire quickly. With an 
ARM tablet, I personally find 10-inch tablets (original iPad size) to be too bulky to carry around and even use casually 
on the sofa. Personally, I prefer smaller 7-inch screens.
Microsoft’s Surface tablets provide a great deal of flexibility. They come with both lower power ARM processors 
that offer long battery life, and Intel processors that provide the full Windows 8 desktop experience. The integration of 
a keyboard in the cover is a bonus that may make a Surface tablet a suitable alternative to an ultrabook.
Windows 8 and OEM Installation Discs
I want to tackle one of the biggest problems facing people buying new computers. This is the omission of a Windows 8 
installation DVD.
Original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) have worked with Microsoft for years now to reduce the number of 
pirated copies of Windows. Most OEMs no longer ship new computers with a copy of the Windows installation DVD; 
instead they provide recovery partitions with a copy of the installed factory image that can be restored if need be.
The downside is that if you need to restore the operating system and you haven’t backed up your files and 
documents (which you have, right!?), then you will almost certainly lose them all because restoring the rescue image 
that came with your computer always destroys any files you have stored on the same partition as your Windows 8 
installation. You will also take the machine back to its default state, reinstall all your software, and reconfigure the 
computer from scratch.

APPENDIX D ■ UPGRADING YOUR COMPUTER
564
Sure, you can create your own custom disc image, even wiping out the factory one to save disc space, but haven’t 
you paid for a copy of Windows, which includes the installation disc?
My best advice here is to always check the manufacturer’s policy regarding installation discs before you buy. 
High-end and business computers commonly come with an option to get the disc, or they provide it automatically, 
but budget computers don’t.
Many OEMs allow you to get a copy of the disc separately for a small shipping fee (usually $10) and many people 
think this is reasonable. If an OEM flatly refuses to provide a disc under any circumstances, however, I recommend 
that you spend your money elsewhere.
Note
 
■
 If you buy a Windows 8 ARM tablet, you can never get an installation disc. This version of the operating system 
is only available to OEMs and is not user-installable.
It is important to note that OEM discs are commonly tied to the computer’s BIOS or UEFI firmware purchased 
with a new PC. This means that if you try to install them on another computer, they will not work.
SHOULD YOU BUY EXTRA SOFTWARE?
The subject of discs brings me to the age-old question of should you buy all the extra software that salespeople 
want you to buy because they make more money on that than on the PC itself. Most often, they try to sell you an 
antivirus suite and a full copy of Microsoft Office saying you need both because what comes with Windows 8 is 
just not good enough.
What comes with Windows 8, both in terms of antivirus and Office, is good enough for most people. The advice 
I’ve included throughout this book helps you get the most out of them. Perhaps you’d find a copy of Adobe 
Photoshop Elements very useful. Windows 8 doesn’t come with DVD or Blu-Ray players, so you might like one of 
these. But antivirus and general Office—forget it!
Adding More Memory to a PC or Laptop
It is widely known and accepted that the quickest, cheapest, and fastest way to get a performance increase out of an 
older computer is to add more memory to it. You always need to make sure that you add the correct type of memory, 
however.
When you open the computer’s case or the panel where the memory is located (see Figures D-1 and D-2), you see 
that the memory sticks have labels on them. The information you need from the labels are memory type (DDR, DDR2, 
DDR3, etc.) and speed in MHz.

APPENDIX D ■ UPGRADING YOUR COMPUTER
565
Figure D-1. Adding memory to a desktop PC
Figure D-2. Adding memory to a laptop or all-in-one PC

APPENDIX D ■ UPGRADING YOUR COMPUTER
566
You should always make sure that hard disks are properly screwed into the computer’s case.
When it comes to laptops and all-in-one PCs, hard disks commonly come in a slide-out caddy (see Figure D-4). 
They are less accessible than the memory in some laptops. You should check your computer’s manual to determine 
whether the hard disk is a user-serviceable component.
These are the two things you need to match when buying additional memory. You also need to check if there are 
any free memory slots. The documentation that came with your motherboard can tell you what types of memory are 
compatible.
There is a clip at each end of the memory slots on a desktop PC. When you insert the memory, you need to make 
certain that these are clipped into place firmly.
When adding memory to a laptop, you also find small clips that need to be firmly fixed in place on either side.
Note
 
■
 If you are using the 32-bit (x86) version of Windows, adding more than 3GB of memory won’t result in greater 
speed because Windows won’t see it. A 32-bit operating system can only see a maximum of 4GB of memory, including 
what’s on the graphics card. You can determine which version of Windows you are using in the System section of the 
Control Panel.
Figure D-3. Adding hard drives to a desktop PC. The drive on the far left is the SSD
Changing or Adding a Hard Disk
In Figure D-3, you see two SATA hard disks and an SSD. The power and data plugs that attach to the back of these 
drives only go in one way. You shouldn’t force them because the plastic on the connectors could snap.

APPENDIX D ■ UPGRADING YOUR COMPUTER
567
Figure D-4. Changing the hard disk in a laptop or all-in-one
Changing or Adding a Graphics Card
At times, people want to change the graphics card on their computers. Doing it is usually a simple matter of pulling 
out the old card and slotting in the new one. Each type of card only fits in the correct slot (see Figure D-5). You should 
check the documentation that came with your motherboard to determine the type of slot it has before buying a 
graphics card.

APPENDIX D ■ UPGRADING YOUR COMPUTER
568
You should always check if your graphics card requires additional power, usually provided by a six- or eight-pin 
plug, because not all power supplies come equipped with these.
If your power supply does not have the relevant plugs (apart from the question of whether you need a new power 
supply to supply the additional current the graphics card requires), you can buy a power lead adapter cable to give 
you the plug you need.
Changing the Power Supply in Your PC
The power supply is commonly the first thing in a PC to fail. The power supply is the big box in the back of the 
computer into which you connect the mains electricity cable. In the desktop PC, a power supply is simple to 
change. The leads coming from it need to be unplugged (make a note of what it’s plugged into so you can easily 
reconnect everything again). There is a power lead for each drive, perhaps one for the graphics card and two for the 
motherboard.
There are four screws on the back of the case, at the top and bottom corners of the power supply (not the ones on 
the fan) that, when undone, allow the old power supply to pop out (see Figure D-6). Screw the new one in place and 
reconnect the wires, and all is done.
Figure D-5. Changing the graphics card in a PC

APPENDIX D ■ UPGRADING YOUR COMPUTER
569
Figure D-6. A power supply
If you have an all-in-one or a small form-factor PC with an internal power supply, you will probably need to take 
the computer to an authorized service center to have it replaced.
Safely Working with Your PC, Laptop, or Tablet
To work safely with your computer when you are adding or changing hardware, you should always follow these 
instructions:
Place the computer on a firm, flat surface.
•฀
Make sure the computer is switched off and unplugged from the main electricity.
•฀
Touch unpainted metal inside the computer’s case to ground yourself and release any static 
•฀
electricity discharge from your body.
Avoid working on nylon carpet or other locations where static electricity build-up is common.
•฀
Upgrading Windows 8
Throughout this book, I have made reference to features that are only available in the Pro edition of the operating 
system, such as Group Policy, or that need to be bought separately, such as Windows Media Center and DVD/Blu-Ray 
playback functionality.
You can add these features to Windows 8 by upgrading it. In the Control Panel, there is an Add Features to 
Windows 8 option (see Figure D-7). You can purchase upgrades and add-ons for the operating system that gives you 
new features.

APPENDIX D ■ UPGRADING YOUR COMPUTER
570
Summary
The instructions on how to upgrade and change the parts inside your computer are fairly short. This is because it is 
actually much simpler and easier to perform these actions than you might think.
On a computer, every cable only plugs into the right thing, so you never need to worry about incorrectly plugging 
in something somewhere it will cause harm or damage. Laptop and all-in-one PC sockets and plugs are all hard-wired 
and fixed in place, so you can only slot in components.
The short instructions prove just how easy it is to upgrade a PC and breathe new life into it.
Figure D-7. Upgrading Windows 8 from the Control Panel

A









Action Center, 34
Administrative tools, 464
computer management console
change drive letter and path, 466
disk management tools, 465
extend and shrink volume, 467
new and delete volume, 467
defragment and optimize  
drives, 468
disk cleanup, 468
event viewer, 469
local security policy, 470
performance monitor, 470–471
resource monitor, 471–472
services, 472–473
system coniguration, 473
system information, 474
task scheduler, 474–475
windows memory diagnostics, 475
Advanced Query Syntax (AQS) search
Attachments, 557
Boolean operators
keyword/symbol, 555–556
properties, 556
Calendar, 559
Communications, 558
Contacts, 557–558
Data Store location, 553
Dates, 556–557
Documents, 559
File kind
restrict search, 553–554
properties, 554–555
Filter by Size, 555
Music, 560
Pictures, 560
Presentations, 559
syntax options
Datemodiied, 169
Kind, 169
Name, 170
Type, 170
Video, 560
Advanced system settings
data execution prevention, 450–451
properties, 447
system protection, 451–452
virtual memory settings, 449–450
visual efects, 448
Alarm app, 39
App bar, 23–24
Apps and live tiles
arranging live tiles into groups, 26
hiding and adding
arrangement types, 29
opening All Apps view, 28
Unpin from Start, 28
zoomed-out view, 30
performing functions, 25
AVG Anti-Virus, 349
B









Battery icon, 34
BitLocker
back up keys, 367
decrypt times, 368
page activation, 366–367
PII, 370
reinstalled Windows 8.1, 367–368
To Go feature, 369–370
TPM chip preparation, 365–366
USB lash drive, 367
Bluetooth, 429
Index
571

C









Calculator app, 40
Calculator program, 47
Calendar app, 40
Camera app, 41
Cathode ray tube (CRT)  
monitors, 290
Character Map, 48
Charms, 30
Compromised web sites, 90
Coniguration and customization
administrative tools (see Administrative tools)
advanced system settings (see Advanced  
system settings)
automatic logging, 477–478
control panel (see Control panel)
hardware devices (see Hardware devices)
lock screen disabling, 476–477
PC settings (see PC settings)
registry hacks, 479
add/remove options, 481
backup, 479
command prompt, 482
copy and move options, 480
defragment option, 481
drive letter, 482
FTP location, 482
shutdown command, 484
super-administrator  
account, 484
taskbar modiication, group  
policy, 484
taskbar program previews, 483
unused items hiding, 484
storage spaces
advantages, 452
RAID system, 454
types, 453
taskbar’s toolbar feature, 478–479
Control panel, 437
AutoPlay options, 440
customization
biometric controls, 439
category view, 438
item list, 438–439
default program settings
ile association, 442
program choosing, 441–442
set program access and computer  
defaults, 442
font management, 443–444
location settings, 445
pen and touch options, 445–446
tablet PC settings, 446
Custom Refresh image, 540
D









Data execution prevention (DEP), 450–451
Date and Time icon, 35
Disk management tools, 539
E









Ease of Access Center
accessible apps, 342
ClearType, 328
control panel, 325
handwriting recognition training, 338–340
magniier controls, 331
Microsoft web site, 342
mouse easier, 332
ilter keys, 338
functions, 336
properties, 337
sticky keys, 338
turn of shake and snap, 336
narrator
keyboard commands, 335
settings window, 333–334
touch gestures, 334
options, 324, 326
personalization, 330
scale options, 328
scaling documents, 329
screen resolution, 327–328
settings, 324
sign-in settings, 327
sounds, 338
speech recognition
commands, 341
on desktop, 340
reference card, 340
zoom gestures, 329
Electronic program guide (EPG), 229
Encrypting File System  
(EFS), 176, 361–364
F









Family Safety, 104
activity report, 105
age ratings system, games, 111
allow and block websites, 109
App Restrictions feature, 112
content iltering, 106
options, 108
Time Restrictions page, 110
web iltering, 108
File Explorer
address bar, 137
copying and moving iles, 145
■฀INDEX
572

customize (navigation pane), 139
hiding ile, 141
main File Explorer pane, 141
navigation pane, 138
Quick Access Toolbar, 136
Ribbon function, 142
Computer tab, 142
ile tab, 142
Home tab, 143
layout section, 145
Share tab, 143
View tab, 144
Ribbon headers, 136
status bar and folder options, 139
G









Games
coniguration, 207
3D gaming, 212
hardware
graphics cards, 211
hard disk, 210
memory, 210
motherboard, 210
processor, 210
ratings, 205
USB controllers, 211
Xbox Games, 204
Xbox SmartGlass, 204
H









Hardware drivers, 454
boll back driver, 462
device manager
hidden devices, 456
hierarchical view, 455
resources, 456
installation
compatible hardware, 459
device driver wizard, 457
driver selection, 458
hardware selection, 460
software updation, 458
Update Driver Software, 457
network connection
dial-up or cable Internet, 464
set up, 463
uninstallation and repairing, 462
Hibernation, 310
Home networks, 60
Hyper-V, 488
additional options, 501
coniguring networking options, 495–496
conirming VM details, 498–499
Hyper-V Manager, 490–491
importing and exporting VM
conirming choices, 512
Hyper-V Management  
console, 507
import wizard, 508
name of VM, 509
storing, 511
straight import or copy, 510
installing OS, 497–498
integrating additional  
services, 512
lunching VM, 500–501
memory, 494–495
New Virtual Machine  
Wizard, 491–492
running VM, 499–500
saving checkpoints, 505
Start screen, 490
types of VM, 493–494
valid license, 488
virtual disk properties, 496–497
virtual switch
connecting VM, 504
creating, 502
Internal and Private options, 503
options, 503
VM name and store  
location, 492–493
Windows 8.1 Pro and Enterprise, 489
I, J









Internet Explorer 11 (IE11)
add-ons, toolbars and search  
providers, 83
App bar, 77
as default browser, 91
on desktop, 79
favorites, 78
features, 78
Flash player software, 77
identifying safe and unsafe  
web sites, 90
options and coniguration, 84
safety and privacy, 85
safety features, 81
SmartScreen ilter, 82
IP address, 131–132
K









Kaspersky Anti-Virus, 350
Keyboard icon, 34
■฀INDEX
573

L









Libraries, Windows 8.1
adding and removing folders, 155
arrange iles, 153
creation, 150
default save location, 156
details pane, 159
display content, 152
File Explorer, 149
folder options
advanced folder view options, 164
irst tab, 161
folder search options, 165
legacy folder view, 162
noteworthy options, 164
managing, 154
network locations-libraries
media center, 157
symbolic link, 156
viewing network drives, 158
tags and ratings, 158
view photos, 154
Windows Photo Gallery, 159
M









Maintaining and backup
computer
Action Center, 378
automated troubleshooters, 381
automatic maintenance system, 380
causes for unstableness, 377
custom Refresh image, 402
desktop, 391
diagnostic startup mode, 407
factory settings, 410
hardware drivers and roll back, 395
hiding and restoring, 395
recovery drive, 398–399
refresh, 400
Safe Mode, 406
service pack, 397
startup menus, 410
startup repair, 407
Task Manager (see Task Manager)
Windows RT, 378
Windows Store, 396
Windows Update settings, 390
iles and folders
encrypt business backups, 412
File Explorer, 424
File History, 413
ile versioning options, 416
Microsoft’s SkyDrive service, 412
new partitions, 420, 422
partition and unpartition disk, 418–419
restore and delete iles, 417
store backups, 411
user folders, 423
Malware, 90
Maps app, 42
Math Input, 48
Microsoft Enterprise Desktop Virtualization  
(MED-V), 489
Microsoft PhotoDraw, 487
MinWin, 1
Modular operating system, 1
Music and Video apps, 42, 47
MKV codec, 226
playlists, 224
Windows Media Player, 223–224
N









Narrator touch gestures, 548
Network attached storage (NAS), 411
Network connections
actions on toolbar, 73
airplane mode, 63
company domain, 66
company workplace, 66
virtual private networks, 68
home networks, 60
InPrivate mode, 89
Internet Explorer 11 (see Internet Explorer 11 (IE11))
Internet threats, 90
mobile broadband networks
access to, 63
connecting to, 65
data usage, 63, 74
Network and Sharing Center, 72
network connection window, 62
network management best practice, 73
network password, 63, 71
public networks, 61
recovering lost web site usernames and  
passwords, 88
setting network sharing and  
security, 60
Wi-Fi networks
hidden Wi-Fi networks, 63
features, 63
securing, 74
wireless network proiles deletion, 70
work networks, 61
Network icon, 34
Norton 349, 360
Norton AntiVirus, 349
Notepad, 48
■฀INDEX
574

O









Organizing and searching, 135
File Explorer
address bar, 137
copying and moving iles, 145
customize (navigation pane), 139
hiding ile, 141
main File Explorer pane, 141
navigation pane, 138
Quick Access Toolbar, 136
Ribbon function, 142
Ribbon headers, 136
status bar and folder options, 140
iles and folders, 148
libraries
creation, 150
default save locations, 156
display content, 152
File Explorer, 149
folder options, 161
managing libraries, 154
network locations-libraries, 156
tags and ratings, 158
Windows Photo Gallery, 159
XTree, 135
Outlook app, 42
P, Q









Paint, 49
Password Reset drive, 98
PC settings
access features, 436
accounts, 431
app sizes, 434
defaults, 434
devices panel
AutoPlay, 431
Bluetooth, 429
corners and edges, 431
default save locations, 430
device manager, 429
display, 428
lock screen, 428
mouse and touchpad, 430
PC info, 431
power and sleep, 431
typing, 430
File History, 437
front screen, 427
network, 436
notiications, 433
privacy, 435
quiet hours feature, 434
recovery, 437
search system, 432
sharing function, 433
SkyDrive ile, 431
time and language, 436
windows update, 436
People app, 44
Personalizing, 271
default File Explorer view, 302
power management options, 306
advanced power settings, 311
maximize battery life, 312
power button, options and password wakeup, 308
power buttons, 312
power buttons toolbar, 319
power plan, 306
sleep and hibernation options, 310
Recycle Bin warnings, 299
region settings
customizing region options, 304
date options, 303
PC settings, 302
Personalizing. See Windows 8.1
Personally identiiable information (PII), 370
Phishing, 90
Photos app, 45
Adobe Photoshop Elements, 217
Adobe Photoshop Express, 217
App bar, 214–215
digital photographs and videos
additional options, 221–222
advantages, 218
descriptive tags, 219
import wizard, 218
Windows Photo Gallery, 219–220
editing features, 213
management, 214
Pixlr, 217
Windows Photo Gallery, 215
Power management options, 306
advanced power settings, 311
maximize battery life, 312
power button, options and password wakeup
additional options, 310
display and sleep options, 309
power button options, 308
power buttons toolbar
custom toolbar, 319
folder creation, 320
power toolbar, 321
toolbar options, 321
power plan
default, 307
PC and devices section, 306
power options page, 307
■฀INDEX
575

sleep and hibernation  
options, 310
Start screen and taskbar
address bar, 317
appropriate name, 314
icon, 316–317
power icons, 319
properties, 316
shortcut, 313
shortcut code, 314
Presentation mode, 261
Printers
color proiles, 193
ink and toner, 201
installation
add printer dialog, 183
devices, 180–181
IP address, 185
PC settings, 179–180
management
Advanced tab, 190
color management, 191
controls, 195
devices, 195
general properties, 187
paper preferences, 198
Ports tab, 189–190
printing preferences, 197
security, 192
settings, 196
sharing properties, 188
network printer, 199
places, 186
server properties, 194
wireless printer, 199
Productivity tools
Microsoft SkyDrive (see SkyDrive)
multimonitor wallpapers, 268
multiple displays
management, 265
multimonitor tools, 266
Screen Resolution window, 266
screen shots, 268
taskbar properties, 267
Windows desktop, 265
multiple programs
boss mode, 246
Jump Lists, 250
mouse shake, minimizing and restoring 
windows, 247
pinning programs to  
taskbar, 248
snapping side by side, 247
thumbnails, 248
running apps
side by side apps (see Side by side apps)
switching between apps, 243
three or four apps, 243
screen shots
Share charm, 256
snipping tool, 257
Windows key + Prnt Scrn key, 256
spell checker, 253
USB lash drives, 269
Windows Mobility Center (see Windows  
Mobility Center)
Public networks, 61
R









Reading List app, 45
Repetitive strain injury (RSI), 326
S









“Sandbox” Windows XP, 488
Searching
detailed and contextualized search  
results, 167
File Explorer
Explorer window, 169
Ribbon, 168
search box, 168
search syntax options, 169
ile index
advanced button, 176
folders, 174
indexing options, 173
libraries
full power, 171
saving and sharing, 172
saving searches, 170
network locations, 177
Start screen, 166
syntax, 177
tagging iles, 172
Searching. See Organizing and searching
Security systems
Apple iMacs, 344
biometric devices, 373–375
iles, folders, and drives encryption
with BitLocker (see BitLocker)
using EFS, 361–364
NTFS permissions
advanced button, 372
efective access tab, 373
iles and folders, 371
properties, 370
security tab, 371
■฀INDEX
576
Power management options (cont.)

third–party antivirus software
oline virus scanners, 351
scanning tests, 349
Windows Defender (see Windows  
Defender)
UAC, 343, 359–361
Windows Firewall
advanced settings, 354–359
basic irewall, 351
default settings, 354
network types, 353
private/public settings, 353
program/apps, 352
Windows XP, 344
Sharing, 93
applications, 123
ile and printer sharing, 130
ile sharing connections, 131
HomeGroup, 131
in PC Settings, 113
security concerns, 115
UPnP devices, 115
in Windows 8.1, 114
media streaming, 131
on network, 116
with groups of people, 117
with individuals, 116
with non-Windows computers, 118
network discovery, 130
network storage, 131
irewall settings, 132
IP address, 131–132
ISP, 131
map network drive, 132
optical drives, 125
DVD drive, 125
HYPER-VDVD-Share, 127
USB lash drive, 125
password protected ile sharing, 131
public folder sharing, 131
SkyDrive, 119
to PC, 120–121
using Microsoft, 122
streaming music and videos, 128
user accounts
Microsoft account password reset, 99
new user account creation, 93
Password Reset drive, 98
user accounts (see User accounts)
with RT Tablets, Ultrabooks, and  
Laptops, 119
Shortcut keys
Alt key combinations, 552
Alt+Shift key combinations, 552
Ctrl key combinations, 551
Ctrl+Alt key combinations, 552
Logo key combinations, 549–551
Shift key combinations, 552
without modiier, 549
Show Desktop button, 35
Side by side apps
arranging
snap apps, 246
split-screen, 244–246
displaying, 241–242
SkyDrive, 119, 431
folders and iles, 251
low-storage devices, 252
oline/online command, 252–253
to PC, 120–121
using Microsoft, 122
Snipping Tool, 49
Solid-state drive (SSD), 210, 378, 540
Sound Recorder, 49
Start button, 32
Sticky Notes, 49
Stock-keeping units (SKUs), 519
System Image Backup, 540
System tray, 34
T









Tagging iles, 172
Task Manager
App History tab, 386
customization, 388
detail information, 387
End Task button, 383–384
monitoring software, 384–385
startup programs, 388
Tethering, 260
Touch gestures, 547–548
Trend Micro Titanium, 350
Trusted Platform Module (TPM) chip, 365
TunerFree MCE, 230
U









Uninterruptable Power Supplies (UPS), 258
Universal Plug and Play (UPnP)  
devices, 115
Upgrading, Windows 8
Add Features, 569–570
additional memory, 564–566
considerations, 561
Desktop PC
advantages and disadvantages, 562
graphics card, 567–568
hard disk, 566–567
mechanical hard disk, 562
■฀INDEX
577

power supply, 568–569
safety, 569
solid-state (SSD) hard disk, 562
laptop and ultrabook, 563
and OEM installation discs, 563–564
tablets, 563
USB lash drive, 125
User Account Control (UAC), 343, 359–361
User accounts, 93
account creation, 93
administrators, 100
management
another account, 102
family safety control, 104
Microsoft account online, 104
own account, 101
Microsoft account password reset, 99
Password Reset drive, 98
standard users, 100
V









VHDs. See Virtual hard disks (VHDs)
Virtual hard disks (VHDs)
booting Windows, 515
creating, 513
option selection, 514
Virtualization
beneit of, 488
deinition, 488
Hyper-V (see Hyper-V)
“Sandbox” Windows XP, 488
VHDs (see Virtual Hard Disks)
virtual machine, 488
Windows 7, 487
Windows 8.1, 487
Windows XP, 487
Virtual machine (VM), 488. See also Hyper-V
Virtual private network (VPN), 68, 412
Virtual Switch Manager, 502
Volume icon, 34
W









Windows 8.1, 1, 271
32-bit and 64-bit, 4
administrative tools, 280
apps and live tiles
arranging live tiles into groups, 26
hiding and adding, 28
performing functions, 25
App Updates, 52–53
CDs and DVDs player, 237
charms, 30
commonalities, 38
default audio devices, 236
description of, 1
desktop
apps view displays, 301
corner navigation, 300
Date and Time dialog box, 35
icons, 291
Jump Lists, 37
personalization options, 285–286
Shake and Snap features, 38
start screen navigation, 301
taskbar, 33
taskbar and navigation properties, 300
viewing thumbnails, 36
Windows Administration menu, 33
games (see Games)
Hyper-V, 6
lock screen, 8, 271
login method, 12
using pin or picture password, 11
mouse pointers, 292
multiple languages, 304
music and video (see Music and Video apps)
new features, 8
notiication toasts, 282
Onscreen keyboard, 13
photos (see Photos app)
preinstalled apps
Alarm, 39
Calculator, 40
Calendar, 40
Camera, 41
Maps, 42
Music, 42
Outlook, 42
People, 44
Photos, 45
Reading List, 45
Video, 47
preinstalled desktop programs
calculator, 47
Character Map, 48
Math Input, 48
Notepad, 48
Paint, 49
Snipping Tool, 49
Sound Recorder, 49
Sticky Notes, 49
Windows Fax and Scan, 49
Windows Journal, 50
Windows Media Center/Windows  
Media Player, 51
WordPad, 51
XPS Viewer, 52
■฀INDEX
578
Upgrading, Windows 8 (cont.)

privacy and security, 15
Refresh and Reset options, 5
scanner, 222
screen saver options, 289
Secure Boot, 8
shortcut keys (see Shortcut keys)
SkyDrive, 8
sound options, 288
Sound Recorder, 235
Start screen, 5
App bar, 23–24
appearance, 274
context menus, 23
elements, 17
higher-resolution displays, 19
intensive desktop user, 276
light desktop user, 277
locking and signing out, 20
personalization options, 273
pinning more than two apps, 18–19
running apps, 20
scrollbar, 22
side-by-side app view, 18
switcher, 275
widget dashboard, 279
work/life balance user, 278
zoomed out view, 23
zoom in and out, 22
Storage Spaces, 7
syncing feeling
diferent settings, 284
Internet Explorer tabs, 284
synchronize lots, 284
taskbar personalization options
jump lists tab, 295
navigation properties dialog, 293
system tray icons, 296
time and date, 297
tweak, 294
touch interface, 13
uninstalling app, 57
uninstalling software, 54–56
Upgrading (see Upgrading, Windows 8)
window colors, 288
vs. Windows 7 and Vista, 2
Windows Media Center (see Windows  
Media Center)
Windows Media Player, 238
vs. Windows RT, 2
Windows RT installing error, 53–54
Windows To Go system, 6
vs. Windows XP, 3
Windows Defender, 350
antivirus package, 345
conigurations, 345–346, 348–349
Windows 8.1 installation
backup iles, 519
clean installation, 520
bootable media, 534–535
cons, 520
Drive options, 538
Install Now button, 536
partition size, 540
pros, 520
selecting hard disks, 538
upgrade, 537
Windows partition, 540
downloading
bootable installation media, 523
ISO ile, 522
Upgrade Assistant, 522
USB lash drive, 522
Windows 7 USB/DVD download  
tool, 524
editions, 519
ISO ile, 523
on Netbooks, 529
preparation
32-bit version, 527
64-bit version, 527
hardware requirements, 529
Windows 7 upgrade, 526–527
Windows Vista upgrade, 525–526
Windows XP upgrade, 524
transfer iles
backup iles, 545
external hard disk/USB lash  
drive, 542
home/work network, 542
method selection, 542
network connection, 543
PC, 543
transfer cable, 542
Windows Easy Transfer, 541
upgrading
advisor, 534
application, 531
cons, 520
displays information, 530
DVD/USB lash drive, 531
iles from previous  
installation, 533
latest updates, 532
pros, 520
Windows Store, 529–530
WinISO, 531
Windows Journal, 50
Windows Media Center, 51, 226
Control Panel, 226
DVD and Blu-ray codecs, 227
■฀INDEX
579

■฀INDEX
580
DVR-MS format, 232
EPG, 229
library, 227
Live TV, set up, 229
settings, 230
TunerFree MCE, 230
Xbox 360 console, 231
Windows Media Player, 51
Windows Mobility Center, 257–258
managing battery life, 258
secondary displays, 261
sharing mobile broadband  
connection, 259
synchronizing iles
ActiveSync devices, 261
Center, 262
Oline Files dialog, 262–263
Sync Center, 261
Work Folders set up, 263
without electricity/internet access, 258
WordPad, 51
Work networks, 61
WPS, 115
X, Y, Z









XPS Viewer, 52
Windows Media Center (cont.)

Beginning Windows 8.1
Mike Halsey

Beginning Windows 8.1
Copyright © 2013 by Mike Halsey
his work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material 
is concerned, speciically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, 
reproduction on microilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, 
electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed. 
Exempted from this legal reservation are brief excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or material 
supplied speciically for the purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the 
purchaser of the work. Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the 
Copyright Law of the Publisher’s location, in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from 
Springer. Permissions for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center. Violations are 
liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4302-6358-6
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4302-6359-3
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a trademark symbol with every 
occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we use the names, logos, and images only in an editorial fashion 
and to the beneit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark.
he use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even if they are not identiied 
as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or not they are subject to proprietary rights.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication, neither 
the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for any errors or omissions that may 
be made. he publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein.
President and Publisher: Paul Manning
Lead Editor: Jonathan Hassell
Technical Reviewer: Brent Schooley and Ian Bennett
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Mark Beckner, Ewan Buckingham, Gary Cornell, Louise Corrigan, Morgan Ertel, 
Jonathan Gennick, Jonathan Hassell, Robert Hutchinson, Michelle Lowman, James Markham,  
Matthew Moodie, Jef Olson, Jefrey Pepper, Douglas Pundick, Ben Renow-Clarke, Dominic Shakeshaft, 
Gwenan Spearing, Matt Wade, Tom Welsh
Coordinating Editor: Katie Sullivan
Copy Editor: Kimberly Burton
Compositor: SPi Global
Indexer: SPi Global
Artist: SPi Global
Cover Designer: Anna Ishchenko
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media New York, 233 Spring Street, 6th Floor, 
New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 348-4505, e-mail orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit  
www.springeronline.com. Apress Media, LLC is a California LLC and the sole member (owner) is Springer Science + 
Business Media Finance Inc (SSBM Finance Inc). SSBM Finance Inc is a Delaware corporation. 
For information on translations, please e-mail rights@apress.com, or visit www.apress.com. 
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or promotional use. eBook 
versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For more information, reference our Special Bulk Sales–eBook 
Licensing web page at www.apress.com/bulk-sales.
Any source code or other supplementary materials referenced by the author in this text is available to readers at  
www.apress.com. For detailed information about how to locate your book’s source code, go to  
www.apress.com/source-code/.

Four years ago I self-publiushed my irst Windows book. his book is the successor to that title.  
I would therefore like to dedicate this book to everyone who has a dream of becoming an author…  
never give up.

vii
Contents
About the Author .............................................................................................................xxiii
About the Technical Reviewers ........................................................................................ xxv
Acknowledgments .......................................................................................................... xxvii
Introduction ..................................................................................................................... xxix
Chapter 1: Introducing Windows 8.1
 
■
 .................................................................................1
What Is Windows 8.1? ...................................................................................................................1
What’s the Difference Between Windows 8.1 and Windows RT? ..........................................................................2
How Windows 8.1 Differs from Windows 7 and Windows Vista .............................................................................2
How Windows 8.1 Differs from Windows XP .........................................................................................................3
32-bit (x86) and 64-bit (x64) Explained .................................................................................................................4
What’s New in Windows 8.1? ........................................................................................................4
Start Screen ...........................................................................................................................................................5
Refresh and Reset .................................................................................................................................................5
Windows To Go ......................................................................................................................................................6
Hyper-V ..................................................................................................................................................................6
Storage Spaces .....................................................................................................................................................7
SkyDrive Integration ..............................................................................................................................................8
Secure Boot ...........................................................................................................................................................8
What Else Is New? .................................................................................................................................................8
Conﬁguring the Windows 8.1 Lock Screen ....................................................................................8
Using a Pin or Picture Password on the Lock Screen ..........................................................................................11
Changing Your Login Method ...............................................................................................................................12

■ CONTENTS
viii
Mastering Touch in Windows 8.1 .................................................................................................13
Using the Onscreen Keyboard in Windows 8.1 ............................................................................13
Privacy and Security for Personal and Business Data .................................................................15
Summary .....................................................................................................................................15
Chapter 2: Finding Your Way Around Windows 8.1
 
■
 .........................................................17
Using the Start Screen and Apps .................................................................................................17
Switching Between and Shutting Down Running Apps .......................................................................................20
Locking the Computer and Signing Out ...............................................................................................................20
Controlling the Windows 8.1 Start Screen ...........................................................................................................22
Controlling Apps and Live Tiles ...................................................................................................24
Performing Functions on Apps and Live Tiles ......................................................................................................25
Arranging Live Tiles into Groups ..........................................................................................................................26
Hiding and Adding Apps and Tiles .......................................................................................................................28
Using the Charms ........................................................................................................................30
Using the Desktop in Windows 8.1 ..............................................................................................32
Start Button .........................................................................................................................................................32
Windows Administration Menu ............................................................................................................................33
Using the Desktop Taskbar ..................................................................................................................................33
Using the Date and Time Dialog Box ....................................................................................................................35
Viewing Taskbar Thumbnails ...............................................................................................................................36
Using Taskbar Jump Lists ....................................................................................................................................37
Managing Windows on the Desktop ....................................................................................................................38
Common Ways to Work with Windows Apps ...............................................................................38
Preinstalled Windows 8.1 Apps ...................................................................................................39
Alarm ...................................................................................................................................................................39
Calculator ............................................................................................................................................................40
Calendar ..............................................................................................................................................................40
Camera ................................................................................................................................................................41
Maps ....................................................................................................................................................................42

■ CONTENTS
ix
Music ...................................................................................................................................................................42
Outlook ................................................................................................................................................................42
People ..................................................................................................................................................................44
Photos ..................................................................................................................................................................45
Reading List .........................................................................................................................................................45
Video ....................................................................................................................................................................47
Preinstalled Desktop Programs ...................................................................................................47
Calculator ............................................................................................................................................................47
Character Map .....................................................................................................................................................48
Math Input ...........................................................................................................................................................48
Notepad ...............................................................................................................................................................48
Paint ....................................................................................................................................................................49
Snipping Tool .......................................................................................................................................................49
Sound Recorder ...................................................................................................................................................49
Sticky Notes .........................................................................................................................................................49
Windows Fax and Scan .......................................................................................................................................49
Windows Journal .................................................................................................................................................50
Windows Media Center/Windows Media Player ..................................................................................................51
WordPad ..............................................................................................................................................................51
XPS Viewer ..........................................................................................................................................................52
Installing and Uninstalling Apps and Programs ...........................................................................52
Summary .....................................................................................................................................57
Chapter 3: Getting Connected
 
■
 ..........................................................................................59
Getting Online with Windows 8.1 ................................................................................................59
Understanding Public and Home and Work Networks .........................................................................................59
Connecting to Networks in Windows 8.1 .............................................................................................................62
Managing Mobile Broadband ...............................................................................................................................63
Connecting to Hidden Wi-Fi Networks .................................................................................................................63
Connecting to a Mobile Broadband Network .......................................................................................................65
Connecting to a Company Workplace ..................................................................................................................66

■ CONTENTS
x
Connecting to a Company Domain ......................................................................................................................66
Connecting to Virtual Private Networks ...............................................................................................................68
Managing and Deleting Wireless Network Proﬁles .....................................................................70
Managing Network Connections .................................................................................................72
Network Management Best Practice ...................................................................................................................73
Securing Wi-Fi Networks .....................................................................................................................................74
Managing Mobile Broadband Data Usage ...........................................................................................................74
Using Internet Explorer 11 ...........................................................................................................76
Using the Internet Explorer 11 App ......................................................................................................................77
Using Favorites in Internet Explorer ....................................................................................................................78
Using Internet Explorer 11 on the Desktop ..........................................................................................................79
Managing Browser Tabs in IE11 on the Desktop .................................................................................................81
Internet Explorer 11 Safety Features ...................................................................................................................81
Using the SmartScreen Filter to Block Malicious Web Sites ................................................................................82
Managing Add-ons, Toolbars and Search Providers in IE11 ................................................................................83
Internet Explorer 11 Options and Conﬁguration ..................................................................................................84
Managing Safety and Privacy in Internet Explorer 11 ..........................................................................................85
Recovering Lost Web Site Usernames and Passwords ...............................................................88
What is InPrivate Mode? ..............................................................................................................89
Staying Safe Online .....................................................................................................................90
Internet Threats Explained ...................................................................................................................................90
Identifying Safe and Unsafe Web Sites in IE11 ....................................................................................................90
Making the Desktop Version of IE11 Your Default Browser .................................................................................91
Summary .....................................................................................................................................92
Chapter 4: Sharing with Family and Friends
 
■
 ...................................................................93
Working with User Accounts .......................................................................................................93
Setting Up Users ..................................................................................................................................................93
Creating a Password Reset Drive ........................................................................................................................98
Resetting Your Microsoft Account Password .......................................................................................................99
Managing User Accounts ...................................................................................................................................100

■ CONTENTS
xi
Managing a Microsoft Account Online ...............................................................................................................104
Using Family Safety ...........................................................................................................................................104
Sharing Files and Folders with HomeGroup ..............................................................................113
Sharing Files and Folders on a Network ...................................................................................116
Sharing with Individuals ....................................................................................................................................116
Sharing with Groups of People ..........................................................................................................................117
Sharing with Non-Windows Computers .............................................................................................................118
Sharing Files with Windows 8.1 and RT Tablets, Ultrabooks, and Laptops  ..............................119
Windows 8.1 and SkyDrive File Backup ....................................................................................119
Downloading SkyDrive Files to Your PC .............................................................................................................121
Using Microsoft SkyDrive to Share Files ............................................................................................................122
Sharing Content Within Apps .....................................................................................................123
Sharing Optical Drives ...............................................................................................................125
Streaming Music and Video to Devices and Computers ............................................................128
Changing the Advanced Sharing Settings in Windows 8.1 ........................................................130
Connecting to Network Shared Storage ....................................................................................131
Why You Might Not See Network Storage on Your Computer ............................................................................131
Viewing the Status of Network Drives ...............................................................................................................132
Summary ...................................................................................................................................134
Chapter 5: Organizing and Searching Your Computer
 
■
 ...................................................135
Using File Explorer ....................................................................................................................136
Quick Access Toolbar .........................................................................................................................................136
The Address Bar ................................................................................................................................................137
The Navigation Pane ..........................................................................................................................................138
Status Bar and Folder Options ...........................................................................................................................139
Main Explorer View ............................................................................................................................................141
Hiding Picture File Names .................................................................................................................................141
File Explorer Ribbon ...........................................................................................................................................142
Copying and Moving Files in File Explorer .........................................................................................................145

■ CONTENTS
xii
Managing Files and Folders from Apps .....................................................................................148
Using Libraries in Windows 8.1 .................................................................................................149
Creating a Library ..............................................................................................................................................150
Changing the Way a Library Displays Files ........................................................................................................152
Managing Libraries ............................................................................................................................................154
Changing the Default Save Location ..................................................................................................................156
Adding Network Locations to Libraries ..............................................................................................................156
Using Tags and Ratings to Organize Files ..........................................................................................................158
Simplify Adding Tags and Ratings with Windows Photo Gallery ........................................................................159
Managing Folder Options ...................................................................................................................................161
Using Search in Windows 8.1 ....................................................................................................165
Searching from the Start Screen .......................................................................................................................166
Searching in File Explorer ..................................................................................................................................168
Expanding Libraries with Saved Searches in Windows 8.1 .......................................................170
Harnessing the Full Power of Saved Searches ..................................................................................................171
Saving and Sharing Your Saved Searches .........................................................................................................172
Tagging Files in Microsoft Ofﬁce ...............................................................................................172
Managing the Search and File Index in Windows 8.1 ................................................................173
Adding Folders to the Index ...............................................................................................................................174
Changing the Advanced Indexing Options .........................................................................................................176
Searching Network Locations in Windows 8.1 ..........................................................................177
Using Search Syntax in Internet Explorer ..................................................................................177
Summary ...................................................................................................................................178
Chapter 6: Printing and Managing Printers
 
■
 ...................................................................179
Installing Printers in Windows 8.1 .............................................................................................179
Setting Default Printers for Different Places .............................................................................186
Managing Printers in Windows 8.1 ............................................................................................187
Managing Color Proﬁles for Printers and Displays ....................................................................193
Managing Shared Printers in Windows 8.1 ...............................................................................194
Managing Printing in Windows 8.1 ............................................................................................194

■ CONTENTS
xiii
Working with Wireless Printers in Windows 8.1 ........................................................................199
Obtaining the IP Address of a Network Printer ..........................................................................199
Top Printing Tips ........................................................................................................................201
Summary ...................................................................................................................................201
Chapter 7: Having Fun with Games, Photos, Music, and Video
 
■
 .....................................203
Managing Games in Windows 8.1 .............................................................................................203
The Games App ..................................................................................................................................................204
Xbox SmartGlass ...............................................................................................................................................204
Managing Game Ratings for Children ................................................................................................................205
Conﬁguring Windows 8.1 for the Latest Games ................................................................................................207
Choosing and Upgrading Your Gaming Hardware ..............................................................................................209
Working with Gaming Peripherals .....................................................................................................................211
3D Gaming on Windows 8.1 ...............................................................................................................................212
Viewing and Editing Photos in Windows 8.1 .............................................................................213
The Photo App ....................................................................................................................................................213
Windows Photo Gallery ......................................................................................................................................215
Other Third-Party Photo Editing Packages .........................................................................................................216
Importing Digital Photographs and Videos from a Camera ................................................................................218
Manually Adding a Scanner to Windows 8.1 .............................................................................222
Playing and Enjoying Music and Video in Windows 8.1 .............................................................223
Creating and Managing Playlists in the Music and Video Apps .........................................................................224
Audio and Video Codecs in Windows 8.1 ...........................................................................................................226
Windows Media Center .............................................................................................................226
Organizing Your Media Libraries in Media Center ..............................................................................................227
Setting Up, Watching, and Recording Live TV ....................................................................................................229
Managing Windows Media Center .....................................................................................................................230
Using Xbox 360 to Access TV, Music, Video, and Pictures from Windows 8.1 ....................................................231
Converting Recorded TV to DVR-MS Format ......................................................................................................232
Recording Audio Directly to Your PC ..........................................................................................235
Changing the Default Audio Devices on Your PC .......................................................................236

■ CONTENTS
xiv
Burn CDs and DVDs Directly from the Desktop .........................................................................237
Burn Audio CDs in Windows Media Player ................................................................................238
Summary ...................................................................................................................................239
Chapter 8: Maximizing Your Productivity
 
■
 ......................................................................241
Managing and Arranging Running Apps ....................................................................................241
Switching Between Running Apps .....................................................................................................................243
Arranging Two Apps Side by Side ......................................................................................................................244
Working with Multiple Programs on the Desktop ......................................................................246
Hiding and Restoring All Windows on the Desktop (a.k.a. Boss Mode) .............................................................246
Minimizing and Restoring Windows Using Shake ..............................................................................................247
Snapping Two Windows Side by Side ................................................................................................................247
Peeking at and Closing Windows from Thumbnails ...........................................................................................248
Pinning Programs to the Desktop Taskbar .........................................................................................................248
Maximizing Productivity with Jump Lists ..........................................................................................................250
Using Microsoft SkyDrive with Windows 8.1 .............................................................................251
Using the Windows 8.1 Spell Checker .......................................................................................253
Taking Screen Shots in Windows 8.1 ........................................................................................256
Using the Snipping Tool .....................................................................................................................................257
Windows Mobility Center ...........................................................................................................257
Managing Battery Life on Laptops, Ultrabooks, and Tablets ..............................................................................258
Maintaining Productivity Without Electricity/Internet Access ............................................................................258
Sharing a Mobile Broadband Connection ..........................................................................................................259
Working with Secondary Displays .....................................................................................................................261
Synchronizing Files with Other Computers and Devices ...................................................................................261
Working with Multiple Screens and Desktops in Windows 8.1 .................................................265
Managing Multiple Displays in Windows 8.1 .....................................................................................................265
Using Multimonitor Wallpapers in Windows 8.1 ................................................................................................268
Creating a Windows To Go Drive Without Windows To Go ..........................................................269
Summary ...................................................................................................................................270

■ CONTENTS
xv
Chapter 9: Personalizing Your Windows Experience
 
■
 .....................................................271
Personalizing Windows 8.1 .......................................................................................................271
Personalizing the Lock Screen ..........................................................................................................................271
Personalizing the Start Screen ..........................................................................................................................273
Displaying Administrative Tools on the Start Screen .........................................................................................280
Managing Notiﬁcation “Toasts” .........................................................................................................................282
That Syncing Feeling .........................................................................................................................................283
Personalizing the Windows 8.1 Desktop ...................................................................................285
Personalizing the Desktop Wallpaper ................................................................................................................285
Personalizing the Window Color ........................................................................................................................287
Personalizing Sounds in Windows 8.1 ...............................................................................................................288
Choosing a Screen Saver ...................................................................................................................................289
Changing the Desktop Icons ..............................................................................................................................291
Changing the Mouse Pointer .............................................................................................................................292
Personalizing the Taskbar ..................................................................................................................................293
Enabling Recycle Bin Warnings .................................................................................................299
Start Windows 8.1 Directly to the Desktop ................................................................................299
Changing the Default File Explorer View ...................................................................................302
Changing and Customizing Your Region Settings ......................................................................302
Working with Multiple Languages in Windows 8.1 ....................................................................304
Personalizing the Power Management Options.........................................................................306
Changing the Power Plan ..................................................................................................................................306
Controlling the Power Button, Power Options, and Password Wakeup..............................................................308
Controlling Sleep and Hibernation .....................................................................................................................310
Changing the Advanced Power Settings ............................................................................................................311
Maximizing Battery Life on Mobile Devices .......................................................................................................312
Adding Power Buttons to the Start Screen and Taskbar ....................................................................................312
Creating a Power Buttons Toolbar .....................................................................................................................319
Summary ...................................................................................................................................322

■ CONTENTS
xvi
Chapter 10: Making Windows 8.1 More Accessible and Easier to Use
 
■
..........................323
Making Windows 8.1 Easier to Use ...........................................................................................323
The Ease of Access Center ........................................................................................................325
Making Text and Windows Easier to Read .................................................................................327
Using the Narrator to Read Text Aloud .......................................................................................333
Controlling the Narrator with Touch ...................................................................................................................334
Controlling the Narrator with the Keyboard .......................................................................................................335
Making Your Keyboard and Mouse Easier to Use ......................................................................336
Using Text or Visual Alternatives for Sounds .............................................................................338
Making It Easier to Focus on Tasks ...........................................................................................338
Training Windows 8.1’s Handwriting Recognition .............................................................................................338
Using Speech Recognition with Windows 8.1 ...........................................................................340
Common Speech Recognition Controls .............................................................................................................341
Finding Accessible Apps in Windows 8.1 ..................................................................................342
Where to Find Accessibility Help and Support...........................................................................342
Summary ...................................................................................................................................342
Chapter 11: Keeping You, Your Files, and Your Computer Safe
 
■
 ......................................343
How Secure Is Windows 8.1 Really? .........................................................................................343
Maintaining Security When Using Windows 8.1 with Other Windows Versions .........................344
Maintaining Security When Using Windows 8.1 with Non-Windows Operating Systems ..........344
Windows Defender ....................................................................................................................345
Conﬁguring and Updating Windows Defender ...................................................................................................345
Finding and Installing Third-Party Antivirus Software ...............................................................349
Disabling Windows Defender .............................................................................................................................350
Ofﬂine Antivirus Scanners .................................................................................................................................351
Using the Windows Firewall ......................................................................................................351
Conﬁguring and Maintaining the Windows Firewall ..........................................................................................351
Using the Advanced Firewall .............................................................................................................................354

■ CONTENTS
xvii
User Account Control .................................................................................................................359
Encrypting Files, Folders, and Drives ........................................................................................361
Encrypting Files and Folders Using the Encrypting File System .......................................................................361
Encrypting Drives with BitLocker ......................................................................................................................364
Using BitLocker To Go ........................................................................................................................................369
Encryption Best Practice ...................................................................................................................................370
Permitting and Blocking File and Folder Access with NTFS Permissions .................................370
Using Biometric Devices with Windows 8.1 ..............................................................................373
Summary ...................................................................................................................................376
Chapter 12: Maintaining and Backing Up Your Computer and Files
 
■
 ..............................377
Maintaining a Healthy Computer ...............................................................................................377
What Causes Computers to Become Unstable ..................................................................................................377
How is Windows RT Different? ..........................................................................................................................378
Using the Windows 8.1 Action Center ................................................................................................................378
The Windows 8.1 Task Manager ........................................................................................................................383
Using Windows Update ......................................................................................................................................389
Protecting and Repairing Windows ...........................................................................................398
Creating a Recovery Drive .................................................................................................................................398
Backing Up and Recovering Your Windows 8.1 Installation ...............................................................................400
Safe Mode and Diagnostic Startup Mode ..........................................................................................................406
Using Startup Repair..........................................................................................................................................407
Restoring Windows 8.1 to Factory Settings .......................................................................................................410
Backing Up Files and Folders  ...................................................................................................411
Where to Store Backups ....................................................................................................................................411
Remember to Encrypt Business Backups ..........................................................................................................412
Backing Up Your Files in Windows 8.1 ...............................................................................................................412
Restoring Backed up and Deleted Files with File History ..................................................................................417
Safeguarding Your Personal Files and Folders ..................................................................................................418
Taking Ownership of Files and Folders ..............................................................................................................424
Summary ...................................................................................................................................425

■ CONTENTS
xviii
Chapter 13: Advanced Conﬁguration and Customization
 
■
 ..............................................427
PC Settings ................................................................................................................................427
Front Screen ......................................................................................................................................................427
PC & Devices  ....................................................................................................................................................428
Accounts ............................................................................................................................................................431
SkyDrive ............................................................................................................................................................431
Search & Apps ...................................................................................................................................................432
Privacy ...............................................................................................................................................................435
Network .............................................................................................................................................................436
Time & Language ...............................................................................................................................................436
Ease of Access ...................................................................................................................................................436
Update & Recovery ............................................................................................................................................436
Control Panel .............................................................................................................................437
Customizing the Control Panel ..........................................................................................................................438
Choosing AutoPlay Options ................................................................................................................................439
Setting Default Programs ..................................................................................................................................441
Managing Fonts in Windows 8.1 ........................................................................................................................443
Using Location Settings and Other Sensors ......................................................................................................445
Managing Pen, Touch, and Tablet Settings ........................................................................................................445
Conﬁguring the Windows 8.1 Advanced System Settings .........................................................447
Managing Virtual Memory Settings ...................................................................................................................449
Managing Data Execution Prevention ................................................................................................................450
Conﬁguring and Managing System Protection ..................................................................................................451
Using and Conﬁguring Storage Spaces .....................................................................................452
Working with Hardware Devices ...............................................................................................454
Device Manager .................................................................................................................................................455
Manually Connecting to Networks .....................................................................................................................463
Windows 8.1 Administrative Tools .............................................................................................464
Computer Management Console .......................................................................................................................465
Defragment and Optimize Drives .......................................................................................................................468

■ CONTENTS
xix
Disk Cleanup ......................................................................................................................................................468
Event Viewer ......................................................................................................................................................469
Local Security Policy..........................................................................................................................................469
Performance Monitor .........................................................................................................................................470
Resource Monitor ..............................................................................................................................................471
Services .............................................................................................................................................................472
System Conﬁguration ........................................................................................................................................473
System Information ...........................................................................................................................................474
Task Scheduler ..................................................................................................................................................474
Windows Memory Diagnostic ............................................................................................................................475
Further Customizing Windows 8.1.............................................................................................476
Disabling the Windows 8.1 Lock Screen ............................................................................................................476
Automatically Logging on to Windows 8.1 .........................................................................................................477
Bring Back the Start Menu with a Toolbar .........................................................................................................478
Useful Windows Registry Hacks ........................................................................................................................479
Summary ...................................................................................................................................486
Chapter 14: Getting Started with Virtualization
 
■
 ............................................................487
What Is Virtualization? ...............................................................................................................488
When Should You Use a Virtual Machine? .................................................................................488
Why You Should “Sandbox” Windows XP ..................................................................................488
Can’t Find Hyper-V on Your PC? .................................................................................................489
Installing an Operating System in Hyper-V ................................................................................490
Setting Up Networking with Hyper-V .................................................................................................................502
Saving VM Checkpoints .....................................................................................................................................505
Importing and Exporting Virtual Machines in Hyper-V .......................................................................................506
Integrating Additional Services into a VM ..........................................................................................................512
Using Virtual Hard Disks ............................................................................................................512
Creating a VHD in Windows 8.1 .........................................................................................................................513
Booting Windows from a VHD ............................................................................................................................515
Summary ...................................................................................................................................517

■ CONTENTS
xx
Chapter 15: Installing Windows 8.1 on Your Computer
 
■
 .................................................519
Back Up Your Files and Documents First! .................................................................................519
Windows 8.1 Edition Differences ..............................................................................................519
Deciding How to Install Windows 8.1 on an Existing Computer ................................................520
When Is an Upgrade Also a Clean Install? .........................................................................................................520
When You Should Perform a Clean Install ..........................................................................................................521
Acquiring Windows 8.1 ..............................................................................................................521
Downloading Windows 8.1 ................................................................................................................................521
Creating Bootable Media from a Windows 8.1 ISO File .....................................................................................523
Preparing to Install Windows 8.1 ...............................................................................................524
Upgrading from Windows XP .............................................................................................................................524
Upgrading from Windows Vista ..........................................................................................................................525
Upgrading from Windows 7 ...............................................................................................................................526
Moving from 32-bit (x86) to 64-bit (x64) ...........................................................................................................527
Windows 8.1 Minimum Hardware Requirements ..............................................................................................529
Installing Windows 8.1 on Netbooks ..................................................................................................................529
Upgrading to Windows 8.1 ........................................................................................................529
Performing a Clean Install .........................................................................................................534
Best Practices for Installing Windows 8.1 .........................................................................................................538
Transferring Files and Documents from an Old Computer ........................................................541
Summary ...................................................................................................................................545
Appendix A: Windows 8 Touch Gestures
 
■
 .......................................................................547
Narrator Touch Gestures ............................................................................................................548
Appendix B: Windows 8 Shortcut Keys
 
■
 .........................................................................549
Appendix C: Advanced Query Syntax for Search
 
■
 ...........................................................553
Data Store Location ...................................................................................................................553
Common File Kinds ...................................................................................................................553
Properties by File Kind ..............................................................................................................554
Filter by Size ..............................................................................................................................555

■ CONTENTS
xxi
Boolean Operators .....................................................................................................................555
Boolean Properties ....................................................................................................................556
Dates .........................................................................................................................................556
Attachments ..............................................................................................................................557
Contacts ....................................................................................................................................557
Communications .......................................................................................................................558
Calendar ....................................................................................................................................559
Documents ................................................................................................................................559
Presentations ............................................................................................................................559
Music .........................................................................................................................................560
Pictures .....................................................................................................................................560
Video .........................................................................................................................................560
Appendix D: Upgrading Your Computer
 
■
 .........................................................................561
Choosing a New Windows 8 Computer .....................................................................................561
Do You Need a New Computer? .........................................................................................................................561
Choosing the Right Desktop PC .........................................................................................................................561
Choosing the Right Laptop or Ultrabook ............................................................................................................563
Choosing the Right Tablet ..................................................................................................................................563
Windows 8 and OEM Installation Discs .....................................................................................563
Adding More Memory to a PC or Laptop ...................................................................................564
Changing or Adding a Hard Disk ................................................................................................566
Changing or Adding a Graphics Card .........................................................................................567
Changing the Power Supply in Your PC .....................................................................................568
Safely Working with Your PC, Laptop, or Tablet .........................................................................569
Upgrading Windows 8 ...............................................................................................................569
Summary ...................................................................................................................................570
Index .................................................................................................................................571

xxiii
About the Author
Mike Halsey is a Microsoft Most Valueable Professional (MVP) awardee (2011, 
2012 and 2013) and the author of many Windows books including Troubleshooting 
Windows 7 Inside Out, Troubleshoot and Optimize Windows 8 Inside Out and 70-687  
Coniguring Windows 8 Exam Ref (Microsoft Press), Windows 8: Out of the Box 
(O’Reilly) and Beginning Windows 8 (Apress).
Mike regularly makes help, how-to and troubleshooting videos along with 
writing tech and help articles on his website. He is also a teacher who lives with his 
rescue border collie, Jed, in an eco-home in Yorkshire (UK).
You can ind mike on his website at the longclimb.com and on Facebook, 
Twitter and YouTube as HalseyMike.

xxv
About the Technical Reviewers
Ian N. Bennett is a Technical Evangelist with the Developer Platform Evangelism 
group at Microsoft, helping consumer brands design and build consumer solutions 
using a myriad of both client and server technologies. Ian has spent the last ifteen 
years in many diferent verticals designing, building, supporting, and leading the 
development of systems and applications utilizing a vast spectrum of technologies 
across many diferent platforms. You can read more about Ian’s current work at 
http://blogs.msdn.com/ianisms.
Brent Schooley is a Technical Evangelist for Infragistics who has been working 
with Microsoft technologies since 2004. His interests include client and mobile 
application development and user experience design, with a recent emphasis on 
Windows 8 and Windows Phone. Other platforms he has worked with include 
WPF, Silverlight, Windows Forms, and iOS. He has a passion for making people’s 
experiences with software the best that they can possibly be. Brent is the author of 
Designing for Windows 8 , a Windows 8 design primer from Apress.

xxvii
Acknowledgments
With thanks to Jon Hassell. hanks for the continued support.

