ACTS OF GOD
Ben Bova
Who else but Sam Gunn would sue the Pope?
I'd known Sam since we were both astronauts with
NASA, riding the old shuttle to the original Mac Dae
Shack—but sue the Pope? That's Sam.
At first I thought it was a joke, or at least a
grandstand stunt. Then I began to figure that it was just
the latest of Sam's ploys to avoid marrying me. I'd been
chasing him for years, subtly at first, but once I'd retired
from the Senate, quite openly.
It got to be a game that we both enjoyed. At least, I
did. It was fun to see the panicky look on Sam's Huck
Finn face when I would bring up the subject of marriage.
"Aw, come on, Jill," he would say. "I'd make a lousy
husband. I like women too much to marry one of 'em."
I would smile my most sphinxlike smile and softly
reply, "You're not getting any younger, Sam. You need a
good woman to look after you."
And he'd arrange to disappear. I swear, his first
expedition out to the asteroid belt was as much to get
away from me as to find asteroids for mining. He came
close to getting himself killed then, but he created the

new industry of asteroid mining—and just about wiped
out the metals and minerals markets in most of the
resource-exporting nations on Earth. That didn't win him
any friends, especially among the governments of those
nations and the multinational corporations that fed off
them.
I still had connections into the Senate Intelligence
Committee in those days, and I knew that at least three
southern hemisphere nations had put out contracts on
Sam's life. To say nothing of the big multinationals. It was
my warnings that saved his scrawny little neck.
Sam lost the fortune he made on asteroid mining, of
course. He'd made and lost fortunes before that, it was
nothing new to him. He just went into other business
lines; you couldn't keep him down for long.
He was running a space freight operation when he
sued the Pope. And the little sonofagun knew that I'd be
on the International Court of Justice panel that heard his
suit.
"Senator Meyers, may I have a word with you?" My
Swedish secretary looked very upset. He was always very
formal, always addressed me by my old honorific, the
way a governor of a state would be called “Governor''
even if he's long retired or in jail or whatever.
"What's the matter, Hendrick?" I asked him.
Hendrick was in his office in The Hague, where the
World Court is headquartered. I was alone in my house in
Nashua, sipping at a cup of hot chocolate and watching

the winter's first snow sifting through the big old maples
on my front lawn, thinking that we were going to have a
white Christmas despite the greenhouse warming. Until
Hendrick's call came through, that is. Then I had to look
at his distressed face on my wall display screen.
"We have a very unusual... situation here," said
Hendrick, struggling to keep himself calm. "The chief
magistrate has asked me to call you."
From the look on Hendrick's face, I thought
somebody must be threatening to unleash nuclear war, at
least.
"A certain .. . person," Hendrick said, with
conspicuous distaste, "has entered a suit against the
Vatican."
"The Vatican!" I nearly dropped my hot chocolate.
"What's the basis of the suit? Who's entering it?"
"The basis is apparently over some insurance claims.
The litigant is an American citizen acting on behalf of the
nation of Ecuador. His name is"—Hendrick looked down
to read from a document that I could not see on the
screen—"Samuel S. Gunn, Esquire."
"Sam Gunn?" I did drop the cup; hot chocolate all
over my white corduroy slacks and the hooked rug my
great-grandmother had made with her very own arthritic
fingers.

Sam was operating out of Ecuador in those days.
Had himself a handsome suite of offices in the
presidential palace, no less. I drove through the slippery
snow to Boston and took the first Clipper out; had to use
my ex-Senatorial and World Court leverage to get a seat
amidst all the jovial holiday travelers.
I arrived in Quito half an hour later. Getting through
customs with my one hastily packed travel bag took
longer than the flight. At least Boston and Quito are in
the same time zone; I didn't have to battle jet lag.
"Jill!" Sam smiled when I swept into his office, but
the smile looked artificial to me. “What brings you down
here?"
People say Sam and I look enough alike to be
siblings. Neither Sam nor I believe it. He's short, getting
pudgy, keeps his rusty red hair cropped short. Shifty eyes,
if you ask me. Mine are a steady brown. I'm just about his
height, and the shape of my face is sort of round, more or
less like his. We both have a sprinkle of freckles across
our noses. But there all resemblance—physical and
otherwise—definitely ends.
"You know damned well what brings me down
here," I snapped, tossing my travel bag on one chair and
plopping myself in the other, right in front of his desk.
Sam had gotten to his feet and started around the
desk, but one look at the blood in my eye and he
retreated back to his own swivel chair. He had built a
kind of platform behind the desk to make himself seem

taller than he really was.
He put on his innocent little boy face. "Honest, Jill,
I haven't the foggiest idea of why you're here. Christmas
vacation?''
"Don't be absurd."
"You didn't bring a justice of the peace with you, did
you?"
I had to laugh. Every time I asked myself why in the
ever-loving blue-eyed world I wanted to marry Sam
Gunn, the answer always came down to that. Sam made
me laugh. After a life of grueling work as an astronaut
and then the tensions and power trips of Washington
politics, Sam was the one man in the world who could
make me see the funny side of everything. Even when he
was driving me to distraction, we both had grins on our
faces.
"I should have brought a shotgun," I said, trying to
get serious.
"You wouldn't do that," he said, with that impish
grin of his. Then he added a worried, “Would you?''
“Where did you get the bright idea of suing the
Vatican?"
"Oh, that!" Sam visibly relaxed, eased back in his
chair and swiveled around from side to side a little.
"Yes, that," I snapped. "What kind of a brain-dead
nincompoop idea is that?"

"Nincompoop?" He looked almost insulted. "Been a
long time since I heard that one."
"What's going on, Sam? You know a private citizen
can't sue a sovereign state."
"Sure I know that. I'm not suing the Vatican. The
sovereign nation of Ecuador is suing. I'm merely acting as
their representative, in my position as CEO of Ecuador
National Space Systems."
I sank back in my chair, thinking fast. "The Vatican
isn't a party to the International Court of Justice's
protocols. Your suit is null and void, no matter who the
plaintiff may be."
"Christ, Jill, you sound like a lawyer."
"You can't sue the Vatican."
Sam sighed and reached out one hand toward the
keyboard on his desk. He tapped at it with one finger,
then pointed to the display screen on the wall.
The screen filled with print, all legalese of the
densest kind. But I recognized it. The Treaty of
Katmandu, the one that ended the three-way biowar
between India, China, and Pakistan. The treaty that
established the International Peacekeeping Force and
gave it global mandatory powers.
" 'All nations are required to submit grievances to
the International Court of Justice,' " Sam quoted from the
treaty, " 'whether they are signatories to this instrument or
not.' "

I knew it as well as he did. “That clause is in there
to prevent nations from using military force," I said.
Sam gave a careless shrug. "Regardless of why it's in
there, it's there. The World Court has jurisdiction over
every nation in the world. Even the Vatican."
"The Vatican didn't sign the treaty."
"Doesn't matter. The treaty went into effect when
two-thirds of the membership of the UN signed it," Sam
said. "And any nation that doesn't obey it gets the
Peacekeepers in their face."
"Sam, you can't sue the Pope!"
He just gave me his salesman's grin. "The nation of
Ecuador has filed suit against the Vatican State. The
World Court has to hear the case. It's not just my idea,
Jill—it's the law."
The little sonofabitch was right.
I expected Sam would invite me to dinner. He did,
and then some. Sam wouldn't hear of my staying at a
hotel; he had already arranged for a guest suite for me in
the presidential palace. Which gave the lie to his
supposed surprise when I had arrived at his office, of
course. He knew I was coming. It sort of surprised me,
though. I wouldn't have thought that he'd want me so
close to him. He had always managed to slip away when
I'd pursued him before. This time he ensconced me in

presidential splendor in the same building where he was
sleeping.
I should have been suspicious. I've got to admit that,
instead, I sort of half thought that maybe Sam was getting
tired of running away from me. Maybe he wanted me to
be near him.
He did. But for his own reasons, of course.
When we ate dinner that evening it was with the
president of Ecuador himself: Carlos Pablo Francisco
Esperanza de Rivera. He was handsome, haughty, and
kind of pompous. Wore a military uniform with enough
braid to buckle the knees of a Ukranian weightlifter. Very
elegant silver hair. A noble profile with a distinguished
Castilian nose.
"It is an extremely serious matter," he told me, in
Harvard-accented English. "We do not sue the head of
Holy Mother Church for trivial reasons."
The fourth person at the table was a younger man,
Gregory Molina. He was dark and intense, the smoldering
Latino rebel type. Sam introduced him as the lawyer who
was handling the case for him.
We sat at a sumptuous table in a small but elegant
dining room. Crystal chandelier, heavy brocade napkins,
damask tablecloth, gold-rimmed dishes, and tableware of
solid silver. Lavish Christmas trimmings on the windows;
big holiday bows and red-leafed poinsettias decorating
the dining table.

Ecuador was still considered a poor nation,
although as the Earthbound anchor of Sam's space
operations there was a lot of money flowing in. Most of it
must be staying in the presidential palace, I thought.
Once the servants had discreetly taken away our fish
course and deposited racks of roast lamb before us, I said,
"The reason I came here is to see if this matter can be
arbitrated without actually going to court."
"Of course!" said el Presidente. "We would like
nothing better."
Sam cocked a brow. "If we can settle this out of
court, fine. I don't really want to sock the Pope if we can
avoid it."
Molina nodded, but his burning eyes told me he'd
like nothing better than to get the Pope on the witness
stand.
"I glanced through your petition papers on the flight
down here," I said. "I don't see what your insurance
claims have to do with the Vatican."
Sam put his fork down. "Over the past year and a
half, Ecuador National Space Systems has suffered three
major accidents: A booster was struck by lightning during
launch operations and forced to ditch in the ocean; we
were lucky that none of the crew was killed."
"Why were you launching into stormy weather?" I
asked.
"We weren't!" Sam placed a hand over his heart, like

a little kid swearing he was telling the truth. "Launchpad
weather was clear as a bell. The lightning strike came at
altitude, over the Andes, out of an empty sky."
"A rare phenomenon," said Molina. "The scientists
said it was a freak of nature."
Sam resumed, "Then four months later one of our
unmanned freight carriers was hit by a micrometeor and
exploded while it was halfway to our lunar mining base.
We lost the vehicle and its entire cargo."
"Seventy million dollars, US," Molina said.
President de Rivera's eyes filled with tears.
"And just six months ago a lunar quake collapsed
our mine in the ringwall of Aristarchus."
I hadn't known that. "Was anyone killed?"
"The operation was pretty much automated. A
couple technicians were injured," Sam said. "But we lost
three mining robots."
"At sixteen million dollars apiece," Molina added.
The president dabbed at his eyes with his napkin.
"I don't see what any of this has to do with the
Vatican," I said.
The corners of Sam's mouth turned down. "Our
mother-loving insurance carrier refused to cover any of
those losses. Claimed they were all acts of God, not
covered by our accident policy."

I hadn't drunk any of the wine in the crystal goblet
before me, so there was no reason for me to be slow on
the uptake. Yet I didn't see the association with the
Vatican.
"Insurance policies always have an 'Acts of God'
clause," I said.
"Okay," Sam said, dead serious. "So if our losses
were God's fault, how do we get Him to pay what He
owes us?"
"Him?" I challenged.
"Her," Sam snapped back. "It. Them. I don't care."
President de Rivera steepled his long, lean fingers
before his lips, and said, "For the purposes of our
discussion, and in keeping with ancient tradition, let us
agree to refer to God as Him." And he smiled his
handsome smile at me.
"Okay," I said, wondering how much he meant by
that smile. "We'll call Her Him."
Molina snickered and Sam grinned. El Presidente
looked puzzled; either he didn't appreciate my humor, or
he didn't understand it.
Sam got back to his point. "If God's responsible for
our losses, then we want to get God to pay for them.
That's only fair."
"It's silly," I said. "How are you—"
Sam's sudden grin cut me off. "The Pope is

considered to be God's personal representative on Earth,
isn't he?"
"Only by the Roman Catholics."
"Of which there are more than one billion in the
world," Molina said.
"The largest religion on Earth," said the president.
"It's more than that," Sam maintained. "Nobody else
claims to be the personal representative of God. Only the
Pope, among the major religious leaders. One of his titles
is 'the vicar of Christ,' isn't it?"
The two men nodded in unison.
"The Catholics believe that Christ is God, don't
they?" Sam asked.
They nodded again.
"And Christ—God Herself—personally made St.
Peter His representative here on Earth."
More nods.
"And the Pope is Peter's descendant, with all the
powers and responsibilities that Peter had. Right?"
"Exactly so," murmured el Presidente.
"So if we want to sue God, we go to his personal
representative, the Pope." Sam gave a self-satisfied nod.
Only Sam Gunn would think of such a devious,
convoluted scheme.

"We cannot sue the Pope personally," Molina
pointed out, as earnest as a missionary, "because he is
technically and legally the head of a state: the Vatican. A
sovereign cannot be sued except by his own consent; that
is ancient legal tradition."'
"So you want to sue the state he heads," I said.
"The Vatican. Yes."
"And since an individual or corporation can't sue a
state, the nation of Ecuador is entering the suit."
Sam smiled like a jack-o'-lantern. "Now you've got
it."
I picked my way through the rest of the dinner in
stunned silence. I couldn't believe that Sam would go
through with something so ridiculous, yet there he was
sitting next to the president of Ecuador and a fervent
young lawyer who seemed totally intent on hauling the
Pope before the World Court.
I wondered if the fact that the present Pope was an
American—the first US cardinal to be elected Pope—had
anything to do with the plot hatching inside Sam's shifty,
twisted, Machiavellian brain.
After the servants had cleared off all the dishes and
brought a tray of liqueur bottles, I finally gathered
enough of my wits to say, "There's got to be a way to
settle this out of court."

"Half a billion would do it," Sam said.
He hadn't touched any of the after-dinner drinks and
had only sipped at his wine during dinner. So he wasn't
drunk.
"Half a billion?"
"A quarter billion in actual losses," Molina
interjected, "and a quarter billion in punitive damages."
I almost laughed in his face. "You want to punish
God?"
"Why not?" The look on his face made me wonder
what God had ever done to him to make him so angry.
President de Rivera took a silver cigarette case from
his heavily braided jacket.
"Please don't smoke," I said.
He looked utterly shocked.
"It's bad for your lungs and ours," I added.
Sighing, he slipped the case back into his pocket.
"You sound like my daughter."
"Thank you," I said, and made a polite smile for him.
"Do you think we can settle out of court?" Sam
asked.
"Where's the Pope going to get half a billion?" I
snapped.
Sam shrugged good-naturedly. "Sell some artwork,

maybe?''
I pushed my chair from the table. Molina and the
president shot to their feet. De Rivera was closer to me;
he held my chair while I stood up.
"Allow me to escort you to your room," he said.
"Thank you so much," I replied.
Sam, still seated, gave me a suspicious look. But he
didn't move from his chair. The president gave me his
arm, and I placed my hand on it, just like we were
Cinderella and the Prince at the ball. As we walked
regally out of the dining room I glanced back at Sam. He
was positively glowering at me.
We took an intimately small elevator up two flights.
There was barely room enough in it for the two of us. De
Rivera wasn't much taller than I, but he kept bobbing up
on his toes as the elevator inched its way up. I wondered
if it was some sort of exercise for his legs, until I realized
that he was peeking down the front of my blouse. I had
dressed casually. Modestly. And there wasn't much for
him to see there anyway. But he kept peeking.
I took his proffered arm once again as he walked me
to my door. The wide upstairs corridor was lined with
portraits, all men, and furniture that looked antique and
probably very valuable.
He opened the door to my suite, but before he could
step inside I maneuvered myself into the doorway to
block him.

"Thank you so much for the excellent dinner," I
said, smiling my kiss-off smile.
"I believe you will find an excellent champagne
already chilled in your sitting room," said the president.
I gave him the regretful head shake. "It's much too
late at night for me to start drinking champagne."
"Ah, but the night is young, my lovely one."
Lovely? Me? I was as plain as a pie pan, and I knew
it. But el Presidente was acting as if I was a ravishing
beauty. Did he think he could win me over to his side by
taking me to bed? I've heard of tampering with a judge,
but this was ridiculous.
"I'm really very tired, Mr. President."
"Carlos," he whispered.
"I'm really very tired, Carlos."
"Then it would be best for you to go directly to bed,
would it not?"
I was wondering if I'd have to knee him in the groin
when Sam's voice bounced cheerfully down the corridor,
"Hey, Jill, I just remembered that there was another
so-called act of God that cost us ten-twenty mill or so."
The president stiffened and stepped back from me.
Sam came strolling down the corridor with that imp's grin
spread across his round face.
"Lemme tell you about it," he said.

"I'm very tired, and I'm going to sleep," I said firmly.
"Good night, Sam. And good night, Carlos."
As I shut the door I saw Carlos glaring angrily at
Sam. Maybe I've broken up their alliance, I thought.
Then I realized that Sam had come upstairs to rescue
me from Carlos. He was jealous! And he cared enough
about me to risk his scheme against the Pope.
Maybe he did love me after all. At least a little.
We tried to settle the mess out of court. And we
might have done it, too, if it hadn't been for the other
side's lawyer. And the assassins.
All parties concerned wanted to keep the suit as
quiet as possible. Dignity. Good manners. We were
talking about the Pope, for goodness' sake. Maintain a
decent self-control and don't go blabbing to the media.
All the parties agreed to that approach. Except Sam.
The instant the World Court put his suit on its arbitration
calendar, Sam went roaring off to the newspeople. All of
them, from BBC and CNN to the sleaziest tabloids and
paparazzi.
Sam was on global television more than the hourly
weather reports. He pushed Santa Claus out of the
headlines. You couldn't punch up a news report on your
screen without seeing Sam's jack-o'-lantern face grinning
at you.
"I think that if God gets blamed for accidents and
natural disasters, the people who claim to represent God

ought to be willing to pay the damages," Sam said
gleefully, over and again. "It's only fair."
The media went into an orgy of excitement.
Interviewers doggedly tracked down priests, ministers,
nuns, lamas, imams, mullahs, gurus of every stripe and
sect. Christmas was all but forgotten; seven "holiday
specials" were unceremoniously bumped from the
entertainment networks so they could put on panel
discussions of Sam's suit against the Pope instead.
Philosophers became as commonplace on the news
as athletes. Professors of religion and ethics got to be
regulars on talk shows all over the world. The Dalai
Lama started his own TV series.
It was a bonanza for lawyers. People everywhere
started suing God—or the nearest religious establishment.
An unemployed mechanic in Minnesota sued his local
Lutheran Church after he slipped on the ice while fishing
on a frozen lake. An Englishwoman sued the Archbishop
of Canterbury when her cat got itself run over by a
delivery truck. Ford Motor Company sued the Southern
Baptists because a ship carrying electronic parts from
Korea sank in a typhoon and stopped Ford's assembly
operation in Alabama.
Courts either refused to hear the suits, on the
grounds that they lacked jurisdiction over
You-Know-Who, or held them up pending the World
Court's decision. One way or another, Sam was going to
set a global precedent.

The Pope remained stonily silent. He virtually
disappeared from the public eye, except for a few
ceremonial masses at St. Peter's and his regular Sunday
blessing of the crowds that he gave from his usual
balcony. There were even rumors that he wouldn't say the
traditional Christmas Eve mass at St. Peter's.
He even stopped giving audiences to visitors—after
the paparazzi and seventeen network reporters infiltrated
an audience that was supposed to be for victims of a
flood in the Philippines. Eleven photographers and seven
Filipinos were arrested after the Swiss Guard broke up
the scuffle that the newspeople started.
The Vatican spokesman was Cardinal Hagerty, a
dour-faced Irishman with the gift of gab, a veteran of the
Curia's political infighting who stonewalled the media
quite effectively by sticking to three points:
One: Sam's suit was frivolous. He never mentioned
Ecuador at all; he always pinpointed the notorious Sam
Gunn as the culprit.
Two: This attempt to denigrate God was sacrilegious
and doomed to failure. Cardinal Hagerty never said it in
so many words, but he gave the clear impression that in
the good old days the Church would have taken Sam by
the scruff of his atheistic little neck and burned him at the
stake.
Three: The Vatican simply did not have any money
to spend on malicious lawsuits. Every penny in the
Vatican treasury went to running the Church and helping

the poor.
The uproar was global. All across the world people
were being treated to "experts" debating the central
question of whether or not God should be—or could
be— held responsible for the disasters that are constantly
assailing us.
There were bloody riots in Calcutta after an
earthquake killed several hundred people, with the
Hindus blaming Allah and the Moslems blaming Kali or
Rama or any of the other hundreds of Hindu gods and
goddesses. The Japanese parliament solemnly declared
that the Emperor, even though revered as divine, was not
to be held responsible for natural disasters. Dozens of
evangelist ministers in the US damned Sam publicly in
their TV broadcasts and as much as said that anyone who
could stop the little bugger would be a hero in the eyes of
God.
"What we need," yowled one TV evangelist, "is a
new Michael the Archangel, who will smite this son of
Satan with a fiery sword!"
In Jerusalem, the chief rabbi and Grand Mufti
stunned the world by appearing in public side by side to
castigate Sam and call upon all good Jews and Moslems
to accept whatever God or Allah sends their way.
"Humility and acceptance are the hallmarks of the
true believers," they jointly told their flocks.
My sources on the Senate Intelligence Committee
told me that the chief rabbi added privately, "May He

Who Is Nameless remove this evil man from our sight."
The Grand Mufti apparently went further. He
promised eternal Paradise for anyone who martyred
himself assassinating Sam. In a burst of modernism, he
added, "Even if the assassin is a woman, Paradise awaits
her." I thought he must have been either pretty damned
furious at Sam or pretty damned desperate.
Officially, the Vatican refused to defend itself. The
Pope would not even recognize the suit, and the Curia—
which had been at odds with the new American Pope—
backed him on this issue one hundred percent. Even
though they knew that the World Court could hear the
suit in their absence and then send in the Peacekeepers to
enforce its decision, they felt certain that the Court would
never send armed troops against the Vatican. It would
make a pretty picture, our tanks and jet bombers against
their Swiss Guardsmen. Heat-seeking missiles against
medieval pikes. In St. Peter's, yet.
But the insurance conglomerate that carried the
policy for Ecuador National Space Systems decided that
it would step forward and represent the Vatican in the
pre-trial hearing.
"We've got to put a cork in this bottle right away,"
said their president to me. "It's a disgrace, a shameful
disgrace."
His name was Frank Banner, and he normally
looked cheerful and friendly, probably from the days
when he was a salesman who made his living from

sweet-talking corporate officials into multimillion-dollar
insurance policies. We had known each other for years;
Frank had often testified before Senate committees—and
donated generously to campaign funds, including mine.
But now he looked worried. He had flown up to
Nashua to see me shortly after I returned from Quito. His
usual broad smile and easygoing manner were gone; he
was grim, almost angry.
"He's ruining the Christmas season," Frank
grumbled.
I had to admit that it was hard to work up the usual
holiday cheer with this lawsuit hanging over us.
"Look," he said, as we sipped hot toddies in my
living room, "I've had my run-ins with Sam Gunn in the
past, Lord knows, but this time the little pisser's gone too
goddamned far. He's not just attacking the Pope, although
that in itself is bad enough. He's attacking the very
foundation of Western civilization! That wise-assed little
bastard is spitting in the eye of every God-fearing man,
woman, and child in the world!"
I had never seen Frank so wound up. He sounded
like an old-time politician yelling from a soap box. His
face got purple, and I was afraid he'd hyperventilate. I
didn't argue with him; I merely snuggled deeper into my
armchair and let him rant until he ran out of steam.
Finally, he said, "Well, somebody's got to stand up
for what's right and decent."

"I suppose so," I murmured.
"I'm assigning one of our young lawyers to act as an 
amicus curiae in your pretrial hearing."
"I'm not sure that's the proper legal term," I said.
"Well, whatever!" His face reddened again. 
"Somebody's got to protect the Pope's ass. Might as well
be us."
I nodded, thinking that if Sam somehow did win his
suit against the Pope it would turn the entire insurance
industry upside down. Amicus curiae indeed.
The moment I laid eyes on the lawyer that Frank
sent I knew we'd have nothing but trouble.
Her name was Josella Ecks, and she was a tall, slim,
gorgeous black woman with a mind as sharp as a laser
beam. Skin the color of milk chocolate. Almond-shaped
eyes that I would have killed for. Long silky legs, and she
didn't mind wearing slitted skirts that showed them off
cunningly.
I knew Sam would go ape over her; the little
juvenile delinquent always let his hormones overpower
his brain.
Sure enough, Sam took one look at her and his eyes
started spinning like the wheels in a slot machine. I felt
myself turning seventeen shades of green. If Sam had
seemed a little jealous of Carlos de Rivera, I was
positively bilious with envy over Josella Ecks.

The four of us met ten days before Christmas in my
formal office in the World Court building in The Hague:
Sam, his lawyer Greg Molina, the delectable Ms. Ecks,
and my plain old self. I settled into my desk chair, feeling
shabby and miserable in a nubby tweed suit. Josella sat
between the two men; when she crossed her long legs her
slitted skirt fell away, revealing ankle, calf, and a lot of
thigh. I thought I saw steam spout out of Sam's ears.
She didn't seem to affect Greg that way, but then
Gregory Molina was a married man—married to President
de Rivera's daughter, no less.
"This pretrial hearing," I said, trying to put my
emotions under some semblance of control, "is mandated
by the International Court of Justice for the purpose of
trying to come to an amicable agreement on the matter of 
Ecuador v. Vatican without the expense and publicity of
an actual trial."
"Fine by me," Sam said breezily, his eyes still on the
young woman sitting beside him. "As long as we can get it
over with by eleven. I've gotta catch the midnight Clipper.
Gotta be back at Selene City for the Christmas festivities."
I glowered at Sam. Here the future of Christianity
was hanging in the balance, and he was worried about a
Christmas party.
Greg was more formal. His brows knitting very
earnestly, he said, "The nation of Ecuador would be very
much in favor of settling this case out of court." He was
looking at me, not Josella. "Providing, of course, that we

can arrive at a reasonable settlement."
Josella smiled as if she knew more than he did. "Our
position is that a reasonable settlement would be to
throw this case in the trash bin, where it belongs."
Sam sighed as if someone had told them there is no
Santa Claus. "A reasonable settlement would be a half
billion dollars, US."
Josella waggled a finger at him. I saw that her nails
were done in warm pink. "Your suit is without legal basis,
Mr. Gunn."
"Then why are we here, oh beauteous one?"
I resisted the urge to crown Sam with the meteoric
iron paperweight on my desk. He had given it to me years
earlier, and at that particular moment I really wanted to
give it back to him—smack between his leering eyes.
Josella was unimpressed. Quite coolly, she
answered, "We are here, Mr. Gunn, because you have
entered a frivolous suit against the Vatican."
Greg spoke up. "I assure you, Ms. Ecks, the nation
of Ecuador is not frivolous."
"Perhaps not," she granted. "But I'm afraid that
you're being led down the garden path by this
unscrupulous little man."
"Little?" A vein in Sam's forehead started to throb.
"Was Napoleon little? Was Steinmetz little? Did Neil
Armstrong play basketball in college?"

Laughing, Josella said, "I apologize for the personal
reference, Mr. Gunn. It was unprofessional of me."
"Sam."
"Mr. Gunn," she repeated.
"I still want half a bill," Sam growled.
"There isn't that much money in the entire Vatican,"
she said.
"Baloney. They take in a mint and a half." Sam
ticked off on his fingers. "Tourists come by the millions.
The Vatican prints its own stamps and currency. They're
into banking and money exchange, with no internal taxes
and no restrictions on importing and exporting foreign
currencies. Nobody knows how much cash flows through
the Vatican, but they must have the highest per capita
income in the solar system."
"And it all goes to funding the Church and helping
the poor."
"The hell it does! They live like kings in there," Sam
growled.
"Wait," I said. "This is getting us nowhere."
Ignoring me, Sam went on, "And the Pope has 
absolute authority over all of it. He's got all the
executive, legislative, and judicial powers in his own
hands. He's an absolute monarch, responsible to
nobody!"
"Except God," Greg added.

"Right," Sam said. "The same God who owes me half
a billion dollars."
I repeated, "This is getting us nowhere."
"Perhaps I can set us on a useful course," Greg said.
I nodded hopefully at him.
Greg laid out Sam's case, chapter and verse. He
spent nearly an hour tracing the history of the Petrine
theory that is the basis for the Pope's claim to be "the
vicar of Christ." Then he droned on even longer about the
logic behind holding the Pope responsible for so-called
acts of God.
"If we truly believe in a God who is the cause of
these acts," he said, with implacable logic, "and we
accept the Pope's claim to be the representative of God
on Earth, then we have a firm legal, moral, and ethical
basis for this suit."
"God owes me," Sam muttered.
"The contract between God and man implied by the
Ten Commandments and the Scriptures," said Greg,
solemnly, "must be regarded as a true contract, binding
on both parties, and holding both parties responsible for
their misdeeds."
"How do you know they're misdeeds?" Josella
instantly rebutted. "We can't know as much as God does.
Perhaps these acts of God are part of His plan for our
salvation."

With an absolutely straight face, Greg said, "Then
He must reveal his purposes to us. Or be held responsible
for His acts in a court of law."
Josella shook her head slowly. I saw that Sam's eyes
were riveted on her.
She looked at me, though, and asked, "May I present
the defendant's argument, Your Honor?"
"Yes, of course."
Josella started a careful and very detailed review of
the legal situation, with emphasis on the absurdity of
trying to hold a person or a state responsible for acts of
God.
"Mr. Gunn is attempting to interpret literally a
phrase that was never so meant," she said firmly, with a
faint smile playing on her lips.
Sam fidgeted in his chair, huffed and snorted as she
went on and on, cool and logical, marshaling every point
or precedent that would help her demolish Sam's case.
She was nowhere near finished when Sam looked at
his wristwatch, and said, "Look, I've got to get to Selene.
Big doings there, and I'm obligated to be present for
them."
"What's happening?" I asked.
"Christmas stuff. Parties. We've brought in a ballet
troupe from Vancouver to do The Nutcracker. Nothing
that has anything to do with this legal crapola." He turned

to Greg. "Why don't you two lawyers fight it out and
lemme know what you decide, okay?"
Sam had to lean toward Josella to speak to Greg, but
he looked right past her, as if she weren't there. And he
was leaving Greg to make the decision? That wasn't like
Sam at all. Was he bored by all these legal technicalities?
He got to his feet. Then a slow grin crept across his
face, and he said, "Unless the three of you would like to
come up to Selene with me, as my guests. We could
continue the hearing there."
So that was it. He wanted Josella to fly with him to
the Moon. Greg and I would be excess baggage that he
would dump the first chance he got.
And Josella actually smiled at him, and replied, "I've
never been to the Moon."
Sam's grin went ear-to-ear. "Well, come on up! This
is your big chance."
"This is a pretrial hearing," I snapped, "not a tourist
agency."
Just then the door burst open and four women in
janitorial coveralls pushed into my office. Instead of
brooms they were carrying machine pistols.
"On your feet, all of you, godless humanists!"
shouted their leader, a heavy set blonde. "You are the
prisoners of the Daughters of the Mother!" She spoke in
English, with some sort of accent I couldn't identify. Not
Dutch, and certainly not American.

I stabbed at the panic button on my phone console.
Direct line to security. The blonde ignored it and hustled
the four of us out into the corridor to the bank of
elevators. The corridor was empty; I realized it was well
past quitting time, and the Court's bureaucrats had
cleared out precisely at four-thirty.
But security should be here, I thought. No sign of
them. They must have been out Christmas shopping, too.
The Daughters of the Mother pushed us into an elevator
and rode up to the roof. It was dark and cold up there;
the wind felt as if it came straight from the North Pole.
A tilt-rotor plane sat on the roof, its engines
swiveled to their vertical position, their big propellers
swinging slowly like giant scythes, making a whooshing
sound that gave the keening sea wind a basso
counterpoint.
"Get in, all of you." The hefty blonde prodded me
with the snout of her pistol.
We marched toward the plane's hatch.
"Hey, wait a minute," Sam said, pulling his sports
jacket tight across his shivering body. "I'm the guy you
want; leave these others out of it. Hell, they'd just as soon
shoot me as you would."
"I said all of you!" the blonde shouted.
Where was security? They couldn't be so lax as to
allow a plane to land on our roof and kidnap us. They 
had to be coming to our rescue. But when?

I decided to slow us down a bit. As we approached
the plane's hatch, I stumbled and went down.
"Ow!" I yelled. "My ankle!"
The big blonde wrapped an arm around my waist,
hauled me off the concrete, and tossed me like a sack of
potatoes through the open hatch of the plane. I landed on
the floor plates with a painful thump.
Sam jumped up the two-step ladder and knelt beside
me. "You okay? Are you hurt?"
I sat up and rubbed my backside. "Just my dignity," I
said.
Suddenly the whole roof was bathed in brilliant
light, and we heard the powerful throbbing of helicopter
engines.
"YOU ARE SURROUNDED!" roared a bullhorn
voice. "THIS IS THE POLICE. DROP YOUR WEAPONS
AND SURRENDER."
I scrambled to the nearest window, Sam pressing
close behind me. I could see two helicopters hovering
near the edge of the roof, armored SWAT policemen
pointing assault rifles at us.
"What fun," Sam muttered. "With just a little luck,
we could be in the middle of a firefight."
The blonde came stumping past us, heading for the
cockpit. Greg and Josella were pushed into the plane by
the other three Daughters. The last one slammed the

hatch shut and dogged it down.
"YOU HAVE THIRTY SECONDS TO THROW
DOWN YOUR WEAPONS AND SURRENDER!" roared
the police bullhorn.
"WE HAVE FOUR HOSTAGES ABOARD,
INCLUDING SENATOR MEYERS." The blonde had a
bullhorn, too. "IF YOU TRY TO STOP US, WE WILL
SHOOT HER FIRST."
Sam patted my head. "Lucky lady."
They bellowed threats back and forth for what
seemed like an eternity, but finally the police allowed the
plane to take off. With us in it. There were four police
helicopters, and they trailed after us as our plane lifted
off the roof, swiveled its engines to their horizontal
position, and began climbing into the dark night sky. The
plane was much faster than the choppers; their lights
dwindled behind us, then got lost altogether in the
clouds.
"The Peacekeepers must be tracking us by radar,"
Sam assured me. "Probably got satellite sensors
watching us, too. Jet fighters out there someplace, I bet."
And then I realized he was speaking to Josella, not
me.
We rode for hours in that plane, Sam jabbering
across the aisle to Josella while I sat beside him, staring
out the window and fuming. Greg sat on the window seat
beside Josella, but as I could see from their reflections in

the glass, Sam and Josella had eyes only for each other. I
went beyond fuming; I would have slugged Sam if we
weren't in so much trouble already.
Two of the Daughters sat at the rear of the cabin,
guns in their laps. Their leader and the other one sat up
front. Who was in the cockpit I never knew.
Beneath my anger at Sam I was pretty scared. These
Daughters of the Mother looked like religious fanatics to
me, the kind who were willing to die for their cause—
and therefore perfectly willing to kill anybody else for
their cause. They were out to get Sam, and they had
grabbed me and the other two as well. We were hostages.
Bargaining chips for the inevitable moment when the
Peacekeepers came at them with everything in their
arsenal.
And Sam was spending his time talking to Josella,
trying to ease her fears, trying to impress her with his own
courage.
"Don't worry," he told her. "It's me they want.
They'll let you and the others loose as soon as they turn
me over to their leader, whoever that might be."
And the others. I seethed. As far as Sam was
concerned, I was just one of the others. Josella was the
one he was interested in, tall and willowy and elegant. I
was just a sawed-off runt with as much glamour as a fire
hydrant, and pretty much the same figure.
Dawn was just starting to tinge the sky when we
started to descend. I had been watching out the window

during the flight, trying to puzzle out where we were
heading from the position of the Moon and the few stars I
could see. Eastward, I was pretty certain. East and south.
That was the best I could determine.
As the plane slowed down for its vertical landing, I
mentally checked out the possibilities. East and south for
six hours or so could put us somewhere in the
Mediterranean. Italy, Spain—or North Africa.
"Where in the world have they taken us?" I half
whispered, more to myself than anyone who might
answer me.
"Transylvania," Sam answered.
I gave him a killer stare. "This is no time to be
funny."
"Look at my wristwatch," he whispered back at me,
totally serious.
Its face showed latitude and longitude coordinates in
digital readout. Sam pressed one of the studs on the
watch's outer rim, and the readout spelled RUMANIA.
Another touch of the stud: TRANSYLVANIA. Another:
NEAREST MAJOR CITY, VARSAG.
I showed him my wristwatch. "It's got an
ultrahigh-frequency transponder in it. The Peacekeepers
have been tracking us ever since we left The Hague. I
hope."
Sam nodded glumly. "These Mother-lovers aren't
afraid of the Peacekeepers as long as they've got you for a

hostage."
"There's going to be a showdown, sooner or later," I
said.
Just then the plane touched down with a thump.
"Welcome," said Sam, in a Hollywood vampire
accent, "to Castle Dracula."
It wasn't a castle that they took us to. It was a mine
shaft.
Lord knows how long it had been abandoned. The
elevator didn't work; we had to climb down, single file,
on rickety wooden steps that creaked and shook with
every step we took. And it was dark down there. And
cold, the kind of damp cold that chills you to the bone. I
kept glancing up at the dwindling little slice of blue sky
as the Daughters coaxed us with their gun muzzles down
those groaning, shuddering stairs all the way to the very
bottom.
There were some dim lanterns hanging from the
rough stone ceiling of the bottom gallery. We walked
along in gloomy silence until we came to a steel door. It
took two of the Daughters to swing it open.
The bright light made my eyes water. They pushed
us into a chamber that had been turned into a
rough-hewn office, of sorts. At least it was warm. A big,
beefy redheaded woman sat scowling at us from behind a
steel desk.
"You can take their wristwatches from them now,"

she said to the blonde. Then she smiled at the surprise on
my face. "Yes, Senator Meyers, we know all about your
transponders and positioning indicators. We're not fools."
Sam stepped forward. "All right, you're a bunch of
geniuses. You've captured the most-wanted man on
Earth—me. Now you can let the others go and the
Peacekeepers won't bother you."
"You think not?" the redhead asked, suspiciously.
"Of course not!" Sam smiled his sincerest smile.
"Their job is to protect Senator Meyers, who's a judge on
the World Court. They don't give a damn about me."
"You're the blasphemer, Sam Gunn?"
"I've done a lot of things in a long and eventful life,"
Sam said, still smiling, "but blasphemy isn't one of them."
"You don't think that what you've done is
blasphemy?" The redhead's voice rose ominously. I
realized that her temper was just as fiery as her hair.
"I've always treated God with respect," Sam insisted.
"I respect Her so much that I expect Her to honor her
debts. Unfortunately, the man in the Vatican who claims
to be Her special representative doesn't think She has any
sense of responsibility."
"The man in the Vatican." The redhead's lips curled
into a sneer. "What does he know of the Mother?"
"That's what I say," Sam agreed fervently. "That's
why I'm suing him, really."

For a moment the redhead almost bought it. She
looked at Sam with eyes that were almost admiring. Then
her expression hardened. "You are a conniving little
sneak, aren't you?"
Sam frowned at her. "Little. Is everybody in the
world worried about my height?"
"And fast with your tongue, too," the redhead went
on. "I think that's the first part of you that we'll cut off."
Then she smiled viciously. "But only the first part."
Sam swallowed hard, but recovered his wits almost
immediately. "Okay, okay. But let the others go. They
can't hurt you, and if you let them go, the Peacekeepers
will get out of your hair."
"Liar."
"Me?" Sam protested.
The redhead got to her feet. She was huge, built like
a football player. She started to say something but the
words froze in her throat. Her gaze shifted from Sam to
the door, behind us.
I turned my head and saw half a dozen men in khaki
uniforms, laser rifles in their hands. The Peacekeepers, I
thought, then instantly realized that their uniforms
weren't right.
"Thank you so much for bringing this devil's spawn
to our hands," said one of the men. He was tall and slim,
with a trim moustache and an olive complexion.

"Who in hell are you?" the redhead demanded.
"We are the Warriors of the Faith, and we have
come to take this son of a dog to his just reward."
"Gee, I'm so popular," Sam said.
"He's ours!" bellowed the redhead. "We snatched
him from The Hague."
"And we are taking him from you. It is our holy
mission to attend to this pig"
"You can't!" the redhead insisted. "I won't let you!"
"We'll send you a videotape of his execution," said
the leader of the Warriors.
"No, no! We've got to kill him!"
"I am so sorry to disagree, but it is our sacred duty to
execute him. If we must kill you also, that is the will of
God."
They argued for half an hour or more, but the
Warriors outnumbered and outgunned the Daughters. So
we were marched out of that underground office, down
the mine gallery, and through another set of steel doors
that looked an awful lot like the hatches of airlocks.
The underground corridors we walked through
didn't look like parts of a mine anymore. The walls were
smoothly finished and lined with modern doors that had
numbers on them, like a hotel's rooms.
Sam nodded knowingly as we tramped along under

the watchful eyes of the six Warriors.
"This is the old shelter complex for the top
Rumanian government officials," he told me as we
walked. "From back in the Cold War days, when they
were afraid of nuclear attack."
"But that was almost a century ago," Josella said.
Sam answered, "Yeah, but the president of Rumania
and his cronies kept the complex going for years
afterward. Sort of an underground pleasure dome for the
big shots in the government. Wasn't discovered by their
taxpayers until one of the bureaucrats fell in love with
one of the call girls and spilled the beans to the media so
he could run off with her."
"How do you know?" I asked him.
"The happy couple works for me up in Selene City.
He's my chief bookkeeper now, and she supervises guest
services at the hotel."
"What kind of hotel are you running up there in
Selene?" Greg asked.
Sam answered his question with a grin. Then he
turned back to me, and said, "This complex has several
exits, all connected to old mine shafts."
Lowering my voice, I asked, "Can we get away from
these Warriors and get out of here?''
Sam made a small shrug. "There's six of them and
they've all got guns. All we've got is trickery and deceit."

"So what—"
"When I say 'beans,' " Sam whispered, "shut your
eyes tight, stop walking, and count to ten slowly."
"Why ... ?"
"Tell Greg," he said. Then he edged away from me
to whisper in Josella's ear. I felt my face burning.
"What are you saying?" one of the Warriors
demanded.
Sam put on a leering grin. "I'm asking her if she's
willing to grant the condemned man his last request."
The Warrior laughed. "We have requests to make
also."
"Fool!" their leader snapped. "We are consecrated to
the Faith. We have foresworn the comforts of women."
"Only until we have executed the dog."
"Yes," chimed another Warrior. "Once the pig is
slain, we are free of our vows."
A third added, "Then we can have the prisoners." He
smiled at Greg.
"Now wait," Sam said. He stopped walking. "Let me
get one thing straight. Am I supposed to be a pig or a
dog?"
The leader stepped up to him. "You are a pig, a dog,
and a piece of camel shit."
The man loomed a good foot over Sam's stubby

form. Sam shrugged good-naturedly, and said, "I guess
you're entitled to your opinion."
"Now walk," said the leader.
"Why should I?" Sam stuffed his hands into the
pockets of his slacks.
A slow smile wormed across the leader's lean face.
"Because if you don't walk, I will break every bone in
your face."
They were all gathered around us now, all grinning,
all waiting for the chance to start beating up on Sam. I
realized we were only a few feet away from another
airlock hatch.
"You just don't know beans about me, do you?" Sam
asked sweetly.
I squeezed my eyes shut, but the glare still burned
through my closed lids so brightly that I thought I'd go
blind. I remembered to count... six, seven ...
"Come on!" Sam grabbed at my arm. "Let's get
going!"
I opened my eyes and still saw a burning afterimage,
as if I had stared directly into the sun. The six Warriors
were down on their knees, whimpering, pawing madly at
their eyes, their rifles strewn across the floor.
Sam had Josella by the wrist with one hand. With
the other he was pulling me along.
"Let's move!" he commanded. "They won't be down

for more than a few minutes."
Greg stooped down and took one of the laser rifles.
"Do you know how to use that?" Sam asked.
Greg shook his head. "I feel better with it, though."
We raced to the hatch, pushed it open, squeezed
through it, then swung it shut again. Sam spun the control
wheel as tightly as he could.
"That won't hold them for more than a minute," he
muttered.
We ran. Of the four of us I was the slowest. Josella
sprinted ahead on her long legs, with Greg not far behind.
Sam stayed back with me, puffing almost as badly as I
was.
"We're both out of shape," he panted.
"We're both too old for this kind of thing," I said.
He looked surprised, as if the idea of getting old had
never occurred to him.
"What did you do back there?" I asked, as we
staggered down the corridor.
"Miniaturized high-intensity flash lamp," Sam said,
puffing. "For priming minilasers."
"You just happened ..." I was gasping. "... to have
one ... on you?"
"Been carrying a few," he wheezed, "ever since the
fanatics started making threats."

"Good thinking."
We found a shaft and climbed up into the sweet,
clean air of a pine forest. It was cold; there was a dusting
of snow on the ground. Our feet got thoroughly soaked,
and we were shivering as Sam pushed us through the
woods.
"Clearing," he kept telling us. "We gotta get to a
clearing."
We found a clearing at last, and the thin sunshine
filtering through the gray clouds felt good after the chill
shadows of the forest. Sam made us close our eyes again
and he set off another of his flashbulbs.
"Surveillance satellites oughtta see that," he said.
"Now it's just a matter of time to see who gets us first, the
Peacekeepers or the dog-pig guys."
It was the Peacekeepers, thank goodness. Two of
their helicopters came clattering and whooshing down on
that little clearing while a pair of jump-jets flew cover
high overhead. I was never so happy to see that big
blue-and-white symbol in my life.
The Peacekeepers had mounted a full
search-and-rescue operation. Their helicopter was
spacious, comfortable, and even soundproofed a little.
They thought of everything. While Sam filled in one of
their officers on the layout of the Rumanian shelter
complex, two enlisted personnel brought us steaming-hot
coffee and sandwiches. It made me realize that we hadn't
eaten or slept in close to twenty-four hours.

I was starting to drowse when I heard Sam ask, over
the muted roar of the 'copter's turbines, "Who were those
guys?"
The Peacekeeper officer, in her sky-blue uniform,
shook her head. "Neither the Daughters of the Mother nor
the Warriors of God are listed in our computer files."
"Terrorists," Greg Molina said. "Religious fanatics."
"Amateurs," said Josella Ecks, with a disdainful curl
of her lip.
That startled me. The way she said it. But the need
for sleep was overpowering my critical faculties. I
cranked my seat back and closed my eyes. The last thing I
saw was Sam holding Josella's hand and staring longingly
into her deep, dark, beautifully lashed eyes.
I wanted to murder her, but I was too tired.
Sam went to Selene the next day and, sure enough,
Josella went with him. Greg Molina returned to Quito,
dropping in at my office just before he left.
"Will the trial be held in The Hague or at Selene?"
he asked.
"Wherever," I groused, seething at the thought of
Sam and Josella together a quarter million miles away.
"I assume there will be a trial, since there was no
agreement at the pretrial hearing," he said.

Grimly, I answered, "It certainly looks that way."
Looking slightly worried, he asked, "If it's on the
Moon, will I have to go there? Or can I participate
electronically?"
"It would be better if you were there in person."
"I've never been in space," he admitted.
"There's nothing to it," I said. "It's like flying in an
airplane."
"But the lack of gravity ..."
"You'll get used to it in a day or so. You'll enjoy it,"
I assured him.
He looked unconvinced.
It took me a whole day of fussing and fuming before
I bit the bullet and rocketed to the Moon after Sam. And
Josella. Pride is one thing, but I just couldn't stand the
thought of Sam chasing that willowy young thing—and
catching her. Josella Ecks might think she was smart and
cool enough to avoid Sam's clutches, but she didn't know
our sawed-off Lothario as well as I did.
And it would be just like Sam to try to get the other
side's lawyer to fall for him. Even if he wasn't bonkers
about Josella, he'd want to sabotage her ability to
represent his adversary in court.
So I told myself I was doing my job as a judge of the
International Court of Justice as I flew to Selene.

I hadn't been to the Moon in nearly five years, and I
was impressed with how much bigger and more luxurious
the underground city had grown.
Selene's main plaza had been mostly empty the last
time I'd seen it, an immense domed structure of bare lunar
concrete rumbling with the echoes of bulldozers and
construction crews. Now the plaza—big enough to hold
half a dozen football fields—was filled with green trees
and flowering shrubbery. On one side stood the
gracefully curved acoustical shell of an open-air theater.
Small shops and restaurants were spotted along the
pleasant winding walk that led through the plaza, all of
them decked out with Christmas ornaments. The trees
along the walk twinkled with lights.
There were hundreds of people strolling about,
tourists walking awkwardly, carefully, in their weighted
boots to keep them from stumbling in the one-sixth
gravity. A handful of fliers soared high up near the
curving dome, using colorful rented plastic wings and
their own muscle power to fly like birds. For years Sam
had said that tourism would become a major industry in
space, and at last his prediction was coming true.
Christmas on the Moon: the ultimate holiday trip.
The lobby of the Selene Hotel was marvelous,
floored with basalt from Mare Nubium polished to a
mirror finish. The living quarters were deeper
underground than the lobby level, of course. There were
no stairs, though; too easy for newcomers unaccustomed
to the low gravity to trip and fall. I walked down a wide

rampway, admiring the sheets of water cascading
noiselessly down tilted panes of lunar glass on either side
of the central rampway into spacious fish ponds at the
bottom level. Freely flowing water was still a rare sight
on the Moon, even though aquaculture provided more of
the protein for lunar meals than agriculture did.
Soft music wafted through hidden speakers, and
tourists tossed chunks of bread to the fish in the pools,
not realizing that sooner or later the fish would be
feeding them. I saw that others had thrown coins into the
water and laughed to myself, picturing Sam wading in
there every night to collect the loose change.
I hadn't told Sam I was coming, but he must have
found out when I booked a suite at the hotel. There were
real flowers and Swiss chocolates waiting for me when I
checked in. I admired the flowers and gave the chocolates
to the concierge to distribute to the hotel's staff. Let them
have the calories.
Even before I unpacked my meager travel bag I put
in a call to Sam's office. Surprisingly, he answered it
himself.
"Hi, there!" Sam said brightly, his larger-than-life
face grinning at me from the electronic window that
covered one whole wall of my sitting room. "What brings
you to Selene?"
I smiled for him. "I got lonesome, Sam."
"Really?"

"And I thought that I'd better make certain you're
not suborning an officer of the court."
"Oh, you mean Josella?"
"Don't put on your innocent face for me, Sam
Gunn," I said. "You know damned well I mean Josella."
His expression went serious. "You don't have to
worry about her. She's got more defenses than a
porcupine. Her arms are a lot longer than mine, I found
out."
He actually looked sad. I felt sorry for him, but I
didn't want him to know it. Not yet. Sam had a way of
using your emotions to get what he wanted.
So I said, "I presume you're free for dinner."
He sighed. "Dinner, lunch, breakfast, you call it."
"Dinner. Seven o'clock in the hotel's restaurant." All
the lunar facilities kept Greenwich Mean Time, which
was only an hour off from The Hague.
I had expected Sam to be downcast. I'd seen him
that way before, moping like a teenaged Romeo when the
object of his desire wouldn't go along with him. Usually
his pining and sighing only lasted until he found a new
object of desire; I think twenty-four hours was the longest
he'd ever gone, in the past. Like a minor viral infection.
But when I got to the restaurant Sam was practically
bouncing with excitement. As the maitre d' led me to the
table, Sam jumped to his feet so hard that he rose clear

above the table and soared over it, landing on his toes
right in front of me like a star ballet dancer. People stared
from their tables.
Gracefully, Sam took my hand and bent his lips to
it. His lips were curved into a tremendously self-satisfied
smile.
Alarm bells went off in my head. Either he's finally
scored with Josella, or he's found a new love. I knew he
couldn't possibly be this happy just to see me again.
Sam shooed the maitre d' away and helped me into
my chair. Then he chugged around the table and sat
down, folded his hands, rested his chin on them, and
grinned at me as if he was a cat who'd just cornered the
canary market.
I saw that there was a chilled bottle of French
champagne in a silver bucket next to the table. A waiter
immediately brought a dish of caviar and placed it in the
center of the table.
"What's going on?" I asked.
Sam cocked an eyebrow at me. "Going on? What do
you mean?"
"The champagne and caviar. The grin on your face."
"Couldn't that be just because I'm so happy to see
you?"
"No it couldn't," I said. "Come on, Sam, we've
known each other too long for this kind of runaround."

He laughed softly and leaned closer toward me.
"He's coming here."
"Who's coming here?"
"Il Papa himself," Sam whispered.
"The Pope?" My voice squeaked like a surprised
mouse.
His head bobbing up and down, Sam said, "William
I. The bishop of Rome. Vicar of Christ. Successor to the
prince of the Apostles. Supreme pontiff of the universal
church. Patriarch of the west, primate of Italy, archbishop
and metropolitan of the Roman province, sovereign of the
state of Vatican City, servant of the servants of God."
He took a breath. "That one."
"The Pope is coming here? To the Moon? To
Selene?"
"Just got the word from Cardinal Hagerty himself.
Pope Bill is coming here to deal with me personally."
I felt as if I was in free fall, everything inside me
sinking. "Oh my God," I said.
"Nope," said Sam. "Just His representative."
It was supposed to be very hush-hush. No news
reporters. No leaks. The Pope came incognito, slipping
out of Rome in plain clothes and riding to the Moon in a
private rocket furnished by Rockledge Industries and paid

for by Frank Banner's insurance consortium.
For once in his life Sam kept a secret that wasn't his
own. He bubbled and jittered through the two days it
took for the Pope to arrive at Selene. Instead of putting
him up in the hotel, where he might be recognized, Sam
ensconced Pope William, Cardinal Hagerty, and their
retinue of guards and servants—all male—in a new wing
of Selene's living quarters that hadn't been opened yet for
occupancy.
Their quarters were a little rough, a little unfinished.
Walls nothing but bare stone. Some of the electrical
fixtures hadn't been installed yet. But there was
comfortable furniture and plenty of room for them.
Suddenly I was a World Court judge in charge of a
pretrial hearing again. I set up the meeting in the Pope's
suite, after a half day of phone discussions with Sam and
Cardinal Hagerty. Greg Molina reluctantly came up from
Quito; Sam provided him with a special high-energy
boost so he could get to us within twenty-four hours.
So there we were: Sam, the Pope, Cardinal Hagerty,
Greg, Josella, and me, sitting around a circular table
made of lunar plastic. Of the six of us, only Sam and I
seemed truly at ease. The others looked slightly queasy
from the low gravity. Cardinal Hagerty, in particular,
gripped the arms of his chair as if he was afraid he'd be
sucked up to the bare stone ceiling if he let go.
I was surprised at Josella's uneasiness. She was
seated next to me—I made certain to place myself

between her and Sam. She had always seemed so cool
and self-possessed that I felt almost pained for her.
While Greg went through the formality of reading
the precis of Sam's suit against the Vatican, I leaned over,
and whispered to Josella, "Are you having trouble
adjusting to the gravity?"
She looked surprised, almost shocked. Then she
tried to smile. "It's ... not that. It's this room. I feel... it
must be something like claustrophobia."
I wondered that she hadn't been bothered before,
but then I figured that the other rooms of the hotel had
big electronic window walls and green plants and
decorations that tricked the eye into forgetting that you
were buried deep underground. This conference room's
walls were bare, which made its ceiling seem low. Like a
monk's cell, I thought.
Halfway through Greg's reading of the precis,
Cardinal Hagerty cleared his throat noisily, and asked, "If
there's nothing new in this travesty, could we be
dispensing with the rest of this reading?''
Hagerty was by far the oldest person in the group.
His face was lined and leathery; his hair thin and white.
He looked frail and cranky, and his voice was as creaky as
a rusted door hinge.
Sam nodded agreement, as did Josella. Greg tapped
his hand-sized computer and looked up from its screen.
"Now then," said the Pope, folding his hands on the

tabletop, "let's get down to the nitty-gritty."
He was smiling at us. Pope William looked even
younger in person than on TV. And even more dynamic
and handsome. A rugged and vigorous man with steel
gray hair and steel gray eyes. He looked more like a
successful corporate executive or a lawyer than a man of
God. Even in his white Papal robes, it was hard for me to
think of him as a priest. And a celibate.
He had the knack of making you feel that he was
concentrating all his attention on you, even when he
wasn't looking directly at you. And when his eyes did
catch mine, I got goose bumps, so help me. Dynamic? He
was dynamite.
Of course, he didn't affect Sam the way he hit me.
"You want the nitty-gritty?" Sam replied, with no
hint of awe at speaking face-to-face with the Pope. "Okay.
God owes me half a billion dollars."
"Ridiculous," Cardinal Hagerty croaked.
"Not according to the insurance industry," Sam
countered. He jabbed a finger toward Josella. "Tell 'em,
kid."
Josella looked startled. "Tell them what?"
"Your employers claim that the accidents that've
almost wrecked Ecuador National Space Systems were
acts of God. Right?"
"Yes," Josella answered warily.

Sam spread his hands. "See? They're the ones who
put the blame on God, not me. All I'm trying to do is
collect what's owed me."
Pope William turned his megawatt smile on Sam.
"Surely you don't expect the Church to pay you for
industrial accidents."
"Don't call me Shirley," Sam mumbled.
"What?"
Barely suppressing his glee, Sam said, "We've been
through all this. The insurance industry says God's
responsible. You claim to be God's representative on
Earth. So you owe Ecuador National Space Systems half
a billion dollars."
Pope William's smile darkened just a bit. "And what
will you do if we refuse to pay—assuming, that is, that
the World Court should decide in your favor."
"Which is ridiculous," said Hagerty.
Sam was unperturbed. "If the World Court really is
an International Court of Justice, as it claims to be"—he
gave me the eye—"then it has to decide in my favor."
"I doubt that," said the Pope.
"Ridiculous," uttered Cardinal Hagerty. It seemed to
be his favorite word.
"Think about it," Sam went on, sitting up straighter
in his chair. "Think of the reaction in the Moslem nations
if the World Court seems to treat the Vatican differently

from other nations. Or India or China."
Pope William's brows knit slightly. Hagerty's
expression could have soured milk.
"Another thing," Sam added. "You guys have been
working for a century or so to heal the rifts among other
Christians. Imagine how the Protestants will feel if they
see the Vatican getting special treatment from the World
Court."
"Finding the Vatican innocent of responsibility for
your industrial accidents is hardly special treatment," said
Pope William.
"Maybe you think so, but how will the Swedes feel
about it? Or the Orthodox Catholics in Greece and Russia
and so on? Or the Southern Baptists?"
The Pope said nothing.
"Think about the publicity," Sam said, leaning back
easily in his chair. "Remember what an American writer
once said: 'There is no character, howsoever good and
fine, but can be destroyed by ridicule.' "
" 'By ridicule, howsoever poor and witless,' " the
Pope finished the citation. "Mark Twain."
"That's right," said Sam.
Cardinal Hagerty burst out, "You can't hold the
Vatican responsible for acts of the Lord! You can't expect
the Church to pay every time some daft golfer gets struck
by lightning because he didn't have sense enough to come

in out of the rain!"
"Hey, you're the guys who claim you're God's
middle-man. You spent several centuries establishing that
point, too, from what I hear."
"All right," said Pope William, smiling again, "let's
grant for the sake of argument that the World Court
decides against the Vatican. We, of course, will refuse to
pay. It would be impossible for us to pay such a sum, in
fact. Even if we could, we'd have to take the money away
from the poor and the starving in order to give it to you."
"To the nation of Ecuador," Sam corrected.
"To Ecuador National Space Systems," grumbled
Cardinal Hagerty.
"Which is you," said the Pope.
Sam shrugged.
Pope William turned to me. "What would happen if
we refused to pay?"
I felt flustered. My face got hot. "I... uh—the only
legal alternative would be for the Court to ask the
Peacekeepers to enforce its decision."
"So the Peacekeepers will invade the Vatican?"
Cardinal Hagerty sneered. "What will they do, cart away
the Pieta? Hack off the roof of the Sistine Chapel and
sell it at auction?"
"No," I admitted. "I don't see anything like that
happening."

"Lemme tell you what'll happen," Sam said. "The
world will see that your claim to be God's special
spokesman is phony. The world will see that you hold
yourselves above the law. Your position as a moral leader
will go down the toilet. The next time you ask the nations
to work for peace and unity the whole world will laugh in
your face."
Cardinal Hagerty went white with anger. He
sputtered, but no words came past his lips. I thought he
was going to have a stroke, right there at our conference
table.
But the Pope touched him on the shoulder, and the
Cardinal took a deep, shuddering breath and seemed to
relax somewhat.
Pope William's smile was gone. He focused those
steel gray eyes on Sam, and said, "You are a dangerous
man, Mr. Gunn."
Sam stared right back at him. "I've been called lots
of things in my time, but never dangerous."
"You would extort half a billion dollars out of the
mouths of the world's neediest people?"
"And use it to create jobs so that they wouldn't be
needy anymore. So they won't have to depend on you or
anybody else. So they can stand on their own feet and
live in dignity."
Sam was getting worked up. For the first time in my
life, I saw Sam becoming really angry.

"You go around the world telling people to accept
what God sends them. You'll help them. Sure you will.
You'll help them to stay poor, to stay miserable, to be
dependent on Big Daddy from Rome."
"Sam!" I admonished.
"I've read the Gospels. Christ went among the poor
and shared what he had with them. He told a rich guy to
sell everything he had and give it to the poor if he wanted
to make it into heaven. I don't see anybody selling off the
Papal jewels. I see Cardinals jet-setting around the world.
I see the Pope telling the poor that they're God's chosen
people—from the balconies of posh hotels."
Greg Molina smiled grimly. He must be a Catholic
who's turned against the Church, I thought.
Sam kept on. "All my life I've seen the same old
story: big government or big religion or big corporations
telling the little guys to stay in their places and be
grateful for whatever miserable crumbs they get. And they
stay in their places and take what you deign to give them.
And their children grow up poor and hungry and
miserable and listen to the same sad song and make more
children who grow up just as poor and hungry and
miserable."
"That's not his fault," I said.
"Isn't it?" Sam was trembling with rage. "They're all
the same, whether it's government or corporate or
religion. As long as you stay poor and miserable they'll
help you. And all they do is help you to stay dependent

on them."
Pope William's expression was grim. But he said,
"You're entirely right."
Sam's mouth opened, then clicked shut. Then he
managed to utter, "Huh?"
"You are entirely right," the Pope repeated. He
smiled again, but now it was almost sad, from the heart.
"Oh, maybe not entirely, but right enough. Holy Mother
Church has struggled to help the world's poor for
centuries, but today we have more poor people than ever
before. It is clear that our methods are not successful."
Sam's eyes narrowed warily, sensing a trap ahead.
Cardinal Hagerty grumbled something too low for me to
hear.
"For centuries we have ridden on the horns of a
dilemma, a paradox, if you will," the Pope continued.
"The goal of Holy Mother Church—the task given to
Peter by Christ—was to save souls, not bodies. The
Church's eyes have always been turned toward Heaven.
Everything we have done has been done to bring souls to
salvation, regardless of the suffering those souls must
endure on Earth."
Before Sam could object, the Pope added, "Or so we
have told ourselves."
Cardinal Hagerty let out his breath in what might
have been a sigh. Or a hiss.
Pope William smiled at the old man, then

continued, "The news media have hinted at... frictions
between myself and the Curia—the bureaucracy that
actually runs the Vatican."
"I've heard such rumors," I said.
Clasping his hands together, the Pope said, "The
differences between myself and the Curia are based on
the assessment that you have just made, Mr. Gunn. The
Church has indeed told its faithful to ignore the needs of
this world in order to prepare for the next. I believe that
such an attitude has served us poorly. I believe the
Church must change its position on many things. We can't
save souls who have given themselves to despair, to crime
and drugs and all kinds of immorality. We must give our
people hope.''
"Amen to that," Sam muttered.
"Hope for a better life here on Earth."
Ordinarily Sam would have quipped that we weren't
on Earth at the moment. But he remained quiet.
"So you see," Pope William said, "we are not so far
apart as you thought."
Sam shook himself, like a man trying to break loose
from a hypnotic spell. "I still want my half bill," he said.
Pope William smiled at him. "We don't have it, and
even if we did, we wouldn't give it to you."
"Then you're going to go down the tubes, just like I
said."

"And the changes I am trying to make within the
Vatican will go down the tubes with me," Pope William
replied.
Sam thought a moment, then said, "Yeah, I guess
they will."
Leaning toward Sam, Pope William pleaded, "But
don't you understand? If you press your case, all the
reforms that the Church needs will never be made. Even
if you don't win, the case will be so infamous that I'll be
blocked at every turn by the Curia."
"That's your problem," Sam replied, so low I could
barely hear him.
"Why do you think I came up here?" the Pope
continued. "I wanted to make a personal appeal to you to
be reasonable. I need your help!"
Sam said nothing.
Cardinal Hagerty recovered his voice. "I thought
from the beginning that this trip was a waste of precious
time."
Pope William pushed his chair back from the table.
"I'm afraid you were right all along," he said to the
Cardinal.
"So we'll have a trial," Sam said, getting to his feet.
"We will," said the Pope. He was nearly six feet tall;
he towered over Sam.
"You'll lose," Sam warned.

The Pope's smile returned, but it was only a pale
imitation of the earlier version. "You're forgetting one
thing, Mr. Gunn. God is on our side."
Sam gave him a rueful grin. "That's okay. I'm used to
working against the big guys."
Sam and I walked slowly along the corridor that led
from the Pope's quarters to the main living section of
Selene. Josella trudged along on Sam's other side; Greg
was a few steps ahead of us.
"Sam," I said, "I'm going to recommend against a
trial."
He didn't look surprised.
"You can't do this," I said. "It's not right."
Sam seemed subdued, but he still replied, "You can
recommend all you want to, Jill. The Court will still have
to hear the case. The law's on my side."
"Then the law is an ass!"
He grinned at me. "Old gray-eyes got to you, didn't
he? Sexy guy, for a Pope."
I glared at him. There's nothing so infuriating as a
man who thinks he knows what's going on inside your
head. Especially when he's right.
Josella said, "I'll have to report this meeting to my
superiors back in Hartford."
"How about having supper with me?" Sam asked

her. Right in front of me.
Josella glanced at me. "I don't think so, Sam. It
might be seen as a conflict of interest."
Sam laughed. "We'll bring the judge along. We'll
discuss the case. Hey, Greg," he called up the corridor,
"you wanna have dinner with the rest of us?"
So the four of us met at the hotel's restaurant after
freshening up in our individual rooms. I made certain to
follow Sam to his suite, down the corridor from Josella's,
before going to my own.
"Bodyguarding me?" he asked mischievously.
"Protecting my interest," I said. Then I added loftily,
"In the integrity of the World Court and the international
legal system."
Sam gave me a wry smile.
"I don't want you tampering with the opposition's
lawyer," I said.
"Tamper? Me? The thought never entered my mind."
"I know what's in your mind, Sam. You can't fool
me."
"Have I ever tried to?" he asked.
And I had to admit to myself that he never had. To
the rest of the world Sam might be a devious womanizing
rogue, a sly underhanded con man, even an extortionist,
but he'd always been up-front with me. Damn him!

The restaurant was crowded, but Sam got us a quiet
table in a corner. He and Greg were already there when I
arrived. Shortly after me, Josella swept in, looking like an
African princess in a long, clinging gold-mesh sheath.
Sam's eyes went wide. He had barely flickered at my Paris
original, but I didn't have Josella's figure or long legs.
Sam sat Josella on one side of him, me on the other.
Greg was across the table from him. I think he was
enjoying having two women next to him. I only hoped he
couldn't see how jealous I was of Josella.
Trying to hide that jealousy, I turned to Greg. I was
curious about him. Over predinner cocktails, I asked him,
"You're a Catholic, aren't you? How do you feel about all
this?"
Greg looked down into his drink as he stirred it with
his straw. "I am a Catholic, but not the kind you may
think. There are many of us in Latin America who
recognized ages ago that the bishops and cardinals and all
the 'official' Church hierarchy were in the service of the
big landlords, the government, the tyrants."
"Greg was a revolutionary," Sam said, with a smirk.
"I still am," he told us. "But now I work from inside
the system. I learned that from Sam. Now I help to create
jobs for the poor, to educate them and help them break
free of poverty."
"And free of the Church?" Josella asked.
Greg said, "Most of us remain Catholics, but we do

not support the hierarchy. We have worker priests among
us, men of the people."
"Isn't that what Pope William wants to encourage?" I
asked.
"Perhaps so," Greg said. "His words sound good. But
words are not deeds."
"You're really going to insist on a trial?" I asked
Sam.
He didn't look happy about it, but he said softly,
"Got to. Ecuador National is close to bankruptcy. We
need that money."
Greg nodded. I believed him, not Sam.
Dinner was uncomfortable, to say the least. Pope
William had gotten to all of us, even Sam.
But by the time dessert was being served, at least
Sam had brightened up a bit. He turned his attention to
Josella.
"Is your last name Dutch?" he asked her.
She smiled a little. "Actually, its derivation is Greek,
I believe."
"You don't look Greek."
"Looks can be deceiving, Mr. Gunn."
"Call me Sam."
Josella seemed to consider the proposition for a few
moments, then decided. "All right—Sam."

"Did you call your bosses in Hartford, Josie?" he
asked her.
"Did I! Old man Banner himself got on the screen. Is
he pissed with you!"
Sam laughed. "Good. He's the sonofabitch who
shifted the blame to God."
"That's a standard clause in every policy, Sam."
"Yeah, but I asked him personally to reconsider in
my case, and he laughed in my face."
"He said if you took this case to trial, he'd personally
break your neck," Josella said, very seriously. "He used a
lot of adjectives to describe you, your neck, and how
much he'd enjoy doing it."
"Great!" Sam grinned. "Did you make a copy of the
conversation?"
Josella gave him a slow, delicious smile. "I did not. I
even erased the core memory of it in my computer. You
won't be subpoenaing my boss's heated words, Mr.
Gunn."
Sam feigned crushing disappointment.
"This Mr. Banner hates Sam so much?" Greg asked.
"I think he truly does," said Josella.
"Perhaps he is the one who sent the assassins after
Sam," Greg suggested. "At least one set of them."
"Mr. Banner?" she looked shocked.

A thought struck me. "You said the assassins were
amateurs, Josella. Have you had much experience with
terrorists?"
"Only what I read in the news media," she answered
smoothly. "It seems to me that real terrorists blow you
away as soon as they get the chance. They don't drag you
across the landscape and gloat at you."
"Then let's be glad they were amateurs," Sam said.
"Professionals would have killed us all, right there in
your office," Josella said to me. Flatly. As if she knew
exactly how it was done.
"Without worrying about getting caught?" Greg
asked.
"Considering the response time of the Dutch security
people," Josella said, "they could have iced the four of us
and made it out of the building with no trouble. If they
had been professionals."
"Pleasant thought," Sam said.
There was plenty of night life in Selene, but as we
left the restaurant Sam told us that he was tired and going
to his quarters. It sounded completely phony to me.
Then Josella said she was retiring for the night, too.
Greg looked a little surprised.
"I understand there's a gaming casino in the hotel,"

he said. "I think I'll try my luck."
We said good night to Greg and headed for the
elevator to take us down to the level where our rooms
were. On Earth, the higher your floor, the more
prestigious and expensive. On the Moon, where the
surface is pelted with micrometeors and bathed in hard
radiation, prestige and expense increase with your
distance downward.
Sam made a great show of saying good night to
Josella. She even let him kiss her hand before she closed
her door. I walked with him as far as the door to my own
suite.
"Want to come in for a nightcap?" I asked.
Sam shook his head. "I'm really pretty pooped, kid.
This business with the Pope's hit me harder than I thought
it would."
But his eyes kept sliding toward Josella's door,
down the corridor.
"Okay, Sam," I said, trying to make it sound sweet
and unsuspecting. "Good night."
He pecked me on the cheek. A brotherly kiss. I
hadn't expected more, but I still wanted something
romantic or at least warm.
I closed my door and leaned against it. Suddenly I
felt really weary, tired of the whole mess. Tired of
chasing Sam, who was interested in every female in the
solar system except me. Tired of this legal tangle with the

Vatican. And scared of the effect that Pope William had
on me. I wondered if one of the changes he wanted to
make in the Church was to allow priests to marry. Wow!
I honestly tried to sleep. But I just tossed and fussed
until I finally admitted that I was wide awake. I told the
phone beside the bed to get Sam for me.
It got his answering routine. "I'm either sleeping or
doing something else important. Leave your name, and I'll
get back to you, promise."
Sleeping or doing something else important. I knew
what "something else" was. I pulled on a set of coveralls
and tramped down the corridor to Sam's door. I knocked.
No answer. Knocked harder. Still no answer.
Pounded on it. He wasn't there.
I knew where he was. Steaming with rage, I stomped
down the corridor to Josella's door and banged on it with
both fists. I even kicked it.
"I know you're in there, Sam!" I shouted, not giving a
damn who in the hotel could hear me. "Open up this
goddamned door!"
Josella opened it. She was wearing nothing but the
sheerest of nightgowns. And she had a pistol in her hand.
"Senator Meyers," she said, with a sad kind of
resignation in her voice. "I had hoped to avoid this."
Puzzled, I pushed past her and into her room. Sam
was sitting on the bed, buck naked, a sheet wrapped

around his middle.
"Aw, shit, Jill," he said, frowning. "Now she's got
you, too."
It hit me at last. Turning to Josella, I said, "You're an
assassin!"
She nodded, her face very serious.
"She wants to waste me," Sam said gloomily, not
moving from the bed.
"But why?" I blurted.
Josella kept the pistol rock-steady in her hand.
"Because the ayatollahs are unanimous in their decision
that this unbeliever must die."
"You're a Moslem?"
She smiled tightly. "Not all Moslem women wear
veils and chadors, Senator Meyers."
"But why would the Moslems want to kill Sam? He's
suing the Pope, not Islam."
"He is making a travesty of all religions. He is
mocking God. The Church of Rome has yet to see the
light of true revelation, but we slaves of Allah can't allow
this blasphemy to continue."
"It's Islam's contribution to global religious
solidarity," Sam said, disgust dripping from his words.
"I had wanted to do it cleanly, professionally,"
Josella said, "without any complications."

"That's why you let Sam into your room," I said.
"Yes," she said. "To give the condemned man his last
wish. Although Sam didn't know he was condemned
when I granted his wish."
"So you made it with her, after all," I said to Sam,
angrily.
He made a sour face. "She screwed me, all right."
"And now what?" I asked Josella. "You kill us
both?"
"I'm afraid so."
"And how do you get away?"
She shrugged. Inside that sheer nightgown it looked
delicious, even to me. "There's a shuttle leaving for Earth
orbit at midnight. Passage on it has already been booked
for a young man named Shankar. By the time your bodies
are discovered I will be Mr. Shankar, complete with
moustache and beard."
"It'll have to be a damned good disguise," Sam
groused. Almost smiling, Josella said, "It will be. Even
my fingerprints will be different."
"You said you're a professional." I stalled for time.
"You mean you've done this kind of thing before?"
Josella nodded slowly. "For six years. My job has
been to assassinate policyholders whose estates would go
to Islamic causes."

"You've worked for insurance companies, and they
never knew?''
"Of course not."
"She's a lawyer, for Chrissake," Sam snapped. "She's
trained to lie."
The phone rang. We heard Josella's taped voice say
sweetly, "I am not able to answer your call right now.
Please leave your name, and I'll call you back as soon as I
possibly can."
"Josella?" I recognized that bombastic voice. It was
Frank Banner. "This is Banner. Haven't been able to sleep
for the past two nights. This damned business with Sam
Gunn is driving me nuts. He's actually going ahead with
his suit in the World Court, is he? Damned little pissant
jerk! We can't let him drag the Pope through the mud the
way he wants to. We just can't! Tell him we'll settle with
him. Not his damned half billion, that's outrageous. But
tell him we'll work out something reasonable if he'll drop
this damned lawsuit."
I felt my mouth drop open. I looked at Sam, and he
was grinning as if he'd been expecting this all along.
"And tell him that if I ever see him in the same room
with me, I'll break every bone in his scrawny goddamned
neck! Tell him that, too!"
The phone connection clicked dead. Sam flopped
back on the bed and whooped triumphantly.
"I knew it!" he yelled. "I knew that Francis Xavier

Banner couldn't let the Pope come to trial. I knew the
tightfisted sonofabitch would finally break down and
offer to settle my insurance claims!" He laughed wildly,
kicking his bare hairy legs in the air and pounding the
mattress with his fists.
I just stood there, dumbfounded. Had this whole
complex procedure been nothing more than an elaborate
scheme by Sam to get his insurance carrier to accept his
accident claims? Yes, I realized. That was Sam Gunn at
his wiliest: threaten the Pope to get what he considered
he was owed.
The gun in Josella's hand wavered, then she let her
arm drop to her side.
"You don't have to kill Sam now," I said. "There's
not going to be a court case after all."
"No," she said. "The blasphemer must still die."
Sam got to his bare feet, clutching the bedsheet
around his middle like a Roman senator who didn't quite
know how to drape his toga properly.
"You're a fraud," Sam said.
Josella's dark eyes snapped at him. "Fraud?"
"You're about as professional a killer as that fat
blond Daughter."
"You think so?" Josella's voice went hard and cold,
like an ice pick. She still had the gun in her hand.
"You said professionals do the job without

hesitation," Sam said. "No talk, just boom, you're dead."
Josella nodded.
"So you're an amateur," Sam said, grinning at her.
"You did a lot more than talk before you hauled out your
gun."
"I did that with all the others, too," Josella said. It
was a flat statement, neither a boast nor an excuse. "It's
my trademark. Two of the older men I didn't even have to
kill; they died of natural causes."
"Bullshit all the others. You've never killed
anybody, and we both know it."
"You're wrong—"
"Yeah, sure. I'm going to start believing what a
lawyer tells me, at my advanced age."
Josella looked confused. I know I was.
But Sam knew exactly what he was doing. "Put your
gun back wherever the hell you were hiding it and get out
of here," he told her. "Get on the midnight shuttle and
don't come back."
"I can't do that," said Josella. "My mission is to kill
you—or die. If I let you go, they'll kill me."
"Oh shit," Sam muttered.
"You mean that your own people will murder you if
you don't kill Sam?"
Josella nodded. "I must succeed or die. That is what

I promised them."
With a disgusted frown, Sam clutched his bedsheet a
little tighter and reached for the phone with his free hand.
"Don't!" Josella warned, raising her gun.
"I'm not calling security."
"Then who . . . ?"
Sam called Pope William. The Pope looked
shocked, even on the tiny screen of the Picturephone, and
even more surprised when Sam told him what his call was
about.
"Sanctuary," he said. "This lady here needs your
protection."
Blinking sleep from his steely eyes, Pope William
said, "Maybe you'd better come over here to explain this
to me."
It was almost comical watching Sam and Josella get
dressed while she still tried to keep her pistol on us. Then
the three of us trotted down the nearly empty corridors,
back to the Pope's quarters. Two of his own security men,
Swiss guards in plain coveralls, were waiting for us.
They brought us to a kind of sitting room, a bare
little cell with four chairs grouped around a coffee table.
Nothing else in the room: not a decoration or any
refreshments or even a carpet on the stone floor. Josella
sat down warily, put her pistol on her lap.
Pope William entered the room a few moments after

we did. He was wearing a white sweatshirt and an old
pair of Levis, and he still filled the room with a warm
brilliance.
It was long past midnight before Sam got the whole
thing explained to the Pope. Josella didn't help, insisting
that she wanted no help from unbelievers.
"I won't try to convert you," William said, smiling at
her. "But I can offer you protection and help you create a
new persona for yourself."
"A kind of witness protection plan," Sam said, trying
to encourage her. "See, we're bringing the Vatican into
the twenty-first century."
Me? I was stewing. The two of them were falling all
over themselves trying to help Josella and ignoring me
altogether.
Josella was starting to nod, seeing that maybe there
was a way out of the blind corner she'd trapped herself in.
She took the gun from her lap, popped open its magazine,
and laid the pieces on the coffee table.
"All right," she said. "I'll go along with you."
"But what about those other killings?" I heard
myself blurt out. "She's admitted to murdering God
knows how many men!"
Sam glowered at me.
Pope William smiled. "How do we know, Senator
Meyers, that this entire episode—Sam's lawsuit, my

coming to the Moon, the various assassination
attempts—how do we know that all of this hasn't been
God's way of bringing this one woman to repentance and
salvation?"
"I won't convert," Josella snapped. "I'm a Moslem."
"Of course," said the Pope. "I only want you to
change your life, not your religion."
"All this," I heard the disbelief in my own voice,
"just for her?''
"There is more joy in heaven over one sinner who's
redeemed than there is over one of the faithful," Pope
William said.
Even God was concentrating on Josella, I thought,
ashamed of my jealousy but feeling it seething inside me
nonetheless.
Sam grinned at him. "So you think this whole thing
has been an act of God, huh?"
"Everything is an act of God," said Pope William.
"Isn't that right, Josella?"
She nodded silently.
Sam and I left Josella with the Pope. As we walked
back along the corridors I tried to stop feeling so damned
jealous. But the thought of her with Pope William just
plain boiled me. All of a sudden it struck me that Josella
might be more of a threat to William than she was to
Sam. His soul, that is; not his body.

I started to laugh.
"What's so funny?" Sam asked.
"Nothing," I said. "It's just—everything's turned
upside down and inside out."
"Nope," Sam said. "Everything worked out just the
way I thought it would. Ol' Francis X. was an altar boy,
y'know. Went to Notre Dame and almost became a priest,
before he found out how much he enjoyed making
money."
"You knew that all along?"
"I was counting on it," Sam answered cheerfully.
We were at my door. I realized I was very weary,
drained physically and emotionally. Sam looked as
chipper as a sparrow, despite the hour.
"Tomorrow's Christmas Eve," he said.
I tapped my wristwatch. "You mean today; it's well
past midnight."
"Right. I gotta get a high-gee boost direct to Rome
set up for Billy Boy if he's gonna say Christmas Eve mass
in St. Peter's. Even then it's gonna be awful close. See
ya!"
He hustled down the corridor to his own suite,
whistling shrilly off-key. And that's the last I saw of Sam
until Christmas.

Pope William was overjoyed, of course. He invited
me to breakfast that morning, just before his high-boost
shuttle was set to take off. Even Cardinal Hagerty
managed to smile, although it looked as if the effort might
shatter his stony face. Josella was nowhere in sight,
though.
"My prayers have been answered," the Pope told me.
"The Lord certainly moves in mysterious ways," I
said.
"Indeed She does," said the Pope, with a
mischievous wink.
More mysterious than either of us realized at the
time. Sam set up a direct high-gee flight to Rome for the
Papal visitors, so that Pope William could get back in
time for his Christmas Eve mass in St. Peter's. But all of a
sudden an intense solar flare erupted and raised radiation
levels in cislunar space so high that all flights between
the Earth and the Moon had to be canceled. All work on
the lunar surface stopped and everybody had to stay
underground for forty-eight hours. It was as if God was
forcing all of Selene's residents and visitors to observe the
Christmas holiday.
Which is how William I became the first Pope to
celebrate a public mass on the Moon. On Christmas Eve,
in Selene's main plaza. The whole population turned out,
even Sam.
"I figure about five percent of this crowd is Roman
Catholic," Sam said, looking over the throng. We were

seated up on the stage of the theater shell, behind the
makeshift altar. Several thousand people jammed the
theater's tiers of seats and spilled out onto the grass of the
plaza's greenway.
"That doesn't matter," I said. "For one hour, we're all
united."
Sam grinned. The Pope didn't have his best
ceremonial robes with him; he offered the mass in a plain
white outfit. "They're doing The Nutcracker this evening,"
Sam whispered to me. "Wanna see it?"
Low-gravity ballet. Once I had dreams of becoming
a dancer on the Moon. "I wouldn't miss it."
"Good," said Sam.
We watched the elaborate ritual of the mass, and the
thousands of transfixed men and women and children
standing out on the plaza, their eyes on the Pope. I
spotted a slim, dark-skinned young man in a trim
moustache and beard who looked awfully familiar.
"Y'know," Sam whispered, "maybe I've been wrong
about this all along."
I nodded.
"I mean," he went on, "if a guy really wants to make
a fortune, he ought to start a religion."
I turned and stared at him. "You wouldn't!"
"Maybe that's what I ought to do."

"Oh Sam, you devil! Start a religion? You?"
"Who knows."
I tried to glare at him but couldn't.
"And another thing," he whispered. "If we ever do
get married, you'll have to live here on the Moon with
me. I'm not going back to Earth; it's too dangerous down
there."
My heart skipped a couple of beats. That was the
first time Sam had ever admitted there was any kind of
chance he'd marry me.
He shrugged good-naturedly. "Merry Christmas,
Jill."
"Merry Christmas," I replied, thinking that it might
turn out to be a very interesting new year indeed.

