Sometime just before dawn.
My name is Robert Foster.
Up until twenty four hours ago I lived in a place called the Gap. I've lived
with a peaceful tribe of nomads for as long as I can remember.  Today, as our
tribal leader predicted, security forces from Union City came to our
location.  They were only interested in finding one man, me.  Why I don't
know.
After being forced at gun point into the heletransport, my peaceful village
was destroyed.  It was then that I vowed revenge.  I must find who was
responsible for bringing me here and having so many innocent people killed.
On our voyage in, our heletransport crash landed somewhere in the city.
Before I fled the transport, I was able to recover the character board from
my robotic companion, Joey.  I was also able to grab these security manuals
and files about this city and its residents.  Hopefully, with Joey's help, they
can give me the information I need to get through this nightmare.
If you should find this manual I hope you will continue my fight to rid this
city of the oppressive forces that crush the inhabitants' free will.  The
revolution must be fought with or without me.
ROBERT FOSTER
-----START PAGE 1-----
CONTENTS
CHAIRMANS FORWARD
2
REICH S. COMMANDER
3
BRIEFING NOTES
4
OBSERVATION LIST
6
SUSPECTS
LAMB, GILBERT
7
EINBECK, ANITA
8
COLSTON, VIC
9
HOBBINS, HOWARD
10
BONNEVIALLE, VINCENT
11
BURKE, SURGEON
12
GODDARD, KIT
13
GILLATT, JEROME
14
PIERMONT, DANIELLE
15
ERHARD, BEVERLEY
16
LIFEY, PAMELA
17
WARD, HUTCH
18
RATGIRL
19
DODDS, DINGO
20
KEARNS, KIPPER
21
WHIM, DOUGLAS
22
KOPPISS, HANNAH
23
scanned and compiled by Underdogs for Home of the Underdogs, http://www.theunderdogs.org
Beneath a Steel Sky

WERNER, KAREN
24
SANTINI, JOEL
25
EVANS, GINGER
26
OPERATION 'STEEL SKY'
27
GAME WALK-THROUGH
34
-----END PAGE 1-----
-----START PAGE 2-----
FORWARD BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE UNION
SECURITY COUNCIL
The council is proud of the achievement of the security forces in promoting
the interests of the Union Group. It is your fight against subversion that
has allowed continued recovery.
Over the last year market share has again increased despite production
restrictions due to mineral shortages. The acquisition of Asio-city makes
the Union Group the second largest of the six remaining city states and
represents the capitulation of the last non-corporate city.
The quality of the air being re-cycled within the protection dome that
encases the city continues to improve. The predictions made last century
about deteriorating public health due to ecological poisoning has been
proven untrue. Even the toxic air outside the dome in 'The Gap' has not
deteriorated beyond the point of supporting human life.
Security in the Gap has been a top priority. After preemptive strikes
against random Gap villages, there has been a marked increase in
community taxation receipts and a reduction in economically damaging
'scavenging' raids.
The Hobart corporation continues the abhorrent market policies
eradicated decades ago in the Union Group. Their discredited policies of
labor representation and social benefits for the 'needy' contradicts the
basic neo-democratic principles agreed on cessation of hostilities of the
Great Euro-American war. Since the LINC computer system was assigned
control of all city functions twenty years ago, a determined economic war
has been waged, and is being won, against Hobart which has consistently
sought to undermine the foundations of our success.
We can congratulate ourselves on another successful year. And, as
always, be vigilant, be alert.
-----END PAGE 2-----
-----START PAGE 3-----

NAME:
REICH S. COMMANDER
ADDRESS:
BELLE VUE GARDENS, EYRIE 2291
AGE:
36 YEARS
LINC STATUS:
5
SPECIAL OPERATIVE NO:
UO88 / H2
This Security Manual is to be carried by you at all times. It provides you
with rules and guidelines to which you should adhere. Areas and suspects
currently under surveillance are listed. Additions to the lists will be made
via the special code files in your LINC directory. Ensure that you check
your files daily using your Special Operative card for new information and
special mission orders. You will report to Chief Blazer through LINC
communication channels.
You will be based at Security Headquarters in Granville Heights Room
1030.
-----END PAGE 3-----
-----START PAGE 4-----
BRIEFING NOTES:
As Senior LINC Security Officer you are responsible for the protection of
all Union City personnel from external espionage. It is known that Hobart
personnel have attempted to infiltrate Union City and their identification
and elimination is a top priority. This manual includes a list of blocks, with
their reference number, in which Hobart activities are suspected. You
should liaise closely with your counterparts in these blocks.
You have security clearance in the industrial sector of Eyrie Tower and
the suburban sector, Belle Vue. Special status clearance may be requested
for operations outside immediate jurisdiction.
Briefing documents for your orders are included. Further details and
updates are available from your LINC directory.

A list of individuals under investigation has been included. These suspects
require continuous surveillance.
-----END PAGE 4-----
-----START PAGE 5-----
PRIORITY
BRIEFING NOTES REF: O2/OSS
LINC Status:  HIGH - to be executed immediately.
Linc Mission Category:  INVESTIGATE AND DISSOLVE.  Infiltrate the Gap
to locate Robert Overman.  Once DNA match has been confirmed, return
Overmann to Union City without delay.  Dissolve all trace of Overmann
Gap existence.
Linc Mission Summary:  Read the following background information
carefully. Subject Robert Overmann known to have been taken by mother
(Ref: VP06/N9) Pierro in bid to defect to Hobart. Engine sabotaged and
flight terminated in Gap (Ref: F9/367, S23/820). Initial inspection at crash
site revealed a shallow grave containing the remains of Pierro. Presume
subject Pierro buried by Gap people. No infant remains found in or around
the crash site. Robert Overmann survival assumed. Crash site at location
01312 north 23100 west. Take a squadron to the grave site and carry out
a full inspection. Proceed to search surrounding area for possible leads to
Robert Overmann.
On return to Union City report to Chief Blazer using your LINC card for
further instruction.
-----END PAGE 5-----
-----START PAGE 6-----
THE FOLLOWING BLOCKS ARE CURRENTLY
UNDER HIGH SECURITY OBSERVATION
ASTORIA
293
EYRIE
520
FAIRHAVEN
284
GRANVILLE HEIGHTS
704
HIGH GREEN
113
NORTHBRIDGE TOWER
386
OTOMO JUNCTION
257
PACIFIC
180
TERMINUS TERRACE
492
TURNVALE TOWER
305
UNION GENERAL
815
THE WALKWAYS
127
-----END PAGE 6-----
-----START PAGE 7-----

SUSPECT:
LAMB, GILBERT
ADDRESS:
EYRIE 520
Suspect has turbulent childhood history. Found abondoned at age of 13
in tire factory. Parents not identified but suspected as D-LINC's. Lamb
joined the New Youth League and championed the elimination of animal
preservation rights and Union City ecology conservation laws. Recently
promoted to supervisor without LINC approval. It is suspected that an
unsanctioned LINC access has illegally amended LINC records on
Lamb's behalf.
LEVEL 3 SURVEILLANCE CURRENTLY IN OPERATION
-----END PAGE 7-----
-----START PAGE 8-----
SUSPECT:
EINBECK, ANITA
ADDRESS:
FAIRHAVEN 666
Admitted to illegally entering LINC network using counterfeit software.
On conviction, subject transferred from Social Services to D-LINC position
in Keating Pipe Factory.

POSSIBLE CHANCE OF CONTACT BY HOBART AGENTS
LEVEL 2 SURVEILLANCE TO BE MAINTAINED.
-----END PAGE 8-----
-----START PAGE 9-----
SUSPECT:
COLSTON, VIC
ADDRESS:
HIGH GREEN 476
Colston has a history of heavy drinking and gambling and has been taken
into custody on several occasions for disorderly behavior.
He is the manager of the St. James Club, which employs "The Hot Club
Quartet", a band whose futuristic music is suspected of contributing to
the high level of West Block delinquency. Suspected of anti-corporate
activities.
-----END PAGE 9-----
-----START PAGE 10-----
SUSPECT:
HOBBINS, HOWARD
ADDRESS:
GRANVILLE HEIGHTS 338
Hobbins shows utter contempt for authority. Numerous complaints have
been made against him for attitude maladjustment and anti-social

behavior, but they have never been pursued by the City's Personnel
Correctional Council. Several ongoing cases pending.
Possible case for social indoctrination bio-lobotomy.
Serious threat not suspected. Maintain surveillance and report any further
behavioral abnormalities.
-----END PAGE 10-----
-----START PAGE 11-----
SUSPECT:
BONNEVIALLE, VINCENT
ADDRESS:
OTOMO JUNCTION 509
Bonnevialle is a young man with a highly technical mind.  He is known to
be in possession of advanced computer technology.
As a prime target for Hobart recruitment, Bonnevialle should be brought
into our fold and encouraged to enroll in Union City sponsored Piermont
Junior Security Training Course with view to graduating to Security
Services.
-----END PAGE 11-----
-----START PAGE 12-----
SUSPECT:
BURKE, SURGEON

ADDRESS:
THE WALKWAYS 222
Despite impeccable record with no evidence of subversion, Burke is
under surveillance due to recent reports of organ trading in the city.
Corpses being held for examination should be checked and results
reported as a matter of urgency to Chief Blazer.
DO NOT, AT ANY COST, ALERT THE SURGEON TO YOUR ACTIVITIES.
-----END PAGE 12-----
-----START PAGE 13-----
SUSPECT:
GODDARD, KIT
ADDRESS:
NORTHBRIDGE TOWER
Expelled from the Security Services on grounds of corruption.
Known for his neo-deus fundamentalist tendencies, the self-proclaimed
'pastor' concentrates on providing religious instruction to the under-
classes in Union City.
An ex-criminal, he now devotes all his efforts to converting the delinquent
element loitering on our walkways. It is reported that the juveniles are
considerably more disruptive after the conversion, than they had been
previously.
KEEP A CLOSE EYE ON ALL HIS ACTIVITIES
-----END PAGE 13-----
-----START PAGE 14-----

SUSPECT:
GILLATT, JEROME
ADDRESS:
ASTORIA 345
Multiple complaints have been received regarding his smoking habits.
Having been repeatedly cautioned for public air pollution offenses and
good neighbor code violations, the council has decreed that further
breaches of these laws will result in enforced basbitocite treatment at
the Otomo Rehabilitation Unit.
-----END PAGE 14-----
-----START PAGE 15-----
SUSPECT:
PIERMONT, DANIELLE
ADDRESS:
TURNVALE TOWER 642
Widow of the Late Professor Piermont, she now heads the Piermont
Foundation, a philanthropic organization founded by her husband.
Despite excellent health, Professor Piermont suffered a chronic coronary
while attending a Council meeting. Official cause of his death is listed as
Cardiac Arrest as a result of high stress levels experienced as President
of Piermont Foundation. Security Service investigations however suggest

that external forces may have been responsible.
Mrs. Piermont must be protected as a top priority for the Security Services.
Her well-being is of vital importance to us.
-----END PAGE 15-----
-----START PAGE 16-----
SUSPECT:
ERHARD, BEVERLEY
ADDRESS:
NO FIXED ABODE
Travel writer by profession, currently under suspicion of spying. Erhard
lived with father until he failed to return from business trip in Hobart. It is
suspected that he has defected.
Ms. Erhard makes weekly trip to Hobart City. She is a possible prime
contact for Hobart agents.
Her hobbies include virtual globe trotting.
MAINTAIN SURVEILLANCE UNTIL FURTHER NOTICE.
-----END PAGE 16-----
-----START PAGE 17-----
SUSPECT:
LIFELY, PAMELA

ADDRESS:
UNION GENERAL 500
There is very little on file currently regarding this subject .
She has been under suspicion for a series of recent thefts in the Belle
Vue Level.
Lifely may be linked to the mobile appliance laundering circle operating in
the city.
THIS CASE WILL REQUIRE UNDERCOVER SECURITY WORK
-----END PAGE 17-----
-----START PAGE 18-----
SUSPECT:
WARD, HUTCH
ADDRESS:
UNION GENERAL 765
Has repeatedly violated the restrictive language laws.
Ward's file contains damning evidence of past anti-Security Service
behavior including the removal of the Security symbol from outside two
of our branch offices, defacing the memorial to Chief Reilly and, most
recently, responsibility for the graffiti on our flag at Security Headquarters.
So far Ward has eluded the Security Trackers.
Bring him back to the Interrogation Unit for questioning before
termination.
-----END PAGE 18-----
-----START PAGE 19-----

SUSPECT:
RATGIRL
ADDRESS:
UNKNOWN
Ratgirl earned her name after repeatedly escaping from security custody.
We are unable as yet to ascertain the girl's real name.
Although a juvenile, she has already earned herself quite a reputation and
could prove helpful to the Security Service in the future.
It is imperative that she is closely watched and guarded against any
enemy contact.
-----END PAGE 19-----
-----START PAGE 20-----
SUSPECT:
DODDS, DINGO
ADDRESS:
NORTHBRIDGE TOWER 879
Dodds has been campaigning against the introduction of the new
pavement and parks litter laws.
Foul play is suspected on his part.
Ensure that all his movements are tracked and reported to the Chief.

Make every effort to collect any solid evidence to convict him.
-----END PAGE 20-----
-----START PAGE 21-----
SUSPECT:
KEARNS, KIPPER
ADDRESS:
NORTHBRIDGE 662
Escaped from custody last month during special leave to visit his late
mother's grave. He made off while his guard made an inquiry regarding
the location of the grave.
He was serving a twelve-month sentence for attempted theft of ancient
religious artifacts.
Kearns was last seen limping through Lampton Cemetery wearing his
prison uniform and ankle chains. He was carrying a plastic bag containing
a relic of Saint Jude and a photograph of his mother.
BELIEVED TO BE STILL AT LARGE IN UNION CITY.
-----END PAGE 21-----
-----START PAGE 22-----
SUSPECT:
WHIM, DOUGLAS
ADDRESS:
GRANVILLE HEIGHTS 567

Renowned as the instigator of the 'Peeping-Tom' phenomenon which led
to changes in the laws governing voyeurism.
He operates from a double glazing company in Hurd Heights; which is
believed to be a front for the banned Church of Inward Contemplation.
Whim possesses psycho-combat skills and should ON NO ACCOUNT be
tackled single-handedly.
-----END PAGE 22-----
-----START PAGE 23-----
SUSPECT:
KOPPISS, HANNAH
ADDRESS:
ASTORIA 332
Hannah is an unemployed journalist and is believed to be responsible for
the subversive broadcast, 'It's your life, isn't it?'
An analysis of her literary style indicates a pretension factor of 68%.
Subject considered for post of Romantic Fiction Writer for LINC PR channel.
Determine whereabouts and approach with a view to recruitment.
-----END PAGE 23-----
-----START PAGE 24-----
SUSPECT:

WERNER KAREN
ADDRESS:
THE WALKWAYS 555
Suspected member of the outlawed Social Services.
Wanted on numerous charges of campaigning for the rights of D-LINCS.
TO BE TERMINATED ON SIGHT.
-----END PAGE 24-----
-----START PAGE 25-----
SUSPECT:
SANTINI, JOEL
ADDRESS:
TURNVALE TOWER
Professional pianist, a.k.a. Surreal McCoy. Regular engagement at St.
James Club as leader of cult band, 'The Hot Club Quartet.'
Following an accident during a Security raid on the club, Santini made an
astounding comeback despite having three fingers bitten off from his
right hand.
Granted a life-long appeal for protection, Santini is under constant security
scrutiny.
-----END PAGE 25-----
-----START PAGE 26-----

SUSPECT:
EVANS, GINGER
ADDRESS:
TERMINUS TERRACE 223
One of the main instigators of the Great Industrial Riots, he served three
years in Cullinagh Prison.
After his release he became involved in the Community Rehabilitation
Scheme for ex-criminals.
Evans was last seen by one of our agents in Hobart city.
SUSPECT SHOULD BE ELIMINATED.
-----END PAGE 26-----
-----START PAGE 27-----
NOTES
Operation 'Steel Sky'
1.26pm - Reached grid location 01312 N, 23100 W. Temperature
109C. Radiation levels high. Craft debris identified. Full inspection of
grave site Ref: OP06/NP. Pierro. Exhumed body identified as Pierro. Confirm
no infant remains found.
4.03pm - Investigated rock outcrop in which heat source was revealed.
Discovered group of twenty subhuman dwellers who appeared to be
suffering from Gap plague. No physical contact made for fear of
contamination. Dwellers were unable to provide any information.
8.44pm - Encountered a small encampment after many hours of
searching. Tribe leader indicated knowledge of someone resembling Robert
Overmann's description living with a group of migrants located due west.
Despite further interrogation he was unable to provide any details.
10.23pm - Located tribal camp. Positive identification of subject
achieved using DNA scanners.
10.45pm - Carried out final mission orders. Prisoner exhibited acts of
aggression and was forcefully restrained.

11.00pm - Subject taken into custody and began return flight to Union
City.
05.32am - Passed first guidance beacon. Automatic landing sequence initiated.
-----END PAGE 27-----
-----START PAGE 28-----
TECHNICAL NOTES AND INSTRUCTIONS -
MS DOS VERSIONS
SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
IBM PC or 100% compatible with 386 processor or better, 2 Meg RAM, CD-ROM drive
single or double with at least 150KB access time, (550k free base memory) of which 256
color VGA graphics, Hard drive (10 Meg free), Mouse, (supports AdLib, Roland and
Sound Blaster).
PAUSING THE GAME
To pause the game press P; all action will freeze and the screen will be dimmed. Press P
again to restart.
SCREEN SAVER
If you leave the game without moving the mouse for approximately 5 minutes, an automatic
screen saver will be enabled and the game will freeze. To resume play simply move the
mouse or press a key.
SCROLLING
In some parts of the game, screens will scroll. This feature can be disabled by pressing the
SCROLL LOCK key.
SOUND CARD SUPPORT
Beneath a Steel Sky supports the Roland, Sound Blaster and Ad Lib sound cards. The
program will automatically detect which board you are using.
WHAT IS GOING ON IN UNION CITY?
In Beneath a Steel Sky you take the role of Robert Foster. Abducted by brutal Security
forces and brought to Union City, Foster's fate is in your hands as he talks to people and
explores the area around him in an attempt to discover why he was brought to the City. At
the start of the game Foster has escaped from the wreck of the helicopter in which he was
kidnapped. Now it is up to you to insure that he eludes Security in order to discover his past
and his destiny.
CONTROLLING THE GAME
Beneath a Steel Sky is played using the mouse to move a cursor about the game screen.
Clicking on objects or characters will cause Foster to interact with them. A full description
of how to use the mouse to tell the computer what you want to do is shown below in Game
Control Summary.
-----END PAGE 28-----
-----START PAGE 29-----
MOVING ABOUT IN UNION CITY

Normally, Foster can be moved by pointing the cursor at certain areas on the screen and
clicking either of the mouse buttons. Obviously, Foster will not walk up walls or to areas to
which he has no access. If he is blocked by another character while moving he will attempt
to find an alternative route.
The cursor will change to a large arrow when positioned over a possible exit.
Occasionally, Foster may be able to look through windows to adjoining rooms. This is done
by clicking the RIGHT button while the cursor is over a window.
EXPLORING AND MANIPULATING ITEMS...
Certain objects in the game may be examined or used by Foster. These objects will be
identified by their name and the cursor will change to a cross when over them. Pressing the
LEFT button will cause Foster to examine the object. Pressing the RIGHT button will prompt
Foster to pick up an object, or to attempt to use or operate the selected object. Virtual
Theatre has a feature which automatically selects the most logical manner in which an
object can be used or manipulated. For instance, if you click on a closed door the program
assumes that you wish to OPEN it (or CLOSE an open door), or in the case of a button, that
you want to PUSH it.
Objects which are picked up and carried will appear in Foster's inventory. To display the
inventory move the cursor to the top of the screen. Select an item by pointing at it and
clicking the RIGHT button. The selected object will be highlighted and you are now able to
use that item on any other visible object on screen, including other objects in the inventory.
-----END PAGE 29-----
-----START PAGE 30-----
 The selected object can also be offered to other characters.
PUTTING WORDS INTO FOSTER'S MOUTH...
Foster will meet many strange characters in the game, and from them he can find out more
about the City. Not all of them will be friendly, but with perseverance and luck he may find
allies who will help him.

When the cursor is moved over another character in the game, his or her name will be
displayed (if known by the player). Clicking either mouse button will prompt Foster to talk to
the selected character. Usually, you will have a choice of text which is displayed at the top
of the screen. Select a question or remark by pointing the cursor at the line of text and click
either mouse button.
CURSOR SHAPE
LEFT MOUSE
RIGHT MOUSE
Small arrow
Walk to pointer
Walk to pointer
Cross (over an object)
Look at object
Use/pick up object
Large Arrow (over doorway)
Exit the location
Exit the location
Cross (over a person)
Talk to person
Talk to person
GAME CONTROL SUMMARY
Don't panic, it's easy! The Virtual Theatre interface has been designed to be easy to use. You
can interact with the backgrounds and people you meet easily and simply using your mouse.
Follow the example shown below and you are on your way.
GAME SCREEN
CURSOR SHAPE
LEFT MOUSE
RIGHT MOUSE
Cross (over an item)
Look at item
Pick up item
Cross with item (over person)
Give item to person
Give item to person
Cross with item (over object)
Use item on object
Use item on object
-----END PAGE 30-----
-----START PAGE 31-----
When the game starts your mouse pointer will be a SMALL ARROW. Move the pointer
over the door on the right hand side of the screen and it will change into a cross with the
word door next to it. Press the left button and Foster will look at the door. Press the
RIGHT BUTTON and Foster will use the door (try to open it). Unfortunately it's locked so
you will have to find something to open it with.
INVENTORY MODE
Move the pointer to the top of the screen and a bar will drop down showing the items
Foster is carrying. The mouse works in the same way with the items in the inventory.
Pointing at them will reveal what they are. Press the left button and you will get a
description. Press the right button and you will pick up the item (it will be attached to
the pointer. If you now move the pointer (with the item) over an object like the door and
then click either button Foster will attempt to use the inventory object on the background
object/person.
If you direct Foster to attempt something impossible or pointless (using a Spanner on a
Sandwich) he will turn and shrug his shoulders.
-----END PAGE 31-----
-----START PAGE 32-----
CONTROL PANEL

Press F5 to access the control panel. From this screen you can save and restore your
position in the game, and change the game settings to your preference. To return to a game
in progress, click on the PLAY button.
SAVING GAMES
As you play Beneath a Steel Sky you are advised to save your game at regular intervals. That
way, if you want to backtrack to a certain section and choose a different path, or if you have
been careless enough to get Foster into a "negative existence situation", you need not play
the whole game from the beginning.
Clicking on the SAVE button will display a list of slots in which you can save your
position. This list can be scrolled by clicking on the up or down arrows to the right of the list.
Click on one of the slots in order to select it, then use the keyboard to describe the current
save (maximum of 18 characters). You may also use BACKSPACE to erase or rename a slot
description. Click again on the SAVE button or press RETURN to save the game. If you
change your mind and do not wish to save, click on the CANCEL button.
RESTORING SAVED GAMES
Click on the RESTORE button to display the current list of saved games, then click on one
of the occupied slots to select it. Press RETURN or click on RESTORE to load a game. If you
change your mind and do not wish to restore a game, click on the CANCEL button.
Remember when restoring a game that the current game in progress will be lost.
OTHER OPTIONS
The remaining buttons on the control panel enable you to quit the game and exit to DOS,
restart the game from the beginning and turn both the music and the sound effects on or
off. The slider control controls the speed at which the game runs.
PLAYING TIPS
Talking to the inhabitants of Union City will often provide clues which will help your progress.
Examining objects may also provide clues - and Joey's analytical skills may prove of use.
-----END PAGE 32-----
-----START PAGE 33-----
If you are totally stuck, it may prove useful to return to areas of the City which you've
already visited.
WARNING!!
THE FOLLOWING HINTS ARE SPECIFIC TO SECTION ONE.
THEY ARE INTENDED TO AID PLAYERS WHO ARE NEW TO THIS TYPE OF GAME.
To escape the first guard, get the rung from the left hand side of the ledge and use it to
open the door on the right.
To obtain a spanner, stand on the lift to distract Hobbins. As soon as you can, walk

through to his workshop and open the small cupboard on the left of the back wall. The
spanner will be a very useful item later in the game, so grab it quick before Hobbins
returns!
To get Joey up and running you must insert his character board into the discarded robot
shell below the lift.
To start the transporter robot in the lift room, examine it then talk to Hobbins until he
tells you what is wrong with the robot. You will then be able to tell Joey to mend the robot.
This in turn will cause the lift to start running when the robot returns with a canister. As the
lift descends you will be able to climb into the lift shaft.
To escape from the furnace, examine the slot beside the door. You will then be able to
instruct Joey to open the door.
GOOD LUCK.........
-----END PAGE 33-----
-----START PAGE 34-----
GAME WALK-THROUGH
Beneath a Steel Sky Walkthrough:  This section describes how to get past certain sections in the
game.
The following information may help you with gameplay strategies/hints for Beneath a Steel Sky.
Product Support makes reasonable efforts to ensure that the information contained within this
document is accurate. However, we make no warranty, either express or implied, as to the
accuracy, effectiveness, or completeness of the information contained in this documentation.
We shall not be liable for any special, incidental, consequential, or other damages arising from the
use of this or any document.
Walk through
After overhearing the conversation between Hobbs and the security officer, you must move to the
left side of the catwalk and get the rung (metal bar) from the wall.. You must then use the bar to
open the door on the right wall. After the security officer guard comes outside and then returns
inside, reenter and go down the stairs. Exit through the door on the right.
Inside the next room click Joey's circuit board on the junk pile that has the treads. This will bring
Joey to life. Click on the transporter robot (will not work at this point).. Walk over and stand on the
lift, this will set off the alarm. As soon as Hobbs goes to turn off the alarm, exit to the right.
Quickly open the cupboard door and collect the spanner. You can't do this if Hobbs has returned
to this room. Next talk to Hobbs until you find out what's wrong with the transporter robot. Then go
back to the robot and ask Joey to fix it. Once the transporter robot places a load on the lift, it will
go down leaving a hole. Climb down the hole to the furnace room. (Joey will follow).
Click on the lock, then ask Joey to open the door. Reich will enter and the camera will kill him.
Search the body to find the ID card and sunglasses. Leave the furnace room to the right.
Go right and enter the door closest to the LINC terminal. Enter the room and talk to the woman
until Lamb comes in. Tell Lamb you are security. After Lamb leaves, walk to the right.
Place the spanner in the Cogs. After the machine stops, collect the spanner. Go back to the room
where the welder robot is, one room to the left.

Use the spanner to loosen the shell. Ask Joey if he wants a new shell. Then, go back to the right,
where you stopped the machine. Try to exit through the sensors. You will not be able to pass. Ask
Joey to check out the storeroom. When Joey comes out ask him if he found anything useful. Ask
him to disable the fuse box. Once this is done, you can enter. Click on the grate on the ground
and then pick up the putty. Exit the store room.
Go left two screens, back to the LINC terminal. You will see a red cable to the right of the terminal.
Get Joey to cut it for you. Next go left as far as you can and enter the power room.
Inside use the spanner on each button. Ask Joey to press the right button. Just as he presses the
button you need to press the left button. When this is done the man will leave the room. Now turn
the switch OFF, remove the light bulb, and place the putty in the light socket. Turn the switch back
on, this will blow the door open. Now move the left switch up and right switch down. This will turn
on the power for the lift.
Exit the room and travel two screens to the right, to the lift and use the ID card in the slot. This will
let you go down to the next level.. Once you exit the lift, collect the red cable. Go left to the first
door and enter it.
You should be in the courtyard area of Reich and Lambs Apts. Use the ID card to open the left
door. Inside the apartment, look under the pillow for the biker magazine and grab it. Exit the
apartment and then the courtyard. Then to the right two screens.
Talk to the agent and offer to trade the magazine for the tickets. Take the tickets. Go back outside
the
apartments and wait for Lamb. When you see Lamb, give him the tickets. In return he will give you
a tour of the factory. Go back up the lift and enter the door to the right of the LINC terminal..
After the tour you will be able to go into the reactor area. Go to the right and then talk to Anita.
Keep talking to Anita until she downloads the jammer to you ID card and tells you where to get
surgery. Go back to the apartment level. Make sure that Joey is still with you. Go all the way to the
left and enter the door marked Bio Surgery. Inside, talk to the holograph. She will not let you in, so
ask Joey to try. Joey will handle her.
When you get to see the good doctor, you will need to make a trade to pay for the surgery to
receive a Schribmann Port. Go back up the lift to the LINC terminal and use the keycard to enter
it. Enter Security Services; special operations, file adjustment and freeze Lambs assets and the
D-Link him. Exit the terrminal.
Lamb will not be able to access the lift, talk to him and he will ask you to feed his cat. He will then
give you access to his apartment. Go back to the apartments and open the door on the right.
Once inside, collect the video tape. No real need to feed the cat.
Go back to the doctor's office. Ask about help to get down. He will tell you of a friend named Willy.
At this point visit the insurance office (next to the travel agent). Tell the agent that Dr. Burk sent
you. When he goes into the back room, tell Joey to use he welder on the statue. When you get the
anchor, place the cable and anchor icons together. This should make one icon.
Go back to the top floor and all the way to the left. Enter the door across from the power room. Go
back up the stairs and out the same door that you first opened at the beginning of the game. Use
the grappling hook on the security symbol and swing through the locker room window.
Go through the door to the right. Use the key card in the slot and then click on the interface. Once
inside the interface collect the ball. Exit right and use the open icon on the bag, collect the items
from the bag. Use the magnifying glass on all of the documents found in the interface menu. The
"?" should disappear. Keep moving to the right. In the next room use the decompress icon on the

password icons. Use the password icons on the floor symbols to create bridges between the floor
panels.
PASSWORD PUZZLE:
Place green, then go right, place red, then go left, pickup green, go up, place green, right, down,
pickup red, up, place red, left, pickup green, up right, down, green, up, up, and exit..
Collect the bust and the book. Then use the disconnect icon to exit the interface.
Now use the key card to enter the LINC terminal. Inside the terminal select Security Services.
Look at all the new documents. Next go to Special Operations and request a status change. You
will get a 48-hour access to all areas. Now enter the lift on the right side of the screen.
Go down one level, then to the left. Go down to the pool area. Go to the right and then around the
pool to the left. Try to open the door to the storage building. Look at the door. Then use your key
card on the lock to open the door. Inside, collect the secateurs.
Go left and talk to the doorman at the St. James Club. He will tell you that you need a sponsor to
get into the club. Next go ask Mrs. Piermont about being your sponsor. She will invite you up to
her apartment. Go to the lift on the far right and buzz her apartment. Inside, after some
conversation, she will agree to sponsor you. Once she gets on the phone, put the video tape in
the VCR. This will distract the dog. Now got to the dog's dish and collect the biscuits.
Go back to the pool area. Exit to the upper left and you should see the construction area. Place
the biscuits on the plank. Soon the dog will start barking at the plank. Pull the rope and the dog
will catapult into the pool. Now the guard is distracted and you can enter the cathedral.
In the cathedral enter the north-most door. In the center locker you will find Anita's body. Once you
have found the body go back to her workstation, near the reactor in the factory. Open the center
locker to find the overalls. Put on the overalls and go inside the reactor room. Enter the LINC
terminal and open the reactor door. Inside, next to the reactor on the floor you will find Anita's
card. Get the ID card and exit the reactor. Change clothes and exit the factory. Go left one screen.
Enter the security office and go through the lift on the right. Using Anita's card, go back into the
interface. Inside you will need to blind both eyeballs to collect the tuning fork. This must be done
with no delay.
TUNING FORK PUZZLE:
Use the blind icon to blind the first eye, exit to the right. Walk close to the second eye, blind the
second eye. Quickly exit up and then up again. Pick up the tuning fork before the eye comes
back. Exit to the left.
Click the playback icon on the well, watch message and then disconnect.
Go back to the pool and talk to the kid playing the video game, then the gardener, then the boy,
then talk to the gardener three more times. Next go all the way to the left and enter the court
room. Sit through the trial. Go to the St. James Club and play the first song in the jukebox. One of
the men will get up from the table, at this point collect the glass on the table. Take the glass back
to Dr. Burk. Then return to the St. James Club and go to the door on the right, back wall. Press
the plate to enter the wine cellar.
Inside, use the metal bar to pry the top off the large box. Place the large box top on the small box.
Climb on top of the box. Use the bar to poke a hole in the grate. Now use the secateurs to cut the
grate out. Climb though the hole to the subway tunnel.

Once inside the tunnel, go to the right, right + up, and then to the right. One the wall, next to the
hole, put the light bulb in the socket. At the end of the tunnel, you will enter another tunnel. You
must hurry through, before it caves in. After you exit the tunnel, use the bar twice on the plaster
and a brick on the bar to complete the puncture. Soon the door will open and a droid will enter to
repair the wound. Make your escape through the door.
Exit north --inside the room with the pit-go to the control unit and reduce the temperature. Pull the
metal bar down and exit the room. Go two rooms to the right and put Joey's circuit board in the
robot (slot).. Go back left twice and look through the grill on the wall. Ask Joey to check out the
talk room. Then tell him to open the tap.
After Joey returns, it will be safe to enter the talk room. Exit upper right, then through the top right
door. Enter the terminal; access restricted areas, open the access door. Exit left. After Gallager
dies, collect his LINC card and grab Joey's circuit board. Enter the next room to the lower right
and collect the tongs on the wall next to the door. Go back to the room with the terminal. Use
Gallager's card to enter the interface. Once inside, go to the right and then up (make sure you
blind the eye).. Use the Divine Wrath on the Crusader. After he dies, disconnect and re-enter the
interface using Anita'a LINC card. Go back to where the Crusader was and exit right. Use the
tuning fork (oscillator) on the crystal. Then collect the Helix and disconnect. Go back to the room
with the Nitrogen tank and use Anita's LINC card to crash the console monitor. Using the tongs,
collect a piece of tissue and freeze the tissue in the nitrogen tank. Exit one screen to the right.
Open the cabinet, below the console, near the middle android. Insert Joey's card and then click on
the console. Choose download character data and then run startup program. Once again travel to
the right. Foster and Ken must press the panels at the same time. Ken's hand will then get stuck.
Travel to the right until the pipes travel down. Tie your cable to the pipe support and climb down
the rungs. Use the tongs on the orifice. After a second or two, an exit will appear on the left wall.
Use the cable to get to the exit. Inside the boardroom, you must ask Ken to sit in the chair. The
rest is to watch........

