arXiv:math/0507480v1  [math.LO]  22 Jul 2005
Sheaves for predicative toposes
Benno van den Berg
22 July, 2005
Abstract: In this paper, we identify some categorical structures in
which one can model predicative formal systems: in other words, pred-
icative analogues of the notion of a topos, with the aim of using sheaf
models to interprete predicative formal systems.
Among our techni-
cal results, we prove that all the notions of a “predicative topos” that
we consider, are stable under presheaves, while most are stable under
sheaves.
1
Introduction
The importance for topos theory to logic is due to the fact that toposes provide
categorical models of impredicative constructive theories, like higher-order type
theoretic logics or the set theory IZF. The theory of toposes yields a large stock of
examples of such models in the form of toposes of sheaves, thereby also incorporating
the set-theoretic method of forcing. Toposes of sheaves for a site are an especially
fruitful source of examples, because the construction can be iterated: i.e., the notion
of a sheaf for a site can be formulated internally in a topos and these sheaves for
the internal site again form a topos. Using these topos-theoretic models, one can
obtain consistency and independence results and derived rules (good sources for
logical applications of topos theory are [4], [17], Chapter 15, [11], Chapter 6)
But important instances of constructive formal theories are also predicative. One
could think of Myhill’s set theory CST, extended by Peter Aczel to CZF and Martin-
L¨of type theory, where CST and CZF have the predicative features of restricting
the use of the separation and powerset axiom.
For the study of metamathematical properties of predicative formal systems,
topos-theoretic methods, like sheaves, have been much less developed, let alone used.
As it happens, the notion of a topos is not the most suitable for that purpose, as it is
an inherently impredicative structure by containing power objects and a subobject
classiﬁer.
So when one tries to formulate an appropriate notion of sheaf for a
predicative formal system, one ﬁrst has to modify the notion of a topos. Therefore
in their work [12] and [13], Moerdijk and Palmgren start to investigate predicative
analogues of the notion of a topos and to redevelop for these “predicative toposes”
those parts of the theory of toposes that are important for logical applications, like
the theory of sheaves.
The theory of predicative toposes is connected to type theory and set theory in
the following ways. The connection of predicative toposes with type theory relies on
the work of Seely [16], who established a correspondence between locally cartesian
closed categories and type theories (for coherence problems related to substitution,
people have found diﬀerent solutions, for example [8]). In [13], Moerdijk and Palm-
gren establish the connection with set theory by building a model of Aczel’s CZF
in a suﬃciently strong version of a predicative topos. Because of these relations,
1

the theory of sheaves in the context of predicative toposes has implications for type
theory and constructive set theory.
The work of Moerdijk and Palmgren provide a ﬁrst step in formulating the
right notion of a predicative topos. They suggest the notions of a ΠW-pretopos
and a stratiﬁed pseudotopos and in this paper, we propose several other related
axiomatisations. The candidates are introduced in the second section of this paper.
The main parts of the paper are sections 4 and 5 in which we show that all candidates
for the title of predicative topos that we consider are stable under presheaves, while
most are also stable under taking sheaves for an internal site. We hope to take up
the logical implications of these results in later work.
More concretely, we show that:
1. When E is a ΠW-pretopos and C is an internal category, then PShE(C) is
also a ΠW-pretopos. In [12], Moerdijk and Palmgren assume an additional
principle of transﬁnite induction for W-types, which is shown to be superﬂu-
ous.
2. When E is a ΠW-pretopos with a class of small maps satisfying the collection
axiom and C is an internal site with small covers, then ShE(C) is a ΠW-
pretopos.
In [13], the authors make the assumption that the small maps
satisfy an additional axiom, the axiom of multiple choice (AMC). We show
that this assumption is not necessary.
3. We propose an alternative notion of predicative topos, weaker than Moer-
dijk and Palmgren’s notion of a stratiﬁed pseudotopos (with AMC): a ΠW-
pretopos satisfying the universe operator axiom UO. We show that for a
ΠW-pretopos E satisfying UO and containing an internal site C, the cate-
gory ShE(C) is a ΠW-pretopos again satisfying UO. A similar stability result
holds for the stratiﬁed pseudotoposes, as shown in [13], but the proof for our
alternative is much simpler.
Besides Moerdijk and Palmgren, other people have worked on sheaves for pred-
icative formal systems. An older source is the work by Grayson [7], while some
recent work has been done by Gambino [5]. Their work is done in the context of
set theory, while some (unpublished) work in connection with type theory has been
done by Martin-L¨of. Awodey and Warren have a categorical approach in [2], but
are not concerned with the same issues as we are here.
I would like to thank several people for discussing with me the research reported
here. First of all, my supervisor Ieke Moerdijk, but also Martin Hyland, Nicola
Gambino, Thierry Coquand, Per Martin-L¨of and Erik Palmgren, who also invited
me to speak on these matters in the Stockholm-Uppsala Logic Seminar. I also spoke
on this topic during the Summer School on Topos Theory in Haute-Bodeux, and
I would also like to thank the organizers of the summer school for giving me this
opportunity.
2
A predicative notion of topos
2.1
Categorical preliminaries
We use this section to introduce some terminology and recall some useful facts from
category theory.
Deﬁnition 2.1 A subobject X of A in a category E is called the image of f : B →
A, if X is the least subobject through which f factors. A map f : B →A in E is
called a cover, when its image is the maximal subobject A of A.
2

Deﬁnition 2.2 A square
D
/

B

C
/ A
in a category E with pullbacks is called a quasi-pullback, if the induced map
D
/ B ×A C
is a cover.
Deﬁnition 2.3 A category E is called regular, when it has ﬁnite limits and all
maps factor, in a stable fashion, as a cover followed by a mono. A regular category
E is called exact, when every equivalence relation
R
// X
has a quotient X/R, i.e., an object that ﬁts into a diagram
R
// X
/ X/R
that is both a pullback and a coequalizer. In an exact category, such quotients are
moreover required to be stable under pullback.
Deﬁnition 2.4 A category E is called a pretopos, when it is exact and has ﬁnite
disjoint and stable sums.
In a pretopos, epis and covers coincide.
In general, when E is a category with ﬁnite limits in which for any map f :
B →A the induced pullback functor f ∗: E/A →E/B has a right adjoints Πf,
the category E is called locally cartesian closed. A locally cartesian closed pretopos
will also be called a Π-pretopos. A Π-pretopos has enough structure to interpret
ﬁrst-order intuitionistic predicate logic.
In a Π-pretopos, any map f : B →A gives rise to its associated polynomial
functor:
Pf(X) = Σa∈AXBa
If an initial algebra for this endofunctor exists, it is called the W-type for f. We
think of f as specifying a signature: a term constructor for every element a ∈A of
arity Ba. The W-type Wf is, whenever it exists, the object of all terms over the
signature speciﬁed by f. Since Wf is a Pf-algebra, it naturally comes equipped
with a map Pf(Wf) →Wf, usually denoted by sup.
Intuitively, for any pair
(a ∈A, t : Ba →Wf), supa(t) is the term constructed by taking a and substituting
t(b) in the b-th component of the term a.
In the sequel, we need the following characterization theorem (see [3]):
Theorem 2.5 In a Π-pretopos E with a natural number object, a Pf-algebra (V, m :
Pf(V ) →V ) is the W-type for a morphism f iﬀit has no proper Pf-subalgebras
and m is iso.
We will also need the notion of a subterm and the fact that this notion can
be formalized in the internal logic of Π-pretoposes with a natural number object.
Brieﬂy, when the W-type Wf of a map f exists, one calls a sequence of the form
⟨w0, b0, w1, b1, . . . , wn⟩
3

a path from w0 to wn, if wi ∈Wf and bi ∈B are such that they satisfy the following
compatibility condition: if for an i < n, wi is of the form supaiti, then f(bi) = ai
and wi+1 = tibi. Then v is a subterm of w, when there is a path from w to v.
(For more details on the formalization of paths and subterms in the internal logic
of Π-pretoposes with natural number object, see [3].)
A Π-pretopos E in which all W-types exist is a ΠW-pretopos. A ΠW-pretopos
always has a natural number object, because it is the W-type associated to one of
the sum inclusions 1 →1 + 1.
2.2
Small maps
Among the various notions of predicative topos that we will discuss in this paper, the
concept of a ΠW-pretopos is the most basic. The main problem with this concept is
that we will not able to show that ΠW-pretoposes are stable under taking sheaves
for an internal site. A natural solution is strenghtening the notion of a predicative
topos by formulating a categorical analogue of a type theoretic universe. To this
end, we introduce ideas from algebraic set theory. The basic context is that of a
category E equipped with a class of maps S. The maps in S are referred to as small
and the intuition is that their ﬁbres are small in some sense. One should think
of: a set as opposed to a proper class, ﬁnite as opposed to inﬁnite, countable as
opposed to uncountable, a small type as opposed to a type outside the universe of
small types, etcetera. The idea is not to ﬁx a set of axioms for this class S once
and for all, but algebraic set theory is supposed to be a ﬂexible framework for the
categorical study of notions from set theory. Still, we will have to make a choice in
order to get started. We will follow [13]1.
So let E be ΠW-pretopos and let S be a class of maps.
Deﬁnition 2.6 S is called stable if it satisﬁes the following axioms:
S1 (Pullback stability) In a pullback square
D
/
g

C
f

B
p
/ A
(1)
g belongs to S, whenever f does.
S2 (Descent) If in a pullback diagram as in (1), p is epi, then f belongs to S,
whenever g does.
S3 (Sum) If two maps f : B →A and f ′ : B′ →A′ belong to S, then so does
f + f ′ : A + A′ →B + B′.
These axioms express that maps belong to S in virtue of the properties of their
ﬁbres.
Deﬁnition 2.7 A stable class S is called a locally full subcategory, if it also sat-
isﬁes the following axiom:
1For diﬀerent axiom systems, see [10], [1] and other references at the “Algebraic Set Theory”
website: http://www.phil.cmu.edu/projects/ast/. The main reason for axiomatizing the notion
of a class of small maps as we do, is to include the category of setoids as a natural example. Still,
the results presented here should be largely independent of such choices.
4

S4 In a commuting triangle
C
g
/
h
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
B
f
~~~~~~~
A
where f belongs to S, g belongs to S if and only if h does.
Remark 2.8 If S1 holds and all identities belong to S, S4 is equivalent to the
conjunction of the following two statements:
S4a Maps in S are closed under composition.
S4b If f : X →Y belongs to S, the diagonal X →X ×Y X in E/Y also belongs
to S.
When thinking in terms of type constructors, this means that S4 expresses that
smallness is closed under dependent sums and (extensional) equality types. We will
actually require the class of small maps to be closed under all type constructors,
hence the next deﬁnition.
For any object X in E, we write SX for the full subcategory of E/X whose
objects belong to S. An object X is called small, when the unique map X →1 is
small.
Deﬁnition 2.9 A locally full subcategory S in a ΠW-pretopos E is called a class
of small maps, if for any object X of E, SX is a ΠW-pretopos, and the inclusion
functor SX →E/X preserves the structure of a ΠW-pretopos.
Deﬁnition 2.10 A stable class (locally full subcategory, class of small maps) S is
called representable, if there is a map π : E →U in S such that any map f : B →A
in S ﬁts into a double pullback diagram of the form
B
f

B′
/

o
E
π

A
A′
p
oo
/ U
where p is epi, as indicated.
Representability formulates the existence of a weak version of a universe. In
this paper, classes of small maps will always be assumed to be representable. The
map π in the deﬁnition of representability is often called the universal small map,
even though it is not unique (not even up to isomorphism). Representability has
the consequence that, in the internal logic of E, a map f : B →A belongs to S iﬀ
it holds that
∀a ∈A∃u ∈U : Ba ∼= Eu
The axioms for a class of small maps that we have given so far form the basic
deﬁnition. The deﬁnition can be extended by adding various choice or collection
principles. As a matter of fact, we will frequently assume that a class of small maps
satisﬁes the collection axiom in the sense of Joyal and Moerdijk in [10]:
5

(CA) For any small map f : A →X and epi C →A, there exists a quasi-pullback
of the form
B
/
g

C
/ / A
f

Y
/ / X
where Y →X is epi and g : B →Y is small.
In [13], Moerdijk and Palmgren work with a much stronger axiom: what they call
the axiom of multiple choice AMC (for a precise formulation, see loc.cit.). One of
the purposes of this paper is to eliminate the need for this axiom.
As discussed in [13], the collection axiom can be reformulated using the notion
of a collection map. Informally, a map g : D →C in E is a collection map, whenever
it is true (in the internal logic of E), that for any map f : F
/ / Dc covering some
ﬁbre of g, there is another ﬁbre Dc′ covering Dc via a map p : Dc′
/ / Dc which
factors through f. Diagrammatically, one can express this by asking that for any
map c : T →C and any epi E →T ×C D there is a diagram of the form
D

D ×C T ′

o
/ E
/ / T ×C D

/ D

C
T ′
o
/ / T
/ C
where the middle square is a quasi-pullback with an epi on the bottom, while the
two outer squares are pullbacks. A map g : D →C over A is a collection map over
A, if it is a collection map in E/A.
The collection axiom is now equivalent to stating that the universal small map
π : E →U is a collection map. (This is imprecise, but in a harmless way: if one
universal small map is a collection map, they all are.)
We will need the following variation on the notion of a collection map. A span
(g, h)
D
h
/
g

B
C
is called a collection span, when, in the internal logic, it holds that for any map
f : F
/ / Dc covering some ﬁbre of g, there is another ﬁbre Dc′ of g covering Dc
via a map p : Dc′
/ / Dc over B which factors through f.
We return to the issue of the various possible notions of a predicative topos. In
[13], Moerdijk and Palmgren take what they call “stratiﬁed pseudotoposes” as their
notion of predicative topos.
Deﬁnition 2.11 A ΠW-pretopos E is called a stratiﬁed pseudotopos, if it is equip-
ped with a collection (“hierarchy”) of classes of small maps (Sn)n∈N such that Sn ⊆
Sn+1 for every n, every map in E is contained in some Sn, and a speciﬁed universal
small map πn : En →Un for Sn has Sn+1-small codomain.
Again, it is possible to strengthen the notion of a stratiﬁed pseudotopos by assuming
that every Sn satisﬁes some additional choice or collection principles. In [13], it is
assumed that every Sn satisﬁes AMC. Here, we will show how to work with CA
instead.
My preferred notion of a predicative topos is even weaker. A ΠW-pretopos E
satisﬁes the universe operator axiom, whenever
6

(UO) Every map f : B →A is contained in a class of small maps satisfying the
collection axiom.
This axiom is inspired by Palmgren’s notion of a universe operator (see [14] and
[15]). His idea was to add to type theory for every dependent type
B(a) Set [a : A]
a universe closed under all the type theoretic operations and containing the types
B(a) for every a ∈A (but not necessarily A itself). Actually, when intensional
Martin-L¨of type theory is extended with such a universe operator, the category of
setoids will satisfy UO.
This means we have (at least) ﬁve notions of a predicative topos. We list them
for future reference:
1. A ΠW-pretopos.
2. A stratiﬁed pseudotopos without any choice or collection.
3. A stratiﬁed pseudotopos in which the classes of small maps satisfy CA.
4. A stratiﬁed pseudotopos in which the classes of small maps satisfy AMC.
5. A ΠW-pretopos satisfying UO.2
3
Sites
3.1
Diﬀerent notions of sites
Here we will give precise deﬁnitions of various notions of internal sites.
In the
following sections we will prove certain equivalences between them in the context
of ΠW-pretoposes.
The basic categorical structure of an (internal) site consists of an internal cate-
gory C together with a collection of covering families Cov(C) for every object C of
C. This is formalized by a commutative square of the form
Cov
m
/
φ

C1
cod

Cov
/ C0
(2)
(As usual, C1 is the object of arrows and C0 the object of objects of the internal
category C. And cod is of course the codomain map.) So any U ∈Cov(C) gives rise
to an indexing set CovU, indexing a family of arrows all with codomain C. Such a
covering family U will therefore typically be denoted by (αi : Ci →C | i ∈I), where
I is the indexing set.
For a site, the following axiom should hold in the internal logic:
(C) For any covering family (αi : Ci →C | i ∈I) of C and any arrow f : D →C,
there exists a covering family (βj : Dj →D | j ∈J) such that every composite
fβj factors through some αi.
A Grothendieck site satisﬁes the following additional requirements:
(M) For any object C, there is a covering family U ∈Cov(C) such that (1C : C →
C) ∈U.
2As for implications between these various notions, the least obvious ones are (4) ⇒(3) ⇒(5).
(2) and (5) ought to be incomparable.
7

(L) Whenever there is a covering family (αi : Ci →C | i ∈I) of C and families
(βij : Cij
/ Ci | j ∈Ii) covering Ci for every i ∈I, there is a family
(γl : Dl →C | l ∈L) such that for every γl factors through some αiβij.
A site will be called strong, if it satisﬁes condition (C) in the strong form that
the “pullback” (βj | j ∈J) is given (externally) as a function of f and (αi | i ∈I). A
Grothendieck site will be called strong, if it satisﬁes both (C) and (L) in the strong
form, i.e., both the “pullback” in (C) and the “composition” (γl : Dl →C | l ∈L)
in (L) are given as a function of the initial data. (When the axiom of choice is not
externally valid, this is a considerable strengthening of the original deﬁnition.)
In this paper, a pivotal notion is that of a collection site3: a site is a collection
site, when the span (φ, m) in (2) is a collection span over C0.
In the presence of a class of small maps, a site is said to have small covers, when
all indexing sets are small. Diagrammatically this is expressed by requiring that φ
in (2) is small. Finally, a site is called small, when every arrow or object in (2) is
small.
3.2
Equivalent Grothendieck sites
As Johnstone explains in [9], in topos theory (M) and (L) are closure conditions that
“might just as well be there”, but are not essential to the notion of a site. This is
backed up by the result that in a topos there is for every internal site an equivalent
Grothendieck site (equivalent in the sense that it leads to an equivalent category of
internal sheaves). The Grothendieck site is inductively generated by closing oﬀthe
site under the conditions (M) and (L). ΠW-pretoposes contain inductive deﬁnitions
in the shape of W-types, so one may expect versions of this result to hold in the
context of ΠW-pretoposes as well. This section is devoted to the proof that this is
in fact the case.
Theorem 3.1 Let E be a ΠW-pretopos and let C be a site in E.
1. When C is a strong site, there exists an equivalent strong Grothendieck site
D in E with the same underlying category.
2. When C is a collection site, there exists an equivalent collection Grothendieck
site D in E with the same underlying category.
Proof: The construction of D uses the theory of dependent polynomial functors,
their initial algebras and its applications, as developed in the work by Gambino and
Hyland [6]. We outline the construction, which is the same both for (1) and (2).
We take the same underlying category C.
We wish to ﬁnd a new object of
covering families COV over C0 and it should satisfy (C ∈C0):
COVC = 1 +
X
U∈Cov(C)
Y
i∈CovU
COVdom(m(i))
As shown by Gambino and Hyland, such an object can be constructed by ﬁrst
deﬁning a functor F : E/C0 →E/C0 as follows (C ∈C0):
(FX)C = 1 +
X
U∈Cov(C)
Y
i∈CovU
Xdom(m(i))
This is what they call a dependent polynomial functor, and, in the presence of W-
types, these have initial algebras. These algebras are ﬁxed points for the functor
3The following deﬁnition is what was intended, but inaccurately formalized, in [13].
8

and because of their initiality, they allow deﬁnition by recursion on their elements.
This we use to deﬁne the new object COV over COV and the new arrow M, thereby
completing the deﬁnition of the site D:
COV
M
/

C1
cod

COV
/ C0
Elements in COV (over C ∈C0) are either * (the unique element of 1) or of the
form supU(t), where U ∈Cov(C) and t : CovU →COV.
COV∗
=
1
COVsupU (t)
=
X
i∈CovU
COVt(i)
The deﬁnition of M runs as follows. The unique element of COV∗is sent to 1C :
C →C. An element j in COVsupU(t) is of the form (i, k), with i ∈CovU and
k ∈COVt(i). This element (i, k) is sent to m(i) ◦M(k).
We will brieﬂy indicate why the constructed objects have the desired properties.
It is easy to see that the covering families are now closed under (M). By induction
on the construction of the covering family (αi | i ∈I), one can see that the covering
families are closed under (C) and (L) in their strong form, when they were true in
the strong form in the original site, or that they are true (in their normal form),
whenever C is a collection site. The proof that any sheaf for C also satisﬁes the
sheaf condition for this covering family relies on a similar proof by induction, as
does the proof in case (2) that D inherits the property of being a collection site.
To see that any sheaf for this Grothendieck site is also a sheaf for C, take an
element U ∈Cov(C).
Then for every i ∈CovU, consider Di = dom(map(i)).
The family consisting solely of the identity on Di is in COV(Di). This element in
COV(Di) is given as a function t of i ∈CovU and we can therefore construct the
element supU(t) of COV(C). This covering family consists of the same maps as U,
therefore a presheaf satisfying the sheaf condition for supU(t) also satisﬁes the sheaf
condition for U.
□
Remark 3.2 Although we will not need it, it is good to point out that in case E
is equipped with a class of small maps and the original site has small covers or is
small, the same will hold for the equivalent Grothendieck site constructed in the
proof.
3.3
Equivalent collection sites
Here we want to investigate conditions under which sites in a ΠW-pretopos have
equivalent collection sites. Although the following argument is not very diﬃcult, it
is a key step in this paper. We ﬁx a ΠW-pretopos E.
Lemma 3.3 Suppose E is equipped with a class of small maps satisfying collection.
Then any small f : B →A ﬁts into quasi-pullback diagram
D
h / /
g

B
f

C
/ / A
where (g, h) is a collection span over A and g is small.
9

Proof: We use that the universal small map π : E →U is a collection map.
Let C = Σa∈A,u∈U{p : Eu →Ba | p is a cover}. The ﬁbre of g above an element
(a, u, p) is Eu. We leave all the veriﬁcations to the reader.
□
Proposition 3.4 Suppose E is equipped with a class of small maps satisfying col-
lection. Then for every site C with small covers, there exists an equivalent collection
site with small covers and the same underlying category.
Proof: C is a site with small covers, so in the diagram
Cov
m
/
φ

C1
cod

Cov
/ C0
φ is small. We now apply the previous lemma to φ:
E
h / /
ψ

Cov
m
/
φ

C1
cod

D
/ / Cov
/ C0
so the left square is a quasi-pullback, ψ is small and (ψ, h) is a collection span over
Cov. Now, the outer rectangle deﬁnes an equivalent site with small covers and the
same underlying category. It is also collection site, because (ψ, mh) is a collection
span over C0.
□
4
Categories of presheaves
This section is devoted to a proof of the fact that all the notions of a predicative
topos contained on the list are closed under taking presheaves. This is new, except
for predicative toposes of type 4.
We show this ﬁrst for the predicative toposes of the simplest kind (i.e., of type
1 on the list).
Theorem 4.1 If E is a ΠW-pretopos and C is an internal category in E, then
PShE(C) is a ΠW-pretopos.
Proof: The fact that PShC(E) is a locally cartesian closed pretopos with natural
number object is well-known. It remains to show that it has W-types. Here we
follow [12], pp. 205-8, closely.
With any internal presheaf P in E, one can associate the “underlying set” |P|
given by:
|P| = { (x, C) | C ∈C, x ∈P(C) }
For a morphism of presheaves f : B →A, and an element a ∈A(C), one sets
Ba(D) = { (β : D →C, b ∈B(D)) | f(b) = a · β }
Ba has the structure of a presheaf, when restriction along a morphism δ : E →D
is deﬁned as:
(β, b) · δ = (βδ, b · δ)
Whenever X is a presheaf, Pf(X) can be written on an object C of C as
Pf(X)(C) = {(a, t) | a ∈A(C), t : Ba →X}
10

where t is a morphism of presheaves. Restriction along a morphism α : D →C is
then given by
(a, t) · α = (a · α, α∗(t))
where α∗(t)(β, b) = t(αβ, b).
The presheaf morphism f induces a map
g : Σ(a,C)∈|A||Ba| →|A|
in E whose ﬁbre over (a, C) is precisely |Ba|. The W-type in presheaves will be
constructed from the W-type V associated to g in E.
This means that every element in T ∈V is of the form
T = sup
(a,C)
t
where (a, C) ∈|A| and t is a function |Ba| →V . For any such term T , one deﬁnes
its root γ(T ) to be C. If one writes V (C) for the set of terms T such that γ(T ) = C,
then V has the structure of a presheaf. Restriction along a map α : C′ →C is given
by
T · α =
sup
(a·α,C′)
α∗(t)
In [12], composable and natural terms are deﬁned using an additional axiom
allowing transﬁnite recursion, but our point here is that this axiom is unnecessary.
Indeed, composibality and naturality of terms are deﬁnable in the internal logic,
because the terms with these properties are precisely those for which all the sub-
terms have a certain deﬁnable property. We call a term T composable if all subterms
sup(a,C)(t) of T have the property that for all (β : D →C, b) ∈Ba,
γ(t(β, b)) = dom(β)
A term T is natural, if it is composable and if all subterms sup(a,C)(t) of T have
the property that for any (β : D →C, b) ∈Ba and any γ : E →D
t(β, b) · γ = t(βγ, b · γ)
(So t is actually a natural transformation.) These properties are trivially inherited
by subterms.
Moerdijk and Palmgren prove that for a natural term T rooted in C and map
α : C′ →C, the term T · α is also natural (the proof of lemma 5.5 in [12] can be
copied verbatim). So when W(C) ⊆V (C) is the collection of natural terms rooted
in C, W is a subpresheaf of V .
We now use the characterization theorem to show that W is a W-type. First of
all, there is morphism S : Pf(W) →W, making W into a Pf-algebra, because for
any a ∈A(C) and natural transformation t : Ba →W, one can put
SC(a, t) = sup(a,C)t
S is well-deﬁned and an isomorphism of presheaves, because every natural term
T ∈W(C) can uniquely be written as sup(a,C) t for a natural transformation t :
Ba →W.
It remains to verify that W has no proper Pf-subalgebras. This is easy, because
when K is some Pf-subalgebra of W, then
L = {T ∈V | T ∈K(γ(T ))}
is a Pg-subalgebra of V .
□
The following proposition takes care of the other types.
11

Proposition 4.2 Let E be a ΠW-pretopos with a class of small maps S and C be
an internal category in which the codomain map cod : C1 →C0 is small. Then
PShE(C) inherits a class of small maps, denoted by T , by declaring a morphism of
presheaves f : B →A to be T -small, whenever
fC : B(C) →A(C)
is S-small for every C ∈C0.
More formally, if | . . . | is the forgetful functor
PShE(C) →E/C0, a map f is T -small, when ΣC0|f| is S-small.
Moreover, if
S satisﬁes CA or AMC, so does T .
Proof: The argument is essentially contained in both [10] and [13] (for the more
general case of sheaves), therefore we give only a brief indication of why this result
holds.
It is straight forward to see that T is a locally full subcategory, because pullbacks
and sums are computed pointwise and the epis in presheaves are precisely those
morphisms that are pointwise epic.
Quotients of equivalence relations are also computed pointwise, while exponen-
tials of small objects are constructed using the Yoneda Lemma (see [11], prop.
3.6.1), and are small, because cod is assumed to be small. We leave it to the reader
to see that small objects are closed under Π and W.
Representability of the class T is proved both in [10] and [13]. Finally, stability
of CA can be found in [10], while that of AMC can be found in [13].
□
Theorem 4.3 All types of predicative toposes contained in the list are closed under
taking presheaves for an internal category.
Proof: For type 1, this statement is precisely theorem 4.1.
If E is a predicative topos of type 2 and C is an internal category in E, let
Sn be a class of small maps in the hierarchy such that the codomain map of C is
Sn-small. Then let Tm be the class of maps in PShE(C) determined by Sn+m as in
proposition 4.2. Then PShE(C) is again of type 2. The same argument works for
types 3 and 4, because CA and AMC are stable under taking presheaves.
If E is a predicative topos of type 5 and C is an internal category in E and f is
an arbitrary map in PShE(C), let S be a class of small maps satisfying collection
such that both the codomain map of C and the underlying map ΣC0|f| in E are
contained in it.
Then the class of small maps T determined by S in PShE(C)
satisﬁes collection and contains f.
□
5
Categories of sheaves
Without too much eﬀort, we can show that the results in the previous section imply
the following:
Corollary 5.1 If E is a ΠW-pretopos and C is an internal site in C, then the
categories SepE(C) of separated presheaves and ShE(C) of sheaves are both locally
cartesian closed regular categories with W-types.
Proof: Both SepE(C) and ShE(C) have ﬁnite limits, because these are computed
as in presheaves. SepE(C) is regular, because subobjects of separated presheaves
are also separated. To see that ShE(C) is regular, one uses that covers in sheaves
are maps that are locally surjective (see [11], p. 143).
It is well-known that exponentials (and the Π-functors generally) are computed
in sheaves as in presheaves. That the same is true for W-types is proposition 5.7 in
[12]. Similar statements hold for separated presheaves.
□
Unfortunately, it appears that one cannot do better: it seems impossible to show
that ShE(C) is a pretopos (more speciﬁcally, that it has ﬁnite sums and is exact;
12

of course, SepE(C) has ﬁnite disjoint sums). This means that we cannot show that
predicative toposes of type 1 are closed under taking sheaves for an internal site.
In fact, we have similar diﬃculties for predicative toposes of type 2.
In particular, we are unable to construct a sheaﬁﬁcation functor (a left adjoint
to the inclusion of sheaves in presheaves) in general. We do, however, have the
following result by Moerdijk and Palmgren (lemma 8.1 in [13]), which seems to be
the best one can say:
Lemma 5.2 If a ΠW-pretopos E contains a Grothendieck collection site C, the
inclusion of sheaves into presheaves i has a left adjoint, the associated sheaf functor
a : PShE(C) →ShE(C)
This means that only when the internal site C is a collection site, will we know that
ShE(C) is a ΠW-pretopos. The remainder of the section establishes stability under
sheaves of those types of predicative toposes in which every site is equivalent to a
collection site. But ﬁrst we collect the results we have obtained so far in:
Theorem 5.3 If E is a ΠW-pretopos equipped with a class of small maps S satis-
fying collection and containing an internal site C with small covers, then ShE(C)
is a ΠW-pretopos.
Proof: By 3.4 and 3.1, there exists in E an Grothendieck collection site equivalent
to C with the same underlying category. Using the left adjoint from 5.2, we show
that ShE(C) has ﬁnite sums and quotients of equivalence relations (for they can
now be calculated in presheaves and then be sheaﬁﬁed). So it is a ΠW-pretopos by
5.1.
□
Observe that this is an improvement over [13], because there this result depends on
AMC.
To show that a class of predicative toposes is stable under sheaﬁﬁcation, we
again need a proposition of the following type:
Proposition 5.4 Let E be a ΠW-pretopos with a class of small maps S and a small
Grothendieck collection site C. Then ShE(C) inherits a class of small maps, denoted
by T , by declaring a morphism of sheaves f : B →A to be T -small, whenever
fC : B(C) →A(C)
is S-small for every C ∈C0. More formally, when | . . . | is the forgetful functor
ShE(C) →E/C0, a map f is T -small, whenever ΣC0|f| is S-small. Moreover, if S
satisﬁes CA or AMC, so does T .
Proof: The argument is similar to that in 4.2 and again the main points already
appeared in [10] and [13]. We therefore refrain from giving a proof.
□
Theorem 5.5 Predicative toposes of type 5 are closed under taking sheaves for an
internal site.
Proof: Let E be a ΠW-pretopos satisfying UO and C be an internal site. We can
ﬁnd a class of small maps R satisfying collection such that C has R-small covers,
so 5.3 implies that ShE(C) is a ΠW-pretopos.
Let f : B →A be an arbitrary map in ShE(C). Now ﬁnd a class of small maps S
satisfying collection in E such that both the Grothendieck collection site equivalent
to C and the map ΣC0|f| in E are S-small. Let T be the class of maps in ShE(C)
determined by S as in 5.4. Then T is a class of small maps satisfying collection and
f is T -small.
□
13

Theorem 5.6 Predicative toposes of types 3 and 4 are closed under taking sheaves
for an internal site.
Proof: Let E be a stratiﬁed pseudotopos in which the classes of small maps satisfy
either CA or AMC and let C be an internal site in E. Then E satisﬁes UO, so, by
theorem 5.3, ShE(C) is a ΠW-pretopos.
The Grothendieck collection site D equivalent to C will be Sn-small for some
class of small maps Sn in the hierachy. So when Tm is the class of small maps in
ShE(C) determined by Sm+n as in 5.4, the category of sheaves will be equipped
with a hierarchy of small maps making it into a predicative topos of type 3 or 4. □
References
[1] S.
Awodey,
C.
Butz,
A.K.
Simpson,
and
T.
Streicher.
Relat-
ing
set
theories,
toposes
and
categories
of
classes.
Available
from
http://www.phil.cmu.edu/projects/ast/, 2004.
[2] S. Awodey and M.A. Warren. Predicative algebraic set theory. Theory and
Applications of Categories, 15(1):1–39, 2005.
[3] B. van den Berg. Inductive types and exact completion. Annals of Pure and
Applied Logic, 134:95–121, 2005.
[4] A.R. Blass and A. Scedrov. Freyd’s models for the independence of the axiom
of choice. Memoirs of the American Mathematical Society, 79(404), 1989.
[5] N. Gambino. Sheaf interpretations for generalised predicative intuitionistic sys-
tems. PhD thesis, Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester,
2002.
[6] N. Gambino and J.M.E. Hyland. Wellfounded trees and dependent polynomial
functors. In S. Berardi, M. Coppo, and F. Damiani, editors, TYPES 2003,
volume 3085 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 210–225. Springer-
Verlag, 2003.
[7] R. J. Grayson. Forcing in intuitionistic systems without power-set. The Journal
of Symbolic Logic, 48(3):670–682, 1983.
[8] M. Hofmann. On the interpretation of type theory in locally cartesian closed
categories. In L. Pacholski and J. Tiuryn, editors, Computer Science Logic
1994, volume 933 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 427–441.
Springer-Verlag, 1995.
[9] P.T. Johnstone. Sketches of an Elephant: A Topos Theory Compendium. Vol.
2, volume 44 of Oxford Logic Guides. Oxford University Press, 2002.
[10] A. Joyal and I. Moerdijk. Algebraic set theory, volume 220 of London Mathe-
matical Society Lecture Notes Series. Cambridge University Press, 1995.
[11] S. Mac Lane and I. Moerdijk. Sheaves in Geometry and Logic – A First Intro-
duction to Topos Theory. Springer-Verlag, 1992.
[12] I. Moerdijk and E. Palmgren. Wellfounded trees in categories. Annals of Pure
and Applied Logic, 104:189–218, 2000.
[13] I. Moerdijk and E. Palmgren.
Type theories, toposes and constructive set
theory: predicative aspects of AST. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 114:155–
201, 2002.
14

[14] E. Palmgren.
An information system interpretation of Martin-L¨of’s partial
typetheory with universes. Information and Computation, 106:26–60, 1993.
[15] E. Palmgren. On universes in type theory. In G. Sambin and J.M. Smith,
editors, Twenty-ﬁve Years of Constructive Type Theory - Proceedings of a
Congress Held in Venice, October 1995, volume 36 of Oxford Logic Guides,
pages 191–204. Oxford University Press, 1998.
[16] R.A.G Seely. Locally cartesian closed categories and type theory. Mathematical
Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 95(1):33–48, 1984.
[17] A. S. Troelstra and D. van Dalen. Constructivism in Mathematics, Volume 2,
volume 123 of Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics. North-
Holland, 1988.
15

