
THE 
MODERN 
LIBRARY 
OF 
THE 
WORLD'S 
BEST 
BO OKS 
CRF.ATIVE 
EVOLUTION 
The publishers ·will be plrrrscd to send, upon request, an 
illustrated folder setting fortlt tlte purpose and scope of 
THE MODERN 
LIBRARY, and listing each volume 
in the series. Every reader of books will find titles he has 
been looking for, handsomely printed, in unabridged 
editions, and at an unusually low price. 


Creative Evolution 
By 
HENRI 
BERGSON 
In the Authorized Translation 
by 
ARTHUR 
MITCHELL 
Witlz a Foreword by 
IRWIN EDMA³ 
THE 
MODERN LIBRARY 
NEW YORK 

Copyright, 1911, by Henry Holt and Company 
Copyright, 1944, by Random House, Inc. 
Random House 1s THE PunLisHER o F  
THE MODERN LIBRARY 
BENNETT A. CERF 
• 
DONALD S .. KLOPFER 
• 
ROBERT K. HAAS 
Manufactured in the United States of Ameriu 
Printed by Parkway Printing Cornpany 
Bound by H. Wolf! 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTE 
IN the writing of this English translation of Professor 
Bergson᯻s most important work, I was helped by the 
friendly interest of Professor William James, to whom I 
owe the illumination of much that was dark to me as 
well as the happy rendering of certain words and 
phrases for which an English equivalent was difficult to 
find. His sympathetic appreciation of Professor Berg­
son's thought is well known, and he has expressed his 
admiration for it in one of the chapters of A Pluralistic 
Universe. It was his intention, had he lived to see the 
completion of this translation, himself to introduce it to 
English readers in a prefatory note. 
I wish to thank my friend, Dr. George Clarke Cox, 
for many valuable suggestions. 
I have endeavored to follow the text as closely as 
possible, and at the same time to preserve the living 
union of diction and thought. Professor Bergson has 
himself carefully revised the whole work. We both of us 
wish to acknowledge the great assistance of Miss Milli­
cent Murby. She has kindly studied the translation 
phrase by phrase, weighing each word, and her revision 
has resulted in many improvements. 
But above all we must express our acknowledgment 
to Mr. H. Wildon Carr, the Honorary Secretary of the 
Aristotelian Society of London, and the writer of sev# 
v 

vi 
TRANSLATOR'S 
NOTE 
eral studies of "Evolution Creatrice." 1 We asked him 
to be kind enough to revise the proofs of our work. He 
has done much more than revise them : they have come 
from his hands with his personal mark in many places. 
We cannot express all that the present work owes to 
him. 
ARTHUR MITCHELL 
HARVARD UNIVERSITY 
1 Procerdin{!,s of the Aristotelian Society, vols. ix. and x., and Hibbert 
Journal for July, 1910. 

CONTENTS 
FoREWORD by Irwin Edman 
INTRODUCTION 
CHAPTER I 
TnE EvOLUTION OF LIFE-MECHANISM AND TELEOLOGY 
Of duration in general-Unorganized bodies and abstract time 
--Organized bodies and real duration-Individuality and the 
process of growing old . 
0£ transformism and the different ways of interpreting it-Radi­
cal mechanism and real duration : the relation of biology to 
physics and chemistry-Radical finalism and real duration: 
the relation of biology to philosophy 
The quest of a criterion-Examination of the various theories 
with regard to a particular example-Darwin and insensible 
variation-De Vries and sudden variation-Eimer and or­
thogenesis-Neo-Lamarckism 
and 
the · hereditability 
of 
acquired characters 
Result of the inquiry-The vital impetus 
CHAPTER II 
TnE DIVERGENT DIRECTIONS OF THE EVOLUTION OF 
LIFE-TORPOR, INTELLIGENCE, INSTINCT 
General idea of the evolutionary process-Growth-Divergent 
and complementary tendencies-The meaning of progres.!" 
PAGE 
ix 
xix 
.. 
62 
94 
and of adaptation 
. 
109 
The relation of the animal to the plant-General tendency of 
animal life-The development of animal life . 
II7 
The main directions of the evolution of life: torpor, intelligence, 
instinct 
149 
The nature of the intellect . 
167 
The nature of instinct . 
182 
Life and consciousness-The apparent place of man in nature 
194 
vii 

viii 
CONTEN TS 
CHAPTER III 
ON TilE MEANING OF LIFE-THE ORDER OF NATURE 
AND TilE FORM OF INTELLIGENCE 
PAGE 
Relation of the problem of life to the problem of knowledge-
The method of philosophy-Apparent vicious circle of the 
method proposed-Real vicious circle of the oppoite method 
204 
Simultaneous genesis of matter and intelligence-Geometry in­
herent in matter-Geometrical tendency of the intellect­
Geometry and deduction-Geometry and induction-Phys-
ical laws 
. 
218 
Sketch of a theory of knowledge based on the af'alysis of the idea 
of Disorder-Two opposed forms of order: the problem of 
genera and the problem of laws-The idea oi "disorder" an 
oscillation of the intellect between the two kinds of order 
240 
Creation and cvolution-Irlcal gcm·sis of matter-The origin and 
function of life-The essential and the accidental in the vital 
process and in the evolutionary movement-Mankind-The 
life of the body and the life of the spirit 
258 
CHAPTER IV 
TnE CINEMATOGRAPIIICAL MECHANISM OF THOUGHT AND THE 
MECHANISTIC ILLUSION-A GLANCE AT THE HISTORY 
OF 
SYSTEMS-REAL BECOMING AND FALSE EVOLUTIONISM 
Sketch of a c riticism of philosophical systems, based on the anal­
ysis of the idea of Immutability and of the idea of "Noth­
ing"-Relation of mctaphy~ical problems to the idea of 
"Nothing"-Real meaning of this idea 
296 
Form and Becoming 
324 
The philosophy of Forms and its conception of Becoming-Plato 
and Aristotle--The natural trend of the intellect . 
330 
Becoming in modern science: two views of Time 
. 
357 
The metaphysical interpretation of modern science: Descartes, 
Spinoza, Leibniz 
374 
The Criticism of Kant . 
387 
The evolutionism of Spencer . 
39S 
INDEX 
403 

FOREWORD 
by Irwin Edman 
HENRI BERGSON died in Paris on January 4, 1941, at 
the age of eighty-one. The general public, and that rela­
tively private clique known as the philosophical public, 
had long ago fallen into the habit of thinking of Berg­
son as dead. Only on the publication of the dramatic 
news of Bergson's decision to renounce all posts and 
honors rather than to accept exemption from the anti­
Semitic laws of the Vichy government was the world 
reminded that he was still alive. There had been an in­
terval of more than twenty-five years between the publi· 
cation of his phenomenally successful Creative Evolu· 
tion in 1907 and the book rather blindly called The 
Two Sources of Morality and Religion. A few people 
knew vaguely that Bergson was still living, an invalid 
in retirement, in Paris. A few, and not only philosophers, 
remembered when his name was something to conjure 
with, and his philosophy was hailed, by William James 
among others, as an almost medicinal magic. "Oh, my 
Bergson," James wrote to the author of Creative Evolu· 
tion when that book first appeared, "you are a magician 
and your book is a marvel, a real wonder . . . .  But, 
unlike the works of genius of the Transcendentalist 
movement (which are so obscurely and abominably and 
inaccessibly written), a pure classic in point of form 
u 

X 
FOREWORD 
such a flavor of persistent euphony, as of a rich 
river that never foamed or ran thin, but steadily and 
firmly proceeded with its banks full to the brim. Then 
the aptness of your illustrations, that never scratch or 
stand out at right angles, but invariably simplify the 
thought and help to pour it along. Oh, indeed you are 
a magician! And if your next book proves to be as great 
an advance on this one as this is on its two predecessors, 
your name will surely go down as one of the great 
creative names in philosophy." 
James's generous salute came at the very peak of 
Bergson's reputation. There was a whole epidemic of 
books about Bergson; his themes and his terms became 
cliches in philosophical discussion all over the world; 
and all over the world, too, Creative Evolution, with its 
gleaming mellifluous stream of thought, entranced many 
more than could understand it, and many readers, too, 
of many different worlds : the fashionable dowagers who 
found refuge from boredom in his elan vital, the re­
ligious liberals welcoming a philosopher who seemed to 
have found critical circumvention of mechanistic sci­
ence and a new and poetic support for belief in God, in 
free will, and even, though in a somewhat Pickwickian 
sense, in immortality. Sorel could connect Bergson's 
theory of reality as an integral movement with a doc­
trine of revolution as contrasted with piecemeal parlia­
mentary reform. Those wearied of the rationalism of 
the Transcendentalists and the fixities and the iron ne­
cessities of materialistic science found in him a hope, 
an inspiration and a release. Here, moreover, was one 
romantic who seemed to have a clear head. Here, too, 
was a philosopher who, while a consummate literary 

FORE WORD 
artist, could beat precise analysts at their own game, 
and analyze nuances of feeling, action and thought 
which seemed to escape through the nets of logic and to 
be crushed by the tight schemes of matter in motion. 
All that seems long ago now. Bergson, secure, or so it 
seemed in the years before the Vichy government was 
thought of, in his post at the College de France, had his 
claim to immortality staked out. But his popularity with 
the general literate public vanished almost as quickly 
as it had appeared. As for the professional philosophers 
whose admiration had always been tinctured with criti­
cal reserve, these now found more to criticize and, what 
was perhaps more decisive, began to think in other 
terms about other problems. When, in 1935, the Eng­
lish edition of Les Deux Sources de la Religion ct de la 
Morale appeared, having been completed through long 
and painful years of paralyzing illness, all the masteries 
and subtleties of analysis were still there, extended now 
to morals and religion, and to art as well. The book was 
respectfully greeted, and has had some academic influ­
ence, but Bergson's day as a central figure in philoso­
phy and, certainly, in general culture seemed to be over. 
Like other intellectual figures who became briefly fash­
ionable, he had become dated before he died. All that 
remained in the public memory were a few tags : "elan 
vital," "creative evolution," "the stream of conscious­
ness," "the flow of reality." Now other men were using 
other terms for other issues. The intellectual scene and 
the world setting in which Bergson wrote had almost 
nightmarishly changed. 
What did Bergson contribute? What remains? Look­
ing back now, one sees that, for all his "French" clarity 

xii 
FOREWORD 
(Bergson is one of the most lucid writers ever to have 
been a professor of philosophy) ,  Bergson is in a roman­
tic, almost a German romantic, tradition. In his early 
youth he was a disciple of Herbert Spencer, but soon 
felt, as so many less articulate people in the late nine­
teenth century felt, something sterile and inadequate, 
something artiftcial about the "reality" revealed by "sci­
entific laws." In his youth Bergson had studied psy­
chology and biology, and was caught by the fascination 
of two ideas, nay, for him two realities : life and time. 
One of the most characteristically contagious passages 
of his works is in his little Introduction to Meta physics, 
where he makes one feel and realize, almost as a poet 
might, the tension and the fluency of time, the urgency 
and poignancy of duration. Bergson was rebelling 
against the fixities and rigidities which both logicians 
and materialists had ascribed to reality. Bergson found 
reality in movement and change themselves, an aperyu 
not uncongenial to the dynamic changing society in 
which he lived. If change was real, novelty was real ; if 
novelty was real, freedom was real. The immediate was 
flux, and the changing was ultimate. When in Creative 
Evolution Bergson turned to biological considerations, 
he held that change means growth, growth means crea­
tion, creation means freedom. And if freedom was ulti­
mately real, what a liberation that spelled for the soul 
of man, no longer bound by the fixities of space, of 
logic and of habit! The real facts of evolution were to 
be found, not in a mechanical elimination of the unfit, 
but in the creative surge of life, in an elan vital. That 
propulsive life was best known in the living of it, "bath-

FOREWORD 
xiii 
ing in the full stream of experience." Knowledge wa:s 
not in spatial formulas, post-mortems of the living flux; 
knowledge lay in intuition, in the self-immolating and 
absorbed insights of the poet, the artist, the saint, of 
men at the acme of life, in the creative activity of 
genius, worship or love. 
To the professional philosopher, Bergson's most 
acute and permanent contributions came not from his 
celebrations of the aspiring and inventive movement of 
evolution or the novel cumulative growth of nature. 
They lay, rather, in those early works, Introduction to 
Metaphysics, and Matter and Memory, wherein Berg­
son developed his metaphysics and epistemology of 
change and indetermination. Actuality, reality, lay at 
the junctions of experience, the acutely felt centers of 
indetermination which marked those successive births 
and rebirths of awareness we call consciousness. Aware­
ness itself is a function of the possibility of choice; it is, 
in fact, the sense of ch᯺ice. As experience cumulates, 
any moment focuses wider and wider, deeper and 
deeper, more richly concentrated resources of choice 
and felt possibilities of action. Memory in action is not 
a dead deposit; it is a living and functional focusing of 
energies. It is life at the acme of attention, creation and 
decision. Memory is life cumulated and brought to bear 
as alternatives of action, as impellingly realized possi­
bilities of choice. Memory is the living reality, the past 
felt, those moments of heightened consciousness which 
we feel as suggested opportunities to make the future. 
What we commonly call memory is what we commonly 
-and falsely-call time: spatially measurable images. 

xiv 
FOREWORD 
Matter is the deposit of life, the static residues of ac­
tions done, choices made in the past. Living memory is 
the past felt in the actualities of realities, of change. 
In Time and Free Will Bergson elaborates with skill­
ful dialectic detail-Bergson's mastery of his technical 
tools is one of his most impressive virtuoso character­
istics-time, "duration," in contrast with measured and 
the measurable "physical" time of the physicists. He 
traverses here the same theme, in essence, with which 
he is concerned in Matter and Memory. Here time as 
real is again time as experienced as freedom, as, and in, 
moments of choice. Necessity is the order of the fixed, 
of the past as analyzed by the retrospective, geometriz­
ing intellect. 
Bergson's theory of time and memory becomes a 
critique of purposes and ends in the logic and meta­
physics of both idealism and mechanism, and of both 
mechanical and vitalistic evolution. Evolution moves to 
no fixed ends, and, on the other hand, it is more than 
advance by mechanical Darwinian elimination. Evolu­
tion (and all of nature) is the expression of a creative 
urgency, a fulfillment of novel ends inventively gener­
ated in the process of time itself. Bergson's critique of 
the purely intellectual analysis of the idealists and the 
purely geometrical analysis of the materialists is shrewd 
criticism, however vague the positive doctrine of "crea­
tive evolution." 
Not least suggestive is Bergson's brilliant critique of 
pure logic and pure mechanism in morals, art and re­
ligion. He naturalizes the saint, the artist and the 
prophet. These stand at junctures of openness and 
freshness. Necessity, obligation and formalism close 

FOREWORD 
XV 
minds and close societies. Genius and vision open new 
roads and new perspectives. Prophets are the creative 
memories of the race. Bergson at the end remained the 
voice, both romantic and critical, of the creative im­
pulses in societies given over to regimentation and for­
mulas. For Bergson, himself a lucid intellectual, was 
on the side of the visionary poets, seers and saints. 
It is not hard to see what the dreaming spirits of men, 
whose dreams had been clipped by physics and by soci­
ety, found in this celebration of enraptured impulse and 
creative movement. It is easy to see what people, 
wearied of fixed and conventional goals in what Berg­
son in Morality and Religion was to call a "closed soci­
ety," found to cherish in his conception of spontaneous 
freedom in open societies. In the latter, Bergson sug­
gested, the intuitions of seers and saints and poets 
opened new roads and suggested unattained but not im-· 
possible heights from which men might have angelic 
vistas. "The universe," he'says at the close of Morality 
and Religion, ". . . is a machine for the making of 
God." 
Bergson's persuasiveness came not so much from the 
seductive vagueness of intuition and of the elan vital as 
from his shrewd and subtly destructive analyses of the 
pretensions of the intellect and of intellectualism to be 
revelations of reality. Intelligence-here he was at one 
with the pragmatists-was purely practical. It set up 
immobilities to guide us in the chartless flux. But for 
the truth we must turn our backs on the "false second­
ary power by which we multiply distinctions," and 
feel intimately the pulsing movement of life itself. The 
pragmatists enjoyed and applauded Bergson's critique 

xvi 
FOREWORD 
of intelligence and scientific method. The mystics and 
the romanticists applauded and hugged to their hearts 
the passionate hugging of life which he counseled as the 
way of reality. The liberal theologians were delighted 
because they thought the elan vital might lead any­
where. Did not Bergson himself suggest that it might 
lead to immortality and to God? In an age given to 
statistics and formulas the artists welcomed intuition. 
Everyone rebelling against convention in conduct, 
chafing against formalism in art, revolting against the 
fixed and stable in thought, found in him an enchant­
ing voice. Only other philosophers found things to 
grumble at. They did not mind Bergson's celebrating 
life, but they did not approve the obscurantism of turn­
ing one's back on intelligent discrimination. They ad­
mired the subtlety of his analyses, but could not make 
out where the analysis !ed, or for that matter, where the 
elan vital led. They questioned the casuistry by which 
Bergson proved there wa᯼ a real future without a causal 
past. They distrusted, above all, the anti-intellectual­
ism to which Bergson turned his own fine intellect. The 
elan vital means a renaissance to a poet ; to a barbarian 
it means brute power. The reactionary forces now in 
control of France arc also exhibitions of the elan vital. 
But it was the intelligence of integrity that caused 
Bergson, just a few weeks before his death, to refuse to 
be made an exception by the Vichy government to their 
racial laws. Bergson's philosophy was once hailed as a 
new thing in the world. Its elements are very old; its 
mysticism is as old as Plotinus, to whom Bergson ac­
knowledged himself much indebted. His elan vital goes 
back a long way too: ultimately to the Dionysiac mys-

FOREWORD 
xvii 
teries and, in the modern world, to Schopenhauer. Its 
romanticism goes back to Schelling, Fichte and Rous­
seau. Its dress was sophisticated and new; its substance 
was old and primitive, in both vitality and opaqueness. 
There are subterranean vital forces now come to the 
surface of the world. The world is a machine making 
devils as well as gods. The abdication of mind is cele­
brated by barbarians. Instinct and intuition demand 
education, not wanton trust. Analysis may be abstract 
or irrelevant, as Bergson pointed out; it may also be 
the servant of that life which otherwise wanders into 
dark by-paths and fanatic blind alleys. "Evolution" 
is creative when men intelligently co-operate ; otherwise 
it is, as events have proved, brutal, fatal and blind. 
One might have selected another book of Bergson's 
for inclusion in the Modern Library. Time and Free 
Will, for example, is in some ways a subtler piece of 
analysis and a far more permanPnt contribution to the 
study of psychological aspects of experience than Berg­
son's Creath'e Evolution is a contribution to the under­
standing of its biological phases. But nearly everything 
Bergson has to say about other things, even about re­
ligion, politics and art, is implicit in these pages. It con­
tains a very brilliant critique of the assumptions of 
mechanistic science ; it conveys the intimate sense of 
reality as life, of life as movement, of movement as 
creation, which is one of Bergson's central themes. It is· 
marked by his extraordinary gift for philosophical im­
ages, such as that of life being the skyrocket bursting 
in air, and matter being the dead ashes falling down, or 
again of reality being a line in the drawing rather than 
the line drawn. It contains his apotheosis of man as the 

xviii 
F O:R.EWORD 
tool-making animal and his treatment of intelligence as 
itself a tool which helps man in his practical necessities 
while it hides from him the moving reality of being 
which the path of instinct and intuition, the alternative 
to intelligence, discloses. It suggests all he later says 
explicitly about the creative functions of the artist, the 
saint and the authentic revolutionary, awake to, inven­
tive of, the fresh, the alive breaking through the en­
crustations of government, society and learning. 
In perspective now Bergson, as recent scholarship 
has shown, is less daringly original than William James 
and others had supposed. But the note of creation and 
its spirit, which is struck in these pages, is in all Berg­
son's books. Creative Evolution by its very title and by 
the hold it has exercised over the educated public has 
about it the atmosphere, not illusory, of a classic, a 
modern one, and, one suspects, a permanent one. Every 
author has his note which comes out most clearly and 
comprehensively in one of his books. BPrgson's note 
and most of his overtones are in C1·eative Evolution. 
December, 1943 

INTRODUCTION 
THE history of the evolution of life, incomplete as it yet 
is, already reveals to us how the intellect has been 
formed, by an uninterrupted progress, along a line 
which ascends through the vertebrate series up to man. 
It shows us in the faculty of understanding an append­
age of the faculty of acting, a more and more precise, 
more and more complex and supple adaptation of the 
consciousness of living beings to the conditions of exist­
ence that are made for them. Hence should result this 
consequence that our intellect, in the narrow sense of 
the word, is intended to secure the perfect fitting of our 
body to its environment, to represent the relations of 
external things among thimselves-in short, to think 
matter. Such will indeed be one of the conclusions of 
the present essay. We shall see that the human intellect 
feels at home among inanimate objects, more especially 
among solids, where our action finds its fulcrum and our 
industry its tools; that our concepts have been formed 
on the model of solids; that our logic is, pre-eminently, 
the logic of solids; that, consequently, our intellect tri­
umphs in geometry, wherein is revealed the kinship of 
logical thought with unorganized matter, and where the 
intellect has only to follow its natural movement, after 
the lightest possible contact with experience, in order 
to go from discovery to discovery, sure that experience 
xix 

XX 
INTROD U C TION 
is following behind it and will justify it invariably. 
But from this it must also follow that our thought, 
in its purely logical form, is incapable of presenting the 
true nature of life, the full meaning of the evolutionary 
movement. Created by life, in definite circumstances, 
to act on definite things, how can it embrace life, of 
which it is only an emanation or an aspect? Deposited 
by the evolutionary movement in the course of its way, 
how can it be applied to the evolutionary movement it­
self? As well contend that the part is equal to the whole, 
that the effect can reabsorb its cause, or that the pebble 
left on the beach displays the form of the wave that 
brought it there. In fact, we do indeed feel that not one 
of the categories of our thought-unity, multiplicity, 
mechanical causality, intelligent finality, etc.-applies 
exactly to the things of life: who can say where indi­
viduality begins and ends, whether the living being is 
one or many, whether it is the cells which associate 
themselves into the organism or the organism which 
Jissociates itself into cells? In vain we force the living 
into this or that one of our molds. All the molds crack. 
They are too narrow, above all too rigid, for what we 
try to put into them. Our reasoning, so sure of itself 
among things inert, feels ill at ease on this new ground. 
It would be difficult to cite a biological discovery due to 
pure reasoning. And most often, when experience has 
finally shown us how life goes to work to obtain a cer­
tain result, we find its way of working is just that of 
which we should never have thought. 
Yet evolutionist philosophy does not hesitate to ex­
tend to the things of life the same methods of explana­
tion which have succeeded in the case of unorganized 

INTRODUCTION 
xxi 
matter. It begins by showing us in the intellect a local 
effect of evolution, a flame, perhaps accidental, which 
lights up the coming and going of living beings in the 
narrow passage open to their action; and lo! forgetting 
what it has just told us, it makes of this lantern glim­
mering in a tunnel a Sun which can illuminate the 
world. Boldly it proceeds, with the powers of conceptual 
thought alone, to the ideal reconstruction of all things, 
even of life. True, it hurtles in its course against such 
formidable difficulties, it sees its logic end in such 
strange contradictions, that it very speedily renounces 
its f1rst ambition. "It is no longer reality itself," it says, 
"that it will reconstruct, but only an imitation of the 
real, or rather a symbolical image; the essence of things 
escapes us, and will escape us always ; we move among 
relations; the absolute is not in our province; we are 
brought to a stand before the Unknowable."-But for 
the human intellect, after too much pride, this is really 
an excess of humility. If the intellectual form of the 
living being has been gradually modeled on the recip· 
rocal actions and reactions of certain bodies and their 
material environment, how should it not reveal to us 
something of the very essence of which these bodies are 
made? Action cannot move in the unreal. A mind born 
to speculate or to dream, I admit, might remain outside 
reality, might deform or transform the real, perhaps 
even create it-as we create the figures of men and ani­
mals that our imagination cuts out of the passing cloud. 
But an intellect bent upon the act to be performed and 
the reaction to follow, feeling its object so as to get its 
mobile impression at every instant, is an intellect that 
touches something of the absolute. Would the idea ever 

INTROD U C TION 
have occurred to us to doubt this absolute value of our 
knowledge if philosophy had not shown us what contra­
dictions our speculation meets, what dead-locks it ends 
in? But these difficulties and contradictions all arise 
from trying to apply the usual forms of our thought to 
objects with which our industry has nothing to do, and 
for which, therefore, our molds are not made. Intellec­
tual knowledge, in so far as it relates to a certain aspect 
of inert matter, ought, on the contrary, to give us a 
faithful imprint of it, having been stereotyped on this 
particular object. It becomes relative only if it claims, 
such as it is, to present to us life-that is to say, the 
maker of the stereotype-plate. 
Must we then give up fathoming the depths of life? 
Must we keep to that mechanistic idea of it which the 
understanding will always give us-an idea necessarily 
artificial and symbolical, since it makes the total activ­
ity of life shrink to the form of a certain human activity 
which is only a partial and local manifestation of life, 
a result or by-product of the vital process? We should 
have to do so, indeed, if life had employed all the psy­
chical potentialities it possesses in producing pure un­
derstandings-that is to say, in making geometricians. 
But the line of evolution that ends in man is not the 
only one. On other paths, divergent from it, other forms 
of consciousness have been developed, which have not 
been able to free themselves from external constraints 
or to regain control over themselves, as the human in­
tellect has done, but which, none the less, also express 
something that is immanent and essential in the evolu­
tionary movement. Suppose these other forms of con-

INTRO D U CTION 
xxiii 
sciousness brought together and amalgamated with in­
tellect : would not the result be a consciousness as wide 
as life? And such a consciousness, turning around sud­
denly against the push of life which it feels behind, 
would have a vision of life complete-would it not?­
even though the vision were fleeting. 
It will be said that, even so, we do not transcend our 
intellect, for it is still with our intellect, and through 
our intellect, that we see the other forms of conscious­
ness. And this would be right if we were pure intellects, 
jf there did not remain, around our conceptual and logi­
cal thought, a vague nebulosity, made of the very sub­
stance out of which has been formed the luminous nu­
cleus that we call the intellect. Therein reside certain 
powers that are complementary to the understanding, 
powers of which we have only an indistinct feeling when 
we remain shut up in ourselves, but which will become 
clear and distinct when they perceive themselves at 
work, so to speak, in the evolution of nature. They will 
thus learn what sort of effort they must make to be 
intensified and expanded in the very direction of life. 
This amounts to saying that theory of knowledge and 
theory of life seem to us inseparable. A theory of life 
that is not accompanied by a criticism of knowledge is 
obliged to accept, as they stand, the concepts which the 
understanding puts at its disposal : it can but enclose 
the facts, willing or not, in pre-existing frames which it 
regards as ultimate. It thus obtains a symbolism which 
is convenient, perhaps even necessary to positive 
science, but not a direct vision of its object. On the 
other hand, a theory of knowledge which does not re · 

xxiv 
INTRODUCTION 
place the intellect in the general evolution of life will 
teach us neither how the frames of knowledge have been 
constructed nor how we can enlarge or go beyond them. 
It is necessary that these two inquiries, theory of 
knowledge and theory of life, should join each other, 
and, by a circular process, push each other on unceas­
ingly. 
Together, they may solve by a method more sure, 
brought nearer to experience, the great problems that 
philosophy poses. For, if they should succeed in their 
common enterprise, they would show us the formation 
of the intellect, and thereby the genesis of that matter· 
of which our intellect traces the general configuration. 
They would dig to the very root of nature and of mind. 
They would substitute for the false evolutionism of 
Spencer-which consists in cutting up present reality, . 
.1lready evolved, into little bits no less evolved, and 
then recomposing it with these fragments, thus positing 
in advance everything that is to be explained-a true 
evolutionism, in which reality would be followed in its. 
generation and its growth. 
But a philosophy of this kind will not be made in a 
day. Unlike the philosophical systems properly so 
called, each of which was the individual work of a man 
of genius and sprang up as a whole, to be taken or left, 
it will only be built up by the collective and progressive· 
effort of many thinkers, of many observers also, com-· 
pleting, correcting and improving one another. So the· 
present essay does not aim at resolving at once the­
greatest problems. It simply desires to define the· 
method and to permit a glimpse, on some essential. 
points, of the possibility of its application. 
Its plan is traced by the subject itself. In the first. 

I N TROD UCTION 
XXV 
chapter, we try on the evolutionary progress the two 
ready-made garments that our understanding puts at 
our disposal, mechanism and finality; 1 we show that 
they do not fit, neither the one nor the other, but that 
one of them might be recut and resewn, and in this new 
form fit less badly than the other. In order to transcend 
the point of view of the understanding, we try, in our 
second chapter, to reconstruct the main lines of evolu­
tion along which life has traveled by the side of that 
which has led to the human intellect. The intellect is 
thus brought back to its generating cause, which we 
then have to grasp in itself and follow in its movement. 
It is an effort of this kind that we attempt-incom᯽ 
pletely indeed-in our third chapter. A fourth and last 
part is meant to show how our understanding itself, by 
submitting to a certain discipline, might prepare a phi­
losophy which transcends it. For that, a glance over the 
history of systems became necessary, together with an 
analysis of the two great illus"ions to which, as soon as 
it speculates on reality in general, the human under᯾ 
standing is exposed. 
1 The idea of regarding life as transcending teleology as well as 
mechanism is far from being a new idea. Notably in three articles by 
Ch. Dunan on "Le problcme de Ia vie" (Revue philosophique, 1892) it 
is profoundly treated. In the development of this idea, we agree with 
Ch. Dunan on more than one point. But the views we are presenting on 
this matter, as on the questions attaching to it, are those that we ex­
pressed long ago in our Essai sur les don>1ees immediates de la conscience 
(Paris, r889) .  One of the principal objects of that essay was, in fact, to 
show that the psychical life is neither unity nor multiplicity, that it 
transcends both the mechanical and the intellectual, mechanism and 
finalism having meaning only where there is "distinct multiplicity," 
"spatiality," and consequently assemblage of pre-existing parts: "real 
duration" signifies both undivided continuity and creation. In the pres­
ent work we apply these same ideas to life in general, regarded, more­
over, itself from the psychological point of view. 


CREATIVE EVOLUTION 


CHAPTER I 
THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE-MECHANISM AND TELEOLOGY 
THE existence of which we are most assured and which 
we know best is unquestionably our own, for of every 
other object we have notions which may be considered 
external and superficial, whereas, of ourselves, our per­
ception is internal and profound. What, then, do we 
find? In this privileged case, what is the precise mean­
ing of the word "exist"? Let us recall here briefly the 
conclusions of an earlier work. 
I find, first of all, that I pass from state to state. I 
am warm or cold, I am merry or sad, I work or I do 
nothing, I look at what is arotlnd me or I think of some­
thing else. Sensations, feelings, volitions, ideas-such 
are the changes into which my existence is divided and 
which color it in turns. I change, then, without ceasing . 
But this is not saying enough. Change is far more radi­
cal than we are at first inclined to suppose. 
For I speak of each of my states as if it formed a 
block and were a separate whole. I say indeed that I 
change, but the change seems to me to reside in the 
passage from one state to the next : of each state, taken 
separately, I am apt to think that it remains the same 
during all the time that it prevails. Nevertheless, a 
slight effort of attention would reveal to me that there 
3 

4 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
is no feeling, no idea, no volition which is not under­
going change every moment: if a mental state ceased 
to vary, its duration would cease to flow. Let us take 
the most stable of internal states, the visual perception 
of a motionless external object. The object may remain 
the same, I may look at it from the same side, at the 
same angle, in the same light; nevertheless the vision I 
now have of it differs from that which I have just had, 
even if only because the one is an instant older than 
the other. My memory is there, which conveys some­
thing of the past into the present. My mental state, as 
it advances on the road of time, is continually swelling 
with the duration which it accumulates : it goes on in­
creasing-rolling upon itself, as a snowball on the snow. 
Still more is this the case with states more deeply in­
ternal, such as sensations, feelings, desires, etc., which 
do not correspond, like a simple visual perception, to 
an unvarying external object. But it is expedient to 
disregard this uninterrupted change, and to notice it 
only when it becomes sufficient to impress a new atti­
tude on the body, a new direction on the attention. 
Then, and then only, we find that our state has changed. 
The truth is that we change without ceasing, and that 
the state itseli is nothing but change. 
This amounts to saying that there is no essential dif­
ference between passing from one state to another and 
persisting in the same state. If the state which "remains 
the same" is more varied than we think, on the other 
hand the passing from one state to another resembles, 
more than we imagine, a single state being prolonged; 
the transition is continuous. But, just because we close 
our eyes to the unceasing variation of every psychical 

DURATION 
5 
state, we are obliged, when the change has become so 
considerable as to force itself on our attention, to speak 
as if a new state were placed alongside the previous 
one. Of this new state we assume that it remains un­
varying in its turn, and so on endlessly. The apparent 
discontinuity of the psychical life is then due to our 
attention being fixed on it by a series of separate acts: 
actually there is only a gentle slope; but in following 
the broken line of our acts of attention, we think we 
perceive separate steps. True, our psychic life is full 
of the unforeseen. A thousand incidents arise, which 
seem to be cut off from those which precede them, and 
to be disconnected from those which follow. Discontinu­
ous though they appear, however,.in point of fact they 
stand out against the continuity of a background on 
which they are designed, and to which indeed they owe 
the intervals that separate them ; they are the beats of 
the drum which break forth here and there in the sym­
phony. Our attention fixes on. them because they in­
terest it more, but each of them is borne by the fluid 
mass of our whole psychical existence. Each is only the 
best illuminated point of a moving zone which com­
prises all that we feel or think or will-all, in short, that 
we are at any given moment. It is this entire zone which 
in reality makes up our state. Now, states thus defined 
cannot be regarded as distinct elements. They continue 
each other in an endless flow. 
But, as our attention has distinguished and separated 
them artificially, it is obliged next to reunite them by 
an artificial bond. It imaginP.s, therefore, a formless ego, 
indifferent and unchangeable, on which it threads the 
psychic states which it has set up as independent en-

6 
CREATIVE E VOLUTION 
tities. Instead of a flux of fleeting shades merging into 
each other, it perceives distinct and, so to speak, solid 
colors, set side by side like the beads of a necklace; it 
must perforce then suppose a thread, also itself solid, 
to hold the beads together. But if this colorless sub­
stratum is perpetually colored by that which covers it, 
it is for us, in its indeterminateness, as if it did not exist, 
since we only perceive what is colored, or, in other 
words, psychic states. As a matter of fact, this sub­
stratum has no reality; it is merely a symbol intended 
to recall unceasingly to our consciousness the artificial 
character of the process by which the attention places 
clean-cut states side by side, where actually there is a 
continuity which unfolds. If our existence were com­
posed of separate states with an impassive ego to unite 
them, for us there would be no duration. For an ego 
which does not change does not endure, and a psychic 
state which remains the same so long as it is not re­
placed by the following state does not endure either. 
Vain, therefore, is the attempt to range such states be­
side each other on the ego supposed to sustain them : 
never can these solids strung upon a solid make up that 
duration which flows. What we actually obtain in this 
way is an artificial imitation of the internal life, a static 
equivalent which well lend itself better to the require­
ments of logic and language, just because we have elimi­
nated from it the element of real time. But, as regards 
the psychical life unfolding beneath the symbols which 
conceal it, we readily perceive that time is just the 
stuff it is made of. 
There is, moreover, no stuff more resistant nor more 
substantial. For our duration is not merely one instant 

DURATION 
7 
replacing another; if it were, there would never be any­
thing but the present-no prolonging of the past into 
the actual, no evolution, no concrete duration. Dura· 
tion is the continuous progress of the past which gnaws 
into the future and which swells as it advances. And 
as the past grows without ceasing, so also there is no 
limit to its preservation. Memory, as we have tried to 
prove/ is not a faculty of putting away recollections in 
a drawer, or of inscribing them in a register. There is 
no register, no drawer ; there is not even, properly 
speaking, a faculty, for a faculty works intermittently, 
when it will or when it can, whilst the piling up of the 
past upon the past goes on without relaxation. In re­
ality, the past is preserved by itself, automatically. In 
its entirety, probably, it follows us at every instant; all 
that we have felt, thought and willed from our earliest 
infancy is there, leaning over the present which is about 
to join it, pressing against the portals of consciousness 
that would fain leave it outside. The cerebral mechan­
ism is arranged just so as to drive back into the uncon­
scious almost the whole of this past, and to admit be­
yond the threshold only that which can cast light on 
the present situation or further the action now being 
prepared-in short, only that which can give useful 
work. At the most, a few superfluous recollections may 
succeed in smuggling themselves through the half-open 
door. These memories, messengers from the uncon­
scious, remind us of what we are dragging behind us 
unawares. But, even though we may have no distinct 
idea of it, we feel vaguely that our past remains present 
to us. What are we, in fact, what is our character, if 
1 MatUre et m@moire, Paris, 1896, chaps. ii. and ii. 

8 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
not the condensation of the history that we have lived 
from our birth-nay, even before our birth, since we 
bring with us prenatal dispositions? Doubtless we think 
with only a small part of our past, but it is with our 
entire past, including the original bent of our soul, that 
we desire, will and act. Our past, then, as a whole, is 
made manifest to us in its impulse; it is felt in the form 
of tendency, although a small part of it only is known 
in the form of idea. 
From this survival of the past it follows that con­
sciousness cannot go through the same state twice. The 
circumstances may still be the same, but they will act 
no longer on the same person, since they find him at a 
new moment of his history. Our personality, which is 
being built up each instant with its accumulated experi­
ence, changes without ceasing. By changing, it prevents 
any state, although superficially identical with another, 
from ever repeating it in its very depth. That is why 
our duration is irreversible. We could not live over 
again a single moment, for we should have to begin by 
effacing the memory of all that had followed. Even 
could we erase this memory from our intellect, we 
could not from our will. 
Thus our personality shoots, grows and ripens with­
out ceasing. Each of its moments is something new 
added to what was before. We may go further : it is not 
only something new, but something unforeseeable. 
Doubtless, my present state is explained by what was 
in me and by what was acting on me a moment ago. 
In analyzing it I should find no other elements. But 
even a superhuman intelligence would not have been 
able to foresee the simple indivisible form . .which gives 

DURATION 
9 
to these purely abstract elements their concrete organi­
zation. For to foresee consists of projecting into the 
future what has been perceived in the past, or of im­
agining for a later time a new grouping, in a new order, 
of elements already perceived. But that which has never 
been perceived, and which is at the same time simple, 
is necessarily unforeseeable. Now such is the case with 
each of our states, regarded as a moment in a history 
that is gradually unfolding: it is simple, and it cannot 
have been already perceived, since it concentrates in 
its indivisibility all that has been perceived and what 
the present is adding to it besides. It is an original 
moment of a no less original history. 
The finished portrait is explained by the features of 
the model, by the nature of the artist, by the colors 
spread out on the palette; but, even with the knowledge 
of what explains it, no one, not even the artist, could 
have foreseen exactly what the portrait would be, for 
to predict it would have tieen to produce it before it 
was produced-an absurd hypothesis which is its own 
refutation. Even so with regard to the moments of our 
life, of which we are the artisans. Each of them is a 
kind of creation. And just as the talent ot the painter 
is formed or deformed-in any case, is modified-under 
the very influence of the works he produces, so each of 
our states, at the moment of its issue, modifies our per­
sonality, being indeed the new form that we are just 
assuming. It is then right to say that what we do de­
pends on what we are; but it is necessary to add also 
that we are, to a certain extent, what we do, and that 
we are creating ourselves continually. This creation of 
self by self is the more complete, the more one reasons 

I O  
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
on what one does. For reason does not proceed in such 
matters as in geometry, where impersonal premises 
are given once for all, and an impersonal conclusion 
must perforce be drawn. Here, on the contrary, the 
same reasons may dictate to different persons, or to 
the same person at different moments, acts profoundly 
different, although equally reasonable. The truth is that 
they are not quite the same reasons, since they are not 
those of the same person, nor of the same moment. That 
is why we cannot deal with them in the abstract, from 
outside, as in geometry, nor solve for another the prob­
lems by which he is faced in life. Each must solve them 
from within, on his own account. But we need not go 
more deeply into this. We are seeking only the precise 
meaning that our consciousness gives to this word "ex­
ist," and we find that, for a conscious being, to exist 
is to change, to change is to mature, to mature is to go 
on creating oneself endlessly. Should the same be said 
of existence in general? 
A material object, of whatever kind, presents oppo­
site characters to those which we have just been de­
·3cribing. Either it remains as it is, or else, if it changes 
under the influence of an external force, our idea of 
this change is that of a displacement of parts which 
themselves do not change. If these parts took to chang­
ing, we should split them up in their turn. We should 
thus descend to the molecules of which the fragments 
are made, to the atoms that make up the molecules, to 
the corpuscles that generate the atoms, to the "impon­
derable" within which the corpuscle is perhaps a mere 
vortex. In short, we should push the division or analysis 

UNORGANIZED BODIES 
I I  
as far as necessary. But we should stop only before the 
unchangeable. 
Now, we say that a composite object changes by the 
displacement of its parts. But when a part has left its 
position, there is nothing to prevent its return to it. A 
group of elements which has gone through a state can 
therefore always find its way back to that state, if not 
by itself, at least by means of an external cause able 
to restore everything to its place. This amounts to say­
ing that any state of the group may be repeated as often 
as desired, and consequently that the group does not 
grow old. It has no history. 
Thus nothing is created therein, neither form nor 
matter. What the group will be is already present in 
what it is, provided "what it is" includes all the points 
of the universe with which it is related. A superhuman 
intellect could calculate, for any moment of time, the 
position of any point of the system in space. And as 
there is nothing more in the form of the whole than the 
arrangement of its parts, the future forms of the sys­
tem are theoretically visible in its present configura­
tion. 
All our belief in objects, all our operations on the 
systems that science isolates, rest in fact on the idea 
that time does not bite into them. We have touched on 
this question in an earlier work, and shall return to it 
in the course of the present study. For the moment, we 
will confine ourselves to pointing out that the abstract 
time t attributed by science to a material object or to 
an isolated system consists only in a certain number of 
simultaneities or · more generally of correspondences, 
and that this .number remains the same, whatever be 

1 2  
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
the nature of the intervals between the correspondences. 
With these intervals we are never concerned when deal­
ing with inert matter; or, if they are considered, it is 
in order to count therein fresh correspondences, be­
tween which again we shall not care what happens. 
Common sense, which is occupied with detached ob­
jects, and also science, which considers isolated sys:. 
terns, are cortcerned only with the ends of the intervals 
and not with the intervals themselves. Therefore the 
flow of time might assume an infinite rapidity, the en­
tire past, present, and future of material objects or of 
isolated systems might be spread out all at once in 
space, without there being anything to change either 
in the formulae of the scientist or even in the language 
of common sense. The number t would always stand 
for the same thing; it would still count the same number 
of correspondences between the states of the objects or 
systems and the points of the line, ready drawn, which 
would be then the "course of time." 
Yet succession is an undeniable fact, even in the 
material world. Though our reasoning on isolated sys­
tems may imply that their history, past, present and 
future, might be instantaneously unfurled like a fan, 
this history, in point of fact, unfolds itself gradually, 
as if it occupied a duration like our own. If I want to 
mix a glass of sugar and water, I must, willy-nilly, wait 
until the sugar melts. This little fact is big with mean­
ing. For here the time I have to wait is not that mathe­
matical time which would apply equally well to the en­
tire history of the material world, even if that history 
were spread out instantaneously in space. It coincides 
with my impatience, that is to say, with a certain por-

U NORGANI ZED BODIES 
13 
tion of my own duration, which I cannot protract or 
contract as I like. It is no longer something thought, it 
is something liʦed. It is no longer a relation, it is an 
absolute. What else can this mean than that the glass 
of water, the sugar, and the process of the sugar's melt­
ing in the water are abstractions, and that the Whole 
within which they have been cut out by my senses and 
understanding progresses, it may be in the manner of 
a consciousness? 
Certainly, the operation by which science isolates and 
closes a system is not a.'Itogether artificial. If it had no 
objective foundation, we could not explain why it is 
clearly indicated in some cases and impossible in others. 
We shall see that matter has a tendency to constitute 
isolable systems, that can be treated geometrically. In 
fact, we shall define matter by just this tendency. But 
it is only a tendency. Matter does not go to the end, and 
the isolation is never complete. If science does go to 
the end and isolate complet᯷y, it is for convenience of 
study; it is understood that the so-called isolated sys­
tem remains subject to -certain external influences. 
Science merely leaves these alone, either because it finds 
them slight enough to be negligible, or because it in­
tends to take them into account later on. It is none the 
less true that these influences are so many threads 
which bind up the system to another more extensive, 
and to this a third which includes both, and so on to 
the system most objectively isolated and most inde­
pendent of all, the solar system complete. But, even 
here, the isolation is not absolute. Our sun radiates heat 
and light beyond the farthest planet. And, on the other 
hand, it moves in a certain fixed direction, drawing with 

14 
CREATIVE EVOLU TION 
it the planets and their satellites. The thread attaching 
it to the rest of the universe is doubtless very tenuous. 
Nevertheless it is along this thread that is transmitted 
down to the smallest particle of the world in which we 
live the duration immanent to the whole of the universe. 
The universe endures. The more we study the nature 
of time, the more we shall comprehend that duration 
means invention, the creation of forms, the continual 
elaboration of the absolutely new. The systems marked 
off by science endure only because they are bound up 
inseparably with the rest of the 'universe. It is true that 
in the universe itself two opposite movements are to 
be distinguished, as we shall see later on, "descent" 
and "ascent." The first only unwinds a roll ready pre­
pared. In principle, it might be accomplished almost 
instantaneously, like releasing a spring. But the ascend­
ing movement, which corresponds to an inner work of 
ripening or creating, endures essentially, and imposes 
its rhythm on the first, which is inseparable from it. 
There is no reason, therefore, why a duration, and 
so a form of existence like our own, should not be at­
tributed to the systems that science isolates, provided 
such systems are reintegrated into the Whole. But they 
must be so reintegrated. The same is even more obvi­
ously true of the objects cut out by our perception. The 
distinct outlines which we see in an object, and which 
give it its individuality, are only the design of a certain 
kind of influence that we might exert on a certain point 
of space : it is the plan of our eventual actions that is 
sent back to our eyes, as though by a mirror, when we 
see the surfaces and edges of things. Suppress this ac­
tion, and with it consequently those main directions 

ORGA NIZED BODIES 
I S 
which by perception are traced out for it in the en­
tanglement of the real, and the individuality of the 
body is reabsorbed in the universal interaction which, 
without doubt, is reality itself. 
Now, we have considered material objects gener­
ally. Are there not some objects privileged? The bodies 
we perceive are, so to speak, cut out of the stuff of 
nature by our perception, and the scissors follow, in 
some way, the marking of lines along which action 
might be taken. But the body which is to perform this 
action, the body which marks out upon matter the de­
sign of its eventual actions even before they are actual, 
the body that has only to point its sensory organs on 
the flow of the real in order to make that flow crystal­
lize into definite forms and thus to create all the other 
bodies-in short, the living body-is this a body as 
others are? 
Doubtless it, also, consists in a portion of extension 
bound up with the rest of extension, an intimate part of 
the Whole, subject to the same physical and chemical 
laws that govern any and every portion of matter. But, 
while the subdivision of matter into separate bodies is 
relative to our perception, while the building up of 
closed-off systems of material points is relative to our 
science, the living body has been separated and closed 
off by nature herself. It is composed of unlike parts that 
complete each other. It performs diverse functions that 
involve each other. It is an individual, and of no other 
object, not even of the crystal, can this be said, for a 
crystal has neither difference of parts nor diversity of 
functions. No doubt, it is hard to decide, even in the 
organized world, what is individual and what is not. 

1 6  
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
The difficulty is great, even in the animal kingdom; 
with plants it is almost insurmountable. This difficulty 
is, moreover, due to profound causes, on which we shall 
dwell later. We shall see that individuality admits of 
any number of degrees, and that it is not fully realized 
anywhere, even in man. But that is no reason for think­
ing it is not a characteristic property of life. The biolo­
gist who proceeds as a geometrician is too ready to take 
advantage here of our inability to give a precise and 
general definition of individuality. A perfect definition 
applies only to a completed reality; now, vital proper­
ties are never entirely realized, though always on the 
way to become so; they are not so much states as tend­
encies. And a tendency achieves all that it aims at only 
if it is not thwarted by another tendency. How, then, 
could this occur in the domain of life, where, as we shall 
show, the interaction of antagonistic tendencies is 
always implied? In particular, it may be said of indi­
viduality that, while the tendency to individuate is 
everywhere present in the organized world, it is every­
where opposed by the tendency toward reproduction. 
For the individuality to be perfect, it would be neces­
sary that no detached part of the organism could live 
separately. But then reproduction would be impossible. 
For what is reproduction, but the building up of a new 
organism \-vith a detac᯸ed fragment of the old? Indi­
viduality therefore harbors its enemy at home. Its very 
need of perpetuating itself in time condemns it never to 
be complete in space. The biologist must take due ac­
count of both tendencies in every instance, and it is 
therefore useless to ask him for a definition of individu­
ality that shall fit all cases and work automatically. 

ORGANIZED BODIES 
I 7 
But too often one reasons about the things of life in 
the same way as about the conditions of crude matter. 
Now here is the confusion so evident as in discussions 
about individuality. We are shown the stumps of a Lum­
briculus, each regenerating its head and living thence­
forward as an independent individual ; a hydra whose 
pieces become so many fresh hydras ; a sea-urchin's 
egg whose fragments develop complete embryos : where 
then, we are asked, was the individuality of the egg, the 
hydra, the worm ?-But, because there are several indi· 
viduals now, it does not follow that there was not a 
single individual just before. No doubt, when I have 
seen several drawers fall from a chest, I have no longer 
the right to say that the article was all of one piece. 
But the fact is that there can be nothing more in the 
present of the chest of drawers than there was in its 
past, and if it is made up of several different pieces 
now, it was so from the date of its manufacture. Gen­
erally speaking, unorganized bodies, which are what we 
have need of in order that we may act, and on which 
we have modeled our fashion of thinking, are regulated 
by this simple law: the present contains nothing more 
than the past, and what is found in the effect was 
already in the cause. But suppose that the distinctive 
feature of the organized body is that it grows and 
changes without ceasing, as indeed the most superficial 
observation testifies, there would be nothing astonishing 
in the fact that it was one in the first instance, and after­
wards many. The reproduction of unicellular organisms 
consists in just this-the living being divides into two 
halves, of which each is a complete individual. True, in 
the more complex animals, nature localizes in the almost 

18 
CREATIVE E VOL U TION 
independent sexual cells the power of producing the 
whole anew. But something of its power may remain 
diffused in the rest of the organism, as the facts of re­
generation prove, and it is conceivable that in certain 
privileged cases the faculty may persist integrally in a 
latent condition and manifest itself on the first oppor­
tunity. In truth, that I may have the right to speak of 
individuality, it is not necessary that the organism 
should be without the power to divide into fragments 
that are able to live. It is sufficient that it should have 
presented a certain systematization of parts before the 
division, and that the same systematization tend to be 
reproduced in each separate portion afterwards. Now, 
that is precisely what we observe in the organic world. 
We may conclude, then, that individuality is never per­
fect, and that it is often difficult, sometimes impossible, 
to tell what is an individual, and what is not, but that 
life nevertheless manifests a search for individuality, 
as if it strove to constitute systems naturally isolated, 
naturally closed. 
By this is a living being distinguished from all that 
our perception or our science isolates or closes artifi­
cially. It would therefore be wrong to compare. it to 
an object. Should we wish to find a term of comparison 
in the inorganic world, it is not to a determinate ma­
terial object, but much rather to the totality of the ma­
terial universe that we ought to compare the living or­
ganism. It is true that the comparison would not be 
worth much, for a living being is observable, whilst the 
whole of the universe is constructed or reconstructed by 
thought. But at least our attention wcu1lrl t.h115 have been 

ORGANIZED BODI&S . 
I9 
called to the essential character of organization. Like 
the universe as a whole, like each conscious being taken 
separately, the organism which lives is a thing that en­
dures. Its past, in its entirety, is prolonged into its pres­
ent, and abides there, actual and acting. How otherwise 
could we understand that it passes through distinct and 
well-marked phases, that it changes its age-in short, 
that it has a history? If I consider my body in particu­
lar, I find that, like my consciousness, it matures little 
by little from infancy to old age; like myself, it grows 
old. Indeed, maturity and old age are, properly speak­
ing, attributes only of my body; it is only metaphori­
cally that I apply the same names to the corresponding 
changes of my conscious self. Now, if I pass from the 
top to the bottom of the scale of living beings, from one 
of the most to one of the least differentiated, from the 
multicellular organism of man to the unicellular organ­
ism of the Infusorian, I find, even in this simple cell, the 
same process of growing old. The Infusorian is ·ex­
hausted at the end of a certain number of divisions, arid 
though it may be possible, by modifying the environ­
ment, to put off the moment when a rejuvenation by 
conjugation becomes necessary, this cannot be indefi­
nitely postponed.1 It is true that between these two ex• 
treme cases, in which the organism is completely indi­
vidualized, there might be found a multitude of others 
in which the individuality is less well marked, and in 
which, although there is doubtless an aging somewhere, 
one cannot say exactly what it is that grows old. Once 
more, there is no universal biological law which applies 
1 Calkins, Studies on the Life Hitory. of Protozoa (Archiv /. Entwick­
lungsmechanik, vol. xv., ,'-pp.l IJ9-I86) . 

20 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
precisely and automatically to every living thing. There 
are only directions in which life throws out species in 
general. Each particular species, in the very act by 
which it is constituted, affirms its independence, follows 
its caprice, deviates more or less from the straight line, 
sometimes even remounts the slope and seems to turn 
its back on its original direction. It is easy enough to 
argue that a tree never grows old, since the tips of its 
branches are always equally young, always equally 
capable of engendering new trees by budding. But in 
such an organism-which is, after all, a society rather 
than an individual-something ages, if only the leaves 
and the interior of the trunk. And each cell, considered 
separately, evolves in a specific way. Wherever anything 
lives, there is, open somewhere, a register in which time 
is being inscribed. 
This, it will be said, is oniy a metaphor.-It is of the 
very essence of mechanism, in fact, to consider as meta­
phorical every expression which attributes to time an 
effective action and a reality of its own. In vain does 
immediate experience show us that the very basis of our 
conscious existence is memory, that is to say, the pro­
longation of the past into the present, or, in a word, du­
ration, acting and irreversible. In vain does reason prove 
to us that the more we get away from the objects cut out 
and the systems isolated by common sense and by sci­
ence and the deeper we dig beneath them, the more we 
have to do with a reality which changes as a whole in its 
inmost states, as if an accumulative memory of the past 
made it impossible to go back again. The mechanistic 
Instinct of the mind is stronger than reason, stronger 
than immediate experience. The metaphysician that we 

INDI VIDUALITY AND AGE 
2 1  
each carry unconsciously within us, and the presence of 
which is explained, as we shall see later on, by the very 
place that man occupies amongst the living beings, has 
its fixed requirements, its ready-made explanations, its 
irreducible propositions : all unite in denying concrete 
duration. Change must be reducible to an arrangement 
or rearrangement of parts; the irreversibility of time 
must be an appearance relative to our ignorance; the 
impossibility of turning back must be only the inability 
of man to put things in place again. So growing old can 
be nothing more than the gradual gain or loss of certain 
substances, perhaps both together. Time is assumed to 
have just as much reality for a living being as for an 
hour-glass, in which the top part empties while the lower 
fills, and all goes where it was before when you turn 
the glass upside down. 
True, biologists are not agreed on what is gained and 
what is lost between the day of birth and the day of 
death. There are those who hold to the continual growth 
in the volume of protoplasm from the birth of the cell 
right on to its death.1 More probable and more pro­
found is the theory according to which the diminution 
bears on the quantity of nutritive substance contained 
in that "inner environment" in which the organism is 
being renewed, and the increase on the quantity of un­
excreted residual substances which, accumulating in the 
body, finally "crust it over." 2 Must we however-with 
1 Sedgwick Minot, On Certain Phenomena of Growinr Old (Proc. 
Amer. Assoc. for the Advancement of Science, 39th Meeting, Salem, 
18911 pp. 271-288 ) .  
• Le Dantec, L'lndividualit@ d l'e"eur itldividualiste, Paris, 1905• pp. 
84 ff. 

22 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
an eminent bacteriologist-declare any explanation of 
growing old insufficient that does not take account of 
phagocytosis? 1 We do not feel qualified to settle the 
question. But the fact that the two theories agree in af­
firming the constant accumulation or loss of a certain 
kind of matter, even though they have little in common 
as to what is gained and lost, shows pretty well that the 
frame of the explanation has been furnished a priori. 
We shall see this more and more as we proceed with our 
study: it is not easy, in thinking of time, to escape the 
image of the hour-glass. 
The cause of growing old must lie deeper. We hold 
that there is unbroken continuity between the evolution 
of the embryo and that of the complete organism. The 
impetus which causes a living being to grow larger, to 
develop and to age, is the same that has caused it to 
pass through the phases of the embryonic life. The de­
velopment of the embryo is a perpetual change of form. 
Anyone who attempts to note all its successive aspects 
becomes lost in an infinity, as is inevitable in dealing 
with a continuum. Life does but prolong this prenatal 
evolution. The proof of this is that it is often impossible 
for us to say whether we are dealing with an organism 
growing old or with an embryo continuing to evolve; 
such is the case, for example, with the larvae of insects 
and crustacea. On the other hand, in an organism such 
as our own, crises like puberty or the menopause, ii 
which the individual is completely transformed, are 
quite comparable to changes in the course of larval or 
1 Metchnikoff, La Degt!Àrescence senile (AnÀe biologique, iii., 1897, 
pp.- 249. ff.). Cf. by the same auor, La Naure humaine, Paris, 1903, 
pp. JI 2 ff. 

INDIVIDUALITY AND AGE 
23 
embryonic life-yet they are part and parcel of the 
process of our aging. Although they occur at a definite 
age and within a time that may be quite short, no one 
would maintain that they appear then ex abrupto, from 
without, simply because a certain age is reached, just 
as a legal right is granted to us on our one-and-twentieth 
birthday. It is evident that a change like that of puberty 
is in course of preparation at every instant from birth, 
and even before birth, and that the aging up to that 
crisis consists, in part at least, of this gradual prepara­
tion. In short, what is properly vital in growing old is the 
insensible, infinitely graduated, continuance of the 
change of form. Now, this change is undoubtedly ac­
companied by phenomena of organic destruction : to 
these, and to these alone, will a mechanistic explanation 
of aging be confined. It will note the facts of sclerosis, 
the gradual accumulation of residual substances, the 
growing hypertrophy of the protoplasm of the cell. But 
under these visible effects an inner cause lies hidden. 
The evolution of the living being, like that of the em­
bryo, implies a continual recording of duration, a per­
sistence of the past in the present, and so an appear· 
ance, at least, of organic memory. 
The present state of an unorganized body depends 
exclusively on what happened at the previous instant; 
and likewise the position of the material points of a 
system defined and isolated by science is determined by 
the position of these same points at the moment imme­
diately before. In other words, the laws that govern un᯹ 
l)rganized matter are expressible, in principle, by dif­
fetential equations in which time (in the sense in which 
!he·mathematician takes this wdrd) would play the rolo 

24 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
of independent variable. Is it so with the laws of life? 
Does the state of a living body find its complete ex­
planation in the state immediately before? Yes, if it is 
agreed a priori to liken the living body to other bodies, 
and to identify it, for the sake of the argument, with the 
artificial systems on which the chemist, physicist and 
astronomer operate. But in astronomy, physics and 
chemistry the proposition has a perfectly definite mean­
ing: it signifies that certain aspects of the present, im­
portant for science, are calculable as functions of the 
immediate past. Nothing of the sort in the domain of 
life. Here calculation touches, at most, certain phenom­
ena of organic destruction. Organic creation, on the con­
trary, the evolutionary phenomena which properly 
constitute life, we cannot in any way subject to a mathe­
matical treatment. It will be said that this impotence 
is due only to our ignorance. But it may equally well 
express the fact that the present moment of a living 
body does not find its explanation in the moment imme­
diately before, that all the past of the organism must 
be added to that moment, its heredity-in fact, the 
whole of a very long history. In the second of these two 
hypotheses, not in the first, is really expressed the pres­
ent state of the biological sciences, as well as their di­
rection. As for the idea that the living body might be 
treated by some superhuman calculator in the same 
mathematical way as our solar system, this has gradu­
ally arisen from a metaphysic which has taken a more 
precise form since the physical discoveries of Galileo, 
but which, as we shall show, was always the natural 
metaphysic of the human mind. Its apparent clearness, 
our impatient desire to find it true, the enthusiasm with 

INDIVIDUALITY AND AGE 
which so many excellent minds accept it without proof 
-all the seductions, in short, that it exercises on our 
thought, should put us on our guard against it. The at­
traction it has for us proves well enough that it gives 
satisfaction to an innate inclination. But, as will be seen 
further on, the intellectual tendencies innate today, 
which life must have created in the course of its evolu­
tion, are not at all meant to supply us with an explana­
tion of life : they have something else to do. 
Any attempt to distinguish between an artificial and 
a natural system, between the dead and the living, runs 
counter to this tendency at once. Thus it happens that 
we find it equally difficult to imagine that the organized 
has duration and that the unorganized has not. When 
we say that the state of an artificial system depends exA 
elusively on its state at the moment before, does it not 
seem as if we were bringing time in, as if the system had 
something to do with real duration? And, on the other 
hand, though the whole of the past goes into the making 
of the living being's present moment, does not organic 
memory press it into the moment immediately before the 
present, so that the moment immediately before be­
comes the sole cause of the present one?-To speak thus 
is to ignore the cardinal difference between concrete 
time, along which a real system develops, and that ab­
stract time which enters into our speculations on arti­
ficial systems. What does it mean, to say that the state 
of an artificial system depends on what it was at the 
moment immediately before? There is no instant imme­
diately before another instant; there could not be, any 
more than there could be one mathematical point touch­
ing another. The instant "immediately before" is, in 

J6 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
reality, that which is connected with the present instant 
by the interval dt. All that you mean to say, therefore, 
is that the present state of the system is defined by 
equations into which differential coefficients enter, such 
as ds/dt, dv/dt, that is to say, at bottom, present veloci., 
ties and present accelerations. You are therefore really 
speaking only of the present-a present, it is true, con.­
sidered along with its tendency. The systems science 
works with are, in fact, in an instantaneous present that 
is always being renewed ; such systems are never in 
that real, concrete duration in which the past remains 
bound up with the present. When the mathematician 
calculates the future state of a system at the end of a 
time t, there is nothing to prevent him from supposing 
that the universe vanishes from this moment till that, 
and suddenly reappears. It is the t-th moment only that 
counts-and that will be a mere instant. What will flow 
on in the interval-that is to say, real time-does not 
count, and cannot enter into the calculation. If the 
mathematician says that he puts himself inside this in­
terval, he means that he is placing himself at a certain 
point, at a particular moment, therefore at the extremity 
again of a certain time t'; with the interval up to T' he 
is not concerned. If he divides the interval into infinitely 
small parts by considering the differential dt, he thereby 
expresses merely the fact that he will consider accelera• 
tions and velocities-that is to say, numbers which de­
note tendencies and enable him to calculate· the state of 
the system at a given moment. But he is always speaking 
of -a given moment-a static moment, that isݾand not 
of flowing time. In short, the world the mathematic«m 
deals with is a world that dies and is reborn at every 

INDIVIDUALITY AND AOE 
2'r 
instant-the world which Descartes was thinking of 
when he spoke of continued creation. But, in time thus 
conceived, how could evolution, which is the very es­
sence of life, ever take place? Evolution implies a real 
persistence of the past in the present, a duration which 
is, as it were, a hyphen, a connecting link. In other 
words, to know a living being or natural system is to get 
at the very interval of duration, while the knowledge 
of an artificial or mathematical system applies only to 
the extremity. 
Continuity of change, preservation of the past in the 
present, real duration-the living being seems, then, to 
share these attributes with consciousness. Can we go 
further and say that life, like conscious activity, is in­
vention, is unceasing creation? 
It does not enter into our plan to set down here the 
proofs of transformism. We wish only to explain in a 
word or two why we shall accept it, in the present work, 
as a sufficiently exact and precise expression of the facts 
actually known. The idea of transformism is already in 
germ in the natural classification of organized beings. 
The naturalist, in fact, brings together the organisms 
that are like each other, then divides the group into sub· 
groups within which the likeness is still greater, and so 
on: all through the operation, the characters of the 
group appear as general themes on which each of the 
sub-groups performs its particular variation. Now, such 
b just the relation we find, in the animal and in the 
vegetable world between the generator and the gen· 
era ted : on the canvas which the ancestor passes on, an<! 
which his descendants possess in common, each puts his 

::r8 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
own original embroidery. True, the differences between 
the descendant and the ancestor are slight, and it may 
be asked whether the same living matter presents 
enough plasticity to take in turn such different forms as 
those of a fish, a reptile and a bird. But, to this ques­
tion, observation gives a peremptory answer. It shows 
that up to a certain period in its development the em­
bryo of the bird is hardly distinguishable from that of 
the reptile, and that the individual develops, through­
out the embryonic life in general, a series of transfor­
mations comparable to those through which, according 
to the theory of evolution, one species passes into an­
other. A single cell, the result of the combination of two 
cells, male and female, accomplishes this work by di­
viding. Every day, before our eyes, the highest forms 
of life are springing from a very elementary form. Ex­
perience, then, shows that the most complex has been 
able to issue from the most simple by way of evolution. 
Now, has it arisen so, as a matter of fact? Paleontology, 
in spite of the insufficiency of its evidence, invites us to 
believe it has; for, where it makes out the order of suc­
cession of species with any precision, this order is just 
what considerations drawn from embryogeny and com­
parative anatomy would lead anyone to suppose, and 
each new paleontological discovery brings transformism 
a new confirmation. Thus, the proof drawn from mere 
observation is ever being strengthened, while, on the 
other hand, experiment is removing the objections one 
by one. The recent experiments of H. de Vries, for in­
stance, by showing that important variations can be 
produced suddenly and transmitted regularly, have 
overthrown some of the greatest difficulties raised by 

TRANS FORMISM 
the theory. They have enabled us greatly to shorten the 
time biological evolution seems to demand. They also 
render us less exacting toward paleontology. So that, 
all things considered, the transformist hypothesis looks 
more and more like a close approximation to the truth, 
It is not rigorously demonstrable; but, failing the cer­
tainty of theoretical or experimental demonstration, 
there is a probability which is continually growing, due 
to evidence which, while coming short of direct proof, 
seems to point persistently in its direction : such is the 
kind of probability that the theory of transformism 
offers. 
Let us admit, however, that transformism may be 
wrong. Let us suppose that species are proved, by in­
ference or by experiment, to have arisen by a discon­
tinuous process, of which today we have no idea. Would 
the doctrine be affected in so far as it has a special in­
terest or importance for us? Classification would prob­
ably remain, in its broad lines. The actual data of em­
bryology would also remain. The correspondence be­
tween comparative embryogeny and comparative anat­
omy would remain too. Therefore biology could and 
would continue to establish between living forms the 
same relations and the same kinship as transformism 
supposes today. It would be, it is true, an ideal kinship, 
and no longer a material affiliation. But, as the actual 
data of paleontology would also remain, we should still 
have to admit that it is successively, not simultaneously, 
that the forms between which we find an ideal kinship 
have appeared. Now, the evolutionist theory, so far as it 
has any importance for philosophy, requires no more. 
It consists above all in estublishing relations of ideal 

CREATIVE E VOL {,T'UO N 
kinship, and in maintaining that wherever there is this 
relation of, so to speak, logical affiliation between forms, 
there is also a relation of chronological succession be­
tween the species in which these forms are materialized. 
Both arguments would hold in any case. And hence, an 
evolution somewhere would still have to be supposed, 
whether in a creative Thought in which the ideas of the 
different species are generated by each other exactly as 
transformism holds that species themselves are gener­
ated on the earth; or in a plan of vital organization 
immanent in nature, which gradually works itself out, 
in which the relations of logical and chronological affilia­
tion between pure forms are just those which transform­
ism presents as relations of real aff1liation between liv­
ing individuals; or, finally, in some unknown cause of 
life, which develops its effects as if they generated one 
another. Evolution would then simply have been trans­
posed, made to pass from the visible to the invisible. 
Almost all that transformism tells us today would be 
preserved, open to interpretation in another way. Will 
'it not, therefore, be better to stick to the letter of trans­
Iormism as almost all scientists profess it ? Apart from 
the question to what extent the theory of evolution de­
scribes the facts and to what extent it symbolizes them, 
there is nothing in it that is irreconcilable with the doc­
trines it has claimed to replace, even with that of special 
creations, to which it is usually opposed. For this reason 
we think the language of transformism forces itself now 
upon all philosophy, as the dogmatic affirmation of 
transformism forces itself upon science. 
But then, we must no longer speak of life in general 
as an abstraction, or as a mere heading under which al 

TRANSFORMISM 
31 
living beings are inscribed. At a certain moment, in cer­
tain points of space, a visible current has taken rise ; 
this current of life, traversing the bodies it has organ­
ized one after another, passing from generation to gen­
eration, has become divided amongst species and dis­
tributed amongst individuals without losing anything of 
its force, rather intensifying in proportion to its ad­
vance. It is well known that, on the theory of the "con­
tinuity of the germ-plasm," maintained by Weismann, 
the sexual elements of the generating organism pass on 
their properties directly to the sexual elements of the 
organism engendered. In this extreme form, the theory 
has seemed debatable, for it is only in exceptional cases 
that there are any signs of sexual glands at the time of 
segmentation of the fertilized egg. But, though the cells 
that engender the sexual elements do not generally ap­
pear at the beginning of the embryonic life, it is none 
the less true that they are always formed out of those 
tissues of the embryo which have not undergone any 
particular functional differentiation, and whose cells are 
made of unmodified protoplasm.1 In other words, the 
genetic power of the fertilized ovum weakens, the more 
it is spread over the growing mass of the tissues of the 
embryo; but, while it is being thus diluted, it is concen­
trating anew something of itself on a certain special 
point, to wit, the cells, from which the ova or sperma­
tozoa will develop. It might therefore be said that, 
though the germ-plasm is not continuous, there is at 
least continuity of genetic energy, this energy being ex­
pended only at cert<J,in insf4nts, for just enough time to 
giv.e the requisite impulsion to the embryonic life, and 
1 Roule, L'Embryologie generale, Paris, 1893, p. 319. 

32 
CREATIVE EVOLU TION 
being recouped as soon as possible in new sexual ele­
ments, in which, again, it bides its time. Regarded from 
this point of view, life is like a current passing from 
germ to germ through the medium of a developed organ­
ism. It is as if the organism itself were only an excres­
cence, a bud caused to sprout by the former germ 
endeavoring to continue itself in a new germ. The essen­
tial thing is the continuous progress indefinitely pur­
sued, an invisible progress, on which each visible organ­
ism rides during the short interval of time given it to 
live. 
Now, the more we fix our attention on this continuity 
of life, the more we see that organic evolution resembles 
the evolution of a consciousness, in which the past 
presses against the present and causes the upspringing 
of a new form of consciousness, incommensurable with 
its antecedents. That the appearance of a vegetable or 
animal species is due to specific causes, nobody will 
gainsay. But this can only mean that if, after the fact, 
we could know these causes in detail, we could explain 
by them the form that has been produced; foreseeing 
the form is out of the question.1 It may perhaps be said 
that the form could be foreseen if we could know, in all 
their details, the conditions under which it will be pro­
duced. But these conditions are built up into it and are 
part and parcel of its being; they are peculiar to that 
phase of its history in which life finds itself at the mo­
ment of producing the form : how could we know be-
1 The irreversibility of the series of living beings has been well set 
forth by Baldwin (Development and Evolution, New York, 1902 ;  iD 
particular p. 327). 

TRAN S F ORMISM 
forehand a situation that is unique of its kind, that has 
never yet occurred and will never occur again? Of the 
future, only that is foreseen which is like the past or 
can be made up again with elements like those of the 
past. Such is the case with astronomical, physical and 
chemical facts, with all facts which form part of a sys­
tem in which elements supposed to be unchanging are 
merely put together, in which the only changes are 
changes of position, in which there is no theoretical ab­
surdity in imagining that things are restored to their 
place; in which, consequently, the same total phenome­
non, or at least the same elementary phenomena, can 
be repeated. But an original situation, which imparts 
something of its own originality to its elements, that is 
to say, to the partial views that are taken of it, how can 
such a situation be pictured as given before it is actually 
produced? 1 All that can be said is that, once produced, 
it will be explained by the elements that analysis will 
then carve out of it. Now, what is true of the produc­
tion of a new species is also true of the production of 
a new individual, and, more generally, of any moment 
of any living form. For, though the variation must 
reach a certain importance and a certain generality in 
order to give rise to a new species, it is being produced 
every moment, continuously and insensibly, in every 
living being. And it is evident that even the sudden 
"mutations" which we now hear of are possible only if 
a process of incubation, or rather of maturing, is going 
on throughout a series of generations that do not seem 
1 We have dwelt on this point and tried to make it clear in the l!.ssta 
1ur les donnees immediates de Ia conscience, pp. 140-ISI. 

34 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
to change. In this sense it might be said of life, as of con­
sciousness, that at every moment it is creating some­
thing.1 
But against this idea of the absolute originality and 
unforeseeability of forms our whole intellect rises in re­
volt. The essential function of our intellect, as the evolu­
tion of life has fashioned it, is to be a light for our con­
duct, to make ready for our action on things, to foresee, 
for a given situation, the events, favorable or unfavor­
able, which may follow thereupon. Intellect therefore 
instinctively selects in a given situation whatever is like 
something already known ; it seeks this out, in order 
that it may apply its principle that "like produces like." 
In just this does the prevision of the future by common 
sense consist, Science carries this faculty to the highest 
possible degree of exactitude and precision, but does not 
alter its essential character. Like ordinary knowledge, 
in dealing with things science is concerned only with the 
aspect of repetition. Though the whole be original, sci­
ence will always manage to analyze it into elements or 
aspects which are approximately a reproduction of the 
past. Science can work only on what is supposed to re-
1 In his fine work on Genius in Art (Le Genie dans !'art) , M. Seailles 
develops this twofold thesis, that art is a continuation of nature and 
that life is creation. We should willingly accept the second formula ; but 
by creation must we understand, as the author does, a synthesis of ele­
ments ? Where the elements pre-exist, the synthesis that will be made is 
virtually given, being only one of the possible arrangements. This ar­
rangement a superhuman intellect could have perceived in advance 
among all the possible ones that surround it. We hold, on the contrary., 
chat in the domain of life the elements have no real and separate exist­
ence. They are manifold mental views of an indivisible process. And for 
that reason there is radical contingency in progress, incommensurability 
between what goes before and what follows-in short, duration. 

BIOLOGY, P H Y S I C S  AND C H E M I S T RY 
35 
peat itself-that is to say, on what is withdrawn, by hy­
pothesis, from the action of real time. Anything that is ir­
reducible and irreversible in the successive moments of a 
h1<>tory eludes science. To get a notion of this irreduci­
bility and irreversibility, we must break with scientific 
habits which are adapted to the fundamental require­
ments of thought, we must do violence to the mind, go 
counter to the natural bent of the intellect. But that is 
just the function of philosophy. 
In vain, therefore, does life evolve before our eyes as 
a continuous creation of unforeseeable form : the idea 
always persists that form, unforeseeability and continu­
ity are mere appearance-the outward reflection of our 
own ignorance. What is presented to the senses as a con­
tinuous history would break up, we are told, into a 
series of successive states. "What gives you the impres­
sion of an original state resolves, ᯶on analysis, into 
elementary facts, each of which is the repetition of a 
fact already known. What you call an unforeseeable 
form is only a new arrangement of old elements. The 
elementary causes, which in their totality have deter­
mined this arrangement, are themselves old causes re­
peated in a new order. Knowledge of the elements and 
of the elementary causes would have made it possible 
to foretell the living form which is their sum and their 
resultant. When we have resolved the biological aspect 
of phenomena into physico-chemical factors, we will 
leap, if necessary, over physics and chemistry them­
selves; we will go from masses to molecules, from mole­
cules to atoms, from atoms to corpuscles : we must in­
deed at last come to something that can be treated as a 
kind of solar system, astronomically. If you deny it, you 

CREATIVE EVOL U T I O N  
oppose the very principle of scientific mechanism, and 
you arbitrarily affirm that living matter is not made of 
the same elements as other matter."-We reply that we 
do not question the fundamental identity of inert matter 
and organized matter. The only question is whether the 
natural systems which we call living beings must be as­
similated to the artificial systems that science cuts out 
within inert matter, or whether they must not rather be 
compared to that natural system which is the whole of 
the universe. That life is a kind of mechanism I cordially 
agree. But is it the mechanism of parts artificially iso­
lated within the whole of the universe, or is it the Clech­
anism of the real whole? The real whole might well be, 
we conceive, an indivisible contimiity. The systems we 
cut out within it would, properly speaking, not then be 
parts at all ; they would be partial views of the whole. 
And, with these partial views put end to end, you will 
not make even a beginning of the reconstruction of the 
whole, any more than, by multiplying photographs of an 
object in a thousand different aspects, you will repro­
duce the object itself. So of life and of the physico­
chemical phenomena to which you endeavor to reduce it. 
Analysis will undoubtedly resolve the process of organic 
creation into an ever-growing number of physico-chem­
ical phenomena, and chemists and physicists will have 
to do, of course, with nothing but these. But it does not 
follow that chemistry and physics will ever give us 
the key to life. 
A very small element of a curve is very near being a 
straight line. And the smaller it is, the nearer. In the 
limit, it may be termed a part of the curve or a part of 
the straight line, as you please, for in each of its points 

BIOLOGY, 
P H Y S I C S  AND C H E M ISTRY 
3 7 
a curve coincides with its tangent. So likewise "vitality, 
is tangent, at any and every point, to physical and 
chemical forces ; but such points are, as a fact, only 
views taken by a mind which imagines stops at various 
moments of the movement that generates the curve. In 
reality, life is no more made of physico-chemical ele­
ments than a curve is composed of straight lines. 
In a general way, the most radical progress a science 
can achieve is the working of the completed results into 
a new scheme of the whole, by relation to which they 
become instantaneous and motionless views taken at in­
tervals along the continuity of a movement. Such, for 
example, is the relation of modern to ancient geometry. 
The latter, purely static, worked with figures drawn 
once for all ; the former studies the varying of a func­
tion-that is, the continuous movement by which the 
figure is described. No doubt, for greater strictness, all 
considerations of motion may be eliminated from mathe­
matical processes ; but the introduction of motion into 
the genesis of figures is nevertheless the origin of mod­
ern mathematics. We believe that if biology could ever 
get as close to its object as mathematics does to its own, 
it would become, to the physics and chemistry of organ­
ized bodies, what the mathematics of the moderns has 
proved to be in relation to ancient geometry. The wholly 
superficial displacements of masses and molecules stud­
ied in physics and chemistry would become, by relation 
to that inner vital movement (which is transformation 
and not translation) what the position of a moving ob­
ject is to the movement of that object in space. And, so 
far as we can see, the procedure by which we should 
then pass from the definition of a certain vital action to 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
the system of physico-chemical facts which it implie! 
would be like passing from the function to its derivative, 
from the equation of the curve (i.e. the law of the con­
tinuous movement by which the curve is generated) to 
the equation of the tangent giving its instantaneous di­
rection. Such a science would be a mechanics of trans­
formation, of which our mechanics of translation would 
become a particular case, a simplification, a projection 
on the plane of pure quantity. And just as an infinity of 
functions have the same differential, these functions 
differing from each other by a constant, so perhaps the 
integration of the physico-chemical clements of properly 
vital action might determine that action only in part­
a part would be left to indetermination. But such an 
integration can be no more than dreamed of ; we do not 
pretend that the dream will ever be realized. We arc 
only trying, by carrying a certain comparison as far as 
possible, to show up to what point our theory goes along 
with pure mechanism, and where they part company. 
Imitation of the living by the unorganized may, how­
ever, go a good way. Not only does chemistry make 
organic syntheses, but we have succeeded in reproduc­
ing artificially the external appearance of certain facts 
of organization, such as indirect cell-division and proto­
plasmic circulation. It is well known that the protoplasm 
of the cell effects various movements within its en­
velope; on the other hand, indirect cell-division is the 
outcome of very complex operations, some involving the 
nucleus and others the cytoplasm. These latter com­
mence by the doubling of the centrosome, a small spher­
kal body alongside the nucleus. The two centrosomes 
t.hus obtained draw apart, attract the broken and 

BIOLOGY, PHYSICS AND CHE M I S TRY 
39 
doubled ends of the filament of which the original nu­
cleus mainly consisted, and join them to form two iresh 
nuclei about which the two new cells are constructed 
which will succeed the first. Now, in their broad lines 
and in their external appearance, some at least of these 
operations have been successfully imitated. If some 
sugar or table salt is pulverizrcl and some very old oil 
is added, and a drop of the mixture is observed under 
the microscope, a froth of alveolar structure is seen 
whose configuration is like that of protoplasm, accord­
ing to certain theories, and in which movements take 
place which are decidedly like those of protoplasmic 
circulation.1 If, in a froth of the same kind, the air is ex­
tracted from an alveolus, a cone of attraction is seen 
to form, like those about the centrosomes which result 
in the division of the nucleus.:! Even the external motions 
of a unicellular organism-of an amoeba, at any rate­
are sometimes explained mechanically. The displace­
ments of an amoeba in a drop of water would be com­
parable to the motion to and fro of a grain of dust in 
a draughty room. Its mass is all the time absorbing cer­
tain soluble matters contained in the surrounding water, 
and giving back to it certain others ; these continual 
exchanges, like those between two vessels separated by 
a porous partition, would create an ever-changing vortex 
around the little organism. As for the temporary pro­
longations or pseudopodia which the amoeba seems to 
make, they would be not so much given out by it as at-
1 Biitschli, Untersuchungen uber mikroskopische Schaume und das 
Protoplasma, Leipzig, 1892, First Part. 
• Rhumbler, Versuch einer mechanischen Erklirung der indirektett 
ZeU- und Kernteilung (R01%'s A.rcltiv, 1896). 

40 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
tracted from it by a kind of inhalation or suction of the 
surrounding medium.1 In the same way we may perhaps 
come to explain the more complex movements which the 
Infusorian makes with its vibratory cilia, which, more­
over, are probably only fixed pseudopodia. 
But scientists are far from agreed on the value of 
explanations and schemata of this sort. Chemists have 
pointed out that even in the organic-not to go so far 
as the organized-science has reconstructed hitherto 
nothing but waste products of vital activity; the pecu­
liarly active plastic substances obstinately defy syn­
thesis. One of the most notable naturalists of our time 
has insisted on the opposition of two orders of phenom­
ena observed in living tissues, anagenesis and katagene­
sis. The role of the anagenetic energies is to raise the 
inferior energies to their own level by assimilating in­
organic substances. They construct the tissues. On the 
other hand, the actual functioning of life (excepting, of 
course, assimilation, growth and reproduction) is of 
the katagenetic order, exhibiting the fall, not the rise, of 
energy. It is only with these facts of katagenetic order 
that physico-chemistry deals-that is, in short, with the 
dead and not with the living.2 The other kind of facts 
certainly seem to defy physico-chemical analysis, even 
if they are not anagenetic in the proper sense of the 
word. As for the artificial imitation of the outward ap­
pearance of protoplasm, should a real theoretic impor­
tance be attached to this when the question of the phys-
' Berthold, Studien uber Protoplasmamechanik , Leipzig, 1 886, p. 102. 
Cf. the explanation proposed by Le Dantec, Theorie nouvrlle de la t•ie, 
Paris, 1896, p. 6o. 
2 Cope, The Primary Factors of Organic Evolution, Chicago, 1896, pp. 
475-484. 

B IOLOGY, 
P H Y S ICS AND C H E M I S TRY 
41 
ical framework of protoplasm is not yet settled? We are 
still further from compounding protoplasm chemically. 
Finally, a physico-chemical explanation of the motions 
of the amoeba, and a fortiori of the behavior of the In­
fusoria, seems impossible to many of those who have 
closely observed these rudimentary organisms. Even in 
these humblest manifestations of life they discover 
traces of an effective psychological activity.1 But in­
structive above all is the fact that the tendency to ex­
plain everything by physics and chemistry is discour­
aged rather than strengthened by deep study of histo­
logical phenomena. Such is the conclusion of the truly 
admirable book which the histologist E. B. Wilson has 
devoted to the development of the cell : "The study of 
the cell has, on the whole, seemed to widen rather than 
to narrow the enormous gap that separates even the 
lowest forms of life from the inorganic world." 2 
To sum up, those who are concerned only with the 
functional activity of the living being are inclined to be­
lieve that physics and chemistry will give us the key 
to biological processes.a They have chiefly to do, as a 
fact, with phenomena that are repeated continually in 
the living being, as in a chemical retort. This explains, 
1 Maupas, "Elude des infusoires cilics" (Arch. de :oologic experimen­
tale, 1883, pp. 47, 491 ,  518, 549, in particular) . P. Vignon, Recherches 
de cytologic generate sur les epitheliums, Paris, 1902, p. G55. A profound 
study of the motions of the Infusoria and a very penetrating criticism 
of the idea of tropism have been made recently by Jennings (Contribu­
tions to the Study of the Behavior of Lowrr Organisms, Washington, 
1904) . The "type of behavior" of these lower organisms, as Jennihgs 
defines it (pp. 23 7-252 ) ,  is unquestionably of the psychological order. 
• E. B. Wilson, The Cell in Development and Inheritance, New York, 
1897, p. 330. 
8 Dastre, La Vie et la mort, p. 43· 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
in some measure, the mechanistic tendencies of physiol­
ogy. On the contrary, those whose attention is concen­
trated on the minute structure of living tissues, on their 
genesis and evolution, histologists and embryogenists on 
the one hand, naturalists on the other, are interested in 
the retort itself, not merely in its contents. They find 
that this retort creates its own form through a unique 
series of acts that really constitute a history. Thus, his­
tologists, embryogenists, and naturalists believe far less 
readily than physiologists in the physico-chemical char­
acter of vital actions. 
The fact is, neither one nor the other of these two 
theories, neither that which affirms nor that which de­
nies the possibility of chemically producing an ele­
mentary organism, can claim the authority of experi­
ment. They are both unverifiable, the former because 
science has not yet advanced a step toward the chemical 
synthesis of a living substance, the second because 
there is no conceivable way of proving experimentally 
the impossibility of a fact. But we have set forth the 
theoretical reasons which prevent us from likening the 
living being, a system closed off by nature, to the sys­
tems which our science isolates. These reasons have less 
force, we acknowledge, in the case of a rudimentary 
organism like the amoeba, which hardly evolves at all. 
But they acquire more when we consider a complex 
organism which goes through a regular cycle of trans­
formations. The more duration marks the living being 
with its imprint, the more obviously the organism dif­
fers from a mere mechanism, over which duration glides 
without penetrating. And the demonstration bs most 
force when it applies to the evolution of life as a whole, 

RADICAL 
M E C H A N I S M  
43 
from its humblest origins to its highest forms, inasmuch 
as this evolution constitutes, through the unity and 
continuity of the animated matter which supports it, a 
single indivisible history. Thus viewed, the evolutionist 
hypothesis does not seem so closely akin to the mecha­
nistic conception of life as it is generally supposed to be. 
Of this mechanistic conception we do not claim, of 
course, to furnish a mathematical and final refutation. 
But the refutation which we draw from the considera­
tion of real time, and which is, in our opinion, the only 
refutation possible, becomes the more rigorous and 
cogent the more frankly the evolutionist hypothesis is 
assumed. We must dwell a good deal more on this point. 
But let us first show more clearly the notion of life to 
which we are leading up. 
The mechanistic explanations, we said, hold good for 
the systems that our thought artificially detaches from 
the whole. But of the whole itself and of the systems 
which, within this whole, seem to take after it, we can­
not admit a priori that they arc mechanically explicable, 
for then time would be useless, and even unreal. The es­
sence of mechanical explanation, in fact, is to regard 
the future and the past as calculable functions of the 
present, and thus to claim that all is given. On this 
hypothesis, past, present and future would be open at 
a glance to a superhuman intellect capable of making 
the calculation. Indeed, the scientists who have believed 
in the universality and perfect objectivity of mechanical 
explanations have, consciously or unconsciously, acted 
on a hypothesis of this kind. Laplace formulated it with 
the greatest precision : "An intellect which at a given 
instant knew all the forces with which nature is ani-

44 
CREATIVE 
EVOLUTION 
mated, and the respective situations of the beings that 
compose nature-supposing the said intellect were vast 
enough to subject these data to analysis-would em­
brace in the same formula the motions of the greatest 
bodies in the universe and those of the slightest atom : 
nothing would be uncertain for it, and the future, like 
the past, would be present to its eyes." 1 And Du Bois­
Reymond : "We can imagine the knowledge of nature 
arrived at a point where the universal process of the 
world might be represented by a single mathematical 
formula, by one immense system of simultaneous dif­
ferential equations, from which could be deduced, for 
each moment, the position, direction, and velocity of 
every atom of the world." !l Huxley has expressed the 
same idea in a more concrete form : "If the fundamental 
proposition of evolution is true, that the entire world, 
living and not living, is the result of the mutual inter­
action, according to definite laws, of the forces pos­
sessed by the molecules of which the primitive nebu­
losity of the universe was composed, it is no less certain 
that the existing world lay, potentially, in the cosmic 
vapor, and that a sufficient intellect could, from a 
knowledge of the properties of the molecules of that 
vapor, have predicted, say the state of the Fauna of 
Great Britain in r869, with as much certainty as one 
can say what will happen to the vapor of the breath in 
a cold winter's day." In such a doctrine, time is still 
spoken of : one pronounces the word, but one does not 
1 Laplace, Introduction d la thtorie analytique des probabilitts 
(CEuvres compUtes, vol. vii., Paris, 1886, p. vi.) . 
1 Du Bois-Reymond, Vber die Grenzen des Naturerkennens, Leipzig, 
1892. 

R A D I C AL 
F I N A L I S M 
45 
think of the thing. For time is here deprived of efficacy, 
and if it does nothing, it is nothing. Radical mechanism 
implies a metaphysic in which the totality of the real is 
postulated complete in eternity, and in which the appar­
ent duration of things expresses merely the infirmity of 
a mind that cannot know everything at once. But dura­
tion is something very different from this for our con­
sciousness, that is to say, for that which is most indis­
putable in our experience. We perceive duration as a 
stream against which we cannot go. It is the foundation 
of our being, and, as we feel, the very substance of the 
world in which we live. It is of no use to hold up before 
our eyes the dazzling prospect of a universal mathe­
matic; we cannot sacrifice experience to the require­
ments of a system. That is why we reject radical mecha­
nism. 
But radical finalism is quite as unacceptable, and for 
the same reason. The doctrine of teleology, in its ex­
treme form, as we find it in Leibniz for example, implies 
that things and beings merely realize a program pre­
viously arranged. But if there is nothing unforeseen, no 
invention or creation in the universe, time is useless 
again. As in the mechanistic hypothesis, here again it 
is ᯳upposed that all is given. Finalism thus understood 
is only inverted mechanism. It springs from the same 
postulate, with this sole difference, that in the move­
ment of our finite intellects along successive things, 
whose successiveness is reduced to a mere appearance, 
it holds in front of us the light with which it claims to 
guide us, instead of putting it behind. It substitutes the 
attraction of the future for the impulsion of the past. 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
But succession remains none the less a mere appearance, 
as indeed does movement itself. In the doctrine of Leib­
niz, time is reduced to a confused perception, relative 
to the human standpoint, a perception which would van­
ish, like a rising mist, for a mind seated at the center of 
things. 
Yet finalism is not, like mechanism, a doctrine with 
fixed rigid outlines. It admits of as many inflections as 
we like. The mechanistic philosophy is to be taken or 
left : it must be left if the least grain of dust, by stray­
ing from the path foreseen by mechanics, should show 
the slightest trace of spontaneity. The doctrine of final 
causes, on the contrary, will never be definitively re­
futed. If one form of it Le put aside, it will take an­
other. Its principle, v.•hich is essentially psychological, is 
very flexible. 1t is .so extensible, and thereby so com­
prehensive, that one accef)ts something of it as soon as 
one rejects pure mechanism. The theory we shall put 
forward in this book will therefore necessarily partake 
of finalism to a certain extent. For that reason it is im­
portant to intimate exactly what we are going to take of 
it, and what we mean to lc<J,ve. 
Let us say at once that to thin out the Leibnizian 
finalism by breaking it into an infinite number of pieces 
seems to us a step in the wrong direction. This is, how­
ever, the tendency of the doctrine of finality. It fu.lly 
realizes that if the universe as a whole is the carrying 
out of a plan, this cannot be demonstrated empirically, 
and that even of the organized world alone it is hardly 
easier to prove all harmonious : facts would equally 
well testify to the contrary. Nature sets living beings at 
discord with one another. She everywhere presents dis-

RADI CAL 
F I N A L I S M  
47 
order alongside of order, retrogression alongside of 
progress. But, though finality cannot be affirmed either 
of the whole of matter or of the whole of life, might it 
not yet be true, says the finalist, of each organism taken 
separately? Is there not a wonderful division of labor, 
a marvelous solidarity among the parts of an organ­
ism, perfect order in infinite complexity? Does not each 
living being thus realize a plan immanent in its sub­
stance?-This theory consists, at bqttom, in breaking 
up the original notion of finality into bits. It does not 
accept, indeed it ridicules, the idea of an external final­
ity, according to which living beings are ordered with 
regard to e(]ch other : to suppose the grass made for the 
cow, the lamb for the wolf-that is all acknowledged 
to be absurd. But there is, we are told, an internal 
finality : each being is made for itself, all its parts con­
spire for the greatest good of the whole and are intelli­
gently organized in view of that end. Such is the notion 
of finality which has long been classic. Finalism has 
shrunk to the point of never embracing more than one 
living being at a time. By making itself smaller, it prob­
ably thought it would offer less surface for blows. 
The truth is, it lay open to them a great deal more. 
Radical as our own theory may appear, finality is ex­
ternal or it is nothing at all. 
Consider the most complex and the most harmonious 
organism. All the elements, we are told, conspire for 
the greatest good of the whole. Very well, but let us 
not forget that each of these elements may itself be an 
organism in certain cases, and that in subordinating the 
existence of this small organism to the life of the great 
one we accept the principle of an external finality. The 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
idea of a finality that is always internal is therefore a 
self-destructive notion. An organism is composed of tis­
sues, each of which lives for itself. The cells of which 
the tissues are made have also a certain independence. 
Strictly speaking, if the subordination of all the ele­
ments of the individual to the individual itself were 
complete, we might contend that they are not organ­
isms, reserve the name organism for the individual, and 
recognize only internal finality. But every one knows 
that these elements may possess a true autonomy. To 
say nothing of phagocytes, which push independence to 
the point of attacking the organism that nourishes them, 
or of germinal cells, which have their own life alongside 
the somatic cells-the facts of regeneration are enough: 
here an element or a group of elements suddenly reveals 
that, however limited its normal space and function, it 
can transcend them occasionally; it may even, in certain 
cases, be regarded as the equivalent of the whole. 
There lies the stumbling-block of the vitalistic the­
ories. We shall not reproach them, as is ordinarily done, 
with replying to the question by the question itself : the 
"vital principle" may indeed not explain much, but it is 
at least a sort of label affixed to our ignorance, so as to 
remind us of this occasionally,1 while mechanism in-
1 There are really two lines to follow in contemporary nco-vitalism: 
on the one hand, the assertion that pure mechanism is insufficient, which 
assumes great authority when made by such scientists as Driesch or 
Reinke, for example ; and, on the other hand, the hypotheses which this 
vitalism superposes on mechanism (the "entclechies" of Driesch, and 
the "dominants" of Reinke, etc.) . Of these two parts, the former is per­
haps the more interesting. See the admirable studies of Driesch-Die 
Lokalisation morphogenetischer Vorgiinge, Leipzig, 1899 ; Die organ­
ischen Regulationen, Leipzig, 1901 ; Naturbegri!Je tmd NatururteUe, 
Leipzig, 1904 ;  Der Vitalism us als Gescl:ichte und als Lehre, Leipzig, 

RADICAL 
F I N  A L I S M  
49 
vites us to ignore that ignorance. But the position of 
vitalism is rendered very difficult by the fact that, in 
nature, there is neither purely internal finality nor abso­
lutely distinct individuality. The organized elements 
composing the individual have themselves a certain in­
dividuality, and each will claim its vital principle if 
the individual pretends to have its own. But, on the 
other hand, the individual itself is not sufficiently inde­
pendent, not sufficiently cut off from other things, for us 
to allow it a "vital principle" of its own. An organism 
such as a higher vertebrate is the most individuated of 
all organisms; yet, if we take into account that it is only 
the development of an ovum forming part of the body 
of its mother and of a spermatozoon belonging to the 
body of its father, that the egg (i.e. the ovum fertilized) 
is a connecting link between the two progenitors since 
it is common to their two substances, we shall realize 
that every individual organism, even that of a man, is 
merely a bud that has sprouted on the combined body 
of both its parents. Where, then, does the vital princi­
ple of the individual begin or end? Gradually we shall 
be carried further and further back, up to the individ­
ual's remotest ancestors : we shall find him solidary with 
each of them, solidary with that little mass of proto­
plasmic jelly which is probably at the root of the gene­
alogical tree of life. Being, to a certain extent, one with 
this primitive ancestor, he is also solidary with all that 
descends from the ancestor in divergent directions. In 
this sense each individual may be said to remain united 
1905 ; and of Reinke-Die Welt als Tat, Berlin, 1899 ; Einleitung in die 
theoretische Biologie, Berlin, 1901 ; Philosophie der Botanik, Leipzig, 
1905. 

so 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
with the totality of living beings by invisible bonds. So 
it is of no use to try to restrict finality to the individu­
ality of the living being. If there is finality in the world 
of life, it includes the whole of life in a single indivisible 
embrace. This life common to all the living undoubtedly 
presents many gaps and incoherences, ana again it is not 
so mathematically one that it cannot allow each being to 
become individualized to a certain degree. But it forms 
a single whole, none the less ; and we have to choose be­
tween the out-and-out negation of finality and the hy­
pothesis which co-ordinates not only the parts of an or­
ganism with the organism itself; but also each living 
being with the collective whole of all others. 
Finality will not go down any easier for being taken 
as a powder. Either the hypothesis of a finality imma­
nent in life should be rejected as a whole, or it must 
undergo a treatment very different from pulverization. 
The error of !"adical finalism, as also that of radical 
mechanism, is to extend too far the application of cer­
tain concepts that are natural to our intellect. Origina11y, 
we think only in order to act. Our intellect has been 
cast in the mold of action. Speculation is a luxury, 
while action is a necessity. Now, in order to act, we 
begin by proposing an end ; we make a plan, then we 
go on to the detail of the mechanism which will bring 
it to pass. This latter operation is possible only if we 
know what we can reckon on. We must therefore have 
managed to extract resemblances from nature, which 
enable us to anticipate the future. Thus we must, con­
sciously or unconsciously, have made use of the law of 
causality. Moreover, the more sharply the idea of effi-

B I O L O G Y  
A N U  
P H IL O S O P H Y  
5 1 
dent causality is defined in our mind, the more it takes 
the form of a mechanical causality. And this scheme, 
in its turn, is the more mathematical according as it ex­
presses a more rigorous necessity. That is why we have 
only to follow the bent of our mind to become mathe­
maticians. But, on the other hand, this natural mathe­
matics is only the rigid unconscious skeleton beneath 
our conscious supple habit of linking the same causes 
to the same effects ; and the usual object of this habit is 
to guide actions inspired by intentions, or, what comes 
to the same, to direct movements combined with a 
view to reproducing a pattern. We are born artisans as 
we are born geometricians, and indeed we are geometri­
cians only because we are artisans. Thus the human in­
tellect, inasmuch as it is fashioned for the needs of 
human action, is an intellect which proceeds at the same 
time by intention and by calculation, by adapting means 
to ends and by thinking out mechanisms of more and 
more geometrical form. Whether nature be conceived 
as an immense machine regulated by mathematical 
laws, or as the realization of a plan, these two ways of 
regarding it are only the consummation of two tenden­
cies of mind which are complementary to each other, 
and which have their origin in the same vital necessities. 
For that reason, radical finalism is very near radical 
mechanism on many points. Both doctrines are reluc­
tant to see in the course of things generally, or even 
simply in the development of life, an unforeseeable crea­
tion of form. In considering reality, mechanism regards 
only the aspect of similarity or repetition. It is therefore 
dominated by this law, that in nature there is only like 
reproducing like. The more the geometry in mechanism 

C R E A T I V E  
E V O L U T I O N  
is emphasized, the less can mechanism admit that any­
thing is ever created, even pure form. In so far as we are 
geometricians, then, we reject the unforeseeable. We 
might accept it, assuredly, in so far as we are artists, for 
art lives on creation and implies a latent belief in the 
spontaneity of nature. But disinterested art is a luxury, 
like pure speculation. Long before being artists, we are 
artisans; and all fabrication, however rudimentary, lives 
on likeness and repetition, like the natural geometry 
which serves as its fulcrum. Fabrication works on 
models which it sets out to reproduce; and even when it 
invents, it proceeds, or imagines itself to proceed, by a 
new arrangement of elements already known. Its prin­
ciple is that "we must have like to produce like." In 
short, the strict application of the principle of finality, 
like that of the principle of mechanical causality, leads 
to the conclusion that "all is given." Both principles 
say the same thing in their respective languages, because 
they respond to the same need. 
That is why again they agree in doing away with time. 
Real duration is that duration which gnaws on things, 
and leaves on them the mark of its tooth. If everything 
is in time, everything changes inwardly, and the same 
concrete reality never recurs. Repetition is therefore 
possible only in the abstract : what is repeated is some 
aspect that our senses, and especially our intellect, have 
singled out from reality, just because our action, upon 
which all the effort of our intellect is directed, can move 
only among repetitions. Thus, concentrated on that 
which· repeats, solely preoccupied in welding the same 
to the same, intellect turns away from the vision of time. 
It dislikes what is fluid, and solidifies everything it 

BIOLOGY AND P H ILOSOPHY 
53 
touches. We do not think real time. But we live it, be­
cause life transcends intellect. The feeling we have of 
our evolution and of the evolution of all things in pure 
duration is there, forming around the intellectual con­
cept properly so-called an indistinct fringe that fades 
off into darkness. Mechanism and finalism agree in tak­
ing account only of the bright nucleus shining in the 
center. They forget that this nucleus has been formed 
out of the rest by condensation, and that the whole must 
be used, the fluid as well as and more than the con­
densed, in order to grasp the inner movement of life. 
Indeed, if the fringe exists, however delicate and in­
distinct, it should have more importance for philosophy 
than the bright nucleus it surrounds. For it is its pres­
ence that enables us to affirm that the nucleus is a nu­
cleus, that pure intellect is a contraction, by condensa­
tion, of a more extensive power. And, just because this 
vague intuition is of no help in directing our action 
on things, which action takes place exclusively on the 
surface of reality, we may presume that it is to be exer­
cised not merely on the surface, but below. 
As soon as we go out of the encasings in which radical 
mechanism and radical finalism confme our thought, 
reality appears as a ceaseless upspringing of something 
new, which has no sooner arisen to make the present 
than it has already fallen back into the past; at this 
exact moment it falls under the glance of the intellect, 
whose eyes are ever turned to the rear. This is already 
the case with our inner life. For each of our acts we 
shall easily find antecedents of which it may in some 
sort be said to be the mechanical resultant. And it may 
equally well be said that each action is the realization 

54 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
of an intention. In this sense mechanism is everywhere, 
and finality everywhere, in the evolution of our con­
duct. But if our action be one ·that involves the whole 
of our person and is truly ours, it could not have been 
foreseen, even though its antecedents explain it when 
once it has been accomplished. And though it be the 
realizing of an intention, it differs, as a present and 
new reality, from the intention, which can never aim at 
anything but recommencing or rearranging the past. 
Mechanism and finalism are therefore, here, only ex­
ternal views of our conduct. They extract its intellec­
tuality. But our conduct slips between them and ex­
tends much further. Once again, this does not mean that 
free action is capricious, unreasonable action. To be­
have according to caprice is to oscillate mechanically 
between two or more ready-made alternatives and at 
length to settle on one of them ; it is no real maturing of 
an internal state, no real evolution ; it is merely-how­
ever paradoxical the assertion may seem-bending the 
will to imitate the mechanism of the intellect. A conduct 
that is truly our own, on the contrary, is that of a will 
which docs not try to counterfeit intellect, and which, 
remaining itself-that is to say, evolving-ripens grad­
ually into acts which the intellect will be able to resolve 
indefinitely into intelligible elements without ever 
reaching its goal. The free act is incommensurable with 
the idea, and its "rationality" must be defined by this 
very incommensurability, which admits the discovery of 
as much intelligibility within it as we will. Such is the 
tharacter of our own evolution; and such also, without 
rloubt, that of the evolution of life. 

BIOLOGY AND P H IL O S O P H Y  
55 
Our reason, incorrigibly presumptuous, imagines it­
self possessed, by right of birth or by right of conquest, 
innate or acquired, of all the essential elements of the 
knowledge of truth. Even where it confesses that it does 
not know the object presented to it, it believes that its 
ignorance consists only in not knowing which one of it:; 
time-honored categories suits the new object. In what 
drawer, ready to open, shall we put it? In what gar­
ment, already cut out, shall we clothe it? Is it this, or 
that, or the other thing? And "this," and "that," and 
"the other thing" are always something already con­
ceived, already known. The idea that for a new object 
we might have to create a new concept, perhaps a new 
method of thinking, is deeply repugnant to us. The his­
tory of philosophy is there, however, and shows us the 
eternal conflict of systems, the impossibility of satis­
factorily getting the real into the ready-made garments 
of our ready-made concepts, the necessity of making to 
measure. But, rather than go to this extremity, our rea­
son prefers to announce once for all, with a proud mod­
esty, that it has to do only with the relative, and that 
the absolute is not in its province. This preliminary 
declaration enables it to apply its habitual method of 
thought without any scruple, and thus, under pretense 
that it does not touch the absolute, to make absolute 
judgments upon everything. Plato was the first to set up 
the theory that to know the real consists in finding its 
Idea, that is to say, in forcing it into a pre-existing 
frame already at our disposal-as if we implicitly pos­
sessed universal knowledge. But this belief is natural to 
the human intellect, always engaged as it is in deter. 

C R E AT I V E  
E V O L U T I O N  
mining under what former heading it shall catalogue 
any new object; and it may be said that, in a certain 
sense, we are all born Platonists. 
Now here is the inadequacy of this method so obvious 
as in theories of life. If, in evolving in the direction of 
the vertebrates in general, of man and intellect in par­
ticular, life has had to abandon by the way many ele­
ments incompatible with this particular mode of organ­
ization and consign them, as we shall show, to other 
lines of development, it is the totality of these elements 
that we must find again and rejoin to the intellect 
proper, in order to grasp the true n.ature of vital activ­
ity. And we shall probably be aided in this by the fringe 
of vague intuition that surrounds our distinct-that is, 
intellectual-representation. For what can this useless 
fringe be, if not that part of the evolving principle 
which has not shrunk to the peculiar form of our organ­
ization, but has settled around it unasked for, un­
wanted? It is there, accordingly, that we must look for 
hints to expand the intellectual form of our thought; 
from there shall we derive the impetus necessary to lift 
us above ourselves. To form an idea of the whole of life 
cannot consist in combining simple ideas that have been 
left behind-in us by life itself in the course of its evolu­
tion. How could the part be equivalent to the whole, the 
content to the container, a by-product of the vital op­
eration to the operation itself? Such, however, is our 
illusion when we define the evolution of life as a "pas­
sage from the homogeneous to the heterogeneous," or 
by any other concept obtained by putting fragments of 
intellect side by side. We place ourselves in one of the 
points where evolution comes to a head-the principal 

B I O L O GY 
A N D  
P H I L O S O P H Y  
57 
one, no doubt, but not the only one; and there we do 
not even take all we find, for of the intellect we keep 
only one or two of the concepts by which it expresses 
itself; and it is this part of a part that we declare repre­
sentative of the whole, of something indeed which goes 
beyond the concrete whole, I mean of the evolution 
movement of which this "whole" is only the present 
stage ! The truth is, that to reprrsent this the entire in­
tellect would nut be too much-nay, it would not be 
enough. It would be necessary to add to it what we find 
in every other terminal point of evolution. And these 
diverse and divergent c!eme;1ts must be considered as so 
many extracts which arc, or at least which were, in 
their humblest form , mutually complementary . Only 
then might we have an inkling of the real nature of the 
evolution movement ; and evrn then we should fail to 
grasp it completely, fo r we should still be dealing only 
with the evolved, which is a result, and not with evolu­
tion itself, which is the act by which the result is 
obtained. 
Such is the philosophy of life to which we are lead­
ing up. It claims to transcend both mechanism and 
finalism; but, as we announced at the beginning, it is 
nearer the second doctrine than the first. It will not be 
amiss to dwell on this point, and show more precisely 
how far this philosophy of life resembles finalism and 
wherein it is different. 
Like radical finalism, although in a vaguer form, our 
philosophy represents the organized world as a har­
monious whole. But this harmony is far from being as 
perfect as it has been claimed to be. It admits of much 
discord, because each species, each individual even, re· 

ss 
C R E A T I V E  
EVOL U T I O N  
tains only a certain impetus from the universal , vital 
impulsion and tends to use this energy in its own inter­
est. In this consists adaptation. The species and the in­
dividual thus think only of themselves-whence arises 
a possible conflict with oth<'r forms of life. Harmony, 
therefore, does not exist in fact; it exists rather in prin­
ciple; I mean that the original impetus is a common 
impetus, and the higher we ascend the stream of life the 
more do diverse tendencies appear complementary to 
each other. Thus the wind at a street corner divides 
into diverging currents which are all one and the same 
gust. Harmony, or rather "complementarity," is re­
vealed only in the mass, in tendencies rather than in 
states. Especially (and this is the point on which final­
ism has been most seriously mistaken) harmony is 
rather behind us than before. It is due to an identity of 
impulsion and not to a common aspiration. It would be 
futile to try to assign to life an end, in the human sense 
of the word. To speak of an end is to think of a pre­
existing model which has only to be realized. It is to 
suppose, therefore, that all is given, and that the future 
can be read in the present. It is to believe that life, in 
its movement and in its entirety, goes to work like our 
intellect, which is only a motionless and fragmentary 
view of life, and which naturally takes its stand outside 
of time. Life, on the contrary, progresses and endures 
in time. Of course, when once the road has been trav­
eled, we can glance over it, mark its direction, note this 
in psychological terms and speak as if there had been 
pursuit of an end. Thus shall we speak ourselves. But, 
of the road which was going to be traveled, the human 
mind could have nothing to say, for the road has been 

B I O L O G Y  A N D  
P H IL O S O P H Y  
59 
created pari passu with the act of traveling over it, 
being nothing but the direction of this act itself. At 
every instant, then, evolution must admit of a psycho­
logical interpretation which is, from our point of view, 
the best interpretation ; but this explanation has neither 
value nor even significance except retrospectively. 
Never could the fmalistic interpretation, such as we 
shall propose it, be taken for an anticipation of the fu­
ture. It is a particular mode of viewing the past in the 
light of the present. In short, the classic conception of 
finality postubtes at once too much and too little : it is 
both too wide and too narrow. In explilining life by in­
tellect, it limits too much the meaning of lilc: intellect, 
such at least as we find it in ourselves, has been fash­
ioned by evolution during the course of progress ; it is 
cut out of something larger, or, rather, it is only thE 
projection, necessarily on a plane, of a reality that pos· 
sesses both relief and depth. It is this more compre· 
hensive reality that true fmalism ought to reconstruct, 
or, nther, if possible, embrace in one view. But, on the 
other hand, just because it goes beyond intellect-the 
faculty of connecting the same with the same, of per­
ceiving and also of producing repet it ions-this reality 
is undoubtedly creative, i.e. productive of effects in 
which it expands and transcends its own being. These 
effects were therefore not given in it in advance, and so 
it could not take them for ends, although, when once 
produced, they admit of a rational interpretation, like 
that of the manufactured article that has reproduced a 
model. In short, the theory of final causes does not go 
far enough when it confines itself to ascribing some in· 
telligence to nature, and it goes too far when it supposes> 

6o 
C R E A T I V E  
E V O L U T I O N  
a pre-existence of the future in the present in the form 
of idea. And the second theory, which sins by excess, is 
the outcome of the first, which sins by defect. In place 
of intellect proper must be substituted the more com­
prehensive reality of which intellect is only the con­
traction. The future then appears as expanding the 
present : it was not, therefore, contained in the present 
in the form of a represented end. And yet, once realized, 
it will explain the present as much as the present ex­
plains it, and even more ; it must be viewed as an end 
as much as, and more than, a result. Our intellect has a 
right to consider the future abstractly from its habitual 
point of view, being itself an abstract view of the cause 
of its own being. 
It is true that the cause may then seem beyond our 
grasp. Already the finalist theory of life eludes all pre­
cise verification. What if we go beyond it in one of its 
directions? Here, in fact, after a necessary digression, 
we are back at the question which we regard as essen­
tial : can the insufficiency of mechanism be proved by 
facts? We said that if this demonstration is possible, it 
is on condition of frankly accepting the evolutionist 
hypothesis. We must now show that if mechanism is in­
sufficient to account for evolution, the way of proving 
this insufficiency is not to stop at the classic conception 
of finality, still less to contract or attenuate it, but, on 
the contrary, to go further. 
Let us indicate at once the principle of our demon­
stration. We said of life that, from its origin, it is the 
continuation of one and the same impetus, divided into 
divergent lines of evolution. Something has grown, 
something has developed by a series of additions which 

BIOLOGY AND P HILOSOPHY 
6I 
have been so many creations. This very development 
has brought about a dissociation of tendencies which 
were unable to grow beyond a certain point without be­
coming mutually incompatible. Strictly speaking, there 
is nothing to prevent our imagining that the evolution 
of life might have taken place in one single individual 
by means of a series of transformations spread over 
thousands of ages. Or, instead of a single individual, 
any number might be supposed, succeeding each other 
in a unilinear series. In both cases evolution would have 
had, so to speak, one dimension only. But evolution has 
actually taken place through millions of individuals, on 
divergent lines, each ending at a crossing from which 
new paths radiate, and so on indefinitely. If our hypoth­
esis is justified, if the essential causes working along 
these diverse roads are of psychological nature, they 
must keep something in common in spite of the diver­
gence of their effects, as school-fellows long separated 
keep the same memories of boyhood. Roads may fork 
or by-ways be opened along which dissociated elements 
may evolve in an independent manner, but neverthe­
less it is in virtue of the primitive impetus of the whole 
that the movement of the parts continues. Something 
of the whole, therefore, must abide in the parts; and 
this common element will be evident to us in some way, 
perhaps by the presence of identical organs in very dif­
ferent organisms. Suppose, for an instant, that the 
mechanistic explanation is the true one : evolution must 
then have occurred through a series of accidents added 
to one another, each new accident being preserved by 
selection if it is advantageous to that sum of former ad­
vantageous accidents which the present form of the liv-

62 
CREATIVE 
E V O L U T I O N  
ing being represents. What likelihood is there that, by 
two entirely different series of accidents being added to­
gether, two entirely different evolutions will arrive at 
similar results? The more two lines of evolution diverge᯴ 
the less probability is there that accidental outer influ­
ences or accidental inner variations bring about the con­
struction of the same apparatus upon them, especially 
if there was no trace of this apparatus at the moment of 
divergence. But such similarity of the two products 
would be natural, on the contrary, in a hypothesis like 
ours : even in the latest channel there would be some­
thing of the impulsion received at the source. Pure 
mechanism, then, would be rc futable, and finality, in 
the special sense in which we understand it, would be 
demonstrable in a certain aspect, if it could be proved 
.áhat life may manufacture the like apparatus, by unlike 
means, on divergent lines of evolution ; and tlte strength 
of the proof would be proportional both to the diver­
gency between the lines of evolution thus chosen and to 
the complexity of the similar structures found in them. 
It will be said that resemblance of structure is due to 
sameness of the general conditions in which life has 
evolved, and that these permanent outer conditions may 
have imposed the same direction on the forces construct­
ing this or that apparatus, in spite of the diversity of 
transient outer influences and accidental inner changes. 
We are not, of cour᯵e, blind to the role which the con­
cept of adaptation plays in the science of today. Biolo­
gists certainly do not all make the same use of it. Some 
think the outer conditions capable of causing change in 
organisms in a ditect manner, in a definite direction, 
through physico-chemical alterations induced by them in 

T H E  
Q U E S T  
O F  
A 
C R I T E R I O N  
63 
the living substance ; such is the hypothesis of Eimer, for 
example. Others, more faithful to the spirit of Darwin­
ism, believe the in11uence of conditions works indirectly 
only, through favoring, in the struggle for life, those rep­
resentatives of a species which the chance of birth has 
best adapted to the emrironment. In other words, some 
attribute a positive inf1uencc to outer conditions, and say 
that they actually give rise to variations, while the others 
say these conrlitions have only a negative influence and 
merely eliminate variations. B ut, in both cases, the outer 
conditions are supposed to bring about a precise adjust­
ment of the organism to its circumstances. Both parties, 
then, will attempt to explain mechanically, by adapta­
tion to similar conditions, the similarities of structure 
which we think arc the strongest argument against 
mechanism. So W(' must at once indicate in a general 
way, before passing to the detail, why explanations from 
"adaptation" seem to us insufficient. 
Let us first remark that , of the two hypotheses just 
described, the Litter is the only one which is not equivo­
cal. The Darwinian idea of adaptation by automatic 
elimination of the unadapted is a simple and clear idea. 
But, just because it attributes to the outer cause which 
controls evolution a merely negative influence, it has. 
great difficulty in accounting for the progressive and, so 
to say, rectilinear development of complex apparatus 
such as we are about to examine. How much greater will 
this difficulty be in the case of the similar structure of 
two extremely complex organs on two entirely different 
lines of evolution! An accidental variation, however mi­
nute, implies the working of a great number of small 
physical and chemical causes. An accumulation of acci-

CREATIVE 
E V O L U T I O N  
dental variations, such as would be necessary to produce 
a complex structure, requires therefore the concurrence 
of an almost infinite number of infmitesimal causes. 
Why should these causes, entirely accidental, recur the 
same, and in the same order, at different points of space 
and time? No one will hold that this is the case, and the 
Darwinian himself will probably merely maintain that 
identical effects may arise from different causes, that 
more than one road leads to the same spot. But let us not 
be fooled by a metaphor. The place reached does not give 
the form of the road that leads there ; while an organic 
structure is just the accumulation of those small differ­
ences which evolution has had to go through in order to · 
achieve it. The struggle for life and natural selection can 
be of no use to us in solving this part of the problem, for 
we are not concerned here with what has perished, we 
have to do only with what has survived. Now, we see that 
identical structures have been formed on independent 
lines of evolution by a gradual accumulation of effects. 
How can accidental causes, occurring in an accidental 
order, be supposed to have repeatedly come to the same 
result, the causes being infinitely numerous and the ef­
fect infinitely complicated? 
The principle of mechanism is that "the same causes 
1'lroduce the same effects." This principle, of course, does 
not always imply that thP- same effects must have the 
same causes; but it does involve this consequence in the 
particular case in which the causes remain visible in the 
effect that they produce and are indeed its constitutive 
tlements. That two walkers starting from different 
points and wandering at random should finally meet, is 
no great wonder. But that, throughout their walk, they 

T H E  
Q U E S T  
O F  
A 
CRITERI O N  
6S 
should describe two identical curves exactly superpos­
able on each other, is altogether unlikely. The improba­
bility will be the greater, the more complicated the 
routes ; and it will become impossibility, if the zigzags 
are infmitely complicated. Now, what is this complexity 
of zigzags as compared with that of an organ in which 
thousands of different cells, each being itself a kind of 
organism, are arranged in a definite order? 
Let us turn, then, to the other hypothesis, and see how 
it would solve the problem. Adaptation, it says, is not 
merely elimination of the unadapted ; it is due to the 
positive influence of outer conditions that have molded 
the organism on their own form. This time, similarity of 
effects will be explained by similarity of cause. We shall 
remain, apparently, in pure mechanism. But if we look 
closely, we shall see that the explanation is merely 
verbal, that we are again the dupes of words, and that the 
trick of the solution consists in taking the term "adapta­
tion" in two entirely different senses at the same time. 
If I pour into the same glass, by turns, water and wine, 
the two liquids will take the same form, and the same­
ness in form will be due to the sameness in adaptation of 
content to container. Adaptation, here, really means me­
chanical adjustment. The reason is that the form to 
which the matter has adapted itself was there, ready· 
made, and has forced its own shape on the matter. But, in 
the adaptation of an organism to the circumstances it haᯬ 
to live in, where is the pre-existing form awaiting its mat­
ter? The circumstances arc not a mold into which life is 
inserted and whose form life adopts : this is indeed to be 
fooled by a metaphor. There is no form yet, and the life 
must create a form for itself, suited to the circumstances 

66 
CREATIVE EVOL U TI O N  
which are made for it. It will have to make the best of 
these circumstances, neutralize their inconveniences and 
utilize their advantages-in short, respond to outer ac­
tions by building up a machine which has no resemblance 
to them. Such adapting is not repeating, but replying,­
an entirely different thing. If there is still adaptation, it 
will be in the sense in which one may say of the solution 
of a problem of geometry, for example, that it is adapted 
to the conditions. I grant indeed that adaptation so 
understood explains why different evolutionary proc­
esses result in similar forms : the same problem, of 
course, calls for the same solution. But it is necessary 
then to introduce, as for the solution of a problem of ge­
ometry, an intelligent activity, or at least a cause which 
behaves in the same way. This is to bring in finality 
again, and a finality this time more than ever charged 
with anthropomorphic elements. In a word, if the adap­
tation is passive, if it is mere repetition in the relief of 
what the conditions give in the mold, it will build up 
nothing that one tries to make it build ; and if it is active, 
capable of responding by a calculated solution to the 
problem which is set out in the conditions, that is going 
further than we do-too far, indeed, in our opinion-in 
the direction we indicated in the beginning. But the truth 
is that there is a surreptitious passing from one of these 
two meanings to the other, a flight for refuge to the first 
whenever one is about to be caught in flagrante delicto of 
finalism by employing the second. It is really the second 
which serves the usual practice of science, but it is the 
first that generally provides its philosophy. In any par­
ticular case one talks as if the process of adaptation were 
an effort of the organism to build up a machine capable 

T H E  C H OI C E  O F  
A N  
E X A M P L E  
67 
of turning external circumstances to the best possible ac­
count : then one speaks of adaptation in general as if it 
were the very impress of circumstances, passively re­
ceived by an indifferent matter. 
But let us come to the examples. It would be interest­
ing first to institute here a general comparison between 
plants and animals. One cannot fail to be struck with the 
parallel progress which has been accomplished, on both 
sides, in the direction of sexuality. Not only is fecunda­
tion itself the same in higher plants and in animals, since 
it consists, in both, in the union of two nuclei thilt differ 
in their properties and structure before their union and 
immediately after become equivalent to each other ; but 
the preparation of sexual elements goes on in both under 
like conditions : it consists essentially in the reduction of 
the number of chromosomes and the rejection of a cer­
tain quantity of chromatic substance.1 Yet vegetables 
and animals have evolved on independent lines, favored 
by unlike circumstances, opposed by unlike obstacles. 
Here are two great series which have gone on diverging. 
On either line, thousands and thousands of causes have 
combined to determine the morphological and functional 
evolution. Yet these infinitely complicated causes have 
been consummated, in each series, in the same effect. 
And this effect could hardly be called a phenomenon of 
"adaptation" :  where is the adaptation, where is the pres­
sure of external circumstances? There is no striking util­
ity in sexual generation ; it has been interpreted in the 
most diverse ways; and some very acute enquirers even 
1 P. Guࠐrin, Les C onnaissa11ces actuelles sur la ft!condation chez les 
phanerogames, Paris,· 1904, pp. 144-148. Cf. Delage, L'Heredite, 2nd 
edition, 1903, pp. 140 ff. 

68 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
regard the sexuality of the plant, at least, as a luxury 
which nature might have dispensed with.1 But we do not 
wish to dwell on facts so disputed. The ambiguity of the 
term "adaptation," and the necessity of transcending 
both the point of view of mechanical causality and that 
of anthropomorphic fmality, will stand out more clearly 
with simpler examples. At all times the doctrine of final­
ity has laid much stress on the marvelous structure of 
the sense-organs, in order to liken the work of nature to 
that of an intelligent workman. Now, since these organs 
are found, in a rudimentary state, in the lower animals, 
and since nature offers us many intermediaries between 
the pigment-spot of the simplest organisms and the in­
finitely complex eye of the vertebrates, it may just as 
well be alleged that the result has been brought about by 
natural selection perfecting the organ automatically. In 
short, if there is a case in which it seems justifiable to in­
voke adaptation, it is this particular one. For there may 
be discussion about the function and meaning of such a 
thing as sexual generation, in so far as it is related to the 
conditions in which it occurs; but the relation of the eye 
to light is obvious, and when we call this relation an 
adaptation, we must know what we mean. If, then, we 
can show, in this privileged case, the insufficiency of the 
principles invoked on both sides, our demonstration will 
at once have reached a high degree of generality. 
Let us consider the example on which the advocates of 
finality have always insisted : the structure of such an 
organ as the human eye. They have had no difficulty in 
1 Mobius, Beitriige zur Lehre von der Fortpftanzung der Gewiichse, 
lena, 1897, pp. 203-206 in particular. Cf. Harto11, "Sur les phenomenes 
de reproduction" (Annl!e biologique, 1895, pp. 707-709) . 

T H E  C H OICE O F  A N  EXAMPLE 
6ƃ 
showing that in this extremely complicated apparatus all 
the elements are marvelously co-ordinated. In order that 
vision shall operate, says the author of a well-known 
book on Final Causes, "the sclerotic membrane must be­
come transparent in one point of its surface, so as to en­
able luminous rays to pierce it . . . ; the cornea must 
correspond exactly with the opening of the socket . . .  ; 
behind this transparent opening there must be refract­
ing media . . . ; there must be a retina 1 at the extrem­
ity of the dark chamber . . . ; perpendicular to the 
retina there must be an innumerable quantity of trans• 
parent cones permitting only the light directed in the 
line of their axes to reach the nervous membrane,"2 etc.1 
etc. In reply, the advocate of final causes has been in· 
vited to assume the evolutionist hypothesis. Everything 
is marvelous, indeed, if one consider an eye like ours, in 
which thousands of elements are co-ordinated in a single 
function. But take the function at its origin, in the In· 
fusorian, where it is reduced to the mere impressionabil­
ity (almost purely chemical) of a pigment-spot to light : 
this function, possibly only an accidental fact in the be­
ginning, may have brought about a slight complication of 
the organ, which again induced an improvement of the 
function. It may have done this either directly, through 
some unknown mechanism, or indirectly, merely 
through the effect of the advantages it brought to the liv­
ing being and the hold it thus offered to natural selection. 
Thus the progressive formation of an eye as well con­
trived as ours would be explained by an almost infinite 
number of actions and reactions between the function 
1 Paul Janet, Les Causes finales, Paris, 1876, p. 83. 
1 Ibid. p. So. 

CREATIVE EVOL U T I O N  
and the organ, without the intervention of other than 
mechanical causes. 
The question is hard to decide, indeed, when put di­
rectly between the function and the organ, as is done in 
the doctrine of fmality, as also mechanism itself docs. 
For organ and function are terms of different nature, and 
each conditions the other so closely that it is i1ᯮ1possible 
to say a priori whether in expressing their relation we 
should begin with the f1rst, as does mechanism, or with 
the second, as finalism requires. But the discussion 
would take an entirely different turn, we think, if we be­
gan by comparing together two terms of the same na­
ture, an organ with an organ, instead of an organ with 
its function. In this case, it would be possible to proceed 
little by little to a solution more and more plausible, and 
there would be the more chance of a successful issue the 
more resolutely we assumed the evolutionist hypothesis. 
Let us place side by side the eye of a vertebrate and 
that of a mollusk such as the common Pecten. \Ve find 
the same essential parts in each, composed of analogous 
elements. The eye of the Pecten presents a retina, a cor­
nea, a lens of cellular structure like our own. There is 
even that peculiar inversion of retinal dements which is 
not met with, in general, in the retina of the inverte­
brates. Now, the origin of mollusks nᯭay be a debated 
question, but, whatever opinion we hold, all are agreed 
that mollusks and vertebrates separated from their com­
mon parent-stem long before the appearance of an eye 
so complex as that of the Pecten. Whence, then, the 
structural analogy? 
Let us question on this point the two opposed systems 
of evolutionist explanation in turn-the hypothesis of 

T H E  C HOICE O F  A N  EXAMPLE 
7 1  
purely accidental variations, and that of a variation di­
rected in a definite way under the influence of external 
conditions. 
The first, as is well known, is presented today in two 
quite different forms. Darwin spoke of very slight vari­
ations being accumulated by natural selection. He was 
not ignorant of the facts of sudden variation ; but he 
thought these "sports," as he called them, were only 
monstrosities incapable of perpetuating themselves ; and 
he accounted for the genesis of species by an accumula­
tion of insensible variations.1 Such is still the opinion of 
many naturalists. It is tending, however, to give way to 
the opposite idea that a new species comes into being all 
at once by the simultaneous appearance of several new 
characters, all somewhat different from the previous 
ones. This latter hypothesis, already proposed by vari­
ous authors, notably by Bateson in a remarkable book,2 
has become deeply significant and acquired great force 
since the striking experiments of Hugo de Vries. This 
botanist, working on the fEnotlzcra Lamarckiana, ob­
tained at the end of a few generations a certain number 
of new species. The theory he deduces from his experi­
ments is of the highest interest. Species pass through al­
ternate periods of stability and transformation. When 
the period of "mutability" occurs, unexpected forms 
spring forth in a great number of different directions.3-
We will not attempt to take sides between this hypoth-
1 Darwin, Origin of Spuits, chap. ii. 
• Bateson, Materials for the Study of Variation, London, 1894, es­
pecially pp. 567 ff. Cf. Scott, "Variations and Mutations" (America11 
Journal of Scimcr, Nov. 1894) . 
1 De Vries, Die Mutationstheorie, Leipzig, 1901-1903. Cf., by the sam! 
author, Species attd Varieties, Chicago, 1905. 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
esis and that of insensible variations. Indeed, perhaps 
both are partly true. We wish merely to point out that if 
the variations invoked are accidental, they do not, 
whether small or great, account for a similarity of struc­
ture such as we have cited. 
Let us assume, to begin with, the Darwinian theory of 
insensible variations, and suppose the occurrence of 
small differences due to chance, and continually accu­
mulating. It must not be forgotten that all the parts of 
an organism are necessarily co-ordinated. Whether the 
function be the effect of the organ or its cause, it matters 
little; one point is certain-the QI"gan will be of no use 
and will not give selection a hold unless it functions. 
However the minute structure of the retina may develop, 
and however complicated it may become, such progress, 
instead of favoring vision, will probably hinder it if the 
visual centers do not develop at the same time, as well as 
several parts of the visual organ itself. If the variations 
are accidental, how can they ever agree to arise in every 
part of the organ at the same time, in such way that the 
organ will continue to perform its function? Darwin 
quite understood this; it is one of the reasons why he re­
garded variation as insensible.1 For a difference which 
arises accidentally at one point of the visual apparatus, 
if it be very slight, will not hinder the functioning of the 
organ ; and hence this first accidental variation can, in a 
sense, wait for complementary variations to accumulate 
and raise vision to a higher degree of perfection. 
Granted; but while the insensible variation does not hin­
der the functioning of the eye, neither does it help it, so 
long as the variations that are complementary do not 
' Darwin, Origin of Species, chap. vi. 

I N S E N S IBLE VARIATION 
73 
occur. How, in that case, can the variation be retained by 
natural selection? Unwittingly one will reason as if the 
slight variation were a toothing stone set up by the or­
ganism and reserved for a later construction. This hy­
pothesis, so little conformable to the Darwinian princi­
ple, is difficult enough to avoid even in the case of an 
organ which has been developed along one single main 
line of evolution, e.g. the vertebrate eye. But it is abso­
lutely forced upon us when we observe the likene8s of 
structure of the vertebrate eye and that of the mollusks. 
How could the same small variations, incalculable in 
number, have ever occurred in the same order on two 
independent lines of evolution, if they were purely acci­
dental? And how could they have been preserved by se­
lection and accumulated in both cases, the same in the 
same order, when each of them, taken separately, was of 
no use? 
Let us turn, then, to the hypothesis of sudden varia­
tions, and see whether it will solve the problem. It cer­
tainly lessens the difficulty on one point, but it makes it 
much worse on another. If the eye of the mollusk and 
that of the vertebrate have both been raised to their pres­
ent form by a relatively small number of sudden leaps, 
I have less difficulty in understanding the resemblance of 
the two organs than if this resemblance were due to an 
incalculable number of infinitesimal resemblances ac­
quired successively : in both cases it is chance that oper­
ates, but in the first case chance is not required to work 
the miracle it would have to perform in the second. Not 
only is the number of resemblances to be added some­
what reduced, but I can also understand better how each 
could be preserved and added to the others; for the ele· 

74 
CREATIVE EVOL UTION 
mentary variation is now considerable enough to be an 
advantage to the living being, and so to lend itself to the 
play of selection. But here there arises another problem, 
no less formidable, viz., how do all the parts of the visual 
apparatus, suddenly changed, remain so well co-ordi­
nated that the eye continues to exercise its function? For 
the change of one part alone will make vision impossible, 
unless this change is absolutely infinitesimal. The parts 
must then all change at once, each consulting the others. 
I agree that a great number of unco-ordinated variations 
may indeed have arisen in less fortunate individuals, 
that natural selection may have eliminated these, and 
that only the combination fit to endure, capable of pre­
serving and improving vision, has survived. Still, this 
combination had to be produced. And, supposing chance 
to have granted this favor once, can we admit that it re­
peats the self-same favor in the course of the history of 
a species, so as to give rise, every time, all at once, to 
new complications marvelously regulated with reference 
to each other, and so related to former complications as 
to go further on in the same direction? How, especially, 
can we suppose that by a series of mere ((accidents" 
!hesc sudden variations occur, the same, in the same or­
der-involving in each case a perfect harmony of ele­
ments more and more numerous and complex-along 
two independent lines of evolution? 
The law of correlation will be invoked, of course ; 
Darwin himself appealed to it.1 It will be alleged that a 
change is not localized in a single point of the organism, 
but has its nece3sary recoil on other points. The exam­
ples cited by Darwin remain classic: white cats with blue 
1 Darwin, Origin of Species, chap. i. 

S UD D E N  
VAR I A T I O N  
75 
eyes are generally deaf; hairless dogs have imperfect 
dentition, etc.-Granted; but let us not play now on the 
word "correlation." A collective whole of solidary 
changes is one thing, a system of complementary 
changes-changes so co-ordinated as to keep up and even 
improve the functioning of an organ under more compli­
cated conditions-is another. That an anomaly of the 
pilous system should be accompanied by an anomaly of 
dentition is quite conceivable without our having to call 
for a special principle of explanation ; for hair and teeth 
are similar formations/ and the same chemical change 
of the germ that hinders the formation of hair would 
probably obstruct that of teeth : it may be for the same 
sort of reason that white cats with blue eyes are deaf. In 
these different examples the "correlative" changes are 
only solidary changes (not to mention the fact that they 
are really lesions, namely, diminutions or suppressions, 
and not additions, which makes a great difference) .  But 
when we speak of "correlative" changes occurring sud­
denly in the different parts of the eye, we use the word 
in an entirely new sense : this time there is a whole set of 
changes not only simultaneous, not only bound together 
by community of origin, but so co-ordinated that the or­
gan keeps on performing the same simple function, and 
even performs it better. That a change in the germ, 
which influences the formation of the retina, may affect 
at the same time also the formation of the cornea, the 
iris, the lens, the visual centers, etc., I admit, if neces­
sary, although they are formations that differ much more 
• On this 'homology of hair and teeth, see Brandt, "tlber . .
. eine 
mutmassliche Homologie der Haare und Zahne" (Biol. Centralblatt, 
vol. xviii., 1898, especially pp. 262 ff.). 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
from one another in their original nature than do prob­
ably hair and teeth. But that all these simultaneous 
changes should occur in such a way as to improvᯯ or even 
merely maintain vision, this is what, in the hypothesis of 
sudden variation, I cannot admit, unless a mysterious 
principle is to come in, whose duty it is to watch over the 
interest of the function. But this would be to give up the 
idea of "accidental" variation. In reality, these two 
senses of the word "correlation" are often interchanged 
in the mind of the biologist, just like the two senses of the 
word "adaptation." And the confusion is almost legiti­
mate in botany, that science in which the theory of the 
formation of species by sudden variation rests on the 
firmest experimental basis. In vegetables, function is far 
less narrowly bound to form than in animals. Even pro­
found morphological differences, such as a change in the 
form of leaves, have no appreciable influence on the ex­
ercise of function, and so do not require a whole system 
of complementary changes for the plant to remain fit to 
survive. But it is not so in the animal, especially in the 
case of an organ like the eye, a very complex structure 
and very delicate function. Here it is impossible to iden­
tify changes that are simply solidary with changes which 
are also complementary. The two senses of the word 
"correlation" must be carefully distinguished; it would 
be a downright paralogism to adopt one of them in the 
premises of the reasoning, and the other in the conclu­
sion. And this is just what is done when the principle of 
correlation is invoked in explanations of detail in order 
to account for complementary variations, and then cor­
relation in general is spoken of as if it were any group of 

S UDDEN VARIATION 
77 
variations provoked by any variation of the germ. Thus, 
the notion of correlation is first used in current science as 
it might be used by an advocate of finality; it is under­
stood that this is only a convenient way of expressinp: 
oneself, that one will correct it and fall back on pure 
mechanism when explaining the nature of the principles 
and turning from science to philosophy. And one does 
then come back to pure mechanism, but only by giving 
a new meaning to the word "correlation"-a meaning 
which would now make correlation inapplicable to the 
detail it is called upon to explain. 
To sum up, if the accidental variations that bring 
about evolution are insensible variations, some good 
genius must be appealed to--the genius of the future 
species-in order to preserve and accumulate these vari­
ations, for selection will not look after this. If, on the 
other hand, the accidental variations are sudden, then, 
for the previous function to go on or for a new function 
to take its place, all the changes that have happened to­
gether must be complementary. So we have to fall back 
on the good genius again, this time to obtain the conver­
gence of simultaneous changes, as before to be assured of 
the continuity of direction of successive variations. But 
in neither case can parallel development of the same 
complex structures on independent lines of evolution be 
due to a mere accumulation of accidental variations. So 
we come to the second of the two great hypotheses we 
have to examine. Suppose the variations are due, not to 
accidental and inner causes, but to the direct influence 
of outer circumstances. Let us see what line we should 
have to take, on this hypothesis, to account for the re-

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
semblance of eye-structure in two series that are inde­
pendent of each other from the phylogenetic point of 
VIeW. 
Though mollusks and vertebrates have evolved sepa­
rately, both have remained exposed to the influence of 
light. And light is a physical cause bringing forth cer­
tain definite effects. Acting in a continuous way, it has 
been able to produce a continuous variation in a constant 
direction. Of course it is unlikely that the eye of the ver­
tebrate and that of the mollusk have been built up by a 
series of variations due to simple chance. Admitting even 
that light enters into the case as an instrument of selec­
tion, in order to allow only useful variations to persist, 
there is no possibility that the play of chance, even thus 
supervised from without, should bring about in both 
cases the same juxtaposition of elements co-ordinated in 
the same way. But it would be different supposing that 
light acted directly on the organized matter so as to 
change its structure and somehow adapt this structure to 
its own form. The resemblance of the two effects would 
then be explained by the identity of the cause. The more 
aad more complex eye would be something like the 
deeper and deeper imprint of light on a matter which, 
being organized, possesses a special aptitude for receiv­
ing it. 
But can an organic structure be likened to an imprint? 
We have already called attention to the ambiguity of the 
term ((adaptation." The gradual complication of a form 
which is being better and better adapted to the mold of 
outward circumstances is one thing, the increasingly 
complex structure of an instrument which derives more 
and more advantage from these circumstances is an-

ORTHOGE N E S I S  
79 
other. In the former case, the matter merely receives an 
imprint; in the second, it reacts positively, it solves a 
problem. Obviously it is this second sense of the word 
"adapt" that is used when one says that the eye has be­
come better and better adapted to the influence of light. 
But one passes more or less unconsciously from this 
sense to the other, and a purely mechanistic biology will 
strive to make the passive adaptation of an inert matter, 
which submits to the influence of its environment, mean 
the same as the active adaptation of an organism which 
derives from this influence an advantage it can appropri­
ate. It must be owned, indeed, that Nature herself ap­
pears to invite our mind to confuse these two kinds of 
adaptation, for she usually begins by a passive adapta­
tion where, later on, she will build up a mechanism for 
active response. Thus, in the case before us, it is unques­
tionable that the first rudiment of the eye is found in the 
pigment-spot of the lower organisms ; this spot may in­
deed have been produced physically, by the mere action 
of light, and there are a great number of intermediaries 
between the simple spot of pigment and a complicated 
eye like that of the vertebrates.-But, from the fact that 
we pass from one thing to another by degrees, it does not 
follow that the two things are of the same nature. From 
the fact that an orator falls in, at first, with the passions 
of his audience in order to make himself master of them, 
it will not be concluded that to follow is the same as to 
lead. Now, living matter seems to have no other means of 
turning circumstances to good account than by adapting 
itself to them passively at the outset. Where it has to di­
rect a movement, it begins by adopting it. Life proceeds 
by insinuation. The intermediate degrees between a 

So 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
pigment-spot and an eye are nothing to the point: how­
ever numerous the degrees, there will still be the same in­
terval between the pigment-spot and the eye as between 
a photograph and a photographic apparatus. Certainly 
the photograph has been gradually turned into a photo­
graphic apparatus; but could light alone, a physical 
force, ever have provoked this change, and converted an 
impression left by it into a machine capable of using it? 
It may be claimed that considerations of utility are 
out of place here; that the eye is not made to see; but 
that we see because we have eyes ; that the organ is what 
it is, and ((utility" is a word by which we designate the 
functional effects of the structure. But when I say that 
the eye umakes use of" light, I do not merely mean that 
the eye is capable of seeing; I allude to the very precise 
relations that exist between this organ and the apparatus 
of locomotion. The retina of vertebrates is prolonged in 
an optic nerve, which, again, is continued by cerebral 
centers connected with motor mechanisms. Our eye 
makes use of light in that it enables us to utilize, by 
movements of reaction, the objects that we see to be ad­
vantageous, and to avoid those which we see to be injuri­
ous. Now, of course, as light may have produced a 
pigment-spot by physical means, so it can physically de­
termine the movements of certain organisms; ciliated 
Infusoria, for instance, react to light. But no one would 
hold that the influence of light has physically caused the 
formation of a nervous system, of a muscular system, of 
an osseous system, all things which are continuous with 
the apparatus of vision in vertebrate animals. The truth 
is, when one speaks of the gradual formation of the eye, 
and, still more, when one takes into account all that is in-

ORTHOGENESIS 
8 1 
separably connected with it, one brings in something en­
tirely different from ᯰhe direct action of light. One im­
plicitly attributes to organized matter a certain capacity 
sui generis, the mysterious power of building up very 
complicated machines to utilize the simple excitation 
that it undergoes. 
But this is just what is claimed to be unnecessary. 
Physics and chemistry are said to give us the key to 
everything. Eimer's great work is instructive in this re­
spect. It is well known what persevering effort this biolo­
gist has devoted to demonstrating that transformation is 
brought about by the influence of the external on the in­
ternal, continuously exerted in the same direction, and 
not, as Darwin held, by accidental variations. His theory 
rests on observations of the highest interest, of which the 
starting-point was the study of the course followed by 
the color variation of the skin in certain lizards. Before 
this, the already old experiments of Dorfmeister had 
shown that the same chrysalis, according as it was sub­
mitted to cold or heat, gave rise to very different butter­
flies, which had long been regarded as independent spe­
cies, Vanessa levana and Vanessa prorsa : an intermedi­
ate temperature produces an intermediate form. We 
might class with these facts the important transforma­
tions observed in a little crustacean, Artemia salina, 
when the salt of the water it lives in is increased or di­
minished.1 In these various experiments the external 
agent seems to act as a cause of transformation. But 
1 It seems, from later observations, that the transformation of Arte­
mia is a more complex-phenomenon than was first supposed. See on this 
subject Samter and Hcymons, "Die Variation bei Artemia Salina" 
(Anhang zu den Abhandhmgen der k. preussischen Akad. der Wissen­
schaften, 1902). 

CREATIVE EVOL UTION 
what does the word "cause" mean here? Without under­
taking an exhaustive analysis of the idea of causality, we 
will merely remark that three very different meanings of 
this term are commonly confused. A cause may act by 
impelling, releasing, or unwinding. The billiard ball that 
strikes another determines its movement by impelling. 
The spark that explodes the powder acts by releasing. 
The gradual relaxing of the spring that makes the phono­
graph turn unwinds the melody inscribed on the cylin­
der : if the melody which is played be the effect, and 
the relaxing of the spring the cause, we must say that the 
cause acts by unwinding. What distinguishes these three 
cases from each other is the greater or less solidarity be­
tween the cause and the effect. In the first, the quantity 
and quality of the effect vary with the quantity and qual­
ity of thE cause. In the second, neither quality nor quan­
tity of the effect varies with quality and quantity of the 
cause : the effect is invariable. In the third, the quantity 
of the effect depends on the quantity of the cause, but the 
cause does not influence the quality of the effect : the 
longer the cylinder turns by the action of the spring, the 
more of the melody I shall hear, but the nature of the 
melody, or of the part heard, does not depend on the ac­
tion of the spring. Only in the first case, really, does 
cause explain effect; in the others the effect is more or 
less given in advance, and the antecedent invoked iᯱ-in 
different degrees, of course-its occasion rather than its 
cause. Now, in saying that the saltness of the water is 
the cause of the transformations of Artemia, or that the 
degree of temperature determines the color and marks 
of the wings which a certain chrysalis will assume on be­
coming a butterfly, is the word "cause" used in the first 

O R T H O GE N E S I S  
sense? Obviously not : causality has here an intermedi­
ary sense between those of unwinding and releasing. 
Such, indeed, seems to be Eimer's own meaning when he 
speaks of the "kaleidoscopic" character of the varia­
tion/ or when he says that the variation of organized 
matter works in a definite way, just as inorganic matter 
crystallizes in definite directions.2 And it may be 
granted, perhaps, that the process is a merely physical 
and chemical one in the case of the color-changes of the 
skin. But if this sort of explanation is extended to the 
case of the gradual formation of the eye of the verte­
brate, for instance, it must be supposed that the physico­
chemistry of living bodies is such that the influence of 
light has caused the organism to construct a progressive 
series of visual apparatus, all extremely complex, yet all 
capable of seeing, and of seeing better and better.3 What 
more could the most confirmed finalist say, in order to 
mark out so exceptional a physico-chemistry? And will 
not the position of a mechanistic philosophy become still 
more difficult, when it is pointed out to it that the egg of 
a mollusk cannot have the same chemical composition as 
that of a vertebrate, that the organic substance which 
evolved toward the first of these two forms could not 
have been chemically identical with that of the substance 
which went in the other direction, and that, nevertheless, 
under the influence of light, the same organ has been 
constructed in the one case as in the other? 
The more we reflect upon it, the more we shall see that 
1 Eimer, Orthogenesis der Schmelterlinge, Leipzig, 1897, p. 24. Cf. Die 
Entslekung der Arlen, p. 53· 
• Eimer, Die Entslehung der Arlen, Jena, 1888, p. 25. 
1 Ibid. pp. 165 ff. 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
this production of the same effect by two different accu­
mulations of an enormous number of small causes is con­
trary to the principles of mechanistic philosophy. We 
have concentrated the full force of our discussion upon 
an example drawn from phylogenesis. But ontogenesis 
would have furnished us with facts no less cogent. Every 
moment, right before our eyes, nature arrives at identi­
cal results, in sometimes neighboring species, by entirely 
different embryogenic processes. Observations of "heter­
oblastia" have multiplied in late years/ and it has been 
necessary to reject the almost classical theory of the 
specificity of embryonic gills. Still keeping to our com­
parison between the eye of vertebrates and that of mol­
lusks, we may point out that the retina of the vertebrate 
is produced by an expansion in the rudimentary brain of 
the young embryo. It is a regular nervous center which 
has moved toward the periphery. In the mollusk, on the 
contrary, the retina is derived from the ectoderm di­
rectly, and not indirectly by means of the embryonic en­
cephalon. Quite different, therefore, are the evolutionary 
processes which lead, in man and in the Pecten, to the de­
velopment of a like retina. But, without going so far as to 
compare two organisms so distant from each other, we 
might reach the same conclusion simply by looking at 
certain very curious facts of regeneration in one and the 
same organism. If the crystalline lens of a Triton be re­
moved, it is regenerated by the iris.2 Now, the original 
' Salensky, "Heteroblastic" (Proc. of the Fourth International Con­
gress of Zoology, London, 1899, pp. I II-II8). Salensky has coined this 
word to designate the cases in which organs that are equivalent, hut of 
different embryological origin, are formed at the liame points in animals 
related to each other. 
• Wolff, "Die Regeneration der Urodelenlinse" (Arch. f. Entwick­
elungsmechanik, i., 1895, pp. 380 ff.) .  

ORTHOGENESIS 
ss 
lens was built out of the ectoderm, while the iris is of 
mesodermic origin. What is more, in the Salamandra 
maculata, if the lens be removed and the iris left, the re­
generation of the lens takes place at the upper part of the 
iris; but if this upper part of the iris itself be taken away, 
the regeneration takes place in the inner or retinal layer 
of the remaining region.1 Thus, .parts differently situ­
ated, differently constituted, meant normally for differ­
ent functions, are capable of performing the same 
duties and even of manufacturing, when necessary, the 
same pieces of the machine. Here we have, indeed, the 
same effect obtained by different combinations of causes. 
Whether we will or no, we must appeal to some inner 
directing principle in order to account for this conver­
gence of effects. Such convergence does not appear pos­
sible in the Darwinian, and especially the nco-Darwin­
ian, theory of insensible accidental variations, nor in the 
hypothesis of sudden accidental variations, nor even in 
the theory that assigns definite directions to the evolu­
tion of the various organs by a kind of mechanical com­
position of the external with the internal forces. So we 
come to the only one of the present forms of evolution 
which remains for us to mention, viz., neo-Lamarckism. 
It is well known that Lamarck attributed to the living 
being the power of varying by use or disuse of its organs, 
and also of passing on the variation so acquired to its 
descendants. A certain number of biologists hold a doc­
trine of this kind today. The variation that results in a 
new species is not, they believe, merely an accidental 
1 Fischel, "Uber die Regeneration der Linse" (A nat. Anzeiger, xiv., 
1898, pp. 373-380) . 

86 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
variation inherent in the germ itself, nor is it governed by 
a determinism sui gcneris which develops definite char­
acters in a definite direction, apart from every considera­
tion of utility. It springs from the very effort of the liv­
ing being to adapt itself to the circumstances of its ex­
istence. The effort may indeed be only the mechanical 
exercise of certain organs, mechanically elicited by the 
pressure of external circumstances. But it may also im­
ply consciousness and will, and it is in this sense that it 
appears to be understood by one of the most eminent 
representatives of the doctrine, the American naturalist 
Cope.1 Neo-Lamarckism is therefore, of all the later 
forms of evolutionism, the only one capable of admitting 
an internal and psychological principle of development, 
although it is not bound to do so. And it is also the only 
evolutionism that seems to us to account for the building 
up of identical complex organs on independent lines of 
development. For it is quite conceivable that the same 
effort to turn the same circumstances to good account 
might have the same result, especially if the problem put 
by the circumstances is such as to admit of only one solu­
tion. But the question remains, whether the term "effort" 
must not then be taken in a deeper sense, a sense even 
more psychological than any neo-Lamarckian supposes. 
For a mere variation of size is one thing, and a change 
of form is another. That an organ can be strengthened 
and grow by exercise, nobody will deny. But it is a long 
way from that to the progressive development of an eye 
like that of the mollusks and of the vertebrates. If this 
development be ascribed to the influence of light, long 
1 Cope, The Origin of the Fittest, 1887 ; The Primary Factors of Or­
ganic Evolution, 1896. 

VARIATION AND HEREDITY 
87 
continued but passively received, we fall back on the 
theory we have just criticized. If, on the other hand, an 
internal activity is appealed to, then it must be something 
quite different from what we usually call an effort, for 
never has an effort been known to produce the slightest 
complication of an organ, and yet an enormous number 
of complications, all admirably co-ordinated, have been 
necessary to pass from the pigment-spot of the Infuso· 
rian to the eye of the vertebrate. But, even if we accept 
this notion of the evolutionary process in the case ot 
animals, how can we apply it to plants? Here, variations 
of form do not seem to imply, nor always to lead to, func­
tional changes ; and even if the cause of the variation is 
of a psychological nature, we can hardly call it an effort, 
unless we give a very unusual extension to the meaning 
of the word. The truth is, it is necessary to dig beneath 
the effort itself and look for a deeper cause. 
This is especially necessary, we believe, if we wish to 
get at a cause of regular hereditary variations. We are 
not going to enter here into the controversies over the 
transmissibility of acquired characters ; still less do we 
wish to take too definite a side on this question, which is 
not within our province. But we cannot remain com­
pletely indifferent to it. Nowhere is it clearer that phi­
losophers cannot today content themselves with vague 
generalities, but must follow the scientists in experi­
mental detail and discuss the results with them. If Spen­
cer had begun by putting to himself the question of the 
hereditability of acquired characters, his evolutionism 
would no doubt have taken an altogether different form. 
If (as seems probable to us) a habit contracted by the 
individual were transmitted to its descendants only in 

88 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
very exceptional cases, all the Spencerian psychology 
would need re-making, and a large part of Spencer's phi­
losophy would fall to pieces. Let us say, then, how the 
problem seems to us to present itself, and in what direc­
tion an attempt might be made to solve it. 
After having been affirmed .1.s a dogma, the transmis­
sibility of acquired characters has been no less dogmat­
ically denied, for reasons drawn a priori from the sup­
posed nature of germinal cells. It is well known how 
Weismann was led, by his hypothesis of the continuity 
of the germ-plasm, to regard the germinal cells-ova and 
spermatozoa-as almost independent of the somatic 
cells. Starting from this, it has been claimed, and is still 
claimed by many, that the hereditary transmission of an 
acquired character is inconceivable. But if, perchance, 
experiment should show that acquired characters are 
transmissible, it would prove thereby that the germ­
plasm is not so independent of the somatic envelope as 
has been contended, and the transmissibility of acquired 
characters would become ipso facto conceivable; which 
amounts to saying that conceivability and inconceivabil­
ity have nothing to do with the case, and that experience 
alone must settle the matter. But it is just here that the 
difficulty begins. The acquired characters we are speak­
ing of are generally habits or the effects of habit, and at 
the root of most habits there is a natural disposition. So 
that one can always ask whether it is really the habit 
acquired by the soma of the individual that is trans­
mitted, or whether it is not rather a natural aptitude, 
which existed prior to the habit. This aptitude would 
have remained inherent in the germ-plasm which the in­
dividual bears within him, as it was in the individual him-

VARIATION A N D  HEREDITY 
89 
self and consequently in the germ whence he sprang. 
Thus, for instance, there is no proof that the mole has 
become blind because it has formed the habit of living 
underground ; it is perhaps because its eyes were becom­
ing atrophied that it condemned itself to a life under­
ground.1 If this is the case, the tendency to lose the 
power of vision has been transmitted from germ to germ 
without anything being acquired or lost by the soma of 
the mole itself. From the fact that the son of a fencing, 
master has become a good fencer much more quickly­
than his father, we cannot infer that the habit of the 
parent has been transmitted to the child; for certain 
natural dispositions in course of growth may have passed 
from the plasma engendering the father to the plasma 
engendering the son, may have grown on the way by the 
effect of the primitive impetus, and thus assured to the 
son a greater suppleness than the father had, without 
troubling, so to speak, about what the father did. So of 
many examples drawn from the progressive domestica­
tion of animals : it is hard to say whether it is the ac­
quired habit that is transmitted or only a certain natural 
tendency-that, indeed, which has caused such and such 
a particular species or certain of its representatives to 
be specially chosen for domestication. The truth is, when 
every doubtful case, every fact open to more than one 
interpretation, has been eliminated, there remains hardly 
a single unquestionable example of acquired and trans­
mitted peculiarities, beyond the famous experiments of 
Brown-Sequard, repeated and confirmed by other physi-
1 Cuenot, "La Nouvelle Theorie transformiste" (Revue ginirale des 
sciences, 1894) . Cf. Morgan, Evolution and Adaptation, London, 1903, 
p. 357· 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
ologists.1 By cutting the spinal cord or the sciatic nerve 
of guinea pigs, Brown-Sequard brought about an epilep­
tic state which was transmitted to the descendants. Le­
sions of the same sciatic nerve, of the restiform body, 
etc., provoked various troubles in the guinea pig which 
its progeny inherited sometimes in a quite different form : 
exophthalmia, loss of toes, etc. But it is not demonstrated 
that in these different cases of hereditary transmission 
there had been a real influence of the soma of the animal 
on its germ-plasm. Weismann at once objected that the 
operations of Brown-Sequard might have introduced cer­
tain special microbes into the body of the guinea pig, 
which had found their means of nutrition in the nervous 
tissues and transmitted the malady by penetrating into 
the sexual elements.2 This objection has been answered 
by Brown-Sequard himself; 3 but a more plausible one 
might be raised. Some experiments of Voisin and Peron 
have shown that fits of epilepsy are followed by the 
elimination of a toxic body which, when injected into 
animals,4 is capable of producing convulsive symptoms. 
Perhaps the trophic disorders following the nerve lesions 
made by Brown-Sequard correspond to the formation of 
precisely this convulsion-causing poison. If so, the toxin 
passed from the guinea pig to its spermatozoon or ovum, 
1 Brown-Sequard, "Nouvelles recherches sur l'epilepsic due a certaines 
lesions de Ia moelle epinicere et des nerfs rachidiens" (Arch. de physi­
ologie, vol. ii., 1866, pp. 2 1 1, 422, and 497 ) .  
0 Weismann, Aujsiitze uber Vererbung, Jena, 1892, pp. 376-378, and 
also Vortriige uber Descendenztheorie, Jena, 1902, vol. ii., p. 76. 
1 Brown-Scquard, "Heredite d'une affection due a une cause acci­
dentelle" (Arch. de physiologie, 1892, pp. 686 ff.) . 
' Voisin and Peron, "Recherches sur Ia toxicitc urinaire chez les 
epileptiques" (Arch. de neurologie, vol. xxiv., 1892, and xxv., t893. Cf. 
the IVork of Voisin, L'Epilepsie, Paris, 1897, pp. 1 25-IJJ) . 

VARIATION AND H EREDITY 
91 
and caused in the development of the embryo a general 
disturbance, which, however, had no visible effects ex­
cept at one point or another of the organism when de­
veloped. In that case, what occurred would have been 
somewhat the same as in the experiments of Charrin, 
Delamare and Moussu, where guinea pigs in gestation, 
whose liver or kidney was injured, transmitted the lesion 
to their progeny, simply because the injury to the 
mother's organ had given rise to specific "cytotoxins" 
which acted on the corresponding organ of the foetus.1 
It is true that, in these experiments, as in a former ob­
servation of the same physiologists,2 it was the already 
formed foetus that was influenced by the toxins. But 
other researches of Charrin have resulted in showing 
that the same effect may be produced, by an analogous 
process, on the spermatozoa and the ova.3 To conclude, 
then : the inheritance of an acquired peculiarity in the 
experiments of Brown-Sequard can be explained by the 
effect of a toxin on the germ. The lesion, however well 
localized it seems, is transmitted by the same process as, 
for instance, the taint of alcoholism. But may it not be 
the same in the case of every acquired peculiarity that 
has become hereditary? 
There is, indeed, one point on which both those who 
affirm and those who deny the transmissibility of ac-
1 Charrin, Dclamarc and Moussu, "Transmission experimentale aux 
descendants de lesions dcveloppces chez les ascendants" (C. R. de l'Acad. 
des sciences, vol. cxxxv., 1902, p. 191 ) .  Cf. Morgan, Evolution and 
Adaptation, p. 257, and Delage, L'Ht!rldite, 2nd edition, p. 388. 
• Charrin ad Delamare, "Hcredite cellulaire" (C. R. de l'Acad. des 
sciences, vol. cxxxiii., 1901, pp. 69-7 1 ) .  
• Charrin, "L'Heredite pathologique" (Revue gt!nirale des sciences, 
I 5 janvier I 896). 

92 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
quired characters are agreed, namely, that certain influ­
ences, such as that of alcohol, can affect at the same time 
both the living being and the germ-plasm it contains. In 
such case, there is inheritance of a defect, and the result 
is as if the soma of the parent had acted on the germ­
plasm, although in reality soma and plasma have simply 
both suffered the action of the same cause. Now, suppose 
that the soma can influence the germ-plasm, as those 
believe who hold that acquired characters are transmis­
sible. Is not the most natural hypothesis to suppose that 
things happen in this second case as in the first, and that 
the direct effect of the influence of the soma is a general 
alteration of the germ-plasm? If this is the case, it is by 
exception, and in some sort by accident, that the modi­
fication of the descendant is the same as that of the 
parent. It is like the hereditability of the alcoholic taint: 
it passes from father to children, but it may take a differ­
ent form in each child, and in none of them be like what 
it was in the father. Let the letter C represent the change 
in the plasm, C being either positive or negative, that is 
to say, showing either the gain or loss of certain sub­
stances. The effect will not be an exact reproduction of 
the cause, nor will the change in the germ-plasm, pro­
voked by a certain modification of a certain part of the 
soma, determine a similar modification of the corre­
sponding part of the new organism in process of forma­
tion, unless all the other nascent parts of this organism 
enjoy a kind of immunity as regards C :  the same part 
will then undergo alteration jn the new organism, be­
cause it happens that the development of this part is 
alone subject to the new influence. And, even then, the 
part might be altered in an entirely different way from 

VARIATION A N D  H EREDITY 
93 
that in which the corresponding part was altered in the 
generating organism. 
We should propose, then, to introduce a distinction be­
tween the hereditability of deviation and that of char­
acter. An individual which acquires a new character 
thereby deviates from the form it previously had, which 
form the germs, or oftener the half-germs, it contains 
would have reproduced in their development. If this 
modification does not involve the production of sub­
stances capable of changing the germ-plasm, or does not 
so affect nutrition as to deprive the germ-plasm of cer­
tain of its elements, it will have no effect on the offspring 
of the individual. This is probably the case as a rule. If, 
on the contrary, it has some effect, this is likely to be due 
to a chemical change which it has induced in the germ­
plasm. This chemical change might, by exception, bring 
about the original modification again in the organism 
which the germ is about to develop, but there are as 
many and more chances that it will do something else. 
In this latter case, the generated organism will perhaps 
deviate from the normal type as much as the generating 
organism, but it will do so differently. It will have in­
herited deviation and not character. In general, there­
fore, the habits formed by an individual have probably 
no echo in its offspring; and when they have, the modi­
fication in the descendants may have no visible likeness 
to the original one. Such, at least, is the hypothesis 
which seems to us most likely. In any case, in default 
of proof to the contrary, and so long as the decisive ex­
periments called for by an eminent hiologistl have not 
been made, we must keep to the actual results '1f ob-
1 Giard, Controverses transformislt's, Patis, 1 ')04, p. 1 4 7 .  

94 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
servation. Now, even if we take the most favorable view 
of the theory of the transmissibility of acquired char­
acters, and assume that the ostensible acquired char­
acter is not, in most cases, the more or less tardy de­
velopment of an innate character, facts show us that 
hereditary transmission is the exception and not the 
rule. How, then, shall we expect it to develop an organ 
such as the eye? When we think of the enormous num­
ber of variations, all in the same direction, that we must 
suppose to be accumulated before the passage from the 
pigment-spot of the Infusorian to the eye of the mollusk 
and of the vertebrate is possible, we do not see how 
heredity, as we observe it, could ever have determined 
this piling-up of differences, even supposing that individ­
ual efforts could have produced each of them singly. 
That is to say that neo-Lamarckism is no more able than 
any other form of evolutionism to solve the problem. 
In thus submitting the various present forms of evo­
lutionism to a common test, in showing that they all 
strike against the same insurmountable difficulty, we 
have in no wise the intention of rejecting them alto­
gether. On the contrary, each of them, being supported 
by a considerable number of facts, must be true in its 
way. Each of them must correspond to a certain aspect 
of the process of evolution. Perhaps even it is necessary 
that a theory should restrict itself exclusively to a partic­
ular point of view, in order to remain scientific, i.e. to 
give a precise direction to researches into detail. But the 
reality of which each of these theories takes a partial 
view must transcend them all. And this reality is the 
special object of philosophy, which is not constrained 

R E S U L T  O F  T H E  D I S C U S SION 
95 
to scientific precision because it contemplates no prac­
tical application. Let us therefore indicate in a word or 
two the positive contribution that each of the three pres­
ent forms of evolutionism seems to us to make toward 
the solution of the problem, what each of them leaves 
out, and on what point this threefold effort should, in 
our opinion, converge in order to obtain a more compre­
hensive, although thereby of necessity a less definite, 
idea of the evolutionary process. 
The neo-Darwinians are probably right, we believe, 
when they teach that the essential causes of variation are 
the differences inherent in the germ borne by the individ­
ual, and not the experiences or behavior of the individual 
in the course of his career. Where we fail to follow these 
biologists, is in regarding the differences inherent in the 
germ as purely accidental and individual. We cannot 
help believing that these differences are the develop­
ment of an impulsion which passes from germ to germ 
across the individuals, that they are therefore not pure 
accidents, and that they might well appear at the same 
time, in the same form, in all the representatives of the 
same species, or at least in a certain number of them. 
Already, in fact, the theory of mutations is modifying 
Darwinism profoundly on this point. It asserts that at a 
given moment, after a long period, the entire species is 
beset with a tendency to change. The tendency to change, 
therefore, is not accidental. True, the change itself would 
be accidental, since the mutation works, according to 
De Vries, in different directions in the different repre­
sentatives of the species. But, first we must see if the 
theory is confirmed by many other vegetable species 
(De Vries has verified it only by the mnothera Lamarck-

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
iana) ,t and then there is the possibility, as we shall ex­
plain further on, that the part played by chance is much 
greater in the variation of plants than in that of animals, 
because, in the vegetable world, function does not de­
pend so strictly on form. Be that as it may, the neo­
Darwinians are inclined to admit that the periods of mu­
tation are determinate. The direction of the mutation 
may therefore be so as well, at least in animals, and to 
the extent we shall have to indicate. 
We thus arrive at a hypothesis like Eimer's, accord­
ing to which the variations of different characters con­
tinue from generation to generation in definite direc­
tions. This hypothesis seems plausible to us, within the 
limits in which Eimer himself retains it. Of course, the 
evolution of the organic world cannot be predetermined 
as a whole. We claim, on the contrary, that the spon­
taneity of life is manifested by a continual creation of 
new forms succeeding others. But this indetermination 
cannot be complete; it must leave a certain part to de­
termination. An organ like the eye, for example, must 
have been formed by just a continual changing in a defi­
nite direction. Indeed, we do not see how otherwise to 
explain the likeness of structure of the eye in species that 
have not the same history. Where we differ from Eimer 
is in his claim that combinations of physical and chemi­
cal causes are enough to secure the result. We have trieq 
to prove, on the contrary, by the example of the eye, 
1 Some analogous facts, however, have been noted, all in the vegetable 
world. See Blaringhem, "La Notion d'espece et Ia theorie de Ia muta­
tion" (Annie psychologique, vol. xii., 1906, pp. 95 ff.) , and De Vries, 
Species and Varieties, p. 655. 

R E S U L T  O F  THE DIS C U S SION 
97 
that if there is ''orthogenesis" here, a psychological 
cause intervenes. 
Certain neo-Lamarckians do indeed resort to a cause 
of a psychological nature. There, to our thinking, is one 
of the most solid positions of neo-Lamarckism. But if 
this cause is nothing but the conscious effort of the in­
dividual, it cannot operate in more than a restricted 
number of cases-at most in the animal world, and not 
at all in the vegetable kingdom. Even in animals, it will 
act only on points which are under the direct or indirect 
control of the will. And even where it does act, it is not 
clear how it could compass a change so profound as an 
increase of complexity : at most this would be conceiv­
able if the acquired characters were regularly trans­
mitted so as to be added together; but this transmission 
seems to be the exception rather than the rule. A heredi­
tary change in a definite direction, which continues to 
accumulate and add to itself so as to build up a more an.! 
more complex machine, must certainly be related to 
some sort of effort, but to an effort of far greater depth 
than the individual effort, far more independent of cit ­
cumstances, an effort common to most representatives 
of the same species, inherent in the germs they bear 
rather than in their substance alone, an effort thereby as­
sured of being passed on to their descendants. 
So we come back, by a somewhat roundabout way, to 
the idea we started from, that of an original impetus 
of life, passing from one generation of germs to the fol­
lowing generation of germs through the developed organ­
isms which bridge the interval between the generations. 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
Tniᯫ l,npetus, sustained right along the lines of evolu­
tion among which it gets divided, is the fundamental 
cause of variat .on<:. at least of those that are regularly 
passed on, that accumulate and create new species. In 
general, when species have begun to diverge from a com­
mon stock, they accentuate their divergence as they pro­
gress in their evolution. Yet, in certain definite points, 
they may evolve identically; in fact, they must do so if 
the hypothesis of a common impetus be accepted. This is 
just what we shall have to show now in a more precise 
way, by the same example we have chosen, the formation 
of the eye in mollusks and vertebrates. The idea of an 
"original impetus," moreover, will tl111s be made clearer. 
Two points are equally striking in an organ like the 
eye : the complexity of its structure and the simplicity 
of its function. The eye is composed of distinct parts, 
such as the sclerotic, the cornea, the retina, the crystal­
line lens, etc. In each of these parts the detail is infinite. 
The retina alone comprises three layers of nervous ele­
ments-multipolar cells, bipolar cells, visual cells--each 
of which has its individuality and is undoubtedly a very 
complicated organism : so complicated, indeed, is the 
retinal membrane in its intimate structure, that no 
simple description can give an adequate idea of it. The 
mechanism of the eye is, in short, composed of an in­
finity of mechanisms, all of extreme complexity. Yet 
vision is one simple fact. As soon as the eye opens, the 
visual act is effected. Just because the act is simple, the 
slightest negligence on the part of nature in the building 
of the infinitely complex machine would have made vi­
sion impossible. This contrast between the complexity of 

T H E  VITAL I M P E T U S  
99 
the organ and the unity of the function is what gives us 
pause. 
A mechanistic theory is one which means to show us 
the gradual building-up of the machine under the influ­
ence of external circumstances intervening either di­
rectly by action on the tissues or indirectly by the selec­
tion of better-adapted ones. But, whatever form this 
theory may take, supposing it avails at all to explain the 
detail of the parts, it throws no light on their correlation. 
Then comes the doctrine of finality, which says that 
the parts have been brought together on a preconceived 
plan with a view to a certain end. In this it likens the 
labor of nature to that of the workman, who also pro­
ceeds by the assemblage of parts with a view to the real­
ization of an idea or the imitation of a model. Mechan­
ism, here, reproaches finalism with its anthropomorphic 
character, and rightly. But it fails to see that itself pro­
ceeds according to this method-somewhat mutilated I 
True, it has got rid of the end pursued or the ideal model. 
But it also holds that nature has worked like a human 
being by bringing parts together, while a mere glance at 
the development of an embryo shows that life goes to 
work in a very different way. Life does not proceed by 
the association and addition of elements, but by dissoci­
ation and division. 
We must get beyond both points of view, both mech­
anism and fina!ism being, at bottom, only standpoints 
to which the human mind has been led by considering 
the work of man. But in what direction can we go be­
yond them? We have said that in analyzing the struc­
ture of an organ, we can go on decomposing forever, al­
though the function of the whole is a simple thing. This 

IOO 
CREATIVE EVOLU TION 
contrast between the infinite complexity of the organ 
and the extreme simplicity of the function is what should 
open our eyes. 
In general, when the same object appears in one as­
pect as simple and in another as infinitely complex, the 
two aspects have by no means the same importance, or 
rather the same degree of reality. In such cases, the sim­
plicity belongs to the object itself, and the infinite com­
plexity to the views we take in turning around it, to the 
symbols by which our senses or intellect represent it to 
us, or, more generally, to elements of a different order, 
with which we try to imitate it artificially, but with 
which it remains incommensurable, being of a different 
nature. An artist of genius has painted a figure on his 
canvas. We can imitate his picture with many-colored 
squares of mosaic. And we shall reproduce the curves 
and shades of the model so much the better as our 
squares are smaller, more numerous and more varied in 
tone. But an infinity of elements infinitely small, pre­
senting an infinity of shades, would be necessary to ob­
tain the exact equivalent of the figure that the artist has 
conceived as a simple thing, which he has wished to 
transport as a whole to the canvas, and which is the more 
complete the more it strikes us as the projection of an 
indivisible intuition. Now, suppose our eyes so made 
that they cannot help seeing in the work of the master 
a mosaic effect. Or suppose our intellect so made that it 
cannot explain the appearance of the figure on the can­
vas except as a work of mosaic. We should then be able 
to speak simply of a collection of little squares, and we 
should be under the mechanistic hypothesis. We might 
add that, besides the materiality of the collection, there 

T H E  VITAL I M P E T U S  
101 
must be a plan on which the artist worked; and then we 
should be expressing ourselves as finalists. But in neither 
case should we have got at the real process, for there 
are no squares brought together. It is the picture, i.e. 
the simple act, projected on the canvas, which, by the 
mere fact of entering into our perception, is decomposed 
before our eyes into thousands and thousands of little 
squares which present, as recomposed, a wonderful ar­
rangement. So the eye, with its marvelous complexity 
of structure, may be only the simple act of vision, di­
vided for us into a mosaic of cells, whose order seems 
marvelous to us because we have conceived the whole 
as an assemblage. 
If I raise my hand from A to D, this movement ap­
pears to me under two aspects at once. Felt from within, 
it is a simple, indivisible act. Perceived from without, it 
is the course of a certain curve, AB. In this curve I can 
distinguish as many positions as I please, and the line 
itself might be defined as a certain mutual co-ordination 
of these positions. But the positions, infmite in number, 
and the order in which they are connected, have sprung 
automatically from the indivisible act by which my hand 
has gone from A to B. Mechanism, here, would consist 
in seeing only the positions. Finalism would take their 
order into account. Dut both mechanism and finalism 
would leave on one side the movement, which is reality 
itself. In one sense, the movement is more than the posi­
tions and than their order ; for it is sufficient to make it 
in its indivisible simplicity to secure that the infinity of 
the successive positions as also their order be given at 
once-with something else which is neither order nor 
position but whith is essential, the mobility. But, in an· 

102 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
other sense, the movement is less than the series of po­
sitions and their connecting order; for, to arrange points 
in a certain order, it is necessary first to conceive the 
order and then to realize it with points; there must be 
the work of assemblage and there must be intelligence, 
whereas the simple movement of the hand contains noth­
ing of either. It is not intelligent, in the human sense 
of the word, and it is not an assemblage, for it is not made 
up of elements. Just so with the relation of the eye to 
vision. There is in vision more than the component cells 
of the eye and their mutual co-ordination : in this sense, 
neither mechanism nor fmalism go far enough. But, in 
another sense, mechanism and finalism both go too far, 
for they attribute to Nature the most formidable of the 
labors of Hercules in holding that she has exalted to the 
simple act of vision an infinity of infinitely complex ele­
ments, whereas Nature has had no more trouble in mak­
ing an eye than I have in lifting my hand. Nature's 
simple act has divided itself automatically into an in­
finity of elements which are then found to be co-ordi­
nated to one idea, just as the movement of my hand has 
dropped an infinity of points which arc then found to 
satisfy one equation. 
We find it very hard to see things in that light, because 
we cannot help conceiving organization as manufactur­
ing. But it is one thing to manufacture, and quite an­
other to organize. Manufacturing is peculiar to man. It 
consists in assembling parts of matter which we have 
cut out in such manner that we can fit them together and 
obtain from them a common action. The parts are ar­
ranged, so to speak, around the action as an ideal center. 
To manufacture, therefore, is to work from the periph-

T H E  VITAL I M P E T U S  
1 03 
ery to the center, or, as the philosophers say, from 
the many to the one. Organization, on the contrary, 
works from the center to the periphery. It begins in a 
point that is almost a mathematical point, and spreads 
around this point by concentric ;vaves which go on en­
larging. The work of manufacturing !s the more effec­
tive, the greater the quantity o f  matter dealt with. It 
proceeds by concentration and compression. The organ­
izing act, on the contrary, has snmcthing explosive about 
it : it needs at the beginning the smallest possible place, 
a minimum of matter, as if the organizing forces only 
entered space rel uctantly. The spermatozoon, which sets 
in motion the evolutionary process of the embryonic life, 
is one of the smallest cells of the organism ; and it is only 
a small part of the sperm᯲.tozoon which really takes part 
in the operation. 
But these are only superf1cial differences. Digging be­
neath them, we think, a deeper difference would be 
found. 
A manufactured thing delineates exactly the form of 
the work of manufacturing it. I mean that the manu­
facturer finds in his product exactly what he has put 
into it. If he is going to make a machine, he cuts out its 
pieces one by one and then puts them together : the 
machine, when made, will show both the pieces and their 
assemblage. The whole of the rݿ'sPlt reprP<:ents the whole 
of the work ; and to each part of the work corresponds a 
part of the result. 
Now I recognize that positive science can and should 
proceed as if organization was like making a machine. 
Only so will it have any hold on organized bodies. For 
its object is not to show us the essence of things, but tr. 

104 
C REATIVE EVOLUTION 
furnish us with the best means of acting on them. 
Physics and chemistry are well advanced sciences, and 
living matter lends itself to our action only so far as 
we can treat it by the processes of our physics and chem­
istry. Organization can therefore only be studied scien­
tifically if the organized body has first been likened to 
a machine. The cells will be the pieces of the machine, 
the organism their assemblage, and the elementary la­
bors which have organized the parts will be regarded as 
the real elements of the labor which has organized the 
whole. This is the standpoint of science. Quite different, 
in our opinion, is that of philosophy. 
For us, the whole of an organized machine may, 
strictly speaking, represent the whole of the organizing 
work (this is, however, only approximately true) , yet 
the parts of the machine do not correspond to parts of 
the work, because the materiality of this machine does 
not represent a sum of means employed, but a sum of 
oqstacles avoided: it is a negation rather than a positive 
reality. So, as we have shown in a former study, vision is 
a power which should attain by right an infinity of things 
inaccessible to uur eyes. But such a vision would not be 
continued into action ; it might suit a phantom, but not 
a living being. The vision of a living being is an effective 
vision, limited to objects on which the being can act : it 
is a vision that is canalized, and the visual apparatus 
simply symbolizes the work of canalizing. Therefore the 
creation of the visual apparatus is no more explained by 
the assembling of its anatomic elements than the dig­
ging of a canal could be explained by the heaping-up oi 
the earth which might have formed its banks. A mecha­
nistic theory would maintain that the earth had been 

T H E  VITAL I M P E T U S  
I05 
brought cart-load by cart-load; finalism would add that 
it had not been dumped down at random, that the carters 
had followed a plan. But both theories would be mis­
taken, for the canal has been made in another way. 
With greater precision, we may compare the process 
by which nature constructs an eye to the simple act by 
which we raise the hand. But we supposed at first that 
the hand met with no resistance. Let us now imagine 
that, instead of moving in air, the hand has to pass 
through iron filings which are compressed and offer re­
sistance to it in proportion as it goes forward. At a cer­
tain moment the hand will have exhausted its effort, and, 
at this very moment, the filings will be massed and co­
ordinated in a certain definite form, to wit, that of the 
hand that is stopped and of a part of the arm. Now, sup­
pose that the hand and arm are invisible. Lookers-on 
will seek the reason of the arrangement in the filings 
themselves and in forces within the mass. Some will ac­
count for the position of each filing by the action exerted 
upon it by the neighboring filings : these are the mech­
anists. Others will prefer to think that a plan of the whole 
has presided over the detail of these elementary actions : 
they are the fmalists. But the truth is that there has been 
merely one indivisible act, that of the hand passing 
through the filings : the inexhaustible detail of the move­
ment of the grains, as well as the order of their final ar­
rangement, expresses negatively, in a way, this undi­
vided movement, being the unitary form of a resistance, 
and not a synthesis of positive elementary actions. For 
this reason, if the arrangement of the grains is termed 
an "effect" and the movement of the hand a "cause," it 
may indeed be said that the whole of the effect is ex-

106 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
plained by the whole of the cause, but to parts of the 
cause parts of the effect will in no wise correspond. In 
other words, neither mechanism nor finalism will here be 
in place, and we must resort to an explanation of a dif­
ferent kind. Now, in the hypothesis we propose, the re­
lation of vision to the visual apparatus would be very 
nearly that of the hand to the iron filings that follow, 
canalize and limit its motion. 
The greater the effort of the hand, the farther it will 
go into the filings. But at whatever point it stops, in­
stantaneously and automatically the f1Iings co-ordinate 
and find their equilibrium. So with vision and its organ. 
According as the undivided act constituting vision ad­
vances more or less, the materiality of the organ is made 
of a more or less considerable number of mutually co­
ordinated elements, but the order is necessarily complete 
and perfect. It could not be partial, because, once again, 
the real process which gives rise to it has no parts. That 
is what neither mechanism nor finalism takes into ac­
count, and it is what we also fail to consider when we 
wonder at the marvelous structure of an instrument such 
as the eye. At the bottom of our wondering is always this 
idea, that it would have been possible for a part only of 
this co-ordination to have been realized, that the com­
plete realization is a kind of special favor. This favor 
the finalists consider as dispensed to them all at once, 
by the final cause; the mechanists claim to obtain it little 
by little, by the effect of natural selection ; but both see 
something positive in this co-ordination, and conse­
quently something fractionable in its cause-something 
which admits of every possible degree of achievement. In 
reality, the cause, though more or less intense, cannot 

T H E  VITAL I M P E T U S  
1 0 7  
produce its effect except in one piece, and completely 
finished. According as it goes further and further in the 
direction of vision, it gives the simple pigmentary masses 
of a lower organism, or the rudimentary eye of a Serpula, 
or the slightly differentiated eye of the Alciope, or the 
marvelously perfected eye of the bird ; but all these or­
gans, unequal as is their complexity, necessarily present 
an equal co-ordination. For this reason, no matter how 
distant two animal species may be from each other, if 
the progress toward vision has gone equally far in both, 
there is the same visual organ in each case, for the form 
of the organ only expresses the degree in which the exer­
cise of the function has been obtained. 
But, in speaking of a progress toward vision, are we 
not coming back to the old notion of finality? It would 
be so, undoubtedly, if this progress required the con­
scious or unconscious idea of an end to be attained. But 
it is really effected in virtue of the original impetus of 
life; it is implied in this movement itself, and that is just 
why it is found in independent lines of evolution. If now 
we arc asked why and how it is implied .therein, we reply 
that life is, more than anything else, a tendency to act on 
inert matter. The direction of this action is not predeter­
mined; hence the unforeseeable variety of forms which 
life, in evolving, sows along its path. But this action al­
ways presents, to some extent, the character of contin­
gency; it implies at least a rudiment of choice. Now 
a choice involves the anticipatory idea of several pos­
sible actions. Possibilities of action must therefore be 
marked out for the living being before the action itself. 
Visual perception is nothing else: 1 the visible outlines of 
1 See, on this subject, Matiere et mimoire, chap. i. 

1 08 
CREATIVE E V O L UTIO N 
bodies are the design of our eventual action on them. 
Vision will be found, therefore, in different degrees in 
the most diverse animals, and it will appear in the same 
complexity of structure wherever it has reached the same 
degree of intensity. 
We have dwelt on these resemblances of structure in 
general, and on the example of the eye in particular, be­
cause we had to define our attitude toward mechanism 
on the one hand and finalism on the other. It remains 
for us to describe it more precisely in itself. This we 
shall now do by showing the divergent results of evolu­
tion not as presenting analogies, but as themselves mutu­
ally complementary. 

CHAPTER II 
rHE DIVERGENT DIRECTIONS OF THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE, 
TORPOR, INTELLIGENCE, INSTINCT 
THE evolution movement would be a simple one, and we 
should soon have been able to determine its direction , 
if life had described a single course, like that of a solid 
ball shot from a cannon. But it proceeds rather like a 
shell, which suddenly bursts into fragments, which frag­
ments, being themselves shells, burst in their turn into 
fragments destined to burst again, and so on for a time 
incommensurably long. \Ve perceive only what is nearest 
to us, namely, the scattered movements of the pulver­
ized explosions. From them we have to go back, stage 
by stage, to the original movement. 
\Vhen a shell bursts, the particular way it breaks is 
explained both by the explosive force of the powder it 
contains and by the resistance of the metal. So of the 
way life breaks into individuals and species. It depends, 
we think, on two series of causes : the resistance life 
meets from inert matter, and the explosive force-due 
to an unstable balance of tendencies-which life bears 
within itself. 
The resistance of inert matter was the obstacle that 
had first to be overcome. Life seems to have succeeded 
in this by dint of humility, by making itself very small 
ICC) 

I IO 
C R E A T I VE 
E V O L U TI O N 
and very insinuating, bending to physical and chemical 
forces, consenting even to go a part of the way with them, 
like the switch that adopts for a while the direction of 
the rail it is endeavoring to leave. Of phenomena in the 
simplest forms of life, it is hard to say whether they are 
still physical and chemical or whether they are already 
vital. Life had to enter thus into the habits of inert mat­
ter, in order to draw it little by little, magnetized, as it 
were, to another track. The animate forms that first ap­
peared were therefore of extreme simplicity. They were 
probably tiny masses of scarcely differentiated proto­
plasm, outwardly resembling the amoeba observable to­
day, but possessed of the tremendous internal push that 
was to raise them even to the highest forms of life. That 
in virtue of this push the first or.᯦anisms sought to grow 
as much as possible , એ;eems likely. B ut organized matter 
has a limit of cxrxmઐion that is very quickly reached; 
beyond a certain [)Oint it diviclrs instead of growing. 
Ages of effort and prodigies of subtlety were probably 
necessary for life to get past this new obstacle. It suc­
ceeded in inducing an increasing number of clements, 
ready to divide, to remain united. By the division of 
labor it knotted between them an indissoluble bond. The 
co:nplex and quasi-discontinuous organism is thus made 
to function as would a continuous living mass which had 
simply grown bigger. 
But the real and profound causes of division were 
those which life bore within its bosom. For life is tend­
ency, and the essence of a tendency is to develop in the 
form of a sheaf, creating, by its very growth, divergent 
directions among which its impetus is divided. This we 
observe in ourselves, in the evolution of that special 

DIVERCEN'I' TENDENCIES 
I I !  
tendency which we call our character. Each of us, glanc­
ing back over his history, will find that his child-person­
ality, though indivisible, united in itself divers persons, 
which could remain blended just because they were in 
their nascent state : this indecision, so charged with 
promise, is one of the greatest charms of childhood. But 
these interwoven personalities become incompatible in 
course of growth, and, as each of us can live but one 
life, a choice must perforce be made. We choose in re­
ality without ceasing; without ceasing, also, we aban­
don many things. The route we pursue in time is strewn 
with the remains of all that we began to be, of all that 
we might have become. But nature, which has at com­
mand an incalculable number of lives, is in no wise bound 
to make such sacrifices. She preserves the different tend­
encies that have bifurcated with their growth. She 
creates with them diverging series of species that will 
evolve separately. 
These series may, moreover, be of unequal impor­
tance. The author who begins a novel puts into his hero 
many things which he is obliged to discard as he goes 
on. Perhaps he will take them up later in other books, 
and make new characters with them, who will seem like 
extracts from, or rather like complements of, the first; 
but they will almost always appear somewhat poor and 
limited in comparison with the original character. So 
with regard to the evolution of life. The bifurcations on 
the way have been numerous, but there have been many 
blind alleys beside the two or three highways ; and of 
these highways themselves, only one, that which leads 
through the vertebrates up to man, has been wide enough 
to allow free passage to the full breath of life. We get 

I 1 2  
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
this impression when we compare the societies of bees 
and ants, for instance, with human societies. The former 
are admirably ordered and united, but stereotyped; the 
latter are open to every sort of progress, but divided, and 
incessantly at strife with themselves. The ideal would 
be a society always in progress and always in equilib­
rium, but this ideal is perhaps unrealizable : the two 
characteristics that would fain complete each other, 
which do complete each other in their embryonic state, 
can no longer abide together when they grow stronger. 
If one could speak, otherwise than metaphorically, of an 
impulse toward social life, it might be said that the brunt 
of the impulse was borne along the line of evolution end­
ing at man, and that the rest of it was collected on the 
road leading to the hymenoptera: the societies of ants 
and bees would thus present the aspect complementary 
to ours. But this would be only a manner of expression. 
There has been no particular impulse toward social life; 
there is simply the general movement of life, which on 
divergent lines is creating forms ever new. If societies 
should appear on two of these lines, they ought to show 
divergence of paths at the same time as community of 
impetus. They will thus develop two classes of char­
acteristics which we shall find vaguely complementary 
of each other. 
So our study of the evolution movement will have to 
unravel a certain number of divergent directions, and to 
appreciate the importance of what has happened along 
each of them-in a word, to determine the nature of the 
dissociated tendencies and estimate their relative pro­
portion. Combining these tendencies, then, we shall get 

ADAP TATION A N I')  PROGRESS 
I IJ 
an approximation, or rather an imitation, of the indivis­
ible motor principle whence their impetus proceeds. Evo­
lution will thus prove to be something entirely different 
from a series of adaptations to circumstances, as mech­
anism claims; entirely different also from the realiza­
tion of a plan of the whole, as maintained by the doctrine 
of finality. 
That adaptation to environment is the necessary con­
dition of evolution we do not question for a moment. 
It is quite evident that a species would disappear, should 
it fail to bend to the conditions of existence which are 
imposed on it. But it is one thing to recognize that outer 
circumstances are forces evolution must reckon with, 
another to claim that they are the directing causes of 
evolution. This latter theory is that of mechanism. It 
excludes absolutely the hypothesis of an original im­
petus, I mean an internal push that has carried life, by 
more and more complex forms, to higher and higher 
destinies. Yet this impetus is evident, and a mere glance 
at fossil species shows us that life need not have evolved 
at all, or might have evolved only in very restricted 
limits, if it had chosen the alternative, much more con­
venient to itself, of becoming anchylosed in its primi­
tive forms. Certain Foraminifera have not varied since 
the Silurian epoch. Unmoved witnesses of the innumer­
able revolutions that have upheaved our planet, the 
Lingulae are today what they were at the remotest timeᯧ 
of the paleozic era. 
The truth is that adaptation explains the sinuosities of 
the movement of evolution, but not its general direc-

1 14 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
tions, still less the movement itself.l The road that leads 
to the town is obliged to follow the ups and downs of the 
hills ; it adapts itself to the accidents of the ground; but 
the accidents of the ground are not the cause of the road, 
nor have they given it its direction. At every moment 
they furnish it with what is indispensable, namely, the 
soil on which it lies; but if we consider the whole of the 
road, instead of each of its parts, the accidents of the 
ground appear only as impediments or causes of delay, 
for the road aims simply at the town and would fain be 
a straight line. Just so as regards the evolution of life and 
the circumstances through which it passes-with this 
difference, that evolution does not mark out a solitary 
route, that it takes directions without aiming at ends, 
and that it remains inventive even in its adaptations. 
But, if the evolution of life is something other than a 
series of adaptations to accidental circumstances, so also 
it is not the realization of a plan. A plan is given in ad­
vance. It is represented, or at least representable, before 
its realization. The complete execution of it may be put 
iiff to a distant future, or even indefinitely; but the idea 
is none the less formulable at the present time, in terms 
actually given. If, on the contrary, evolution is a creation 
unceasingly renewed, it creates, as it goes on, not only 
the forms of life, but the ideas that will enable the intel­
lect to understand it, the terms which will serve to ex­
press it. That is to say that its future overflows its pres­
ent, and cannot be sketched out therein in an idea. 
' This view of adaptation has been noted by M. F. Marin in a re­
markable article on the origin of species, "L'Origine des especes" (Revue 
'cientifique, Nov. 1901, p. 580) . 

ADAPTATION A N D  PROGRES S 
1 1 5  
There is the first error o f  finalism. It involves another, 
yet more serious. 
If life realizes a plan, it ought to manifest a greater 
harmony the further it advances, just as the house shows 
better and better the idea of the architect as stone is set 
upon stone. If, on the contrary, the unity of life is to be 
found solely in the impetus that pushes it along the road 
of time, the harmony is not in front, but behind. The 
unity is derived from a vis a tcrgo : it is given at the start 
as an impulsion, not placed at the end as an attraction. 
In communicating itself, the impetus splits up more and 
more. Life, in proportion to its progress, is scattered in 
manifestations which undoubtedly owe to their common 
origin the fact that they are complementary to each 
other in certain aspects, but which are none the less mu­
tually incompatible and antagonistic. So the discord be­
tween species will go on increasing. Indeed, we have as 
yet only indicated the essential cause of it. We have sup­
posed, for the sake of simplicity, that each species re­
ceived the impulsion in order to pass it on to others, and 
that, in every direction in which life evolves, the propa­
gation is in a straight line. But, as a matter of fact, there 
are species which are arrested ; there are some that ret­
rogress. Evolution is not only a movement forward; in 
many cases we observe a marking-time, and still more 
often a deviation or turning back. It must be so, as we 
shall show further on, and the same causes that divide 
the evolution movement often cause life to be diverted 
from itself, hypnotized by the form it has just brought 
forth. Thence results an increasing disorder. No doubt 
there is progress, if progress mean a continual advance 

u6 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
in the general direction determined by a first impulsion; 
but this progress is accomplished only on the two or 
three great lines of evolution on which forms ever more 
and more complex, ever more and more high, appear; 
between these lines run a crowd of minor paths in which, 
on the contrary, deviations, arrests, and set-backs, are 
multiplied. The philosopher, who begins by laying down 
as a principle that each detail is connected with some 
general plan of the whole, goes from one disappointment 
to another as soon as he comes to examine the facts ; 
and, as he had put everything in the same rank, he finds 
that, as the result of not allowing for accident, he must 
regard everything as accidental. For accident, then, an 
allowaace must first be made, and a very liberal allow­
ance. We must recognize that all is not coherent in na­
ture. By so doing, we shall be led to ascertain the centers 
around which the incoherence crystallizes. This crystal­
lization itself will clarify the rest; the main directions 
will appear, in which life is moving whilst developing the 
original impulse. True, we shall not witness the detailed 
accomplishment of a plan. Nature is more and better 
than a plan in course of realization. A plan is a term as­
signed to a labor : it closes the future whose form it indi­
cates. Before the evolution of life, on the contrary, the 
portals of the future remain wide open. It is a creation 
that goes on forever in virtue of an initial movement. 
This movement CQnstitutes the unity of the organized 
world-a prolific dnity, of an infinite richness, superior 
to any that the intellect could dream of, for the intellect 
is only one of its aspects or products. 
But it is easier to define the method than to apply it. 
The complete interpretation of the evolution movement 

T H E  PLANT A N D  T H E  A N I MAL 
1 1 7  
in the past, as we conceive it, would be possible only if 
the history of the development of the organized world 
were entirely known. Such is far from being the case. 
The genealogies proposed for the different species are 
generally questionable. They vary with their authors, 
with the theoretic views inspiring them, and raise dis­
cussions to which the present state of science does not 
admit of a final settlement. But a comparison of the dif­
ferent solutions shows that the controversy bears less on 
the main lines of the movement than on matters of de­
tail; and so, by following the main lines as closely as 
possible, we shall be sure of not going astray. Moreover, 
they alone are important to us; for we do not aim, like 
the naturalist, at finding the order of succession of dif­
ferent species, but only at defining the principal direc­
tions of their evolution. And not all of these directions 
have the same interest for us : what t:oncerns us particu­
larly is the path that leads to man. We shall therefore 
not lose sight of the fact, in following one direction and 
another, that our main business is to determine the rela­
tion of man to the animal kingdom, and the place of the 
animal kingdom itself in the organized world as a whore. 
To begin with the second point, let us say that no defi­
nite characteristic distinguishes the plant from the ani­
mal. Attempts to define the two kingdoms strictly have 
always come to naught. There is not a single property of 
vegetable life that is not found, in some degree, in ctr­
tain animals; not a single characteristic feature of the 
animal that has not been seen in certain species or at cer­
tain moments in the vegetable world. Naturally, there­
fore, biologists enamored of clean-cut concepts have re· 

u8 
C RE A TIVE 
E V O L U T I O N  
garded the distinction between the two kingdoms as 
artificial. They would be right, if definition in this case 
must be made, as in the mathematical and physical sci­
ences, according to certain statical attributes which be­
long to the object defmed and are not found in any other. 
Very different, in our opinion, is the kind of definition 
which bef1ts the .!Sciences of life. There is no manifesta­
tion of life which does not contain, in a rudimentary 
state-either latent or potential,-the essential charac­
ters of most other manifestations. The difference is in the 
proportions. nut this very difference of proportion will 
suffice to define the group, if we can establish that it is 
not accidental, and that the group, as it evolves, tends 
more and more to emphasize these particular characters. 
In a word, the group must not be defined by the posses­
sion of certain clzaractrrs, but by its tendency to empha­
size them. From this point of view, taking tendencies 
rather than states into account, we find tl1at vegetables 
and animals may be precisely defined and distinguished, 
and that they correspond to two divergent developments 
of life. 
This divergence is shown, first, in the method of ali­
mentation. We know that the vegetable derives directly 
from the air and water and soil the elements necessary 
to maintain life, especially carbon and nitrogen, which it 
takes in mineral form. The animal, on the contrary, can­
not assimilate these elements unless they have already 
been fixed for it in organic substances by plants, or by 
animals which directly or indirectly owe them to plants; 
so that ultimately the vegetable nourishes the animal. 
True, this law allows of many exceptions among vege­
tables. We do not hesitate to class amongst vegetables 

T H E  P L A N T  A N D  T H E  ANIMAL 
1 19 
the Drosera, the Dionaea, the Pinguicula, which are in­
sectivorous plants. On the other hand, the fungi, which 
occupy so considerable a place in the vegetable world, 
feed like animals : whether they are ferments, sapro­
phytes or parasites, it is to already formed organic sub­
stances that they owe their nourishment. It is therefore 
impossible to draw from this difference any static defini­
tion such as would automatically settle in any particular 
case the question whether we are dealing with a plant or 
an animal. But the difference may provide the beginning 
of a dynamic definition of the two kingdoms, in that it 
marks the two divergent directions in which vegetables 
and animals have taken their course. It is a remarkable 
fact that the fungi, which nature has spread all over the 
earth in such extraordinary profusion, have not been 
able to evolve. Organically they do not rise above tissues 
which, in the higher vegetables, are formed in the em­
bryonic sac of the ovary, :md precede the germinative 
development of the new individual.1 They miᯨht be 
called the abortive children of the vegetable world. Their 
different species are like so many blind alleys, as if, by 
renouncing the mode of alimentation customary 
amongst vegetables, they had been brought to a stand­
still on the highway of vegetable evolution. As to the 
Drosera, the Dionaea, and insectivorous plants in gen­
eral, they are fed by their roots, like other plants; they 
too fix, by their green parts, the carbon of the carbonic 
acid in the atmosphere. Their faculty of capturing, ab­
sorbing and digesting insects must have arisen late, in 
quite exceptional cases where the soil was too poor to 
furnish sufficient nourishment. In a general way, then, 
1 De Saporta and Marion, L'Evolution des cryptogames, I88I, p. 37· 

120 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
if we attach less importance to the presence of special 
characters than to their tendency to develop, and if we 
regard as essential that tendency along which evolution 
has been able to continue indefinitely, we may say that 
vegetables are distinguished from animals by their 
power of creating organic matter out of mineral elements 
which they draw directly from the air and earth and 
water. But now we come to another difference, deeper 
than this, though not unconnected with it. 
The animal, being unable to fix directly the carbon 
and nitrogen which are everywhere to be found, has to 
seek for its nourishment vegetables which have already 
fixed these elements, or animals which have ᯩaken them 
from the vegetable kingdom. So the animal must be able 
to move. From the amoeba, which thrusts out its pseu­
dopodia at random to seize the organic matter scattered 
in a drop of water, up to the higher animals which have 
sense-organs with which to recognize their prey, loco­
motor organs to go and seize it, and a nervous system to 
co-ordinate their movements with their sensations, ani­
maflife is characterized, in its general direction, by mo­
bility in space. In its most rudimentary form, the animal 
is a tiny mass of protoplasm enveloped at most in a thh\ 
albuminous pellicle which allows full freedom for change 
of shape and movement. The vegetable cell, on the conᯪ 
trary, is surrounded by a membrane of cellulose, which 
condemns it to immobility. And, from the bottom to the 
top of the vegetable kingdom, there are the same habits 
growing more and more sedentary, the plant having no 
need to move, and finding around it, in the air and water 
and soil in which it is placed, the mineral elements it can 
appropriate directly. It is true that phenomena of move-

T H E  P L A N T  A N D  T H E  ANIMAL 
1 2  I 
ment are seen in plants. Darwin has written a well­
known work on the movements of climbing plants. He 
studied also the contrivances of certain insectivorous 
plants, such as the Drosera and the Dionaea, to seize 
their prey. The leaf-movements of the acacia, the sensi­
tive plant, etc., are well known. Moreover, the circula­
tion of the vegetable protoplasm within its sheath bears 
witness to its relationship to the protoplasm of animals, 
whilst in a large number of animal species (generally 
parasites) phenomena of fixation, analogous to those of 
vegetables, can be observed.1 Here, again, it would be a 
mistake to claim that fixity and mobility are the two 
characters which enable us to decide, by simple inspec­
tion alone, whether we have before us a plant or an ani­
mal. But fixity, in the animal, generally seems like a 
torpor into which the species has fallen, a refusal to 
evolve further in a certain direction ; it is closely akin to 
parasitism and is accompanied by features that recall 
those of vegetable life. On the other hand, the move­
ments of vegetables have neither the frequency nor the 
variety of those of animals. Generally, they involve only 
part of the organism and scarcely ever extend to the 
whole. In the exceptional cases in which a vague spon­
taneity appears in vegetables, it is as if we beheld the 
accidental awakening of an activity normally asleep. In 
short, although both mobility and fixity exist in the vege­
table as in the animal world, the balance is clearly in 
favor of fixity in the one case and of mobility in the 
other. These two opposite tendencies are so plainly di­
rective of the two evolutions that the two kingdoms 
1 On fixation and parasitism in general, see the work of Houssay, La 
Forme et la vie, Paris, 1900, pp. 721-807. 

1 2 2  
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
might almost be defined by them. But fixity and mobil­
ity, again, are only superficial signs of tendencies that 
a.re still deeper. 
Between mobility and consciousness there is an obvi­
ous relationship. No doubt, the consciousness of the 
higher organisms seems bound up v·ith certain cerebral 
arrangements. The more the nervous system develops, 
the more numerous and more precise become the move­
ments among which it can choose; the clearer, also, is the 
consciousness that accompanies them. But neither this 
mobility nor this choice nor consequently this conscious­
ness involves as a necessary condition the presence of a 
nervous system; the latter has only canalized in definite 
directions, and brought up to a higher degree of inten­
sity, a rudimentary and vague activity, diffused through­
out the mass of the organized substance. The lower we 
descend in the animal series, the more the nervous cen­
ters are simplified, and the more, too, they separate from 
each other, till finally the nervous elements disappear, 
merged in the mass of a less-differentiated organism. But 
it is the same with all the other apparatus, with all the 
other anatomical elements; and it would be as absurd to 
refuse consciousness to an animal because it has no brain 
as to declare it incapable of nourishing itself because it 
has no stomach. The truth is that the nervous system 
arises, like the other systems, from a division of labor. 
It does not create the function, it only brings it to a 
higher degree 9f intensity and precision by giving it the 
double form of reflex and voluntary activity. To accom­
plish a true reflex movement, a whole mechanism is nec­
essary, set up in the spinal cord or the medulla. To 
choose voluntarily between several definite courses of 

T H E  P L A N T  A N D  T H E  A N DI A L  
1 2 3  
action, cerebral centers are necessary, that is, crossways 
from which paths start, leading to motor mechanisms of 
diverse form but equal precision. But whrre nervous ele­
ments are not yet canalized, still less concentrated into 
a system, there is something from v;hich , hy a kind of 
splitting, both the reflex and the volunt::ry will arise, 
something which has neither the mec11anicai precision of 
the former nor the intelligenઑ he:,itntiom of the latter, 
but which, partaking of both, it may be inllnitesimally, is 
a reaction simply undecided, and therefore vaguely con­
scious. This amounts to saying tl1at the humblest organ­
ism is conscious in proportion to its powrr to move 
freely. Is consciousness here, in relation to movement, 
the effect or the cause ? In one srnse it is the cause, since 
it has to direct locomotion. Dut in another sense it is the 
effect, for it is the motor activity that maintains it, and, 
once this activity disappears, consciousness dies away or 
rather falls aslcfp. In cru:.ta.:.c'<઒r.s su::h as the rhizo .. 
cephala, which must fr:J-r1cdy have shown a more differ­
entiated structure, lixity and pa1 asitism accompany the 
degeneration and almost complete disappearance of the 
nervous system. Since, in such a case, the progress of or­
ganization must have localized all the conscious activity 
in nervous centers, we may conjecture that conscious­
ness is even weaker in animals of this kind than in organ­
isms much less differentiated, which have never had 
nervous centers but have remained mobile. 
How then could the plant, which is fixed in the earth 
and finds its food on the spot, have developed in the di­
rection of conscious activity? The membrane of cellu­
lose, in which the protoplasm wraps itself up, not only 
prrvents the simplest veઓetablc or:ran!Æ;m from moving, 

1 24 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
but screens it also, in some measure, from those outer 
stimuli which act on the sensibility of the animal as irri­
tants and prevent it from going to sleep.1 The plant is 
therefore unconscious. Here again, however, we must be­
ware of radical distinctions. "Unconscious" and "con­
scious" are not two labels which can be mechanically 
fastened, the one on every vegetable cell, the other on 
all animals. While consciousness sleeps in the animal 
which has degenerated- into a motionless parasite, it 
probably awakens in the vegetable that has regained lib­
erty of movement, and awakens in just the degree to 
which the vegetable has reconquered this liberty. Never­
theless, consciousness and unconsciousness mark the di­
rections in which the two kingdoms have developed, in 
this sense, that to find the best specimens of conscious­
ness in the animal we must ascend to the highest repre­
sentatives of the series, whereas, to find probable cases 
of vegetable consciousness, we must descend as low as 
possible in the scale of plants-down to the zoospores of 
the algae, for instance, and, more generally, to those uni­
cellular organisms which may be said to hesitate between 
the vegetable form and animality. From this standpoint, 
and in this measure, we should define the animal by sen­
sibility and awakened consciousness, the vegetable by 
consciousness asleep and by insensibility. 
To sum up, the vegetable manufactures organic sub­
stances directly with mineral substances; as a rule, this 
aptitude enables it to dispense with movement and so 
with feeling. Animals, which are obliged to go in search 
of their food, have evolved in the direction of locomotor 
1 Cope, op. cit. p. 76. 

THE P L A N T  A N D  T H E  ANIMAL 
1 2 5  
activity, and consequently of a consciousness more and 
more distinct, more and more ample. 
Now, it seems to us most probable that the animal cell 
and the vegetable cell are derived from a common stock, 
and that the first living organisms oscillated between the 
vegetable and animal form, participating in both at once. 
Indeed, we have just seen that the characteristic tend­
encies of the evolution of the two kingdoms, although 
divergent, coexist even now, both in the plant and in the 
animal. The proportion alone differs. Ordinarily, one of 
the two tendencies covers or crushes down the other, but 
in exceptional circumstances the suppresserl one starts 
up and regains the place it had lost. The mobility and 
consciousness of the vegetable cell are not so sound 
asleep that they cannot rouse themselves when circum­
stances permit or demand it ; and, on the other hand, the 
evolution of the animal kingdom has always been re­
tarded, or stopped, or dragged back, by the tendency it 
has kept toward the vegetative life. However full, how­
ever overflowing the activity of an animal species may 
appear, torpor and unconsciousness are always lying in 
wait for it. It keeps up its role only by effort, at the price 
of fatigue. Along the route on which the animal has 
evolved, there have been numberless shortcomings and 
cases of decay, generally associated with parasitic hab­
its; they are so many shuntings on to the vegetative life. 
Thus, everything bears out the belief that vegetable and 
animal are descended from a common ancestor which 
united the tendencies of both in a rudimentary state. 
But the two tendencies mutually implied in this rudi-

126 
C R E A T I V E  
E V O L U T I O N  
mentary form became dissociated as they grew. Hence 
the world of plants with its fixity and insensibility, hence 
the animals with their mobility and consciousness. There 
is no need, in order to explain this dividing into two, to 
bring in any mysterious force. It is enough to point out 
that the living being leans naturally toward what is most 
convenient to it, and that vegetables and animals have 
chosen two different kinds of convenience in the way of 
procuring the carbon and nitrogen they need. Vegeta­
bles continually and mechanically draw these elements 
from an environment that continually provides it. Ani­
mals, by action that is discontinuous, concentrated in 
certain moments, and conscious, go to find these bodies 
in organisms that have alrf'ady fixed them. They are two 
different ways of being industrious, or perhaps we may 
prefer to say, of being idle. For this very reason we doubt 
whether nervous elements, however rudimentary, will 
ever be found in the plant. What corresponds in it to the 
directing will of the animal is, we believe, the direction 
in which it bends the energy of the solar radiation when 
it uses it to break the connection of the carbon with the 
oxygen in carbonic acid. What corresponds in it to the 
sensibility of the animal is the impressionability, quite 
of its kind, of its chlorophyl to light. Now, a nervous sys­
tem being pre-eminently a mechanism which serves as 
intermediary between sensations and volitions, the true 
"nervous system" of the plant seems to be the mecha­
nism or rathe1 chemicism sui generis which serves as in­
termediary between the impressionability of its chloro­
phyl to light and the producing of starch: which amounts 
to saying that the plant can have no nervous elements, 
and that the same impetus that has led the animal to give 

T H E  PLANT A N D  THE ANIMAL 
1 2 7  
itself nerves and nerve centers must have ended, in the 
plant, in the chlorophyllian junction.1 
This first glance over the organized world will enable 
us to ascertain more precisely what unites the two king­
doms, and also what separates them. 
Suppose, as we suggested in the preceding chapter, 
that at the root of life there is an effort to engraft on to 
the necessity of physical forces the largest possible 
amount of indeterrnination. This effort cannot result in 
the creation of energy, or, if it does, the quantity created 
does not belong to the order of magnitude apprehended 
by our senses and instruments of measurement, our ex­
perience and science. All that the effort can do, then, is 
to make the best of a pre-existing energy which it finds 
at its disposal. Now, it finds only one way of succeeding 
in this, namely, to secure such an accumulation of poten· 
tial energy from matter, that it can get, at any moment, 
the amount of work it needs for its action, simply by 
pulling a trigger. The effort itself possesses only that 
power of releasing. nut the work of releasing, although 
always the same and always smaller than any given 
quantity, will be the more effective the heavier the 
weight it makes fall and the greater the height--or, in 
1 Just as the plant, in certain cases, recovers the faculty of moving 
actively which slumbers in it, so the animal, in exceptional circum­
stances, can replace itself in the conditions of the vegetative life and 
develop in itself an equivalent of the chlorophyllian function. It ap­
pears, indeed, from recent experiments of Maria von Linden, that the 
chrysalides and the caterpillars of certain Iepidoptera, under the in­
fluence of light, f1x the carbon of the carbonic acid contained in the 
atmosphere (M. von Linden, "L'Assimilation de l'acide carbonique 
par les chrysalides de Upidopteres," C. R. de la Soc. de biologit, 1905. 
pp. 6Q2 ff.) . 

1 2 8 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
other words, the greater the sum of potential energy ac­
cumulated and disposable. As a matter of fact, the prin­
cipal source of energy usable on the surface of our planet 
is the sun. So the problem was this : to obtain from the 
sun that it should partially and prov.isionally suspend, 
here and there, on the surface of the earth, its continual 
outpour of usable energy, and store a certain quantity 
of it, in the form of unused energy, in appropriate reser­
voirs, whence it could be drawn at the desired moment, 
at the desired spot, in the desired direction. The sub­
stances forming the food of animals are just such reser­
voirs. Made of very complex molecules holding a consid­
erable amount of chemical energy in the potential state, 
they are like explosives which only need a spark to set 
free the energy stored within them. Now, it is probable 
that life tended at the beginning to compass at one and 
the same time both the manufacture of the explosive and 
the explosion by which it is utilized. In this case, the 
same organism that had directly stored the energy of the 
solar radiation would have expended it in free move­
ments in space. And for that reason we must presume 
that the first living beings sought on the one hand to ac­
cumulate, without ceasing, energy borrowed from the 
sun, and on the other hand to expend it, in a discontinu­
ous and explosive way, in movements of locomotion. 
Even today, perhaps, a chlorophyl-bearing Infusorian 
such as the Euglena may symbolize this primordial tend­
ency of life, though in a mean form, incapable of evolv­
ing. Is the divergent development of the two kingdoms 
related to what one may call the oblivion of each king­
dom as regards one of the two halves of the program? 
Or rather, which is more likely, was the very nature of 

THE P L A N T  A N D  T H E  ANIMAL 
129 
the matter, that life found confronting it on our planet, 
opposed to the possibility of the two tendencies evolving 
very far together in the same organism? What is certain 
is that the vegetable has trended principally in the first 
direction and the animal in the second. But if, from the 
very first, in making the explosive, nature had for object 
the explosion, then it is the evolution of the animal , 
rather than that of the vegetable, that indicates, on the 
whole, the fundamental direction of life. 
The ''harmony" of the two kingdoms, the complemen­
tary characters they display, might then be due to the 
fact that they develop two tendencies which at first were 
fused in one. The more the single original tendency 
grows, the harder it finds it to keep united in the same 
living being those two elements which in the rudimen­
tary state implied each other. Hence a parting in two , 
hence two divergent evolutions ; hence also two series of 
characters opposed in certain points, complementary in 
others, but, whether opposed or complementary, always 
preserving an appearance of kinship. While the animal 
evolved , not without accidents along the way, toward a 
freer and freer expenditure of discontinuous energy, the 
plant perfected rather its system of accumulation with· 
out moving. We shall not dwell on this second point. Suf. 
fice it to say that the plant must have been greatly bene. 
fited, in its turn, by a new division, analogous to that be­
tween plants and animals. While the primitive vegetable 
cell had to fix by itself both its carbon and its nitrogen, 
it became able almost to give up the second of these two 
functions as soon as microscopic vegetables came for­
ward which leaned in this direction exclusively, and even 
specialized diversely in this still-complicated business. 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
The microbes that fix the nitrogen of the air and those 
which convert the ammoniacal compounds into nitrous 
ones, and these again into nitrates, have, by the same 
splitting up of a tendency primitively one, rendered to 
the whole vegetable world the same kind of service as 
the vegetables in general have rendered to animals. If a 
special kingdom were to be made for these microscopic 
vegetables, it might be said that in the microbes of the 
soil, the vegetables and the animals, we have before us 
the analysis, carried out by the matter that life found at 
its disposal on our planet, of all that life contained, at 
the outset, in a state of reciprocal implication. Is this, 
properly speaking, a "division of labor" ?  These words 
do not give the exact idea of evolution, such as we con­
ceive it. Wherever there is division of labor, there is as­
sociation and also convergence of effort. Now, the evolu­
tion we are speaking of is never achieved by means of 
association, but by dissociation ; it never tends toward 
convergence, but toward divergence of efforts. The har­
mony between terms that are mutually complementary 
in certain points is not, in our opinion, produced, in 
course of progress, by a reciprocal adaptation ; on the 
contrary, it is complete only at the start. It arises from 
an original identity, from the fact that the evolutionary 
process, splaying out like a sheaf, sunders, in proportion 
to their simultaneous growth, terms which at first com­
pleted each other so well that they coalesced. 
Now, the elements into which a tendency splits up are 
far from possessing the same importance, or, above all, 
the same power to evolve. We have just distinguished 
ઔhree different kingdoms, if one may so express it, in the 
organized world. While the first comprises only micro-

T H E  P L A N T  AND T H E  ANI MAL 
1 3 1  
organisms which have remained i n  the rudimentary 
state, animals and vegetables have taken their flight 
toward very lofty fortunes. Such, indeed, is generally the 
case when a tendency divides. Among the divergent de­
velopments to which it gives rise, some go on indefinitely, 
others come more or less quickly to the end of their 
tether. These latter do not issue directly from the primi­
tive tendency, but from one of the elements into which 
it has divided ; they are residual developments made and 
left behind on the way by some truly elementary tend­
ency which continues to evolve. Now, these truly ele­
mentary tendencies, we think, bear a mark by which 
they may be recognized. 
This mark is like a trace, still visible in each, of what 
was in the original tendency of which they represent the 
elementary directions. The elements of a tendency are 
not like objects set beside each other in space and mutu­
ally exclusive, but rather like psychi:: states, each of 
which, although it be itself to begin with, yet partakes of 
others, and so virtually includes in itself the whole per­
sonality to which it belongs. There is no real mani­
festation of life, we said, that does not show us, in a 
rudimentary or latent state, the characters of other 
manifestations. Conversely, when we meet, on one line 
of evolution, a recollection, so to speak, of what is devel­
oped along other lines, we must .conclude that we have 
before us dissociated elements of one and the same orig­
inal tendency. In this sense, vegetables anrl animals rep­
resent the two great divergent developments of life. 
Though the plant is distinguished from the animal by 
fixity and insensibility, movement and consciousness 
sleep in it as recollections which may waken. But, be-

132 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
side these normally sleeping recollections, there are 
others awake and active, just those, namely, whose ac­
tivity does not obstruct the development of the elemen­
tary tendency itself. We may then formulate this law : 
When a tendency splits up in the course of its develop­
ment, each of the special tendencies which thus arise 
tries to preserve and develop everything in the primitive 
tendency that is not incompatible with the work for 
which it is specialized. This explains precisely the fact 
we dwelt on in the preceding chapter, viz., the formation 
of identical complex mechanisms on independent lines 
of evolution. Certain deep-seated analogies between the 
animal and the vegetable have probably no other caase : 
sexual generation is perhaps only a luxury for the plant, 
but to the animal it was a necessity, and the plant must 
have been driven to it by the same impetus which im­
pelled the animal thereto, a primitive, original impetus, 
anterior to the separation of the two kingdoms. The 
same may be said of the tendency of the vegetable to­
ward a growing complexity. This tendency is essential 
to the animal kingdom, ever tormented by the need of 
more and more extended and effective action. But the 
vegetable, condemned to fixity and insensibility, exhib­
its the same tendency only because it received at the out­
set the same impulsion. Recent experiments show that it 
varies at random when the period of "mutation" arrives; 
whereas the animal must have evolved, we believe, in 
much more definite directions. But we will not dwell 
further on this original doubling of the modes of life. Let 
us come to the evolution of animals, in which wક are 
more particularly interested. 
What constitutes animality, we said, is the faculty of 

ANIMAL LIFE 
133 
utilizing a releasing mechanism for the conversion of as 
much stored-up potential energy as possible into "ex­
plosive" actions. In the beginning the explosion is hap­
hazard, and does not choose its direction. Thus the 
amoeba thrusts out its pseudopodic prolongations in all 
directions at once. But, as we rise in the animal scale, 
the form of the body itself is observed to indicate a cer­
tain number of very definite directions along which the 
energy travels. These directions arc marked by so many 
chains of nervous clements. Now, the nervous element 
has gradually emerged from the barely differentiated 
mass of organized tissue. It may, therefore, be surmised 
that in the nervous element, as soon as it appears, and 
also in its appendages, the faculty of suddenly freeing 
the gradually stored-up energy is concentrated. No 
doubt, every living cell expends energy without ceasing, 
in order to maintain its equilibrium. The vegetable cell, 
torpid from the start, is entirely absorbed in this work 
of maintenance alone, as if it took for end what must at 
first have been ouly a means. But, in the animal, all 
points to action. that is, to the utilization of energy for 
movements from place to place. True, every animal cell 
expends a good deal-often the whole-of the energy at 
its disposal in keeping itself alive ; but the organism as a 
whole tries to attract as much energy as possible to those 
points where the locomotive movements are effected. So 
that where a nervous system exists, with its complemen­
tary sense-organs and motor apparatus, everything 
should happen as if the rest of the body had, as its essen­
tial function, to prepare for these and pass on to them, 
at the moment required. that force which they are to 
liberate by a sort of explosion. 

134 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
The part played by food amongst the higher animals 
is, indeed, extremely complex. In the first place it serves 
to repair tissues, then it provides the animal with the 
heat necessary to render it as independent as possible of 
changes in external temperature. Thus it preserves, sup­
ports and maintains the organism in which the nervous 
system is set and on which the nervous elements have to 
live. But these nervous elements would have no reason 
for existence if the organism did not pass to them, and 
especially to the muscles they control, a certain energy 
to expend ; and it may even be conjectured that there, in 
the main, is the essential and ultimate destination of 
food. This does not mean that the greater part of the 
food is used in this work. A state may have to make 
enormous expenditure to secure the return of taxes, and 
the sum which it will have to dispose of, after deducting 
the cost of collection, will perhaps be very small : that 
sum is, none the less, the reason for the tax and for all 
that has been spent to obtain its return. So it is with the 
energy which the animal demands of its food. 
Many facts seem to indicate that the nervous and 
muscular elements stand in this relation toward the rest 
of the organism. Glance first at the distribution of ali­
mentary substances among the different elements of the 
living body. These substances fall into two classes, one 
the quaternary or albuminoid, the other the ternary, in­
cluding the carbohydrates and the fats. The albuminoids 
are properly plastic, destined to repair the tissues-al­
though, owing to the carbon they contain, they are cap­
able of providing energy on occasion. But the function 
of supplying energy has developed more particularly on 
the second class of substances : these, being deposited in 

A N IMAL L I FE 
I 3 5  
the cell rather than forming part of its substance, convey 
to it, in the form of chemical potential, an expansive en­
ergy that may be directly converted into either move­
ment or heat. In short, the chief function of the albumi­
noids is to repair the machine, while the funclion of the 
other class of substances is to supply power. It is natural 
that the albuminoids should have no specially allotted 
destination, since every part of the machine has to be 
maintained. But not so with the other substances. The 
carbohydrates are distributed very unequally, and this 
inequality of distribution seems to us in the highest de­
gree instructive. 
Conveyed by the arterial blood in the form of glucose, 
these substances are deposited, in the form of glycogen, 
in the different cells forming the tissues. We know that 
one of the principal functions of the liver is to maintain 
at a constant level the quantity of glucose held by the 
blood, by means of the reserves of glycogen secreted by 
the hepatic cells. Now, in this circulation of glucose and 
accumulation of glycogen, it is easy to sec that the effect 
is as if the whole effort of the organism were directed 
toward providing with potential energy the elements of 
both the muscular and the nervous tissues. The organ­
ism proceeds differently in the two cases, but it arrives 
at the same result. In the first case, it provides the mus­
cle-cell with a large reserve deposited in advance : the 
quantity of glycogen contained in the muscles is, indeed, 
enormous in comparison with what is found in the other 
tissues. In the nervous tissue, on the contrary, the re­
serve is small (the nervous elements, whose function is 
merely to liberate the potential energy stored in the 
muscle, never have to furnish much work at one time) ; 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
but the remarkable thing is that this reserve is restored 
by the blood at the very moment that it is expended, so 
that the nerve is instantly recharged with potential 
energy. Muscular tissue and nervous tissue are, there­
fore, both privileged, the one in that it is stocked with a 
large reserve of energy, the other in that it is always 
served at the instant it is in need and to the exact extent 
of its requirements. 
More particularly, it is from the sensory-motor system 
that the call for glycogen, the potential energy, comes, 
as if the rest of the organism were simply there in order 
to transmit force to the nervous system and to the mus­
cles which the nerves control. True, when we think of 
the part played by the nervous system (even the sensory­
motor system) as regulator of the organic life, it may 
well be asked whether, in this exchange of good offices 
between it and the rest of the body, the nervous system 
is indeed a master that the body serves. But we shall al­
ready incline to this hypothesis when we consider, even 
in the static state only, the distribution of potential 
energy among the tissues ; and we shall be entirely con­
vinced of it when we reflect upon the conditions in which 
the energy is expended and restored. For suppose the 
sensory-motor system is a system like the others, of the 
same rank as the others. Borne by the whole of the or­
ganism, it will wait until an excess of chemical potential 
is supplied to it before it performs any work. In other 
words, it is the production of glycogen which will regu­
late the consumption by the nerves and muscles. On the 
contrary, if the sensory-motor system is the actual mas­
ter, the duration and extent of its action will be inde-

ANIMAL LIFE 
I3 7  
pendent, to a certain extent at least, of the reserve of 
glycogen that it holds, and even of that contained in the 
whole of the organism. It will perform work, and the 
other tissues will have to arrange as they can to supply 
it with potential energy. Now, this is precisely what does 
take place, as is shown in particular by the experiments 
of Morat and Dufourt.1 While the glycogenic function 
of the liver depends on the action of the excitory nerves 
which control it, the action of these nerves is subordi­
nated to the action of those which stimulate the loco­
motor muscles-in this sense, that the muscles begin 
by expending without calculation, thus consuming gly­
cogen, impoverishing the blood of its glucose, and finally 
causing the liver, which has had to pour into the im­
poverished blood some of its reserve of glycogen, to 
manufacture a fresh supply. From the sensory-motor 
system, then, everything starts; on that system every­
thing converges ; and we may say, without metaphor, 
that the rest of the organism is at its service. 
Consider again what happens in a prolonged fast. It' 
is a remarkable fact that in animals that have died of 
hunger the brain is found to be almost unimpaired, while 
the other organs have lost more or less of their weight 
and their cells have undergone profound changes.2 It 
seems as though the rest of the body had sustained th1ᯥ 
1 A rchives de physiologie, 1892. 
• De Manaceine, "Quelques observations experimentales sur l'in· 
fluence de l'insomnie absolue" (Arch. ital. de bioloiie, t. xxi., 1894, pp. 
322 ff.) . Recently, analogous observations have been made on a man 
who died of inanition after a fast of thirty-five days. See, on this sub­
ject, in the Annie biologique of 1898, p. 338, the resumݽ of an artid1 
(in Russian) by Tarakevitch and Stchasny. 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
nervous system to the last extremity, treating itself 
simply as the means of which the nervous system is the 
end. 
To sum up: if we agree, in short, to understand by 
"the sensory-motor system" the cerebro-spinal nervous 
system together with the sensorial apparatus in which it 
is prolonged and the locomotor muscles it controls, we 
may say that a higher organism is essentially a sensory­
motor system installed on systems of digestion, respira­
tion, circulation, secretion, etc., whose function it is to 
repair, cleanse and protect it, to create an unvarying in­
ternal environment for it, and above all to pass it poten­
tial energy to convert into locomotive movement.1 It is 
true that the more the nervous function is perfected, the 
more must the functions required to maintain it develop, 
and the more exacting, consequently, they become for 
themselves. As the nervous activity has emerged from 
the protoplasmic mass in which it was almost drowned, it 
has had to summon around itself activities of all kinds 
'for its support. These could only be developed on other 
activities, which again implied others, ami so on indefi­
nitely. Thus it is that the complexity of functioning of 
the higher organisms goes on to infinity. The study of 
1 Cuvier said : "The nervous system is, at bottom, the whole animal ; 
the other systems are there only to serve it." ("Sur un nouveau rap­
prochement a etablir entre lcs classes qui composent le rcgne animal," 
Arch. du Museum d'histoire naturelle, Paris, 1812, pp. 73-84 .) Of course, 
it woulc! be necessary to apply a great many restrictions to this for­
mula-for example, to allow for the cases of degradation and retro­
gression in which the nervous system passes into the background. And, 
moreover, with the nervous system must be included the sensorial ap­
paratus on the one hand and the motor on the other, between which it 
acts as intermediary. Cf. Foster, art. "Physiology," in the Encyclopaedia 
Britannica, Edinburgh, 1885, o. 17. 

A NIMAL LIFE 
139 
one of these organisms therefore takes us round in a 
circle, as if everything was a means to everything else. 
But the circle has a center, none the less, and that is the 
system of nervous elements stretching between the sen­
sory organs and the motor apparatus. 
We will not dwell here on a point we have treated at 
length in a former work. Let us merely recall that the 
progress of the nervous system has been effected both 
in the direction of a more precise adaptation of move­
ments and in that of a greater latitude left to the living 
being to choose between them. These two tendencies 
may appear antagonistic, and indeed they are so; but 
a nervous chain, even in its most rudimentary form, suc­
cessfully reconciles them. On the one hand, it marks a 
well-denned track between one point of the periphery 
and another, the one sensory, the other motor. It has 
therefore canalized an activity which was originally dif­
fused in the protoplasmic mass. But, on the other hand, 
the elements that compose it are probably discontinu­
ous ; at any rate, even supposing they anastomose, they 
exhibit a functional discontinuity, for each of them ends 
in a kind of crossroad where probably the nervous cur­
rent may choose its course. From the humblest Monera 
to the best-endowed insects, and up to the most intel­
ligent vertebrates, the progress realized has been above 
all a progress of the nervous system, coupled at every 
stage with all the new constructions and complications 
of mechanism that this progress required. As we fore­
shadowed in the beginning of this work, the role of life 
is to insert some indetermination into matter. Indeter­
minate, i.e. unforeseeable, are the forms it creates in the 
course of its evolution. More and more indeterminate 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
also, more and more free, is the activity to which these 
forms serve as the vehicle. A nervous system, with neu, 
rones placed end to end in such wise that, at the extrem­
ity of each, manifold ways open in which manifold ques­
tions present themselves, is a veritable reservoir of in­
determination. That the main energy of the vital impulse 
has been spent in creating apparatus of this kind is, we 
believe, what a glance over the organized world as a 
whole easily shows. But concerning the vital impulse it­
self a few explanations are necessary. 
It must not be forgotten that the force which is evolv­
ing throughout the organized world is a limited force, 
which is always seeking to transcend itself and always 
remains inadequate to the work it would fain produce. 
The errors and puerilities of radical finalism are due to 
the misapprehension of this point. It has represented 
the whole of the living world as a construction, and a 
construction analogous to a human work. All the pieces 
have been arranged with a view to the best possible func­
tioning of the machine. Each species has its reason for 
existence, its part to play, its allotted place; and all join 
together, as it were, in a musical concert, wherein the 
seeming discords are really meant to bring out a funda­
mental harmony. In short, all goes on in nature as in 
the works of human genius, where, though the result 
may be trifling, there is at least perfect adequacy be­
tween the object made and the work of making it. 
Nothing of the kind in the evolution of life. There, 
the disproportion is striking between the work and the 
result. From the bottom to the top of the organized 
world we do indeed find one great effort; but most often 

DEVEL O P M E N T  O F  ANIMAL LIFE 
141 
this effort turns short, sometimes paralyzed by contrary 
forces, sometimes diverted from what it should do by 
what it does, absorbed by the form it is engaged in tak­
ing, hypnotized by it as by a mirror. Even in its most 
perfect works, though it seems to have triumphed over 
external resistances and also over its own, it is at the 
mercy of the materiality which it has had to assume. 
It is what each of us may experience in himself. Our 
freedom, in the very movements by which it is affirmed, 
creates the growing habits that will stifle it if it fails to 
renew itself by a constant effort : it is dogged by autom­
atism. The most living thought becomes frigid in the 
formula that expresses it. The word turns against the 
idea. 
The letter kills the spirit. And our most ardent en­
thusiasm, as soon as it is externalized into action, is so 
naturally congealed into the cold calculation of interest 
or vanity, the one takes so easily the shape of the other, 
that we might confuse them together, doubt our own 
sincerity, deny goodness and love, if we did not know 
that the dead retain for a time the features of the living. 
The profound cause of this discordance lies in an ir­
remediable difference of rhythm. Life in general is mo­
bility itself; particular manifestations of life accept this 
mobility reluctantly, and constantly lag behind. It is 
always going ahead; they want to mark time. Evolution 
in general would fain go on in a straight line; each spe­
cial evolution is a kind of circle. Like eddies of dust 
raised by the wind as it passes, the living turn upon 
themselves, borne up by the great blast of life. They are 
therefore relatively stable, and counterfeit immobility so 
well that we treat each of them as a thing rather than as 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
a progress, forgetting that the very permanence of their 
form is only the outline of a movement. At timesᯞ how­
ever, in a fleeting vision, the invisible breath that bears 
them is materialized before our eyes. We have this sud­
den illumination before certain forms of maternal love, 
<;o striking, and in most animals so touching, observable 
.even in the solicitude of the plant for its seed. This love, 
in which some have seen the great mystery of life, may 
possibly deliver us life's secret. It shows us each genera­
tion leaning over the generation that shall follow. It al­
lows us a glimpse of the fact that the living being is 
above all a thoroughfare, and that the essence of life 
is in the movement by which life is transmitted. 
This contrast between life in general, and the forms 
in which it is manifested, has everywhere the same char­
acter. It might be said that life tends toward the utmost 
possible action, but that each species prefers to con­
tribute the slightest possible effort. Regarded in what 
constitutes its true essence, namely, as a transition from 
species to species, life is a continually growing action. 
But each of the species, through which life passes, aims 
only at its own convenience. It goes for that which de­
mands the least labor. Absorbed in the form it is about 
to take, it falls into a partial sleep, in which it ignores 
almost all the rest of life ; it fashions itself so as to take 
the greatest possible advantage of its immediate envi­
ronment with the least possible trouble. Accordingly, the 
act by which life goes forward to the creation of a new 
form, and the act by which this form is shaped, are two 
different and often antagonistic movements. The first is 
continuous with the second, but cannot continue in it 
without being drawn aside from its direction, as would 

D E VE L O P M E N T  O F  A N I M A L  
L I F E  
143 
happen to a man leaping, if, in order to clear the ob· 
stacle, he had to turn his eyes from it and look at himself 
all the while. 
Living forms are, by their very defmition, forms that 
are able to live. In whatever way the adaptation of the 
organism to its circumstances is explained, it has neces­
sarily been suff1cient, since the species has subsisted. In 
this sense, each of the successive species that paleon­
tology and zoology describe was a success carried off by 
life. But we get a very different impression when we 
refer each species to the movement that has left it be­
hind on its way, instead of to the conditions into which 
it has been set. Often this movement has turned aside; 
very often, too, it has stopped short; what was to have 
been a thoroughfare has become a terminus. From this 
new point of view, failure seems the rule, success excep­
tional and always imperfect. We shall see that, of the 
four main directions along which animal life bent its 
course, two have led to blind alleys, and, in the other two, 
the effort has generally been out of proportion to the re­
sult. 
Documents are lacking to reconstruct this history in 
detail, but we can make out its main lines. We have 
already said that animals and vegetables must have 
separated soon from their common stock, the vegetable 
falling asleep in immobility, the animal, on the contrar:;r, 
becoming more and more awake and marching on to the 
conquest of a nervous system. Probably the effort of the 
animal kingdom resulted in creating organisms still very 
simple, but endowed with a certain freedom of action, 
and, above all, with a shape so undecided that it could 
lend itself to any future dᯟtermination. These animals 

I44 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
may have resembled some of our worms, but with this 
difference, however, that the worms living today, to 
which they could be compared, are but the empty and 
fixed examples of infinitely plastic forms, pregnant with 
an unlimited future, the common stock of the echino­
derms, mollusks, arthropods and vertebrates. 
One danger lay in wait for them, one obstacle which 
might have stopped the soaring course of animal life. 
There is one peculiarity with which we cannot help being 
struck when glancing over the fauna of primitive times, 
namely, the imprisonment of the animal in a more or 
less solid sheath, which must have obstructed and often 
even paralyzed its movements. The mollusks of that time 
had a shell more universally than those of today. The 
arthropods in general were provided with a carapace; 
most of them were crustaceans. The more ancient fishes 
had a bony sheath of extreme hardness.1 The explana­
tion of this general fact should be sought, we believe, in 
a tendency of soft organisms to defend themselves 
against one another by making themselves, as far as 
possible, undevourable. Each species, in the act by which 
it comes into being, trends toward that which is most 
expedient. Just as among primitive organisms there were 
some that turned toward animal life by refusing to 
manufacture organic out of inorganic material and tak­
ing organic substances ready made from organisms that 
had turned toward the vegetative life, so, among the 
animal species themselves, many contrived to live at the 
expense of other animals. For an organism that is ani­
mal, that is to say mobile, can avail itself of its mobility 
1 See, on these different points, the work of Gaudry, Essai de paUon­
lologie philosophique, Paris, 1896, pp. 14-16 and 78-79. 

DEVELO P M E N T  O F  AN IMAL LIFE 
145 
to go in search of defenseless animals, and feed on them 
quite as well as on vegetables. So, the more species be­
came mobile, the more they became voracious and dan­
gerous to one another. Hence a sudden arrest of the 
entire animal world in its progress toward higher and 
higher mobility; for the hard and calcareous skin of the 
echinoderm, the shell of the mollusk, the carapace of the 
crustacean and the ganoid breast-plate of the ancient 
fishes probably all originated in a common effort of the 
animal species to protect themselves against hostile spe­
cies. But this breast-plate, behind which the animal took 
shelter, constrained it in its movements and sometimes 
fixed it in one place. If the vegetable renounced con­
sciousness in wrapping itself in a cellulose membrane, 
the animal that shut itself up in a citadel or in armor 
condemned itself to a partial slumber. In this torpor the 
echinoderms and even the mollusks live today. Prob­
ably arthropods and vertebrates were threatened with it 
too. They escaped, however, and to this fortunate cir­
cumstance is due the expansion of the highest forms of 
life. 
In two directions, in fact, we see the impulse of life 
to movement getting the upper hand again. The fishes 
exchanged their ganoid breast-plate for scales. Long be­
fore that, the insects had appeared, also disencumbered 
of the breast-plate that had protected their ancestors. 
Both supplemented the insufficiency of their protective 
covering by an agility that enabled them to escape their 
enemies, and also to assume the offensive, to choose the 
place and the moment of encounter. We see a progress 
of the same kind in the evolution of human armaments. 
The first impulse is to seek shelter; the second, which is 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
the better, is to become as supple as possible for flight 
and above all for attack-attack being the most effective 
means of defense. So the heavy hoplite was supplanted 
by the legionary; the knight, clad in armor, had to give 
place to the light free-moving infantryman; and in a 
general way, in the evolution of life, just as in the evo­
lution of human societies and of individual destinies, the 
greatest successes have been for those who have ac­
cepted the heaviest risks. 
Evidently, then, it was to the animal's interest to 
make itself more mobile. As we said when speaking of 
adaptation in general, any transformation of a species 
can be explained by its own particular interest. This 
will give the immediate cause of the variation, but often 
only the most superficial cause. The profound cause is 
the impulse which thrust life into the world, which made 
it divide into vegetables and animals, which shunted the 
animal on to suppleness of form, and which, at a cer­
tain moment, in the animal kingdom threatened with 
torpor, secured that, on some points at least, it should 
rouse itself up and move forward. 
. 
On the two paths along which the vertebrates and 
arthropods have separately evolved, development (apart 
from retrogressions connected with parasitism or any 
other cause) has consisted ab0ve all in the progress of 
the sensory-motor nervous system. Mobility and supple­
ness were sought for,· and also-through many experi­
mental attempts, and not without a tendency to excess 
of substance and brute force at the start-variety of 
movements. But this quest itself tooᯠ place in divergent 
directions. A glance at the nervous system of the arthro· 
pods and that of the vertebrates shows us the difference. 

DEVELOP M E N T  O F  ANIM AL 
LIFE 
147 
In the arthropods, the body is formed of a series more or 
less long of rings set together; motor activity is thus 
distributed amongst a varying-sometimes a consider­
able-number of appendages, each of which has its spe­
cial function. In the vertebrates, activity is concentrated 
in two pairs of members only, and these organs perform 
functions which depend much less strictly on their form.1 
The independence becomes complete in man, whose 
hand is capable of any kind of work. 
That, at least, is what we see. But behind what is 
seen there is what may be surmised-two powers, im­
manent in life and originally intermingled, which were 
bound to part company in course of growth. 
To define these powers, we must consider, in the evo­
lution both of the arthropods and the vertebrates, the 
species which mark the culminating point of each. How 
is this point to be determined? Here again, to aim at 
geometrical precision will lead us astray. There is no 
single simple sign by which we can recognize that one 
species is more advanced than another on the same line 
of evolution. There are manifold characters, that must 
be compared and weighed in each particular case, in 
order to ascertain to what extent they are essential or 
accidental and how far they must be taken into account. 
It is unquestionable, for example, that success is the 
most general criterion of superiority, the two terms 
being, up to a certain point, synonymous. By success 
must be understood, so far as the living being is con­
cerned, an aptitude to develop in the most diverse en­
vironments, through the greatest possible variety of ob-
' See, on this subject, Shaler, The Individual, New York, 1900, pp. 
I IS-125. 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
stacles, so as to cover the widest possible extent of 
ground. A species which claims the entire earth for its 
domain is truly a dominating and consequently superior 
species. Such is the human species, which represents the 
culminating point of the evolution of the vertebrates. 
But such also are, in the series of the articulate, the in­
sects and in particular certain hymenoptera. It has been 
said of the ants that, as man is lord of the soil, they are 
lords of the sub-soil. 
On the other hand, a group of species that has ap­
peared late may be a group of degenerates; but, for that, 
some special cause of retrogression must have inter­
vened. By right, this group should be superior to the 
group from which it is derived, since it would corre­
spond to a more advanced stage of evolution. Now man 
is probably the latest .comer of the vertebrates; 1 and in 
the insect series no species is later than the hymenoptera, 
unless it be the Iepidoptera, which are probably degen­
erates, living parasitically on flowering plants. 
So, by different ways, we are led to the same conclu­
sion. The evolution of the arthropods reaches its culmi­
nating point in the insect, and in particular in the hy­
menoptera, as that of the vertebrates in man. Now, since 
instinct is nowhere so developed as in the insect world, 
and in no group of insects so marvelously as in the hy-
1 This point is disputed by M. Rene Quinton, who regards the car­
nivorous and ruminant mammals, as well as certain birds, as subse­
quent to man (R. Quinton, L'Eau de mer milieu organique, Paris, 1904, 
p. 435). We may say here that our general conclusions, although very . 
different from M. Quinton's, are not irreconcilable with them ; for if 
evolution has really been such as we represent it, the vertebrates must 
have made an effort to maintain themselves in the most favorable con­
ditions of activity-the very conditions, iDdeed, which life had chosen 
\n the beginning. 

DEVE LOP M E N T  O F  ANIMAL LIFE 
149 
menoptera, it may be said that the whole evolution of 
the animal kingdom, apart from retrogressions toward 
vegetative life, has taken place on two divergent paths, 
one of which led to instinct and the other to intelligence. 
Vegetative torpor, instinct and intelligence-these, 
then, are the elements that coincided in the vital im­
pulsion common to plants and animals, and which, in 
the course of a development in which they were made 
manifest in the most unforeseen forms, have been dis­
sociated by the very fact of their growth. The cardinal 
error which, from Aristotle onwards, has vitiated most 
of the philosophies of nature, is to see in vegetative, in­
stinctive and rational life, three successive degrees of the 
development of one and the same tendency, whereas they 
are three divergent directions of an activity that has split 
up as it grew. The difference between them is not a dif­
ference of intensity, nor, more generally, of degree, but 
of kind. 
It is important to investigate this point. We have seen 
in the case of vegetable and animal life how they are at 
once mutually complementary and mutually antagonis­
tic. Now we must show that intelligence and instinct also 
are opposite and complementary. But let us first explain 
why we are generally led to regard them as activities of 
which one is superior to the other and based upon it, 
whereas in reality they are not things of the same order: 
they have not succeeded one another, nor can we assign 
to them different grades. 
It is because intelligence and instinct, having origi­
nally been interpenetrating, retain something of their 
common origin. Neither is ever found in a pure state. 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
We said that in the plant the consciousness and mobility 
of the animal, which lie dormant, can be awakened; and 
that the animal lives under the constant menace of being 
drawn aside to the vegetative life. The two tendencies 
-that of the plant and that of the animal-were so thor­
oughly interpenetrating, to begin with, that there has 
never been a complete severance between them : they 
haunt each other continually; everywhere we find them 
mingled; it is the proportion that differs. So with in­
telligence and instinct. There is no intelligence in which 
some traces of instinct are not to be discovered, more 
especially no instinct that is not surrounded with a 
fringe of intelligence. It is this fringe of intelligence that 
has been the cause of so many misunderstandings. From 
the fact that instinct is always more or less intelligent, 
it has been concluded that instinct and intelligence are 
things of the same kind, that there is only a difference 
of complexity or perfection between them, and, above 
all, that one of the two is expressible in terms of the 
other. In reality, they accompany each other only be­
cause they are complementary, and they are comple­
mentary only because they are different, what is instinc­
tive in instinct being opposite to what is intelligent in 
intelligence. 
We are bound to dwell on this point. It is one of the 
utmost importance. 
Let us say at the outset that the distinctions we are 
going to make will be too sharply drawn, just because we 
wish to define in instinct what is instinctive, and in in­
telligence what is intelligent, whereas all concrete in­
stinct is mingled with intelligence, as all real intelligence 
is penetrated by instinct. Moreover, neither intelligence 

I N TELLIGENCE · A N D  I N S T I N C T  
I $ I  
nor instinct lends itself to rigid definition : they are tend­
encies, and not things. Also, it must not be forgotten 
that in the present chapter we are considering intelli­
gence and instinct as going out of life which deposits 
them along its course. Now the life manifested by an 
organism is, in our view, a certain effort to obtain cer­
tain things from the material world. No wonder, there­
fore, if it is the diversity of this effort that strikes us 
in instinct and intelligence, and if we see in these two 
modes of psychical activity, above all else, two differ· 
ent methods of action on inert matter. This rather nar· 
row view of them has the advantage of giving us an ob· 
jective means of distinguishing them. In return, how· 
ever, it gives us, of intelligence in general and of instinct 
in general, only the mean position above and below 
which both constantly oscillate. For that reason thr 
reader must expect to see in what follows only a dia­
grammatic drawing, in which the respective outlines of 
intelligence and instinct are sharper than they should 
be, and in which the shading-off which comes from thᯡ 
indecision of each and from their reciprocal encroach· 
ment on one another is neglected. In a matter so obᯢ 
scure, we cannot strive too hard for clearness. It will 
always be easy afterwards to soften the outlines and 
to correct what is too geometrical in the drawing-in­
short, to replace the rigidity of a diagram by the supple­
ness of life. 
To what date is it agreed to ascribe the appearance of 
man on the earth? To the period when the first weapons, 
the first tools, were made. The memorable quarrel over 
the discovery of Boucher de Perthes in the quarry of 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
Moulin-Quignon is not forgotten. The question was 
whether real hatchets had been found or merely bits of 
flint accidentally broken. But that, supposing they were 
hatchets, we were indeed in the presence of intelligence, 
and more particularly of human intelligence, no one 
doubted for an instant. Now let us open a collection of 
anecdotes on the intelligence of animals : we shall see 
that besides many acts explicable by imitation or by the 
automatic association of images, there are some that we 
do not hesitate to call intelligent : foremost among them 
are those that bear witness to some idea of manufacture, 
whether the animal life succeeds in fashioning a crude 
instrument or uses for its profit an object made by man. 
The animals that rank immediately after man in the 
matter of intelligence, the apes and elephants, are those 
that can use an artificial instrument occasionally. Be­
low, but not very far from them, come those that rec­
ognize a constructed object: for example, the fox, which 
knows quite well that a trap is a trap. No doubt, there 
is intelligence wherever there is inference ; but inference, 
which consists in an inflection of past experience in the 
direction of present experience, is already a beginning 
of invention. Invention becomes complete when it is 
materialized in a manufactured instrument. Toward 
that achievement the intelligence of animals tends as 
toward an ideal. And though, ordinarily, it does not 
yet succeed in fashioning artificial objects and in making 
use of them, it is preparing for this by the very varia­
tions which it performs on the instincts furnished by 
nature. As regards human intelligence, it has not been 
suficiently noted that mechanical invention has been 
from the first its essential feature, that even today our 

I NTELLIGENCE AND I N STINCT 
1 53 
social life gravitates around the manufacture and use. 
of artificial instruments, that the inventions which strew 
the road of progress have also traced its direction. This 
we hardly realize, because it takes us longer to change 
ourselves than to change our tools. Our individual and 
even social habits survive a good while the circumstances 
for which they were made, so that the ultimate effects 
of an invention are not observed until its novelty is al­
ready out of sight. A century has elapsed since the in­
vention of the steam engine, and we are only just begin­
ning to feel the depths of the shock it gave us. But the 
revolution it has effected in industry has nevertheless 
upset human relations altogether. New ideas are arising, 
new feelings are on the way to flower. In thousands of 
years, when, seen from the distance, only the broad lines 
of the present age will still be visible, our wars and our 
revolutions will count for little, even supposing they are 
remembered at all ; but the steam engine, and the pro­
cession of inventions of every kind that accompanied it, 
will perhaps be spoken of as we speak of the bronze or 
of the chipped stone of pre-historic times : it will serve 
to define an age.1 If we could rid ourselves of all pride, 
if, to define our species, we kept strictly to what the his­
toric and the prehistoric periods show us to be the con­
stant characteristic of man and of intelligence, we should 
say not Homo sapiens, but Homo faber. In short, intelli­
gence, considered in what seems to be its original feature, 
is the faculty of manufacturing artificial objects, espe-
1 M. Paul Lacombe has laid great stress on the important influence 
that great inventions have exercised on the evolution of humanity (P. 
Lacombe, De l'histoire considlrt!e comme science, Paris, 1894. See, ln 
particular, pp. 168-247). 

I 54 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
cially tools to make tools, and of indefinitely varying the 
manufacture. 
Now, does an unintelligent animal also possess tools 
or machines? Yes, certainly, but here the instrument 
forms a part of the body that uses it; and, correspond­
ing to this instrument, there is an instinct that knows 
how to use it. True, it cannot be maintained that all in­
stincts consist in a natural ability to use an inborn mech­
anism. Such a definition would not apply to the instincts 
which Romanes called "secondary"; and more than one 
"prhnary" instinct would not come under it. But this 
definition, like that which we have provisionally given of 
intelligence, determines at least the ideal limit toward 
which the very numerous forms of instinct are traveling. 
Indeed, it has often been pointed out that most instincts 
are only the continuance, or rather the consummation, 
of the work of organization itself. Where does the ac­
tivity of instinct begin ? And where does that of nature 
end? We cannot tell. In the metamorphoses of the larva 
into the nymph and into the perfect insect, metamor­
phoses that often require appropriate action and a kind 
of initiative on the part of the larva, there is no sharp 
line of demarcation between the instinct of the animal 
and the organizing work of living matter. We may say, 
as we will, either that instinct organizes the instruments 
it is about to use, or that the process of organization is 
continued in the instinct that has to use the organ. The 
most marvelous instincts of the insect do nothing but 
develop its special structure into movements : indeed, 
where social life divides the labor among different in­
dividuals, and thus allots them different instincts, a 
corresponding difference of structure is observed: the 

I NTELLIGE N C E  AND I N S T I N C T  
I S S  
polymorphism of ants, bees, wasps and certain pseudo­
neuroptera is well known. Thus, if we consider only those 
typical cases in which the complete triumph of intelli­
gence and of instinct is seen, we find this essential dif­
ference between them : instinct perfected is a faculty of 
using and even of constructing organized instruments; 
intelligence perfected is the faculty of making and using 
unorganized instruments. 
The advantages and drawbacks of these two modes of 
activity are obvious. Instinct finds the appropriate in­
strument at hand : this instrument, which makes and 
repairs itself, which presents, like all the works of na­
ture, an infinite complexity of detail combined with a 
marvelous simplicity of function, does at once, when re­
quired, what it is called upon to do, without difficulty 
and with a perfection that is often wonderful. In return, 
it retains an almost invariable structure, since a modifi­
cation of it involves a modification of the species. In­
stinct is therefore necessarily specialized, being nothing 
but the utilization of a specific instrument for a specific 
object. The instrument constructed intelligently, on the 
contrary, is an imperfect instrument. It costs an effort. 
It is generally troublesome to handle. But, as it is made 
of unorganized matter, it can take any form whatsoever, 
serve any purpose, free the living being from every new 
difficulty that arises and bestow on it an unlimited num­
ber of powers. Whilst it is inferior to the natural instru­
ment for the satisfaction of immediate wants, its advan­
tage over it is the greater, the less urgent the need. Above 
all, it reacts on the nature of the being that constructs 
it; for in calling on him to exercise a new function, it 
confers on him, so to speak, a richer organization, being 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
an artificial organ by which the natural organism is ex­
tended. For every need that it satisfies, it creates a new 
need; and so, instead of closing, like instinct, the round 
of action within which the animal tends to move auto­
matically, it lays open to activity an unlimited field into 
which it is driven further and further, and made inore 
and more free. But this advantage of intelligence over 
instinct only appears at a late stage, when intelligence, 
having raised construction to a higher degree, proceeds 
to construct constructive machinery. At the outset, the 
advantages and drawbacks of the artificial instrument 
and of the natural instrument balance so well that it is 
hard to foretell which of the two will secure to the living 
being the greater empire over nature. 
We may surmise that they began by being implied 
in each other, that the original psychical activity in­
cluded both at once, and that, if we went far enough back 
into the past, we should find instincts more nearly ap­
proaching intelligence than those of our insects, intelli­
gence nearer to instinct than that of our vertebrates, in­
telligence and instinct being, in this elementary condi­
tion, prisoners of a matter which they are not yet able 
to control. If the force immanent in life were an un­
limited force, it might perhaps have developed instinct 
and intelligence together, and to any extent, in the same 
organisms. But everything seems to indicate that this 
force is limited, and that it soon exhausts itself in its very 
manifestation. It is hard for it to go far in several direc­
tions at once : it must choose. Now, it has the choice be­
tween two modes of acting on the material world : it can 
either effect this action directly by creating an organized 
fnstrumt>nt to work with; or else it can effect it indirectly 

I N TELLIGENCE AND I N S TI N C T  
I 5 1  
through an organism which, instead of possessing the re­
quired instrument naturally, will itself construct it by 
fashioning inorganic matter. Hence intelligence and in­
stinct, which diverge more and more as they develop, 
but which never entirely separate from each other. On 
the one hand, the most perfect instinct of the insect is 
accompanied by gleams of intelligence, if only in the 
choice of place, time and materials of construction : the 
bees, for example, when by exception they build in the 
open air, invent new and really intelligent arrangements 
to adapt themselves to such new conditions.1 But, on the 
other hand, intelligence has even more need of instinct 
than instinct has of intelligence ; for the power to give 
shape to crude matter involves already a superior degree 
of organization, a degree to which the animal could not 
have risen, save on the wings of instinct. So, while nature 
has frankly evolved in the direction of instinct in the 
arthropods, we observe in almost all the vertebrates the 
striving after rather than the expansion of intelligence. 
It is instinct still which forms the basis of their psychical 
activity; but intelligence is there, and would fain super­
sede it. Intelligence does not yet succeed in inventing 
instruments ; but at least it tries to, by performing as 
many variations as possible on the instinct which it 
would like to dispense with. It gains complete self-pos­
session only in man, and this triumph is attested by the 
very insufftciency of the natural means at man's dis­
posal for defense against his enemies, against cold and 
hunger. This insufficiency, when we strive to fathom its 
significance, acquires the value of a prehistoric docu-
I Bouvier, "La Nidification des abeillcs a !'air libre" (C. R. de l'Ac. 
efts sciencts, 7 mai 1906) . 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
ment; it is the final leave-taking between intelligence 
and instinct. But it is no less true that nature must have 
hesitated between two modes of psychical activity-one 
assured of immediate success, but limited in its effects; 
the other hazardous, but whose conquests, if it should 
reach independence, might be extended indefmitely. 
Here again, then, the greatest success was achieved on 
the side of the greatest risk. Instinct and intelligence 
therefore represent two divergent solutions, equally fit­
ting, of one and the same problem. 
There ensue, it is true, profound differences of internal 
structure between instinct and intelligence. We shall 
dwell only on those that concern our present study. Let 
us say, then, that instinct and intelligence imply two 
radically different kinds of knowledge. But some ex­
planations are first of all necessary on the subject of con­
sciousness in general. 
It has been asked how far instinct is conscious. Our 
reply is that there are a vast number of differences and 
degrees, that instinct is more or less conscious in certain 
cases, unconscious in others. The plant, as we shaH see, 
has instincts ; it is not likely that these are accompanied 
by feeling. Even in the animal there is hardly any com­
plex instinct that is not unconscious in some part at least 
of its exercise. But here we must point out a difference, 
not often noticed, between two kinds of unconsciousness, 
viz., that in which consciousness is absent, and that in 
which consciousness is nullified. Both are equal to zero, 
but in one case the zero expresses the fact that there is 
nothing, in the other that we have two equal quantities 
of opposite sign which compensate and neutralize each 
other. The unconsciousness of a falling stone is of the 

I NTELLIGENCE AND I N S T I N C T  
1 59 
former kind : the stone has no feeling of its fall. Is il 
the same with the unconsciousness of instinct, in the ex­
treme cases in which instinct is unconscious? When we 
mechanically perform an habitual action, when the som­
nambulist automatically acts his dream, unconsciousness 
may be absolute; but this is merely due to the fact that 
the representation of the act is held in check by the 
performance of the act itself, which resembles the idea 
so perfectly, and fits it so exactly, that consciousness is 
unable to fmd room between them. Representation is 
stopped up by action. The proof of this is, that if the 
accomplishment of the act is arrested or thwarted by an 
obstacle, consciousness may reappear. It was there, but 
neutralized by the action which fulfilled and thereby 
111led the representation. The obstacle creates nothing 
positive ; it simply makes a void, removes a stopper. This 
inadequacy of act to representation is precisely what 
we here call consciousness. 
If we examine this point more closely, we shall find 
that consciousness is the light that plays around the zone 
of pessible actions or potential activity which surrounds 
the action really performed by the living being. It sig­
nifies hesitation or choice. Where many equally possible 
actions are indicated without there being any real action 
(as in a deliberation that has not come to an end) , con­
sciousness is intense. Where the action performed is the 
only action possible (as in activity of the somnambulistic 
or more generally automatic kind) ,  consciousness is re­
duced to nothing. Representation and knowledge exist 
none the less in the case if we find a whole series of sys­
tematized movements the last of which is already pre­
figured in the first, and if, besides, consciousness can 

160 
\:REATIVE EVOLUTION 
flash out of them at the shock of an obstacle. From this 
point of view, the consciousness of a thing being may be 
defined as an arithmetical difference between potential 
and real activity. It measures the interval between repre­
sentation and action. 
It may be inferred from this that intelligence is likely 
to point toward consciousness, and instinct toward un­
consciousness. For, where the implement to be used is 
organized by nature, the material furnished by nature, 
and the result to be obtained willed by nature, there is 
little left to choice; the consciousness inherent in the 
representation is therefore counterbalanced, whenever it 
tends to disengage itself, by the performance of the act, 
identical with the representation, which forms its coun­
terweight. Where consciousness appears, it does not so 
much light up the instinct itself as the thwartings to 
which instinct is subject; it is the deficit of instinct, the 
distance, between the act and the idea, that becomes con­
sciousness so that consciousness, here, is only an acci­
dent. Essentially, consciousness only emphasizes the 
starting-point of instinct, the point at which the whole 
series of automatic movements is released. Deficit, on 
the contrary, is the normal state of intelligence. Labor­
ing under difficulties is its very essence. Its original func­
tion being to construct unorganized instruments, it must, 
in spite of numberless difficulties, choose for this work 
the place and the time, the form and the matter. And it 
can never satisfy itself entirely, because every new satis­
faction creates new needs. In short, while instinct and 
intelligence both involve knowledge, this knowledge is 
rather acted and unconscious in the case of instinct, 
thought and conscious in the case of intelligence. But it 

I N TELLIGE N C E  AND I N S TI N C T  
r6r 
is a difference rather of degree than of kind. So long as 
consciousness is all we are concerned with, we close our 
eyes to what is, from the psychological point of view, the 
cardinal difference between instinct and intelligence. 
In order to get at this essential difference we must, 
without stopping at the more or less brilliant light which 
illumines these two modes of internal activity, go 
straight to the two objects, profoundly different from 
each other, upon which instinct and intelligence are di­
rected. 
When the horse-fly lays its eggs on the legs or shoul­
ders of the horse, it acts as if it knew that its larva has 
to develop in the horse's stomach and that the horse, in 
licking itself, will convey the larva into its digestive 
tract. When a paralyzing wasp stings its victim on just 
those points where the nervous centers lie, so as to render 
it motionless without killing it, it acts like a learned en­
tomologist and a skilful surgeon rolled into one. But 
what shall we say of the little beetle, the Sitaris, whose 
story is so often quoted? This insect lays its eggs at the 
entrance of the underground passages dug by a kind 
of bee, the Anthophora. Its larva, after long waiting, 
springs upon the male Anthophora as it goes out of the 
passage, clings to it, and remains attached until the "nup­
tial flight," when it seizes the opportunity to pass from 
the male to the female, and quietly waits until it lays its 
eggs. It then leaps on the egg, which serves as a support 
for it in the honey, devours the egg in a few days, and, 
resting on the shell, undergoes its first metamorphosis. 
Organized now to float on the honey, it consumes this 
provision of nourishment, and becomes a nymph, then a 
perfect insect. Everything happens as if the larva of the 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
Sitaris, from the moment it was hatched, knew that the 
male Anthophora would first emerge from the passage; 
that the nuptial flight would give it the means of convey­
ing itself to the female, who would take it to a store of 
honey sufficient to feed it after its transformation; that, 
until this transformation, it could gradually eat the egg 
of the Anthophora, in such a way that it could at the 
same time feed itself, maintain itself at the surface of the 
honey, and also suppress the rival that otherwise would 
have come out of the egg. And equally all this happens 
as if the Sitaris itself knew that its larva would know all 
these things. The knowledge, if knowledge there be, is 
only implicit. It is reflected outwardly in exact move­
ments instead of being reflected inwardly in conscious­
ness. It is none the less true that the behavior of the in­
sect involves, or rather evolves, the idea of defmite things 
existing or being produced in definite points of space and 
time, which the insect knows without having learned 
them. 
Now, if we look at intelligence from the same point of 
view, we find that it also knows certain things without 
having learned them. But the knowledge in the two cases 
is of a very different order. We must be careful here not 
to revive again the old philosophical dispute on the sub­
ject of innate ideas. So we will confine ourselves to the 
point on which every one is agreed, to wit, that the young 
child understands immediately things that the animal 
will never understand, and that in this sense intelligence, 
like instinct, is an inherited function, therefore an innate 
one. But this innate intelligence, although it is a faculty 
of . knowing, knows no object in particular. When the 
new-born babe seeks for the first time its mother's breast, 

I N TEL L I G E N C E  A N D  I N S T I N C T  
163 
so showing that it has knowledge (unconscious, no 
doubt) of a thing it has never seen, we say, just because 
the innate knowledge is in this case of a definite object, 
that it belongs to instinct and not to intelligence. Intelli­
gence does not then imply the innate knowledge of any 
object. And yet, if intellirᯣencc knows nothing by nature, 
it has nothing innate. What, then, if it be ignorant of all 
things, can it know? Besides things, there are 1·elations. 
The new-born child, so far as intelligent, knows neither 
definite objects nor a definite property of any object ; but 
when, a little later on, he will hear an epithet being ap­
plied to a substantive, he will immediately understand 
what it means. The relation of attribute to subject is 
therefore sei zed by him naturally, and the same might be 
said of the general relation expressed by the verb, a rela­
tion so immediately conceived by the mind that language 
can leave it to be understood, as is instanced in rudimen­
tary languages which have no verb. Intelligence, there­
fore, naturally makes use of relations of like with like, of 
content to container, of cause to effect, etc., which are 
implied in every phrase in which there is a subject, an at­
tribute and a verb, expressed or understood. May one 
say that it has innate knowledge of each of these rela­
tions in particular? It is for logicians to discover whether 
they are so many irreducible relations, or whether they 
c;m be resolved into relations still more general. But, in 
whatever way we make the analysis of thought, we al­
ways end with one or several general categories, of which 
the mind possesses innate knowledge since it makes a 
natural use of them. Let us say, therefore, that whatever, 
in instinct and intelligence, is innate knowled,r:e, hears in 
the first case on things and in the second on relations. 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
Philosophers distinguish between the matter of our 
knowledge and its form. The matter is what is given by 
the perceptive faculties taken in the elementary state. 
The• form is the totality of the relations set up between 
these materials in order to constitute a systematic knowl­
edge. Can the form, without matter, be an object of 
knowledge? Yes, without doubt, provided that this 
knowledge is not like a thing we possess so much as like 
a habit we have contracted-a direction rather than a 
state : it is, if we will, a certain natural bent of attention. 
The schoolboy, who knows that the master is going to 
dictate a fraction to him, draws a line before he knows 
what numerator and what denominator are to come; he 
therefore has present to his mind the general relation be­
tween the two terms although he does not know either of 
them; he knows the form without the matter. So is it, 
prior to experience, with the categories into which our 
experience comes to be inserted. Let us adopt then words 
sanctioned by usage, and give the distinction between in­
telligence and instinct this more precise formula: Intelli­
gence, in so far as it is innate, is the knowledge of a form; 
instinct implies the knowledge of a matter. 
From this second point of view, which is that of knowl­
edge instead of action, the force immanent in life in gen­
eral appears to us again as a limited principle, in which 
originally two different and even divergent modes of 
knowing coexisted and intermingled. The first gets at 
definite objects immediately, in their materiality itself. 
It says, "This is what is." The second gets at no object in 
particular; it is only a natural power of relating an ob­
ject to an object, or a part to a part, or an aspect to an as­
pect-in short, of drawing conclusions when in posses-

I N T ELLIGE N C E  AND I N S T I N C T  
165 
!lion of the premises, of proceeding from what has been 
learnt to what is still unknown. It does not say, "This 
is"; it says only that "if the conditions are such, such will 
be the conditioned." In short, the first kind of knowl­
edge, the instinctive, would be formulated in what phi­
losophers call categorical propositions, while the second 
kind, the intellectual, would always be expressed hypo­
thetically. Of these two faculties, the former seems, at 
first, much preferable to the other. And it would be so, in 
truth, if it extended to an endless number of objects. But, 
in fact, it applies only to one special object, and indeed 
only to a restricted part of that object. Of this, at least, 
its knowledge is intimate and full ; not explicit, but im­
plied in the accomplished action. The intellectual fac­
ulty, on the contrary, possesses naturally only an ex­
ternal and empty knowledge; but it has thereby the 
advantage of supplying a frame in which an infinity of 
objects may find room in turn. It is as if the force evolv­
ing in living forms, being a limited force, had had to 
choose between two kinds of limitation in the field of 
natural or innate knowledge, one applying to the exten­
sion of knowledge, the other to its intension. In the first 
case, the knowledge may be packed and full, but it will 
then be confined to one specific object; in the second, it 
is no longer limited by its object, .but that is because it 
contains nothing, being only a form without matter. The 
two tendencies, at first implied in each other, had to sep­
arate in order to grow. They both went to seek their for­
tune in the world, and turned out to be instinct and intel­
ligence. 
Such, then, are the two divergent modes of knowledge 
by which intelligence and instinct must be defined, from 

1 66 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
the standpoint of knowledge rather than that of action. 
But knowledge and action are here only two aspects of 
one and the same faculty. It is easy to see, indeed, that 
the second definition is only a new form of the first. 
If instinct is, above all, the faculty of using an organ­
ized natural instrument, it must involve innate knowl­
edge (potential or unconscious, it is true) , both of this 
instrument and of the object to which it is applied. In­
stinct is therefore innate knowledge of a thin{!,. But intel­
ligence is the faculty of constructing unorganized-that 
is to say artificial-instruments. If, on its account, na­
ture gives up endowing the living being with the instru­
ments that may serve him, it is in order that the living 
being may be able to vary his construction according to 
.circumstances. The essential function of intelligence is 
therefore to see the way out of a difficulty in any circum­
stances whatever, to fmd what is most suitable, what an­
swers best the question asked. Hence it bears essentially 
on the relations between a given situation and the means 
of utilizing it. What is innate in intellect, therefore, is the 
tendency to establish relations, and this tendency implies 
the natural knowledge of certain very general relations, 
a kind of stuff that the activity of each particular intel­
lect will cut up into more special relations. Where activ­
ity is directed toward manufacture, therefore, knowl­
edge necessarily bears on relations. But this entirely 
formal knowledge of intelligence has an immense ad­
vantage over the material knowledge of instinct. A form, 
just because it is empty, may be filled at will with any 
number of things in turn, even with those that are of no 
use. So that a formal knowledge is not limited to what is 
practically useful, although it is in view of practical util-

I N TELLIGENCE AND I N STINCT 
167 
ity that it has made its appearance in the world. An in­
telligent being bears within himself the means to tran­
scend his own nature. 
He transcends himself, however, less than he wishes, 
less also than he imagines himself to do. The purely for­
mal character of intelligence deprives it of the ballast 
necessary to enable it to settle itself on the objects that 
are of the most powerful interest to speculation. Instinct, 
on the contrary, has the desired materiality, but it is in­
capable of going so far in quest of its object; it does not 
speculate. Here we reach the point that most concerns 
our present inquiry. The difference that we shall now 
proceed to denote between instinct and intelligence is 
what the whole of this analysis was meant to bring out. 
We formulate it thus : There arc things that intelligence 
alone is able to seck, but which, by itself, it will never 
find. T hcse things instinct alone could find; but it will 
never seek them. 
It is necessary here to consider some preliminary de­
tails that concern the mechanism of intelligence. We have 
said that the function of intelligence is to establish rela· 
tions. Let us determine more precisely the nature of 
these relations. On this point we are bound to be eithe1 
vague or arbitrary so long as we see in the intellect a fac· 
ulty intended for pure speculation. We are then reduced 
to taking the general frames of the understanding for 
something absolute, irreducible and inexplicable. The 
understanding must have fallen from heaven with its 
form, as each of us is born with his face. This form may 
be defined, of course, but that is all; there is no asking 
why it is what it is rather than anything else. Thus, it will 
be said that the function of the intellect is essentially 

1 68 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
unification, that the common object of all its operations 
is to introduce a certain unity into the diversity of phe­
nomena, and so forth. But, in the first place, "unifica­
tion" is a vague term, less clear than "relation" or even 
"thought," and says nothing more. And, moreover, it 
might be asked if the function of intelligence is not to 
divide even more than to unite. Finally, if the intellect 
proceeds as it does because it wishes to unite, and if it 
seeks unification simply because it has need of unifying, 
the whole of our knowledge becomes relative to certain 
requirements of the mind that probably might have been 
entirely different from what they are : for an intellect 
differently shaped, knowledge would have been different. 
Intellect being no longer dependent on anything, every­
thing becomes dependent on it; and so, having placed 
the understanding too high, we end by putting too low 
the knowledge it gives us. Knowledge becomes relative, 
as !oon as the intellect is made a kind of absolute.-We 
regard the human intellect, on the contrary, as relative to 
the needs of action. Postulate action, and the vNy form 
of the intellect can ᯤ'e deduced from it. This form is there­
fore neither irreducible nor inexplicable. And, precisely 
because it is not independent, knowledge cannot be said 
to depend on it : knowledge ceases to be a product of the 
intellect and becomes, in a certain sense, part and parcel 
of reality. 
Philosophers will reply that action takes place in an 
ordered world, that this order is itself thought, and that 
we beg the question when we explain the intellect by ac­
tion, which presupposes it. They would be right if our 
point of view in the present chapter was to be o)lr final 
one. We should then be dupes of an illusion like that of 

I N TELLIGE N C E  AND I N S T I N C T  
1 69 
Spencer, who believed that the intellect is sufficiently ex­
plained as the impression left on us by the general char­
acters of matter : as if the order inherent in matter were 
not intelligence itself !  But we reserve for 1 he next chap­
ter the question up to what point and with what method 
philosophy can attempt a real genesis of the intellect at 
the same time as of matter. For the moment, the problem 
that engages our attention is of a psychological order. 
We are asking what is the portion of the material world 
to which our intellect is specially adapted. To reply to 
this question, there is no need to choose a system of phi­
losophy : it is enough to take up the point of view of com­
mon sense. 
Let us start, then, from action, and lay down that the 
intellect aims, first of all, at constructing. This fabrica· 
tion is exercised exclusively on inert matter, in this sense, 
that even if it makes use of organized material, it treats 
it as inert, without troublinϤ about the life which ani­
mated it. And of inert matter itself, fabrication deals only 
with the solid ; the rest escapes by its very fluidity. If, 
therefore, the tendency of the intellect is to fabricate, we 
may expect to fmd that whatever is fluid in the real will 
escape it in part, and \Vha1 cver is life in the living wiii es­
cape it altogether. Our intelligence, as it lravrs the hands 
of nature, has for its chief object the unorganized solid. 
When we pass in review the inteiiectual functions, we 
see that the intellect is never quite at its ease, never en­
tirely at home, except when it is working upon inert mat­
ter, more particularly upon solids. What is the most gen­
eral property of the material world? It is extended : it 
presents to us objects external to other objects, and, in 
these objects, parts external to parts. No doubt, it is use-

CREATI VE EVOLUTION 
ful to us, in view of our ulterior manipulation, to regard 
each object as divisible into parts arbitrarily cut up, each 
part being again divisible as we like, and so on ad infini­
tum. But it is above all necessary, for our present manip­
ulation, to regard the real object in hand, or the real ele­
ments into which we have resolved it, as provisionally 
final, and to treat them as so many units. To this possi­
bility of decomposing matter as much as we please. and 
in any way we please, we allude when we speak of the 
continuity of material extension ; but this continuity, as 
we see it, is nothing else but our ability, :m ability that 
matter allows to t:s to choose the mode of discontinuity 
we shall fmd in it. It is always, in fact, the mode of dis­
continuity once chosen that appears to us as the actually 
real one and that which fixes our attention, just because 
it rules our action. Thus discontinuity is thought for it­
self ; it is thinkable in itself ; ,we form an idea of it by a 
positive act of our mind; while the intellectu::1l represen­
tation of continuity is negative, bPing, at bottom, only 
the refusal of our mind, before any actually given system 
of decomposition, to regard it as the only possible one. 
Of the discontinuous alone docs the intellect form a clear 
idea. 
On the other hand, the objects we act on are certainly 
mobile objects, but the important thing for t:s to know is 
whither the mobile object is going and where it is at any 
moment of its passage. In other words, our interest is di­
rected, before all, to its actual or future positions, and 
not to the progress by which it passes from one position 
to another, progress which is the movement itself. In our 
actions, which are systematized movements, what we fix 
our mind on is the end or meaning of the movement, its 

T H E  F U N CTION O F  T H E  I N TELLECT 
1 7 1  
design as a whole-in a word, the immobile plan of its 
execution. That which really moves in action interests us 
only so far as the whole can be advanced, retarded, or 
stopped by any incident that may happen on the way. 
From mobility itself our intellect turns aside, because it 
has nothing to gain in dealing with it. If the intellect were 
meant for pure theorizing, it would take its place within 
movement, for movement is reality itself, and immobil­
ity is always only apparent or relative. But the intellect 
is meant for something altogether different. Unless it 
does violence to itself, it takes the opposite course; it al­
ways starts from immobility, as if this were the ultimate 
reality : when it tries to form an idea of movement, it 
does so by constructing movement out of immobilities 
put together. This operation, whose illegitimacy and 
danger in the field of speculation we shall show later on 
(it leads to deadlocks, and creates artificially insoluble 
philosophical problems) ,  is easily justified when we ref"er 
it to its proper goal. Intelligence, in its natural state, 
aims at a practically useful end. When it substitutes for 
movement immobilities put together, it does not pretend 
to reconstitute the movement such as it actually is; it 
merely replaces it with a practical equivalent. It is the 
philosophers who are mistaken when they import into 
the domain of speculation a method of thinking which is 
made for action. But of this more anon. Suffice it now to 
say that to the stable and unchangeable our intellect is 
attached by virtue of its natural disposition. Of immobil­
ity alone does the intellect form a clear idea. 
Now, fabricating consists in carving out the form of 
an object in matter. What is the most important is the 
form to be obtained. As to the matter, we choose that 

CREATIVE EVOL U T I O N  
which i s  most convenient ; but, i n  order t o  choose it, that 
is to say, in order to go and seek it among many others, 
we must have tried , in imagination at least, to endow 
every kind of matter with the form of the objઌct con­
ceived. In other \vords, an intelligence which :tims at fab­
ricating is an intelligence which never stops at the actual 
form of things nor regards it as final, but, on the con­
trary, looks upon all matter as if it were carvablc at will. 
Plato compares the good dialectician to tll<' skil ful cook 
who carves the animal without breaking its bones, by 
following the ?.rticulations marked out by nature.1 An 
intelligence which always proceeded thus would really be 
an intelligence turned toward speculation. But action, 
and in particular fabrication, requires the opposite men­
tal tendency : it makes us consider every actual form of 
things, even the form of natural things, as artificial ખnd 
provisional ; it makes our thought efface from the object 
perceived, even though organized and living, the lines 
Lhat outwardly mark its inward structure ; in short, it 
makes us regard its matter as indifferent to its form. The 
whole of matter is made to appear to our thought as an 
immense piece of cloth in which we can cut out what we 
will and sew it together again as we please. Let us note, 
in passing, that it is this power that we affirm when we 
say that there iગ a space, that is to say, a homogeneous 
and empty medium, infinite and infinitely divisible, lend­
ing itself indiiferently to any mode of decomposition 
whatsoever. A medium of this kind is never perceived ; it 
is only conceived. What is perceived is extension colored, 
resistant, divided according to the lines which mark out 
the boundaries of real bodies or of their real elements. 
1 Plato, Thaedms, 265 E. 

T H E  F U N C T I O N  O F  T H E  I N TELLECT 
1 73 
But when we think of our power over this matter, that is 
to say, of our faculty of decomposing and recomposing it 
as we please, we project the whole of these possible de­
compositions and recompositions behind real extension 
in the form of a homogeneous space, empty and indiffer­
ent, which is supposed to underlie it. This space is there­
fore, pre-eminently, the plan of our possible action on 
things, although, indeed, things have a natural tendency, 
as we shall explain further on, to enter into a frame of 
this kind. It is a view taken by mind. The animal has 
probably no idea of it, even when, like us, it prrceives ex­
tended things. It is an idea that symbolizes the tendency 
of the human intellect to fabrkation. But this point must 
not detain us now. Suffice it to say that the intellect is 
characterized by the unlimitr:d power of decomposing ac­
cording to any law and of recomposing into any system. 
We have now enumerat ed a few of the essential fea­
tures of human intellbઍnce. But we have hitherto con­
sidered the individual in isolation, without taking ac­
count of social lif c .  In reality, man is a being who lives in 
society. If it be true that the human intellect .1ims at fab­
rication, we must add that, for that as well as for other 
purposes, it is associated with other intellects. Now, it is 
difficult to imagine a society whose members do not com­
municate by signs. Insect societies probably have a lan­
guage, and this language must be adapted, like that of 
man, to the necessities of life in common. By language 
community of action is made possible. But the require­
ments of joint action are not at all the same in a colony of 
ants and in a human society. In insect societies there is 
generally polymorphism, the subdivision of labor is natu­
ral, and each individual is riveted by its structure to the 

1 74 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
function it performs. In any case, these societies are 
based on instinct, and consequently on certain actions or 
fabrications that are more or less dependent on the form 
of the organs. So if the ants, for instance, have a lan­
guage, the signs which compose it must be very limited 
in number, and each of them, once the species is formed, 
must remain invariably attached to a certain object or a 
certain operation : the sign is adherent to the thing sig­
nified. In human society, on the contrary, fabrication 
and action are of variable form, and, moreover, each in­
dividual must learn his part, because he is not preor­
dained to it by his structure. So a language is required 
which makes it possible to be always passing from what 
is known to what is yet to be known. There must be a 
language whose signs-which cannot be infinite in num­
ber-are extensible to an infinity of things. This tend­
ency of the sign to transfer itself from one object to 
another is characteristic of human language. It is ob­
servable in the little child as soon as he begins to speak. 
Immediately and naturally he extends the meaning of 
the words he learns, availing himself of the most acci­
dental connection or the most distant analogy to detach 
and transfer elsewhere the sign that had been associated 
in his hearing with a particular object. "Anything can 
designate anything"; such is the latent principle of in­
fan tine language. This tendency has been wrongly con­
fused with the faculty of generalizing. The animals 
themselves generalize ; and, moreover, a sign--even an 
instinctive sign-always to some degree represents a 
genus. But what characterizes the signs of human lan­
guage is not so much their generality as their mobility. 

T H E  F U N CTION O F  T H E  I N T ELLECT 
1 7 5  
The instinctive sign is adherent, the intelligent sign is 
mobile. 
Now, this mobility of words, that makes them able to 
pass from one thing to another, has enabled them to be 
extended from things to ideas. Certainly, language would 
not have given the faculty of reflecting to an intelligence 
entirely externalized and incapable of turning home­
ward. An intelligence which reflects is one that originally 
had a surplus of energy to spend, over and above prac­
tically useful efforts. It is a consciousness that has vir­
tually reconquered itself. llut t>till the virtual has to be­
come actual. Without language, intelligence would prob­
ably have remained riveted to the material objects which 
it was interested in considering. It would have lived in a 
state of somnambulism, outside itself, hypnotized on its 
own work. Language has greatly contributed to its liber­
ation. The word, made to pass from one thing to another, 
is, in fact, by nature transferable and free. It can there­
fore be extended, not only from one perceived thing to 
another, but even from a perceived thing to a recollection 
of that thing, from the precise recollection to a more 
fleeting image, and finally from an image fleeting, 
though still pictured, to the picturing of the act by which 
the image is pictured, that is to say, to the idea. Thus is 
revealed to the intelligence, hitherto always turned out­
wards, a whole internal world-the spectacle of its own 
workings. It required only this opportunity, at length of­
fered by language. It profits by the fact that the word is 
an external thing, which the intelligence can catch hold 
of and cling to, and at the same time an immaterial thing, 
by means of which the intelligence can penetrate even to 

J 76 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
the inwardness of its own work. Its first business was in­
deed to make instruments, but this fabrication is pos­
sible only by the employment of certain means which are 
not cut to the exact measure of their object, but go be­
yond it and thus allow intelligence a supplementary­
that is to say disinterested work. From the moment that 
the intellect, reflecting upon its own doings, perceives it­
self as a creator of ideas, as a faculty of representation 
in general, there is no object of which it may not wish to 
have the idea, even though that object be without direct 
relation to practical action. That is why we said there are 
things that intellect alone can seek. Intellect alone, in­
deed, troubles itself about theory ; and its theory would 
fain embrace everything-not only inanimate matter, 
over which it has a natural hold, but even life and 
thought. 
By what means, what instruments, in short by what 
method it will approach these problems, we can easily 
guess. Originally, it was fashioned to the form of matter. 
Language itself, which has enabled it to extend its field 
of operations, is made to designate things, and nought 
but things : it is only because the word is mobile, because 
it flies from one thing to another, that the intellect was 
sure to take it, sooner or later, on the wing, while it was 
not settled on anything, and apply it to an object which is 
not a thing and which, concealed till then, awaited the 
coming of the word to pass from darkness to light. But 
the word, by covering up this object, again converts it 
into a thing. So intelligence, even when it no longer oper­
ates upon its own object, follows habits it has contracted 
in that operation : it applies forms that are indeed those 
of unorganized matter. It is made for this kind of work. 

T H E  
F U N C T I O N  
O F  T H E  I N T E L L E C T  
!77 
With this kind of work alone is it fully satisfied. And that 
is what intelligence expresses by saying that thus only it 
arrives at distinctness and clearness. 
It must, therefore, in order to think itself clearly and 
distinctly, perceive itself under the form of discontinuity. 
Concepts, in fact, are outside each other, like objects in 
space; and they have the same stability as such objects, 
on which they have been modeled. Taken together, they 
constitute an "intelligible world," that resembles the 
world of solids in its essential characters, but whose ele­
ments are lighter, more diaphanous, easier for the intel­
lect to deal with than the image of concrete things : they 
are not, indeed, the perception itself of things, but the 
representation of the act by which the intellect is fixed on 
them. They are, therefore, not im:1ges, but symbols. 
Our logic is the complete set of rules that must be fol­
lowed in using symbols. As these symbols are derived 
from the consideration of solids, as the rules for combin­
ing these symbols hardly do more than express the most 
general relations among solids, our logic triumphs in that 
science which takes the solidity of bodies for its object, 
that is, in geometry. Logic and geometry engender each 
other, as we shall see a little further on. It is from the 
extension of a certain natural geometry, suggested by the 
most general and immediately perceived properties of 
solids, that natural logic has arisen ; then from this natu­
ral logic, in its turn, has sprung scientific geometry, 
which extends further and further the knowledge of the 
external properties of solids.1 Geometry and logic are 
strictly applicable to matter; in it they are at home, and 
in it they can proceed quite alone. But, outside this do-
l We shall return to these points in the next chapter. 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
main, pure reasoning needs to be supervised by common 
sense, which is an altogether different thing. 
Thus, all the elementary forces of the intellect tend to 
transform matter into an instrument of action, that is, in 
the etymological sense of the word, into an organ. Life, 
not content with producing organisms, would fain give 
them as an appendage inorganic matter itself, converted 
into an immense organ by the industry of the living be­
ing. Such is the initial task it assigns to intelligence. That 
is why the intellect always behaves as if it were fasci­
nated by the contemplation of inert matter. It is life 
looking outward, putting itself outside itself, adopting 
the ways of unorganized nature in principle, in order to 
direct them in fact. Hence its bewilderment when it turns 
to the living and is confronted with organization. It does 
what it can, it resolves the organized into the unorgan­
ized, for it cannot, without reversing its natural direction 
and twisting about on itself, think true continuity, real 
mobility, reciprocal penetration-in a word, that crea­
tive evolution which is 1i fe. 
Consider continuity. The aspect of life that is acces­
sible to our intellect-as indeed to our senses, of which 
our intellect is the extension-is that which offers a hold 
to our action. Now, to modify an object, we have to per­
ceive it as divisible and discontinuous. From the point of 
view of positive science, an incomparable progress was 
realized when the organized tissues were resolved into 
cells. The study of the cell, in its turn, has shown it to be 
an organism whose complexity seems to grow, the more 
thoroughly it is examined. The more science advances, 
the more it sees the number grow of heterogeneous ele­
ments which are placed together, outside each other, to 

THE F U N C TION O F  THE I N TELLECT 
1 79 
make up a living being. Does science thus get any nearer 
to life? Does it not, on the contrary, find that what is 
really life in the living seems to recede with every step by 
which it pushes further the detail of the parts combined? 
There is indeed already among scientists a tendency to 
regard the substance of the organism as continuous, and 
the cell as an artificial entity.1 But, supposing this view 
were finally to prevail, it could only lead, on deeper 
study, to some other mode of analyzing of the living be­
ing, and so to a new discontinuity-although less re­
moved, perhaps, from the real continuity of life. The 
truth is that this continuity cannot be thought by the in­
tellect while it follows its natural movement. It implies 
at once the multiplicity of elements and the interpenetra­
tion of all by all, two conditions that can hardly be recon­
ciled in the field in which our industry, and consequently 
our intellect, is engaged. 
Just as we separate in space, we fix in time. The intel­
lect is not made to think evolution, in the proper sense of 
the word-that is to say, the continuity of a change that 
is pure mobility. We shall not dwell here on this point, 
which we propose to study in a special chapter. Suffice it 
to say that the intellect represents becominf!. as a series 
of states, each of which is homogeneous with itself and 
consequently does not change. Is our attention called td 
the internal change of one of these states? At once we de­
compose it into another series of states which, reunited, 
will be supposed to make up this internal modification. 
Each of these new states must be invariable, or else their 
internal change, if we are forced to notice it, must be re­
solved again into a fresh series of invariable states, and 
1 We shall return to this point in chapter iii., p. 283. 

180 
C R E A T I VE 
E VOL U T I O N 
so on to infinity. Here again, thinking consists in recon­
stituting, and, naturally, it is with given clements, and 
consequently with stable elements, that we reconstitute. 
So that, though we may do our best to imitate the mobil­
ity of becoming by an addition that is ever going on, be­
coming itself slips through our fingers just when we think 
we are holding it tight. 
Precisely because it is always trying to reconstitute, 
and to reconstitute with what is given, the intellect lets 
what is new in each moment of a history escape. It does 
not admit the unforeseeable. It rejects all creation. That 
definite antecedents bring forth a defmite consequent, 
calculable as a function of them, is what satisfies our in­
tellect. That a definite end calls forth defmite means to 
attain it, is what we also understand. In both cases we 
have to do with the known which is combined with the 
known, in short, with the old which is repeated. Our in­
tellect is there at its ease ; and, whatever be the object, it 
will abstract, separatf', eliminate, so as to substitute for 
the object itself, if necessary, an approximate equivalent 
in which things will happen in this way. But that each 
instant is a fresh endowment, that the new is ever up­
springing, that the form just come into existence ( al­
though, when once produced, it may be regarded as an 
effect determined by its causes) could never have been 
foreseen-because the causes here, unique in their kind, 
are part of the effect, have come into existence with it, 
and are determined by it as much as they determine it­
all this we can feel within ourselves and also divine, by 
sympathy, outside ourselves, but we cannot think it, in 
the strict sense of the word, nor express it in terms of 
pure understanding. No wonder at that: we must re-

THE F U N CTION O F  THE I N TELLECT 
181 
member what our intellect is meant for. The causality it 
seeks and finds everywhere expresses the very mecha .. 
nism of our industry, in which we go on recomposing the 
same whole with the same parts, repeating the same 
movements to obtain the same result. The finality it un· 
derstands best is the finality of our industry, in which we 
work on a model given in advance, that is to say, old or 
composed of elements already known. As to invention 
properly so called, which is, however, the point of de·· 
parture of industry itself, our intellect does not succeed 
in grasping it in its upspringing, that is to say, in its inં 
divisibility, nor in its fervor, that is to say, in its creative· 
ness. Explaining it always consists in resolving it, it the 
unforeseeable and new, into elements old or known, ar· 
ranged in a different order. The intellect can no more ad· 
mit complete novelty than real becoming ; that is to say1• 
here again it lets an essential aspect of life escape, as if it 
were not intended to think such an object. 
All our analyses bring us to this conclusion. But it is 
hardly necessary to go into such long details concerning 
the mechanism of intellectual working ; it is enough to 
consider the results. We see that the intellect, so skilfu1 
in dealing with the inert, is awkward the moment it 
touches the living. Whether it wants to treat the life of 
the body or the life of the mind, it proceeds with the 
rigor, the stiffness and the brutality of an instrument not 
designed for such use. The history of hygiene or of pedaઃ 
gogy teaches us much in this matter. When we think of 
the cardinal, urgent and constant need we have to pre઄ 
serve our bodies and to raise our souls, of the special 
facilities given to each of us, in this field, to experiment 
continually on ourselves and on others, of the palpable 

CREATIVE 
EVOLUTION 
injury by which the wrongness of a medical or pedagogi­
cal practice is both made manifest and punished at once, 
we are amazed at the stupidity and especially at the per­
sistence of errors. We may easily find their origin in the 
natural obstinacy with which we treat the living like the 
lifeless and think all reality, however fluid, under the 
form of the sharply defined solid. We are at ease only in 
the discontinuous, in the immobile, in the dead. The in­
tellect is characterized by a natural inability to compre­
hend life. 
Instinct, on the contrary, is molded on the very form 
of life. While intelligence treats everything mechanically, 
instinct proceeds, so to speak, organically. If the con­
sciousness that slumbers in it should awake, if it were 
wound up into knowledge instead of being wound off into 
action, if we could ask and it could reply, it would give 
up to us the most intimate secrets of life. For it only car­
ries out further the work by which life organizes matter 
-so that we cannot say, as has often been shown, where 
organization ends and where instinct begins. When the 
little chick is breaking its shell with a peck of its beak, 
it is acting by instinct, and yet if does but carry on the 
movement which has borne it through embryonic life. 
Inversely, in the course of embryonic life itself ( espe­
cially when the embryo lfves freely in fhe form of a 
larva) ,  many of the acts accomplished must be referred 
to instinct. The most essential of the primary instincts 
are really, therefore, vital processes. The potential con­
sciousness that accompanies them is generally actualized 
only at the outset of the act, and leaves the rest of the 
process to go on by itself. It would only have to expand 

T H E  NATURE O F  I N S T I N C T  
1 83 
more widely, and then dive into its own depth com­
pletely, to be one with the generative force of life. 
When we see in a living body thousands of cells work­
ing together to a common end, dividing the task between 
them, living each for itself at the same time as for the 
others, preserving itself, feeding itself, reproducing it­
self, responding to the menace of danger by appropriate 
defensive reactions, how can we help thinking of so many 
instincts ? And yet these are the natural functions of the 
cell, the constitutive elements of its vitality. On the other 
hand, when we see the bees of a hive forming a system so 
strictly organized that no individual can live apart from 
the others beyond a certain time, even though furnished 
with food and shelter, how can we lwlp recognizing that 
the hive is really, and not metaphorically, a single organ­
ism, of which each bee is a cell united to the others by in­
visible bonds? The instinct that animates the bee is in­
distinguishable, then, from the force that animates the 
cell, or is only a prolongation of that force. In extreme 
cases like this, instinct coincides with the work of organi­
zation. 
Of course there are degrees of perfection in the same 
instinct. Between the humble-bee, and the honey-bee, 
for instance; the distance is great ; and we pass from one 
to the other through a great number of intermediaries, 
which correspond to so many complications of the social 
life. But the same diversity is found in the functioning of 
histological elements belonging to different tissues more 
or less akin. In both cases there are manifold variations 
on one and the same theme. The constancy of the theme 
is manifest, however, and the variations only fit it to the 
diversity of the circumstances. 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
Now, in both cases, in the instinct of the animal and 
in the vital properties of the cell, the same knowledge 
and the same ignorance are shown. All goes on as if the 
cell knew, of the other cells, what concerns itself ; as i f  
the animal knew, o f  the other animals, what i t  can utilize 
-all else remaining in shade. It seems as if life, as soon 
as it has become bound up in a species, is cut off from the 
rest of its own work, save at one or two points that are of 
vital concern to the species just arisen. Is it not plain 
that life goes to work here exactly like consciousness, ex­
actly like memory? We trail behind us, unawares, the 
whole of our past ; but our memory pours into the pres­
ent only the odd recollection or two that in some way 
complete our present situation. Thus the instinctive 
knowledge which one species possesses of another on a 
certain particular point has its root in the very unity of 
life, which is, to use the expression of an ancient philoso­
pher, a "whole sympathetic to itself." It is impossible to 
consider some of the special instincts of the animal and 
of the plant, evidently arisen in extraordinary circum­
stances, without relating them to those recollections, 
seemingly forgotten, which spring up suddenly under the 
pressure of an urgent need. 
No doubt many secondary instincts, and also many 
varieties of primary instinct, admit of a scientific expla­
nation. Yet it is doubtful whether science, with its pres­
ent methods of explanation, will ever succeed in ana­
lyzing instinct completely. The reason is that instinct 
and intelligence arc two divergent developments of one 
and the same principle, which in the one case remains 
within itself, in the other steps out of itself and becomes 
absorbed in the utilization of inert matter. This gradual 

T H E  NATURE 
O F  I N S T I N C T  
185 
divergence testifies to a radical incompatibility, and 
points to the fact that it is impossible for intelligence to 
re-absorb instinct. That which is instinctive in instinct 
cannot be expressed in terms of intelligence, nor, conse­
quently, can it be analyzed. 
A man born blind, who had lived among others born 
blind, could not be made to believe in the possibility of 
perceiving a distant object without first perceiving all 
the objects in between. Yet vision performs this miracle. 
In a certain sense the blind man is right, since vision, 
having its origin in the stim ulation of the retina, by the 
vibrations of the light, is nothinϤ rise, in fact, but a reti­
nal touch. Such is indeed the scientific explanation, for 
the function of science is just to cxpress all perceptions 
in terms of touch. But we hઅwe shown elsewhere that the 
philosophical explanation of perception ( i f  it may still be 
called an explanation) mt:st be of another kincU Now 
instinct also is a knowledge at a distance. It has the same 
relation to intelligence that vision has to touch. Sciઆnce 
cannot do otherwise than express it in terms of intelli­
gence; but in so doing it constructs an imitation of in­
stinct rather than penetrates within it. 
Anyone can convince himself of this by studying the 
ingenious theories of evolutionist biology. They may be 
reduced to two types, which are often intermingled. One 
type, following the principles of neo-Darwinism, regards 
instinct as a sum of accidental differences preserved by 
selection : such and such a useful behavior, naturally 
adopted by the individual in virtue of an accidental pre­
disposition of the germ, has been transmitted from germ 
to germ, waiting for chance to add fresh improvementઇ 
1 Matiere et mimoire, chap. i. 

186 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
to it by the same method. The other type regards instinct 
as lapsed intelligence : the action, found useful by the 
species or by certain of its representatives, is supposed to 
have engendered a habit, which, by hereditary transmis­
sion, has become an instinct. Of these two types of 
theory, the first has the advantage of being able to bring 
in hereditary transmission without raising grave objec­
tion ; for the accidental modification which it places at 
the origin of the instinct is not supposed to have been ac­
quired by the individual, but to have been inherent in the 
germ. But, on the other hand, it is absolutely incapable 
of explaining instincts as sagacious as those of most in­
sects. These instincts surely could not have attained, all 
at once, their present degree of complexity ; they have 
probably evolved ; but, in a hypothesis like that of the 
neo-Darwinians, the evolution of instinct could have 
come to pass only by the progressive addition of new 
pieces which, in some way, by happy accidents, came to 
fit into the old. Now it is evident that, in most cases, in­
"5tinct could not have perfected itself by simple accre­
tion : each new piece really requires, if all is not to be 
spoiled, a complete recasting of the whole. How could 
mere chance work a recasting of the kind ? I agree that 
an accidental modification of the germ may be passed on 
hereditarily, and may somehow wait for fresh accidental 
modifications to come and complicate it. I agree also that 
natural selection may eliminate all those of the more 
complicated forms of instinct that are not fit to survive. 
Still, in order that the life of the instinct may evolve, 
complications fit to survive have to be produced. Now 
they will be produced only if, in certain cases, the addi­
tion of a new element brings about the correlative change 

THE NATURE 
O F  I N S TI N C T 
187 
of all the old elements. No one will maintain that chance 
could perform such a miracle : in one form or another 
we shall appeal to intelligence. We shall suppose that it 
is by an effort, more or less conscious, that the living be­
ing develops a higher instinct. But then we shall have to 
admit that an acquired habit can become hereditary, and 
that it does so regularly enough to ensure an evolution. 
The thing is doubtful, to put it mildly. Even if we could 
refer the instincts of animals to habits intelligently ac­
quired and hereditarily transmitted, it Is not clear how 
this sort of explanation could be extended to tue vege­
table world, where effort is never intelligent, even sup­
posing it is sometimes conscious. And yet, when we see 
with what sureness and precision climbing plants use 
their tendrils, what marvelously combined manreuvres 
the orchids perform to procure their fertilization by 
means of insects, 1 how can we help thinking that these 
are so many instincts ? 
This is not saying that the theory of the neo-Darwin­
ians must be altogether rejected, any more than that of 
the neo-Lamarckians. The firSt are probably right in 
holding that evolution takes place from germ to germ 
rather than from individual to individual ; the second 
are right in saying that at the origin of instinct there is 
a'!l effort (although it is something quite different, we 
believe, from an intelligent effort) .  But the former are 
probably wrong when they make the evolution of in­
stinct an accidental evolution, and the latter when they 
regard the effort from which instinct proceeds as an in­
dividual effort. The effort by which a species modifies its 
1 See the two works of Darwin, Climbing Plants and The Fertiliza­
tion of Orchids by Insects. 

r88 
C R E A T I V E  
E VO L  U1 I O N  
instinct, and modifies itself as well, must be a much 
deeper thing, dependent solely neither on circumstances 
nor on individuals. It is not purely accidental, although 
accident has a large place in it ; and it does not depend 
solely on the initiative of individuals, although individu­
als collaborate in it. 
Compare the different forms of the same instinct in 
different species of hymenoptera. The impression de­
rived is not always that of an increasing complexity 
made of elements that have been added together one 
after the other. Nor docs it suggest the ide<'. of steps up 
a ladder. Rather do we think, in many cases at least, of 
the circumference of a circle, from different points of 
which these different varieties have started, all facing 
the same center, all making an effort in that direction, 
but each approaching it only to the extent of its means, 
and to the extent also to which this central point has been 
illumined for it. In other words, instinct is everywhere 
complete, but it is more or less simplified, and, above all, 
simplified differently. On the other hand, in cases where 
we do get the impression of an ascending scale, as if one 
and the same instinct had gone on complicating itself 
more and more in one direction and along a straight line, 
the species which are thus arranged by their instincts 
into a linear series are by no means always akin. Thus, 
the comparative study, in recent years, of the social in­
stinct in the different apidae proves that the instinct of 
the meliponines is intermediary in complexity between 
the still rudimentary tendency of the humble bees and 
the consummate science of the true bees ; yet there can 
be no kinship between the bees and the meliponines.1 
1 Buttel-Reepen, 
"Die 
phylogenetische 
Entstehung 
des 
Bienen­
sta-ttes" (Biol. C entralblatt, xxiii. r 903 ) ,  p. ro8 in particular. 

T H E  NATURE O F  I N S T I N C T  
I89 
Most likely, the degree of complexity of these different 
societies has nothing to do with any greater or smaller 
number of added elements. We seem rather to be before 
a musical theme, which had first been transposed, the 
theme as a whole, into a certain number of tones, and on 
which, still the whole theme, different variations hacl 
been played, some very simple, others very skilful. As 
to the original theme, it is everywhere and nowhere. It is 
in vain that we try to express it in terms of any idea : it 
must have been, originally, felt rather than thought. We 
get the same impression before the paralyzing instinct 
of certain wasps. We know that the different species of 
hymenoptera that have this paralyzing instinct lay their 
eggs in spiders, beetles or caterpillars, which, having first 
been subjected by the wasp to a skilful surgical opera­
tion, will go on living motionless a certain number of 
days, and thus provide the larvae with fresh meat. In the 
sting which they give to the nerve-centers of their vic­
tim, in order to destroy its power of moving without kill­
ing it, these different species of hymenoptera take into 
account, so to speak, the different species of prey they 
respectively attack. The Scalia, which attacks a larva of 
the rose-beetle, stings it in one point only, but in this 
point the motor ganglia are concentrated, and those gan­
glia alone : the stinging of other ganglia might cause 
death and putrefaction, which it must avoid.1 The: 
yellow-winged Sphex, which has chosen the cricket for 
its victim, knows that the cricket has three nerve-centers 
which serve its three pairs of legs--or at least it acts as 
if it knew this. It stings the insect first under the neck, 
then behind the prothorax, and then where the thoraJt 
1 Fabre, :Wuvenirs entomoloJl,iques, 3° serie, Paris, 1890, pp. I-69. 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
joins the abdomen.1 The Ammophila Hirsuta gives nine 
successive strokes of its sting upon nine nerve-centers of 
its caterpillar, and then seizes the head and squeezes it 
in its mandibles, enough to cause paralysis without 
death.2 The general theme is "the necessity of paralyz­
ing without killing" ;  the variations are subordinated to 
the structure of the victim on which they are played. No 
doubt the operation is not always perfect. It has recently 
been shown that the Ammophila sometimes kills the 
:aterpillar instead of paralyzing it, tl1at sometimes also 
it paralyzes it incompletely.:' But, beGwse inst inct is, 
like intelligence, fallible, because it also :,hows individ­
ual deviations, it does not at all follow t ktt the instinct 
of the Ammophila has been acqt!ired, as has been 
claimed, by tentative intPiliઈent experiments. Even sup­
posing that the Arnmophila has come in course of time 
to recognize, one after another, by tentative experiment, 
the points of its victim which nwࠏ;t be stung to render it 
motionless, and :llso the special treatment that must be 
inflicted on the head to bring about paralysis without 
death, how can we imagine that elemC'nts so special of a 
knowledge so precise have been regularly transmitted, 
one by one, by heredity? If, in all our present experience, 
there were a single indisputable example of a transmis­
sion of this kind, the inheritance of acquired characters 
would be questioned by no one. As a matter of fact, the 
hereditary transmission of a contracted habit is effected 
in an irregular and far from precise manner, supposing 
it is ever really effected at all. 
1 Fabre, Souvenirs entomologiques, lre serie, 3c edition, Paris, 1894, 
pp. 93 ff. 
1 Fabre, Nouveau;,; souvenirs entomologiques, Paris, 1882, pp. 14 ff. 
1 Peckham, Wasps, Solitary and Social, Westminster, 1905, pp. 28 ff. 

T H E  NATURE OF I N STINCT 
191 
But the whole difficulty comes from our desire to ex· 
press the knowledge of the hymenoptera in terms of in­
telligence. It is this that compels us to compare the 
Ammophila with the entomologist, who knows the cater­
pillar as he knows everything else-from the outside, and 
without having on his part a special or vital interest. The 
Ammophila, we imagine, must learn, one by one, like the 
entomologist, the positions of the nerve-centers of the 
caterpillar-must acquire at least the practical knowl­
edge of these positions by trying the effects of its sting. 
But there is no need for such a view if we suppose a sym­
patlzy (in the etymological sense of the word) between 
the Ammophila and its victim, which teaches it from 
within, so to say, concerning the vulnerability of the 
caterpillar. This feeling of vulnerability might owe noth· 
ing to outward perception, but result from the mere pres· 
ence together of the Ammophila and the caterpillar, con· 
sidered no longer as two organisms, but as two activities. 
It would express, in a concrete form, the relation of the 
one to the other. Certainly, a scientific theory cannot ap­
peal to considerations of this kind. It must not put action 
before organization, sympathy before perception and 
knowledge. But, once more, either philosophy has noth­
ing to see here, or its role begins where that of science 
ends. 
Whether it makes instinct a ((compound reflex," or a 
habit formed intelligently that has become automatism, 
or a sum of small accidental advantages accumulated 
and fixed by selection, in every case science claims to 
resolve instinct completely either into intelligent actions, 
or into mechanisms built up piece by piece like those 
combined by our intelligence. I agree indeed that science 

C R E A T I VE 
E V O L U T I O N  
i s  here within its function. I t  gives us, i n  default o f  a real 
analysis of the object, a translation of this object in 
terms of intelligence. But is it not plain that science itself 
invites philosophy to consider things in another way? If 
our biology was still that of Aristotle, if it regarded the 
series of living beings as unilincar, if it showed us the 
whole of life evolving toward intelligence and passing, 
to that end, through sensibility and instinct, we should 
be right, we, the intelligent beings, in turning back to­
ward the earlier and consequently inferior manifesta­
tions of life and in claiming to fit them, witl;out deform­
ing them, into the molds of our understanding. But one 
of the clearest results of biology has been to show that 
evolution has taken place along divergent lines. It is at 
the extremity of two of these lines-the two principal­
that we find intelligence and instinct in forms almost 
pure. Why, then, should instinct be resolvable into in­
telligent elements ? Why, even, into terms ent irely intel­
ligible? Is it not obvious thal to think here of the intelli­
gent, or of the absolutely intelligible, is to go back to the 
Aristotelian theory of nature? No doubt it is better to go 
back to that than to stop short before instinct as before 
an unfathomable mystery. But, though instinct is not 
within the domain of intelligence, it is not situated be­
yond the limits of mind. In the phenomena of feeling, in 
unreflecting sympathy and antipathy, we experience in 
ourselves-though under a much vaguer form, and one 
too much penet:ated with intelligence-something of 
what must happen in the consciousness of an insect act­
ing by instinct. Evolution does but sunder, in order to 
develop them to the end, elements which, at their origin, 
interpenetrated each other. More precisely, intelligence 

T H E  
N A T U R E  O F  I N S T I N C T  
193 
is, before anything else, the faculty of relating one point 
of space to another, one material object to another ; it 
applies to all things, but remains outside them ; and of a 
deep cause it perceives only the effects spread out side 
by side. Whatever be the force that is at work in the 
genesis of the nervous system of the caterpillar, to our 
eyes and our intelligence it is only a juxtaposition of 
nerves and nervous centers. It is t rue that we thus get 
the whole outer effect of it. The Ammophila, no doubt, 
discerns but a very little of that force, just what concerns 
itself ;  but at least it discerns it from within, quite other­
wise than by a proce:;s of knowledge-by an intuition 
(lived rather than rrprrscntrd), which is probably like 
what we call divining sympathy. 
A very signif1cant fact is the :.wing to and fro of scien­
tific theories of instinct, from regarding it as intelligent 
to regarding it as sirPply intelligible, or, shall I say, be­
tween likening it to an btdligence "lapsed" and reduc­
ing it to a pure mechanism.1 Each of these systems of 
explanation triumphs in its criticism of the other, the 
first when it shows us that instinct cannot be a mere re­
flex, the other when it declares that instinct is something 
different from intelligence , even fallen into unconscious­
ness. What can this mean but that they are two symbol­
isms, equally acceptable in certain respects, and, in other 
respects, equally inadequate to their object? The con­
crete explanation, no longer scientific, but metaphysical, 
must be sought along quite another path, not in the di­
rection of intelligence, but in that of "sympathy." 
1 See, in parlirular, among rercnt works, Bcthe, "Diirfcn wir den 
Ameisen und Bicncn psychische Qualitatcn zuschreiben ?" (Arch. f. d. 
ges. Physiolugie, 1898) , and Fore!, "Un Aperͤu de psychologie com­
paree" (A1mee psycllologique, 1895) . 

194 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
Instinct is sympathy. If this sympathy could extend 
its object and also reflect upon itself, it would give us the 
key to vital operations-just as intelligence, developed 
and disciplined, guides us into matter. For-we cannot 
too often repeat it-intelligence and instinct are turned 
in opposite directions, the former toward inert matter, 
the latter toward life. Intelligence, by means of science, 
which is its work, will deliver up to us more and more 
completely the secret of physical operations ; of life it 
brings us, and moreover only claims to bring us, a trans­
lation in terms of inertia. It goes all round life, taking 
from outside the greatest possible number of views of it, 
drawing it into itself instead of entering into it. But it is 
to the very inwardness of life that intuition leads us-by 
intuition I mean instinct that has become disinterested, 
self-conscious, capable of reflecting upon its object and 
of enlarging it indefinitely. 
That an effort of this kind is not impossible, is proved 
by the existence in man of an aesthetic faculty along 
with normal perception. Our eye perceives the features 
of the living being, merely as assembled, not as mutually 
organized. The intention of life, the simple movement 
that runs through the lines, that binds them together and 
gives them significance, escapes it. This intention is just 
what the artist tries to regain, in placing himself back 
within the object by a kind of sympathy, in breaking 
down, by an effort of intuition, the barrier that space 
puts up between him and his model. It is true that this 
ઉesthetic intuition, like external perception, only attains 
the individual. B ut we can conceive an inquiry turned 
in the same direction as art, which would take life in gen­
eral for its object, just as physical science, in following 

LIFE 
AND C O N S CIOU S N E S S  
195 
to the end the direction pointed out by external percep­
tion, prolongs the individual facts into general laws. No 
doubt this philosophy will never obtain a knowledge of 
its object comparable to that which science has of its 
own. Intelligence remains the luminous nucleus around 
which instinct, even enlarged and purified into intuition, 
forms only a vague nebulosity. But, in default of know!, 
edge properly so called, reserved to pure intelligence, in­
tuition may enable us to grasp what it is that intelligence 
fails to give us, and indicate the means of supplementing 
it. On the one hand, it will utilize the mechanism of intel­
ligence itself to show how intellectual molds cease to be 
strictly applicable ; and on the other hand, by its own 
work, it will suggest to us the vague feeling, if nothing 
more, of what must take the place of intellectual molds. 
Thus, intuition may bring the intellect to recognize that' 
life does not quite go into the category of the many nor 
yet into that of the one ; that neither mechanical causal­
ity nor finality can give a sufficient interpretation of the 
vital process. Then, by the sympathetic communication 
which it establishes between us and the rest of the living, 
by the expansion of our consciousness which it brings 
about, it introduces us into life's own domain, which is, 
reciprocal interpenetration, endlessly continued crea­
tion. But, though it thereby transcends intelligence, it is1 
from intelligence that has come the push that has made 
it rise to the point it has reached. Witnout intelligence, it 
would have remained in the form of instinct, riveted to 
the special object of its practical interest, and 
-turned/ 
outward by it into movements of locomotion. 
How theory of knowledge must take account of these 
two faculties, intellect and intuition, and how also, for 

C R E A T I V E  
E V O L U T I O N  
want of establishing a sufficiently clear distinction be­
tween them, it becomes involved in inextricable difficul­
ties, creating phantoms of ideas to which there cling 
phantoms of problems, we shall endeavor to show a little 
further on. We shall sec that the problem of knowledge, 
from this point of view, is one with the metaphysical 
problem, and that both one and the other depend upon 
experience. On the one hand, indeed, if intelligence is 
charged with matter and instinct with life, we must 
squeeze them both in order to get the double essence 
from them ; metaphysics is therefore dcpendrnt upon 
theory of knowledge. B ut, on the other hand, if con­
sciousness has thus split up into intuition and intelli­
gence, it is because of the need it had to apply itself to 
matter at the same time as it had to follow the stream of 
life. The double form of consciousness is then due to the 
double form of the real, and theory of knowledge must 
be dependent upon metaphysics. In fact, each of these 
two lines of thought lead.-; to the other ; they form a cir­
cle, and there can be no other center to the circle but the 
empirical study of evolution, It is only in seeing con­
sciousness run through matter, lose itself there and find 
itself there again, divide and reconstitute itself, that we 
shall form an idea of the mutual opposition of the two 
terms, as also, perhaps, of their common origin. But, on 
the other hand, by dwelling on this opposition of the two 
elements and on this identity of origin, perhaps we shall 
bring out more clearly the meaning of evolution itself. 
Such will be the aim of our next chapter. But the facts 
that we have just noticed must have already suggested 
to us the idea that life is connected either with conscious­
ness or with something that resembles it. 

L I FE A N D  C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
197 
Throughout the whole extent of the animal kingdom, 
we have said, consciousness seems proportionate to the 
living being's power of choice. It' lights up the zone of 
potentialities that surrounds the act. It fills the interval 
between what is done and what might be done. Looked 
at from without, we may regard it as a simple aid to ac­
tion, a light that action kindles, a momentary spark flyઊ 
ing up from the friction of real action against possible 
actions. But we must also point out that things would go 
on in just the same way if consciousness, instead of be­
ing the effect, were the cause. We might suppose that 
consciousness, even in the most rudimentary animal, 
covers by right an enormous field, but is compressed in 
fact in a kind of vise : each advance of the nervous cen­
ters, by giving the organism a choice between a larger 
number of actions, calls forth the potentialities that are 
capable of surrounding the real, thus opening the vise 
wider and allowing consciousness to pass more freely. In 
this second hypothesis, as in the first, consciousness is 
still the instrument of action ; but it is even more true to 
say that ac-ti<m-
iઋ-th-e Instrument of consciousness ; for 
the complicating of action with action, and the oppos­
ing of action to action, are for the imprisoned conscious­
ness the only possible means to set itself free. How, then, 
shall we choose between the two hypotheses? If the first 
is true, consciousness must express exactly, at each in­
stant, the state of the brain ; there is strict parallelism 
(so far as intelligible) between the psychical and the 
cerebral state. On the second hypothesis, on the con­
trary, there is indeed solidarity and interdependence be­
tween the brain and consciousness, but not parallelism : 
the more complicated the brain becomes, thus giving the. 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
organism greater choice of possible actions, the more 
does consciousness outrun its physical concomitant. 
Thus, the recollection of the same spectacle probably 
modifies in the same way a dog's brain and a man's brain, 
if the perception has been the same ; yet the recollection 
must be very different in the man's consciousness from 
what it is in the dog's. In the dog, the recollection re­
mains the captive of perception ; it is brought back to 
consciousness only when an analogous perception recalls 
it by reproducing the same spectacle, and then it is mani­
fested by the recognition, acted rather than thought, of 
the present perception much more than by an actual re­
appearance of the recollection itself. Man, on the con­
trary, is capable of calling up the recoliection at will, at 
any moment, independently of the present perception. 
He is not limited to playinr.: his past life again ; he repre­
sents and dreams it. The local modification of the brain 
to which the recollection is attached being the same in 
each case, the psychological difference between the two 
recollections cannot have its ground in a particular dif­
ference of detail between the two cerebral mechanisms, 
but in the difference between the two brains taken each 
as a whole. The more complex of the two, in putting a 
greater number of mechanisms in opposition to one an­
other, has enabled consciousness to disengage itself from 
the restraint of or:e and all and to reach independence. 
That things do happen in this way, that the second of 
the two hypotheses is that which must be chosen, is what 
we have tried to prove, in a former work, by the study of 
facts that best bring into relief the relation of the con­
scious state to the cerebral state, the facts of normal and 
pathological recognition, in particular the forms of 

LIFE AND C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
199 
aphasia.1 But it could have been proved by pure reason­
ing, before even it was evidenced by facts. We have 
shown on what self-contradictory postulate, on what 
confusion of two mutually incompatible symbolisms, the 
hypothesis of equivalence between the cerebral state and 
the psychic state rests.2 
The evolution of life, looked at from this point, re­
ceives a clearer meaning, although it cannot be sub­
sumed under any actual idea. It is as if a broad current 
of consciousness had penetrated matter, loaded, as all 
consciousness is, with an enormous multiplicity of inter­
woven potentialities. It has carried matter along to or­
ganization, but its movement has been at once infmitely 
retarded and infinitely divided. On the one hand, indeed, 
consciousness has had to fall asleep, like the chrysalis in 
the envelope in which it is preparing for itself wings ; 
and, on the other hand, the manifold tendencies it con­
tained have been distributed among divergent series of 
organisms which, moreover, express these tendencies 
outwardly in movements rather than internally in repre­
sentations. In the course of this evolution, while some be­
ings have fallen more and more asleep, others have more 
and more completely awakened, and the torpor of some 
has served the activity of others. But the waking could 
be effected in two different ways. Life, that is to say con· 
sciousness launched into matter, fixed its attention 
either on its own movement or on the matter it was pass­
ing through; and it has thus been turned either in the 
direction of intuition or in that of intellect. Intuition, at 
1 M  atiere et mimoire, chaps. ii. and iii. 
1 "Le Paralogisme psycho-pbysiologique" (Revue de metaphysique, 
Nov. ICJ04) . 

200 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
first sight, seems far preferable to intellect, since in it 
life and consciousness remain within themselves. But a 
glance at the evolution of living beings shows us that in­
tuition could not go very far. On the side of intuition, 
consciousness found itself so restricted by its envelope 
that intuition had to shrink into instinct, that is, to em­
brace only the very small portion of life that interested 
it; and this it embraces only in the dark, touching it 
while hardly seeing it. On this side, the horizon was soon 
shut out. On the contrary, consciousness, in shaping it­
self into intelligence, that is to say in concentrating itself 
at first on matter, seems to externalize itself in relation 
to itself ;  but, just because it adapts itself thereby to ob­
jects from without, it succeeds in moving among them 
and in evading the barriers they oppose to it, thus open­
ing to itself an unlimited field. Once freed, moreover, it 
can turn inwards on itself, and awaken the potentialities 
of intuition which still slumber within it. 
From this point of view, not only does consciousness 
appear as the motive principle of evolution, but also, 
among conscious beings themselves, man comes to oc­
cupy a privileged place. Between him and the animals 
the difference is no longer one of degree, but of kind. We 
shall show how this conclusion is arrived at in our next 
chapter. Let us now show how the preceding analyses 
suggest it. 
A noteworthy fact is the extraordinary disproportion 
between the consequences of an invention and the inven­
tion itself. We have said that intelligence is modeled on 
matter and that it aims in the first place at fabrication. 
But does it fabricate in order to fabricate or does it not 
pursue involuntarily, and even unconsciously, something 

LIFE A N D  C O N S CIOUSNESS 
20I 
entirely different ?  Fabricating consists in shaping mat­
ter, in making it supple and in bending it, in converting 
it into an instrument in order to become master of it. It 
is this mastery that profits humanity, much more even 
than the material result of the invention itself. Though 
we derive an immediate advantage from the thing made, 
as an intelligent animal might do, and though this advan­
tage be all the inventor sought, it is a slight matter com­
pared with the new ideas and new feelings that the in­
vention may give rise to in every direction, as if the es­
sential part of the effect were to raise us above ourselves 
and enlarge our horizon. Between the effect and the 
cause the disproportion is so great that it is difficult to 
regard the cause as producer of its effect. It releases it, 
whilst settling, indeed, its direction. Everything happens 
as though the grip of intelligence on matter were, in its 
main intention, to let something pass that matter is hold­
ing back. 
The same impression . arises when we compare the 
brain of man with that of the animals. The difference at 
first appears to be only a difference of size and complex­
ity. But, judging by function, there must be something 
else besides. In the animal, the motor mechanisms that 
the brain succeeds in setting up, or, in other words, the 
habits contracted voluntarily, have no other object nor 
effect than the accomplishment of the movements 
marked out in these habits, stored in these mechanisms. 
But, in man, the motor habit may have a second result, 
out of proportion to the first : it can hold other motor 
habits in check, and thereby, in overcoming automatism, 
set consciousness free. We know what vast regions in the 
human brain language occupies. The cerebral mecha-

202 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
nisms that correspond to the words have this in particu­
lar, that they can be made to grapple with other mecha­
nisms, those, for instance, that correspond to the things 
themselves, or even be made to grapple with one another 
Meanwhile consciousness, 
which would have been 
dragged down and drowned in the accomplishment of the 
act, is restored and set free.1 
The difference must therefore be more radical than a 
superficial examination would lead us to suppose. It is 
the difference between a mechanism which engages the 
attention and a mechanism from which it can be di­
verted. The primitive steam engine, as Newcomen con­
ceived it, required the presence of a person exclusively 
employed to turn on and off the taps, either to let the 
steam into the cylinder or to throw the cold spray into it 
in order to condense the steam. It is said that a boy em­
ployed on this work, and very tired of having to do it, got 
the idea of tying the handles of the taps, with cords, to 
the beam of the engine. Then the machine opened and 
closed the taps itself ;  it worked all alone. Now, if an ob­
server had compared the structure of this second ma­
chine with that of the first without taking into account 
the two boys left to watch over them, he would have 
found only a slight difference of complexity. That is, in­
deed, all we can perceive when we look only at the ma­
chines. But if we cast a glance at the two boys, we shall 
see that whilst one is wholly taken up by the watching, 
1 A geologist whom we have already had occasion to cite, N. S. Shaler, 
well says that "when we come to man, it seems as if we find the an­
cient subjection of mind to body abolished, and the intellectual parts 
develop with an extraordinary rapidity, the structure of the body re­
maining identical in essentials" (Shaler, The Interpretation of Nature, 
Boston, 1899, p. 187). 

LIFE AND C O N S C I O U S N E S S  
203 
the other is free to go and play as he chooses, and that, 
from this point of view, the difference between the two 
machines is radical, the first holding the attention cap­
tive, the second setting it at liberty. A difference of the 
same kind, we think, would be found between the brain 
of an animal and the human brain. 
If, now, we should wish to express this in terms of 
finality, we should have to say that consciousness, after 
having been obliged, in order to set itself free, to divide 
organization into two complementary parts, vegetables 
on one hand and animals on the other, has sought aD 
issue in the double direction of instinct and of intelli­
gence. It has not found it with instinct, and it has not 
obtained it on the side of intelligence except by a sudden 
leap from the animal to man. So that, in the last analysis, 
man might be considered the reason for the existence of 
the entire organization of life on our planet. But this 
would be only a manner of speaking. There is, in reality: 
only a current of existence and the opposing current; 
thence proceeds the whole evolution of life. We must nov.r 
grasp more closely the opposition of these two currents. 
Perhaps we shall thus discover for them a common 
source. By this we shall also, no doubt, penetrate the 
most obscure regions of metaphysics. However, as the 
two directions we have to follow are clearly marked, in 
intelligence on the one hand, in instinct and intuition on 
the other, we are not afraid of straying. A survey of the 
evolution of life suggests to us a certain conception of 
knowledge, and also a certain metaphysics, which imply 
each other. Once made clear, this metaphysics and this 
critique may throw some light, in their turn, on evolu­
tion as a whole. 

CHAPTER III 
ON THE MEANING OF LIFE-THE ORDER OF NATURE 
AND THE FORM OF INTELLIGENCE 
IN the course of our first chapter we traced a line of de­
marcation between the inorganic and the organized, but 
we pointed out that the division of unorganized matter 
into separate bodies is relative to our senses and to our 
intellect, and that matter, looked at as an undivided 
whole, must be a flux rather than a thing. In this we were 
preparing the way for a reconciliation between the inert 
and the living. · 
On the other side, we have shown in our second chap­
ter that the same opposition is found again between in­
stinct and intelligence, the one turned to certain deter­
minations of life, the other molded on the configuration 
of matter. But instinct and intelligence, we have also 
said, stand out from the same background, which, for 
want of a better name, we may call consciousness in gen­
eral, and which must be coextensive with universal life. 
In this way, we have disclosed the possibility of showing 
the genesis of intelligence in setting out from general 
consciousness, which embraces it. 
We are now, then, to attempt a genesis of intellect at 
the same time as a genesis of material bodies-two en­
terprises that are evidently correlative, if it be true that 
l04 

T H E  M E T H O D  O F  P H ILO S O P H Y  
205 
the main lines of our intellect mark out the general form 
of our action on matter, and that the detail of matter is 
ruled by the requirements of our action. Intellectuality 
and materiality have been constituted, in detail, by re­
ciprocal adaptation. Both are derived from a wider and 
higher form of existence. It is there that we must replace 
them, in order to see them issue forth. 
Such an attempt may appear, at first, more daring 
than the boldest speculations of metaphysicians. It 
claims to go further than psychology, further than cos­
mology, further than traditional metaphysics ; for psy­
chology, cosmology and metaphysics take intelligence, 
in all that is essential to it, as given, instead of, as we now 
propose, engendering it in its form and in its matter. The 
enterprise is in reality much more modest, as we are go­
ing to show. But let us first say how it differs from others. 
To begin with psychology, we are not to believe that 
it engenders intelligence when it follows the progressive 
development of it through the animal series. Compara­
tive psychology teaches us that the more an animal is in­
telligent, the more it tends to reflect on the actions by 
which it makes use of things, and thus to approximate to 
man. But its actions have already by themselves adopted 
the principal lines of human action ; they have made out 
the same general directions in the material world as we 
have ; they depend upon the same objects bound together 
by the same relations ; so that animal intelligence, al· 
though it does not form concepts properly so called, al· 
ready moves in a conceptual atmosphere. Absorbed af 
every instant by the actions it performs and the attitudes 
it must adopt, drawn outward by them and so external­
ized in relation to itself, it no doubt plays rather than 

206 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
thinks its ideas ; this play none the less already corre­
sponds, in the main, to the general plan of human intel­
ligence.1 To explain the intelligence of man by that of 
the animal consists then simply in following the develop­
ment of an embryo of humanity into complete humanity . 
We show how a certain direction has been followed fur­
ther and further by beings more and more intelligent. 
But the moment we admit the direction, intelligence is 
given. 
In a cosmogony like that of Spencer, intelligence is 
taken for granted, as matter also at the same time. We 
are shown matter obeying laws, objects connected with 
objects and facts with facts by constant relations, con­
sciousness receiving the imprint of these relations and 
laws, and thus adopting the general configuration of na­
ture and shaping itself into intellect. But how can we 
fail to see that intelligence is supposed when we admit 
objects and facts? A priori and apart from any hypoth­
esis on the nature of the matter, it is evident that the 
materiality of a body does not stop at the point at which 
we touch it : a body is present wherever its influence is 
felt; its attractive force, to speak only of that, is exerted 
on the sun, on the planets, perhaps on the entire uni­
verse. The more physics advances, the more it effaces the 
individuality of bodies and even of the particles into 
which the scientific imagination began by decomposing 
them : bodies and corpuscles tend to dissolve into a uni­
versal interaction. Our perceptions give us the plan of 
our eventual action on things much more than that of 
things themselves. The outlines we find in objects simply 
1 We have developed this point in Mature et mtmoire, chaps. ii. and 
il., notably pp. 78-So and r69-r86. 

THE M E T H O D  O F  P H ILOSOPHY 
207 
mark what we can attain and modify in them. The lines 
we see traced through matter are just the paths on which 
we are called to move. Outlines and paths have declared 
themselves in the measure and proportion that con­
sciousness has prepared for action on unorganized mat­
ter-that is to say, in the measure and proportion that 
intelligence has been formed. It is doubtful whether ani­
mals built on a different plan-a mollusk or an insect, for 
instance-cut matter up along the same articulations. It 
is not indeed necessary that they should separate it into 
bodies at all. In order to follow the indications of in­
stinct, there is no need to perceive ob jccts, it is enough to 
distinguish properties. Intelligence, on the contrary, 
even in its humblest form, already aims at getting mat­
ter to act on matter. If on one side matter lends itself to 
a division into active and passive bodies, or more simply 
into coexistent and distinct fragments, it is from this side 
that intelligence will regard it ; and the more it busies it­
self with dividing, the more it will spread out in space, in 
the form of extension adjoining extension, a matter that 
undoubtedly itself has a tendency to spatiality, but 
whose parts are yet in a state of reciprocal implication 
and interpenetration. Thus the same movement by which 
the mind is brought to form itself into intellect, that is to 
say, into distinct concepts, brings matter to break itself 
up into objects excluding one another. The more con­
sciousness is intcllcctualizal, the more is matter spatial­
ized. So that the evolutionist philosophy, when it imag­
ines in space a matter cut up on the very lines that our 
action will follow, has given itself in advance, ready 
made, the intelligence of which it claims to show the 
genesis. 

208 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
Metaphysics applies itself to a work of the same kind, 
though subtler and more self-conscious, when it deduces 
a priori the categories of thought. It compresses intel­
lect, reduces it to its quintessence, holds it tight in a prin­
ciple so simple that it can be thought empty : from this 
principle we then draw out what we have virtually put 
into it. In this way we may no doubt show the coherence 
of intelligence, define intellect, give its formula, but we 
do not trace its genesis. An enterprise like that of Fichte, 
although more philosophical than that of Spencer, in 
that it pays more respect to the true order of things, 
hardly leads us any further. Fichte takes thought in a 
concentrated state, and expands it into reality ; Spencer 
starts from external reality, and condenses it into intel­
lect. But, in the one case as in the other, the intellect 
must be taken at the beginning as given--either con­
densed or expanded, grasped in itself by a direct vision 
or perceived by reflection in nature, as in a mirror. 
The agreement of most philosophers on this point 
comes from the fact that they are at one in affirming the 
unity of nature, and in representing this unity under an 
abstract and geometrical form. Between the organized 
and the unorganized they do not see and they will not 
see the cleft. Some start from the inorganic, and, by com­
pounding it with itself, claim to form the living ; others 
place life first, and proceed toward matter by a skilfully 
managed decrescendo ; but, for both, there are only dif­
ferences of degree in nature-degrees of complexity in 
the first hypothesis, of intensity in the second. Once this 
principle is admitted, intelligence becomes as vast as 
reality ; for it is unquestionable that whatever is geomet­
rical in things is entirely accessible to human intelli-

THE M E T H O D  O F  P H ILOSOPHY 
209 
gence, and if the continuity between geometry and the 
rest is perfect, all the rest must indeed be equally intel­
ligible, equally intelligent. Such is the postulate of most 
systems. Anyone can easily be convinced of this by com­
paring doctrines that seem to have no common point, no 
common measure, those of Fichte and Spencer for in­
stance, two names that we happen to have just brought 
together. 
At the root of these speculations, then, there are the 
two convictions correlative and complementary, that na­
ture is one and that the function of intellect is to embrace 
it in its entirety. The faculty of knowing being supposed 
coextensive with the whole of experience, there can no 
longer be any question of engendering it. It is already 
given, and we merely have to use it, as we use our sight 
to take in the horizon. It is true that opinions differ as to 
the value of the result. For some, it is reality itself that 
the intellect embraces ; for others, it is only a phantom. 
But, phantom or reality, what intelligence grasps is 
thought to be all that can be attained. 
Hence the exaggerated confidence of philosophy in the 
powers of the individual mind. Whether it is dogmatic or 
critical, whether it admits the relativity of our knowl­
edge or claims to be established within the absolute, a 
philosophy is generally the work of a philosopher, a sin­
gle and unitary vision of the whole. It is to be taken or 
left. 
More modest, and also alone capable of being com­
pleted and perfected, is the philosophy we advocate. Hu­
man intelligence, as we represent it, is not at all what 
Plato taught in the allegory of the cave. Its function is 
not to look at passing shadows nor yet to turn itself 

2 IO 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
round and contemplate the glaring sun. It has something 
else to do. Harnessed, like yoked oxen, to a heavy task, 
we feel the play of our muscles and joints, the weight of 
the plow and the resistance of the soil. To act and to know 
that we are acting, to come into touch with reality and 
even to live it, but only in the measure in which it con­
cerns the work that is being accomplished and the fur­
row that is being plowed, such is the function of human 
intelligence. Yet a beneficent fluid bathes us, whence we 
draw the very force to labor and to live. From this ocean 
of life, in which we are immersed, we are continually 
drawing something, and we feel that our being, or at 
least the intellect that guides it, has been formed therein 
by a kind of local concentration. Philosophy can only be 
an effort to dissolve again into the Whole. Intelligence, 
reabsorbed into its principle, may thus live back again 
its own genesis. But the enterprise cannot be achieved in 
one stroke ; it is necessarily collective and progressive. 
It consists in an interchange of impressions which, cor­
recting and adding to each other, will end by expanding 
the humanity in us and making us even transcend it. 
But this method has against it the most inveterate 
habits of the mind. It at once suggests the idea of a vi­
cious circle. In vain, we shall be told, you claim to go 
beyond intelligence : how can you do that except by in­
telligence ? All that is clear in your consciousness is in­
telligence. You are inside your own thought ; you cannot 
get out of it. Say, if you like, that the intellect is capable 
of progress, that it will see more and more clearly into a 
greater and greater number of things ; but do not speak 
of engendering it, for it is with your intellect itself that 
you would have to do the work. 

THE METHOD O F  PHILO S O P H Y  
2 I I 
The objection presents itself naturally to the mind. 
But the same reasoning would prove also the impossibil­
ity of acquiring any new habit. It is of the essence of rea­
soning to shut us up in the circle of the given. But action 
breaks the circle. If we had never seen a man swim, we 
might say that swimming is an impossible thing, inas­
much as, to learn to swim, we must begin by holding our­
selves up in the water and, consequently, already know 
how to swim. Reasoning, il! fact, always nails us down 
to the solid ground. But if, quite simply, I throw myself 
into the water without fear, I may keep myself up well 
enough at first by merely struggling, and gradually 
adapt myself to the new environment : I shall thus have 
learnt to swim. So, in theory, there is a kind of absurdity 
in trying to know otherwise than by intelligence ; but if 
the risk be frankly accepted, action will perhaps cut the 
knot that reasoning has tied and will not unloose. 
Besides, the risk will appear to grow less, the more our 
point of view is adopted. We have shown that intellect 
has detached itself from a vastly wider reality, but that 
there has never been a clean cut between the two ; all 
around conceptual thought there remains an indistinct 
fringe which recalls its origin. And further we compared 
the intellect to a solid nucleus formed by means of con­
densation. This nucleus does not differ radically from the 
fluid surrounding it. It can only be reabsorbed in it beJ 
cause it is made of the same substance. He who throws 
himself into the water, having known only the resistance 
of the solid earth, will immediately be drowned if he does 
not struggle against the fluidity of the new environment: 
he must perforce still cling to that solidity, so to speak, 
which even water presents. Only on this condition can he 

2 1 2  
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
get used to the fluid's fluidity. So of our thought, when it 
has decided to make the leap. 
But leap it must, that is, leave its own environment. 
Reason, reasoning on its powers, will never succeed in 
extending them, though the extension would not appear 
at all unreasonable once it were accomplished. Thou­
sands and thousands of variations on the theme of walk­
ing will never yield a rule for swimming: come, enter the 
water, and when you know how to swim, you will under­
stand how the mechanism of swimming is connected with 
that of walking. Swimming is an extension of walking, 
but walking would never have pushed you on to swim­
ming. So you may speculate as intelligently as you will 
on the mechanism of intelligence; you will never, by this 
method, succeed in going beyond it. You may get some­
thing more complex, but not something higher nor even 
something different. You must take things by storm : you 
must thrust intelligence outside itself by an act of will. 
So the vicious circle is only apparent. It is, on the con­
trary, real, we think, in every other method of philoso­
phy. This we must try to show in a few words, if only to 
prove that philosophy cannot and must not accept the re­
lation established by pure intellectualism Detween the 
theory of knowledge and the theory of the known, be­
tween metaphysics and science. 
At first sight, it may seem prudent to leave the consid­
eration of facts to positive science, to let physics and 
chemistry busy themselves with matter, the biological 
and psychological sciences with life. The task of the phi­
losopher is then clearly defined. He takes facts and laws 
from the scientists' hand; and whether he tries to go be-

S CI E N C E  A N D  P H IL O S O P H Y  
2 IJ 
yond them in order to reach their deeper causes, or 
whether he thinks it impossible to go further and even 
proves it by the analysis of scientific knowledge, in both 
cases he has for the facts and relations, handed over by 
science, the sort of respect that is due to a final verdict. 
To this knowledge he adds a critique of the faculty of 
knowing, and also, if he thinks proper, a metaphysic; 
but the matter of knowledge he regards as the affair of 
science and not of philosophy. 
But how does he fail to see that the real result of this 
so-called division of labor is to mix up everything and 
confuse everything? The metaphysic or the critique that 
the philosopher has reserved for himself he has to re­
ceive, ready-made, from positive science, it being al­
ready contained in the descriptions and analyses, the 
whole care of which he left to the scientists. For not hav­
ing wished to intervene, at the beginning, in questions of 
fact, he finds himself reduced, in questions of principle, 
to formulating purely and simply in more precise terms 
the unconscious and consequently inconsistent meta­
physic and critique which the very attitude of science to 
reality marks out. Let us not be deceived by 2.n apparent 
analogy between natural things and human things. Here 
we are not in the judiciary domain, where the descrip­
tion of fact and the judgment on the fact are two distinct 
things, distinct for the very simple reason that above the 
fact, and independent of it, there is a law promulgated 
by a legislator. Here the laws are internal to the facts 
and relative to the lines that have been followed in cut­
ting the real into distinct facts. We cannot describe the 
outward appearance of the object without prejudging its 
inner nature and its organization. Form is no longer en-

2 14 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
tirely isolable from matter, and he who has begun by re­
serving to philosophy questions of principle, and who 
has thereby tried to put philosophy above the sciences, 
as a "court of cassation" is above the courts of assizes 
and of appeal, will gradually come to make no more of 
philosophy than a registration court, charged at most 
with wording more precisely the sentences that are 
brought to it, pronounced and irrevocable. 
Positive science is, in fact, a work of pure intellect. 
Now, whether our conception of the intellect be accepted 
or rejected, there is one point on which everybody will 
agree with us, and that is that the intellect is at home in 
the presence of unorganized matter. This matter it 
makes use of more and more by mechanical inventions, 
and mechanical inventions become the easier to it the 
more it thinks matter as mechanism. The intellect bears 
within itself, in the form of natural logic, a latent ge­
ometrism that is set free in the measure and proportion 
that the intellect penetrates into the inner nature of in­
ert matter. Intelligence is in tune with this matter, and 
that is why the physics and metaphysics of inert matter 
are so near each other. Now, when the intellect under­
takes the study of life, it necessarily trᯝats the living like 
the inert, applying the same forms to this new object, 
carrying over into this new field the same habits that 
have succeeded so well in the old; and it is right to do so, 
for only on such terms does the living offer to our action 
the same hold as inert matter. But the truth we thus ar­
rive at becomes altogether relative to our faculty of ac­
tion. It is no more than a symbolic verity. It cannot have 
the same value as the physical verity, being only an ex­
tension of physics to an object which we are a priori 

S C IENCE AND P H ILOS O P H Y  
2 15 
agreed to look at only in its external aspect. The duty of 
philosophy should be to intervene here actively, to exam­
ine the living without any reservation as to practical util­
ity, by freeing itself from forms and habits that are 
strictly intellectual. Its own special object is to specu· 
late, that is to say, to see; its attitude toward the living 
should not be that of science, which aims only at action, 
and which, being able to act only by means of inert mat­
ter, presents to itself the rest of reality in this single re­
spect. What must the result be, if it leave biological and 
psychological facts to positive science alone, as it has 
left, and rightly left, physical facts? It will accept a 
priori a mechanistic conception of all nature, a concep­
tion unreflected and even unconscious, the outcome of 
the material need. It will a priori accept the doctrine of 
the simple unity of knowledge and of the abstract unity 
of nature. 
The moment it does so, its fate is sealed. The philoso­
pher has no longer any choice save between a metaphysi­
cal dogmatism and a metaphysical skepticism, both of 
which rest, at bottom, on the same postulate, and neither 
of which adds anything to positive science. He may hy­
postasize the unity of nature, or, what comes to the same 
thing, the unity of science, in a being who is nothing 
since he does nothing, an ineffectual God who simply 
sums up in himself all the given ; or in an eternal Matter 
from whose womb have been poured out the properties 
of things and the laws of nature; or, again, in a pure 
Form which endeavors to seize an unseizable multiplic­
ity, and which is, as we will, the form of nature or the 
form of thought. All these philosophies tell us, in their 
different languages, that science is right to treat the liv· 

2 16 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
ing as the inert, and that there is no difference of value, 
no distinction to be made between the results which in­
tellect arrives at in applying its categories, whether it 
rests on inert matter or attacks life. 
In many cases, however, we feel the frame cracking. 
But as we did not begin by distinguishing between the 
inert and the living, the one adapted in advance to the 
frame in which we insert it, the other incapable of being 
held in the frame otherwise than by a convention which 
eliminates from it all that is essential, we find ourselves, 
in the end, reduced to regarding everything the frame 
contains with equal suspicion. To a metaphysical dog­
matism, which has erected into an absolute the factitious 
unity of science, there succeeds a skepticism or a relativ­
ism that universalizes and extends to all the results of 
science the artificial character of some among them. So 
philosophy swings to and fro between the doctrine that 
regards absolute reality as unknowable and that which, 
in the idea it gives us of this reality, says nothing more 
than science has said. For having wished to prevent all 
conflict between science and philosophy, we have sacri­
ficed philosophy without any appreciable gain to science. 
And for having tried to avoid the seeming vicious circle 
which consists in using the intellect to transcend the in­
tellect, we find ourselves turning in a real circle, that 
which consists in laboriously rediscovering by meta­
physics a unity that we began by positing a priori, a 
unity that we admitted blindly and unconsciously by the 
very act of abandoning the whole of experience to sci­
ence and the whole of reality to the pure understanding. 
Let us begin, on the contrary, by tracing a line of de­
marcation between the inert and the living. We shall find 

SCIENCE AND P H ILOSOP H Y  
2 I 7 
that the inert enters naturally into the frames of the in­
tellect, but that the living is adapted to these frames only 
artificially, so that we must adopt a special attitude to­
ward it and examine it with other eyes than those of 
positive science. Philosophy, then, invades the domain 
of experience. She busies herself with many things which 
hitherto have not concerned her. Science, theory of 
knowledge, and metaphysics find themselves on the same 
ground. At first there may be a certain confusion. All 
three may think they have lost something. But all three 
will profit from the meeting. 
Positive science, indeed, may pride itself on the uni­
form value attributed to its affirmations in the whole 
field of experience. But, if they are all placed 01_1 the same 
footing, they are all tainted with the same relativity. It 
is not so, if we begin by making the distinction which, in 
our view, is forced upon us. The understanding is at 
home in the domain of unorganized matter. On this mat­
ter human action is naturally exercised; and action, as 
we said above, cannot be set in motion in the unreal. 
Thus, of physics-so long as we are considering only its 
general form and not the particular cutting out of mat­
ter in which it is manifested-we may say that it touches 
the absolute. On the contrary, it is by accident--chance 
or convention, as you please-that science obtains a hold 
on the living analogous to the hold it has on matter. Here 
the use of conceptual frames is no longer natural. I do 
not wish to say that it is not legitimate, in the scientific 
meaning of the term. If science is to extend our action on 
things, and if we can act only with inert matter for in­
strument, science can and must continue to treat the liv­
ing as it has treated the inert. But, in doing so, it must bÆ 

n 8 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
understood that the further it penetrates the depths of 
life, the more symbolic, the more relative to the contin­
gencies of action, the knowledge it supplies to us be­
comes. On this new ground philosophy ought then to fol­
low science, in order to superpose on scientific truth a 
knowledge of another kind, which may be called meta­
physical. Thus combined, all our knowledge, both scien­
tific and metaphysical, is heightened. In the absolute we 
live and move and have our being. The knowledge we 
possess of it is incomplete, no doubt, but not external or 
relative. It is reality itself, in the profoundest meaning 
of the word, that we reach by the combined and progres­
sive development of sdence and of philosophy. 
Thus, in renouncing the factitious unity which the 
understanding imposes on nature from outside, we shall 
perhaps find its true, inward and living unity. For the 
effort we make to transcend the pure understanding in­
troduces us into that more vast something out of which 
our understanding is cut, and from which it has detached 
itself. And, as matter is determined by intelligence, as 
there is between them an evident agreement, we cannot 
make the genesis of the one without making the genesis 
of the other. An identical process must have cut out mat­
ter and the intellect, at the same time, from a stuff that 
contained both. Into this reality we shall get back more 
and more completely, in proportion as we compel our­
selves to transcend pure intelligence. 
Let us then concentrate attention on that which we 
have that is at the same time the most removed from ex­
ternality and the least penetrated with intellectuality. 
Let us seek, in the depths of our experience, the point 

INTELLECT AND M A TERIALITY 
2 19 
where we feel ourselves most intimately within our own 
life. It is into pure duration that we then plunge back, 
a duration in which the past, always moving on, is swell­
ing unceasingly with a present that is absolutely new. 
But, at the same time, we feel the spring of our will 
strained to its utmost limit. We must, by a strong recoil 
of our personality on itself, gather up our past which is 
slipping away, in order to thrust it, compact and undi­
vided, into a present which it will create by entering. 
Rare indeed are the moments when we are self-possessed 
to this extent : it is then that our actions are truly free. 
And even at these moments we do not completely possess 
ourselves. Our feeling of duration, I should say the ac­
tual coinciding of ourself with itself, admits of degrees. 
But the more the feeling is deep and the coincidence 
complete, the more the life in which it replaces us ab­
sorbs intellectuality by transcending it. For the natural 
function of the intellect is to bind like to like, and it is 
only facts that can be repeated that are entirely adapta­
ble to intellectual conceptions. Now, our intellect does 
undoubtedly grasp the real moments of real duration 
after they are past; we do so by reconstituting the new 
state of consciousness out of a series of views taken of it 
from the outside, each of which resembles as much as 
possible something already known; in this sense we may 
say that the state of consciousness contains intellectu­
ality implicitly. Yet the state of consciousness overflows 
the intellect; it is indeed incommensurable with the in­
tellect, being itself indivisible and new. 
Now let us relax the strain, let us interrupt the effort 
to crowd as much as possible of the past into the present. 
If the relaxation were complete, there would no longer 

2 2 0  
CREAT IVE EVOLUTION 
be either memory or will-which amounts to saying that, 
in fact, we never do fall into this absolute passivity, any 
more than we can make ourselves absolutely free. But, 
in the limit, we get a glimpse of an existence made of a 
present which recommences unceasinglyᯒevoid of real 
duration, nothing but the instantaneous which dies and 
is born again endlessly. Is the existence of matter of this 
nature? Not altogether, for analysis resolves it into ele­
mentary vibrations, the shortest of which are of very 
slight duration, almost vanishing, but not nothing. It 
may be presumed, nevertheless, that physical existence 
inclines in this second direction, as psychical existence 
in the first. 
Behind "spirituality" on the one hand, and "material­
ity" with intellectuality on the other, there are then two 
processes opposite in their direction, and we pass from 
the first to the second by way of inversion, or perhaps 
even by simple interruption, if it is true that inversion 
and interruption are two terms which in this case must 
be held to be synonymous, as we shall show at more 
length later on. This presumption is confirmed when we 
consider things from the point of view of extension, and 
no longer from that of duration alone. 
The more we succeed in making ourselves conscious 
of our progress in pure duration, the more we feel the 
different parts of our being enter into each other, and 
our whole personality concentrate itself in a point, or 
rather a sharp edge, pressed against the future and cut­
ting into it unceasingly. It is in this that life and action 
are free. But suppose we let ourselves go and, instead of 
acting, dream. At once the self is scattered; our past, 
which till then was gathered together into the indivisible 

INTELLECT A N D  MATERIALITY 
2 2 1  
impulsion it communicated to us, is broken up into a 
thousand recollections made external to one another. 
They give up interpenetrating in the degree that they 
become fixed. Our personality thus descends in the direc­
tion of space. It coasts around it continually in sensation. 
We will not dwell here on a point we have studied else­
where. Let us merely recall that extension admits of de­
grees, that all sensation is extensive in a certain measure, 
and that the idea of unextended sensations, artificially 
localized in space, is a mere view of the mind, suggested 
by an unconscious metaphysic much more than by psy· 
chological observation. 
No doubt we make only the first steps in the direction 
of the extended, even when we let ourselves go as much 
as we can. But suppose for a moment that matter conᯓ 
sists in this very movement pushed further, and that 
physics is simply psychics inverted. We shall now under­
stand why the mind feels at its ease, moves about natu· 
rally in space, when matter suggests the more distinct 
idea of it. This space is already possessed as an implicit 
idea in its own eventual detension, that is to say, of its 
own possible extension. The mind finds space in things, 
but could have got it without them if it had had imagina· 
tion strong enough to push the inversion of its own natu·· 
ral movement to the end. On the other hand. we are able 
to explain how matter accentuates ᯔtill more its material­
ity, when viewerl by the mind. Matter, at first, aided 
mind to run down its own incline; it gave the impulsion. 
But, the impulsion once received, mind continues its 
course. The idea that it forms of pure space is only the 
schema of the limit at which this movement would end. 
Once in possession o'£ the form of space, mind uses it like 

2 2 2  
CREATIVE E V O L U T I O N  
a net with meshes that can be made and unmade at will, 
which, thrown over matter, divides it as the needs of our 
action demand. Thus, the space of our geometry and the 
spatiality of things are mutually engendered by the re­
ciprocal action and reaction of two terms which are es­
sentially the same, but which move each in the direction 
inverse of the other. Neither is space so foreign to our 
nature as we imagine, nor is matter as completely ex­
tended in space as our senses and intellect represent it. 
We have treated of the first point elsewhere. As to the 
second, we will limit ourselves to pointing out that per­
fect spatiality would consist in a perfect externality of 
parts in their relation to one another, that is to say, in a 
complete reciprocal independence. Now, there is no ma­
terial point that does not act on every other material 
point. When we observe that a thing really is there where 
it acts, we shall be led to say (as Faraday1 was) that all 
the atoms interpenetrate and that each of them fills the 
world. On such a hypothesis, the atom or, more gener­
ally, the material point, becomes simply a view of the 
mind, a view which we come to take when we continue 
far enough the work (wholly relative to our faculty of 
acting) by which we subdivide matter into bodies. Yet it 
is undeniable that matter lends itself to this subdivision, 
and that, in supposing it breakable into parts external to 
one another, we are constructing a science sufficiently 
representative of the real. It is undeniable that if there 
be no entirely isolated system, yet science finds means of 
cutting up the universe into systems relatively independ­
ent of each other, and commits no appreciable error in 
1 Faraday, .4. Speculation concerning Electric Conductio" (Philosoph­
ical Maga:ine, 3d. series, vol. xxiv.) . 

INTELLECT AND M A TERIALITY 
223 
doing so. What else can this mean but that matter ex­
tends itself in space without being absolutely extended 
therein, and that in regarding matter as decomposable 
into isolated systems, in attributing to it quite distinct 
elements which change in relation to each other without 
changing in themselves (which are "displaced," shall we 
say, without being "altered") , in short, in conferring on 
matter the properties of pure space, we are transporting 
ourselves to the terminal point of the movement of which 
matter simply indicates the direction? 
What the Transcendental A esthetic of Kant appears 
to have established once for all is that extension is not 
a material attribute of the same kind as others. We can­
not reason indefinitely on the notions of heat, color, or 
weight : in order to know the modalities of weight or of 
heat, we must have recourse to experience. Not so of the 
notion of space. Supposing even that it is given empiri­
cally by sight and touch (and Kant has not questioned 
the fact) there is this about it that is remarkable that our 
mind, speculating on it with its own powers alone, cuts 
out in it, a priori, figures whose properties we determine 
a priori: experience, with which we have not kept in 
touch, yet follows us through the infinite complications 
of our reasonings and invariably justifies them. That is 
the fact. Kant has set it in clear light. But the explana­
tion of the fact, we believe, must be sought in a different 
direction to that which Kant followed. 
Intelligence, as Kant represents it to us, is bathed in 
an atmosphere of spatiality to which it is as inseparably 
united as the living body to the air it breathes. Our per­
ceptions reach us only after having passed through this 
atmosphere. They have been impregnated in advance by 

2 24 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
our geometry, so that our faculty of thinking only finds 
again in matter the mathematical properties which our 
faculty of perceiving has already deposed there. We are 
assured, therefore, of seeing matter yield itself with do­
cility to our reasonings; but this matter, in all that it has 
that is intelligible, is our own work; of the reality ''in 
itself" we know nothing and never shall know anything, 
since we only get its refraction through the forms of our 
faculty of perceiving. So that if we claim to affirm some­
thing of it, at once there rises the contrary affirmation, 
equally demonstrable, equally plausible. The ideality of 
space is proved directly by the analysis of knowledge in­
directly by the antinomies to which the opposite theory 
leads. Such is the governing idea of the Kantian criti­
cism. It has inspired Kant with a peremptory refutation 
of "empiricist" theories of knowledge. It is, in our opin­
ion, definitive in what it denies. But, in what it affirms, 
does it give us the solution of the problem? 
With Kant, space is given as a ready-made form of our 
perceptive faculty-a veritable deus ex machina, of 
which we see neither how it arises, nor why it is what it 
is rather than anything else. "Things-in-themselves" are 
also given, of which he claims that we can know nothing: 
by what right, then, can he affirm their existence, even 
as "problematic"? If the unknowable reality projects 
into our perceptive faculty a "sensuous manifold" cap­
able of fitting into it exactly, is it not, by that very fact, 
in part known? And when we examine this exact fitting, 
shall we not be led, in one point at least, to suppose a 
pre-established harmony between things and our mind­
an idle hypothesis, which Kant was right in wishing to 
avoid? At bottom. it is for not having distinguished de-

INTELLECT AND MATERIALITY 
2 2 5  
grees in spatiality that he has had to take space ready­
made as given-whence the question how the "sensuous 
manifold" is adapted to it. It is for the same reason that 
he has supposed matter wholly developed into parts ab­
solutely external to one another;-whence antinomies, 
of which we may plainly see that the thesis and antithe­
sis suppose the perfect coincidence of matter with ge­
ometrical space, but which vanish the moment we ceasr 
to extend to matter what is true only of pure space. 
Whence, finally, the conclusion that there are three al· 
ternatives, and three only, among which to choose a the• 
ory of knowledge : either the mind is determined by 
things, or things are determined by the mind, or between 
mind and things we must suppose a mysterious agree­
ment. 
But the truth is that there is a fourth, which does not 
seem to have occurred to Kant-in the first place be­
cause he did not think that the mind overflowed the in­
tellect, and in the second place (and this is at bottom the 
same thing) because he did not attribute to duration an 
absolute existence, having put time, a priori, on the samf' 
plane as space. This alternative consists, first of all, in 
regarding the intellect as a special function of the mind, 
essentially turned toward inert matter; then in saying 
that neither does matter determine the form of the intel· 
lect, nor does the intellect impose its form on matter, nor 
have matter and intellect been regulated in regard to one 
another by we know not what pre-established harmony, 
but that intellect and matter have progressively adapted 
themselves one to the other in order to attain at last a 
common form. This adaptation has, moreover, been 
brought about quite naturally, because it is the same in-

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
version of the same movement which creates at once the 
intellectuality of mind and the materiality of things. 
From this point of view the knowledge of matter that 
our perception on one hand and science on the other give 
to us appears, no doubt, as approximative, but not as 
relative. Our perception, whose role it is to hold up a 
light to our actions, works a dividing up of matter that is 
always too sharply defined, always subordinated to prac­
tical needs, consequently always requiring revision. Our 
science, which aspires to the mathematical form, over­
accentuates the spatiality of matter ; its formulae are, 
in general, too precise, and ever need remaking. For a 
scientific theory to be final, the mind would have to em­
brace the totality of things in block and place each thing 
in its exact relation to every other thing; but in reality 
we are obliged to consider problems one by one, in terms 
which arc, for that very reason, provisional, so that the 
solution of each problem will have to be corrected indefi­
nitely by the solution that will be given to the problems 
that will follow : thus, science as a whole is relative to the 
particular order in which the problems happen to have 
been put. It is in this meaning, and to this degree, that 
science must be regarded as conventional. But it is a 
conventionality of fact so to speak, and not of right. In 
principle, positive science bears on reality itself, pro­
vided it does not overstep the limits of its own domain, 
which ;s inert matter. 
Scientific knowledge, thus regarded, rises to a higher 
plane. In return, the theory of knowledge becomes an in­
finitely difficult enterprise, and which passes the powers 
of the intellect alone. It is not enough to determine, by 
careful analysis, the categories of thought; we must en-

INTELLECT AND MATERIALITY 
2 2 7 
gender them. As regards space, we must, by an effort of 
mind sui generis, follow the progression or rather the re­
gression of the extra-spatial degrading itself into spa­
tiality. When we make ourselves self-conscious in the 
highest possible degree and then let ourselves fall back 
little by little, we get the feeling of extension : we have an 
extension of the self into recollections that are fixed and 
external to one another, in place of the tension it pos­
sessed as an indivisible active will. But this is only a be­
ginning. Our consciousness, sketching the movement, 
shows us its direction and reveals to us tbe possibility of 
continuing it to the end; but consciousness itself does 
not go so far. Now, on the other hand, if we consider mat­
ter, which seems to us at first coincident with space, we 
find that the more our attention is fixed on it, the more 
the parts which we said were laid side by side enter into 
each other, each of them undergoing the action of the 
whole, which is consequently somehow present in it. 
Thus, although matter stretches itself out in the direc­
tion of space, it does not completely attain it; whence we 
may conclude that it only carries very much further the 
movement that consciousness is able to sketch within us 
in its nascent state. We hold, therefore, the two ends of 
the chain, though we do not succeed in seizing the inter­
mediate links. Will they always escape us? We must re­
member that philosophy, as we define it, has not yet be­
come completely conscious of itself. Physics understands 
its role when it pushes matter in the direction of spatial­
ity; but has metaphysics understood its role when it has 
simply trodden in the steps of physics, in the chimerical 
hope of going further in the same direction? Should not 
its own task be, on the contrary, to remount the incline 

.28 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
that physics descends, to bring back matter to its origins, 
and to build up progressively a cosmology which would 
be, so to speak, a reversed psychology? All that which 
seems positive to the physicist and to the geometrician 
would become, from this new point of view, an interrup­
tion or inversion of the true positivity, which would have 
to be defined in psychological terms. 
When we consider the admirable order of mathemat­
ics, the perfect agreement of the objects it deals with, the 
immanent logic in numbers and figures, our certainty of 
always getting the same conclusion, however diverse and 
complex our reasonings on the same subject, we hesitate 
to see in properties apparently so positive a system of 
negations, the absence rather than the presence of a true 
reality. But we must not forget that our intellect, which 
finds this order and wonders at it, is directed in the same 
line of movement that leads to the materiality and spa­
tiality of its object. The more complexity the intellect 
puts into its object by analyzing it, the more complex is 
the order it finds there. And this order and this complex­
ity necessarily appear to the intellect as a positive real­
ity, since reality and intellectuality are turned in the 
same direction. 
When a poet reads me his verses, I can interest myself 
enough in him to enter into his thought, put myself into 
his feelings, live over again the simple state he has 
broken into phrases and words. I sympathize then with 
his inspiration, I follow it with a continuous movement 
which is, like the inspiration itself, an undivided act. 
Now, I need only relax my attention, let go the tension 
that there is in me, for the sounds, hitherto swallowed up 

T H E  GEOMETRICAL ORDER 
229 
in the sense, to appear to me distinctly, one by one, in 
their materiality. For this I have not to do anything; it 
is enough to withdraw something. In proportion as I let 
myself go, the successive sounds will become the more in­
dividualized ; as the phrases were broken into words, so 
the words will scan in syllables which I shall perceive one 
after another. Let me go farther still in the direction of 
dream : the letters themselves will become loose and will 
be seen to dance along, hand in hand, on some fantastic 
sheet of paper. I shall then admire the precision of the 
interweavings, the marvelous order of the procession, 
the exact insertion of the letters into the syllables, of the 
syllables into the words and of the words into the sen­
tences. The farther I pursue this quite negative direction 
of relaxation, the more extension and complexity I shall 
create; and the more the complexity in its turn increases, 
the more admirable will seem to be the order which con­
tinues to reign, undisturbed, among the elements. Yet 
this complexity and extension represent nothing posi­
tive; they express a deficiency of will. And, on the other 
hand, the order must grow with the complexity, since it 
is only an aspect of it. The more we perceive, symboli­
cally, parts in an indivisible whole, the more the number 
of the relations that the parts have between themselves 
necessarily increases, since the same undividedness of 
the real whole continues to hover over the growing multi­
plicity of the symbolic elements into which the scattering 
of the attention has decomposed it. A comparison of this 
kind will enable us to understand, in some measure, how 
the same suppression of positive reality, the same inver­
sion of a certain original movement, can create at once 
extension in space and the admirᯕble order which mathe-

230 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
matics finds there. There is, of course, this difference 
between the two cases, that words and letters have been 
invented by a positive effort of humanity, while space 
arises automatically, as the remainder of a subtraction 
arises once the two numbers are posited.1 But, in the one 
case as in the other, the infinite complexity of the parts 
and their perfect co-ordination among themselves are 
created at one and the same time by an inversion which 
is, at bottom, an interruption, that is to say, a diminution 
of positive reality. 
All the operations of our intellect tend to geometry, as 
to the goal where they fmd their perfect fulfillment. But, 
as geometry is necessarily prior to them (since these 
operations have not as their end to construct space and 
cannot do otherwise than take it as given) it is evident 
that it is a latent geometry, immanent in our idea of 
space, which is the main spring of our intellect and the 
1 Our comparison does no more than develop the content of the tݼrm 
U'Yos, as Plotinus understands it. For while the M-yos of this phi­
losopher is a generating a.nd informing power, an aspect or a fragment 
of the 1/lvxࠎ. on the other hand Plotinus sometimes speaks of it as of a 
tliscourse. More generally, the relation that we establish in the present 
chapter between "extension" and "detension" resembles in some aspects 
that which Plotinus supposes (some developmrnts of which must have 
inspired M. Ravaisson) when he makes extension not indeed an inver­
ͥion of original Being, but an enfeeblement of its essence, one of the 
last stages of the procession (see in particular, Enn. IV. iii. 9-I I ,  and 
III. vi. 17-18). Yet ancient philosophy did not see what consequences 
would result from this for mathematics, for Plotinus, like Plato, erected 
mathematical essences into absolute realities. Above all, it suffered itself 
to be deceived by the purely superficial analogy of duration with ex­
tension. It treated the one as it treated the other, regarding change as 
a degradation of immutability, the sensible as a fall from the intelli­
gible. Whence, as we shall show in the next chapter, a philosophy which 
fails to recognize the real function and 5cope of the intellect. 

T H E  GEOM ETRICAL ORDER 
23 1  
c.ause of its working. We shall be convinced of this i f  we 
consider the two essential functions of intellect, the fac­
ulty of deduction and that of induction. 
Let us begin with deduction. The same movement by 
which I trace a figure in space engenders its properties : 
they are visible and tangible in the movement itself ; I 
fPel, I see in space the relation of the definition to its 
consequences, of the premises to the conclusion. All the 
other concepts of which experience suggests the idea to 
me are only in part constructible a priori; the definition 
of them is therefore imperfect, and the deductions into 
v:hich these oncepts enter, however closely the conclu­
sion is linked to the premises, participate in this imper­
fection. But when I trace roughly in the sand the base of 
a triangle, as I begin to form the two angles at the base, I 
know positively, and understand absolutely, that if these 
two angles are equal the sides will be equal also, the 
figure being then able to be turned over on itself without 
there being any change whatever. I know it before I have 
learnt geometry. Thus, prior to the science of geometry, 
there is a natural geometry whose clearness and evidence 
surpass the clearness and evidence of other deductions. 
Now, these other deductions bear on qualities, and not on 
magnitudes purely. They are, then, likely to have been 
formed on the model of the first, and to borrow their 
force from the fact that, behind quality, we see magni­
tude vaguely showing through. We may notice, as a fact, 
that questions of situation and of magnitude are the first 
that present themselves to our activity, those which in­
telligence externalized in action resolves even before 
reflective intelligence has appeared. The savage under­
stands better than the civilized man how to judge dis-

'232 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
tances, to determine a direction, to retrace by memory 
the often complicated plan of the road he has traveled, 
and so to return in a straight line to his starting-point.1 
If the animal does not deduce explicitly, if he does not 
form explicit concepts, neither does he form the idea of a 
homogeneous space. You cannot present this space to 
yourself without introducing, in the same act, a virtual 
geometry which will, of itself, degrade itself into logic. 
All the repugnance that philosophers manifest toward 
this manner of regarding things comes from this, that the 
logical work of the intellect represents to their eyes a 
positive spiritual effort. But, if we understand by spiritu­
ality a progress to ever new creations, to conclusions in­
commensurable with the premises and indeterminable 
by relation to them, we must say of an idea that moves 
among relations of necessary determination, through 
premises which contain their conclusion in advance, 
that it follows the inverse direction, that of materiality. 
What appears, from the point of view of the intellect, as 
an effort, is in itself a letting go. And while, from the 
point of view of the intellect, there is a petitio principii 
in making geometry arise automatically from space, and 
logic from geometry--on the contrary, if space is the 
ultimate goal of the mind's movement of dctension, 
space cannot be given without positing also logic and 
geometry, which are along the course of the movement 
of which pure spatial intuition is the goal. 
It has not been enough noticed how feeble is the reach 
of deduction in the psychological and moral sciences. 
Frorr. a proposition verified by facts, verifiable conse­
quences can here be drawn only up to a certain point, 
1 BLstian, The Brain as an Organ Q{ the Mind, pp. 214-16. 

GEOM E TRY A N D  DEDUCTION 
233 
:mly in a certain measure. Very soon appeal has to be 
made to common sense, that is to say, to the continuous 
experience of the real, in order to inflect the conse­
quences deduced and bend them along the sinuosities. of 
life. Deduction succeeds in things moral only metaphori­
cally, so to speak, and just in the measure ia which the 
moral is transposable into the physical, I should say 
translatable into spatial symbols. The metaphor never 
goes very far, any more than a curve can long be con­
fused with its tangent. Must we not be struck by this 
feebleness of deduction as something very strange and 
even paradoxical ? Here is a pure operation of the mind, 
accomplished solely by the power of the mind. It seems 
that, if anywhere it should feel at home and evolve at 
ease, it would be among the things of the mine\, in the 
domain of the mind. Not at all ; it is there that it is im­
mediately at the end of its tether. On the contrary, in 
geometry, in astronomy, in physics, where we have to do 
with things external to us, deduction is all-powerful ! Ob­
servation and experience are undoubtedly necessary in 
these sciences to arrive at the principle, that is, to dis­
cover the aspect under which things must be regarded; 
but, strictly speaking, we might, by good luck, have hit 
upon it at once; and, as soon as we possess this principle, 
we may draw from it, at any length, consequences which 
experience will always verify. Must we not conclude, 
therefore, that deduction is an operation governed by the 
properties of matter, molded on the mobile articulations 
of matter, implicitly given, in fact, with the space that 
underlies matter? As long as it turns upon space or 
spatialized time, it has only to let itself go. It is duration 
that puts spokes in its wheels. 

234 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
Deduction, then, does not work unless there be spatial 
intuition behind it. But we may say the same of indue· 
tion. It is not necessary indeed to think geometrically, 
nor even to think at all, in order to expect from the same 
conditions a repetition of the same fact. The conscious· 
ness of the animal already does this work, and indeed, 
independently of all consciousness, the living body itself 
is so constructed that it can extract from the successive 
situations in which it finds itself the similarities which 
interest it, and so respond to the stimuli by appropriate 
reactions. But it is a far cry from a mechanical expecta­
tion and reaction of the body, to induction properly so 
called, which is an intellectual operation. Induction rests 
on the belief that there are causes and effects, and that 
the same effects follow the same causes. Now, if we ex­
amine this double belief, this is what we find. It implies, 
in the first place, that reality is decomposable into 
groups, which can be practidtlly regarded as isolated and 
independent. If I boil water in a kettle on a stove, the 
operation and the objects that support it are, in reality, 
bound up with a multitude of other objects and a multi­
tude of other operations; in the end, I should find that 
our entire solar system is concerned in what is being 
done at this particular point of space. But, in a certain 
measure, and for the special end I am pursuing, I may 
admit that things happen as if the group water-kettle­
stove were an independent microcosm. That is my first 
affirmation. Now, when I say that this microcosm will 
always behave in the same way, that the heat will neces­
sarily, at the end of a certain time, cause the boiling of 
the water, I admit that it is sufficient that a certain num­
ber of elements of the system be given in order that the 

GEOMETRY AND INDUCTION 
235 
system should be complete; it completes itself auto­
matically, I am not free to complete it in thought as I 
please. The stove, the kettle and the water being given, 
with a .certain interval of duration, it seems to me that 
the boiling, which experience showed me yesterday to be 
the only thing wanting to complete the system, will com­
plete it tomorrow, no matter when tomorrow may be. 
What is there at the base of this belief? Notice that the 
belief is more or less assured, according as the case may 
be, but that it is forced upon the mind as an absolute 
necessity when the microcosm considered contains only 
magnitudes. If two numbers be given, I am not free ta 
choose their difference. If two sides of a triangle and the 
contained angle are given, the third side arises of itself 
and the triangle completes itself automatically. I can, if 
matters not where and it matters not when, trace the 
same two sides containing the same angle : it is evident 
that the new triangles so formed can be superposed on 
the first, and that consequently the same third side will 
come to complete the system. Now, if my certitude is 
perfect in the case in which I reason on pure space de­
terminations, must I not suppose that, in the other cases, 
the certitude is greater the nearer it approaches this ex­
treme case? Indeed, may it not be the limiting case which 
is seen through all the others and which colors them, ac­
cordingly as they are more or less transparent, with a 
more or less pronounced tinge of geometrical necessity? 1 
In fact, when I say that the water on the fire will boil to­
day as it did yesterday, and that this is an absolute 
necessity, I feel vaguely that my imagination is placing 
1 We have dwelt on this point in a former work. See the Essai sur les 
donnees immediates de la conscience. Paris, 1889, pp. ISS-I6o. 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
the stove of yesterday on that of today, kettle on kettle, 
water on water, duration on duration, and it seems then 
that the rest must coincide also, for the same reason that, 
when two triangles are superposed and two of thᯖir sides 
coincide, their third sides coincide also. But my imagina­
tion acts thus only because it shuts its eyes to two essen­
tial points. For the system of today actually to be super­
imposed on that of yesterday, the latter must have 
waited for the former, time must have halted, and every­
thing become simultaneous : that happens in geometry, 
but in geometry alone. Induction therefore implies first 
that, in the world of the physicist as in that of the geome­
trician, time does not count. But it implies also that 
qualities can be superposed on each other like magni­
tudes. If, in imagination, I place the stove and fire of 
today on that of yesterday, I find indeed that the focm 
has remained the same; it suffices, for that, that the sur­
faces and edges coincide; but what is the coincidence of 
two qualities, and how can t'hey be superposed one on 
another in order to ensure that they are identical? Yet I 
extend to the second order of reality all that applies to 
the•first. The physicist legitimates this operation bter on 
by reducing, as far as possible, differences of quality to 
differences of magnitude; but, prior to all science, I in­
cline to liken qualities to quantities, as if I perceived 
behind the qualities, as through a transparency, a geo­
metrical mechanism.1 The more complete this trans­
parency, the more it seems to me that in the same condi­
tions there must be a repetition of the same fact. Our 
inductions are certain, to our eyes, in the exact degree in 
which we make the qualitative differences melt into the 
1 Op. cit. cbaps. i. and ii. passim. 

P H Y S ICAL LAWS 
237. 
homogeneity of the space which subtends them, so that 
geometry is the ideal limit of our inductions as well as of 
our deductions. The movement at the end of which is 
spatiality lays down along its course the faculty of induc­
tion as well as that of deduction, in fact, intellectuality 
entire. 
It creates them in t!,e mind. But it creates also, in 
things, the "order" which our induction, aided by deduc­
tion, finds there. This order, 'on which our action leans 
and in which our intellect recognizes itself, seems to us 
marvelous. Not only do the same general causes always 
produce the same general effects, but beneath the visible 
causes and effects our science discovers an infinity of 
infinitesimal changes which work more and more exactly 
into one another, the further we push the analysis : so 
much so that, at the end of this analysis, matter becomes, 
it seems to us, geometry itself. Certainly, the intellect is 
right in admiring here the growing order in the growing 
complexity ; both the one and the other must have a 
positive reality for it, since it looks upon itself as posi­
tive. But things change t!1eir aspect when we consider the 
whole of reality as an undivided advance forward to suc­
cessive creations. It seems to us, then, that the complex­
ity of the material elements and the mathematical order 
that binds them together must arise automatically when 
within the whole a partial interruption or inversion is 
produced. Moreover, as the intellect itself is cut out of 
mind by a process of the same kind, it is attuned to this 
order and complexity, and admires them because it 
recognizes itself in them. But what is admirable in itself, 
what really deserves to provoke wonder, is the ever-

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
renewed creation which reality, whole and undivided, ac­
complishes in advancing; for no complication of the 
mathematical order with itself, however elaborate we 
may suppose it, can introduce an atom of novelty into the 
world, whereas this power of creation once given (and it 
exists, for we are conscious of it in ourselves, at least 
when we act freely) has only to be diverted from itself to 
relax its tension, only to relax its tension to extend, only 
to extend for the mathem<1;tical order of the clements so 
distinguished and the inflexible determinism connecting 
them to manifest the interruption of the creative act: in 
fact, inflexible determinism and mathematical order are 
one with this very interruption. 
It is this merely negative tendency that the particular 
laws of the physical world express. None of them, taken 
separately, has objective reality; each is the work of an 
investigator who has regarded things from a certain bias, 
isolated certain variables, applied certain conventional 
units of measurement. And yet there is an order approxi­
mately mathematical immanent in matter, an objective 
order, which our science approaches in proportion to its 
progress. For if matter is a relaxation of the inextensive 
into the extensive and, thereby, of liberty into necessity, 
it does not indeed wholly coincide with pure homo­
geneous space, yet is constituted by the movement 
which leads to space, and is therefore on the way to 
geometry. It is true that laws of mathematical form will 
.never apply to it completely. For that, it would have to 
be pure space and step out of duration. 
We cannot insist too strongly that there is something 
artificial in the mathematical form of a physical law, 

PHYSICAL LAWS 
239 
and consequently in our scientific knowledge of things.1 
Our standards of measurement are conventional, and, 
so to say, foreign to the intentions of nature : can we sup­
pose that nature has related all the modalities of heat to 
the expansion of the same mass of mercury, or to the 
change of pressure of the same mass of air kept at a con­
stant volume? But we may go further. In a general way, 
measuring is a wholly human operation, which implies 
that we really or ideally superpose two objects one on 
another a certain number of times. Nature did not dream 
of this superposition. It does not measure, nor does it 
count. Yet physics counts, measures, relates ((quantita­
tive" variations to one another to obtain laws, and it 
succeeds. Its success would be inexplicable, if the move­
ment which constitutes materiality were not the same 
movement which, prolonged by us to its end, that is to 
say, to homogeneous space, results in making us count, 
measure, follow in their respective variations terms that 
are functions one of another. To effect this prolongation 
of the movement, our intellect has only to let itself go, 
for it runs naturally to space and mathematics, intel­
lectuality and materiality being of the same nature and 
having been produced in the same way. 
If the mathematical order were a positive thing, if 
there were, immanent in matter, laws comparable to 
those of our codes, the success of our science would have 
in it something of the miraculous. What chances should 
we have indeed of finding the standard of nature and of 
isolating exactly, in order to determine their reciprocal 
1 Cf. especially the profound studies of M. Ed. Le Roy in the Revull 
de metaph. et de morale. 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
relations, the very variables which nature has chosen? 
But the success of a science of mathematical form would 
be no less incomprehensible, if matter did not already 
possess everything necessary to adapt itself to our for­
mulae. One hypothesis only, therefore, remains plausi­
ble, namely, that the mathematical order is nothing pos­
itive, that it is the form toward which a certain interrup­
tion tends of itself, and that materiality consists pre­
cisely in an interruption of this kind. We shall under­
stand then why our science is contingent, relative to the 
variables it has chosen, relative to the order in which it 
has successively put the problems, and why neverᯗheless 
it succeeds. It might have been, as a whole, altogether 
different, and yet have succeeded. This is so, just because 
there is no definite system of mathematical laws, at the 
base of nature, and because mathematics in general rep­
resents simply the side to which matter inclines. Put one 
of those little cork dolls with leaden feet in any posture, 
lay it on its back, turn it up on its head, throw it into the 
air : it will always stand itself up again, automatically. 
So likewise with matter : we can take it by any end and 
handle it in any way, it will always fall back into some 
one of our mathematical formulae, because it is weighted 
with geometry. 
But the philosopher will perhaps refuse to found a 
theory of knowledge on such considerations. They will 
be repugnant to him, because the mathematical order, 
being order, will appear to him to contain something 
positive. It is in vain that we assert that this order pro­
duces itself automatically by the interruption of the in­
verse order, that it is this very interruption. The idea 

THE IDEA O F  DISORDER 
24t 
persists, none the less, that there might be no order at all, 
and that the mathematical order of things, being a con­
.Juest over disorder, possesses a positive reality. In exam­
ining this point, we shall see what a prominent part the 
idea of disorder plays in problems relative to the theory 
of knowledge. It does not appear explicitly, and that is 
why it escapes our attention. It is, however, with the 
criticism of this idea that a theory of knowledge ought to 
begin, for if the great problem is to know why and how 
reality submits itself to an order, it is because the ab­
sence of every kind of order appears possible or con­
ceivable. It is this absence of order that realists and 
idealists alike believe they are thinking of-the realist 
when he speaks of the regularity that "objective" laws 
actually impose on a virtual disorder of nature, the ideal­
ist when he supposes a "sensuous manifold" which is co­
ordinated (and consequently itself without order) under 
the organizing influence of our understanding. The idea 
of disorder, in the sense of absence of order, is then what 
must be analyzed first. Philosophy borrows it from daily 
life. And it is unquestionable that, when ordinarily we 
speak of disorder, we are thinking of something. But of 
what? 
It will be seen in the next chapter how hard it is to 
determine the content of a negative idea, and what illu­
sions one is liable to, what hopeless difficulties philos­
ophy falls into, for not having undertaken this task. Dif­
ficulties and illusions are generally due to this, that we 
accept as final a manner of expression essentially pro­
visional. They are due to our bringing into the domain 
of speculation a procedure made for practice. If I choose 
a volume in my library at random, I may put it back on 

242 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
the shelf after glancing at it and say, "This is not verse." 
Is this what I have really seen in turning over the leaves 
of the book? Obviously not. I have not seen, I never 
shall see, an absence of verse. I have seen prose. But as 
it is poetry I want, I express what I find as a function of 
what I am looking for, and instead of saying, "This is 
prose," I say, "This is not verse." In the same way, if the 
fancy takes me to read prose, and I happen on a volume 
of verse, I shall say, "This is not prose," thus expressing 
the data of my perception, which shows me verse, in the 
language of my expectation and attention, which are 
fixed on the idea of prose and will hear of nothing else. 
Now, if M. Jourdain heard me, he would infer, no 
doubt, from my two exclamations that prose and poetry 
are two forms of language reserved for books, and that 
these learned forms have come and overlaid a language 
which was neither prose nor verse. Speaking of this thing 
which is neither verse nor prose, he would suppose, more­
over, that he was thinking of it : it would be only a 
pseudo-idea, however. Let us go further still : the pseudo­
idea would create a pseudo-problem, if M. Jourrlain were 
to ask his professor of philosophy how the prose form 
and the poetry form have been superadded to that which 
possessed neither the one nor the other, and if he wished 
the professor to construct a theory of the imposition of 
these two forms upon this formless matter. His question 
would be absurd, and the absurdity would lie in this, that 
he was hypostasizing as the substratum of prose and 
poetry the simultaneous negation of both, forgetting 
that the negation of the one consists in the affirmation of 
the other. 
Now, suppose that there are two species of order, and 

THE IDEA OF DISORDER 
243 
that these two orders are two contraries within one and 
the same genus. Suppose also that the idea of disorder 
arises in our mind whenever, seeking one of the two kinds 
of order, we find the other. The idea of disorder would 
then have a clear meaning in the current practice of life : 
it would objectify, for the convenience of language, the 
disappointment of a mind that finds before it an order 
different from what it wants, an order with which it is 
not concerned at the moment, and which, in this sense, 
does not exist for it. But the idea would not admit a 
theoretical use. So if we claim, notwithstanding, to intro­
duce it into philosophy, we shall inevitably lose sight of 
its true meaning. It denotes the absence of a certain or­
der, but to the profit of another (with which we are not 
concerned) ; only, as it applies to each of the two in turn, 
and as it even goes and comes continually between the 
two, we take it on the way, or rather on the wing, like a 
shuttlecock between two battledores, and treat it as if it 
represented, not the absence of the one or other order as 
the case may be, but the absence of both together-a 
thing that is neither perceived nor conceived, a simple 
verbal entity. So there arises the problem how order is 
imposed on disorder, form on matter. In analyzing the 
idea of disorder thus subtilized, we shall see that it repre­
sents nothing at all, and at the same time the problems 
that have been raised around it will vanish. 
It is true that we must begin by distinguishing, and 
even by opposing one to the other, two kinds of order 
which we generally confuse. As this confusion has 
created the principal difficulties of the problem of knowl­
edge, it will not be useless to dwell once more on the 
marks by which the two orders are distinguished. 

244 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
In a general way, reality is ordered exactly to the de­
gree in which it satisfies our thought. Order is therefore 
a certain agreement between subject and object. It is the 
mind finding itself again in things. But the mind, we said, 
can go in two opposite ways. Sometimes it follows its 
natural direction : there is then progress in the form of 
tension, continuous creation, free activity. Sometimes it 
inverts it, and this inversion, pushed to the end, leads to 
extension, to the necessary reciprocal determination of 
clements externalized each by relation to the others, in 
short, to geometrical mechanism. Now, whether expe­
rience seems to us to adopt the first direction or whether 
it is drawn in the direction of the second, in both cases 
we say there is order, for in the two processes the mind 
finds itself again. The confusion between them is there­
fore natural. To escape it, different names would have to 
be given to the two kinds of order, and that is not easy, 
because of the variety and variability of the forms they 
take. The order of the second kind may be defined as 
geometry, which is its extreme 11mit; more generally, it 
is that kind of order that is concerned whenever a rela­
tion of necessary determination is found between causes 
and effects. It evokes ideas of inertia, of passivity, of 
automatism. As to the first kind of order, it oscillates no 
doubt around finality; and yet we cannot define it as 
finality, for it is sometimes above, sometimes below. In 
its highest forms, it is more than finality, for of a free 
action or a work of art we may say that they show a 
perfect order, and yet they can only be expressed in 
terms of ideas approximately, and after the event. Life 
in its entirety, regarded as a creative evolution, is some­
thing analogous ; it transcends finality, if we understand 

LAWS AND GENERA 
245 
by finality the realization of an idea conceived or con­
ceivable in advance. The category of finality is therefore 
too narrow for life in its entirety. It is, on the other hand, 
often too wide for a particular manifestation of life taken 
separately. Be that as it may, it is with the vital that we 
have here to do, and the whole present study strives to 
prove that the vital is in the direction of the voluntary. 
We may say then that this first kind of order is that of 
the vital or of the willed, in opposition to the second, 
which is that of the inert and the automatic. Common 
sense instinctively distinguishes between the two kinds 
of order, at least in the extreme cases; instinctively, also, 
it brings them together. We say of astronomical phe­
nomena that they manifest an admirable order, meaning 
by this that they can be foreseen mathematically. And 
we find an order no less admirable in a symphony o{ 
Beethoven, which is genius, originality, and therefort' 
unforeseeability itself. 
But it is exceptional for order of the first kind to takf 
so distinct a form. Ordinarily, it presents features that 
we have every interest in confusing with those of the op· 
posite order. It is quite certain, for instance, that if wf 
could view the evolution of life in its entirety, the spon• 
taneity of its movement and the unforeseeability of iU 
procedures would thrust themselves on our attention. 
But what we meet in our daily experience is a certain 
determinate living being, certain special manifestations 
of life, which repeat, almost, forms and facts already 
known; indeed, the similarity of structure that we find 
everywhere between what generates and what is gen­
erated-a similarity that enables us to include any num­
ber of living individuals in the same group-is to ow 

CREATIVE EVOL UTION 
eyes the very type of the generic : the inorganic genera 
seem to us to take living genera as models. Thus the vital 
order, such as it is offered to us piecemeal in experience, 
presents the same character and performs the same func­
tion as the physical order: both cause experience to re­
peat itself, both enable our mind to generalize. In reality, 
this character has entirely different origins in the two 
cases, and even opposite meanings. In the second case, 
the type of this character, its ideal limit, as also its foun­
dation, is the geometrical necessity in virtue of which the 
same components give the same resultant. In the first 
case, this character involves, on the contrary, the inter­
vention of something which manages to obtain the same 
total effect although the infinitely complex elementary 
causes may be quite different. We insisted on this last 
point in our first chapter, when we showed how identical 
structures are to be met with on independent lines of evo­
lution. But, without looking so far, we may presume 
that the reproduction only of the type of the ancestor by 
his descendants is an entirely different thing from the 
repetition of the same composition of forces which 
yields an identical resultant. When we think of the in­
finity of infinitesimal elements and of infinitesimal 
causes that concur in the genesis of a living being, when 
we reflect that the absence or the deviation of one of 
them would spoil everything, the first impulse ot the 
mind is to consider this army of little workers as watched 
over by a skilled foreman, the "vital principle," which is 
ever repairing faults, correcting effects of neglect or ab­
sentmindedness, putting things back in place : this is 
how we try to express the difference between the physical 

LAWS AND GENERA 
247 
.and the vital order, the former making the same com­
bination of causes give the same combined effect, the 
latter securing the constancy of the effect even when 
there is some wavering in the causes. But that is only a 
comparison ; on reflection, we find that there can be no 
foreman, for the very simple reason that there are no 
workers. The causes and elements that physico-chemical 
analysis discovers are real causes and elements, no 
doubt, as far as the facts of organic destruction are con­
cerned; they are then limited in number. But vital phe­
nomena, properly so called, or facts of organic creation 
open up to us, when we analyze them, the perspective of 
an analysis passing away to infinity: whence it may be 
inferred that the manifold causes and elements are here 
only views of the mind, attempting an ever closer and 
closer imitation of the operation of nature, while the op­
eration imitated is an indivisible act. The likeness be­
tween individuals of the same species has thus an en­
tirely different meaning, an entirely different origin, to 
that of the likeness between complex effects obtained by 
the same composition of the same causes. But in the one 
case as in the other, there is likeness, and consequently 
possible generalization. And as that is all that interests 
us in practice, since our daily life is and must be an ex­
pectation of the same things and the same situations, it 
is natural that this common character, essential from the 
point of view of our action, should bring the two orders 
together, in spite of a merely internal diversity between 
them which interests speculation only. Hence the idea of 
a general order of nature, everywhere the same, hovering 
over life and over matter alike. Hence our habit of desig-

CREATIVE EVOL U TI O N  
nating by the same word and representing in the same 
way the existence of laws in the domain of inert matter 
and that of genera in the domain of life. 
Now, it will be found that this confusion is the origin 
of most of the difficulties raised by the problem of knowl­
edge, among the ancients as well as among the moderns. 
The generality of laws and that of genera having been 
designated by the same word and subsumed under the 
same idea, the geometrical order and the vital order are 
accordingly confused together. Accordinᯘ to the point of 
view, the generality of laws is explained by that of 
genera, or that of genera by that of laws. The first view 
is characteristic of ancient thought; the second belongs 
to modern philosophy. But in both ancient and modern 
philosophy the idea of "generality" is an equivocal idea, 
uniting in its denotation and in its connotation incom­
patible objects and elements. In both there are grouped 
under the same concept two kinds of order which are 
alike only in the facility they give to our action on things. 
We bring together the two terms in virtue of a quite ex­
ternal likeness, which justifies no doubt their designation 
by the same word for practice, but which does not au­
thorize us at all, in the speculative domain, to confuse 
them in the same definition. 
The ancients, indeed, did not ask why nature submits 
to laws, but why it is ordered according to genera. The 
idea of genus corresponds more especially to an objective 
reality in the domain of life, where it expresses an un­
questionable fact, heredity. Indeed, there can only be 
genera where there are individual objects; now, while 
the organized being is cut out from the general mass of 
matter by his very organization, that is to say naturally, 

LAWS AND GENERA 
249 
it is our perception which cuts inert matter into distinct. 
bodies. It is guided in this by the interests of action, by 
the nascent reactions that our body indicates-that is, as 
we have shown elsewhere/ by the potential genera that 
are trying to gain existence. In this, then, genera and 
individuals determine one another by a semi-artificial 
operation entirely relative to our future action on things. 
Nevertheless the ancients did not hesitate to put all gen­
era in the same rank, to attribute the same absolute 
existence to all of them. Reality thus being a system of 
genera, it is to the generality of the genera (that is, in 
effect, to the generality expressive of the vital order) 
that the generality of laws itself had to be brought. It is 
interesting, in this respect, to compare the Aristotelian 
theory of the fall of bodies with the explanation fur­
nished by Galileo. Aristotle is concerned solely with the 
concepts "high" and "low," "own proper place" as dis­
tinguished from "place occupied," "natural movement" 
and "forced movement" ; ᯙ the physical law in virtue of 
which the stone falls expresses for him that the stone re­
gains the "natural place" of all stones, to wit, the earth. 
The stone, in his view, is not quite stone so long as it is 
not in its normal place; in falling back into this place it 
aims at completing itself, like a living being that grows, 
thus realizing fully the essence of the genus stone.3 If 
this conception of the physical law were exact, the law 
would no longer be a mere relation established by the 
mind; the subdivision of matter into bodies would no 
1 M  atiĥre et mĦmoire, chapters iii. and iv. 
• See in particular, Phys., iv. 215 a 2 ;  v. 230 b 12 ; viii. 225 a 2 ;  and 
De Caelo, iv. 1-5 ; ii. 296 b 2 7 ;  iv. 308 a 34· 
• De Caelo, iv. JIO a 34 Tࠍ 8'<ls TOP auToii TCJ'IrOP "''p•fJa• lKa<TTOP .,.ࠌ 
els TO auToii .,!66s f<TT' .pipeafJa •• 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
longer be relative to our faculty of perceiving; all bodies 
would have the same individuality as living bodies, and 
the laws of the physical universe would express relations 
of real kinship between real genera. We know what kind 
of physics grew out of this, and how, for having believed 
in a science unique and final, embracing the totality of 
the real and at one with the absolute, the ancients were 
confined, in fact, to a more or less clumsy interpretation 
of the physical in terms of the vital. 
But there is the same confusion in the moderns, with 
this difference, however, that the relation between the 
two terms is inverted : laws are no longer reduced to 
genera, but genera to laws ; and science, still supposed 
to be uniquely one, becomes altogether relative, instead 
of being, as the ancients wished, altogether at one with 
the absolute. A noteworthy fact is the eclipse of the prob­
lem of genera in modern philosophy. Our theory of 
knowledge turns almost entirely on the question of laws : 
genera are left to make shift with laws as best they can. 
The reason is, that modern philosophy has its point of 
departure in the great astronomical and physical discov­
eries of modern times. The laws of Kepler and of Galileo 
have remained for it the ideal and unique type of all 
knowledge. Now, a law is a relation between things or 
between facts. More precisely, a law of mathematical 
form expresses the fact that a certain magnitude is a 
function of one or several other variables appropriately 
chosen. Now, the choice of the variable magnitudes, the 
distribution of nature into objects and into facts, has 
already something of the contingent and the conven­
tional. But, admitting that the choice is hinted at, if not 
prescribed, by experience, the law remains none the less 

LAWS A N D  GENERA 
a relation, and a relation is essentially a comparison ;  it 
has objective reality only for an intelligence that repre­
sents to itself several terms at the same time. This intel­
ligence may be neither mine nor yours : a science which 
bears on laws may therefore be an objective science, 
which experience contains in advance and which we 
simply make it disgorge; but it is none the less true that a 
comparison of some kind must be effected here, imper­
sonally if not by anyone in particular, and that an ex­
perience made of laws, that is, of terms related to other 
terms, is an experience made of comparisons, which, be­
fore we receive it, has already had to pass through an 
atmosphere of intellectuality. The idea of a science and 
of an experience entirely relative to the human under­
standing was therefore implicitly contained in the con­
ception of a science one and integral, composed of laws : 
Kant only brought it to light. But this conception is the 
result of an arbitrary confusion between the generality 
of laws and that of genera. Though an intelligence be 
necessary to condition terms by relation to each other, 
we may conceive that in certain cases the terms them­
selves may exist independently. And if, beside relations 
of term to term, experience also presents to us independ­
ent terms, the living genera being something quite dif­
ferent from systems of laws, one half, at least, of our 
knowledge bears on the "thing-in-itself," the very real­
ity. This knowledge may be very difficult, just because it 
no longer builds up its own object and is obliged, on the 
contrary, to submit to it; but, however little it cuts into 
its object, it is into the absolute itself that it bites. We 
may go further : the other half of knowledge is no longer 
so radically, so definitely relative as certain philosophers 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
say, if we can establish that it bears on a reality of in­
verse order, a reality which we always express in mathe­
matical laws, that is to say in relations that imply com­
parisons, but which lends itself to this work only because 
it is weighted with spatiality and consequently with ge­
ometry. Be that as it may, it is the confusion of two 
kinds of order that lies behind the relativism of the 
moderns, as it lay behind the dogmatism of the ancients. 
We have said enough to mark the origin of this con­
fusion. It is due to the fact that the "vital'' order, which 
is essentially creation, is manifested to us less in its es­
sence than in some of its accidents, those which imitate 
the physical and geometrical order; like it, they present 
to us repetitions that make generalization possible, and 
in that we have all that interests us. There is no doubt 
that life as a whole is an evolution, that is, an unceasing 
transformation. But life can progress only by means of 
the living, which are its depositaries. Innumerable living 
beings, almost alike, have to repeat each other in space 
and in time for the novelty they are working out to grow 
and mature. It is like a book that advances toward a 
new edition by going through thousands of reprints with 
thousands of copies. There is, however, this difference 
between the two cases, that the successive impressions 
are irlentical, as well as the simultaneous copies of the 
same impression, whereas representatives of one and 
the same species are never entirely the same, either in 
different points of space or at different moments of time. 
Heredity does not only transmit characters ; it transmits 
also the impetus in virtue of which the characters are 
modified, and this impetus is vitality itself. That is why 
we say that the repetition which serves as the base of our 

LAWS A N D  GENERA 
2 53 
generalizations is essential in the physical order, acci­
dental in the vital order. The physical order is "auto­
matic" ; the vital order is, I will not say voluntary, but 
analogous to the order "willed." 
Now, as soon as we have clearly distinguished between 
the order that is "willed" and the order that is "auto­
matic," the ambiguity that underlies the idea of disorder 
is dissipated, and, with it, one of the principal difficulties 
of the problem of knowledge. 
The main problem of the theory of knowledge is to 
know how science is possible, that is to say, in effect, 
why there is order and not disorder in things. That order 
exists is a fact. But, on the other hand, disorder, which 
appears to us to be less than order, is, it seems, of right. 
The existence of order is then a mystery to be cleared 
up, at any rate a problem to be solved. More simply, 
when we undertake to found order, we regard it as con­
tingent, if not in things, at least as viewed by the mind : 
of a thing that we do not judge to be contingent we do not 
require an explanation. If order did not appear to us as 
a conquest over something, or as an addition to some­
thing (which something is thought to be the "absence of 
order"), ancient realism would not have spoken of a 
"matter" to which the Idea superadded itself, nor would 
modern idealism have supposed a "sensuous manifold" 
that the understanding organizes into nature. Now, it is 
unquestionable that all order is contingent, and con­
ceived as such. But contingent in relation to what? 
The reply, ta our thinking, is not doubthtl. An order is 
contingent, and seems so, in relation to the inverse order, 
as verse is continr:ent in relation to prose and prose in 
relation to verse. But, just as all speech which is not 

254 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
prose is verse and necessarily conceived as verse, just as 
all speech which is not verse is prose and necessarily con­
ceived as prose, so any state of things that is not one of 
the two orders is the other and is necessarily conceived 
as the other. But it may happen that we do not realize 
what we are actually thinking of, and perceive the idea 
really present to our mind only through a mist of af­
fective states. Anyone can be convinced of this by con­
sidering the use we make of the idea of disorder in daily 
life. When I enter a room and pronounce it to be "in dis­
order," what do I mean? The position of each object is 
explained by the automatic movements of the person 
who has slept in the room, or by the efficient causes, 
whatever they may be, that have caused each article of 
furniture, clothing, etc., to be where it is : the order, in 
the second sense of the word, is perfect. But it is order of 
the first kind that I am expecting, the order that a me­
thodical person consciously puts into his life, the willed 
order and not the automatic : so I call the absence of this 
order "disorder." At bottom, all there is that is real, per­
ceived and even conceived, in this absence of one of the 
two kinds of order, is the presence of the other. But the· 
second is indifferent to me, I am interested only in the 
first, and I express the presence of the second as a func­
tion of the first, instead of expressing it, so to speak, as a 
function of itself, by saying it is disorder. Inversely, 
when we affirm that we are imagining a chaos, that is to­
say a state of things in which the physical world no· 
longer obeys laws, what are we thinking of? We imagine 
facts that appear and disappear capriciously. First we 
think of the physical universe as we know it, with effects 
and causes well proportioned to each other ; then, by a 

T H E  TWO KINDS O F  ORDER 
2 55 
series of arbitrary decrees, we augment, diminish, sup­
press, so as to obtain what we call disorder. In reality W6 
have substituted will for the mechanism of nature; we 
have replaced the "automatic order" by a multitude of 
elementary wills, just to the extent that we imagine the 
apparition or vanishing of phenomena. No doubt, for all 
these little wills to constitute a "willed order," they must 
have accepted the direction of a higher will. But, on 
looking closely at them, we see that that is just what they 
do : our own will is there, which objectifies itself in each 
of these capricious wills in turn, and takes good care not 
to connect the same with the same, nor to permit the 
effect to be proportional to the cause-in fact makes one 
simple intention hover over the whole of the elementary 
volitions. Thus, here again, the absence of one of the 
two orders consists in the presence of the other. In ana­
lyzing the idea of chance, which is closely akin to the 
idea of disorder, we find the same elements. When the 
wholly mechanical play of the causes which stop the 
wheel on a number makes me win, and consequently acts 
like a good genius, careful of my interests, or when the 
wholly mechanical force of the wind tears a tile off the 
roof and throws it on to my head, that is to say acts like 
a bad genius, conspiring against my person : in both cases 
I find a mechanism where I should have looked for, 
where, indeed, it seems as if I ought to have found, an 
intention. That is what I express in speaking of chance. 
And of an anarchical world, in which phenomena suc­
ceed each other capriciously, I should say again that it is 
a realm of chance, meaning that I find before me wills, or 
rather decrees, when what I am expecting is mechanism. 
Thus is explained the singular vacillation of the mind 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
when it tries to define chance. Neither efficient cause nor 
final cause can furnish the definition sought. The mind 
swings to and fro, unable to rest, between the idea of an 
absence of final cause and that of an absence of efficient 
cause, each of these definitions sending it back to the 
other. The problem remains insoluble, in fact, so long as 
the idea of chance is regarded as a pure idea, without 
mixture of feeling. But, in reality, chance merely ob­
jectifies the state of mind of one who, expecting one of 
the two kinds of order, finds himself confronted with the 
other. Chance and disorder are therefore necessarily 
conceived as relative. So if we wish to represent them to 
ourselves as absolute, we perceive that we are going to 
and fro like a shuttle between the two kinds of order, 
passing into the one just at the moment at which we 
might catch ourself in the other, and that the supposed 
o1bsence of all order is really the presence of both, with, 
besides, the swaying of a mind that cannot rest finally in 
either. Neither in things nor in our idea of things can 
there be any question of presenting this disorder as the 
substratum of order, since it implies the two kinds of 
order and is made of their combination. 
But our intelligence is not stopped by this. By a simple 
sic jubeo it posits a disorder which is an "absence of 
order." In so doing it thinks a word or a set of words, 
nothing more. If it seeks to attach an idea to the word, it 
finds that disorder may indeed be the negation of order, 
but that this negation is then the implicit affirmation of 
the presence of the opposite order, which we shut our 
eyes to because it does not interest us, or which we evade 
by denying the second order in its turn-that is, at bot­
tom, by re-establishing the first. How can we speak, then, 

T H E  TWO KINDS O F  ORDER 
257 
of an incoherent diversity which an understanding or­
ganizes? It is no use for us to say that no one suppose3 
this incoherence to be realized or realizable: when we 
speak of it, we believe we are thinking of it ; now, in 
analyzing the idea actually present, we find, as we said 
before, only the disappointment of the mind confronted 
with an order that docs not interest it, or a swaying of the 
mind between two kinds of order, or, finally, the idea 
pure and simple of the empty word that we have created 
by joining a negative prefix to a word which itself signi­
fies something. But it is this analysis that we neglect to 
make. We omit it, precisely because it does not occur to 
us to distinguish two kinds of order that are irreducible 
to one another. 
We said, indeed, that all order necessarily appears as 
contingent. If there are two kinds of order, this contin­
gency of order is explained : one of the forms is contin­
gent in relation to the other. Where I find the geometrical 
order, the vital was possible ; where the order is vital , it 
might have been geometrical. But suppose that the or­
der is everywhere of the same kind, and simply admits 
of degrees which go from the geometrical to the vital : 
if a determinate order still appears to me to be contin­
gent, and can no longer be so by relation to an order of 
another kind, I shall necessarily believe that the order is 
contingent by relation to an absence of itself, that is to 
say by relation to a state of things "in which there is no 
order at all." And this state of things I shall believe that 
I am thinking of, because it is implied, it seems, in the 
very contingency of order, which is an unquestionable 
fact. I shall therefore place at the summit of the hier­
archy the vital order; then, as a diminution or lower 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
complication of it, the geometrical order; and finally, at 
the bottom of all, an absence of order, incoherence itself, 
on which order is superposed. This is why incoherence 
has the effect on me of a word behind which there must 
be something real, if not in things, at least in thought. 
But if I observe that the state of things implied by the 
contingency of a determinate order is simply the pres­
ence of the contrary order, and if by this very fact I posit 
two kinds of order, each the inverse of the other, I per­
ceive that no intermediate degrees can be imagined be­
tween the two orders, and that there is no going down 
from the two orders to the "incoherent." Either the in­
coherent is only a word, devoid of meaning, or, if I give 
it a meaning, ii is on condition of putting incoherence 
midway between the two orders, and not below both of 
them. There is not first the incoherent, then the geo­
metrical, then the vital ; there is only the geometrical 
and the vital, and then, by a swaying of the mind be­
tween them, the idea of the incoherent. To speak of an 
unco-ordinated diversity to which order is superadded is 
therefore to commit a veritable petitio principii; for in 
imagining the unco-ordinated we really posit an order, or 
rather two. 
This long analysis was necessary to show how the real 
can pass from tension to extension and from freedom to 
mechanical necessity by way of inversion. It was not 
enough to prove that this relation between the two terms 
is suggested to us, at once, by consciousness and by sen­
sible experience. It was necessary to prove that the geo­
metrical order has no need of explanation, being purely 
and simply the suppression of the inverse order. And, for 

IDEAL GENESIS O F  MATTER 
259 
that, it was indispensable to prove that suppression is 
always a substitution and is even necessarily conceived 
as such : it is the requirements of practical life alone that 
suggest to us here a way of speaking that deceives us 
both as to what happens in things and as to what is pres­
ent to our thought. We must now examine more closely 
the inversion whose consequences we have just de­
scribed. What, then, is the principle that has only to let 
go its tension-may we say to detend-in order to ex­
tend, the interruption of the cause here being equivalent 
to a reversal of the effect? 
For want of a better word we have called it conscious­
ness. But we do not mean the narrowed consciousness 
that functions in each of us. Our own consciousness is the 
consciousness of a certain living being, placed in a cer­
tain point of space; and though it does indeed move in 
the same direction as its principle, it is continually drawn 
the opposite way, obliged, though it goes forward, to look 
behind. This retrospective vision is, as we have shown, 
the natural function of the intellect, and consequently of 
distinct consciousness. In order that our consciousness 
shall coincide with something of its principle, it must 
detach itself from the already-made and attach itself to 
the being-made. It needs that, turning back on itself and 
twisting on itself, the faculty of seeing should be made to 
be one with the act of willing-a painful effort which we 
can make suddenly, doing violence to our nature, but 
cannot sustain more than a few moments. In free action, 
when we contract our whole being in order to thrust it 
forward, we have the more or less clear consciousness of 
motives and of impelling forces, and even, at rare mo­
ments, of the becoming by which they are organized into 

260 
CRE ATIVE EVOLUTION 
an act : but the pure willing, the current that runs 
through this matter, communicating life to it, is a thing 
which we hardly feel, which at most we brush lightly as 
it passes. Let us try, however, to install ourselves within 
it, if only for a moment; even then it is an individual and 
fragmentary will that we grasp. To get to the principle of 
all life, as also of all materiality, we must go further still. 
Is it impossible? No, by no means ; the history of philos­
ophy is there to bear witness. There is no durable system 
that is not, at least in some of its parts, vivified by intui­
tion. Dialectic is necessary to put intuition to the proof, 
necessary also in order that intuition should break itself 
up into concepts and so be propagated to other men ; but 
all it does, often enough, is to develop the result of that 
intuition which transcends it. The truth is, the two pro­
cedures are of opposite direction : the same effort, by 
which ideas are connected with ideas, causes the intui­
tion which the ideas were storing t!p to vanish. The phi­
losopher is obliged to abandon intuition, once he has re­
ceived from it the impetus, and to rely on himself to 
carry on the movement by pushing the concepts one af­
ter another. But he soon feels he has lost foothold ; he 
must come into touch with intuition again ; he must undo 
most of what he has done. In short, dialectic is what en­
sures the agreement of our thought with itself. But by 
dialectic-which is only a relaxation of intuition-many 
different agreements are possible, while there is only one 
truth. Intuition, if it could be prolonged beyond a few 
instants, would not only make the philosopher agree with 
his own thought, but also all philosophers with each 
other. Such as it is, fugitive and incomplete, it is, in each 
system, what is worth more than the system and survives 

IDEAL GE N E S I S  O F  MATTE R  
261 
it. The object of philosophy would be reached if this in­
tuition could be sustained, generalized and, above all, 
assured of external points of reference in order not to go 
astray. To that end a continual coming and going is nec­
essary between nature and mind. 
When we put back our being into our will, and our 
will itself into the impulsion it prolongs, we understand, 
we feel, that reality is a perpetual growth, a creation 
pursued without end. Our will already performs this 
miracle. Every human work in which there is invention, 
every voluntary act in vvhich there is freedom, every 
movement of an organism that manifests spontaneity, 
brings something new into the world. True, these are 
only creations of form. How could they be anything else? 
We are not the vital current itself ;  we are this current al­
ready loaded with matter, that is, with congealed parts 
of its own st:bstance which it carries along its course. In 
the composition of a work of genius, as in a simple free 
decision, we do, indeed, stretch the spring of our activity 
to the utmost and thu::; create what no mere assemblage 
of materials could have given (what assemblage of 
curves already known can ever be equivalent to the 
pencil-stroke of a great artist? )  but there are, none the 
less, elements here that pre-exist and survive their or­
ganization. But if a sirnrlc arrest of the action that gen­
erates form could const!tuLݻ mntter (arc not the original 
lines drawn by the adst themselves already the fixation 
and, as it were, con.gealmrnt of a movement? ) ,  a creation 
of matter would be neither incomprehensible nor inad­
missible. For we seize from \Vithin, we live at every in­
stant, a creation of form, and it is just in those cases in 
which the form is pure, and in which the creative current 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
is momentarily interrupted, that there is a creation of 
matter. Consider the letters of the alphabet that enter 
into the composition of everything that has ever been 
written : we do not conceive that new letters spring up 
and come to join themselves to the others in order to 
make a new poem. But that the poet creates the poem 
and that human thought is thereby made richer, we un­
derstand very well : this creation is a simple act of the 
mind, and action has only to make a pause, instead of 
continuing into a new creation, in order that, of itself, it 
may break up into words which dissociate themselves 
into letters which are added to all the letters there are 
already in the world. Thus, that the number of atoms 
composing the material universe at a given moment 
should increase runs counter to our habits of mind, con­
tradicts the whole of our experience; but that a reality of 
quite another order, which contrasts with the atom as the 
thought of the poet with the letters of the alphabet, 
should increase by sudden additions, is not inadmissible; 
and the reverse of each addition might indeed be a world, 
which we then represent to ourselves, symbolically, as an 
assemblage of atoms. 
The mystery that spreads over the existence of the 
universe comes in great part from this, that we want the 
genesis of it to have been accomplish6d at one stroke or 
the whole of matter to be ctcrr:al. Whether we speak of 
creation or posit an uncreated matter, it is the totality of 
the universe that we are considering at once. At the root 
of this habit of mind lies the prejudice which we will 
analyze in our next chapter, the idea, common to mate­
rialists and to their opponents, that there is no really act­
ing duration, and that the absolute-matter or mind-

IDEAL GENESIS O F  M A TTER 
263 
can have no place in concrete time, in the time which we 
feel to be the very stuff of our life. From which it follows 
that everything is given once for all, and that it is neces­
sary to posit from all eternity either material multiplic­
ity itself, or the act creating this multiplicity, given in 
block in the divine essence. Once this prejudice is eradi­
cated, the idea of creation becomes more clear, for it is 
merged in that of growth. But it is no longer then of the 
universe in its totality that we must speak. 
Why should we speak of it? The universe is an assem­
blage of solar systems which we have every reason to be­
lieve analogous to our own. No doubt they are not abso­
lutely independent of one another. Our sun radiates heat 
and light beyond the farthest planet, and, on the other 
hand, our entire solar system is moving in a definite di­
rection as if it were drawn. There is, then, a bond be­
tween the worlds. But this bond may be regarded as in­
finitely loose in comparison with the mutual dependence 
which unites the parts of the same world among them­
selves; so that it is not artificially, for reasons of mere 
convenience, that we isolate our solar system : nature 
itself invites us to isolate it. As living beings, we depend 
on the planet on which we are, and on the sun that pro­
vides for it, but on nothing else. As thinking beings, we 
may apply the laws of our physics to our own world, and 
extend them to each of the worlds taken separately; but 
nothing tells us that they apply to the entire universe, 
nor even that such an affirmation has any meaning; for 
the universe is not made, but is being made continually. 
It is growing, perhaps indefinitely, by the addition of 
new worlds. 
Let us extend. then, to the whole of our solar system 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
the two most general laws of our science, the principle of 
conservation of energy and that of its degradation­
limiting them, however, to this relatively closed system 
and to other systems relatively closed. Let us see what 
will fo1low. We must remark, first of a11, that these two 
principles have not the same metaphysical scope. The 
first is a quantitative law, and consequently relative, in 
part, to our methods of measurement. It says that, in a 
system presumed to be closed, the total energy, that is to 
say the sum of its kinetic and potential energy, remains 
constant. Now, if there were only kinetic energy in the 
world, or even if there were, besides kinetic energy, only 
one single kind of potential energy, but no more, the arti­
fice of measurement would not make the law artificial. 
The law of the conservation of energy would express in­
deed that something is preserved in constant quantity. 
B ut there are, in fact, energies of various kinds/ and the 
measurement of each of them has evidently been so 
chosen as to justify the principle of conservation of 
energy. Convention, therefore, plays a large part in this 
principle, although there is undoubtedly, between the 
variations of the different energies composing one and 
the same system, a mutual dependence which is just what 
has made the extension of the principle possible by meas­
urements suitably chosen. If, therefore, the philosopher 
applies this principle to the solar system complete, he 
must at least soften its outlines. The law of the conserva­
tion of energy cannot here express the objective perma­
nence of a certain quantity of a certain thing, but rather 
the necessity for every change that is brought about to 
1 On these differences of quality see the work of Duhem, L' Evolrllion 
de la mtcanique, Paris, 1905, pp. 197 ff. 

IDEAL GENESIS OF MATTER 
265 
be counterbalanced in some way by a change in an oppo­
site direction. That is to say, even if it governs the whole 
of our solar system, the law of the conservation of energy 
is concerned with the relationship of a fragment of this 
world to another fragment rather than with the nature of 
the whole. 
It is otherwise with the second principle of thermo­
dynamics. The law of the degradation of energy does not 
bear essentially on magnitudes. No doubt the first idea of 
it arose, in the thought of Carnot, out of cert:tin quanti­
tative considerations on the yield of thermic machines. 
Unquestionably, too, the terms in which Clausius gen­
eralized it were mathematical, and a calculable magni­
tude, "entropy," was, in fact, the final conception to 
which he was led. Such precision is necessary for prac­
tical applications. But the law might have been vaguely 
conceived, and, if absolutely necessary, it might have 
been roughly formulated, even though no one had ever 
thought of measuring the different energies of the physi­
cal world, even though the concept of energy had not 
been created. Essentially, it expresses the fact that all 
physical changes have a tendency to be degraded into 
heat, and that heat tends to be distributed among bodies 
in a uniform manner. In this less precise form, it be­
comes independent of any convention ; it is the most 
metaphysical of the laws of physics since it points out 
without interposed symbols, without artificial devices of 
measurements, the direction in which the world is going. 
It tells us that changes that are visible and heterogeneous 
will be more and more diluted into changes that are in­
visible and homogeneous, and that the instability to 
which we owe the richness and variety of the changes 

266 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
taking place in our solar system will gradually give way 
to the relative stability of elementary vibrations contin­
ually and perpetually repeated. Just so with a man who 
keeps up his strength as he grows old, but spends it less 
and less in actions, and comes, in the end, to employ it 
entirely in making his lungs breathe and his heart beat. 
From this point of view, a world like our solar system 
is seen to be ever exhausting something of the mutability 
it contains. In the beginning, it had the maximum of pos­
sible utilization of energy: this mutability has gone on 
diminishing unceasingly. Whence does it come? We 
might at first suppose that it has come from some other 
point of space, but the difficulty is only set back, and for 
this external source of mutability the same question 
springs up. True, it might be added that the number of 
worlds capable of passing mutability to each other is un­
limited, that the sum of mutability contained in the uni­
verse is infinite, that there is therefore no ground on 
which to seek its origin or to foresee its end. A hypothesis 
of this kind is as irrefutable as it is indemonstrable ; but 
to speak of an infmite universe is to admit a perfect coin­
cidence of matter with abstract space, and consequently 
an absolute externality of all the parts of matter in rela­
tion to one another. We have seen above what we must 
think of this theory, and how difficult it is to reconcile 
with the idea of a reciprocal influence of all the parts of 
matter on one another, an influence to which indeed it 
itself makes appeal. Again it might be supposed that the 
general instability has arisen from a general state of 
stability; that the period in which we now are, and in 
which the utilizable energy is diminishing, has been pre­
ceded by a period in which the mutability was increas· 

IDEAL GENESIS OF MATTER 
267 
ing, and that the alternations of increase and diminution 
succeed each other forever. This hypothesis is theoreti­
cally conceivable, as has been demonstrated quite re­
cently; but, according to the calculations of Boltzmann, 
the mathematical improbability of it passes all imagina­
tion and practically amounts to absolute impossibility.1 
In reality, the problem remains insoluble as long as we 
keep on the ground of physics, for the physicist is obliged 
to attach energy to extended particles, and, even if he 
regards the particles only as reservoirs of energy, he re­
mains in space : he would belie his role if he sought the 
origin of these energies in an extra-spatial process. It is 
there, however, in our opinion, that it must be sought. 
Is it extension in general that we are considering in 
abstracto? Extension, we said, appears only as a tension 
which is interrupted. Or, are we considering the concrete 
reality that fills this extension? The order which reigns 
there, and which is manifested by the laws of nature, is 
an order which must be born of itself when the inverse 
order is suppressed; a detension of the will would pro­
duce precisely this suppression. Lastly, we find that the 
direction, which this reality takes, suggests to us the idea 
of a thing unmaking itself; such, no doubt, is one of the 
essential characters of materiality. What conclusion are 
we to draw from all this, if not that the process by which 
this thing makes itself is directed in a contrary way to 
that of physical processes, and that it is therefore, by its 
very definition, immaterial? The vision we have of the 
material world is that of a weight which falls: no image 
drawn from matter, properly so called, will ever give us 
the idea of the weight rising. But this conclusion will 
1 Boltzmann, Vorlesungen uber Gastheorie. Leipzi&. 1898, pp. 253 ff. 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
come homᯚ to us with still greater force if we press nearer 
to the concrete reality, and if we consider, no longer only 
matter in general, but, within this matter, living bodies. 
All our analyses show us, in life, an effort to re-mount 
the incline that matter descends. In that, they reveal to 
us the possibility, the necessity even of a process the in­
verse of materiality, creative of matter by its interrup­
tion alone. The life that evolves on the surface of our 
planet is indeed attached to matter. If it were pure con­
sciousness, a fortiori if it were supraconsciousness, it 
would be pure creative activity. In fact, it is riveted to 
an organism that subjects it to the general laws of inert 
matter. But everything happens as if it were doing itᯛ 
utmost to set itself free from these laws. Iݺ has not the 
power to reverse the direction of physical c11anges, such 
as the principle of Carnot determines it. It does, how­
ever, behave absolutely as a force would behave which, 
left to itself, would work in the inverse direction. In­
capable of stopping the course of material changes down­
wards, it succeeds in retarding it. The evolution of life 
really continues, as we have shown, an initial impulsion : 
this impulsion, which has determined the developmer.t of 
the chlorophyllian function in the plant and of the sen­
sory-motor system in the animal, brings life to more and 
more efficient acts by the fabrication and use of more 
and more powerful explosives. Now, what do these ex­
plosives represent if not a storing-up of the solar energy, 
the degradation of which energy is thus provisionally 
suspended on some of the points where it was being 
poured forth? The usable energy which the explosive 
conceals will be expended, of course, at the moment of 
the explosion; but it would have been expended sooner if 

IDEAL GENESIS OF MATTER 
269 
an organism had not happened to be there to arrest its 
dissipation, in order to retain it and save it up. As we see 
it today, at the point to which it was brought by a scis­
sion of the mutually complementary tendencies which it 
contained within itself, life is entirely dependent on the 
chlorophyllian function of the plant. This means that, 
looked at in its initial impulsion, before any scission, life 
was a tendency to accumulate in a reservoir, as do espe­
cially the green parts of vegetables, with a view to an 
instantaneous effective discharge, like that which an ani­
mal brings about, something that would have otherwise 
flowed away. It is like an effort to raise the weight which 
falls. True, it succeeds only in retarding the fall. But at 
least it can give us an idea of what the raising of the 
weight was.1 
Let us imagine a vessel full of steam at a high pres­
sure, and here and there in its sides a crack through 
which the steam is escaping in a jet. The steam thrown 
into the air is nearly all condensed into little drops which 
fall back, and this condensation and this fall represent 
simply the loss of something, an interruption, a deficit. 
1 In :r. book rich in facts and in ideas (La Dissolution opposee a 
/'evolution, Paris, r 899), M. Andre Lalande shows us everything going 
toward death, in spite of the momentary resistance which organisms 
seem to oppose.-But, even from the side of unorganized matter, have 
we the right to extend to the entire universe considerations drawn from 
the present state of our solar system ? Beside the worlds which are 
dying, there are without doubt worlds that are being born. On the 
other hand, in the organized world, the death of individuals does not 
seem at all like a diminution of "life in general," or like a necessity 
which life submits to reluctantly. As has been more than once remarked, 
life has never made an effort to prolong indefinitely the existence of the 
individual, although on so many other points it has made so many 
successful efforts. Everything is as if this death had been willed, or at 
least accepted, for the greater progress of life in general. 

CREATIVE E VOLUTION 
But a small part of the jet of steam subsists, uncon­
densed, for some seconds; it is making an effort to raise 
the drops which arc falling; it succeeds at most in re­
tarding their fall. So, from an immense reservoir of life, 
jets must be gushing out unceasingly, of which each, 
falling back, is a world. The evolution of living species 
within this world represents what subsists of the primi­
tive direction of the original jet, and of an impulsion 
which continues itself in a direction the inverse of mate­
riality. But let us not carry too far this comparison. It 
gives us but a feeble and even deceptive image of reality, 
for the crack, the jet of steam, the forming of the drops, 
are determined necessarily, whereas the creation of a 
world is a free act, and the life within the material world 
participates in this liberty. Let us think rather of an ac­
tion like that of raising the arm ; then let us suppose that 
the arm, left to itself, falls back, and yet that there sub­
sists in it, striving to raise it up again, something of the 
will that animates it. In this image of a creative action 
which unmakes its6lj we have already a more exact rep­
resentation of matter. In vital activity we see, then, that 
which subsists of the direct movement in the inverted 
movement, a reality which is making itself in a reality 
which is unmaking itself. 
Everything is obscure in the idea of creation if we 
think of things which are created and a thing which cre­
ates, as we habitually do, as the understanding cannot 
help doing. We shall show the origin of this illusion in our 
next chapter. It is natural to our intellect, whose func­
tion is essentially practical, made to present to us things 
and states rather than changes and acts. But things and 
states are only views, taken by our mind, of becoming. 

IDEAL GENESIS OF MATTER 
2 7 I  
There are no things, there are only actions. More par­
ticularly, if I consider the world in which we live, I find 
that the automatic and strictly determined evolution of 
this well-knit whole is action which is unmaking itself, 
and that the unforeseen forms which life cuts out in it, 
forms capable of being themselves prolonged into un­
foreseen movements, represent the action that is making 
itself. Now, I have every reason to believe that the other 
worlds are analogous to ours, that things happen there 
in the same way. And I know they were not all con­
structed at the same time, since observation shows me, 
even today, nebulae in course of concentration. Now. if 
tne same kind of action is going on everywhere, whether 
it is that which is unmaking itself or whether it is that 
which is striving to remake itself, I simply express this 
probable similitude when I speak of a center from which 
worlds shoot out like rockets in a fire-works display­
provided, however, that I do not present this center as a 
thing, but as a continuity of shooting out. God thus de­
fined, has nothing of the already made; He is unceasing 
life, action, freedom. Creation, so conceived, is not a 
mystery; we experience it in ourselves when we act 
freely. That new things can join things already existing 
is absurd, no doubt, since the tlzing results from a solidi· 
fication performed by our understanding, and there are 
never any things other than those that the understanding 
has thus constituted. To speak of things creating them­
selves would therefore amount to saying that the under. 
standing presents to itself more than it presents to itself 
-a self-contradictory affirmation, an empty and vain 
idea. But that action increases as it goes on, that it ere. 
ates in the measure of its advance, is what each of us 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
finds when he watches himself act. Things are consti­
tuted by the instantaneous cut which the understanding 
practices, at a given moment, on a flux of this kind, and 
what is mysterious when we compare the cuts together 
becomes clear when we relate them to the flux. Indeed, 
the modalities of creative action, in so far as it is still 
going on in the organization of living forms, are much 
simplified when they are taken in this way. Before the 
complexity of an organism and the practically infinite 
multitude of interwoven analyses and syntheses it pre­
supposes, our understanding recoils disconcerted. That 
the simple play of physical and chemical forces, left to 
themselves, should have worked this marvel, we find 
hard to believe. And if it is a profound science which is at 
work, how are we to understand the influence exercised 
on this matter without form by this form without mat­
ter? But the difficulty arises from this, that we represent 
statically ready-made material particles juxtaposed to 
one another, and, also statically, an external cause which 
plasters upon them a skilfully contrived organization. In 
reality, life is a movement, materiality is the inverse 
movement, and each of these two movements is simple, 
the matter which forms a world being an undivided flux, 
and undivided also the life that runs through it, cutting 
out in it living beings all along its track. Of these two 
currents the second runs counter to the first, but the first 
obtains, all the same, something from the second. There 
results between them a modus vivendi, which is organi­
zation. This organization takes, for our senses and for 
our intellect, the form of parts entirely external to other 
parts in space and in time. Not only do we shut our eyes 
to the unity of the impulse which, passing through gen-

IDEAL G E N E S I S  O F  M A TTER 
2 73 
erations, links individuals with individuals, species with 
species, and makes of the whole series of the living one 
single immense wave flowing over matter, but each indi­
vidual itself seems to us as an aggregate, aggregate of 
molecules and aggregate of facts. The reason of this lies 
in the structure of our intellect, which is formed to act on 
matter from without, and which succeeds by making, in 
the flux of the real, instantaneous cuts, each of which be­
comes, in its fixity, endlessly decomposable. Perceiving, 
in an organism, only parts external to parts, the under­
standing has the choice between two systems of explana­
tion only: either to regard the infinitely complex (and 
thereby infinitely well-contrived) organization as a for­
tuitous concatenation of atoms, or to relate it to the in­
comprehensible influence of an external force that has 
grouped its elements together. But this complexity is the 
work of the understanding; this incomprehensibility is 
also its work. Let us try to see, no longer with the eyes of 
the intellect alone, which grasps only the already made 
and which looks from the outside, but with the spirit, I 
mean with that faculty of seeing which is immanent in 
the faculty of acting and which springs up. somehow, by 
the twisting of the will on itself, when action is turned 
into knowledge, like heat, so to say, into light. To move­
ment, then, everything will be restored, and into move· 
ment everything will be resolved. Where the understand 
ing, working on the image supposed to be fixed of the 
progressing action, shows us parts infinitely manifold 
and an order infinitely well contrived, we catch a glimpse 
of a simple process, an action which is making itself 
across an action of the same kind which is unmaking it­
self, like the fiery path torn by the last rocket of a fire-

2 74 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
works display through the black cinders of the spent 
rockets that are falling dead. 
From this point of view, the general considerations we 
have presented concerning the evolution of life will be 
cleared up and completed. We will distinguish more 
sharply what is accidental from what is essential in this 
evolution. 
The impetus of life, of which we are speaking, consists 
in a need of creation. It cannot create absolutely, be­
cause it is confronted with matter, that is to say with the 
movement that is the inverse of its own. But it seizes 
upon this matter, which is necessity itself, and strives to 
introduce into it the largest possible amount of indeter­
mination and liberty. How does it go to work? 
An animal high in the scale may be represented in a 
general way, we said, as a sensory-motor nervous system 
imposed on digestive, respiratory, circulatory systems, 
etc. The function of these latter is to cleanse, repair and 
protect the nervous system, to make it as independent as 
possible of external circumstances, but, above all, to fur­
nish it with energy to be expended in movements. The 
increasing complexity of the organism is therefore due 
theoretically (in spite of innumerable exceptions due to 
accidents of evolution) to the necessity of complexity in 
the nervous system. No doubt, each complication of any 
part of the organism involves many others in addition, 
because this part itself must live, and every change in 
one point of the body reverberates, as it were, through­
out. The complication may therefore go on to infinity in 
all directions; but it is the complication of the nervous 
system which conditions the others in right, if not always 

T H E  M EANING O F  EVOLUTION 
2 75 
in fact. Now, in what does the progress of the nervous 
system itself consist? In a simultaneous development of 
automatic activity and of voluntary activity, the first 
furnishing the second with an appropriate instrument. 
Thus, in an organism such as ours, a considerable num­
ber of motor mechanisms are set up in the medulla and in 
the spinal cord, awaiting only a signal to release the cor­
responding act: the will is employed, in some cases, in 
setting up the mechanism itself, and in the others in 
choosing the mechanisms to be released, the manner of 
combining them and the moment of releasing them. The 
will of an animal is the more effective and the more in­
tense, the greater the number of the mechanisms it can 
choose from, the more complicated the switchboard on 
which all the motor paths cross, or, in other words, the 
more developed its brain. Thus, the progress of the nerv­
ous system assures to the act increasing precision, in­
creasing variety, increasing efficiency and independence. 
The organism behaves more and more like a machine for 
action, which reconstructs itself entirely for every new 
act, as if it were made of india-rubber and could, at any 
moment, change the shape of all its parts. But, prior to 
the nervous system, prior even to the organism properly 
so called, already in the undifferentiated mass of the 
amoeba, this essential property of animal life is found. 
The amoeba deforms itself in varying directions; its en­
tire mass does what the differentiation of parts will local­
ize in a sensory-motor system in the developed animal. 
Doing it only in a rudimentary manner, it is dispensed 
from the complexity of the higher organisms; there is no 
need here of the auxiliary elements that pass on to motor 
elements the energy to expend; the animal moves as a 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
whole, and, as a whole also, procures energy by means of 
the organic substances it assimilates. Thus, whether low 
or high in the animal scale, we always find that animal 
life consists ( 1 )  in procuring a provision of energy; ( 2 )  
in expending it, by means o f  a matter as supple as pos­
sible, in directions variable and unforeseen. 
Now, whence comes the energy? From the ingested 
food, for food is a kind of explosive, which needs only the 
spark to discharge the energy it stores. Who has made 
this explosive? The food may be the flesh of an animal 
nourished on animals and so on ; but, in the end it is to 
the vegetable we always come back. Vegetables alone 
gather in the solar energy, and the animals do but borrow 
it from them, either directly or by some passing it on to 
others. How then has the plant stored up this energy? 
Chiefly by the chlorophyllian function, a chemicism sui 
generis of which we do not possess the key, and which is 
probably unlike that of our laboratories. The process 
consists in using solar energy to fix the carbon of car­
bonic add, and thereby to store this energy as we should 
store that of a water-carrier .by employing him to fill an 
elevated reservoir : the water, once brought up, can set in 
motion a mill or a turbine, as we will and when we will. 
Each atom of carbon fixed represents something like the 
elevation of the weight of water, or like the stretching of 
an elastic thread uniting the carbon to the oxygen in the 
carbonic acid. The elastic is relaxed, the weight falls 
back again, in short the energy held in reserve is re­
stored, when, by a simple release, the carbon is permitted 
to rejoin its oxygen. 
So that all life, animal and vegetable, seems in its es­
sence like an effort to accumulate energy and then to let 

THE MEANING OF EVOLUTION 
2 7 7  
it  flow into flexible channels, changeable in shape, at the 
end of which it will accomplish infinitely varied kinds of 
work. That is what the vital impetus, passing through 
matter, would fain do all at once. It would succeed, no 
doubt, if its power were unlimited, or if some reinforce­
ment could come to it from without. But the impetus is 
finite, and it has been given once for all. It cannot over­
come all obstacles. The movement it starts is sometimes 
turned aside, sometimes divided, always opposed; and 
the evolution of the organized world is the unrolling of 
this conflict. The first great scission that had to be ef­
fected was that of the two kingdoms, vegetable and ani­
mal, which thus happen to be mutually complementary, 
without, however, any agreement having been made be­
tween them. It is not for the animal that the plant accu­
mulates energy, it is for its own consumption ; but its 
expenditure on itself is less discontinuous, and less con­
centrated, and therefore less efficacious, than was re­
quired by the initial impetus of life, essentially directed 
toward free actions : the same organism could not with 
equal force sustain the two functions at once, of gradual 
storage and sudden use. Of themselves, therefore, and 
without any external intervention, simply by the effect 
of the duality of the tendency involved in the original 
impetus and of the resistance opposed by matter to this 
impetus, the organisms leaned some in the first direction, 
others in the second. To this scission there succeeded 
many others. Hence the diverging lines of evolution, at 
least what is essential in them. But we must take into ac­
count retrogressions, arrests, accidents of every kind. 
And we must remember, above all, that each species be­
haves as if the general movement of life stopped at it in-

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
stead of passing through it. It thinks only of itself, it 
lives only for itself. Hence the numberless struggles that 
we behold in nature. Hence a discord, striking and ter­
rible, but for which the original principle of life must not 
be held responsible. 
The part played by contingency in evolution is there­
fore great. Contingent, generally, are the forms adopted, 
or rather invented. Contingent, relative to the obstacles 
encountered in a given place and at a given moment, is 
the dissociation of the primordial tendency into such and 
such complementary tendencies which create divergent 
lines of evolution. Contingent the arrests and setbacks; 
contingent, in large measure, the adaptations. Two 
things only are necessary : ( 1 )  a gradual accumulation 
of energy; ( 2 )  an elastic canalization of this energy in 
variable and indeterminable directions, at the end of 
which are free acts. 
This twofold result has been obtained in a particular 
way on our planet. But it might have been obtained by 
entirely different means. It was not necessary that life 
should fix its choice mainly upon the carbon of carbonic 
acid. What was essential for it was to store solar energy; 
but, instead of asking the sun to separate, for instance, 
atoms of oxygen and carbon, it might (theoretically at 
least, and, apart from practical difficulties possibly in­
surmountable) have put forth other chemical elements, 
which would then have had to be associated or dissoci­
ated by entirely different physical means. And if the ele­
ment characteristic of the substances that supply energy 
to the organism had been other than carbon, the element 
characteristic of the plastic substances would probably 
have been other than nitrogen, and the chemistry of liv-

THE MEANING OF EVOLUTION 
2 79 
ing bodies would then have been radically different from 
what it is. The result would have been living forms with­
out any analogy to those we know, whose anatomy would 
have been different, whose physiology also would have 
been different. Alone, the sensory-motor function would 
have been preserved, if not in its mechanism, at least in 
its effects. It is therefore probable that life goes on in 
other planets, in other solar systems also, under forms of 
which we have no idea, in physical conditions to which it 
seems to us, from the point of view of our physiology, to 
be absolutely opposed. If its essential aim is to catch up 
usable energy in order to expend it in explosive actions, 
it probably chooses, in each solar system and on each 
planet, as it does on the earth, the fittest means to get 
this result in the circumstances with which it is con­
fronted. That is at least what reasoning by analogy leads 
to, and we use analogy the wrong way when we declare 
life to be impossible wherever the circumstances with 
which it is confronted are other than those on the earth. 
The truth is that life is possible wherever energy de­
scends the incline indicated by Carnot's law and where a 
cause of inverse direction can retard the descent-that is 
to say, probably, in all the worlds suspended from all the 
stars. We go further : it is not even necessary that life 
should be concentrated and determined in organisms 
properly so called, that is, in definite bodies presenting to 
the flow of energy ready-made though elastic canals. It 
can be conceived (although it can hardly be imagined) 
that energy might be saved up, and then expended on 
varying lines running across a matter not yet solidified. 
Every essential of life would still be there, since there 
would still be slow accumulation of energy and sudden 

So 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
release. There would hardly be more difference between 
this vitality, vague and formless, and the definite vitality 
we know, than there is, in our psychical life, between the 
state of dream and the state of waking. Such may have 
been the condition of life in our nebula before the con­
densation of matter was complete, if it be true that life 
springs forward at the very moment when, as the effect 
of an inverse movement, the nebular matter appears. 
It is therefore conceivable that life might have as­
sumed a totally different outward appearance and de­
signed forms very different from those we know. With 
another chemical substratum, in other physical condi­
tions, the impulsion would have remained the same, but 
it would have split up very differently in course of prog­
ress ; and the whole would have traveled another road­
whether shorter or longer who can tell? In any case, in 
the entire series of living beings no term would have been 
what it now is. Now, was it necessary that there should 
be a series, or terms? Why should not the unique impetus 
have been impressed on a unique body, which might have 
gone on evolving? 
This question arises, no doubt, from the comparison of 
life to an impetus. And it must be compared to an im­
petus, because no image borrowed from the physical 
world can give more nearly the idea of it. But it is only 
an image. In reality, life is of the psychological order, 
and it is of the essence of the psychical to enfold a con­
fused plurality of interpenetrating terms. In space, and 
in space only, is distinct multiplicity possible : a point is 
absolutely external to another point. But pure and empty 
unity, also, is met with only in space; it is that of a math­
ematical point. Abstract unity and abstract multiplicity 

THE MEANING OF EVOLUTION 
281 
are determinations of space or categories of the under­
standing, whichever we will, spatiality and intellectual­
ity being molded on each other. But what is of psychical 
nature cannot entirely correspond with space, nor enter 
perfectly into the categories of the understanding. Is my 
own person, at a given moment, one or manifold? If I de­
clare it one, inner voices arise and protest-those of the 
sensations, feelings, ideas, among which my individual­
ity is distributed. But, if I make it distinctly manifold, 
my consciousness rebels quite as strongly; it affirms that 
my sensations, my feelings, my thoughts are abstractions 
which I effect on myself, and that each of my states im­
plies all the others. I am then (we must adopt the lan­
guage of the understanding, since only the understanding 
has a language) a unity that is multiple and a multi­
plicity that is one; 1 but unity and multiplicity are only 
views of my personality taken by an understanding that 
directs its categories at me; I enter neither into one nor 
into the other nor into both at once, although both, 
united, may give a .fair imitation of the mutual inter­
penetration and continuity that I find at the base of my 
own self. Such is my inner life, and such also is life in 
general. While, in its contact with matter, life is compar­
able to an impulsion or an impetus, regarded in itself it is 
an immensity of potentiality, a mutual encroachment of 
thousands and thousands of tendencies which neverthe­
less are "thousands and thousands" only when once re­
garded as outside of each other, that is, when spatialized. 
Contact with matter is what determines this dissociation. 
1 We have dwelt on this point in an article entitled "IntroductioD 
a Ia metaphysique" (Revue de mttaphysique et de morale, January 
1903, pp. I-25). 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
Matter divides actually what was but potentially mani­
fold; and, in this sense, individuation is in part the work 
of matter, in part the result of life's own inclination. 
Thus, a poetic sentiment, which bursts into distinct 
verses, lines and words, may be said to have already con­
tained this multiplicity of individuated elements, and 
yet, in fact, it is the materiality of language that creates 
it. 
But through the words, lines and verses runs the 
simple inspiration which is the whole poem. So, among 
the dissociated individuals, one life goes on moving: 
everywhere the tendency to individualize is opposed and 
at the same time completed by an antagonistic and com­
plementary tendency to associate, as if the manifold 
unity of life, drawn in the direction of multiplicity, made 
so much the more effort to withdraw itself on to itself. A 
part is no sooner detached than it tends to reunite itself, 
if not to all the rest, at least to what is nearest to it. 
Hence, throughout the whole realm of life, a balancing 
between individuation and association. Individuals join 
together into a society; but the society, as soon as 
formed, tends to melt the associated individuals into a 
new organism, so as to become itself an individual, able 
in its turn to be part and parcel of a new association. At 
the lowest degree of the scale of organisms we already 
find veritable associations, microbial colonies, and in 
these associations, according to a recent work, a tend­
ency to individuate by the constitution of a nucleus.1 The 
same tendency is met with again at a higher stage, in the 
protophytes, which, once having quitted the parent cell 
1 Cf. a paper written (in Russian) by Serkovski, and reviewed in the 
Annie biologique, I8Q8, p. 317. 

THE MEANING OF EVOLUTION 
283 
by way of division, remain united to each other by the 
gelatinous substance that surrounds them-also in those 
protozoa which begin by mingling their pseudopodia and 
end by welding themselves together. The "colonial" the­
ory of the genesis of higher organisms is well known. The 
protozoa, consisting of one single cell, are supposed to 
have formed, by assemblage, aggregates which, relating 
themselves together in their turn, have given rise to ag­
gregates of aggregates ; so organisms more and more 
complicated, and also more and more differentiated, are 
born of the association of organisms barely differentiated 
and elementary.1 In this extreme form, the theory is open 
to grave objections: more and more the idea seems to be 
gaining ground, that polyzoism is an exceptional and ab­
normal fact.2 But it is none the less true that things hap­
pen as if every higher organism was born of an associa­
tion of cells that have subdivided the work between 
them. Very probably it is not the cells that have made the 
individual by means of association ; it is rather the indi­
vidual that has made the cells by means of dissociation.3 
But this itself reveals to us, in the genesis of the indi­
vidual, a haunting of the social form, as if the individual 
could develop only on the condition that its substance 
should be split up into elements having themselves an 
appearance of individuality and united among them­
selves by an appearance of sociality. There are numerous 
1 Ed. Perrier, Les Colonies animales, Paris, 1897 (2nd edition). 
'Delage, L'HerUite, 2nd edition, Paris, 1 903, p. 97· Cf. by the same 
author, "La Conception polyz<Jique des etres" (Revue scientifique, 1896, 
pp. 641-653) .  
• 'This is the theory maintained by Kunstler, Delage, SedgwicĶ Labbe, 
etc. Its development, with bibliographical references, will be found in 
the work of Busquet, Les etrƯs t•ivants, Paris, 1899. 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
cases in which nature seems to hesitate between the two 
forms, and to ask herself if she shall make a society or an 
individual. The slightest push is enough, then, to make 
the balance weigh on one side or the other. If we take an 
infusorian sufficiently large, such as the Stentor, and cut 
it into two halves each containing a part of the nucleus, 
each of the two halves will generate an independent 
Stentor; but if we divide it incompletely, so that a pro­
toplasmic communication is left between the two halves, 
we shall see them execute, each from its side, corre­
sponding movements : so that in this case it is enough 
that a thread should be maintained or cut in order that 
life should affect the social or the individual form. Thus, 
in rudimentary organisms consisting of a single cell, we 
already find that the apparent individuality of the whole 
is the composition of an undefined number of potential 
individualities potentially associated. But, from top to 
bottom of the series of living beings, the same law is 
manifested. And it is this that we express when we say 
that unity and multiplicity are categories of inert matter, 
that the vital impetus is neither pure unity nor pure mul­
tiplicity, and that if the matter to which it communicates 
itself compels it to choose one of the two, its choice will 
never be definitive : it will leap from one to the other in­
definitely. The evolution of life in the double direction 
of individuality and association has therefore nothing 
accidental about it: it is due to the very nature of life. 
Essential also is the progress to reflection. If our anal­
ysis is correct, it is consciousness, or rather supra-con­
sciousness, that is at the origin of life. Consciousness, or 
supra-consciousness, is the name for the rocket whose 
t>xtinguished fragments fall back as matter; conscious-

THE M EA N I N G  O F  EVOLUTION 
28ᯜ 
ness, again, is the name for that which subsists of the 
rocket itself, passing through the fragments and lighting 
them up into organisms. But this consciousness, which is 
a need of creation, is made manifest to itself only where 
creation is possible. It lies dormant when life is con­
demned to automatism; it wakens as soon as the possi­
bility of a choice is restored. That is why, in organisms 
unprovided with a nervous system, it varies according to 
the power of locomotion and of deformation of which the 
organism disposes. And in animals with a nervous sys­
tem, it is proportional to the complexity of the switch­
board on which the paths called sensory and the paths 
called motor intersect-that is, of the brain. How must 
this solidarity between the organisll' and consciousness 
be understood? 
We will not dwell here on a point that we have dealt 
with in former works. Let us merely recall that a theory 
such as that according to which consciousness is attached 
to certain neurons, and is thrown off from their work like 
a phosphorescence, may be accepted by the scientist for 
the detail of analysis; it is a convenient mode of expres­
sion. But it is nothing else. In reality, a living being is a 
center of action. It represents a certain sum of contin­
gency entering into the world, that is to say, a certain 
quantity of possible action-a quantity variable with in­
dividuals and especially with species. The nervous sys­
tem of an animal marks out the flexible lines on which its 
action will run (although the potential energy is accumu­
lated in the muscles rather than in the nervous system 
itself) ;  its nervous centers indicate, by their develop­
ment and their configuration, the more or less extended 
choice it will have among more or less numerous and 

286 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
complicated actions. Now, since the awakening of con· 
sciousness in a living creature is the more complete, the 
greater the latitude of choice allowed to it and the larger 
the amount of action bestowed upon it, it is clear that the 
development of consciousness will appear to be depend­
ent on that of the nervous centers. On the other hand, 
every state of consciousness being, in one aspect of it, a 
question put to the motor activity and even the begin­
ning of a reply, there is no psychical event that does not 
imply the entry into play of the cortical mechanisms. 
Everything seems, therefore, to happen as if conscious­
ness sprang from the brain, and as if the detail of con­
scious activity were modeled on that of the cerebral ac­
tivity. In reality, consciousness docs not spring from the 
brain; but brain and consciousness correspond because 
equally they mea.c;ure, the one by the complexity of its 
structure and the other by the intensity of its awareness, 
the quantity of choice that the living being has at its dis­
posal. 
It is precisely because a cerebral state expresses 
simply what there is of nascent action in the corre­
sponding psychical state, that the psychical state tells us 
more than the cerebral state. The consciousness of a liv­
ing being, as we have tried to prove elsewhere, is insep­
arable from its brain in the sense in which a sharp knife 
is inseparable from its edge : the brain is the sharp edge 
by which consciousness cuts into the compact tissue of 
events, but the brain is no more coextensive with con­
sciousness than the edge is with the knife. Thus, from the 
fact that two brains, like that of the ape and that of the 
man, are very much alike, we cannot conclude that the 

THE MEANING OF EVOLUTION 
287 
corresponding consciousnesses are comparable or com­
mensurable. 
But the two brains may perhaps be less alike than we 
suppose. How can we help being struck by the fact that, 
while man is capable of learning any sort of exercise, of 
constructing any sort of object, in short of acquiring any 
kind of motor habit whatsoever, the faculty of combin­
ing new movements is strictly limited in the best-en­
dowed animal, even in the ape? The cerebral character­
istic of man is there. The human brain is made, like every 
brain, to set up motor mechanisms and to enable us to 
choose among them, at any instant, the one we shall put 
in motion by the pull of a trigger. But it differs from 
other brains in this, that the number of mechanisms it 
can set up, and consequently the choice that it gives as 
to which among them shall be released, is unlimited. 
Now, from the limited to the unlimited there is all the 
distance between the closed and the open. It is not a dif­
ference of degree, but of kind. 
Radical therefore, also, is the difference between ani­
mal consciousness, even the most intelligent, and human 
consciousness. For consciousness corresponds exactly to 
the living being's power of choice; it is coextensive with 
the fringe of possible action that surrounds the real ac­
tion : consciousness is synonymous with invention and 
with freedom. Now, in the animal, invention is never 
anything but a variation on the theme of routine. Shut 
up in the habits of the species, it succeeds, no doubt, in 
enlarging them by its individual initiative; but it escapes 
automatism only for an instant, for just the time to 
create a new automatism. The gates of its prison close as 
soon as they are opened; by pulling at its chain it sue-

:z88 
CREA TIVE EVOLUTION 
ceeds only in stretching it. With man, consciousness 
breaks the chain. In man, and in man alone, it sets itself 
free. The whole history of life until man has been that of 
the effort of consciousness to raise matter, and of the 
more or less complete overwhelming of consciousness by 
the matter which has fallen back on it. The enterprise 
was paradoxical, if, indeed, we may speak here otherwise 
than by metaphor of enterprise and of effort. It was to 
create with matter, which is necessity itself, an instru­
ment of freedom, to make a machine which should tri­
umph over mechanism, and to use the determinism of 
nature to pass through the meshes of the net which this 
very determinism had spread. But, everywhere except in 
man, consciousness has let itself be caught in the net 
whose meshes it tried to pass through : it has remained 
the captive of the mechanisms it has set up. Automatism, 
which it tries to draw in the direction of freedom, winds 
about it and drags it down. It has not the power to es­
cape, because the energy it has provided for acts is al­
most all employed in maintaining the infmitely subtle 
and essentially unstable equilibrium into which it has 
brought matter. But man not only maintains his ma­
chine, he succeeds in using it as he pleases. Doubtless he 
owes this to the superiority of his brain, which enables 
him to build an unlimited number of motor mechanisms, 
to oppose new habits to the old ones unceasingly, and, by 
dividing automatism against itself, to rule it. He owes it 
to his language, which furnishes consciousness with an 
immaterial body in which to incarnate itself and thus 
exempts it from dwelling exclusively on material bodies, 
whose flux would soon drag it along and finally swallow 
it up. He owes it to social life, which stores and preserves 

THE MEANING OF EVOLUTION 
281) 
efforts as language stores thought, fixes thereby a mean 
level to which individuals must raise themselves at the 
outset, and by this initial stimulation prevents the aver­
age man from slumbering and drives the superior man to 
mount still higher. But our brain, our society, and our 
language are only the external and various signs of one 
and the same internal superiority. They tell, each after 
its manner, the unique, exceptional success which life 
has won at a given moment of its evolution. They express 
the difference of kind, and not only of degree, which sep­
arates man from the rest of the animal world. They let 
us guess that, while at the end of the vast spring-board 
from which life has taken its leap, all the others have 
stepped down, finding the cord stretched too high, man 
alone has cleared the obstacle. 
It is in this quite special sense that man is the "term" 
and the "end" of evolution. Life, we have said, tran­
scends finality as it transcends the other categories. It is 
essentially a current sent through matter, drawing from 
it what it can. There has not, therefore, properly speak­
ing, been any project or plan. On the other hand, it is 
abundantly evident that the rest of nature is not for the 
sake of man : we struggle like the other species, we have 
struggled against other species. Moreover, if the evolu­
tion of life had encountered other accidents in its course, 
if, thereby, the current of life had been otherwise di­
vided, we should have been, physically and morally, far 
different from what we are. For these various reasons it 
would be wrong to regard humanity, such as we have it 
before our eyes, as pre-figured in the evolutionary move­
ment. It cannot even be said to be the outcome of the 
whole of evolution, for evolution has been accomplished 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
on several divergent lines, and while the human species 
is at the end of one of them, other lines have been fol­
lowed with other species at their end. It is in a quite dif­
ferent sense that we hold humanity to be the ground of 
evolution. 
From our point of view, life appears in its entirety as 
an immense wave which, starting from a center, spreads 
outwards, and which on almost the whole of its circum­
ference is stopped and converted into oscillation: at one 
single point the obstacle has been forced, the impulsion 
has passed freely. It is this freedom that the human form 
registers. Everywhere but in man, consciousness has had 
to come to a stand; in man alone it has kept on its way. 
Man, then, continues the vital movement indefinitely, 
although he does not draw along with him all that life 
carries in itself. On other lines of evolution there have 
traveled other tendencies which life implied, and of 
which, since everything interpenetrates, man has, doubt­
less, kept something, but of which he has kept only very 
little. It is as if a vague and formless bcinK, whom we 
may call, as we will, man or superman, had sought to re­
alize himself, and had succeeded only by abandoning a 
part of himself on the way. The losses are represented by 
the rest of the animal world, and even by the vegetable 
world, at least in what these have that is positive and 
above the accidents of evolution. 
From this point of view, the discordances of which na­
ture offers us the spectacle are singularly weakened. The 
organized world as a whole becomes as the soil on which 
was to grow either man himself or a being who morally 
must resemble him. The animals, however distant they 
may be from our species, however hostile to it, have none 

THE MEANING OF EVOLUTION 
291 
the less been useful traveling companions, on whom con­
sciousness has unloaded whatever encumbrances it was 
dragging along, and who have enabled it to rise, in man, 
to heights from which it sees an unlimited horizon open 
again before it. 
It is true that it has not only abandoned cumbersome 
baggage on the way; it has also had to give up valuable 
goods. Consciousness, in man, is pre-eminently intellect. 
It might have been, it ought, so it seems, to have been 
also intuition. Intuition and intellect represent two oppo­
site directions of the work of consciousness : intuition 
goes in the very direction of life, intellect goes in the in­
verse direction, and thus finds itself naturally in accord­
ance with the movement of matter. A complete and per­
fect humanity would be that in which these two forms of 
conscious activity should attain their full development. 
And, between this humanity and ours, we may conceive 
any number of possible stages, corresponding to all the 
degrees imaginable of intelligence and of intuition. In 
this lies the part of contingency in the mental structure 
of our species. A different evolution might have led to a 
humanity either more intellectual still or more intuitive. 
In the humanity of which we are a part, intuition is, in 
fact, almost completely sacrificed to intellect. It seems 
that to conquer matter, and to reconquer its own self, 
consciousness has had to exhaust the best part of its 
power. This conquest, in the particular conditions in 
which it has been accomplished, has required that con­
sciousness should adapt itself to the habits of matter 
and concentrate all its attention on them, in fact deter­
mine itself more especially as intellect. Intuition is there, 
however, but vague and above all discontinuous. It is a 

.. 92 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
)amp almost extinguished, which only glimmers now and 
then, for a few moments at most. But it glimmers wherᯐ 
ever a vital interest is at stake. On our personality, on 
our liberty, on the place we occupy in the whole of naᯑ 
ture, on our origin and perhaps also on our destiny, it 
throws a light feeble and vacillating, but which none the 
less pierces the darkness of the night in which the intel­
lect leaves us. 
These fleeting intuitions, which light up their object 
only at distant intervals, philosophy ought to seize, first 
to sustain them, then to expand them and so unite them 
together. The more it advances in this work, the more 
will it perceive that intuition is mind itself, and, in a cer­
tain sense, life itself :  the intellect has been cut out of it 
by a process resembling that which has generated mat­
ter. Thus is revealed the unity of the spiritual life. We 
recognize it only when we place ourselves in intuition in 
order to go from intuition to the intellect, for from the in­
tellect we shall never pass to intuition. 
Philosophy introduces us thus into the spiritual life. 
And it shows us at the same time the relation of the life 
of the spirit to that of the body. The great error of the 
doctrines on the spirit has been the idea that by isolating 
the spiritual life from all the rest, by suspending it in 
space as high as possible above the earth, they were plac­
ing it beyond attack, as if they were not thereby simply 
exposing it to be taken as an effect of mirage! Certainly 
they are right to listen to conscience when conscience af­
firms human freedom; but the intellect is there, which 
says that the cause determines its effect, that like condi­
tions like, that all is repeated and that all is given. They 
are right to believe in the absolute reality of the person 

THE MEANING OF EVOLUTION 
293 
and in his independence toward matter; but science is 
there, which shows the interdependence of conscious life 
and cerebral activity. They are right to attribute to man 
a privileged place in nature, to hold that the distance is 
infinite between the animal and man; but the history of 
life is there, which makes us witness the genesis of spe­
cies by gradual transformation, and seems thus to rein­
tegrate man in animality. When a strong instinct assures 
the probability of personal survival, they are right not to 
close their ears to its voice; but if there exist "souls" 
capable of an independent life, whence do they come? 
When, how and why do they enter into this body which 
we see arise, quite naturally, from a mixed cell derived 
from the bodies of its two parents? All these questions 
will remain unanswered, a philosophy of intuition will be 
a negation of science, will be sooner or later swept away 
by science, if it does not resolve to see the life of the body 
just where it really is, on the road that leads to the life of 
the spirit. But it will then no longer have to do with defi­
nite living beings. Life a.s a whole, from the initial impul­
sion that thrust it into the world, will appear as a wave 
which rises, and which is opposed by the descending 
movement of matter. On the greater part of its surface, 
at different heights, the current is converted by matter 
into a vortex. At one point alone it passes freely, drag­
ging with it the obstacle which will weigh on its progress 
but will not stop it. At this point is humanity; it is our 
privileged situation. On the other hand, this rising wave 
is consciousness, and, like all consciousness, it includes 
potentialities without number which interpenetrate and 
to which consequently neither the category of unity nor 
that of multiplicity is appropriate, made as they both 

294 
CREA TIVE EVOLUTION 
are for inert matter. The matter that it bears along with 
it, and in the interstices of which it inserts itself, alone 
can divide it into distinct individualities. On flows the 
current, running through human generations, subdivid­
ing itself into individuals. This subdivision was vaguely 
indicated in it, but could not have been made clear with­
out matter. Thus souls are continually being created, 
which, nevertheless, in a certain sense pre-existed. They 
are nothing else than the little rills into which the great 
river of life divides itself, flowing through the body of 
humanity. The movement of the stream is distinct from 
the river bed, although it must adopt its winding course. 
Consciousness is distinct from the organism it animates, 
although it must undergo its vicissitudes. As the possible 
actions which a state of consciousness indicates are at 
every instant beginning to be carried out in the nervous 
centers, the brain underlies at every instant the motor 
indications of the state of consciousness; but the interde­
pendency of consciousness and brain is limited to this; 
the destiny of consciousness is not bound up on that ac­
count with the destiny of cerebral matter. Finally, con­
sciousness is essentially free; it is freedom itself ;  but it 
cannot pass through matter without settling on it, with­
out adapting itself to it : this adaptation is what we call 
intellectuality; and the intellect, turning itself back to­
ward active, that is to say free, consciousness, naturally 
makes it enter into the conceptual forms into which it is 
accustomed to see matter fit. It will therefore always per­
ceive freedom in the form of necessity; it will always 
neglect the part of novelty or of creation inherent in the 
free act; it will always substitute for action itself an imi­
tation artificial, approximative, obtained by compound-

THE MEANING OF EVOLUTION 
295 
ing the old with the old and the same with the same. 
Thus, to the eyes of a philosophy that attempts to reab· 
sorb intellect in intuition, many difficulties vanish or be· 
come light. But such a doctrine does not only facilitate 
speculation; it gives us also more power to act and to 
live. For, with it, we feel ourselves no longer isolated in 
humanity, humanity no longer seems isolated in the na­
ture that it dominates. As the smallest grain of dust is 
bound up with our entire solar system, drawn along with 
it in that undivided movement of descent which is mate­
riality itself, so all organized beings, from the humblest 
to the highest, from the first origins of life to the time in 
which we are, and in all places as in all times, do but evi­
dence a single impulsion, the inverse of the movement of 
matter, and in itself indivisible. All the living hold to­
gether, and all yield to the same tremendous push. The 
animal takes its stand on the plant, man bestrides ani­
mality, and the whole of humanity, in space and in time, 
is one immense army galloping beside and before and be­
hind each of us in an overwhelming charge able to beat 
down every resistance and clear the most formidable ob­
stacles, perhaps even death. 

CHAPTER IV 
THE CINEMATOGRAPHICAL MECHANISM OF THOUGHT 
AND THE MECHANISTIC ILLUSION-A GLANCE AT 
THE HISTORY 01" SYSTEMS1-REAL BECOMING AND 
FALSE EVOLUTIONISM. 
IT remains for us to examine in themselves two theoreti­
cal illusions which we have frequently met with before, 
but whose consequences rather than principle have 
hitherto concerned us. Such is the object of the present 
chapter. It will afford us the opportunity of removing 
certain objections, of clearing up certain misunder­
'5tandings, and, above all, of defining more precisely, by 
contrasting it with others, a philosophy which sees in 
duration the very stuff of reality. 
Matter or mind, reality has appeared to us as a per­
petual becoming. It makes itself or it unmakes itself, but 
it is never something made. Such is the intuition that we 
have of mind when we draw aside the veil which is inter­
posed between our consciousness and ourselves. This, 
also, is what our intellect and senses themselves would 
1 The part of this chapter which treats of the history of systems, par­
ticularly of the Greek philosophy, is only the very succinct resume of 
views that we dcvl'lupL<l at length, from 1 900 to 1 ')04, in our lectures 
at the Colli3!(e de Franc<·, egperially in a course on the 1/Wstory of the 
Idea of Time (1<)02 -1<JO.> ) .  We tlx>n compared the mechnnism of con­
ceptual thought to that cf the cinemato2raph. We believe the compari­
lion will be useful here. 

T H E  IDEA O F  " N O T H I N G " 
2 9 7  
show us of matter, if they could obtain a direct and dis­
interested idea of it. But, preoccupied before everything 
with the necessities of action, the intellect, like the 
senses, is limited to taking, at intervals, views that are 
instantaneous and by that very fact immobile of the be­
coming of matter. Consciousness, being in its turn 
formed on the intellect, sees clearly of the inner life what 
is already made, and only feels confusedly the making. 
Thus, we pluck out of duration those moments that in­
terest us, and that we have gathered along its course. 
These alone we retain. And we arc right in so doing, 
while action only is in question. But when, in speculat­
ing on the nature of the real, we go on regarding it as our 
practical interest requires us to regard it, we become un­
able to perceive the true evolution, the radical becoming. 
Of becoming we perceive only states, of duration only 
instants, and even when we speak of duration and of be­
coming, it is of another thing that we are thinking. Such 
is the most striking of the two illusions we wish to exam­
ine. It consists in supposing that we can think the un­
stable by means of the stable, the moving by means of 
the immobile. 
The other illusion is near akin to the first. It has the 
same origin, being also due to the fact that we import 
into speculation a procedure made for practice. All ac­
tion aims at getting something that we feel the want of, 
or at creating something that does not yet exist. In this 
very special sense, it fills a void, and goes from the empty 
to the full, from an absence to a presence, from the un­
real to the real. Now the unreality which is here in ques­
tion is purely relative to the direction in which our atten· 
tion is engaged, for we are immersed in realities and can-

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
not pass out of them; only, if the present reality is not 
the one we are seeking, we speak of the absence of this 
sought-for reality wherever we find the presence of an­
other. We thus express what we have as a function of 
what we want. This is quite legitimate in the sphere of 
action. But, whether we will or no, we keep to this way 
of speaking, and also of thinking, when we speculate on 
the nature of things independently of the interest they 
have for us. Thus arises the second of the two illusions. 
We propose to examine this first. It is due, like the other, 
to the static habits that our intellect contracts when it 
prepares our action on things. Just as we pass through 
the immobile to go to the moving, so we make use of the 
void in order to think the full. 
We have met with this illusion already in dealing with 
the fundamental problem of knowlᯆdge. The question, 
we then said, is to know why there is order, and not dis­
order, in things. But the question has meaning only if 
we suppose that disorder, understood as an absence of 
order, is possible, or imaginable, or conceivable. Now, it 
is only order that is real ; but, as order can take two 
forms, and as the presence of the one may be said to con­
sist in the absence of the other, we speak of disorder 
whenever we have before us that one of the two orders 
for which we are not looking. The idea of disorder is then 
entirely practical. It corresponds to the disappointment 
of a certain expectation, and it does not denote the ab­
sence of all order, but only the presence of that order 
which does not offer us actual interest. So that whenever 
we try to deny order completely, absolutely, we find that 
we are leaping from one kind of order to the other indefi­
nitely, and that the supposed suppression of the one and 

T H E  IDEA O F  " N O T H I N G " 
299 
the other implies the presence of the two. Indeed, if we 
go on, and persist in shutting our eyes to this movement 
of the mind and all it involves, we are no longer dealing 
with an idea; all that is left of disorder is a word. Thus 
the problem of knowledge is complicated, and possibly 
made insoluble, by the idea that order fills a void and 
that its actual presence is superposed on its virtual ab­
sence. ':Ve go from absence to presence, from the void to 
the full, in virtue of the fundamental illusion of our 
understanding. That is the error of which we noticed one 
consequence in our last chapter. As we then anticipated, 
we must come to close quarters with this error, and 
finally grapple with it. We must face it in itself, in the 
radically false conception which it implies of negation, 
of the void and of the nought.1 
Philosophers have paid little attention to the idea of 
the nought. And yet it is often the hidden spring, the in­
visible mover of philosophical thinking. From the first 
awakening of reflection, it is this that pushes to the fore, 
right under the eyes of consciousness, the torturing prob­
lems, the questions that we cannot gaze at without feel­
ing giddy and bewildered. I have no sooner commenced 
to philosophize than I ask myself why I exist; and when 
I take account of the intimate connection in which I 
stand to the rest of the universe, the difficulty is only 
pushed back, for I want to know why the universe ex­
ists ; and if I refer the universe to a Principle immanent 
or transcendent that supports it or creates it, my thought 
rests on this principle only a few moments, for the same 
problem recurs, this time in its full breadth and gener-
1 The analysis of the idea of the nought which we give here (pp. 299-
324) has appeared before in the Revue philosophique (November 1906) .  

300 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
ality: Whence comes it, and how can it be understood, 
that anything exists? Even here, in the present work, 
when matter has been defined as a kind of descent, this 
descent as the interruption of a rise, this rise itself as a 
growth, when finally a Principle of creation has been put 
at the base of things, the same question springs up: How 
-why does this principle exist rather than nothing? 
Now, if I push these questions aside and go straight 
to what hides behind them, this is what I find :-Exist­
ence appears to me like a conquest over nought. I say to 
myself that there might be, that indeed there ought to be, 
nothing, and I then wonder that there is something. Or 
I represent all reality extended on nothing as on a car­
pet: at first was nothing, and being has come by super­
addition to it. Or, yet again, if something has always 
existed, nothing must always have served as its sub­
stratum or receptacle, and is therefore eternally prior. A 
glass may have always been full, but the liquid it con­
tains nevertheless fills a void. In the same way, being 
may have always been there, but the nought which is 
filled, and, as it were, stopped up by it, pre-exists for it 
none the less, if not in fact at least in right. In short, I 
cannot get rid of the idea that the full is an embroidery 
on the canvas of the void, that being is superimposed on 
nothing, and that in the idea of "nothing" there is less 
than in that of "something." Hence all the mystery. 
It is necessary that this mystery should be cleared up. 
It is more especially necessary, if we put duration and 
free choice at the base of things. For the disdain of meta­
physics for all reality that endures comes precisely from 
this, that it reaches being only by passing through "not­
being," and that an existence which endures seems to it 

T H E  IDEA O F  " N O T H I N G " 
301 
not strong enough to conquer non-existence and itself 
posit itself. It is for this reason especially that it is in­
clined to endow true being with a logical, and not a psy­
chological or a physical existence. For the nature of a 
purely logical existence is such that it seems to be self­
sufficient and to posit itself by the effect alone of the 
force immanent in truth. If I ask myself why bodies or 
minds exist rather than nothing, I find no answer; but 
that a logical principle, such as A = A, should have the 
power of creating itself, triumphing over the nought 
throughout eternity, seems to me natural. A circle drawn 
with chalk on a blackboard is a thing which needs ex­
planation : this entirely physical existence has not by it­
self wherewith to vanquish non-existence. But the "logi­
cal essence" of the circle, that is to say, the possibility of 
drawing it according to a certain law-in short, its defi­
nition-is a thing which appears to me eternal : it has 
neither place nor date; for nowhere, at no moment, has 
the drawing of a circle begun to be possible. Suppose, 
then, that the principle on which all things rest, and 
which all things manifest possesses an existence of the 
same nature as that of the definition of the circle, or as 
that of the axiom A = A :  the mystery of existence van­
ishes, for the being that is at the base of everything pos­
its itself then in eternity, as logic itself does. True, it will 
cost us rather a heavy sacrifice : if the principle of all 
things exists after the manner of a logical axiom or of a 
mathematical definition, the things themselves must go 
forth from this principle like the applications of an aᯇ 
iom or the consequences of a definition, and there will no 
longer be place, either in the things or in their princi­
ple, for efficient causality understood in the sense of a 

302 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
free choice. Such are precisely the conclusions of a doc­
trine like that of Spinoza, or even that of Leibniz, and 
such indeed has been their genesis. 
Now, if we could prove that the idea of the nought, in 
the sense in which we take it when we oppose it to that 
of existence, is a pseudo-idea, the problems that are 
raised around it would become pseudo-problems. The 
hypothesis of an absolute that acts freely, that in an emi­
nent sense endures, would no longer raise up intellectual 
prejudices. The road would be cleared for a philosophy 
more nearly approaching intuition, and which would no 
longer ask the same sacrifices of common sense. 
Let us then see what we are thinking about when we 
speak of "Nothing." To represent "Nothing," we must 
either imagine it or conceive it. Let us examine what this 
image or this idea may be. First, the image. 
I am going to close my eyes, stop my ears, extinguish 
one by one the sensations that come to me from the outer 
world. Now it is done; all my perceptions vanish, the 
material universe sinks into silence and the night.-I 
subsist, however, and cannot help myself subsisting. I 
am still there, with the organic sensations which come 
to me from the surface and from the interior of my body, 
with the recollections which my past perceptions have 
left behind them-nay, with the impression, most posi­
tive and full, of the void I have just made about me. How 
c:tn I suppress all this? How eliminate myself? I can 
even, it may be, blot out and forget my recollections up 
to my immediate past; but at least I keep the conscious­
ness of my present reduced to its extremest poverty, that 
is to say, of the actual state of my body. I will try, how­
ever, to do away even with this consciousness itself. I 

THE IDEA OF 
" N O T H I N G " 
303 
will reduce more and more the sensations my body sends 
in to me : now they are almost gone ; now they are gone, 
they have disappeared in the night where all things else 
have already died away. But no ! At the very instant that 
my consciousness is extinguished, another consciousness 
lights up-or rather, it was already alight : it had arisen 
the instant before, in order to witness the extinction of 
the first; for the ftrst could disappear only for another 
and in the presence of another. I see myself annihilated 
only if I have already resuscitated myself by an act 
which is positive, however involuntary and unconscious. 
So, do what I will, I am always perceiving something, 
either from without or from within. When I no longer 
know anything of external objects, it is because I have 
taken refuge in the consciousness that I have of myself. 
If I abolish this inner self, its very abolition becomes an 
object for an imaginary self which now perceives as an 
external object the self that is dying away. Be it external 
or internal, some object there always is that my imagina­
tion is representing. My imagination, it is true, can go 
from one to the other, I can by turns imagine a nought of 
external perception or a nought of internal perception, 
but not both at once, for the absence of one consists, at 
bottom, in the exclusive presence of the other. But, from 
the fact that two relative noughts are imaginable in turn, 
we wrongly conclude that they are imaginable together : 
a conclusion the absurdity of which must be obvious, for 
we cannot imagine a nought without perceiving, at least 
confusedly, that we are imagining it, consequently that 
we are acting, that we are thinking, and therefore that 
something still subsists. 
The image, then, properly so called, of a suppression 

304 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
of everything is never formed by thought. The effort by 
which we strive to create this image simply ends in mak­
ing us swing to and fro between the vision of an outer 
and that of an inner reality. In this coming and going of 
our mind between the without and the within, there is a 
point, at equal distance from both, in which it seems to 
us that we no longer perceive the one, and that we do not 
yet perceive the other : it is there that the image of 
"Nothing" is formed. In reality, we then perceive both, 
having re·ached the point where the two terms come to­
gether, and the image of Nothing, so defined, is an image 
full of things, an image that includes at once that of the 
subject and that of the object and, besides, a perpetual 
leaping from one to the other and the refusal ever to 
come to rest finally on either. Evidently this is not the 
nothing that we can oppose to being, and put before or 
beneath being, for it already includes existence in gen­
eral. 
But we shall be told that, if the representation of 
Nothing, visible or latent, enters into the reasonings of 
philosophers, it is not as an image, but as an idea. It may 
be agreed that we do not imagine the annihilation of 
everything, but it will be claimed that we can conceive 
it. We conceive a polygon with a thousand sides, said 
Descartes, although we do not see it in imagination : it is 
enough that we can clearly represent the possibility of 
constructing it. So with the idea of the annihilation of 
everything. Nothing simpler, it will be said, than the pro­
cedure by which we construct the idea of it. There is, in 
fact, not a single object of our experience that we cannot 
suppose annihilated. Extend this annihilation of a first 
ohject to a second, then to a third, and so on as long as 

T H E  IDEA O F  " N O T H I N G " 
305 
you please : the nought is the limit toward which the op-· 
eration tends. And the nought so defined is the annihila­
tion of everything. That is the theory. We need only con­
sider it in this form to see the absurdity it involves. 
An idea constructed by the mind is an idea only if its 
.pieces are capable of coexisting; it is reduced to a mere 
word if the elements that we bring together to compose 
it are driven away as fast as we assemble them. When I 
have defined the circle, I easily represent a black or a 
white circle, a circle in cardboard, iron, or brass, a trans­
parent or an opaque circle-but not a square circle, be­
cause the law of the generation of the circle excludes the 
possibility of defining this figure with straight lines. So 
my mind can represent any existing thing whatever as 
annihilated;-but if the annihilation of anything by the 
mind is an operation whose mechanism implies that it 
works on a part of the whole, and not on the whole itself, 
then the extension of such an operation to the totality of 
things becomes self-contradictory and absurd, and the 
idea of an annihilation of everything presents the same 
character as that of a square circle : it is not an idea, it 
is only a word. So let us examine more closely the mecha­
nism of the operation. 
In fact, the object suppressed is either external or in­
ternal : it is a thing or it is a state of consciousness. Let 
us consider the first case. I annihilate in thought an ex­
ternal object: in the place where it was, there is no longer 
anything.-N o longer anything of that object, of course, 
but another object has taken its place: there is no abso­
lute void in nature. But admit that an absolute void is 
possible : it is not of that void that I am thinking when I 
say that the object, once annihilated, leaves its place un-

:o6 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
occupied; for by the hypothesis it is a place, that is a 
void limited by precise outlines, or, in other words, a 
kind of thing. The void of which I speak, therefore, is, at 
bottom, only the absence of some definite object, which 
was here at first, is now elsewhere and, in so far as it is no 
longer in its former place, leaves behind it, so to speak, 
the void of itself. A being unendowed with memory or 
prevision would not use the words "void" or "nought"; 
he would express only what is and what is perceived; 
now, what is, and what is perceived, is the presence of 
one thing or of another, never the absence of anything. 
There is absence only for a being capable of remember­
ing and expecting. He remembered an object, and per­
haps expected to encounter it again ; he finds another, 
and he expresses the disappointment of his expectation 
(an expectation sprung from recollection) by saying 
that he no longer finds anything, that he encounters 
unothing." Even if he did not expect to encounter the 
object, it is a possible expectation of it, it is still the falsi­
fication of his eventual expectation that he expresses by 
saying that the object is no longer where it was. What he 
perceives in reality, what he will succeed in effectively 
thinking of, is the presence of the old object in a new 
place or that of a new object in the old place; the rest, all 
that is expressed negatively by such words as "nought" 
or the "void," is not so much thought as feeling, or, to 
speak more exactly, it is the tinge that feeling gives to 
thought. The idea of annihilation or of partial nothing­
ness is therefore formed here in the course of the substi­
tution of one thing for another, whenever this substitu­
tion is thought by a mind that would prefer to keep the 
old thing in the place of the new, or at least conceives 

THE IDEA O F  " N O T H ING " 
307 
this preference as possible. The idea implies on the sub­
jective side a preference, on the objective side a substi­
tution, and is nothing else but a combination of, or rather 
an interference between, this feeling of preference and 
this idea of substitution. 
Such is the mechanism of the operation by which our 
mind annihilates an object and succeeds in representing 
in the external world a partial nought. Let us now see 
how it represents it within itself. We find in ourselves 
phenomena that are produced, and not phenomena that 
are not produced. I experience a sensation or an emotion, 
I conceive an idea, I form a resolution : my consciousness 
perceives these facts, which are so many presences, and 
there is no moment in which facts of this kind are not 
present to me. I can, no doubt, interrupt by thought the 
course of my inner life; I may suppose that I sleep with· 
out dreaming or that I have ceased to exist; but at the 
very instant when I make this supposition, I conceive 
myself, I imagine myself watching over my slumber or 
surviving my annihilation, and I give up perceiving my­
self from within only by taking refuge in the perception 
of myself from without. That is to say that here again 
the full always succeeds the full, and that an intelligence 
that was only intelligence, that had neither regret nor 
desire, whose movement was governed by the movement 
of its object, could not even conceive an absence or a 
void. The conception of a void arises here when con­
sciousness, lagging behind itself, remains attached to the 
recollection of an old state when another state is already 
present. It is only a comparison between what is and 
what could or ought to be, between the full and the full. 
In a word, whether it be a void of matter or a void of 

J08 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
consciousness, the representation of the void is always a 
representation which is full and which resolves itself on 
analysis into lwo positive elements: the idea, distinct or 
confused, of a substitution, and the feeling, experienced 
or imagined, of a desire or a regret. 
It follows from this double analysis that the idea of 
the absolute nought, in the sense of the annihilation of 
everything, is a self-destructive idea, a pseudo-idea, a 
mere word. If suppressing a thing consists in replacing it 
by another, if thinking the absence of one thing is only 
possible by the more or less explicit representation of the 
presence of some other thing, if, in short, annihilation 
signifies before anything else substitution, the idea of an 
"annihilation of everything" is as absurd as that of a 
square circle. The absurdity is not obvious, because 
there exists no particular object that cannot be supposed 
annihilated; then, from the fact that there is nothing to 
prevent each thing in turn being suppressed in thought, 
we conclude that it is possible to suppose them sup­
pressed altogether. We do not see that suppressing each 
thing in turn consists precisely in replacing it in propor­
tion and degree by another, and therefore that the sup­
pression of absolutely everything implies a downright 
contradiction in terms, since the operation consists in 
destroying the very condition that makes the operation 
possible. 
But the illusion is tenacious. Though suppressing one 
thing consists in fact in substituting another for it, we 
do not conclude, we are unwilling to conclude, that the 
annihilation of a thing in thought implies the substitu­
tion in thought of a new thing for the old. We agree that 
a thing is always replaced by another thing, and even 

THE IDEA OF 
" NOTHING" 
309 
that our mind cannot think the disappearance of an ob­
ject, external or internal, without thinking-under an 
indeterminate and confused form, it is true-that an­
other object is substituted for it. But we add that the rep­
resentation of a disappearance is that of a phenomenon 
that is produced in space or at least in time, that conse­
quently it still implies the calling up of an image, and 
that it is precisely here that we have to free ourselves 
from the imagination in order to appeal to the pure 
understanding. ((Let us therefore no longer speak," it 
will be said, uof disappearance or annihilation; these are 
physical operations. Let us no longer represent the ob­
ject A as annihilated or absent. Let us say simply that 
we think it ((non-existent." To annihilate it is to act on it 
in time and perhaps also in space; it is to accept, conse­
quently, the condition of spatial and temporal existence, 
to accept the universal connection that binds an object 
to all others, and preTents it from disappearing without 
being at the same time replaced. But we can free our­
selves from these conditions ; all that is necessary is that 
by an effort of abstraction we should call up the idea of 
the object A by itself, that we should agree first to con­
sider it as existing, and then, by a stroke of the intellec­
tual pen, blot out the clause. The object will then be, by 
our decree, ((non-existent." 
Very well, let us strike out the clause. We must not 
suppose that our pen-stroke is self-sufficient-that it can 
be isolated from the rest of things. We shall see that it 
carries with it, whether we will or no, all that we tried to 
abstract from. Let us compare together the two ideas­
the object A supposed to exist, and the same object sup­
posed ((non-existent." 

JIO 
CREATIVE 
EVOLUTION 
The idea of the object A, supposed existent, is the repᯈ 
resentation pure and simple of the object A, for we canᯉ 
not represent an object without attributing to it, by the 
very fact of representing it, a certain reality. Between 
thinking an object and thinking it existent, there is absoᯊ 
lutely no difference. Kant has put this point in clear light 
in his criticism of the ontological argument. Then, what 
is it to think the object A non-existent? To represent it 
non-existent cannot consist in withdrawing from the idea 
of the object A the idea of the attribute "existence," 
since, I repeat, the representation of the existence of the 
object is inseparable from the representation of the obᯋ 
ject, and indeed is one with it. To represent the object 
A non-existent can only consist, therefore, in adding 
something to the idea of this object: we add to it, in fact, 
the idea of an exclusion of this particular object by acᯌ 
tual reality in general. To think the object A as nonᯍ 
existent is first to think the object and consequently to 
think it existent; it is then to think that another reality, 
with which it is incompatible, supplants it. Only, it is 
useless to represent this latter reality explicitly; we are 
not concerned with what it is; it is enough for us to know 
that it drives out the object A, which alone is of interest 
to us. That is why we think of the expulsion rather than 
of the cause which expels. But this cause is none the less 
present to the mind; it is there in the implicit state, that 
which expels being inseparable from the expulsion as the 
hand which drives the pen is inseparable from the penᯍ 
stroke. The act by which we declare an object unreal 
therefore posits the existence of the real in general. In 
other words, to represent an object as unreal cannot conᯌ 
sist in depriving it of every kind of existence, since the 

THE IDEA OF 
" N O T H I N G " 
3 1 1  
representation of an object is necessarily that of the ob­
ject existing. Such an act consists simply in declaring 
that the existence attached by our mind to the object, 
and inseparable from its representation, is an existence 
wholly ideal-that of a mere possible. But the "ideality" 
of an object, and the "simple possibility" of an object, 
have meaning only in relation to a reality that drives into 
the region of the ideal, or of the merely possible, the ob­
ject which is incompatible with it. Suppose the stronger 
and more substantial existence annihilated : it is the at­
tenuated and weaker existence of the merely possible 
that becomes the reality itself, and you will no longer be 
representing the object, then, as non-existent. In other 
words, and however strange our assertion may seem, 
there is more, and not less, in the idea of an object con· 
ceived as "not existing" than in the idea of this same obʥ 
ject conceived as "existing"; for the idea of the ob jcct 
"not existing" is necessarily the idea of the object "exist­
ing" with, in addition, the representation of an exclusion 
of this object by the actual reality taken in block. 
But it will be claimed that our idea of the non-existent 
is not yet sufficiently cut loose from every imaginative 
element, that it is not negative enough. "No matter," 
we shall be told, "though the unreality of a thing consist 
in its exclusion by other things ; we want to know nothing 
about that. Are we not free to direct our attention where 
we please and how we please? Well then, after having 
called up the idea of an object, and thereby, if you will 
have it so, supposed it existent, we shall merely couple 
to our affirmation a 'not,' and that will be enough to 
make us think it non-existent. This is an operation en· 
tirely intellectual, independent of what happens outsidu 

3 12 
CR EATIVE EVOLUTION 
the mind. So let us think of anything or let us think of the 
totality of things, and then write in the margin of our 
thought the 'not,' which prescribes the rejection of what 
it contains : we annihilate everything mentally by the 
mere fact of decreeing its annihilation."-Here we have 
it! The very root of all the difficulties and errors with 
which we are confronted is to be found in the power as­
cribed here to negation. We represent negation as ex­
actly symmetrical with affirmation. We imagine that ne­
gation, like affirmation, is self-sufficient. So that nega­
tion, like affirmation, would have the power of creating 
ideas, with this sole difference that they would be nega­
tive ideas. By affirming one thing, and then another, and 
so on ad infinitum, I form the idea of "All"; so, by deny­
ing one thing and then other things, finally by denying 
All, I arrive at the idea of N othing.-But it is just this 
assimilation which is arbitrary. We fail to see that while 
affirmation is a complete act of the mind, which can suc­
ceed in building up an idea, negation is but the half of an 
intellectual act, of which the other half is understood, or 
rather put off to an indefinite future. We fail to see that 
while affirmation is a purely intellectual act, there enters 
into negation an element which is not intellectual, and 
that it is precisely to the intrusion of this foreign element 
that negation owes its specific character. 
To begin with the second point, let us note that to deny 
always consists in setting aside a possible affirmation.1 
Negation is only an attitude taken by the mind toward 
an eventual affirmation. When I say, "This table is 
1 Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, md edition, p. 737 :  "From the point 
of view of our knowledge in general . . .  the peculiar function of neg­
ative propositions is simply to prevent error." Cf. Sigwart, Logik, 2nd 
edition, vol. l. pp. xso ff. 

THE IDEA OF 
" N O T H I N G " 
J IJ 
black," I am speaking of the table; I have seen it black, 
and my judgment expresses what I have seen. But if I 
say, "This table is not white," I surely do not express 
something I have perceived, for I have seen black, and 
not an absence of white. It is therefore, at bottom, not on 
the table itself that I bring this judgment to bear, but 
rather on the judgment that would declare the table 
\vhite. I judge a judgment and not the table. The propo­
sition, "This table is not white," implies that you might 
believe it white, that you did believe it such, or that I was 
going to believe it such. I warn you or myself that this 
judgment is to be replaced by another (which, it is true, 
I leave undetermined) . Thusᯎ while affirmation bears 
directly on the thing, negation aims at the thing only in­
directly, through an interposed affirmation. An affirma­
tive proposition expresses a judgment on an object; a 
negative proposition expresses a judgment on a judg­
ment. Negation, therefore, differs from affirmation prop­
erly so called in that it is an affirmation of the second de­
gree: it affirms something of an affirmation which itself 
affirms something of an object. 
But it follows at once from this that negation is not 
the work of pure mind, I should say of a mind placed be­
fore objects and concerned with them aloue. When we 
deny, we give a lesson to others, or it may be to our­
selves. We take to task an interlocutor, real or possible, 
whom we find mistaken and whom we put on his guard. 
He was affirming something: we tell him he ought to 
afirm something else (though without specifying the 
affirmation which must be substituted) .  There is no 
longer then, simply, a person and an object; there is, in 
face of the object, a person speaking to a person, oppos-

3 14 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
ing him and aiding him at the same time ; there is a be­
ginning of society. Negation aims at someone, and not 
only, like a purely intellectual operation, at something. 
It is of a pedagogical and social nature. It sets straight 
or rather warns, the person warned and set straight being 
possibly, by a kind of doubling, the very person that 
speaks. 
So much for the second point; now for the first. We 
said that negation is but the half of an intellectual act, 
of which the other half is left indeterminate. If I pro­
nounce the negative proposition, "This table is not 
white," I mean that you ought to substitute for your 
judgment, "The table is white," another judgment. I give 
you an admonition, and the admonition refers to the ne­
cessity of a substitution. As to what you ought to sub­
stitute for your affirmation, I tell you nothing, it is true. 
This may be because I do not know the color of the 
table; but it is also, it is indeed even more, because the 
white color is that alone that interests us for the moment, 
so that I only need to tell you that some other color will 
have to be substituted for white, without having to say 
which. A negative judgment is therefore really one which 
indicates a need of substituting for an affirmative judg­
ment another affirmative judgment, the nature of which, 
however, is not specified, sometimes because it is not 
known, more often because it fails to offer any actual in­
terest, the attention bearing only on the substance of the 
first. 
Thus, whenever I add a "not" to an affirmation, when­
ever I deny, I perform two very definite acts: ( 1 )  I in­
terest myself in what one of my fellow-men affirms, or in 
what he was going to say, or in what might have been 

THE IDEA OF " NOTHING" 
3 15 
said by another Me, whom I anticipate; ( 2 )  I announce 
that some other affirmation, whose content I do not spec­
ify, will have to be substituted for the one I find before 
me. Now, in neither of these two acts is there anything 
but affirmation. The sui gcneris character of negation is 
due to superimposing the first of these acts upon the sec­
ond. It is in vain, then, that we attribute to negation the 
power of creating ideas sui gencris, symmetrical with 
those that affirmation creates, and directed in a contrary 
sense. No idea will come forth from negation, for it has 
no other content than that of the affirmative judgment 
which it judges. 
To be more precise, let us consider an existential, in­
stead of an attributive, judgment. If I say, "The object 
A does not exist," I mean by that, first, that we might 
believe that the object A exists : how, indeed, can we 
think of the object A without thinking it existing, and, 
once again, what difference can there be between the idea 
of the object A existing and the idea pure and simple of 
the object A? Therefore, merely by saying "The object 
A," I attribute to it some kind of existence, though it be 
that of a mere possible, that is to say, of a pure idea. And 
consequently , in the judgment "The object A is not," 
there is at first an affirmation such as "The object A has 
been," or "The object A will be," or, more generally, 
"The object A exists at least as a mere possible." Now, 
when I add the two words "is not," I can only mean that 
if we go further, if we erect the possible object into a real 
object, we shall be mistaken, and that the possible of 
which I am speaking is excluded from the actual reality 
as incompatible with it. Judgments that posit the non­
existence of a thing are therefore judgments that formu· 

316 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
late a contrast between the possible and the actual (that 
is, between two kinds of existence, one thought and the 
other found) ,  where a person, real or imaginary, wrongly 
believes that a certain possible is realized. Instead of this 
possible, there is a reality that differs from it and rejects 
it : the negative judgment expresses this contrast, but it 
expresses the contrast in an intentionally incomplete 
form, because it is addressed to c1 person who is supposed 
to be interested exclusively in the possible that is indi­
cated, and is not concerned to know by what kind of 
reality the possible is replaced. The expression of the 
substitution is therefore bound to be cut short. Instead 
of affuming that a second term is substituted for the first, 
the attention which was originally directed to the first 
term will be kept fixed upon it, and upon it alone. And, 
without going beyond the first, we shall implicitly affirm 
that a second term replaces it in saying that the first ((is 
not." We shall thus judge a judgment instead of judging 
a thing. We shall warn others or warn ourselves of a pos­
sible error instead of supplying positive information. 
Suppress every intention of this kind, give knowledge 
back its exclusively scientific or philosophical character, 
suppose in other words that reality comes itself to in­
scribe itself on a mind that cares only for things and is 
not interested in persons : we shall affirm that such or 
such a thing is, we shall never affirm that a thing is not. 
How comes it, then, that affirmation and negation are 
so persistently put on the same level and endowed with 
an equal objectivity? How comes it that we have so much. 
difficulty in recognizing that negation is subjective, ar­
tificially cut short, relative to the human mind and still 
more to the social life? The reason is, no doubt, that both 

THE IDEA OF "NOTHING" 
3 1 7 
negation and affirmation are expressed in propositions, 
and that any proposition, being formed of words, which 
symbolize concepts, is something relative to social life 
and to the human intellect. Whether I say "The ground 
is damp" or "The ground is not damp," in both cases the 
terms "ground" and "damp" are concepts more or less 
artificially created by the mind of man-extracted, by 
his free initiative, from the continuity of experience. In 
both cases the concepts are represented by the same con­
ventional wordᯏ. In both cases we can say indeed that the 
proposition aiJ:1S at a social and pedagogical end, since 
the first would propagate a truth as the second would 
prevent an error. From this point of view, which is that 
of formal logic, to affirm and to deny are indeed two 
mutually symmetrical acts, of which the first establishes 
a relation of agreement and the second a relation of dis­
agreement between a subject and an attribute. But how 
do we fail to see that the symmetry is altogether external 
and the likeness superficial ? Suppose language fallen 
into disuse, society dissolved, every intellectual initia­
tive, every faculty of self-reflection and of self-judgment 
atrophied in man : the dampness of the ground will sub­
sist none the less, capable of inscribing itself automati­
cally in sensation and of sending a vague idea to the dead­
ened intellect. The intellect will still affirm, in implicit 
terms. And consequently, neither distinct concepts, nor 
words, nor the desire of spreading the truth, nor that of 
bettering oneself, are of the very essence of the affirma­
tion. But this passive intelligence, mechanically keeping 
step with experience, neither anticipating nor following 
the course of the real, would have no wish to deny. It 
could not receive an imprint of negation ; for, once again, 

3 18 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
that which exists may come to be recorded, but the non­
existence of the non-existing cannot. For such an intel­
lect to reach the point of denying, it must awake from 
its torpor, formulate the disappointment of a real or pos­
sible expectation, correct an actual or possible error­
in short, propose to teach others or to teach itself. 
It is rather difficult to perceive this in the example 
we have chosen, but the example is indeed the more in­
structive and the argument the more cogent on that ac­
count. If dampness is able automatically to come and 
record itself, it is the same, it will be said, with non­
dampness ; for the dry as well as the damp can give im­
pressions to sense, which will transmit them, as more or 
less distinct ideas, to the intt>lligence. In this sense the 
negation of dampness is as objective a thing, as purely 
intellectual, as remote from every pedagogical intention, 
as affirmation.-llut let us look at it more closely: we 
shall see that the negative proposition, "The ground is 
not damp," and the affirmative proposition, "The ground 
is dry," have entirely different contents. The second im­
plies that we know the dry, that we have experienced the 
specific sensations, tactile or vis ual for example, that are 
at the base of this idea. The first requires nothing of the 
sort ; it could equally wt>ll have been formulated by an 
intelligent fish, who had never perceived anything but 
the wet. It would be necessary, it is true, that this fish 
should have risen to the distinction between the real and 
the possible, and that he should care to anticipate the 
error of his fellow-fishes, who doubtless consider as alone 
possible the condition of wetness in which they actually 
live. Keep strictly to the terms of the proposition, "The 
ground is not damp," and you will find that it means two 

THE IDEA OF "NOTHING" 
319 
things : ( 1) that one might believe that the ground is 
damp, ( 2) that the dampness is replaced in fact by a cer­
tain quality x. This quality is left indeterminate, either 
because we have no positive knowledge of it, or because 
it has no actual interest for the person to whom the nega­
tion is addressed. To deny, therefore, always consists in 
presenting in an abridged form a system of two affirma­
tions : the one determinate, which applies to a certain 
possible ; the other indeterminate, referring to the un­
known or indifferent reality that supplants this possibil­
ity. The second affirmation is virtually contained in the 
judgment we apply to the first, a judgment which is ne­
gation itself. And what gives negation its subjective 
character is precisely this, that in the discovery of a re­
placement it takes account only of the replaced, and is 
not concerned with what replaces. The replaced exists 
only as a conception of the mind. It is necessary, in order 
to continue to see it, and consequently in order to speak 
of it, to turn our back on the reality, which flows from 
the past to the present, advancing from behind. It is this 
that we do when we deny. We discover the change, or 
more generally the substitution, as a traveler would see 
the course of his carriage if he looked out behind, and 
only knew at each moment the point at which he had 
ceased to be; he could never determine his actual posi­
tion except by relation to that which he had just quitted, 
instead of grasping it in itself. 
To sum up, for a mind which should follow purely and 
simply the thread of experience, there would be no void, 
no nought, even relative or partial, no possible negation. 
Such a mind would see facts succeed facts, states suc­
ceed states, things succeed things. What it would note at 

320 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
each moment would be things existing, states appearing, 
events happening. It would live in the actual, and, if it 
were capable of judging, it would never affirm anything 
except the existence of the present. 
Endow this mind with memory, and especially with 
the desire to dwell on the past; give it the faculty of dis­
sociating and of distinguishing: it will no longer only 
note the present state of the passing reality; it will rep­
resent the passing as a change, and therefore as a con­
trast between what has been and what is. And as there is 
no essential difference between a past that we remember 
and a past that we imagine, it will quickly rise to the idea 
of the "possible" in general. 
It will thus be shunted om. to the siding of negation. 
And especially it will be at the point of representing a 
disappearance. But it will not yet have reached it. To 
represent that a thing has disappeared, it is not enough 
to perceive a contrast between the past and the present; 
it is necessary basides to turn our back on the present, 
to dwell on the past, and to think the contrast of the past 
with the present in terms of the past only, without let­
ting the present appear in it. 
The idea of annihilation is therefore not a pure idea; 
it implies that we regret the past or that we conceive it 
as regrettable, that we have some reason to linger over 
it. The idea arises when the phenomenon of substitution 
is cut in two by a mind which considers only the first 
half, because that alone interests it. Suppress all interest, 
all feeling, and there is nothing left but the reality that 
flows, together with the knowledge ever renewed that it 
\mpresses on us of its present state. 
From annihilation to negation, which is a more gen-

THE IDEA OF "NOTHING" 
32 1 
eral operation, there is now only a step. All that is neces­
sary is to represent the contrast of what is, not only with 
what has been, but also with all that might have been. 
And we must express this contrast as a function of what 
might have been, and not of what is; we must affirm the 
existence of the actual while looking only at the possible. 
The formula we thus obtain no longer expresses merely 
a disappointment of the individual ; it is made to correct 
or guard against an error, which is rather supposed to be 
t.he error of another. In this sense, negation has a peda­
gogical and social character. 
Now, once negation is formulated, it presents an as­
pect symmetrical with that of affirmation; if affirmation 
affirms an objective reality, it seems that negation must 
affirm a non-reality equally objective, and, so to say, 
equally real. In which we are both right and wrong: 
wrong, because negation cannot be objectified, in so far 
as it is negative; right, however, in that the negation of 
a thing implies the latent affirmation of its replacement 
by something else, which we systematically leave on one 
side. But the negative form of negation benefits by tht: 
affirmation at the bottom of it. Bestriding the positive 
solid reality to which it is attached, this phantom objec­
tifies itself. Thus is formed the idea of the void or of a 
partial nought, a thing being supposed to be replaced, 
not by another thing, but by a void which it leaves, that 
is, by the negation of itself. Now, as this operation works 
on anything whatever, we suppose it performed on each 
thing in turn, and finally on all things in block. We thus 
obtain the idea of absolute Nothing. If now we analyze 
this idea of Nothing, we find that it is, at bottom, the idea 
of Everything, together with a movement of the mind 

3 2 2  
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
that keeps jumping from one thing to another, refuses to 
stand still, and concentrates all its attention on this re­
fusal by never determining its actual position except by 
relation to that which it has just left. It is therefore an 
idea eminently comprehensive and full, as full and com­
prehensive as the idea of All, to which it is very closely 
akin. 
How then can the idea of Nought be opposed to that 
of All? Is it not plain that this is to oppose the full to the 
full, and that the question, "Why does something exist?" 
is consequently without meaning, a pseudo-problem 
raised about a pseudo-idea? Yet we must say once more 
why this phantom of a problem haunts the mind with 
such obstinacy. In vain do we show that in the idea of an 
"annihilation of the real" there is only the image of all 
realities expelling one another endlessly, in a circle; in 
vain do we add that the idea of non-existence is only that 
of the expulsion of an imponderable existence, or a 
"merely possible" existence, by a more substantial ex­
istence which would then be the true reality; in vain do 
we find in the sui gencris form of negation an element 
which is not intellectual-negation being the judgment 
of a judgment, an admonition given to someone else or to 
oneself, so that it is absurd to attribute to negation the 
power of creating ideas of a new kind, viz. ideas without 
content;-in spite of all, the conviction persists that be­
fore things, or at least under things, there is "Nothing." 
If we seek the reason of this fact, we shall find it pre­
cisely in the feeling, in the social and, so to speak, prac­
tical element, that gives its specific form to negation. The 
greatest philosophic difficulties arise, as we have said, 
from the fact that the forms of human action venture 

THE IDEA OF "NOTHING" 
3 2 3  
outside of their proper sphere. We are made in order to 
act as much as, and more than, in order to think--or 
rather, when we follow the bent of our nature, it is in 
order to act that we think. It is therefore no wonder that 
the habits of action give their tone to those of thought, 
and that our mind always perceives things in the same 
order in which we are accustomed to picture them when 
we propose to act on them. Now, it is unquestionable, as 
we remarked above, that every human action has its 
starting-point in a dissatisfaction, and thereby in a feel­
ing of absence. We should not act if we did not set before 
ourselves an end, and we seck a thing only because we 
feel the lack of it. Our action proceeds thus from "noth­
ing" to "something," and its very essence is to embroider 
"something" on the canvas of "nothing." The truth is 
that the "nothing" concerned here is the absence not so 
much of a thing ᯀs of a utility. If I bring a visitor into a 
room that I have not yet furnished, I say to him that 
"there is nothing in it." Yet I know the room is full of 
air; but, as we do not sit on air, the room truly contains 
nothing that at this moment, for the visitor and for my­
self, counts for anything. In a general way, human work 
consists in creating utility ; and, as long as the work is 
not done, there is "nothing"-nothing that we want. Our 
life is thus spent in filling voids, which our intellect con­
ceives under the influence, by no means intellectual, of 
desire and of regret, under the pressure of vital neces­
sities; and if we mean by void an absence of utility and 
not of things, we may say, in this quite relative sense, 
that we are constantly going from the void to the full : 
such is the direction which our action takes. Our spe:u­
lation cannot help doing the same; and, naturally: it 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
passes from the relative sense to the absolute sense, since 
it is exercised on things themselves and not on the utility 
they have for us. Thus is implanted in us the idea that 
reality fills a void, and that Nothing, conceived as an 
absence of everything, pre-exists before all things in 
right, if not in fact. It is this illusion that we have tried 
to remove by showing that the idea of Nothing, if we try 
to see in it that of an annihilation of all things, is self­
destructive and reduced to a mere word ; and that if, on 
the contrary, it is truly an idea, then we find in it as much 
matter as in the idea of All. 
This long analysis has been necessary to show that a 
self-sufficient reality is not necessarily a reality foreign 
to duration. If we pass (consciously or unconsciously) 
through the idea of the nought in order to reach that of 
being, the being to which we come is a logical or mathe­
matical essence, therefore non-temporal. And, conse­
quently, a static conception of the real is forced on us : 
everything appears given once for all, in eternity. But we 
must accustom ourselves to think being directly, without 
making a detour, without first appealing to the phantom 
of the nought which interposes itself between it and us. 
We must strive to see in order to see, and no longer to 
see in order to act. Then the Absolute is revealed very 
near us and, in a certain measure, in us. It is of psycho­
logical and not of mathematical nor logical essence. It 
lives with us. Like us, but in certain aspects infinitely 
more concentrated and more gathered up in itself, it 
endures. 
But do we ever think true duration? Here again a di­
rect taking possession is necessary. It is no use trying to 

FORM A N D  B E C O M I N G  
approach duration : we must install ourselves within it 
straight away. This is what the intellect generally re­
fuses to do, accustomed as it is to think the moving by 
means of the unmovable. 
The function of the intellect is to preside over actions. 
Now, in action, it is the result that interests us ; the 
means matter little provided the end is attained. Thence 
it comes that we are altogether bent on the end to be 
realized, generally trusting ourselves to it in order that 
the idea may become an act; and thence it comes also 
that only the goal where our activity will rest is pictured 
explicitly to our mind : the movements constituting the 
action itself either elude our coQsciousness or reach it 
only confusedly. Let us consider a very simple act, like 
that of lifting the arm. Where should we be if we had to 
imagine beforehand all the elementary contractions and 
tensions this act involves, or even to perceive them, one 
by one, as they are accomplished? But the mind is car­
ried immediately to the end, that is to say, to the sche­
matic and simplified vision of the act supposed accom­
plished. Then, if no antagonistic idea neutralizes the ef­
fect of the first idea, the appropriate movements come of 
themselves to fill out the plan, drawn in some way by the 
void of its gaps. The intellect, then, only represents to 
the activity ends to attain, that is to say, points of 5est. 
And, from one end attained to anᯁ her end attained, 
from one rest to another rest, our activity is carried by a 
series of leaps, during which our consciousness is turned 
away as much as possible from the movement going on, 
to regard only the anticipated image of the movement 
accomplished. 
Now, in order that it may represent as unmovable the 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
result of the act which is being accomplished, the intel­
lect must perceive, as also unmovable, the surroundings 
in which this result is being framed. Our activity is fitted 
into the material world. If matter appeared to us as a 
perpetual flowing, we should assign no termination to 
any of our actions. We should feel each of them dissolve 
as fast as it was accomplished, and we should not antici­
pate an ever-fleeting future. In order that our activity 
may leap from an act to an act, it is necessary that mat­
ter should pass from a state to a state, for it is only into a 
state of the material world that action can fit a result, so 
as to be accomplished. But is it thus that matter presents 
itself? 
A priori we may presume that our perception manages 
to apprehend matter with this bias. Sensory organs and 
motor organs are in fact co-ordinated with each other. 
Now, the first symbolize our faculty of perceiving, as the 
second our faculty of acting. The organism thus evi­
dences, in a visible and tangible form, the perfect accord 
of perception and action. So if our activity always aims 
at a result into which it is momentarily fitted, our percep­
tion must retain of the material world, at every moment, 
only a state in which it is provisionally placed. This is 
the most natural hypothesis. And it is easy to see that 
experience confirms it. 
From our frrst glance at the world, before we even 
make our bodies in it, we distinguish qualities. Color 
succeeds to color, sound to sound, resistance to resist­
ance, etc. Each of these qualities, taken separately, is a 
state that seems to persist as such, immovable until an­
other replaces it. Yet each of these qualities resolves it­
self, on analysis, into an enormous number of elemen-

FORM A N D  BECOMING 
tary movements. Whether we see in it vibrations or 
whether we represent it in any other way, one fact is cer­
tain, it is that every quality is change. In vain, moreover, 
shall we seek beneath the change the thing which 
changes : it is always provisionally, and in order to sat­
isfy our imagination, that we attach the movement to a 
mobile. The mobile flies forever before the pursuit of 
science, which is concerned with mobility alone. In the 
smallest discernible fraction of a second, in the almost 
instantaneous perception of a sensible quality, -there may 
be trillions of oscillations which repeat themselves. The 
permanence of a sensible quality consists in this repeti­
tion of movements, as the persistence of life consists in a 
series of palpitations. The primal function of perception 
is precisely to grasp a series of elementary changes under 
the form of a quality or of a simple state, by a work of 
condensation. The greater the power of acting bestowed 
upon an animal species, the more numerous, probably, 
are the elementary changes that its faculty of perceiving 
concentrates into one of its instants. And the progress 
must be continuous, in nature, from the beings that vi­
brate almost in unison with the oscillations of the ether, 
up to those that embrace trillions of these oscillations in 
the shortest of their simple perceptions. The first feel 
hardly anything but movements ; the others perceive 
quality. The first are almost caught up in the running­
gear of things ; the others react, and the tension of their 
faculty of acting is probably proportional to the concen­
tration of their faculty of perceiving. The progress goes 
on even in humanity itself. A man is so much the more a 
"man of action" as he can embrace in a glance a greater 
number of events: he who perceives successive events 

CREATIVE EVOLU TIO N 
one by one will allow himself to be led by them ; he who 
grasps them as a whole will dominate them. In short, the 
qualities of matter are so many stable views that we take 
of its instability. 
Now, in the continuity of sensible qualities we mark 
off the boundaries of bodies. Each of these bodies really 
changes at every moment. In the first place, it resolves 
itself into a group of qualities, and every quality, as we 
said, consists of a succession of elementary movements. 
But, even if we regard the quality as a stable state, the 
body is still unstable in that it changes qualities without 
ceasing. The body pre-eminently-that which we are 
most justified in isolating within the continuity of mat­
ter, because it constitutes a relatively closed system-is 
the living body ; it is, moreover, for it that we cut out the 
others within the whole. Now, life is :m evolution. We 
concentrate a period of this evolution in a stable view 
which we call a form, and, when the change has become 
considerable enough to overcome the fortunate inertia of 
our perception, we say that the body has changed its 
form. But in reality the body is changing form at every 
moment ; or rather, there is no form, sincf' form is immo­
bile and the reality is movement. What is re<1l is the con­
tinual change of form : form is only a snaps/tot view of a 
transition. Therefore, here again, our perception JUan­
ages to solidify into discontinuous images the fluid con­
tinuity of the real. When the successive images do not 
differ from t•ach other too much, we consider them aJI a:: 
the waxing and waning of a single mean. imaᯂe, or as the 
deformation of this image in different directions. And to 
this mean we really atllude when we speak of the essence 
1>f a thing, or of the thing- itself., 

FORM AND B E C O M I N G  
Finally things, once constituted, show on the surface, 
by their changes of situation, the profound changes that 
are being accomplished within the Whole. We say then 
that they act on one another. This action appears to us, 
no doubt, in the form of movement. But from the mo­
bility of the movement we turn away as much as we can; 
what interests us is, as we said above, the unmovable 
plan of the movement rather than the movement itself. 
Is it a simple movement? We ask ourselves where it is 
going. It is by its direction, that is to say, by the position 
of its provisional end, that we represent it at every mo­
ment. Is it a complex movement? We would know above 
all what is going on, what the movement is doing-in 
other words, the result obtained or the presiding inten­
tion. Examine closely what is in your mind when you 
speak of an action in course of accomplishment. The idea 
of change is there, I am willing to grant, but it is hidden 
in the penumbra. In the full light is the motionless plan 
of the act supposed accomplished. It is by this, and by 
this only, that the complex act is distinguished and de­
fined. We should be very much embarrassed if we had to 
imagine the movements inherent in the actions of eating, 
drinking, fighting, etc. It is enough for us to know, in a 
general and indefinite way, that all these acts are move­
ments. Once that side of the matter has been settled, we 
simply seek to represent the general plan of each of these 
complex movements, that is to say the motionless design 
that underlies them. Here again knowledge bears on a 
state rather than on a change. It is therefore the same 
with this third case as with the others. Whether the 
movement be qualitative or evolutionary or extensive, 
the mind manages to take stable views of the instability. 

330 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
And thence the mind derives, as we have just shown, 
three kinds of representations : ( 1) qualities, ( 2 )  forms 
of essences, ( 3) acts. 
To these three ways of seeing correspond three cate­
gories of words : adjectives, substantives and verbs, 
which are the primordial elements of language. Adjec­
tives and substantives therefore symbolize states. But 
the verb itself, if we keep to the clear part of the idea it 
calls up, hardly expresses anything else. 
Now, if we try to characterize more precisely our nat­
ural attitude toward Becoming, this is what we find. Be­
coming is infinitely varied. That which goes from yellow 
to green is not like that which goes from green to blue : 
they are different qualitative movements. That which 
goes from flower to fruit is not like that which goes from 
larva to nymph and from nymph to perfect insect : they 
are different evolutionary movements. The action of eat­
ing or of drinking is not like the action of fighting : they 
are different extensive movements. And these three kinds 
of movement themselves--qualitative, evolutionary, ex­
tensive-differ profoundly. The trick of our perception, 
like that of our intelligence, like that of our language, 
consists in extracting from these profoundly different 
becomings the single representation of becoming in gen­
eral, undefined becoming, a mere abstraction which by 
itself says nothing and of which, indeed, it is very rarely 
that we think. To this idea, always the same, and always 
obscure or unconscious, we then join, in each particular 
case, one or several clear images that represent states 
and which serve to distinguish all becomings from each 
·Jther. It is this composition of a specified and definite 

FORM AND BECOMING 
331 
state with change general and undefined that we substi­
tute for the specific change. An infinite multiplicity of 
becomings variously colored, so to speak, passes before 
our eyes : we manage so that we see only differences of 
color, that is to say, differences of state, beneath which 
there is supposed to flow, hidden from our view, a becom­
ing always and everywhere the same, invariably color­
less. 
Suppose we wish to portray on a screen a living pic­
ture, such as the marching past of a regiment. There is 
one way in which it might first occur to us to do it. That 
would be to cut out jointed figures representing the sol­
diers, to give to each of them the movement of marching, 
a movement varying from individual to individual al­
though common to the human species, and to throw the 
whole on the screen. We should need to spend on this lit­
tle game an enormous amount of work, and even then we 
should obtain but a very poor result : how could it, at its 
best, reproduce the suppleness and variety of life? Now, 
there is another way of proceeding, more easy and at the 
same time more effective. It is to take a series of snap­
shots of the passing regiment and to throw these instan­
taneous views on the screen, so that they replace each 
other very rapidly. This is what the cinematograph does. 
With photographs, each of which represents the regi­
ment in a fixed attitude, it reconstitutes the mobility of 
the regiment marching. It is true that if we had to do 
with photographs alone, however much we might look at 
them, we should never see them animated : with immo­
bility set beside immobility, even endlessly, we could 
never make movement. In order that the pictures may be 
animated, there must be movement somewhere. The 

332 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
movement does indeed exist here; it is in the apparatus. 
It is because the film of the cinematograph unrolls, 
bringing in turn the different photographs of the scene 
to continue each other, that each actor of the scene re­
covers his mobility; he strings all his successive attitudes 
on the invisible movement of the film. The process then 
consists in extracting from all the movements peculiar 
to all the figures an impersonal movement abstract and 
simple, movement in general, so to speak: we put this 
into the apparatus, and we reconstitute the individuality 
of each particular movement by combining this nameless 
movement with the personal attitudes. Such is the con­
trivance of the cinematograph. And such is also that of 
our knowledge. Instead of attaching ourselves to the in­
ner becoming of things, we place ourselves outside them 
in order to recompose their becoming artificially. We 
take snapshots, as it were, of the passing reality, and, as 
these are characteristic of the reality, we have only to 
string them on a becoming, abstract, uniform and invisi­
ble, situated at the back of the apparatus of knowledge, 
in order to imitate what there is that is characteristic in 
this becoming itself. Perception, intellection, language so 
proceed in general. Whether we would think becoming, 
or express it, or even perceive it, we hardly do anything 
else than set going a kind of cinematograph inside us. 
We may therefore sum up what we have been saying in 
the conclusion that the mechanism of our ordinary 
knowledge is of a cinematographical kind. 
Of the altogether practical character of this operation 
there is no possible doubt. Each of our acts aims at a cer­
tain insertion of our will into the reality. There is, be­
twP.P.n nnr hnnv ;mel othP.r hncfjpq ;m ;:rr:tn!rPmPnt JikP. 

FORM A N D  B E C O M I N G  
333 
that of the pieces of glass that compose a kaleidoscopic 
picture. Our activity goes from an arrangement to a re­
arrangement, each time no doubt giving the kaleidoscope 
a new shake, but not interesting itself in the shake, and 
seeing only the new picture. Our knowledge of the oper­
ation of nature must be exactly symmetrical, therefore, 
with the interest we take in our own operation. In this 
sense we may say, if we are not abusing this kind of illm;­
tration, that the cincmatographical clwructer of our 
knowledge oj things is due ltJ the }wleidosco pic character 
of our adaptation to them. 
The cinematographical method is therefore the only 
practical method, since it consists in making the general 
character of knowledge form itself on that of action, 
while expecting that the detail of each act should depend 
in its turn on that of knowledge. In order that action may 
always be enlightened, intelligence must always be pres­
ent in it; but intelligence, in order thus to accompany 
the progress of activity and ensure its direction, must 
begin by adopting its rhythm. Action is discontinuous, 
like every pulsation of life; discontinuous, therefore, is 
knowledge. The mechanism of the faculty of knowing 
has been constructed on this plan. Essentially practical, 
can it be of use, such as it is, for speculation? Let us try 
with it to follow reality in its windings, and see what will 
happen. 
I take of the continuity of a particular becoming a 
series of views, which I connect together by "becoming 
in general." But of course I cannot stop there. What is 
not determinable is not representable :  of "becoming in 
general" I have only a verbal knowledge. As the letter x 
designates a certain unknown quantity. whatever it may 

334 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
be, so my "becoming in general," always the same, sym· 
bolizes here a certain transition of which I have taken 
some snapshots ; of the transition itself it teaches me 
nothing. Let me then concentrate myself wholly on the 
transition, and, between any two snapshots, endeavor to 
realize what is going on. As I apply the same method, I 
obtain the same result; a third view merely slips in be· 
tween the two others. I may begicy again as often as I 
will, I may set views alongside of views for ever, I shall 
obtain nothing .else. Tbe application of the cinema­
tographical method therefore leads to a perpetual re­
commencemᯃnt, during ·which the mind, never able to 
satisfy itself and never finding where to rest, persuades 
itself, no doubt, that it imitates by its instability the very 
movement of the real. But though, by straining itself to 
the point of giddiness, it may end by giving itself the 
illusion of mobility, its operation has not advanced it a 
step, since it remains as far as ever from its goal. In order 
to advance with the moving reality, you must replace 
yourself within it. Install yourself within change, and 
you will grasp at once both change itself and the succes­
sive states in which it might at any instant be immobil­
ized. But with these successive states, perceived from 
without as real and no longer as potential immobilities, 
you will never reconstitute movement. Call them quali· 
ties, forms, positions, or intentions, as the case may be, 
multiply the number of them as you will, let the interval 
between two consecutive states be infinitely small : be­
fore the intervening movement you will always experi· 
ence the disappointment of the child who tries by clap· 
ping his hands together to crush the smoke. The 
movement slips through the interval, because every at-

FORM A N D  B E C O M I N G  
335 
tempt to reconstitute change out of states implies the 
absurd proposition, that movement is made of immo­
bilities. 
Philosophy perceived this as soon as it opened its eyes. 
The arguments of Zeno of Elea, although formulated 
with a very different intention, have no other meaning. 
Take the flying arrow. At every moment, says Zeno, 
it is motionless, for it cannot have time to move, that is, 
to occupy at least two successive positions, unless at least 
two moments arc allowed it. At a given moment, there­
fore, it is at rest at a given point. Motionless in each 
point of its course, it is motionless during all the time 
that it is moving. 
Yes, if we suppose that the arrow can ever be in a 
point of its course. Yes again, if the arrow, which is mov­
ing, ever coincides with a position, which is motionless. 
But the arrow never is in any point of its course. The 
most we can say is that it might be there, in this sense, 
that it passes there and might stop there. It is true that 
if it did stop there, it would be at rest there, and at this 
point it is no longer movement that we should have to do 
with. The truth is that if the arrow leaves the point A to 
fall down at the point B, its movement AB is as simple, 
as indecomposable, in so far as it is movement, as the 
tension of the bow that shoots it. As the shrapnel, burst­
log before it falls to the ground, covers the explosive 
zone with an indivisible danger, so the arrow which goes 
from A to B displays with a single stroke, although over 
a certain extent of duration, its indivisible mobility. Sup­
pose an elastic stretched from A to B, could you divide 
its extension? The course of the arrow is this very exten­
sion; it is equally simple and equally undivided. It is a 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
single and unique bound. You fix a point C in the 
interval passed, and say that at a certain moment the 
arrow was in C. If it had been there, it would have been 
stopped there, and you would no longer have had a flight 
from A to B, but two flights, one from A to C and the 
other from C to B, with an interval of rest. A single 
movement is entirely, by the hypothesis, a movement be­
tween two stops ; if there are intermediate stops, it is 
no longer a single movement. At bottom, the illusion 
arises from this, that the movement, once effected, has 
laid along its course a motionless trajectory on which we 
can count as many immobilities as we will. From this we 
conclude that the movement, whilst being effected, lays 
at each instant beneath it a position with which it coin­
cides. We do not see that the trajectory is created in one 
stroke, although a certain time is required for it; and 
that though we can divide at will the trajectory once 
created, we cannot divide its creation, which is an act in 
progress and not a thing. To suppose that the moving 
body is at a point of its course is to cut the course in two 
by a snip of the scissors at this point, and to substitute 
two trajectories for the single trajectory which we were 
first considering. It is to distinguish two successive acts 
where, by the hypothesis, there is only one. In short, it 
is to attritute to the course itself of the arrow everything 
that can be said of the interval that the arrow has trav­
ersed, that is to say, to admit a priori the absurdity that 
movement coincides with immobility. 
We shall not dwell here on the three other arguments 
of Zeno. We have examined them elsewhere. It is enough 
:o point out that they all consist in applying the move­
ment to the line traversed, and supposinᯄ that what is 

FORM AND DECOMING 
331 
true of the line is true of the movement. The line, for 
example, may be divided into as many parts as we wish, 
of any length that we wish, and it is always the same 
line. From this we conclude that we have the right tc 
suppose the movement articulated as we wish, and that 
it is always the same movement. We thus obtain a series 
of absurdities that all express the same fundamental 
absurdity. But the possibility of applying the movement 
to the line traversed exists only for an observer who, 
keeping outside the movement and seeing at every in­
stant the possibility of a stop, tries to reconstruct the 
real movement with these possible immobilities. The ab­
surdity vanishes as soon as we adopt by thought the con­
tinuity of the real movement, a continuity of which every 
one of us is conscious whenever he lifts an arm or ad­
vances a step. We feel then indeed that the line passed 
over between two stops is described with a single indi­
visible stroke, and that we seek in vain to practice on the 
movement, which traces the line, divisions correspond­
ing, each to each, with the divisions arbitrarily chosen 
of the line once it has been traced. The line traversed by 
the moving body lends itself to any kind of division, be­
cause it has no intern:il organization. But all movement 
is articulated inwardly. It is either an indivisible bound 
(which may occupy, nevertheless, a very long duration) 
or a series of indivisible bounds. Take the articulations 
of this movement into account, or give up speculating 
on its nature. 
When Achilles pursues the tortoise, each of his steps 
must be treated as indivisible, and so must each step of 
the tortoise. After a certain number of steps, Achilles 
will have overtaken the tortoise. There is nothing more 

CR EATIVE EVOL UTION 
simple. If you insist on dividing the two motions further, 
distinguish both on the one side and on the other, in the 
course of Achilles and in that of the tortoise, the sub­
multiples of the steps of each of them ; but respect the 
natural articulations of the two courses. As long as you 
respect them, no difficulty will arise, because you will 
follow the indications of experience. But Zeno's device 
is to reconstruct the movement of Achilles according to a 
law arbitrarily chosen. Achilles with a first step is sup­
posed to arrive at the point where the tortoise was, with 
a second step at the point which it has moved to while he 
was making the first, and so on. In this case, Achilles 
would always have a new step to take. But obviously, to 
overtake the tortoise, he goes about it in quite another 
way. The movement considered by Zeno would only be 
the equivalent of the movement of Achilles if we could 
treat the movement as we treat the interval passed 
through, decomposable and recomposable at will. Once 
you subscribe to this first absurdity, all the others fol­
low.1 
' That is, we do not consider the sophism of Zeno refuted by the fa,­
that the geometrical progression a (• + ;  + !,i +  + .
.
.
 , etc,)-i­
which a designates the initial distance beL ween Actullcs and the tortoise, 
and n the relation of their respective velocities-has a fmite sum if 
n is greater than x. On this point we may refer to the arguments of 
F, Evellin, which we regard as conclusive (sec Evellin, lnfini et quantiU, 
Paris, I88o, pp, 63-97 ;  cf. Revue philosophique, vol. xi., I88I, pp. s64-
S68) . The truth is that mathematics, as we have tried to show in a 
former work, deals and can deal only with lengths. It has therefore had 
to seek devices, first, to transfer to the movement, which is not a length, 
the divisibility of the line passed over, and then to reconcile with ex­
perience the idea (contrary to experience and full of absurdities) of a 
movement that is a length, that is, of a movement placed upon its tra­
jectory and arbitrarily decomposable like it. 

FORM A N D  BECOMING 
339 
Nothing would be easier, now, than to extend Zeno's 
argument to qualitative becoming and to evolutionary 
becoming. We should find the same contradictions in 
these. That the child can become a youth, ripen to ma­
turity and decline to old age, we understand when we 
consider that vital evolution is here the reality itself. 
Infancy, adolescence, maturity, old age, are mere views 
of the mind, possible stops imagined by us, from without, 
along the continuity of a progress. On the contrary, let 
childhood, adolescence, maturity and old age be given as 
integral parts of the evolution, they become real stops, 
and we can no longer conceive how evolution is possible, 
for rests placed beside rests will never be equivalent to 
a movement. How, with what is made, can we reconsti­
tute what is being made? How, for instance, from child· 
hood once posited as a thing, shall we pass to adoles· 
cence, when, by the hypothesis, childhood only is given? 
If we look at it closely, we shall see that our habitual 
manner of speaking, which is fashioned after our habit­
ual manner of thinking, leads us to actual logical dead­
locks-deadlocks to which we allow ourselves to be led 
without anxiety, because we feel confusedly that we can 
always get out of them if we like : all that we have to do, 
in fact, is to give up the cinematographical habits of our 
intellect/When we say "The child becomes a man," let 
us take care not to fathom too deeply the literal mean· 
ing of the expression, or we shall find that, when we posit 
the subject "child," the attribute "man" does not yet ap. 
ply to it, and that, when we express the attribute "man,, 
it applies no more to the subject "child." The reality, 
which is the transition from childhood to manhood, has 
slipped between our fingers'We have only the imaginary 

340 
CREATIVE EVOL U T I O N  
stops "child" and "man," and we are very near to saying 
that one of these stops is the other, just as the arrow of 
Zeno is, according to that philosopher, at all the points 
of the course. The truth is that if language here were 
molded on reality, we should not say ''The child becomes 
the man," but "There is becoming from the child to the 
man." In the first proposition, "becomes" is a verb of 
indeterminate meaning, intended to mask the absurdity 
into which we fall when we attribute the state "man" to 
the subject "child." It behaves in much the same way as 
the movement, always the same, of the cinematographi­
cal film, a movement hidden in the apparatus and whose 
function it is to superpose the successive pictures on one 
another in order to imitate the movement of the real ob­
ject. In the second proposition, "becoming" is a subject. 
It comes to the front. It is the reality its'i;lf ;  childhood 
and manhood are then only possible stops, mere views 
of the mind; we now have to do with the objective move­
ment itself, and no longer with its cinematographical 
imitation. But the first manner of expression is alone 
conformable to our habits of language. We must, in order 
to adopt the second, escape from the cinematographical 
mechanism of thought. 
We must make complete abstraction of this mechan­
ism, if we wish to get rid at one stroke of the theoretical 
absurdities that the question of movement raises. All is 
obscure, all is contradictory when we try, with states, 
to build up a transition. The obscurity is cleared up, the 
contradiction vanishes, as soon as we place ourselves 
along the transition, in order to distinguish states in it 
by making cross cuts therein in thought. The reason is 
that there is more in the transition than the series of 

FORM AND BECOMING 
341 
states, that is to say, the possible cuts-more in the 
movement than the series of positions, that is to iay, the 
possible stops. Only, the first way of looking at things 
is conformable to the processes of the human mind; the 
second requires, on the contrary, that we reverse the bent 
of our intellectual habits. No wonder, then, if philosophy 
at first recoiled before such an effort. The Greeks trusted 
to nature, trusted the natural propensity of the mind, 
trusted language above all, in so far as it naturalli&,­
ternalizes thought. Rather than lay blame on the a'l!lr­
tude of thought and language toward the course of 
things, they preferred to pronounce the course of things 
itself to be wrong. 
Such, indeed, was the sentence passed by the philoso­
phers of the Eleatic school. And they passed it without 
any reservation whatever. As becoming shocks the habits 
of thought and fits ill into the molds of language, they 
declared it unreal. In spatial movement and in change 
in general they saw only pure illusion. This conclusion 
could be softened down withothanging the premises, 
by saying that the reality changes, but that it ought not 
to change.i:xperience confronts us with becoming : that 
is sensible reality. But the intelligible reality, that which 
ought to be, is more real still, and that reality does not 
change. Beneath the qualitative becoming, beneath the 
evolutionary becoming, beneath the extensive becoming, 
the mind must seek that which defies change, the defin­
able quality, the form or essence, the end. Such was the 
fundamental principle of the philosophy which devel­
oped throughout the classic age, the philosophy of 
Forms, or, to use a term more akin to the Greek, thQO 
philosophy of Ideas. 

342 
CREATIVE EVOLUTI O N  
The word e;eo, which we translate here by "Idea," 
has, in fact, this threefold meaning. It denotes ( 1 )  the 
qualitY, ( 2 )  the form or essence, (3) the end or design 
(in the sense of intention) of the act being performed, 
that is to say, at.bottom, the design On the sense of draw­
ing) of the act supposed accomplished. These three as­
pects are those of the .adjective, substantive and verb, 
and correspond to the three essential categories of lan­
guage. After the explanations we have given above, we 
might, and perhaps we ought to, translate e;eo by 
"view" or rather by "moment." For e;eo is the stable 
view taken of the instability of things : the qualify, which 
is a moment of becoming; the form, which is a moment 
of evolution; the essence, which is the mean form above 
and below which the other forms are arranged as altera­
tions of the mean; finally, the intention or mental design 
which presides over the action being accomplished, and 
which is nothing else, we said, than the material design, 
traced out and contemplated beforehand, of the action 
accomplished. To reduce things to Ideas is therefore to 
resolve becoming into its principal moments, each of 
these being, moreover, by the hypothesis, screened from 
the laws of time and, as it were, plucked out of eternity. 
That is to say that we end in the philosophy of Ideas 
when we apply the cinematographical mechanism of the 
intellect to the analysis of the real. 
But, when we put immutable Ideas at the base of the 
moving reality, a whole physics, a whole cosmology, a 
whole theology follows necessarily. We must insist on 
the point. Not that we mean to summarize in a few pages 
a philosophy so complex and so comprehensive as that 
of the Greeks. But, since we have described the cinema-

PLATO A N D  ARI STOTLE 
343 
tographical mechanism of the intellect, it is important 
that we should show to what idea of reality the play o£ 
this mechanism leads. It is the very idea, we believe, that 
we find in the ancient philosophy. The main lines of the 
doctrine that was developed from Plato to Plotinus, pass­
ing through Aristotle (and even, in a certain measure, 
through the Stoics), have nothing accidental, nothing 
contingent, nothing that must be regarded as a philoso­
pher's fancy. They indicate the vision that a systematic 
intellect obtains of the universal becoming when regard­
ing it by means of snapshots, taken at intervals, of its 
flowing. So that, even today, we shall philosophize in 
the manner of the Greeks, we shall rediscover, without 
needing to know them, such and such of their general 
conclusions, in the exact proportion that we trust in the 
cinematographical instinct of our thought. 
We said there is more in a movement than in the suc­
cessive positions attributed to the moving object, more 
in a becoming than in the forms passed through in turn, 
more in the evolution of form than the forms assumed 
one after another. Philosophy can therefore derive terms 
of the second kind from those of the first, but not the 
first from the second : from the first terms speculation 
must take its start. But the intellect reverses the order 
of the two groups; and, on this point, ancient philosophy 
proceeds as the intellect does. It installs itself in the im­
mutable, it posits only Ideas. Yet becoming exists : it 
is a fact. How, then, having posited immutability alone, 
shall we make change come forth from it? Not by the 
addition of anything, for, by the hypothesis, there exists 
nothing positive outside Ideas. It must therefore be by 

344 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
a diminution. So at the base of ancient philosophy lies 
necessarily this postulate : that there is more in the mo­
tionless than in the moving, and that we pass from im­
mutability to becoming by way of diminution or atten­
uation. 
It is therefore something negative, or zero at most, 
that must be added to Ideas to obtain change. In that 
consists the Platonic 11non-being," the Aristotelian "mat­
ter"-a metaphysical zero which, joined to the Idea, like 
the arithmetical zero to unity, multiplies it in space and 
time. By it the motionless and simple Idea is refracted 
into a movement spread out indefinitely. In right, there 
ought to be nothing but immutable Ideas, immutably 
fitted to each other. In fact, matᯅr comes to add to 
them its void, and thereby lets loose the universal be­
coming. It is an elusive nothing, that creeps between the 
Ideas and creates endless agitation, eternal disquiet, like 
a suspicion insinuated between two loving hearts. De­
grade the immutable Ideas: you obtain, by that alone, 
the perpetual flux of things. The Ideas or Forms are the 
whole of intelligible reality, that is to say, of truth, in 
that they represent, all together, the theoretical equilib­
rium of Being. As to sensible reality, it is a perpetual 
oscillation from one side to the other of this point of 
equilibrium. 
Hence, throughout the whole philosophy of Ideas 
there is a certain conception of duration, as also of the 
relation of time to eternity e who installs himself in 
becoming sees in duration the very life of things, the 
fundamental reality. The Forms, which the mind iso­
lates and stores up in concepts, are then only snapshots 
of the changing reality. They are moments gathered 

PLATO AND ARISTOTLE 
.>45 
along the course of time ; and, just because we have cut 
the thread that binds them to time, they no longer en· 
dure/They tend to withdraw into their own definition, 
that is to say, into the artificial reconstruction and sym­
bolical expression which is their intellectual equivalent. 
They enter into eternity, if you will ; but what is eternal 
in them is just what is unreal. On the contrary, if we 
treat becoming by the cinematographical method, the 
Forms are no longer snapshots taken of the change, they 
are its constitutive elements, they represent all that is 
positive in Becoming. Eternity no longer hovers over 
time, as an abstraction ; it underlies time, as a reality 
Such is exactly, on this point, the attitude of the philos­
ophy of Forms or Ideas. It establishes between eternity 
and time the same relation as between a piece of gold 
and the small change-change so small that payment 
goes on forever without the debt being paid off. The 
debt could be paid at once with the piece of gold. It is 
this that Plato expresses in his magnificent language 
when he says that God, unable to make the world eternal, 
gave it Time, "a moving image of eternity." 1 
Hence also arises a certain conception of extension, 
which is at the base of the philosophy of Ideas, although 
it has not been so explicitly brought out. Let us imagine 
a mind placed alongside becoming, and adopting its 
movement. Each successive state, each quality, each 
form, in short, will be seen by it as a mere cut made by 
thought in the universal becoming. It will oe found that 
form is essentially extended, inseparable as it is from the 
extensity of the becoming which has materialized it in 
the course of its flow. Every form thus occupies space 
1 Plato, Timaeus, 37 D. 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
as it occupies time. But the philosophy of Ideas follows 
the inverse direction. It starts from the Form ; it sees 
in the Form the very essence of reality. It does not take 
Form as a snapshot of becoming; it posits Forms in the 
eternal; of this motionless eternity, then, duration and 
becoming are supposed to be only the degradation. Form 
thus posited, independent of time, is then no longer what 
is found in a perception; it is a concept. And, as a reality 
of the conceptual order occupies no more of extension 
than it does of duration, the Forms must be stationed 
outside space as well as above time. Space and time have 
therefore necessarily, in ancient philosophy, the same 
origin and the same value. The same diminution of being 
is expressed both by extension in space and detention in 
time. Both of these are but the distance between what is 
and what ought to be. From the standpoint of ancient 
philosophy, space and time can be nothing but the field 
that an incomplete reality, or rather a reality that has 
gone astray from itself, needs in order to run in quest of 
itself. Only it must be admitted that the field is created 
as the hunting progresses, and that the hunting in some 
way deposits the field beneath it. Move an imaginary 
pendulum, a mere mathematical point, from its position 
of equilibrium : a perpetual oscillation is started, along 
which points are placed next to points, and moments suc­
ceed moments. The space and time which thus arise have 
no more "positivity" than the movement itself. They 
represent the remoteness of the position artificially given 
to the pendulum from its normal position, what it lacks 
in order to regain its natural stability. Bring it back to 
jts normal position : space, time and motion shrink to a 
mathematical point. Just so, human reasonings are 

PLATO AND ARI S TOTLE 
347 
drawn out into an endless chain, but are at once swal­
lowed up in the truth seized by intuition, for their ex­
tension in space and time is only the distance, so to 
speak, between thought and truth.1 So of extension and 
duration in relation to pure Forms or Ideas. The sen­
sible forms are before us, ever about to recover their 
ideality, ever prevented by the matter they bear in them, 
that is to say, by their inner void, by the interval between 
what they are and what they ought to be. They are for­
ever on the point of recovering themselves, forever oc­
cupied in losing themselves. An inflexible law condemns 
them, like the rock of Sisyphus, to fall back when they 
are almost touching the summit, and this law, which 
has projected them into space and time, is nothing other 
than the very constancy of their original insufficiency. 
The alternations of generation and decay, the evolutions 
ever beginning over and over again, the infinite repeti­
tion of the cycles of celestial spheres-this all represents 
merely a certain fundamental deficit, in which materi­
ality consists. Fill up this deficit : at once you suppress 
space and time, that is to say, the endlessly renewed os­
cillations around a stable equilibrium always aimed at, 
never reached. Things re-enter into each other. What 
was extended in space is contracted into pure Form. And 
past, present and future shrink into a single moment, 
which is eternity. 
This amounts to saying that physics is but logic 
spoiled. In this proposition the whole philosophy of 
Ideas is summarized. And in it also is the hidden prin-
1 We have tried to bring out what is true and what is false in this idea, 
so far as spatiality is concerned (see Chapter III.) . It seems to us 
radically false as regards duration. 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
ciple of the philosophy that is innate in our understand­
ing. If immutability is more than becoming, form is more 
than change, and it is by a veritable fall that the logical 
system of Ideas, rationally subordinated and co-ordi­
nated among themselves, is scattered into a physical 
᯿teries of objects and events accidentally placed one after 
another. The generative idea of a poem is developed in 
thousands of imaginations which are materialized in 
phrases that spread themselves out in words. And the 
more we descend from the motionless idea, wound on it­
self, to the words that unwind it, the more room is left 
for contingency and choice. Other metaphors, expressed 
by other words, might have arisen ; an image is called up 
by an image, a word by a word. All these words run now 
one after another, seeking in vain, by themselves, to give 
back the simplicity of the generative idea. Our ear only 
hears the words : it therefore perceives only accidents. 
But our mind, by successive bounds, leaps from the 
words to the images, from the images to the original idea, 
and so gets back, from the perception of words-acci­
dents called up by accidents-to the conception of the 
Idea that posits its own being. So the philosopher pro­
ceeds, confronted with the universe. Experience makes 
to pass before his eyes phenomena which run, they also, 
one behind another in an accidental order determined by 
circumstances of time and place. This physical order­
a degeneration of the logical order-is nothing else but 
the fall of the logical into space and time. But the philos­
opher, ascending again from the percept to the concept, 
sees condensed into the logical all the positive reality 
that the physical possesses. His intellect, doing away 
.with the materiality that iessens being, grasps being it-

P LATO A N D  ARI S TOTLE 
349 
self in the immutable system of Ideas. Thus Science is 
obtained, which appears to us, complete and ready· 
made, as soon as we put back our intellect into its true 
place, correcting the deviation that separated it from the 
intelligible. Science is not, then, a human construction. 
It is prior to our intellect, independent of it, veritably 
the generator of Things. 
And indeed, if we hold the Forms to be simply snap· 
shots taken by the mind of the continuity of becoming, 
they must be relative to the mind that thinks them, they 
can have no independent existence. At most we might 
say that each of these Ideas is an ideal. But it is in the 
opposite hypothesis that we are placing ourselves. Idea& 
must then exist by themselves. Ancient philosophy could 
not escape this conclusion. Plato formulated it, and in 
vain did Aristotle strive to avoid it. Since movement 
arises from the degradation of the immutable, there 
could be no movement, consequently no sensible world, 
if there were not, somewhere, immutability realized. So, 
having begun by refusing to Ideas an independent exist­
ence, and finding himself nevertheless unable to deprive 
them of it, Aristotle pressed them into each other, rolled 
them up into a ball, and set above the physical world a 
Form that was thus found to be the Form of Forms, the 
Idea of Ideas, or, to use his own words, the Thought of 
Thought. Such is the God of Aristotle--necessarily im­
mutable and apart from what is happening in the world, 
since he is only the synthesis of all concepts in a single 
concept. It is true that no one of the manifold concepts 
could rxist ::part, such as it is·in the divine unity : in vain 
should we look for the ideas of Plato within the God of 
Aristotle. But if only we imagine.th᮳ God. of AristQtÅe in 

350 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
a sort of refraction of himself, or simply inclining toward 
the world, at once the Platonic Ideas are seen to pour 
themselves out of him, as if they were involved in the 
unity of his essence : so rays stream out from the sun, 
which nevertheless did not contain them. It is probably 
this possibility of an outpouring of Platonic Ideas from 
the Aristotelian God that is meant, in the philosophy of 
Aristotle, by the active intellect, the vou᮴ that has been 
called r;Ot"IJ'ttY.6᮴-that is, by what is essential and yet un­
conscious in human intelligence. The vou᮴ i.Ot"IJ'ttY.o<; is 
Science entire, posited all at once, which the conscious, 
discursiv᮵ intellect is condemned to reconstruct with dif­
ficulty, bit by bit. There is then within us, or rather be­
hind us, a possible vision of God, as the Alexandrians 
said, a vision always virtual, never actually realized by 
the conscious intellect. In this intuition we should see 
God expand in Ideas. This it is that "does everything," 1 
playing in relation to the discursive intellect, which 
moves in time, the same role as the motionless Mover 
himself plays in relation to the movement of the heavens 
and the course of things. 
There is, then, immanent in the philosophy of Ideas, 
a particular conception of causality, which it is impor­
tant to bring into full light, because it is that which each 
of us will reach when, in order to ascend to the origin of 
things, he follows to the Mld the natural movement of 
the intellect. True, the ancient philosophers never for­
mulated it explicitly. They confined themselves to draw­
ing the consequences of it, and, in general, they have 
1 Aristotle, De anima, 430 a 14 K<d l<TTIV o ,.ࠋ, TotoiiTos voiis To/ ..-civToz 
-ylvet161lt, 6 aP To/ 11"QlfTOI 11"01£iv, .:.s lEIS Tls, olov TO <f>ws. Tp6..-ov -y6.p 
Tlvoz Kill TO <f>ws 11"01Qi Til avv6.1UI 311TOI XPWfl.llTOI Elfenel'l- XJJWfi.OI'rll. 

P L A T O  
A N D  A R I S T O T L E  
351 
marked but points of view of it rather than presented it 
itself. Sometimes, indeed, they speak of an attraction, 
sometimes of an impulsion exercised by the prime mover 
on the whole of the world. Both views are found in Aris­
totle, who shows us in the movement of the universe an 
aspiration of things toward the divine perfection, and 
consequently an ascent toward God, while he descri᮶᮷s 
it elsewhere as the effect of a contact of God with the 
first sphere and as descending, consequently, from God 
to things. The Alexandrians, we· think, do no more than 
follow this double indication when they speak of pro­
cession and con-version. Everything is derived from the 
first principle, and everything aspires to return to it. But 
these two conceptions of the divine causality can only be 
identified together if we bring them, both the one and the 
other, back to a third, which we hold to be fundamental, 
and which alone will enable us to understand, not only 
why, in what sense, things move in space and time, but 
also why there is space and time, why there is movement, 
why there are things. 
This conception, which more and more shows through 
the reasonings of the Greek philosophers as we go from 
Plato to Plotinus, we may formulate thus : The affirma­
tion of a reality implies the simultaneous affirmation of 
all the degrees of reality intermediate between it and 
nothing. The principle is evident in the case of number: 
we cannot aff1rm the number 1 0  without thereby affirm­
ing the existence of the numbers 9, 8, 7, 
.
.
.
 , etc.-in 
short, of the whole interval between 1 0  and zero. But 
here our mind passes naturally from the sphere of quan­
tity to that of quality. It seems to us that, a certain per­
fection being given, the whole continuity of degradations 

352 
CREA'liVE EVOLUTION 
is given also between this perfection, on the one hand, 
and the nought, on the other hand, that we think we con­
ceive. Let us then posit the God of Aristotle, thought of 
thought-that is, thought making a circle, transforming 
itself from subject to object and from object to subject 
by an instantaneous, or rather an eternal, circular proc­
ess : as, on the other hand, the nought appears to posit 
itself, and <fi, the two extremities being given, the in­
terval between them ii equa1ly given, it follows that all 
the descending degrees of being, from the divine perfec­
tion down to the ''absolute nothing," are realoized auto­
matically, so to speak, when we have posited God. 
Let us then run through this interval from top to bot­
tom. First of all, the slightest diminution of the first 
principle will be enough to precipitate Being into space 
and time; but duration and extension, which represent 
this first diminution, will be as near as possible to the 
divine inextension and eternity. We must therefore pic­
ture to ourselves this first degradation of the divine prin­
ciple as a sphere turning on itself, imitating, by the per­
petuity of its circular movement, the eternity of the 
circle of the divine thought; creating, moreover, its own 
place, and thereby place in general/ since it includes 
without being included and moves without stirring from 
the spot; creating also its own duration, and thereby 
duration in general, since its movement is the measure 
of all motion.2 Then, by degrees, we shall see the per-
1 De caelo, ii. 287 a 12 rijs <crxc!.r'I/S 7r<p<rpopas o@re KEvov icrr<v l(wllev 
oGr• r61ror. Phys. iv. 2 1 2  a 34 ro li£ 1rav lcr-r< p.iv ws K<vl!u•ra< luTI 
t5'wr o@. ws p.£v "{atJ 8"-ov, B.p.a -rov -r61rov ov p.e-raf3ci"-X«. 
KVKAo/ li@ 
K<v!)crera<, rwv p.oplwv 'Yap oilros o -r61ros . 
• De caelo, i. 279 a 12 oM£ xp6vos lu-rlv l(w Toii ovpavoii. Phys. vii. 
251 b 27 o x,,vos 1rdl/or T< K<v!)uews. 

PLATO A N D  ARI STO TLE 
353 
fection decrease, more and more, down to our sublunary 
world, in which the cycle of birth, growth and decay 
imitates and mars the original circle for the last time. So 
understood, the causal relation between God and the 
world is seen as an attraction when regarded from be­
low, as an impulsion or a contact when regarded from 
above, since the first heaven, with its circular movement, 
is an imitation of God and all imitation is the reception 
of a form. Therefore, we perceive God as efficient cause 
or as final cause, according to the point of view. And yet 
neither of these two relations is the ultimate causal re­
lation. The true relation is that which is found between 
the two members of an equation, when the first member 
is a single term and the second a sum of an endless num­
ber of terms. It is, we may say, the relation of the gold 
piece to the small change, if we suppose the change to 
offer itself automatically as soon as the gold piece is 
presented. Only thus can we understand why Aristotle 
has demonstrated the necessity of a first motionless 
mover, not by founding it on the assertion that the move­
ment of things must have had a beginning, but, on the 
contrary, by affirming that this movement could not have 
begun and can never come to an end. If movement exists, 
or, in other words, if the small change is being counted, 
the gold piece is to be found somewhere. And if the 
counting goes on forever, having never begun, the sin­
gle term that is eminently equivalent to it must be eter .. 
nal. A perpetuity of mobility is possible only if it is 
backed by an eternity of immutability, which it unwinds 
in a chain without beginning or end. 
Such is the last word of the Greek philosophy. We 
have not attempted to reconstruct it a priori. It has mani-

354 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
fold origins. It is connected by many invisible threads to 
the soul of ancient Greece. Vain, therefore, the effort to 
deduce it from a simple principle.1 But if everything that 
has come from poetry, religion, social life and a still rudi­
mentary physics and biology be removed from it, if we 
take away all the light material that may have been used 
in the construction of the stately building, a solid frame­
work remains, and this framework marks out the main 
lines of a metaphysic which is, we believe, the natural 
metaphysic of the human intellect. We come to a philos­
ophy of this kind, indeed, whenever we follow to the 
end the cinematographical tendency of perception and 
thought. Our perception and thought begin by substitut­
ing for the continuity of evolutionary change a series 
of unchangeable forms which are, turn by turn, "caught 
on the wing," like the rings at a merry-go-round, which 
the children unhook with their little stick as they are 
passing. Now, how can the forms be passing, and on 
what "stick" are they strung? As the stable forms have 
been obtained by extracting from change everything that 
is definite, there is nothing left to characterize the in­
stability on which the forms are laid, but a negative at­
tribute, which must be indetermination itself. Such is the 
first proceeding of our thought : it dissociates each 
change into two elements-the one stable, definable for 
each particular case, to wit, the Form ; the other indefin­
able and always the same, Change in general. And such, 
also, is the essential operation of language. Forms are all 
that it is capable of expressing. It is reduced to taking 
1 Especially have we left almost entirely on one side those admirable 
but somewhat fugitive intuitions that Plotinus was later to seize, to 
study and to fix. 

PLATO AND ARI STO TLE 
355 
as understood or is limited to suggesting a mobility 
which, just because it is always unexpressed, is thought 
to remain in all cases the same.-Then comes in a philos­
ophy that holds the dissociation thus effected by thought 
and language to be legitimate. What can it do, except 
objectify the distinction with more force, push it to its 
extreme consequences, reduce it into a system? It will 
therefore construct the real, on the one hand, with defi­
nite Forms or immutable elements, and, on the other, 
with a principle of mobility which, being the negation of 
the form, will, by the hypothesis, escape all definition 
and be the purely indeterminate. The more it directs its 
attention to the forms delineated by thought and ex­
pressed by language, the more it will see them rise above 
the sensible and become subtilized into pure concepts, 
capable of entering one within the other, and even of 
being at last massed together into a single concept, the 
synthesis of all reality, the achievement of all perfec­
tion. The more, on the contrary, it descends toward the 
invisible source of the universal mobility, the more it 
will feel this mobility sink beneath it and at the same 
time become void, vanish into what it will call the "non­
being." Finally, it will have on the one hand the system 
of ideas, logically co-ordinated together or concentrated 
into one only, on the other a quasi-nought, the Platonic 
"non-being" or the Aristotelian "matter."-But, hav­
ing cut your cloth, you must sew it. With supra-sensible 
Ideas and an infra-sensible non-being, you now have to 
reconstruct the sensible world. You can do so only if you 
postulate a kind of metaphysical necessity in virtue of 
which the confronting of this All with this Zero is equiv­
alent to the affirmation of all the degrees of reality that 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
measure the interval between them-just as an undi· 
vided num᮸er, when regarded as a difference between 
itself and zero, is revealed as a certain sum of units, and 
with its own affirmation affirms all the lower numbers. 
That is the natural postulate. It is that also that we per­
ceive as the base of the Greek philosophy. In order then 
to explain the specific characters of each of these degrees 
of intermediate reality, nothing more is necessary than 
to measure the distance that separates it from the inte· 
gral rea.!ity. Each lower degree consists in a diminution 
of the higher, and the sensible newness that we perceive 
in it is resolved, from the point of view of the intelligible, 
into a new quantity of negation which is superadded to it. 
The smallest possible quantity of negation, that which 
is found already in the highest forms of sensible reality, 
and consequently a fortiori in the lower forms, is that 
which is expressed by the most general attributes of sen· 
.sible reality, extension and duration. By increasing deg­
radations we will obtain attributes more and more spe­
cial. Here the philosopher's fancy will have free scope, 
for it is by an arbitrary decree, or at least a debatable 
one, that a particular aspect of the sensible world will 
be equated with a particular diminution of being. We 
shall not necessarily end, as Aristotle did, in a world con· 
sisting of concentric spheres turning on themselves. But 
we shall be led to an analogous cc;>smology-I mean, to 
a construction whose pieces, though all different, will 
have none the less the same relations between them. And 
this cosmology will be ruled by the same principle. The 
physical will be defined by the logical. Beneath the 
changing phenomena will appear to us, by transparence, 
a closed system of concepts subordinated to and co-ordi· 

MODERN S CIENCE 
357 
nated with each other. Science, understood as the system 
of concepts, will be more real than the sensible reality 
It will be prior to human knowledge, which is only able 
to spell it letter by letter; prior also to things, which 
awkwardly try to imitate it. It would only have to be 
diverted an instant from itself in order to step out of its 
eternity and thereby coincide with all this knowledge 
and all these things. Its immutability is therefore, in­
deed, the cause of the universal becoming. 
Such was the point of view of ancient philosophy in 
regard to change and duration. That modern philosophy 
has repeatedly, but especially in its beginnings, had the 
wish to depart from it, seems to us unquestionable. But 
an irresistible attraction brings the intellect back to its 
natural movement, and the metaphysic of the moderns 
to the general conclusions of the Greek metaphysic. We 
must try to make this point clear, in order to show by 
what invisible threads our mechanistic philosophy re­
mains bound to the ancient philosophy of Ideas, and how 
also it responds to the requirements, above all practical, 
of our understanding. 
Modern, like ancient, science proceeds according to 
the cinematographical method. It cannot do otherwise; 
all science is subject to this law. For it is of the essence of 
science to handle signs, which it substitutes for the ob­
jects themselves. These signs undoubtedly differ from 
those of Jan;z,uage by tltcir greater precision and their 
higher effic.cy ; they are none the less tied down to the 
general condition of the sign, which is to denote a fixed 
aspect nf the reality under an arrested form. In order to 
thir,knwven1᮹r:t,.it const::ntly renewed effort of the mind 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
is necessary. Signs are made to dispense us with this ef­
fort by substituting, for the moving continuity of things, 
an artificial reconstruction which is its equivalent in 
practice and has the advantage of being easily handled. 
But let us leave aside the means and consider only the 
end. What is the es઎ential object of science ? It is to en­
large our influence over things. Science may be specu­
lative in its form, disinterested in its immediate ends : in 
other words we may give it as long a credit as it wants. 
But, however long the day of reckoning may be put off, 
some time or other the paynwnt must be made. It is al­
ways then, in short, pmctical utility that science has in 
view. Even when it launches into theory, it is bound to 
adapt its behavior to the general form of practice. How­
ever high it may rise, it must be ready to fall back into 
the field of action, and at once to get on its feet. This 
would not be possible for it, if its rhythm differed abso­
lutely from that of action itsel f. Now action, we have 
said, proceeds by leaps. To act is to re-adapt oneself. 
To know, that is to say, to foresee in order to act, is then 
to go from situation to situation, from arran!J;ement to 
rearrangement. Science may consicJer rearrangements 
that come closer and closer to each other ; it may thus 
increase the number of moments that it isolates, but it 
always isolates moments. As to what happens in the in­
terval between the moments, science is no more con­
cerned with that than are our common intelligence, our 
senses and our language : it does not bear on the interval , 
but only on the extremities. So the cinematographical 
method forces itself upon our science, as it did already 
on that of the ancients. 
Wherein, then, is the difference between the two 

MODERN SCIENCE 
359 
sciences? We indicated it when we said that the ancients 
reduced the physical order to the vital order, that is to 
say, laws to genera, while the moderns try to resolve 
genera into laws. But we have to look at it in another 
aspect, which, moreover, is only a transposition, of the 
first. Wherein consists the difference of attit:.tde of the 
two sciences toward change? We may formulate it by 
saying that ancient science thinks it knows its object 
sufficiently when it has noted of it some privileged mo­
ments, whereas modern science considers the object at 
any moment whatever. 
The forms or ideas of Plato or of Aristotle correspond 
to privileged or salient moments in the history of things 
-those, in general, that have been fixed by language. 
They are supposed, like the childhood or the old age of 
a living being, to characterize a period of which they ex­
press the quintessence, all the rest of this period being 
filled by the passage, of no interest in itself, from one 
form to another form. Take, for instance, a falling body. 
It was thought that we got near enough to the fact when 
we characterized it as a whole: it was a movement down­
ward; it was the tendency toward a center; it was the 
natural movement of a body which, separated from the 
earth to which it belonged, was now going to find its 
place again. They noted, then, the final term or culmi­
nating point ( ttAo<;, cX')(.fLÄ) and set it up as the essential 
moment: this moment, that language has retained in 
order to express the whole of the fact, sufficed also for 
science to characterize it. In the physics of Aristotle, 
it is by the concepts uhigh" and "low," spontaneous dis­
placement and forced displacement, own place and 
strange place, that the movement of a body shot into 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
space or falling freely is defined. But Galileo thought 
there was no essential moment, no privileged instant. To 
study the falling body is to consider it at it matters not 
what moment in its course. The true science of gravity 
is that which will determine, for any moment of time 
whatever, the position of the body in space. For this, 
indeed, signs far more precise than those of language 
are required. 
We may say, then, that our physics differs from that of 
the ancients chiefly in the indefinite breaking up of time. 
For the ancients, time comprised as many undivided pe­
riods as our natural perception and our language cut out 
in it successive facts, each presenting a kind of individu­
ality. For that reason, each of these facts admits, in their 
view, of only a total definition or description. If, in de­
scribing it, we are led to distinguish phases in it, we have 
several facts instead of a single one, several undivided 
periods instead of a single period ; but time is always sup­
posed to be divided into determinate periods, and the 
mode of division to be forced on the mind by apparent 
-crises of the real, comparable to that of puberty, by the 
apparent release of a new form.-For a Kepler, or a 
Galileo, on the contrary, time is not divided objectively 
in one way or another by the matter that fills it. It has 
no natural articulations. We can, we ought to, divide it 
as we please. All moments count. None of them has the 
right to set itself up as a moment that represents or domi­
nates the others. And, consequently, we know a change 
.only when we are able to determine what it is about at 
;any one of its moments. 
The difference is profound. In fact, in a certain as­
pect it is radical. But, from the pointof view from which 

MODERN S CIENCE 
we are regarding it, it is a difference of degree rather 
than of kind. The human mind has passed from the first 
kind of knowledge to the second through gradual per­
fecting, simply by seeking a higher precision. There is 
the same relation between these two sciences as between 
the noting of the phases of a movement by the eye and 
the much more complete recording of these phases by 
instantaneous photography. It is the same cinemato­
graphical mechanism in both cases, but it reaches a pre­
cision in the second that it cannot have in the first. Of 
the gallop of a horse our eye perceives chiefly a charac­
teristic, essential or rather schematic attitude, a form 
that appears to radiate over a whole period and so fill up 
a time of gallop. It is this attitude that sculpture has 
fixed on the frieze of the Parthenon. But instantaneous 
photography isolates any moment; it puts them all in the 
same rank, and thus the gallop of a horse spreads out for 
it into as many successive attitudes as it wishes, instead 
of massing itself into a single attitude, which is supposed 
to flash out in a privileged moment and to illuminate a 
whole period. 
From this original difference flow all the others. A 
science that considers, one after the other, undivided. 
periods of duration, sees nothing but phases succeeding 
phases, forms replacing forms ; it is content with a quali­
tative description of objects, which it likens to organized 
beings. But when we seek to know what happens within 
one of these periods, at any moment of time, we are aim­
ing at something entirely different. The changes which 
are produced from one moment to another are no longer, 
by the hypothesis, changes of quality; they are quanti .. 
tative variations, it may be of the phenomenon itself, it 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
may be of its elementary parts. wݹ were right then to 
say that modern science is distinguishable from the an­
cient in that it applies to magnitudes and proposes first 
and foremost to measure them. The ancients did indeed 
try experiments, and on the other hand Kepler tried no 
experiment, in the proper sense of the word, in order to 
discover a law which is the very type of scientific knowl­
edge as we understand it. What distinguishes modern 
science is not that it is experimental, but that it experi­
ments and, more generally, works only with a view to 
measure. 
For that reason it is right, again, to say that ancient 
science applied to concepts, while modern science seeks 
laws-constant relations between variable magnitudes. 
The concept of circularity was sufficient to Aristotle to 
define the movement of the heavenly bodies. But, even 
with the more accurate concept of elliptical form, Kepler 
did not think he had accounted for the movement of 
planets. He had to get a law, that is to say, a constant re­
lation between the quantitative variations of two or sev­
eral elements of the planetary movement. 
Yet these are only consequences--differences that fol­
low from the fundamental difference. It did happen to 
the ancients accidentally to experiment with a view to 
measuring, as also to discover a law expressing a con­
stant relation between magnitudes. The principle of Ar­
chimedes is a true experimental law. It takes into ac­
count three variable magnitudes: the volume of a body, 
the density of the liquid in which the body is immersed, 
the vertical pressure that is being exerted. And it states 
indeed that one of these three terms is a function of the 
other two. 

MODERN SCIENCE 
The essential, original difference must therefore be 
sought elsewhere. It is the same that we noticed first. 
The science of the ancients is static. Either it considers 
in block the change that it studies, or, if it divides the 
change into periods, it makes of each of these periods a 
block in its turn : which amounts to saying that it takes 
no account of time. But modern science has been built up 
around the discoveries of Galileo and of Kepler, which 
immediately furnished it with a model. Now, what do the 
laws of Kepler say? They lay down a relation between 
the areas described by the heliocentric radius-vector of a 
planet and the time employed in describing them, a rela­
tion between the longer axis of the orbit and the time 
taken up by the course. And what was the principle dis­
covered by Galileo? A law which connected the space 
traversed by a falling body with the time occupied by the 
fall. Furthermore, in what did the first of the great trans­
formations of geometry in modern times consist, if not in 
introducing-in a veiled form, it is true-time and move­
ment even in the consideration'. of figures? For the an­
cients, geometry was a purely static science. Figures 
were given to it at once, completely finished, like the 
Platonic Ideas. But the essence of the Cartesian geom­
etry (although Descartes did not give it this form) was 
to regard every plane curve as described by the move­
ment of a point on a movable straight line which is dis­
placed, parallel to itself, along the axis of the abscissae 
-the displacement of the movable straight line being 
supposed to be uniform and the abscissa thus becoming 
representative of the time. The curve is then defined if 
we can state the relation connecting the space traversed 
on the movable straight line to the time employed in 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
traversing it, that is, if we are able to indicate the posi­
tion of the movable point, on the straight line which it 
traverses, at any moment whatever of its course. This 
relation is just what we caU the equation of the curve. To 
substitute an equation for a figure consists, therefore, in 
seeing the actual position of the moving points in the 
tracing of the curve at any moment whatever, instead of 
regarding this tracing aU at once, gathered up in the 
unique moment when the curve has reached its finished 
state. 
Such, then, was the directing idea of the reform by 
which both the science of nature and mathematics, which 
serves as its instrument, were renewed. Modern science 
is the daughter of astronomy; it has come down from 
heaven to earth along the inclined plane of Galileo, for it 
is through Galileo that Newton and his successors are 
connected with Kepler. Now, how did the astronomical 
problem present itself to Kepler? The question was, 
knowing the respective positions of the planets at a given 
moment, how to calculate their positions at any other 
moment. So the same question presented itself, hence­
forth, for every material system. Each material point be­
came a rudimentary planet, and the main question, the 
ideal problem whose solution would yield the key to an 
the others was, the positions of these elements at a par­
ticular moment being given, how to determine their rela­
tive positions at any moment. No doubt the problem can­
not be put in these precise terms except in very simple 
cases, for a schematized reality; for we never know the 
respective positions of the real elements of matter, sup­
posing there are real elements; and, even if we knew 
them at a given moment, the calculation of their posi-

MODERN S C I E N C E  
tions at another moment would generally require a math­
ematical effort surpassing human powers. But it is 
enough for us to know that these elements might be 
known, that their present positions might be noted, and 
that a superhuman intellect might, by submitting these 
data to mathematical operations, determine the positions 
of the elements at any other moment of time. This con­
viction is at the bottom of the questions we put to our­
selves on the subject of nature, and of the methods we 
employ to solve them. That is why every law in static 
form seems to us as a provisional instalment or as a par­
ticular view of a dynamic law which alone would give us 
whole and definitive knowledge. 
Let us conclude, then, that our science is not only dis­
tinguished from ancient science in this, that it seeks laws, 
nor even in this, that its laws set forth relations between 
magnitudes : we must add that the magnitude to which 
we wish to be able to relate all others is time, and that 
modern science must be defined pre-eminently by its as­
piration to take time as an independent variable. But 
with what time has it to do? 
We have said before, and we cannot repeat too often, 
that the science of matter proceeds like ordinary knowl­
edge. It perfects this knowledge, increases its precision 
and its scope, but it works in the same direction and puts 
the same mechanism into play. If, therefore, ordinary 
knowledge, by reason of the cinematographical mecha­
nism to which it is subjected, forbears to follow becoming 
in so far as becoming is moving, the science of matter re­
nounces it equally. No doubt, it distinguishes as great a 
number of moments as we wish in the interval of time it 
considers. However small the intervals may be at whicl-

J66 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
it stops, it authorizes us to divide them again if neces­
sary. In contrast with ancient science, which stopped at 
certain so-called essential moments, it is occupied indif­
ferently with any moment whatever. But it always con­
siders moments, always virtual stopping-places, always, 
in short, immobilities. Which amounts to saying that reru 
time, regarded as a flux, or, in other words, as the very 
mobility of being, escapes the hold of scientific knowl­
edge. We have already tried to establish this point in a 
former work. We alluded to it again in the first chapter 
of this book. But it is necessary to revert to it once more, 
in order to clear up misunderstandings. 
When positive science speaks of time, what it refers to 
is the movement of a certain mobile T on its trajectory. 
This movement has been chosen by it as representative 
of time, and it is, by definition, uniform. Let us call T1, 
T2, Ta, .
.
.
 etc., points which divide the trajectory of 
the mobile into equal parts from its origin To. We shall 
say that 1 ,  2 ,  3, 
. . . units of time have flowed past, 
when the mobile is at the points Tt, T2, Ta, . . .  of the 
line it traverses. Accordingly, to consider the state of the 
universe at the end of a certain time t, is to examine 
where it will be when T is at the point Tt of its course. 
But of the flux itself of time, still less of its effect on con­
sciousness, there is here no question; for there enter into 
the calculation only the points T1, T2, Ts, . . .  taken on 
the flux, never the flux itself. We may narrow the time 
considered as much as we will, that is, break up at will 
the interval between two consecutive divisions T n and 
Tn+t ;  but it is always with points, and with points only, 
that we are dealing. What we retain of the movement of 
the mobile T are positions taken on its trajectory. What 

MODERN SCIENCE 
we retain of all the other points of the universe are their 
positions on their respective trajectories. To each virtual 
stop of the moving body T at the points of division T1, 
T2, Ta, . . .  we make correspond a virtual stop of all 
the other mobiles at the points where they are passing. 
And when we say that a movement or any other change 
has occupied a time t, we mean by it that we have noted a 
number t of correspondences of this kind. We have there­
fore counted simultaneities; we have not concerned our­
selves wi.th the flux that goes from one to another. The 
proof of this is that I can, at discretion, vary the rapidity 
of the flux of the universe in regard to a consciousness 
that is independent of it and that would perceive the 
variation by the quite qualitative feeling that it would 
have of it: whatever the variation had been, since the 
movement of T would participate in this variation, I 
should have nothing to change in my equations nor in the 
numbers that figure in them. 
Let us go further. Suppose that the rapidity of the 
flux becomes infinite. Imagine, as we said in the first 
pages of this book, that the trajectory of the mobile T is 
given at once, and that the whole history, past, present 
and future, of the material universe is spread out instan­
taneously in space. The same mathematical correspond­
ences will subsist between the moments of the history of 
the world unfolded like a fan, so to speak, and the divi­
sions T1 ,  T2, Ta, . . .  of the line which will be called, 
by definition, "the course of time." In the eyes of science 
nothing will have changed. But if, time thus spreading 
itself out in space and succession becoming juxtaposi­
tion, science has nothing to change in what it tells us, we 
must conclude that, in what it tells us, it takes account 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
neither of succession in what of it is specific nor of time 
in what there is in it that is fluent. It has no sign to ex­
press what strikes our consciousness in succession and 
duration. It no more applies to becoming, so far as that 
is moving, than the bridges thrown here and there across 
the stream follow the water that flows under their arches. 
Yet succession exists; I am conscious of it; it is a fact. 
When a physical process is going on before my eyes, my 
perception and my inclination have nothing to do with 
accelerating or retarding it. What is important to the 
physicist is the number of units of duration the process 
fills; he does not concern himself about the units them­
selves and that is why the successive states of the world 
might be spread out all at once in space without his hav­
ing to change anything in his science or to cease talking 
about time. But for us, conscious beings, it is the units 
that matter, for we do not count extremities of intervals, 
we feel and live the intervals themselves. Now, we are 
conscious of these intervals as of definite intervals. Let 
me come back again to the sugar in my glass of water : 1 
why must I wait for it to melt? While the duration of the 
phenomenon is relative for the physicist, since it is re­
duced to a certain number of units of time and the units 
themselves are indifferent, this duration is an absolute 
for my consciousness, for it coincides with a certain de­
gree of impatience which is rigorously determined. 
Whence comes this determination? What is it that 
obliges me to wait, and to wait for a certain length of 
psychical duration which is forced upon me, over which 
I have no power? If succession, in so far as distinct from 
mere juxtaposition, has no real efficacy, if time is not a 
1 See page u .  

M-ODERN SCIE.NCE 
kind of force, why does the universe unfold its succes­
sive states with a velocity which, in regard to my con­
sciousness, is a veritable absolute? Why with this par­
ticular velocity rather than any other? Why not with 
an infinite velocity? Why, in other words, is not every­
thing given at once, as on the film of the cinematograph? 
The more I consider this point, the more it seems to me 
that, if the future is bound to succeed the present instead 
of being given alongside of it, it is because the future is 
not altogether determined at the present moment, and 
that if the time taken up by this succession is something 
other than a number, if it has for the consciousness that 
is installed in it absolute value and reality, it is because 
there is unceasingly being created in it, not indeed in any 
such artificially isolated system as a glass of sugared 
water, but in the concrete whole of which every such sys­
tem forms part, something unforeseeable and new. This 
duration may not be the fact of matter itself, but that of 
the life which reascends the course of matter; the two 
movements are none the less mutually dependent upon 
each other. The duration of the universe must therefore 
be one with the latitude of creation which can find place 
in it. 
When a child plays at reconstructing a picture by put­
ting together the separate pieces in a puzzle game, the 
more he practices, the more and more quickly he suc­
ceeds. The reconstruction was, moreover, instantaneous, 
the child found it ready-made, when he opened the box 
on leaving the shop. The operation, therefore, does not 
require a definite time, and indeed, theoretically, it does 
not require any time. That is because the result is given. 
It is because the picture is already created, and because 

370 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
to obtain it requires only a work of recomposing and re. 
arranging-a work that can be supposed going faster 
and faster, and even infinitely fast, up to the point of 
being instantaneous. But, 'tO the artist who creates a pic­
ture by drawing it from the depths of his soul, time is no 
longer an accessory; it is not an interval that may be 
lengthened or shortened without the content being a}. 
tered. The duration of his work is part and parcel of his 
work. To contract or to dilate it would be to modify both 
the psychical evolution that fills it and the invention 
which is its goal. The time taken up by the invention is 
one with the invention itself. It is the progress of a 
thought which is changing in the degree and measure 
that it is taking form. It is a vital process, something like 
the ripening of an idea. 
The painter is before his canvas, the colors are on the 
palette, the model is sitting-all this we see, and also we 
know the painter's style : do we foresee what will appear 
on the canvas? We possess the elements of the problem; 
we know in an abstract way, how it will be solved, for the 
portrait will surely resemble the model and will surely 
resemble also the artist; but the concrete solution brings 
with it that unforeseeable nothing which is everything in 
a work of art. And it is this nothing that takes time. 
Nought as matter, it creates itself as form. The sprouting 
and flowering of this form are stretched out on an un­
shrinkable duration, which is one with their essence. So 
of the works of nature. Their novelty arises from an in­
ternal impetus which is progress or succession, which 
confers on succession a peculiar virtue or which owes to 
succession the whole of its virtue-which, at any rate, 
makes succession, or continuity of interpenetration in 

MODERN SCIENCE 
371 
time, irreducible to a mere instantaneous juxtaposition 
in space. This is why the idea of reading in a present 
state of the material universe the future of living forms, 
and of unfolding now their history yet to come, involves 
a veritable absurdity. But this absurdity is difficult to 
bring out, because our memory is accustomed to place 
alongside of each other, in an ideal space, the terms it 
perceives in turn, because it always represents past suc­
cession in the form of juxtaposition. It is able to do so, 
indeed, just because the past belongs to that which is al­
ready invented, to the dead, and no longer to creation 
and to life. Then, as the succession to come will end by 
being a succession past, we persuade ourselves that the 
duration to come admits of the same treatment as past 
duration, that it is, even now, unrollable, that the future 
is there, rolled up, already painted on the canvas. An il­
lusion, no doubt, but an illusion that is natural, ineradi­
cable, and that will last as long as the human mind l 
Time is invention or it is nothing at all. But of time­
invention physics can take no account, restricted as it is 
to the cinematographical method. It is limited to count­
ing simultaneities between the events that make up this 
time and the positions of the mobile T on its trajectory. 
It detaches these events from the whole, which at every 
moment puts on a new form and which communicates to 
them something of its novelty. It considers them in the 
abstract, such as they would be outside of the living 
whole, that is to say, in a time unrolled in space. It re­
tains only the events or systems of events that can be 
thus isolated without being made to undergo too pro­
found a deformation, because only these lend themselves 
to the application of its method. Our physics dates from 

372 
CREATIVE EVOLU TION 
the day when it was known how to isolate such systems. 
To sum up, while modern physics is distinguished from 
ancient physics by the fact that it considers any moment 
of time whatever, it rests altogether on a substitution of 
time-length for time-invention. 
It seems then that, parallel to this physics, a second 
kind of knowledge ought to have grown up, which could 
have retained what physics allowed to escape. On the 
flux itself of duration science neither would nor could lay 
hold, bound as it was to the cinematographical method. 
This second kind of knowledge would have set the cine­
matographical method aside. It would have called upon 
the mind to renounce its most cherished habits. It is 
within becoming that it would have transported us by an 
effort of sympathy. We should no longer be asking where 
a moving body will be, what shape a system will take, 
through what state a change will pass at a given mo­
ment: the moments of time, which are only arrests of our 
attention, would no longer exist; it is the flow of time, it 
is the very flux of the real that we should be trying to fol­
low. The first kind of knowledge has the advantage of 
enabling us to foresee the future and of making us in 
some measure masters of events; in return, it retains of 
the moving reality only eventual immobilities, that is to 
say, views taken of it by our mind. It symbolizes the real 
and transposes it into the human rather than expresses 
it. The other knowledge, if it is possible, is practically 
useless, it will not extend our empire over nature, it will 
even go against certain natural aspirations of the intel­
lect; but, if it succeeds, it is reality itself that it will hold 
in a firm and final embrace. Not only may we thus com-

MODERN 
SCIENCE 
373 
plete the intellect and its knowledge of matter by accus­
toming it to install itself within the moving, but by de­
veloping also another faculty, complementary to the 
intellect, we may open a perspective on the other half of 
the real. For, as soon as we are confronted with true 
duration, we see that it means creation, and that if that 
which is being unmade endures, it can only be because it 
is inseparably bound to what is making itself. Thus will 
appear the necessity of a continual growth of the uni­
verse, I should say of a life of the real. And thus will be 
seen in a new light the life which we find on the surface 
of our planet, a life directed the same way as that of the 
universe, and inverse of materiality. To intellect, in 
short, there will be added intuition. 
The more we reflect on it, the more we shall find that 
this conception of metaphysics is that which modern sci­
ence suggests. 
For the ancients, indeed, time is theoretically negli­
gible, because the duration of a thing only manifests the 
degradation of its essence : it is with this motionless es­
sence that science has to deal. Change being only the ef­
fort of a form toward its own realization, the realization 
is all that it concerns us to know. No doubt the realiza­
tion is never complete : it is this that ancient philosophy 
expresses by saying that we do not perceive form without 
matter. But if we consider the changing object at a cer­
tain essential moment, at its apogee, we may say that 
there it just touches its intelligible form. This intelligible 
form, this ideal and, so to speak, limiting form, our sci­
ence seizes upon. And possessing in this the gold-piece, it 
holds eminently the small money which we call becoming 

374 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
or change. This change is less than being. The knowledge 
that would take it for object, supposing such knowledge 
were possible, would be less than science. 
But, for a science that places all the moments of time 
in the same rank, that admits no essential moment, no 
culminating point, no apogee, change is no longer a dim­
inution of essence, duration is not a dilution of eternity. 
The flux of time is the reality itself, and the things which 
we study are the things which flow. It is true that of this 
flowing reality we are limited to taking instantaneous 
views. But, just because of this, scientific knowledge 
must appeal to another knowledge to complete it. While 
the ancient concepti-on of scientific knowledge ended in 
making time a degradation, and change the diminution 
of a form given from all eternity-on the contrary, by 
following the new conception to the end, we should come 
to see in time a progressive growth of the absolute, and 
in the evolution of things a continual invention of forms 
ever new. 
It is true that it would be to break with the metaphysics 
of the ancients. They saw only one way of knowing defi­
nitely. Their science consisted in a scattered and frag­
mentary metaphysics, their metaphysics in a concen­
trated and systematic science. Their science and meta­
physics were, at most, two species of one and the same 
genus. In our hypothesis, on the contrary, science and 
metaphysics are two opposed although complementary 
ways of knowing, the first retaining only moments, that 
Is to say, that which does not endure, the second bearing 
on duration itself. Now, it was natural to hesitate be­
tween so novel a conception of metaphysics and the tra­
ditional conception. The temptation must have been 

DESCARTES 
375 
strong to repeat with the new science what had been tried 
on the old, to suppose our scientific knowledge of nature 
completed at once, to unify it entirely, and to give to this 
unification, as the Greeks had already done, the name of 
metaphysics. So, beside the new way that philosophy 
might have prepared, the old remained open, that indeed 
which physics trod. And, as physics retained of time only 
what could as well be spread out all at once in space, the 
metaphysics that chose the same direction had neces­
sarily to proceed as if time created and annihilated noth­
ing, as if duration had no efficacy. Bound, like the phys­
ics of the moderns and the metaphysics of the ancients, 
to the cinematographical method, it ended with the con­
clusion, implicitly admitted at the start and immanent 
in the method itself: All is given. 
That metaphysics hesitated at first between the two 
paths seems to us unquestionable. The indecision is vis­
ible in Cartesianism. On the one hand, Descartes affirms 
universal mechanism : from this point of view movement 
would be relative/ and, as time has just as much reality 
as movement, it would follow that past, present and fu­
ture are given from all eternity. But, on the other hand 
(and that is why the philosopher has not gone to these 
extreme consequences) ,  Descartes believes in the free 
will of man. He superposes on the determinism of physi­
cal phenomena the indeterminism of human actions, and, 
consequently, on time-length a time in which there is in­
vention, creation, true succession. This duration he sup­
ports on a God who is unceasingly renewing the creative 
act, and who, being thus tangent to time and becoming, 
sustains them, communicates to them necessarily some-
' Descartes, Principes, ii. § 29. 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
thing of his absolute reality. When he places himself at 
this second point of view, Descartes speaks of move­
ment, even spatial, as of an absolute.1 
He therefore entered both roads one after the other, 
having resolved to follow neither of them to the end. The 
first would have led him to the denial of free will in man 
and of real will in God. It was the suppression of all effi­
cient duration, the likening of the universe to a thing 
given, which a superhuman intelligence wotild embrace 
at once in a moment or in eternity. In following the sec­
ond, on the contrary, he would have been led to all the 
consequences which the intuition of true duration im­
plies. Creation would have appeared not simply as con­
tinued, but also as continuous. The universe, regarded as 
a whole, would really evolve. The future would no longer 
be determinable by the present; at most we might say 
that, once realized, it can be found again in its antece­
dents, as the sounds of a new language can be expressed 
with the letters of an old alphabet if we agree to enlarge 
the value of the letters and to attribute to them, retro­
actively, sounds which no combination of the old sounds 
could have produced beforehand. Finally, the mechanis­
tic explanation might have remained universal in this, 
that it can indeed be extended to as many systems as we 
choose to cut out in the continuity of the universe; but 
mechanism would then have become a method rather 
than a doctrine. It would have expressed the fact that 
science must proceed after the cinematographical man­
ner, that the function of science is to scan the rhythm of 
the flow of things and not to fit itself into that flow.--
1 Descartes, Principes, ii. §§ 36 ff. 

S P I N O.ZA 
A N D  !EI B N I Z  
Such were the two opposite conceptions of metaphysics 
which were offered to philosophy. 
It chose the first. The reason of this choice is undoubt­
edly the mind's tendency to follow the cinematographical 
method, a method so natural to our intellect, and so well 
adjusted also to the requirements of our science, that we 
must feel doubly sure of its speculative impotence to re­
nounce it in metaphysics. But ancient philosophy also 
influenced the choice. Artists forever admirable, the 
Greeks created a type of suprasensible truth, as of sen­
sible beauty, whose attraction is hard to resist. As soon 
as we incline to make metaphysics a systematization of 
science, we glide in the direction of Plato and of Aris­
totle. And, once in the zone of attraction in which the 
Greek philosophers moved, we are drawn along in their 
orbit. 
Such was the case with Leibniz, as also with Spinoza. 
We are not blind to the treasures of originality their doc­
trines contain. Spinoza and Leibniz have poured into 
them the whole content of their souls, rich with the in­
ventions of their genius and the acquisitions of modern 
thought. And there are in each of them, especially in 
Spinoza, flashes of intuition that break through the sys­
tem. But if we leave out of the two doctrines what 
breathes life into them, if we retain the skeleton only, we 
have before us the very picture of Platonism and Aris­
totelianism seen through Cartesian mechanism. They 
present to us a systematization of the new physics, conᮺ 
structed on the model of the ancient metaphysics. 
What, indeed, could the unification of physics be? The 
inspiring idea of that science was to \solate, within the 
universe, systems of material points such that, the posi-

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
tion of each of these points being known at a given mo­
ment, we could then calculate it for any moment what­
ever. As, moreover, the systems thus defined were the 
only ones on which the new science had hold, and as it 
could not be known beforehand whether a system satis­
fied or did not satisfy the desired condition, it was useful 
to proceed always and everywhere as if the condition was 
realized. There was in this a methodological rule, a very 
natural rule-so natural, indeed, that it was not even 
necessary to formulate it. For simple common sense tells 
us that when we are possessed of an effective instrument 
of research, and are ignorant of the limits of its applica­
bility, we should act as if its applicability were unlim­
ited; there will always be time to abate it. But the temp­
tation must have been great for the philosopher to hypos­
tatize this hope, or rather this impetus, of the new sci­
ence, and to convert a general rule of method into a 
fundamental law of things. So he transported himself at 
once to the limit; he supposed physics to have become 
complete and to embrace the whole of the sensible world. 
The universe became a system of points, the position of 
which was rigorously determined at each instant by rela­
tion to the preceding instant and theoretically calculable 
for any moment whatever. The result, in short, was uni­
versal mechanism. But it was not enough to formulate 
this mechanism; what was required was to found it, to 
give the reason for it and prove its necessity. And the es­
sential affirmation of mechanism being that of a recipro­
cal mathematical dependence of all the points of the uni­
verse, as also of all the moments of the universe, the 
reason of mechanism had to be discovered in the unity of 
a principle into which could be contracted all that is jux-

SPINOZA AND LEIBNIZ 
379 
taposed in space and successive in time. Hence, the 
whole of the real was supposed to be given at once. The 
reciprocal determination of the juxtaposed appearances 
in space was explained by the indivisibility of true being, 
and the inflexible determinism of successive phenomena 
in time simply expressed that the whole of being is given 
in the eternal. 
The new philosophy was going, then, to be a recom­
mencement, or rather a transposition, of the old. The an­
cient philosophy had taken each of the concepts into 
which a becoming is concentrated or which mark its apo­
gee: it supposed them all known, and gathered them up 
into a single concept, form of forms, idea of ideas, like 
the God of Aristotle. The new philosophy was going to 
take each of the laws which condition a becoming in re­
lation to others and which are as the permanent sub­
strata of phenomena : it would suppose them all known, 
and would gather them up into a unity which also would 
express them eminently, but which, like the God of Aris­
totle and for the same reasons, must remain immutably 
shut up in itself. 
True, this return to the ancient philosophy was not 
without great difficulties. When a Plato, an Aristotle, or 
a Plotinus melt all the concepts of their science into a 
single one, in so doing they embrace the whole of the real, 
for concepts are supposed to represent the things them­
selves, and to possess at least as much positive content. 
But a law, in general, expresses only a relation, and phys­
ical laws in particular express only quantitative relations 
between concrete things. So that if a modern philosopher 
works with the laws of the new science as the Greek 
philosopher did with the concepts of the ancient science, 

CREATIVE ' EVOLUTION 
if he makes all the conclusions of a physics supposed 
omniscient converge on a single point, he neglects what 
is concrete in the phenomena-the qualities perceived, 
the perceptions themselves. His synthesis comprises, it 
seems, only a fraction of reality. In fact, the first result 
of the new science was to cut the real into two halves, 
quantity and quality, the former being credited to the ac­
count of bodies and the latter to the account of souls. 
The ancients had raised no such barriers either between 
quality and quantity or between soul and body. For 
them, the mathematical concepts were concepts like the 
others, related to the others and fitting quite naturally 
into the hierarchy of the Ideas. Neither was the body 
then defined by geometrical extension, nor the soul by 
consciousness. If the !flUXÄ of Aristotle, the entelechy of a 
living body, is less spiritual than our "soul," it is because 
his a'W!J.a, already impregnated with the Idea, is less cor­
poreal than our "body." The scission was not yet irreme­
diable between the two terms. It has become so, and 
thence a metaphysic that aims at an abstract unity must 
resign itself either to comprehend in its synthesis only 
one half of the real, or to take advantage of the absolute 
heterogeneity of the two halves in order to consider one 
as a translation of the other. Different phrases will ex­
press different things if they belong to the same lan­
guage, that is to say, if there is a certain relationship of 
sound between them. But if they belong to two different 
languages, they might, just because of their radical di­
versity of sound, express the same thing. So of quality 
and quantity, of soul and body. It is for having cut all 
connection between the two terms that philosophers have 
been led to establish between them a rigorous parallel-

SPINOZA AND LEIBNIZ 
ism, of which the ancients had not dn:amed, to regard 
them as translations and not as inversions of each other; 
in short, to posit a fundamental identity as a substratum 
to their duality. The synthesis to which they rose thus 
became capable of embracing everything. A divine 
mechanism made the phenomena of thought to corre­
spond to those of extension, each to each, qualities to 
quantities, souls to bodies. 
It is this parallelism that we find both in Leibniz and 
in Spinoza-in different forms, it is true, because of the 
unequal importance which they :-tttach to extension. 
With Spinoza, the two terms Thought and Extension are 
placed, in principle at least, in the same rank. They are, 
therefore, two translations of one and the same original, 
or, as Spinoza says, two attributes of one and the same 
substance, which we must call God. And these two transᮻ 
lations, as also an infinity of others into languages which 
we know not, are called up and even forced into existence 
by the original, just as the essence of the circle is trans­
lated automatically, so to speak, both by a figure and by 
an equation. For Leibniz, on the contrary, extension is 
indeed still a translation, but it is thought that is the 
original, and thought might dispense with translation, 
the translation being made only for us. In positing God, 
we necessarily posit also all the possible views of God, 
that is to say, the monads. But we can always imagine 
that a view has been taken from a point of view, and it is 
natural for an imperfect mind like ours to class viev·s, 
qualitatively different, according to the order and posi­
tion of points of view, qualitatively identical, from which 
the views might have been taken. In reality the points of 
view do not exist, for there are only views, each given in 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
an indivisible block and representing in its own way the 
whole of reality, which is God. But we need to express 
the plurality of the views, that are unlike each other, by 
the multiplicity of the points of view that are exterior to 
each other; and we also need to symbolize the more or 
less close relationship between the views by the relative 
situation of the points of view to one another, their near­
ness or their distance, that is to say, by a magnitude. 
That is what Leibniz means when he says that space is 
the order of coexistents, that the perception of extension 
is a confused perception (that is to say, a perception rel­
ative to att imperfect mind), and that nothing exists but 
monads, ᮼxpressing thereby that the real Whole has no 
parts, but is repeated to infinity, each time integrally 
(though diversely) within itself, and that all these repe­
titions are complementary to each other. In just the same 
way, the visible relief of an object is equivalent to the 
whole set of stereoscopic views taken of it from all 
points, so that, instead of seeing in the relief a juxtaposi­
tion of solid parts, we might quite as well look upon it as 
made of the reciprocal complementarity of these whole 
views, each given in block, each indivisible, each differ­
ent from all the others and yet representative of the same 
thing. The Whole, that is to say, God, is this very relief 
for Leibniz, and the monads are these complementary 
plane views ; for that reason he defines God as "the sub­
stance that has no point of view," or, again, as "the uni­
versal harmony," that is to say, the reciprocal comple­
mentarity of monads. In short, Leibniz differs from 
Spinoza in this, that he looks upon the universal mecha­
nism as an aspect which reality takes for us, whereas, 

SPINOZA AND LEIBNIZ 
Spinoza makes of it an aspect which reality takes for it­
self. 
It is true that, after having concentrated in God the 
whole of the real, it became difficult for them to pass 
from God to things, from eternity to time. The difficulty 
was even much greater for these philosophers than an 
Aristotle or a Plotinus. The God of Aristotle, indeed, had 
been obtained by the compression and reciprocal com­
penetration of the Ideas that represent, in their finished 
state or in their culminating point, the changing things 
of the world. He was, therefore, transcendent to the 
world, and the duration of things was juxtaposed to His 
eternity, of which it was only a weakening. But in the 
principle to which we are led by the consideration of uni­
versal mechanism, and which must serve as its substra­
tum, it is not concepts or things, but laws or relations 
that are condensed. Now, a relation does not exist sepa­
rately. A law connects changing terms and is immanent 
in what it governs. The principle in which all these rela­
tions are ultimately summed up, and which is the basis 
of the unity of nature, cannot, therefore, be transcendent 
to sensible reality; it is immanent in it, and we must sup­
pose that it is at once both in and out of time, gathered 
up in the unity of its substance and yet condemned to 
wind it off in an endless chain. Rather than formulate 
so appalling a contradiction, the philosophers were nec­
essarily led to sacrifice the weaker of the two terms, and 
to regard the temporal aspect of things as a mere illu­
sion. Leibniz says so in explicit terms, for he makes of 
time, as of space, a confused perception. While the mul­
tiplicity of his monads expresses only the diversity of 

CREATIVE EVOLUTIO N 
views taken of the whole, the history of an isolated mo­
nad seems to be hardly anything else than the manifold 
views that it can take of its own substance : so that time 
would consist in all the points of view that each monad 
can assume toward itself, as space consists in all the 
points of view that all monads can assume toward God. 
But the thought of Spinoza is much less clear, and this 
philosopher seems to have sought to establish, between 
eternity and that which has duration, the same differ­
ence as Aristotle made between essence and accidents : a 
most difficult undertaking, for the u'A.1J of Aristotle was no 
longer there to measure the distance and explain the pas­
sage from the essential to the accidental, Descartes hav­
ing eliminated it forever. However that may be, the 
deeper we go into the Spinozistic conception of the "in­
adequate," as related to the "adequate," the more we 
feel ourselves moving in the direction of Aristotelianism 
-just as the Leibnizian monads, in proportion as they 
mark themselves out the more clearly, tend to approxi­
mate to the Intelligibles of Plotinus.1 The natural trend 
of these two philosophies brings them back to the con­
clusions of the ancient philosophy. 
To sum up, the resemblances of this new metaphysic 
to that of the ancients arise from the fact that both sup­
pose ready-made-the former above the sensible, the 
latter within the sensible-a science one and complete, 
with which any reality that the sensible may contain is 
believed to coincide. For both, reality as well as truth are 
1 In a course of lectures on Plotinus, given at the College de France in 
I897-1898, we tried to bring out these resemblances. They are numerous 
and impressive. The analogy is continued even in the formulae em­
ployed on each side. 

PARALLELI S M  AND M O N I S M  
385 
integrally given in eternity. Both are opposed to the idea 
of a reality that creates itself gradually, that is, at bot­
tom, to an absolute duration. 
Now, it might easily be shown that the conclusions of 
this metaphysic, springing from science, have rebounded 
upon science itself, as it were, by ricochet. They pene­
trate the whole of our so-called empiricism. Physics and 
chemistry study only inert matter; biology, when it 
treats the living being physically and chemically, consid­
ers only the inert side of the living: hence the mechanis­
tic explanations, in spite of their development, include 
only a small part of the real. To suppose a priori that the 
whole of the real is resolvable into elements of this kind, 
or at least that mechanism can give a complete transla­
tion of what happens in the world, is to pronounce for a 
certain metaphysic-the very metaphysic of which Spi­
noza and Leibniz have laid down the principles and 
drawn the consequences. Certainly, the psycho-physiolo­
gist who affirms the exact equivalence of the cerebral 
and the psychical state, who imagines the possibility, 
for some superhuman intellect, of reading in the brain 
what is going on in consciousness, believes himself very 
far from the metaphysicians of the seventeenth century, 
and very near to experience. Yet experience pure and 
simple tells us nothing of the kind. It shows us the inter­
dependence of the mental and the physical, the necessity 
of a certain cerebral substratum for the psychical state 
-nothing more. From the fact that two things are mu­
tually dependent, it does not follow that they are equiva­
lent. Because a certain screw is necessary to a certain 
machine, because the machine works when the sc.rew is 

386 
CREATIVE 
EVOL UTION 
there and stops when the screw is taken away, we do not 
say that the screw is the equivalent of the machine. For 
correspondence to be equivalence, it would be necessary 
that to any part of the machine a definite part of the 
screw should correspond-as in a literal translation in 
which each chapter renders a chapter, each sentence a 
sentence, each word a word. Now, the relation of the 
brain to consdousness seems to be entirely different. Not 
only does the hypothesis of an equivalence between the 
psychical state and the cerebral state imply a downright 
absurdity, as we have tried to prove in a former essay,1 
but the facts, examined without prejudice, certainly 
seem to indicate that the relation of the psychical to the 
physical is just that of the machine to the screw. To 
speak of an equivalence between the two is simply to cur­
tail, and make almost unintelligible, the Spinozistic or 
Leibnizian metaphysic. It is to accept this philosophy, 
such as it is, on the side of Extension, but to mutilate it 
on the side of Thought. With Spinoza, with Leibniz, we 
suppose the unifying synthesis of the phenomena of mat­
ter achieved, and everything in matter explained me­
chanically. But, for the conscious facts, we no longer 
push the synthesis to the end. We stop half-way. We sup­
pose consciousness to be coextensive with a certain part 
of nature and not with all of it. We are thus led, some­
times to an "epiphenomenalism" that associates con­
sciousness with certain particular vibrations and puts it 
here and there in the world in a sporadic state, and some­
times to a "monism" that scatters consciousness into as 
1 "Le Paralogisme psycho-physiologique" (Revue de mitaphysique et 
de morale, Nov. 1904, pp. 895-9o8). Cl. Mati;re et memoire, Paris, 1896, 
chap. i. 

THE KANTIAN CRITICI S M  
387 
many tiny grains as there are atoms; but, in either case, 
it is to an incomplete Spinozism or to an incomplete Leib­
nizianism that we come back. Between this conception of 
nature and Cartesianism we find, moreover, intermediate 
historical stages. The medical philosophers of the eight­
eenth century, with their cramped Cartesianism, have 
had a great part in the genesis of the "epiphenomenal­
ism" and "monism" of the present day. 
These doctrines are thus found to fall short of the 
Kantian criticism. Certainly, the philosophy of Kant is 
also imbued with the belief in a science single and com­
plete, embracing the whole of the real. Indeed, looked at 
from one aspect, it is only a continuation of the meta­
physics of the moderns and a transposition of the ancient 
metaphysics. Spinoza and Leibniz had, following Aris­
totle, hypostatized in God the unity of knowledge. The 
Kantian criticism, on one side at least, consists in asking 
whether the whole of this hypothesis is necessary to mod­
ern science as it was to ancient science, or if part of the 
hypothesis is not sufficient. For the ancients, science ap­
plied to concepts, that is to say, to kinds of things. In 
compressing all concepts into one, they therefore neces­
sarily arrived at a being, which we may call Thought, 
but which was rather thought-object than thought-sub­
ject. When Aristotle defined God the 'JO'I)aew; 'JOÂat;, it is 
probably on 'JOÂaewÃ, and not on "61Jat; that he put the 
emphasis. God was the synthesis of all concepts, the idea 
of ideas. But modern science turns on laws, that is, on re­
lations. Now, a relation is a bond established by a mind 
between two or more terms. A relation is nothing outside 
of the intellect that relates. The universe, therefore, can 

3'88 
CREA'l'IVE E·VOLUTION 
only be a system of laws if phenomena have passed be­
forehand through the filter of an intellect. Of course, this 
intellect might be that of a being infinitely superior to 
man, who would found the materiality of things at the 
same time that he bound them together : such was the 
hypothesis of Leibniz and of Spinoza. But it is not nec­
essary to go so far, and, for the effect we have here to 
obtain, the human intellect is enough : such is precisely 
the Kantian solution. Between the dogmatism of a Spi­
noza or a Leibniz and the criticism of Kant there is just 
the same distance as between ''it may be maintained 
that-" and "it suffices that-." Kant stops this dogma­
tism on the incline that was making it slip too far toward 
the Greek metaphysics ; he reduces to the strict mini­
mum the hypothesis which is necessary in order to sup­
pose the physics of Galileo indefinitely extensible. True, 
when he speaks of the human intellect, he means neither 
yours nor mine : the unity of nature comes indeed from 
the human understanding that unifies, but the unifying 
function that operates here is impersonal. It imparts it­
self to our individual consciousnesses, but it transcends 
them. It is much less than a substantial God ; it is, how­
ever, a little more than the isolated work of a man or 
even than the collective work of humanity. It does not 
exactly lie within man; rather, man lies within it, as in 
an atmosphere of intellectuality which his consciousness 
breathes. It is, if we will, a formal God, something that 
in Kant is not yet divine, but which tends to become so. 
It became so, indeed, with Fichte. With Kant, however, 
its principal role was to give to the whole of our science 
a relative and human character, although of a humanity 
already somewhat deifiedᮿ From this point of view, the 

THE KANTIAN CRITI C I S M  
ݸ89 
criticism of Kant consisted chiefly in limiting the dog­
matism of his predecessors, accepting their com:eption 
of science and reducing to a minimum the metaphysic it 
implied. 
But it is otherwise with the Kantian distinction be­
tween the matter of knowledge and its form. By regard­
ing intelligence as pre-eminently a faculty of establish­
ing relations, Kant attributed an extra-intellectual ori­
gin to the terms between which the relations are estab­
lished. He affirmed, against his immediate predecessors 
that knowledge is not entirely resolvable into terms o\ 
intelligence. He brought back into philosophy-while 
modifying it and carrying it on to another plane-that 
essential element of the philosophy of Descartes which 
had been abandoned by the Cartesians. 
Thereby he prepared the way for a new philosophy 
which might have established itself in the extra-intellec. 
tual matter of knowledge by a higher effort of intuition. 
Coinciding with this matter, adopting the same rhythm 
and the same movement, might not consciousness, by 
two efforts of opposite direction, raising itself and low­
ering itself by turns, become able to grasp from within, 
and no longer perceive only from without, the two forms 
of reality, body and mind? Would not this twofold effort 
make us, as far as that is possible, re-live the absolute? 
Moreover, as, in the course of this operation, we should 
see intellect spring up of itself, cut itself out in the whole 
of mind, intellectual knowledge would then appear as it 
is, limited, but not relative. 
Such was the direction that Kantianism might have 
pointed out to a revivified Cartesianism. But in this di­
rection Kant himself did·not .go. 

390 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
He would not, because, while assigning to knowledge 
an extra-intellectual matter, he believed this matter to 
be either coextensive with intellect or less extensive than 
intellect. Therefore he could not dream of cutting out 
intellect in it, nor, consequently, of tracing the genesis 
of the understanding and its categories. The molds of 
the understanding and the understanding itself had to be 
accepted as they are, already made. Between the matter 
presented to our intellect and this intellect itself there 
was no relationship. The agreement between the two was 
due to the fact that intellect imposed its form on matter. 
So that not only was it necessary to posit the intellectual 
form of knowledge as a kind of absolute and give up the 
quest of its genesis, but the very matter of this knowl­
edge seemed too ground down by the intellect for us to be 
able to hope to get it back in its original purity. It was 
not the "thing-in-itself," it was only the refraction of it 
through our atmosphere. 
If now we inquire why Kant did not believe that the 
matter of our knowledge extends beyond its form, this is 
what we find. The criticism of our knowledge of nature 
that was instituted by Kant consisted in ascertaining 
what our mind must be and what Nature must be if the 
claims of our science are justified; but of these claims 
themselves Kant has not made the criticism. I mean that 
he took for granted the idea of a science that is one, ca­
pable of binding with the same force all the parts of what 
is given, and of co-ordinating them into a system pre­
senting on all sides an equal solidity. He did not consider, 
in his Critique of Pure Reason, that science became less 
ᮽd less objective, more and more symbolical, to the ex­
tent that it went from the physical to the vital, from the 

THE KANTIAN CRITI C I S M  
39I 
vital to the psychical. Experience does not move, to his 
view, in two different and perhaps opposite ways, the one 
conformable to the direction of the intellect, the other 
contrary to it. There is, for him, only one experience, 
and the intellect covers its whole ground. This is what 
Kant expresses by saying that all our intuitions are sen­
suous, or, in other words, infra-intellectual. And this 
would have to be admitted, indeed, if our science pre­
sented in all its parts an equal objectivity. But suppose, 
on the contrary, that science is less and less objective, 
more and more symbolical, as it goes from the physical 
to the psychical, passing through the vital : then, as it is 
indeed necessary to perceive a thing somehow in order to 
symbolize it, there would be an intuition of the psychical, 
and more generally of the vital, which the intellect would 
transpose and translate, no doubt, but which would none 
the less transcend the intellect. There would be, in other 
words, a supra-intellectual intuition. If this intuition 
exists, a taking possession of the spirit by itself is pos­
sible, and no longer only a knowledge that is external 
and phenomenal. What is more, if we have an intuition 
of this kind (I mean an ultra-intellectual intuition) then 
sensuous intuition is likely to be in continuity with it 
through certain intermediaries, as the infra-red is con­
tinuous with the ultra-violet. Sensuous intuition itself, 
therefore, is promoted. It will no longer attain only the 
phantom of an unattainable thing-in-itself. It is (pro­
vided we bring to it certain indispensable corrections) 
into the absolute itself that it will introduce us. So long 
as it was regarded as the only material of our science, it 
reflected back on all science something of the relativity 
which strikes a scientific knowledge of spirit; and thus 

392 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
the perception of bodies, which is the beginning of the 
science of bodies, seemed itself to be relative. Relative, 
therefore, seemed to be sensuous intuition. But this is not 
the case if distinctions are made between the different 
sciences, and if the scientific knowledge of the spiritual 
(and also, consequently, of the vital) be regarded as the 
more or less artificial extension of a certain manner of 
knowing which, applied to bodies, is not at all symboli­
cal. Let us go further: if there are thus two intuitions of 
different order (the second being obtained by a reversal 
of the direction of the first), and if it is toward the sec­
ond that the intellect naturally inclines, there is no essen­
tial difference between the intellect and this intuition 
itself. The barriers between the matter of sensible knowl­
"edge and its form are lowered, as also between the "pure 
forms" of sensibility and the categories of the under­
standing. The matter and form of intellectual knowledge 
(restricted to its own object) are seen to be engendering 
each other by a reciprocal adaptation, intellect modeling 
itself on corporeity, and corporeity on intellect. 
But this duality of intuition Kant neither would nor 
could admit. It would have been necessary, in order to 
admit it, to regard duration as the very stuff of reality, 
and consequently to distinguish between the substantial 
duration of things and time spread out in space. It would 
have been necessary to regard space itself, and the geom­
etry which is immanent in space, as an ideal limit in the 
direction of which material things develop, but which 
t.hey do not actually attain. Nothing could be more con­
trary to the letter, and perhaps also to the spirit, of the 
Critique of Pure Reason. No doubt, knowledge is pre­
sentedrto mdn it ࠉas an everÁpen· rbll, experience as a 

T H; E  KANTIAN CRITICI S M  
39ʤ 
push of facts that is forever going on. But, according to 
Kant, these facts are spread out on one plane as fast as 
they arise; they are external to each other and external 
to the mind. Of a knowledge from within, that could 
grasp them in their springing forth instead of taking 
them already sprung, that would dig beneath space and 
spatialized time, there is never any question. Yet it is 
indeed beneath this plane that our consciousness places 
us; there flows true duration. 
In this respect, also, Kant is very near his predeces­
sors. Between the non-temporal, and the time that is 
spread out in distinct moments, he admits no mean. And 
as there is indeed no intuition that carries us into the 
non-temporal, all intuition is thus found to be sensuous, 
by definition. But between physical existence, which is 
spread out in space, and non-temporal existence, which 
can only be a conceptual and logical existence like that 
of which metaphysical dogmatism speaks, is there not 
room for consciousness and for life? There is, unques­
tionably. We perceive it when we place ourselves in du­
ration in order to go from that duration to moments, in­
stead of starting from moments in order to bind them 
again and to construct duration. 
Yet it was to a non-temporal intuition that the im­
mediate successors of Kant turned, in order to escape 
from the Kantian relativism. Certainly, the ideas of be­
coming, of progress, of evolution, seem to occupy a large 
place in their philosophy. But does duration really play 
a part in it? Real duration is that in which each form 
flows out of previous forms, while adding to them some­
thing new, and is explained by them as much as it ex­
plains them; but to deduᮾe this form directly from -one 

394 
CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
complete Being which it is supposed to manifest, is to 
return to Spinozism. It is, like Leibniz and Spinoza, to 
deny to duration all efficient action. The post-Kantian 
philosophy, severe as it may have been on the mechanis­
tic theories, accepts from mechanism the idea of a sci­
ence that is one and the same for all kinds of reality. And 
it is nearer to mechanism than it imagines; for though, 
in the consideration of matter, of life and of thought, it 
replaces the successive degrees of complexity, that mech­
anism supposed by degrees of the realization of an Idea 
or by degrees of the objectification of a Will, it still 
speaks of degrees, and these degrees are those of a scale 
which Being traverses in a single direction. In short, it 
makes out the same articulations in nature that mecha­
nism does. Of mechanism it retains the whole design; it 
merely gives it a different coloring. But it is the design 
itself, or at least one half of the design, that needs to be 
remade. 
If we are to do that, we must give up the method of 
construction, which was that of Kant's successors. We 
must appeal to experience--an experience purified, or, 
in other words, released, where necessary, from the 
molds that our intellect has formed in the degree and 
proportion of the progress of our action on things. An 
experience of this kind is not a non-temporal experi­
ence. It only seeks, beyond the spatialized time in which 
we believe we see continual rearrangements between the 
parts, that concrete duration in which a radical recast­
ing of the whole is always going on. It follows the real in 
all its sinuosities. It does not lead us, like the method of 
construction, to higher and higher generalities-piled-up 
stories of a magnificent building. But then it leaves no 

T H E  EVOLUTIONISM O F  S P E N CER 
395 
play between the explanations it suggests and the objects 
it has to explain. It is the detail of the real, and no longer 
only the whole in a lump, that it claims to illumine. 
That the thought of the nineteenth century called for 
a philosophy of this kind, rescued from the arbitrary, 
capable of coming down to the detail of particular facts, 
is unquestionable. Unquestionably, also, it felt that this 
philosophy ought to establish itself in what we call con­
crete duration. The advent of the moral sciences, the 
progress of psychology, the growing importance of em­
bryology among the biological sciences-all this was 
bound to suggest the idea of a reality which endures in­
wardly, which is duration itself. So, when a philosopher 
arose who announced a doctrine of evolution, in which 
the progress of matter toward perceptibility would be 
traced together with the advance of the mind toward ra­
tionality, in which the complication of correspondences 
between the external and the internal would be followed 
step by step, in which change would become the very 
substance of things-to him all eyes were turned. The 
powerful attraction that Spencerian evolutionism has ex­
ercised on contemporary thought is due to that very 
cause. However far Spencer may seem to be from Kant, 
however ignorant, indeed, he may have been of Kantian­
ism, he felt, nevertheless, at his first contact with the bio­
logical sciences, the direction in which philosophy could 
continue to advance without laying itself open to the 
Kantian criticism. 
But he had no sooner started to follow the path than 
he turned off short. He had promised to retrace a genesis, 
and, lo I he was doing something entirely different. His 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
doctrine bore indeed the name of evolutionism ; it 
claimed to remount and redescend the course of the uni­
versal becoming; but, in fact, it dealt neither with be­
coming nor with evolution. 
We need not enter here into a profound examination of 
this philosophy. Let us say merely that the usual device 
of the Spencerian method consists in reconstructing evo­
lution with fragments of the evolved. If I paste a picture 
on a card and then cut up the card into bits, I can repro­
duce the picture by rightly grouping again the small 
pieces. And a child who working thus with the pieces of 
a puzzle-picture, and putting together unformed frag­
ments of the picture finally obtains a pretty colored de­
sign, no doubt imagines that he has produced design and 
color. Yet the act of drawing and painting has nothing 
to do with that of putting together the fragments of a 
picture already drawn and already painted. So, by com­
bining together the most simple results of evolution, you 
may imitate well or ill the most complex effects; but of 
neither the simple nor the complex will you have re­
traced the genesis, and the addition of evolved to 
evolved will bear no resemblance whatever to the move­
ment of evolution. 
Such, however, is Spencer's illusion. He takes reality 
in its present form ; he breaks it to pieces, he scatters it 
in fragments which he throws to the winds ; then he "In­
tegrates" these fragments and "dissipates their move­
ment." Having imitated the Whole by a work of mosaic, 
he imagines he has retraced the design of it, and made 
the genesis. 
Is it matter that is in question? The diffused elements 
which he integrates into visible and tangible bodies have 

THE EVOLUTIONISM 
OF 
SPE N CER 
397 
all the air of being the very particles of the simple bodies, 
which he first supposes disseminated throughout space. 
They are, at any rate, "material points," and conse· 
quently unvarying points, veritable little solids : as if 
solidity, being what is nearest and handiest to us, could 
be found at the very origin of materiality ! The more 
physics progresses, the more it shows the impossibility 
of representing the properties of ether or of electricity­
the probable base of all bodies-on the model of the 
properties of the matter which we perceive. But philoso· 
phy goes back further even than the ether, a mere sche­
matic figure of the relations between phenomena appre­
hended by our senses. It knows indeed that what is visi· 
ble and tangible in things represents our possible action 
on them. It is not by dividing the evolved that we shall 
reach the principle of that which evolves. It is not by 
recomposing the evolved with itself that we shall repro­
duce the evolution of which it is the term. 
Is it the question of mind? By compounding the reflex 
with the reflex, Spencer thinks he generates instinct and 
rational volition one after the other. He fails to see that 
the specialized reflex, being a terminal point of evolution 
just as much as perfect will, cannot be supposed at the 
start. That the first of the two terms should have reached 
its final form before the other is probable enough; but 
both the one and the other are deposits of the evolution 
movement, and the evolution movement itself can no 
more be expressed as a function solely of the first than 
solely of the second. We must begin by mixing the reflex 
and the voluntary. We must then go in quest of the fluid 
reality which has been precipitated in this twofold form. 
and which probably shares in both without being either. 

CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
At the lowest degree of the animal scale, in living beings 
that are but an undifferentiated protoplasmic mass, the 
.reaction to stimulus does not yet call into play one defi­
mite mechanism, as in the reflex; it has not yet choice 
llmong several definite mechanisms, as in the voluntary 
tct; it is, then, neither voluntary nor reflex, though it 
.heralds both. We experience in ourselves something of 
this true original activity when we perform semi-volun­
tary and semi-automatic movements to escape a pressing 
danger. And yet this is but a very imperfect imitation of 
the primitive character, for we are concerned here with 
.a mixture of two activities already formed, already local­
ized in a brain and in a spinal cord, whereas the original 
activity was a simple thing, which became diversified 
through the very construction of mechanisms like those 
of the spinal cord and brain. But to all this Spencer shuts 
his eyes, because it is of the essence of his method to re­
compose the consolidated with the consolidated, instead 
of going back to the gradual process of consolidation, 
which is evolutionjtself. 
Is it, finally, the question of the correspondence be­
tween mind and matter? Spencer is right in defining the 
intellect by this correspondence. He is right in regard­
ing it as the end of an evolution. But when he comes to 
retrace this evolution, again he integrates the evolved 
with the evolved-failing to see that he is thus taking 
useless trouble, and that in positing the slightest frag­
ment of the actually evolved he posits the whole--so 
that it is vain for him, then, to pretend to make the gene­
sis of it. 
For, according to him, the phenomena that succeed 
each other in nature project into the human mind images 

THE EVOLUTIONISM OF 
SPENCER 
399 
which represent them. To the relations between phenom­
ena, therefore, correspond symmetrically relations be­
tween the ideas. And the most general laws of nature, in 
which the relations between phenomena are condensed, 
are thus found to have engendered the directing princi­
ples of thought, into which the relations between ideas 
have been integrated. Nature, therefore, is reflected in 
mind. The intimate structure of our thought corre­
sponds, piece by piece, to the very skeleton of things-I 
admit it willingly; but, in order that the human mind 
may be able to represent relations between phenomena, 
there must first be phenomena, that is to say, distinct 
facts, cut out in the continuity of becoming. And once 
we posit this particular mode of cutting up such as we 
perceive it today, we posit also the intellect such as it is 
today, for it is by relation to it, and to it alone, that 
reality is cut up in this manner. Is it probable that mam­
mals and insects notice the same aspects of nature, trace 
in it the same divisions, articulate the whole in the same 
way? And yet the insect, so far as intelligent, has already 
something of our intellect. Each being cuts up the mate. 
rial world according to the lines that its action must fol. 
low: it is these lines of possible action that, by inter­
crossing, mark out the net of experience of which each 
mesh is a fact. No doubt, a town is composed exclusivel' 
of houses, and the streets of the town are only the inter. 
vals between the houses : so, we may say that nature con 
tains only facts, and that, the facts once posited, the re 
lations are simply the lines running between the facts. 
But, in a town, it is the gradual portioning of the groun(l 
into lots that has determined at once the place of th·e 
houses, their general shape, and the direction of the 

400 
CREATIVE 
EVOLUTION 
streets: to this portioning we must go back if we wish to 
understand the particular mode of subdivision that 
causes each house to be where it is, each street to run as 
it does. Now, the cardinal error of Spencer is to take ex­
perience already allotted as given, whereas the true 
problem is to know how the allotment was worked. I 
agree that the laws of thought are only the integration of 
relations between facts. But, when I posit the facts with 
the shape they have for me today, I suppose my facul­
ties of perception and intel1ection such as they are in me 
today ; for it is they that portion the real into lots, they 
that cut the facts out in the whole of reality. Therefore, 
instead of saying that the relations between facts have 
generated the laws of thought, I can as well claim that it 
is the form of thought that has determined the shape of 
the facts perceived, and consequently their relations 
among themselves : the two ways of expressing oneself 
are equivalent; they say at bottom the same thing. With 
the second, it is true, we give up speaking of evolution. 
But, with the first, we only speak of it, we do not think 
of it any the more. For a true evolutionism would pro­
pose to discover by what modus vivendi, gradually ob­
tained, the intellect has adopted its plan of structure, 
and matter its mode of subdivision. This structure and 
this subdivision work into each other; they are mutually 
complementary; they must have progressed one with the 
other. And, whether we posit the present structure of 
mind or the present subdivision of matter, in either case 
we remain in the evolved: we are told nothing of what 
evolves, nothing of evolution. 
And yet it is this evolution that we must discover. Al­
teaay,:in the field.of physics itself, the 'stientists who are 

THE EVOLUTIONISM OF 
SPEl'I-CER 
401 
pushing the study of their science furthest incline to be.; 
lieve that we cannot reason about the parts as we reason 
about the whole; that the same principles are not ap­
plicable to the origin and to the end of a progress; that 
neither creation nor annihilation, for instance, is inad­
missible when we are concerned with the constituent cor­
puscles of the atom. Thereby they tend to place them­
selves in the concrete duration, in which alone there is 
true generation and not only a composition of parts. It is 
true that the creation and annihilation of which they 
speak concern the movement or the energy, and not the 
imponderable medium through which the energy and the 
movement are supposed to circulate. But what can re­
main of matter when you take away everything that de­
termines it, that is to say, just energy and movement 
themselves? The philosopher must go further than the 
scientist. Making a clean sweep of everything that is 
only an imaginative symbol, he will see the material 
world melt back into a simple flux, a continuity of flow. 
ing, a becoming. And he will thus be prepared to discover 
real duration there where it is still more useful to find it, 
in the realm of life and of consciousness. For, so far as 
inert matter is concerned, we may neglect the flowing 
without committing a serious error : matter, we have 
said, is weighted with geometry; and matter, the reality 
which descends, endures only by its connection with that 
which ascends. But life and consciousness are this very 
ascension. When once we have grasped them in their es­
sence by adopting their movement, we understand how 
the rest of reality is derived from them. Evolution ap­
pears and, within this evolution, the progressive deter­
mination of materiality and intellectuality by the grad-

CREATIVE E VOL UTIO N 
ual consolidation of the one and of the other. But, then, 
it is within the evolutionary movement that we place 
ourselves, in order to follow it to its present results, in­
stead of recomposing these results artificially with frag­
ments of themselves. Such seems to us to be the true 
function of philosophy. So undei'stood, philosophy is not 
only the turning of the mind homeward, the coincidence 
of human consciousness with the living principle whence 
it emanates, a contact with the creative effort: it is the 
study of becoming in general, it is true evolutionism and 
consequently the true continuation of science-provided 
that we understand by this word a set of truths either 
experienced or demonstrated, and not a certain new 
1cholasticism that has grown up during the latter half 
Df the nineteenth century around the physics of Galileo, 
15 the old scholasticism grew up around Aristotle. 

INDEX 
(COMPILED BY THE TRANSLATOR) 
Abolition of everything a self­
contradiction, 304, 308, 322, 
324 
idea of, 303, 304, 3o6-8, 320-2. 
Su Nought 
Absence of order, 253, 256, 298. 
Su Disorder 
Absolute and freedom, 302 
reality, I IO, 249-50, 293, 389, 
393 
reality of the person, 292 
time anci the, 262, 263, 324, 368, 
369, 374 
Absoluteness of duration, 225 
of understanding, xxi, 54, 167, 
209, 218, 219 
Abstract becoming, 330oo4 
multiplicity, 280-2 
time, u, 
20, 23-6, 43, 45, 52, 
ss, 1 79, 345-7, 365, 383-4 
Accident and essence in Aristotle's 
philosophy, 384 
in evolution, 96-7, II5, 1 27-8, 
140, 186, 187, 275, 2 7 7-8, 290, 
291, 354·5 
Accidental v,ariations, 63, 71, 77, 
78, 83, 95-6, 185 
Accumulation of energy, function 
of vegetable organisms, 276, 
278 
Achilles and tortoise, in Zeno, 337, 
339-40 
Acquired characters, 
inheritance 
of, 85-8, 92-4, 97, 186, 187, 
190, 252 
Act, consciousness as inadequacy 
of, to representation, 159 
form (or essence), quality, three 
classes of representation, 328-9 
Action, creativeness of free, 210, 
270 
403 
and concepts, 176, 323 
and consciousness, 
7, 
I 58-9, 
r6o, 197-8, 227, 285 
discontinuity of, 170, 333 
freedom of, in animals, 143 
as function of nervous system, 
285-7 
indivisibility of, 105, ro6, 334·6 
and inert matter, 107, 151, rs6-
7, 172, r86, 205, 216, 247, 398 
instinct and, 150, 156 
instrument 
of, 
consciousnes.'l, 
197 
instrument of, life, 1 78 
instrument of matter, 1 78, 217• 
IS 
as instrument of consciousnes11 
217  
!Lnd intellect. Su Intellect and 
action 
intensity of consciousness varies 
with ratio of possible, to real, 
100 

INDEX 
Action (Continued) 
meaning of, 327-9 
moves from want to fulness, 323, 
324 
organism a machine for, 275, 
277, 326 
and perception, 7, I4, IS, I04, 
207, 226, 249-52, 326, 333. 400 
possible, IS, I6, I07, IS9, I6o, 
I6I-2, I 76, I82, 197-9, 206, 
288 
and science, Io2, 2I4-IS, 2I7-I8, 
357-9 
and space, 223 
sphere of the intellect, I71 
tension in a free, 2I9, 227, 26o, 
262, 327-8 
lctivity, dissatisfaction the start­
ing-point of, 323 
of instinct, continuous with vital 
process, I 54, I 55 
life as, 142-3, 270 
mutually inverse factors in vital, 
270 
and nervous system, 122, 143, 
146-7, 148-9, 198, 274, 285-7 
organism as, 191 
potential. See Action, possible 
tension of free, 219, 221, 227-8, 
244-5, 259, 261, 326-7 
and torpor in evolution, 121, 
I23, 1 25, 126, 132-3, 142-4, 
149·50, 199, 318 
vital, has evolved divergently, 
148 
See Divergent lines of evolu­
tion 
Adaptation, 58, 62, 65-6, 67, 79, 
I 13, I43, 147, 210, 278, 294, 
331-3 
and causation, I I3 
mutual, between materiality and 
intellectuality, 205, 225-7 
Adaptation (Continued) 
and progress, I I 2-I3 
Adequate and inadequate in Spi­
noza, 384 
Adjectives, substantives and verbs, 
330, 342 
Aesthetics and philosophy, I94 
Affection, role of, in the idea of 
chance, 256 
in the idea of nought, 306-8, 3I4, 
3I9, 320, 321 
in negation, 3II-12 
Affirmation and negation, 3 1o-u, 
318 
Age and individuality, r8-2o 
Albuminoid substances, I34-5 
Alciope, 107 
Alexandrian philosophy, 350, 351 
Algae in illustration of probable 
consciousness 
in 
vegetable 
forms, 1 24 
Alimentation, 126, I29, 270 
Allegory of the cave, 209 
Alternations of increase and de-
crease of mutability of the 
universe, 267-8 
Alveolar froth, 39 
Ambiguity of the idea of "gener­
ality" in philosophy, 25I-2, 
347-8 
of primitive organisms, uo, 124, 
125, I43-4 
Ammophila hirsuta, paralyzing in­
stinct in, IQO 
Amoeba, in ilustration of imita­
tion of the living by the un­
organized, 38-42 
in illustration of the ambiguity 
of primitive organisms, uo 
in illustration of the mobility 
characteristic of animals, I 20 
in illustration of the "explosive" 
expenditure of energy charac-

INDEX 
Amoeba (Continued) 
teristic of animals, 133, 276 
Anagenesis, 40 
Anarchy, idea of, 255, 256. See 
Disorder 
Anatomy, comparative, and trans­
formism 30 
Ancient philosophy, Achilles and 
tortoise, 337-8 
Alexandrian philosophy, 350-1 
Allegory of the cave, 209 
Anima (De), 350 note 
Apogee of sensible object, 373, 
374. 379 
Archimedes, 362-3 
Aristotle, r 79, 192, 248-9, 341, 
343. 349. 350, 352, 358-62, 
377. 384, 387, 402 
Arrow of Zeno, 335-40 
ascent toward God, in Aristotle, 
351 
Astronomy,ancient and modern, 
363-5 
attraction 
and 
impulsion 
in, 
351-2 
becoming in, 340-1, 345 
bow and indivisibility of mo­
t'on, 335-6 
Caelo (De), of Aristotle, 350 
note, 352 note 
and Cartesian geometry, 363-4 
causality in, 350, 353-4 
change in, 340-1, 344, 356-7, 
371-3 
cinematographical 
nature 
of, 
342 
circularity of God's thought, 
351-2 
concentric spheres, 356 
concepts, 354-5, 387 
"conversion" and "procession'! 
in, 351 
degradation of ideas into sensi-
Ancient philosophy (Continued) 
hie flux, 344-5, 349, 351-2, . 
355. 356, 373·4, 383-4 
degrees of reality, 35 1-2, 355 
diminution, derivation of be­
coming by. See Degradation 
of ideas, etc. 
duration, 344-5, 351-2, 355-6 
Eleatic philosophy, 335, 341 
Enneads of Plotinus, 230 note 
essence and accident, 385 
essence or form, 341-2 
eternal, 344-5, 352-4 
Eternity, 344-5, 348, 352, 356-7 
extension, 230 note, 345, 352, 355 
form or idea, 341-8, 349, 355, 
357-60, 383 
geometry, Cartesian, and an­
cient philosophy, 363 
God of Aristotle, 2I 5, 349-52, 
379. 383, 387 
vࠈ7J. 384 
Idea, 341-50, 383-4 
and 
indivisibility 
of 
motion, 
334·5, 337-8 
intelligible reality in, 344 
Intelligibles of Plotinus, 384 
XO-yos, of Plotinus, 230 note 
matter in Aristotle's philosophy, 
344. 355 
and modern astronomy, 362-3, 
364 
and modern geometry, 362-3 
and modern philosophy, 248-50, 
253, 374-5, 377. 379-81, _,84, 
387-8 
and 
modern 
science, 357-65, 
372-5, 388 
motion in, 335, 339-40 
necessity in, 355 
1'0""'"'' ,67]11<$, 387 
non-being, 344, 355 
Poiir 1I"0&7JT<ds, 350 

406 
INDEX 
Ancient philosophy (Continued) 
oscilation about being, sensible 
reality as, 345-6 
Physics of Aristotle, 249 note, 
352 note, 359-6o 
Plato, 55, I 72, 209, 230 note, 
343-5, 349-5I, 355, 359, 378, 
379 
Plotinus, 230 note, 343, JSI, 354 
note, 379, 383-4 
procession in Alexandrian phi-
losophy, JSI 
t/t11xl,, 230 note, 38o 
realism in, 2 53 
refraction of idea through mat­
ter or non-being, 344 
sectioning of becoming, 345 
sensible reality, J4I, 344, 348, 
355-7. 383-4 
,.;,.a., J8o 
space and time, 345-7 
Timaeus, 345 note 
time in ancient and in modem 
science, 358-6o, 365-7, 37I-4 
time and space, 345-7 
vision of God in Alexandrian 
philosophy, 350 
Zeno, 335, 340 
Ancient science and modern, 357-
65, 37I-5, 387-8 
Anima (De), 
of Aristotle, 
350 
note 
Animal kingdom, I6, I I 7-I8, IJ2-41 
139, I4J, I44-6, I49-501 I52, 
154. I97. 20J, 277 
Animals, I I 7-62, I84, I87, I99o 
20I, 
205-6, 
2J2, 
234. 
268, 
275-7, 285-9, 2C)O-I1 2951 JI8, 
327 
deduction in, 232 
induction in, 234 
and man, 154-8, 201, 205-7, 232, 
286-8, 2C)O-I 
Animals (Continued) 
and man in respect to brain, 20I, 
202-J, 286-9 
and man in respect to conscious­
ness, I54-8, I98, 20I-2, 205-6, 
210, 232, 286-93 
and man in respect to instru­
ments of action, I54-8, I66 
and man in respect to intelli­
gence, 
I521 
205-6, 
20C)-Io, 
2JI-2 
and plants, 1 17-50, I58, 187, 
I99-2oo, 276-7, JI8 
and plants in respect to activity 
of consciousness, I 2 I, I 23-7, 
IJ1-J, I42-J, 146, I49-50, ISS, 
I99-200, 318 
and plants in respect to func­
tion, I 29-JI, 134-5, I40 
and plants in respect to instinct, 
184, I87 
and plants in respect to mobil­
ity, 12I, I22, 1 25, I43-S. 146-
7. I49, I99 
and plants in respect to nature 
of consciousness, I49-50 
Antagonistic currents of the vital 
impetus, 
I42, 
149-50, 
I99, 
202, 272, 281-2 
Anthophora, I61-2 
Antinomies of Kant, 224-5 
Antipathy. Su Sympathy, Feel-
ing, Divinl}tion 
Antithesis and thesis, 225 
Ants, I I 2, 148, 155, 174 
Ape's brain and consciousness con-
trasted with man's, 286-7 
Aphasia, 198-9 
Apidae, social instinct in the, ISS 
Apogee of instinct in the hyme-
noptera and of intelligence in 
man, 192-3. Su Evolutionary 
superiority 

INDEX 
Apogee of sensible object, in phi­
losophy of Ideas, 313-4, 379 
Approximateness of the knowledge 
of matter, :u6 
Approximation, in matter, to the 
mathematical order, 238. See 
Order 
Archimedes, 362 
Aristotle. See Ancient Philosophy, 
Aristotle 
Arrow, Flying, of Zeno, 335-7, 
338-9 
Art, 9, 34 nou, 52, Ioo, I94 
Artemia Salina, 
transformations 
of, 8I, 82 
Arthropods in evolution, 
I44·9, 
I 57 
Articulate species, I 48 
Articulations of matter relative to 
action, I72, 399 
of motion, 33 7-8 
of real time, 36o-1 
Artificial, how far scientific knowl­
edge is, 2I6-I7, 238-9 
instruments, I 52-6 
Artist, in illustration of the crea­
tiveness of duration, 370 
Ascending cosmic movement, I4, 
227-8, 300, 401 
Ascent toward God, in Aristotle, 
350-I 
Association of organisms, 283. See 
Individuation 
universal oscillation between as­
sociation and individuation, 
282-4. See Societies 
Astronomy and deduction, 233 
and the inert order, 245 
modem, in reference to ancient 
science, 363-5 
Atmosphere of spatiality bathing 
inteligence, 223 
Atom, 262, 267 
Atom (Conlimml) 
as an intellectual view of mat­
ter, 222, 272-3 
and interpenetration, 227 
Attack and defence in evolution, 
145-6 
Attention, s, I64, 170, 203, 228 
discontinuity of, 5 
in man and in lower animals, 
203. See Tension and instinct, 
Tension as inverted extension, 
Tension of personality, Sym­
pathetic 
appreciation, 
etc., 
Relaxation and intellect 
Attraction and impulsion in Greek 
philosophy, 351, 352 
Attribute and subject, 163 
Automatic activity, 16o 
as instrument of voluntary, 27 
order, 245, 253-6. See Negativt 
movement, etc., Geometrical 
order 
Automatism, 141, 158-9, 191, 244-
5, 285, 287-8 
Background of instinct and intelli­
gence, CO®lf.Ciousness as, 204 
Backward-loditltg attitude of the 
intellect, 53, 55, 259 
Baldwin, ]. M., 32 note 
Ballast of intelligence, 167, 251, 
261, 401-2 
Bastian, 232 nou 
Bateson, 71 note 
Becoming, 18r, 259, 270, 297, 324· 
41, 343. 368, 372·3, 375. 396 
in ancient philosophy, 34o-1, 344 
in Descartes's philosophy, 376 
in Eleatic philosophy, J4D-J 
in general, or abstract becoming, 
330, 332·4 
instantaneous and static viewa 
of, 297, 33o-a 

INDEX 
Becoming (Continued) 
atates of, falsely so called, 181, 
270-1, 297, 324-7, 333-5 
in the successors of Kant, 394· 
See Change, New, Duration, 
Time, Views of reality 
"3ees, 1 1 2, 155, I 57, I6I, I83, 188 
Beethoven, 245 
Berthold, 40 note 
Bethe, I93 note 
Bifurcations of tendency, 6I-2. See 
Divergent lines of evolution 
Biology, I6, 29, 30, 35-7, 49, I85-6, 
I92, 2 I 2-I5 
evolutionist, I85-6 
and philosophy, 49, 2 I 2-I5 
and physico-chemistry, 36 
Blaringhem, 96 note 
Bodies, I 72, 206-7, 326-7, 392. See 
Inert matter as a relaxation of 
the unextended into the ex­
tended 
defined as bundles of qualities, 
380 
Bois-Reymond (Du), 44 
Boltzmann, 267 
Bouvier, I57 note 
Bow, strain of, illustrating indivisi­
bility of motion, 335-7 
Brain and consciousness, 7, I 2 2-3, 
I96-8, 2oi-3, 232 note, 275, 
284-8, 294, 385, 386, 398. See 
Nervous System 
in man and lower animals, 201, 
203, 286-9 
Brandt, 75 note 
Breast-plate, in reference to ani­
mal mobility, 144-5. See Ca­
rapace, Cellulose envelope 
Brown-Sequard, 89-91 
Bulb, medullary, in the develop­
ment of the nervous system, 
122, 275 
Busquet, 283 note 
Biltschli, 39 note 
lluttei-Reepen, ISS note 
Butterflies, in illustration of varia-
tion from evolutionary type, 
81 
Caelo (De), of Aristotle, 350 note, 
352 note 
Calcareous sheath, in reference to . 
animal mobility, 144-5 
Calkins, I9 note 
Canal, in illustration of the rela­
tion of function and structure, 
I04 
Canalization, in illustration of the 
function of animal organisms, 
I04, Io6, I 22, 139, 279, 294 
Canvas, embroidering "something" 
on the, of "nothing," 3 23 
Caprice, an attribute not of free­
dom but of mechanism, 54 
Carapace, in reference to animal 
mobility, I44-5 
Carbohydrates, in reference to the 
function of the animal organ­
ism, I34-5 
Carbon, in reference to the func­
tion of organisms, 1 19, I 26, 
1 29, 276, 278 
Carbonic acid, in reference to the 
function of organisms, 276, 278 
Carnot, 265, 268, 279 
Cartesian 
geometry, 
compared 
with ancient, 363 
Cartesianism, 375, 387, 389 
Cartesians, 
389. 
See 
Spinoza, 
Leibniz 
Carving, the, of matter by intel­
lect, 17 I 
Categorical propositions, charac­
teristic of instinctive knowl-
edge, 165 
. 

INDEX 
Categories, conceptual, xx ,  xxi, 55, 
164, r82, 207-8, 2 16, n6-7, 
240-J, 281-4, 289, 390. 392·3· 
See Concept deduction of, and 
genesis of the intellect, 2I$, 
226-7, 390. 
See Genesis of 
matter and of the intellect 
innate, r62-4 
misfit for the vital, xx, xxiv, 55, 
, 182, 214·18, 240·21 28o-2 
in reference to the adaptation to 
each other of the matter and 
form of knowledge, 392 
Cats, in illustration of the law of 
correlation, 7 5 
Causal relation in Aristotle, 353 
between 
consciousness 
and 
movement, 1 23 
in Greek philosophy, 352-3 
Causality, mechanical, a category 
which does not apply to life, 
XX, XXV, 195 
in the philosophy of Ideas, 350-3 
Causation and adaptation, 
I I3, 
II4 
final, involves mechanical, 50-I 
Cause and effect as mathematical 
functions 
of 
each 
other, 
23·5 
efficient, 26o, 30I, 351 
efficient, in Aristotle's philoso­
phy, 352 
efficient, in Leibniz's philoso­
phy, 383-4 
final, 46-7, $0· I, 260 
final, in Aristotle's philosophy, 
353 
by impulsion, release and un­
winding, 82 
mechanical, as conta.ining effect, 
1 7, 255. 293 
in the vital order, 106, 181 
Cave, Plato's allegory of the, 209 
Cell, 19, 28, 38, 178, 183, 184, 
283·4, 293 
as artificial construct, I 79 
in the "colonial theory," 283 
division, 19, 28, 38 
instinct in the, I83, I84 
in relation to the soul, 293 
Cellulose envelope in reference to 
vegetable immobility and tor­
por, 1 20, I 23, I45 
Cerebral activity and conscious. 
ness, 7, 122-3, 197-9, 20I·3, 
232 note, 275, 284-6, 288, 292, 
294, 38o, 38r , 385, 386, 398 
mechanism, 7, 275, 285, 288, 391! 
Cerebro-spinal system, I38. 
Su 
Nervous system 
Certainty of induction, 235-7 
Chance 
analogous 
to 
disorder, 
254-6. See Affection 
in evolution, 96-7, u6, I27, I3Q-
40, 185-8, 275, 277, 278, 290, 
291, 354-5· See Indetermina. 
tion 
Change, 3, 9-II, 22, 95-6, 270, 299, 
319, 326-3 1, 334·$, 340-I, 344, 
354. 356-7, 373·5 
in ancient philosophy, 340-I, 
343·5, 
353-4. 
355-7. 
373. 
375 
in Eleatic philosophy, 341 
known only from within, 334 
Chaos, 254- See Disorder 
Character, moral, 7, I I I  
Charrin, 91 
.Chemistry, 33, 40-2, 62, Sz, 83, 
no, 2 1 2, 247, 278, 280 
Child, intelligence in, r62-3 
adolescence of, in illustration of 
evolutionary becoming, 339-
40 
Chipped stone, in paleontology 
IS;, 

410 
INDEX 
Chlorophyllian function, I I9-20, 
126-7, I 29, 268-9, 276 
Choice, 122, 139. IS8-6o, I97. I98, 
275, 284-8, 300, 398 
and 
consciousness, 
1 22, I97, 
284-8 
Chrysalis, I 27 note 
Cinematograph, 332-4, 369-70 
Cinematographical 
character 
of 
ancient philosophy, 342-3 
of intellectual knowledge, 332-4, 
339-46, 35I-2, 359-61, 376-7 
of language, 332-3, 339-42 
of modem science, 357-9, 365-6, 
370-3, 375. 376, 377 
Circle of the given, broken by ac­
tion, 211, 269-70 
logical and physical, 30I 
vicious, in intellectualist philos­
ophy, 2II-I2, 2r6, 347 
vicious, in the intuitional method 
is only apparent, 211-12 
Circularity of God's thought in 
Aristotle's philosophy, 352 
of each special evolution, I4I 
Circulation, 
protoplasmic, 
imi­
tated, 37-9 
in plants and animals, 120 
Circumstances in the determina­
tion 
of 
evolution, 
112-I41 
I41-3, 147. 153. 157. 166, I83, 
I8s, 187-8, 211-12, 275, 279 
in relation to special instincts, 
I 52, r8s, :u I-12 
Classes of words corresponding to 
the three kinds of representa­
tion, 330 
Clausius, 265 
Clearness characteristic of intel­
lect, 176-7 
Cleft between the organized and 
the unorganized, 2o8, 214-
rS 
Climbing plants, instincts of, 187 
note 
Coincidence of matter with space 
as in Kant, 225-7, 266 
of mind with intellect as in 
Kant, 54, 225 
of qualities, 236 
of seeing and willing, 259 
of self with self, definition of the 
feeling of duration, 218-19 
Coleopter, instinct in, I61-2 
Colonial theory, 282-3 
Colonies, microbial, 282 
Color variation in lizards, 81, 83 
Coming and going of the mind be-
tween the without and the 
within gives rise to the idea of 
"Nothing," 304 
between nature and mind, the 
true method of philosophy, 
261 
Common-sense, 34, r69, 178, 233, 
245. 302 
defined as continuous experience 
of the real, 233 
Comparison of ancient philosophy 
with 
modem, 
248-52, :153, 
356-7, 375-7, 379-87 
Compenetration, 383. See Inter­
penetration 
Complementarity of forms evolved, 
xxiii, 58, I 12, 1 15, 1261 129-301 
149. rso, 277, 278 
of instinct and intelligence, I6I, 
190. See Opposition of In­
stinct and Intelligence 
of intuition and intellect, 373, 
375 
in the powers of life, s6, 107-8, 
154-8, 194, 195-6, 2o1-3, :a6r, 
268-9, 277, 373 
of science 
and metaphysics, 
374 

INDEX 
o4 I I  
Complexity of the order of mathe­
matics, 228-30, 237-8, 274 
Compound reflex, instinct as a, 191 
Concentration, intellect as, 2 10, 
327 
of personality, 219-20 
Concentric spheres in Aristotle's 
philosophy, 356 
Concept accessory to action, xix 
analogy of, with the solid body, 
:m 
in animals, 205 
externality of, 177, 185, 193-5, 
2 18-19, 273. 332, 337' 341 
fringed about with intuition, 
53 
and image distinguished, 177, 
303 
impotent to grasp life, xix-xxiii, 
s6 
intellect 
the 
concept-making 
faculty, xix, s6 
misfit for the vital, 55 
representation of the act by 
which the intellect is fixed on 
things, 177 
synthesis of, in ancient philoso­
phy, 353-4, 387 . 
See Cate­
gories, Externality, Frames, 
Image, Space, Symbol 
Conditions, external, in evolution, 
142-3, 147, 152, 155-7, r6s-7, 
182-5, 187-8, 2 1 1-12, 274. 279, 
28o 
external, in determination of 
special instinct, 155-7, 165-7, 
182-5, 187-8 
Conduct, mechanism and finality 
in the evolution of, 53-4· Su 
Freedom, Determination, In­
determination 
Confused plurality of life, 28o 
Conjugation of Infusoria, 19 
Consciousness and action, :Ox, 7, 
159, 16o, 197-8, 227, 284-6 
consciousness as appendage to 
action, xix 
consciousness 
as 
arithmetical 
difference 
between 
possible 
and real activity, 16o 
consciousness as auxiliary to ac­
tion, 197-8 
consciousness as inadequacy of 
act to representation, 159 
consciousness as instrument of 
action, 197 
consciousness as interval be. 
tween possible and real action, 
16o, 197 
consciousness as light from zonl! 
of possible actions surround­
ing the real act, 197 
consciousness and locomotion, 
285 
consciousness plugged up by ac, 
tion, 159, 16o. See Torpor, 
Sleep 
consciousness as sketch of ac­
tion, 227 
intensity of, varies with ratio of 
possible to real action, 16o 
Consciousness in animals, as dis­
tinguished from the conscious­
ness of plants, 143, 149-so, 
158 
as distinguished from the con­
sciousness of man, 154-8, 198, 
201-2, 205-6, 232, 286-93. See 
Torpor, Sleep 
characteristic of animals, torpor 
of plants, 121, 123, 1 25-6, IJJ, 
143, 149-50, 199 
as background of instinct and 
intelligence, 204 
and brain, 197, 286, 287, 294, 
385 

41 2  
INDEX 
Consciousness in animals (Cont.) 
and choice, 122, 159-6o, 
197, 
285-8 
coextensive with universal life, 
204, 294 
and creation, consciousness as 
demand for creation, 285 
current of, penetrating matter, 
199. 294 
as deficiency of instinct, x6o 
in dog and man, 198 
double form of, 196 
function of, 227 
as hesitation or choice, rs8, 159 
imprisonment of, 
198, 
20I·2, 
287-8 
as invention and freedom, 287-8, 
294 
in man as distinguished from, in 
lower forms of life, 198, 286-8, 
291, 292-3 
and matter, 196, 199-20I, 227 
as motive principle of evolution, 
I99-200 
nullified, as distinguished from 
the absence of consciousness, 
IS8 
and the organism, 294 
in plants, 145, 149-50, 158 
as world principle, 259, 285 
Conservation of energy, 265-7 
Construction, I$3·7, x66, I71·4, 
2oo-r. See Manufacture, Solid 
the characteristic work of intel­
lect, x8o-I 
as the method of Kant's succes­
sors, 396-7 
Contingency, I07, 278, 291. See 
Accident, Chance 
the, of order, 2S3, 257 
Continuation of vital process in 
instinct, 152, 154, r82-4, 268. 
See Variations, Vital process 
Continuity, 3, 31, 34-5, 43, I52·.!h; 
I 7o, 1 78-8I, 281, 328, 332-4. 
337·<), 349, 353·5, 358, 377 
of becoming, 332-4, 339 
of change, 353-5 
of evolution, 22, 23 
of extension, I 70 
of germinative plasma, 31, 43 
of instinct with vital process, 
I54·5, I82-4, 268 
of life, 3· I4, 34, 1 79-Bo, 2.8i 
of living substance, I78-9 
of psychic life, 3, 35 
of the real, 328, 358 
of sensible intuition with ulu:a· 
intellectual, 392 
of sensible universe, 3 76 
Conventionality of science, 2 2<. 
"Conversion" and "procession" .in 
Alexandrian philosophy, 351 
Cook, Plato's comparison of the, 
and the dialectician, I 72 
Cope, 40 note, 86, I24 note 
Correlation, law of, 74-5 
Correspondence between mind and 
matter in Spencer, 400. See 
Simultaneity 
Cortical mechanism, 275-6, 285-6. 
See Cerebral mechanism 
Cosmogony and genesis of matter, 
2o6. See Genesis of matter 
and of in tcllect, Spencer 
Cosmology the, that follows from 
the philosophy of Ideas, 342, 
356 
as reversed psychology, 228 
Counterweight representation as, 
to action, 16o 
Counting simultaneities, the meas­
urement of time is, 367, 371-2 
Creation, xxi, 9, 14, 15, 27, 34, 35, 
51, 98, I I I ,  I I2, I I41 I I7, 1 200 
127, 142-5, I78-8I, 196, 219, 

INDEX 
413 
Creation (Continued) 
237. 238, 244, 247, 252, 259-
63, 285, 294, JOO, 369 
in Descartes's philosophy, 375 
of intellect, 370-2 
of matter, 259, 261, 270-2. See 
Materiality the inversion of 
spirituality 
of present by past, 7-8, 24-7, 32, 
184, 219-2 1  
the vital order as, 252 
Creative evolution, ro, 19, 25, 32, 
34, 4I-3, 73, I l l, I 15-I7, 
178-9, 244-5, 252, 259, 287-8, 
293-4 
Creativeness of free action, 21 I, 
265 
of invention, 274 
Creeping plants in illustration of 
vegetable mobility, 1 21 
Cricket victim of paralyzing in­
stinct of sphex, r89 
Criterion, quest of a, 62 .f. 
of evolutionary rank, 147, 289 
Criticism, Kantian, 224, 3 1 2  note, 
387, 391-4 
of knowledge, 213-14 
Cross-cuts through becoming by 
intellect, 340-1 .  See Views of 
reality 
through matter by perception, 
226 
Crossroads of vital tendency, 58-9, 
61, 1 22, 139 
Crustacea, 22, r 2.3, I44 
Crystal illustrating (by contrast) 
individuation, IS 
Cuenot, 89 note 
Culminating points of evolution­
ary progress, 57, 147-9. See 
Evolutionary superiority 
Current, 31, 32,. s8, ࠇOJ, 258, 259, 
273. 2(}0, 293 
Currents, antagonistic, 272 
of existence, 203 
of life penetrating matter, 3 I, 
32, 290, 294 
vital, 31, 32, 58, 259, 2901 294 
of will penetrating matter, 259 
Curves, as symbol of life, 38, ro1, 
233 
Cuts through becoming by the in­
tellect, 340-1 .  See Views of 
reality, Snapshots in illustra­
tion, etc. 
through matter by perception, 
225-6 
Cuvier, 138 note 
Dantec (Le), 21 note, 40 note 
Darwin, 71-3, 74, 8r, 121, r87 not• 
Darwinism, 63, 95-6 
Dastrc, 41 note 
Dead, the, is the object of intcl· 
lect, 181-2 
Dead-locks in speculation, 171, 339 
Death, 269 note, 295 
Declivity descended by matter, 
227, 268, 279, 368-9. See De­
scending movement 
Decomposing 
and 
recomposing 
powers characteristic of intel­
lect, 1 73, 273 
Deduction, analogy between, re· 
latcd to moral sphere and tan­
gent to curve, 2.33 
ami astronomy, 233 
duration refractory to, 233 
geometry the ideal limit of, 233· 
9, 392 
in animals, 232 
inverse to positive spiritual ef 
fort, 232 
nature of, 2JI 
physics and, 233 

414 
INDEX 
Deduction (Continretf) 
weakness of, in psychology 'and 
moral science, 233 
Defence and attack in evolution, 
146 
Deficiency of will the negative con­
dition of mathematical order 
and complexity, 229 
Definition in the realm of life, 16, 
1 1 7, 1 18 
Degenerates, I48-9 
Dtgntrescence smile (La), 
by 
Metchni.k.off, 22 note 
Degradation of energy, 264-s, 268 
of the 
extra-spatial in to 
the 
spatial, 227 
of the ideas into the sensible 
flux in 
ancient 
philosophy, 
344-7. 3S2·3· 3SS-7. 3S9. 373. 
37S. 383-4 
Degrees of being in the successors 
of Kant, 394 
Degrees of reality in Greek phi-
losophy, 3S2, 3SS-6 
Delage, 67 note, 9I note, 283 note 
Delamare, 91 note 
Deliberation, IS9 
De Manac¥ine, 137 note 
Deposit, instinct and intelligence 
as deposits, emanations, is­
sues, or aspects of life, xx, 
xxii, xxiii, s6, us, u6, ISO, 
397 
De Saporta, I I9 note 
Descartes, 304, 363, 37S, 376, 384, 
389 
becoming, 37S-6 
creation, .376 
determinism, 375 
duration, 376 
freedom, 375, 376 
geometry, 363 
God, 376 
Descartes (Continued) 
image and idea or concept, 304 
indeterminism, 37S 
mechanism, 37S, 376 
motion, 376 
vacillation 
between 
abstract 
time and real duration, 37S 
Descending movement of exist­
ence, 14, 221, 223, 228, 295, 
300, 401 
Design, motionless, of action the 
object of intellect, IJ0-1, 3 2S, 
327-8, 329 
Detension 
in the dream state, 
220-1 
of intuition in intellect, 26o 
Determination, 
86, 
I43-4, 
244, 
268-9 
Determinism, 238, 288, 37S, 379-
See Inert matter, Geometry 
in Descartes, 3 7 s 
Development, 
147, 
148-9, 
1s6. 
See Order, Progress, Evolu­
tion, Superiority 
Deviation from type, 92-4 
Dialectic and intuition in philoso­
phy, 260 
Dichotomy of the real in modem 
philosophy, 380 
Diferentiation of parts in an or­
ganism, 275, 284 
Dilemma of any systematic meta­
physics, 2IS, 216, 2S2 
Diminution, derivation of becom­
ing from being by, in ancient 
philosophy, 
344, 
34S, 
3so, 
351-3, 3SS-7, 373-4, 383 
geometrical order as, or lower 
complication of the vital or­
der, 257-8 
Dionaea illustrating certain ani­
mal characteristics in plants, 
1 191 IH 

INDEX 
Discontinuity of action, I 70, 332-4 
of attention, 5 
of extension relative to action, 
I70, I79 
of knowledge, 332 
of living substance, I 79 
a positive idea, 170 
Discontinuous the object of in­
tellect, I70 
Discord in nature, 140, 141, 277-8, 
290 
Disorder, 46-7, us, 243-4, 247, 
253-7, 298. See Expectation, 
Order, mathematical, Orders 
of reality, two 
Disproportion between an inven­
tion and its consequences, 200 
Dissociation as a cosmic principle 
opposed to association, 283 
of tendencies, 6r, 99, 149, 277, 
278, 280-2. 
See Divergent 
lines of evolution 
Distance, extension as the, be­
tween 
what 
is 
and 
what 
ought to be, 345-7, 355-6, 
359-6o 
Distinct multiplicity in the dream 
state, 220-r, 2 29 
of the inert, 282 
Distinctness characteristic of the 
intellect, 177, 259, 273 
characteristic of perception, 249, 
273 
as spatiality, 222, 227, 266, 272 
Divergent lines of evolution, xxii, 
62, 98, 108, 109-13, I I5-I6, 
uS, n9, r2r, 125, r28, 132, 
143, I46, 148-9, 157, 164, 165, 
184-s, I90, 199, 277, 278, 290, 
291 . St4 Dissociation of tend­
encies, Complementarity, etc., 
Schisms in the primitive im­
pulsion of life 
Diversity, 
sensible, 225, 24I-2, 
252, 257. 258 
Divination, instinct as, 194. St4 
Sympathy, etc. 
Divisibility of extension, 170, 179 
Division as function of intellect, 
167, 1 70, 178-So, 207 
of labor, no, 122, 131, I73-4o 
183, 283 
of labor in cells, 183 
Dog and man,consciousness in, 198 
Dogmatism of the ancient episte­
mology contrasted with the 
relativism of the modern, 252 
of Leibniz and Spinoza, 388-9 
skepticism, and relativism, 2IS­
r6, 252 
Dogs and the law of correlation 
75 
Domestication 
of 
animals 
and 
heredity, 89 
Dominants of Reinke, 48 no( 
Dorfmeister, 81 
Dream, 159, 198, 220, 229, 28o. 
See Interpenetration, Relaxa­
tion, Detention, RecollectioP 
as relaxation, 221 
Driesch, 48 no( 
Drosera, I I9, r 2 I 
Dufourt, 137 
Duhem, 264 note 
Dunan, Ch., xxv note 
Duration, xxv note, 4, 6-8, 12-u,, 
r9, 20, 25, 26, 42-5, 52, 58, 
219, 220, 225, 233. 236, 262, 
296, 297, 300, 324-5, 335, 344' 
6, 347 note, 352, 356, 361, 368. 
372, 373, 375, 385, 392-5 
absoluteness of, 225 
and deduction, 233 
in Descartes's philosophy, 376 
gnawing of, 6, II, 52 
indivisibility of, 9, 335-6 

416 
INDEX 
Duration (Continued) 
and induction, 234 
and the inert, 3 7 3-4 
in the philosophy of Ideas, 343-
s, 347 note, 352, 355-7 
rhythm of, 14, 141, 376, See 
Creation, Evolution, Inven­
tion, Time, UnforeseeableneǦs, 
Uniqueness 
Echinoderms in reference to ani­
mal mobility, 144, 145 
Efficient cause in conception of 
chance, 256 
Spinoza and, 293 
Effort in evolution, 187 
ࠊlBos, 342 
Eimer, 63, 81, 83, 96 
Elaborateness of the mathemati-
cal order, 228-30, 237, 273 
Eleatic philosophy, 335, 341-3 
Emanation, logical 
thought an, 
issue, aspect or deposit of life, 
xix, xxiii, 56 
Embroidering "something" on the 
canvas of "nothing," 323 
Embroidery by descendants on the 
canvas handed down by an­
cestors, 27-8 
Embryo, 22, 23, 31, 84, 91, 99, 1 12, 
182 
Embryogeny, 
comparative, 
and 
transformism, 29 
Embryonic life, 31, 182 
Empirical study of evolution the 
center of the theory of knowl­
edge and of the theory of life, 
196 
theories of knowledge, 224 
Empty, thinking the full by means 
of the empty, 297-8 
End in Eleatic philosophy, 341-3 
of science is practical utility, 358 
Energy, 127-9, 133-7, 264-9, 275· 
8o, 285 
conservation of, 264 
degradation of, 264, 265, 268-9 
solar, stored by plants, released 
by animals, 268, 277 
Enneadae of Plotinus, 230 note 
Entelechy of Driesch, 48 note 
Entropy, 265 
Environment in evolution, 
143, 
147, 153, 154, 157, r65, r84, 
r85, 187-8, 2 1 1, 212, 275, 279, 
280 
and special instincts, 152, 184, 
211, 212 
Epiphenomenalism, 286 
Essence and accidents in Aris­
totle's philosophy, 384 
or form in Eleatic philosophy, 
341-2 
the meaning of, 328-9 
Essences (or forms), qualities and 
acts, the three kinds of repre­
sentation, 329-30 
Eternity, 45, 324, 344, 347, 352, 
356-7, 376, 3S3, 384-5 
in the philosophy of Ideas, 343· 
4, 345-7. 352, 356 
in Spinoza's philosophy, 384 
Euglena, r 28 
Evellin, 338-9 note 
Eventual actions, 
14, 
108. 
Set 
Possible activity 
Evolution, xix-xxv, 22, 24, 27, ::z8, 
29, 30-2, 42-3, 53-63, 71, 77, 
89 note, 94-8, ro8, 109-17, I I9, 
1 25-6, 128-9, 139. 140, 142·4, 
145-6, 147, 148, 149-5 1, 152-5, 
156-7, 158, 178, 183, 184, 185-
90, 191, 192, 193. 196, 199. 
200, 203, 208-9, 206, 207, 217· 
18, 245, 252, 264 note, 268-9, 
270, 271-2, 273. 274, 277, ::z88-

INDEX 
Evolution (Continued) 
90, 293, 297. 328, 339. 376, 
391-2, 397-8 
accident in, u6, 186, 187, 190, 
191, 274, 275 
animal, a progress toward mo­
bility, 144-5 
antagonistic tendencies in, 1 15, 
125-6, 203 
automatic and determinate, is 
action being undone, 271 
blind alleys of, 143 
circularity of each special, 141 
complementarity of the diver-
gent lines of, 108, 109-13, 1 14, 
129 
conceptually inexpressible, 55, 
56-7, 59. 6o, 141, 199, 297-8 
continuity of, 21, 22-3, 32, 43, 
297. 329, 339. 373 
creative, ro, 19, 25, 32, 34, 41-3, 
73, I I I , 1 15-17, 178-9, 244-5, 
252, 259, 287-8, 292-4 
culminating points of, 57, 147, 
192, 203, 289, 290, 292 
development 
by, 147, 148-9, 
155-8 
divergent lines of, xxii, 6o, 61, 
98, 108, 109-13, 115-16, 119, 
192, 268-9 
and duration, 24, 26, 42, 52-3 
empirical study of, the center 
of the theory of knowledge 
and of life, 196 
and environment, 113-14, 143, 
147, 153, 157. 165, 184, 185, 
187-8, 211, 212, 274, 279. 28o 
of instinct, 187, r88, 191-2. See 
Divergent lines, etc., Culmi­
nating points, etc., Evolution 
and environment 
of intellect, xx-xxiii, r68-9, 204, 
207-8, 211-12, 226-8, 390, 391-
Evolution (Continued) 
2. See Divergent lines, etc., 
Culminating 
points, 
etc., 
Genesis of matter and of intel­
lect 
as invention, 373 
of man, 288, 290, 293. See Cui· 
minating points, etc. 
motive 
principle 
of, 
is con­
sciousness, 199 
of species product of the vital 
impetus opposed by matter, 
270-1, 277 
and transformism, 29 
unforeseeable, 53-4, 55, 6o, 96, 
245 
variation in, 27-9, 62-3, 71, 77, 
81 note, 95, 146, 151, 152, 184, 
287-8 
Evolutionary, qualitative, and ex­
tensive motion, 328-30, 338, 
339 
superiority, 147-9, 191-2. 
See 
Success, Criterion of evolu­
tionary 
rank, 
Culminating 
points, etc. 
Evolutionism, xx-xxiii, xxv, 86, 94, 
396 
Exhaustion of the mutability of 
the universe, 366-8 
Existence, logical, as contrasted 
with psychical and phyŨical, 
J00-1, 393 
of matter tends toward instan­
taneity, 220 
of self means change, 3 if. 
superaddition of, upon nothing­
ness, 300 
Expectation, 234-7, 242, 243, 247, 
254, 257-8, 298, 306, 318 
in conception of disorder, 242, 
243. 247. 254. 255. 256-7, 
298 

418 
INDEX 
Expectation (Continued) 
in conception of void or nought, 
306-7, 317·18 
Experience, 1 52, 162-3, 216, 223, 
250, 348, 385, 391 , 394, 400 
Explosion, illustrating cause by 
release, 82 
Explosive 
character 
of 
animal 
energy, 128, 1 29, 133, :r68 
of organization, 103 
Explosives, manufacture of, by 
plants and use by animals, 
268, 277 
Extension, 165, 169-70, 1 77, 221, 
222, 227, 229, 244, 258, 267, 
345-7, 352, 356, 381, 382 
continuity of, 170 
discontinuity of, relative to ac­
tion, 170, 178-9 
as the distance between what is 
and what ought to be, 346 
divisibility of, 1 70, 1 78-9 
the most general property of 
matter, 1 70, 272, 273 
the inverse movement to ten­
sion, 267 
of knowledge, 165 
in Leibniz's philosophy, 
381, 
382 
of matter in space, 223-4, 231 
in the philosophy of Ideas, 345-
7, 350-2, 355 
and relaxation, 22o-1, 227, 228-
91 23 1, 232, 238, 244, 267 
in Spinoza's philosophy, 381 
in the Transcendental Aesthetic, 
2 23 
unity of, 1 75-6 
as weakening of the essence of 
being, in Plotinus, 230 note 
Extensive, evolutionary and quali­
tative motion, 328-30, 337-8, 
339 
External conditions in evolution, 
141-2, 147. 151, 155-6, r66-7, 
184, 185, 187, 2 I I, 212, 275, 
279. 280 
finality, 47 
Externality of concepts, 1 77, 185, 
191, 194·5, 2 1 7-18, 273. 331-2, 
337·41 
the most general property of 
matter, 1 70, 272, 273 
Externalized action in distinction 
from internalized, 162-3, 182. 
See Somnambulism, etc., Au­
tomatic activity, etc. 
Eye of mollusk and vertebrate 
compared, 68, 84, 86-7, 94, 
96, 97-8 
Fabre, 189 1U!te 
Fabrication. See Construction 
Fallacies, two fundamental, 296, 
297 
Fallacy of thinking being by not­
being, 3001 301-2, 30<)1 322-4 
of 
thinking 
the full by the 
empty, 297-9 
of 
thinking 
motion 
by 
the 
motionless, 297, 298, 3 22-4, 
333-5, 336-41 
Fallibility of instinct, 1BQ-90 
Fallin;,: back of matter upon con­
sciousness, 287-8 
bodies, comparison of Aristotle 
and Galileo, 249, 359-60, 363 
weight, figure of material world, 
267, 268 
Familiar, the, is the object of in­
tellect, 180, 181, 2 18, 294-5 
Faraday, 222 
Fasting, in reference to primacy 
of nervous system over the 
other physiological systema, 
137-8 

INDEX 
Fauna, menace of torpor in primi­
tive, 144 
Feeling 
in 
the 
conception 
of 
chance, 227 
and instinct, 158, 191-2 
Fencing-master, 
illustrating 
he­
reditary transmission, 89 
Ferments, certain characteristics 
of, 1 19 
Fertilization of orchids by in­
sects, by Darwin, r87 note 
Fichte's conception of the intellect, 
208-9, 388 
Filings, iron, in illustration of the 
relation of structure to func­
tion, 105, ro6 
Film, cinematographic, figure of 
abstract motion, 330-2 
Final cause, 46-7, 51-2, 256, 353 
conception 
of, 
involves 
con­
ception of mechanical cause, 
so-l 
God as, in Aristotle, 349-50 
Finalism, 45-60, 66, 83, 99-108, 
II3-17, 140-2 
Finality, 46-7, 181, 195, 203, 244, 
245. 289 
external and internal, 47 
misfit for the vital, 195, 244-5, 
246, 289 
and 
the 
unforeseeableness of 
life, 18o-1, 203 
Fischel, 85 note 
Fish 
in 
illustration 
of 
animal 
tendency to mobility, 144, 145 
Fixation 
of 
nutritive 
elements, 
n8-22, 12S1 IJO, 269, 276 
Fillity, 12o-s, 131-2, 143, 171. See 
Torpor 
apparent or relative, 171 
cellulose envelope and the, of 
plants, uo, 123, 14S 
of extension, 171 
Fixity (Continued) 
of plants, 12o-s, 131-2, 143-4 
of torpid animals, 14S 
Flint hatchets and human intel­
ligence, IS2 
Fluidity of life, 169, 182, 2II 
of matter as a whole, 204, 401 
Flux of material bodies, 288 
of reality, 272-3, 366, 372, 374 
Flying arrow of Zeno, 335-7, 338-9 
Focalization of personality, 221 
Food, II8·21, u6, 129, IJJ, 134, 
268-9, 277 
Foraminifera, failure of certain, to 
evolve, 1 13 
Force, 14o-l, 156, I64-S. 193. 268, 
277, J69 
life a, inverse to matter, 268 
limitedness of vital force, 140, 
156, 164 
time as, 368-70 
Fore!, 193 note 
Foreseeing, II, 32-S, 44. Sl, 107. 
See Unforeseeableness 
Form, xxiii, 58, 1 12, ns, 126, 129-
30, 149. rso, 164-9. 171-2, 176, 
r8o, 214-IS, 243, 259, 273, 
277, 328-30, 341, 344-6, 349, 
370, 389, 390, 392-3 
complementarity 
of 
forms 
evolved, xxiii, s8, 1 12, us, 
126, 129-30, 149, 150, 277-8 
expansion of the forms of con­
sciousness, xxii, xxii 
(or essences), qualities and acts 
the three kinds of representa­
tion, 328-30 
God as pure form in Aristotle, 
21S, 349-50 
or idea in ancient philosophy, 
343-6, 3S9 
of intelligence, JJ:V, S s, r 6 2-4, 
182, :o8, 214, 215, 217, 227, 

.J2Q 
ݷNDEX 
Form (Continue4) 
240, 280-2, 291, 389-90, 392. 
See Concept 
and matter in creation, 261, 273 
and matter in knowledge, 214, 
392 
a snapshot view of transition, 
328 
Formal knowledge, 168 
logic, 3 1 7  
Forms o f  sensibility, 392 
Fossil species, II3 
Foster, 138 note 
Fox in illustration of animal in­
telligence, 152 
Frames of the understanding, 54-
s, 165-7, 190, 
195, 216-18, 
24o-1, 244-5, 281, 294, 340, 
389, 396 
fit the inert, 2 16, 238 
inadequate to reality entire, 396 
misfit for the vital, xx, xxiii, 
xxv, 54-5, 190, 195, 216-18, 
244, 281, 340 
product of life, 389 
transform freedom into neces­
sity, 294 
utility of, lies in their unlimited 
application, 165, 167 
Freedom, 14, 54, 140, 143, 1 79-81, 
219, 221, 227, 238, 244, 252, 
258, 261, 270, 271, 287-8, 293, 
294, 302, 369-72, 375-6 
the absolute as freely acting, 
J02 
affirmed by con!cience, 292 
animal 
characteristic 
rather 
than vegetable, 143 
caprice attribute not of, but of 
mechanism, 54 
coextensiveness of consciousness 
with, 122-3, 221, :188, 294 
of creation n<l. life, 270, 277, 278 
Freedom (Continued) 
creativeness of, 244, 261, 27o-1 
in Descartes's philosophy, 375-6 
as efficient causality, 301-2 
inversion of necessity, 258 
and liberation of consciousness, 
288-90. See Imprisonment of 
consciousness 
and novelty, 15, 1 79-8r, 219, 
238, 252, 261, 271, 294. 369-72 
order in, 244 
property 
of 
every 
organism, 
143-5 
relaxation of, into necessity, 238 
tendency of, to self-negation in 
habit, 141 
tension of, 219, 220, 221, 227, 
244, 259, 327 
transformed by the understand­
ing into necessity, 294. See 
Spontaneity 
Fringe of intelligence around in­
stinct, 150 
of intuition 
around intellect, 
xxiii, 53 
of possible action around real 
action, 197, 297 
Froth, alveolar, in imitation of 
organic phenomena, 39 
Full, fallacy of thinking the, by 
the empty, 297-300 
Function, xix, 5, 7-8, 50-1, 52-3, 
54, 98-101, 105, 106, I I8-22, 
125, 1 26-7, 1 29-30, 1J 2-J1 1J41 
140-1, 1461 155, 156, 160, 167-
8, 1 73-4, 178, 18o, 185, 191-3, 
204-10, 2251 254, 259, 268-9, 
274, 277-8o, 285-6, 287, 294-5, 
298, 325, 332, 376, 389, 402 
accumulation 
of 
energy 
the 
function of vegetable organ­
isms, 277 
action the, of intellect, ݶ. 15, 

INDEX 
42 1 
Function (Continua) 
so, 53·4. 104, 178, 1 79. 204·7, 
225-6, 273. 297. 332 
action the, of nervous system, 
285-6, 287 
alimentation, n8, r I9, 134, 268, 
277 
of animals is canalization of 
energy, I04, 1 22, IJ9, 278-9 
carbon and the, of organisms, 
119, I 26, I 29, 276, 278 
chlorophyllian, 
I I9·2o, 126-7, 
I 29, 268-9, 276 
concept-making the, of intel­
lect, xix, 56 
of 
consciousness: 
sketching 
movements, 227 
construction the, of intellect, 
120 
ilumination of action, of per­
ception, 7, 226, 333 
of intelligence: action, xix, IS, 
so, 53·4, I04, 178, I79. 204·7, 
225·6, 273. 297· 333"4 
of intelligence: concept-making, 
xix, s6 
of 
intelligence: 
construction, 
176-7, I8o, 200 
of intelligence: division, 167, 
170, r 78-8o, 207 
of intelligence: illumination of 
action by perception, 7, 226, 
333 
of intelligence: repetition, I8I, 
219, 236 
of 
intelligence: 
retrospection, 
53·4, 259 
of intelligence: connecting same 
with same, 2I8, 255, 295 
of 
intelligence: 
scanning 
the 
rhythm of the universe, 376 
of , intelligence: tactualizing all 
perception, rSs 
Function (Continued) 
of intelligence: unification, r67-
8, I70, 388 
of the nervous system: action, 
285-7 
and organ, 98-ro2, I04·S, 106-7, 
146-7, I54·5, rs6, I73·4· See 
Function and structure 
and organ in arthropods, verte 
brates and man, 146-7 
of the organism, 104, 118-22, 
124, I26, 129, IJ3, IJ9, 19I·2, 
268, 276-9 
of the organism, alimentation, 
I I8, I 19, I3J, IJ4, 268, 276 
of the organism, animal : canal­
izatian of energy, I04, 1 22, 
I39, 278, 279 
of the organism, carbon in, 1 I9, 
I 20, I 29, 276, 278 
of the organism, chlorophyllian 
function, II9-20, I26-7, 129, 
268-9, 276 
of the organism, primary func­
tions of life: storage and ex­
penditure of energy, 276-So 
of the organism, vegetable: ac­
cumulation of energy, 277, 
278 
of philosophy : adoption of the 
evolutionary 
movement 
of 
life and consciousness, 402 
of science, 185, 376 
sketchin:ê 
movements 
the, 
of 
consciousness, 227 
and structure, 62, 70, 75, 77, 83, 
84, 85, 96, 98-Io2, Io4, Io5, 
I07·8, IJI1 146, 154-6, I 74, 
I 78, 273, 275, 279 
tactualizing all perception the, 
of science, I 8 5 
of ve-'etahle organism: accumu­
lation· of ·energy, 277, 278 

422 
INDEX 
Functions of life, the two: storage 
and expenditure of energy, 
276-8o 
Galileo, homogeneity of time in, 
36o 
his influence on metaphysics, 
24, 249 
his influence on modem science, 
363, 364 
extension of Galileo's physics, 
388, 402 
his theory of the fall of bodies 
compared 
with 
Aristotle's, 
249. 359-60, 363 
Ganoid 
breastplate 
of 
ancient 
fishes, in reference to animal 
mobility, 144-5 
Gaudry, 144 note 
f Jenera, relation of, to individuals, 
247-8 
relation of, to laws, 246, 247-8, .f 
359 
potential, 247-8 
and signs, 174 
Generality, ambiguity of the idea 
of, in philosophy, 248, 250-3 
Generalization dependent on repe­
tition, 252 
distinguished from transference 
of sign, 174 
in the vital and mathematical 
orders, 245-7, 25 2 
Generic, type of the: similarity of 
structure between generating 
and generated, 245 
Genesis, xxiv, 169, 204-rS, 227, 390 
of intellect, xxiv, r69, 204, 205, 
208, 2 I I1 215·16, 227, 289, 390 
of knowledge, 209 
of matter, uiv, r6c), 204, 2o6, 
208, 2II0 218, 227, 390 
Genius and the willed order, 245. 
259 
Genus. See GenePa 
Geometrical, the, is the object of 
the intellect, 209 
Geometrical order as a diminu­
tion or lower complication of 
the vital, 244, 246, 257-8, 359· 
See Genera, Relation of, to 
laws 
mutual 
contingency of, 
and 
vital order, 257 
See Mathematical order 
space, relation of, to the spa­
tiality of things, 222 
Geometrism, the latent, of intel­
lect, 214, 230-3 
Geometry, fitness of, to matter, 13 
goal of intellectual operations, 
232, 233. 238 
ideal limit of induction and de­
duction, 
234-9, 
392. 
See 
Space, Descending movement 
of existence 
modem, compared with ancient, 
37. 177, 363 
natural, 213, 230-2 
perception impregnated with, 
223-4. 252 
reasoning in, contrasted with 
reasoning concerning life, ro, 
I I  
scientific, r 77, 23 I 
Germ, accidental predisposition of, 
in Neo-Darwinism, 185, r86, 
187 
Germ-plasm, continuity of, 31, 43, 
88-93 
Giard, 93 note 
Glucose in organic function, I.1So 
136 
Glycogen in organic function, IJS-
7 

INDEX 
423 
God, as activity, 27,3 
of A ristotle, ZI5, 349, 352, 379, 
:;:l.t, JS7-8 
ascent 
toward, 
in A ristotlc's 
pliib;nphy, .>N-SO 
circularity of (;od's thouࠆht, in 
Aristotle's 
philosophy, 
352, 
353 
in Descartes's philosophy, 376, 
377 
as cflicicnt cause in A ristotle's 
philosophy, 353 
as hypostasis of the unity of 
nature, 215, 34Q, 388 
in Leibniz's philosophy, 382, 
383, 387-8 
as eternal matter, 2I5 
as pure form, 2 15, 349 
in Spinoza's philosophy, 
38I, 
387 
Greek philosophy. 
Sec Andcnt 
philosophy 
Green parts of plants, I I9-21, I 26, 
129, 268-9, 277 
Growing old, 19 
Growth, creation is, 262-3, 300 
and novelty, 252 
of the powers of life, I46-7, I48-9 
reality is, 261 
of the universe, 373, 375 
Guerin, P. , 67 note 
Guinea-pig, in illustration of he­
reditary transmission, 90, 9I 
Habit and consciousness annulled, 
I 58 
form of knowledge a habit or 
bent of attention, 164 
and heredity, 87, 93, 186, 187, 
190. See Acquired characters, 
inheritance of 
instinct as an intelligent, 190-I 
and invention in animals, 287 
Habit and consciousness annulled 
(Continued) 
and invention in man, 288 
tendency of freedom to self­
ne::ation in, I4I 
Harmony between instinct and 
life, anrl between intelligence 
and the inert, 204, 213, 214, 
2 1 7  
of the orf(anic world i s  comple­
mentarity due to a common 
ori*inal impulse, 57, s8, I I5, 
I 29, I 3 I  
pre-established, 224, 225 
in radical Jlnalism, 140-1. See 
Dixord 
lfarto Ɵ. (>8 note 
Ilatchšts, ancient flint, and human 
intell¸ct, 152 
Heliocentric radius-vector in Kep­
ler's Ia ws, .363 
Hereditary 
transmission, 
85-93, 
97, I 85-6, 18'7, 190, 246-7, 252 
domestication of animals and, 89 
habit and, 8·;, <JJ, I86, I87, 190 
Hesitation or choice, consciousness 
as, 1 sR, lSo 
Heteroblastia and identical struc­
tures on divergent lines of 
evolution, 84 
Heyrnons, 81 note 
History as creative evolution, 9, 
19, 25, 30, 34, 42, 43, 73-4, 
I J4-I 7, 1 78-9, 287-8, 293-4 
of philosophy, 260 
Hive as an organism, 183 
llomo faber, designation of human 
species, I 53 
Homogeneity of space, 172, 232 
the sphere of intellect, 179 
of time in Galileo, 36o 
Horse-fly illustrating the object of 
instinct, 161 

I N DEX 
Houssay, I 2 I  note 
!Iuman and animal attention, 203 
and animal brain, 203, 286-9 
and animal consciousness, I54-8, 
198, 20I-2, 205-6, 232, 286-93 
and animal instruments of ac­
tion, I54-8, I66 
and 
animal intelligence, 152, 
205-6, 209-IO, 23 I -2 
.tnd animŢ' ;nvention, relation 
of, to habit, 287, 288 
intellect and language, 173-4 
intellect and manufacture, I52-3 
Humanity in evolution, I48, 151-4, 
I57, I62, I74, I99. 202-3, 288-
95· See Culminating points, 
etc. 
goal of evolution, 290, 29I 
Huxley, 44 
Hydra and individuality, I7 
iiX17 of Aristotle, 384 
Hymenoptera, the culmination of 
arthropod and instinctive evo­
lution, 148, I9o-1 
as entomologists, I6I, I89-91 
organization and instinct in, I 55 
paralyzing instinct of, 161, 189-
91 
social instincts of, I I  2, 188 
Hypostasis of the unity of nature, 
God as, 215, 349, 388 
Hypothetical propositions charac­
teristic of intellectual knowl­
edge, 165 
Idea or form in ancient philoso­
phy, 341, 343-6, 359 
in ancient 
philosophy, 
el6of, 
342 
in ancient philosophy, Platonic, 
55 
and image in Descartes, 304 
Idealism, 253 
Idealists and realists alike assume 
the possibility of an absence 
of order, 24I, 253 
Identical structures in divergent 
lines of evolution, 62, 67-70, 
77, 83-7, 98, 132 
Illumination of action the function 
of perception, 7, 226, 333 
Image and idea in Descartes, 304 
distinguished from concept, 177, 
304 
Imitation of being in Greek phi­
losophy, 352, 355 
of instinct by science, 185-6, 
I90-2 
of life in intellectual represen­
tation, 6, 38, 98- roo, I I4, 194, 
228, 233. 247, 282, 371, 396 
of life by the unorganized, 38, 
40-42 
of motion by intelligence, 33 I, 
333-4, 339, 340, 358. See Imi­
tation of the real, etc. 
of the physical order by the 
vital, 252 
of the real by intelligence, 281, 
294. 333 
Immobility of extension, 171 
and plants, I2o-6, I3 I-2, 144 
of primitive and torpid animals, 
144-5 
relative and apparent; mobility 
real, 171 
Impatience, duration as, 
u, 13, 
368-9 
Impelling cause, 82 
Impetus, vital, divergence of, 31-2, 
58-62, 108, 109-17, 1221 131-2, 
140-1, 145, 148-51, 28o-2, 289-
90, 294 
vital, limitedness of, 140, 156, 
163-5, 277 
vital, loaded with matter, 261 

INDEX 
Impetus (Continued) 
vital, as necessity for creation, 
274. 284 
vital, transmission of, through 
organisms, 3I, 32, 88, 95, 97, 
98, 252, 272-4 
vital. See Impulse of life 
Implement, the animal, is natural: 
the human, artificial, I 54-7 
artificial, 152-5, r66 
constructing, function of intel­
ligence, 176, 200-1 
life known to intelligence only 
as, 178 
matter known to intelligence 
only as, I78, 217 
natural, ISS, r6o, r66 
organized, ISS, I6o, r66 
unorganized, rs2-5, r66 
Implicit knowledge, 163 
Impotence of intellect and per­
ception to grasp life, 193-6 
Imprisonment 
of 
consciousness, 
I97-202, 287-90 
Impulse of life, divergence of, 31-2, 
sB-62, roB, 109-17, 1 22, I3 I-2, 
I4o-r, r4s, I48-sr, 280-3, 289-
90, 294 
limitedness of, 140, IS6, 163-5, 
277 
loaded with matter, 261 
tendency to mobility, 144-6 
as necessity for creation, 274, 
284 
negates itself, 270-I 
prolonged in evolution, 268 
prolonged in our will, 261 
transmitted through generations 
of organisms, 31, 32, 88, 95, 
97. 98, 252 
unifi' of, us, 272, 295 
Impulsion and attraction in Greek 
philosophy, 351-2 
Impulsion and attraction in Greek 
philosophy (Continued) 
release and unwinding, the three 
kinds of cause, 82 
given to mind by matter, 22I 
Inadequacy of act to representa­
tion, consciousness as, I 59 
Inadequate 
and 
adequate 
in 
Spinoza, 384 
Inanition, illustrating primacy of 
nervous system, 1,37 note 
Incoherence, 258. See Absence of 
order, Chance, Chaos 
in nature, I r6 
Incommensurability of free act 
with conceptual idea, 54, 220 
of instinct and intelligence, I84-
s, 192-3 
Incompatibility of developed tend­
encies, us, 184-s 
Independent variable, time as, 
23-4, 365 
Indetermination, 96, 127, 139, 274, 
3S4· See Accident in evolu­
tion 
Indeterminism in Descartes, 375 
Individual, viewed by intelligence 
as aggregate of molecules and 
of facts, 27 3 
and division of labor, 154 
in evolutionist biology, r86, I87, 
269 note 
and genus, 247-50 
mind in philosophy, 209 
aesthetic intuition only attains 
the, 194 
and society, 282-4, 288-9 
transmits 
the 
vital impetus, 
272-3, 282, 294-5 
Individuality never absolute, xx, 
IS, I6, 19, 23, 491 283-4 
and age, 19-28, 32, 49 
corporeal, physics tends to deny, 

INDEX 
Individuality 
never 
absolute 
(Continued) 
206, 
227. See Interpenetra­
tion, Obliteration of outlines, 
Solidarity of the parts of mat­
ter 
and generality, 247-50 
the many and the one in the 
idea of, xx, 282 
as plan of possible influence. 1 1  
Individuation never absolute, xx, 
IS-19, 49. 283-4 
as a cosmic principle }n contrast 
with association, 282-4 
property of life, 15-18 
partly the work of matter, 280-
2, 294 
Indivisibility of action, 105-6 
of duration, 9, 335-6 
of invention, r81 
of life, 246-7, 293-4. See Unity 
of life of motion, 334-8 
Induction in animals, 234 
certainty 
of, 
approached 
as 
factors approach pure mag­
nitudes, 243-4 
and duration, 234 
and expectation, 234-7 
geometry the ideal limit of, 234-
9, 392. See Space, Geometry, 
Reasoning, 
"Descending" 
movement of matter, etc. 
and magnitude, 235-7 
repetition the characteristic func­
tion of intellect, r81, 2 19, 236 
and space, 236-7. See Space as 
the ideal limit, Systems, etc. 
Industry, xix, 1 78, 179, r8r 
Inert matter and action, 107, rsr, 
ISS. 1 72, 20S, 21 7, 247, 399 
in Aristotle, 344, 355, 384 
bodies, IO, II, IS, 1 7, 24, 1 71-2, 
17S, 192, 204, 206, 207, 223, 
Inert matter and 
action (Con-­
tinued) 
233. 234, 249. 262, 263, 3 26, 
370, 372, 377-80, 392 
Creation of. Sec Inert matter 
the inversion of life 
flux of, 204, 288, 297, 401 
and form, 164, 1 74, 261, 272 
genesis of, 204 
homogeneity of, 1 72 
imitation of living matter by, 
.38, 40-42 
imitation of physical order by 
vit;d, 252 
instantaneity of, 1 2, 220 
and intcJ!cct, xix, 36, 155, 1 7S-9, 
181, 182, 1 84-5, 192, 197, 199, 
204, 205, 2 14, 2 1 5, 216, 2 1 7 ,  
224-J2, 237-9, 245. 288, 294. 
346, 401 
the inversion or interruption of 
life, 103, 104, 109, 1 10, 142-3, 
169, 194-5, 204, 207, 2o8, 2 1 5, 
2 1 6, 22o, 2 2 1 ,  22R, 240, 253, 
257. 258, 262, 267-73, 2 75. 
277, 28o, 281 ,  282. 284, 288, 
291, 296, 300, 347, 368-9, 373· 
See Inert matter, order in­
herent in 
knowledge of, approximate but 
not relative, 2 26 
the metaphysics and the phy­
sics of, 2 14 
as necessity, 274, 288 
the order inherent in, 46, I I4, 
169, 22 r, 2 26-32, 236, 247-8, 
252-8, 267, 273. 287, 298, 346-8. 
See Inert matter, inversion of 
life 
penetration of, by life, 31, 32, 
sB, 197, 199, 259, 26 f1l 289, 
294. 295 
and perception, rs, 226, 247 

INDEX 
Inert 
matter and 
action (Con­
tinued) 
and the psychical, 220, 221, 224, 
293. 294. 380, 399 
solidarity of the parts of, 206, 
222, 227, 262, 280-2, 294. 295. 
383 
and space, 13, 172, 207, 223-31, 
233. 266, 272, 273, 280 
in Spe'lcer's philosophy, 396-7 
Inertia, 194, 245 
Infant, intelligence in, r62-3 
Inference a beginning of inven 
tion, 152 
Inferiority in evolutionary rank, 
192 
Influence, possible, 14, 206 
Infusoria, conjugation of, 19 
development of the eye from 
its stage in, 68-9, So, 86-7, 94 
and individuation, 284 
and 
mechanical 
explanations, 
40-1 
vegetable function in, 1 28-9 
Inheritance of acquired characters. 
See Hereditary transmission 
Innate knowledge, r6r-3, 165-6 
Innateness of the categories, 163-6 
Inorganic matter. See Inert mat-
ter 
Insectivorous plants, 19-21 
Insects, 22, 1 1 2, 1 19, 139, 145, 148, 
154-5, r6r-2, r 73, 183, r86, 
188-93, 207 
apogee of instinct in hyrnenop­
tera, 148, 190-1 
consciousness and instinct, r6r, 
183, IQO 
continuity of instinct with or-
ganization, r 54, r6r 
fallibility of instinct in, 189-91 
instinct in general in, 187, IQO-I 
language of ants, 1 73-4 
Insects (Continud) 
object of instinct in, r6r 
paralyzing instinct in, r6r, 189, 
190 
social instinct in, 112, 1 73-4, 189 
special instincts as variations 
on a theme, 
183. 
See Ar­
thropods in evolution 
Insensible variation, 72, 74 
Inspiration of a poem an undivided 
intuitive act, contrasted with 
its intellectual imitation in 
words, 
228, 
229, 
282. 
See 
Sympathy 
Instantaneity of the intellectual 
view, 37, 79, 94, roo, 218, 22o­
r, 227, 247, 272, 281, 297, 
326-33, 338, 341, 36o-2, 372, 
382, .J83 
Instinct and action on inert mat­
ter, 151, rs6 
in animals as distinguished from 
plants, 187 
in cells, 183 
and consciousness, rs8-6o, 183, 
184, 190, 191, 192, 204 
culmination of, in evolution, 
147, 192-3. See Arthropods in 
evolution, Evolutionary su­
periority 
fallibility of, 190-1 
in 
insects 
in 
general, 
r86, 
190-1 
and intelligence, xxiii, 58, I I I, 
I I5, 
1 25, 
1 29-31, 
146-52, 
156-8, r6o, r66, r68, 175, 185-
7, IQ0-7, 202-3, 2041 2 16-1 71 
26o, 269, 2]7, 278, 282, 291 ,  
292, 373. 375. 398 
and intuition, 195, 196-7, 199 
object of, r6r-8, r82, r85, r89-
90, 204, 207, 2 14, 256, 277 
and organization, 27-8, I SJ-51 

INDEX 
Instinct and action on inert mat­
ter (Continued) 
1001 183-5, 188-9, I<)O, 194, 
212, 213, 288 
paralyzing, in certain hymen­
optera, 161, 188, 189-90 
in plants, 187, 188 
social, of insects, 112, I 73-4, 188 
Instinctive knowledge, 163, 184, 
185, 190·1 
learning, 2II 
metaphysics, 2rr, 293, 294, JOI 
Instrument, action as, 
of con­
sciousness, 198 
animal, is natural; human arti­
ficial, 154-8 
automatic activity as instru­
ment of voluntary, 275 
consciousness as, of action, 198 
intelligence: the function of in­
telligence is to construct in­
struments, 175, 210-12 
intelligence transforms life into 
an, 178 
intelligence transforms matter 
into an, I 78, 217 
intelligence: the instruments of 
intelligence are artificial, xxi, 
152-4, 155-6, 166 
natural 
or 
organized 
instru­
ments of instinct, 1 55-6, 16o, 
I66 
Intellect and action, xxi, 14, 34, 
5Cl-5, 104, 150, 157. 168-7J, 
178, 197, 204, 205, 2 I I, 2141 
2 I6·1 71 240, 241, 247-50, 274, 
294. 297. 323·5, J27, 328, 332, 
358, 376-7 
in animals, 205 
Fichte's conception of the, 2o8, 
209, 388 
function of the, 7. 14. 15, 50·7, 
IOJ1 1041 1391 15 1-6o, 164-77, 
Intellect and action (Continued) 
185, 191, 194, 1991 205·I8, 
223-8, 234-40, 250, 255, 259, 
263, 264, 268, 269, 274, 294. 
315, 324, 325, 356, 365, 366, 
370, J7Io 377o 378, 387, 388 
genesis of the, xxi-XXV, 56, II41 
r r6-1 7, IJ9·401 168, 169, 204, 
205, 207, 2 1 1, 2IJ1 2 14, 2171 
270·2, J89, 390. 398 
as inversion of intuition, ro, II, 
14, 1 5, sJ, 56, s8, 96, 98-102, 
104, 105, II5·I61 1 25, 1 29·311 
143, 146, 147, 149, 150, 154-8, 
160, 173, 177, 185-98, 1991 
201, 202, 203, 208-23, 227·32, 
2J6-8, 242, 244, 246-7, 251·5, 
257. 258, 200, 267-75. 277-82, 
288, 291-5, J001 301, 340, 358, 
Jti8, 372·5, 393. 401 
and language, 6, 163, 174·7, 281, 
289, 3 1 7, 329, 330, 339o 340, 
354 
and matter, xix-xxv, 13, I4, 55-
6, 103, 149. ISO, 156, 157. 
168-70, 
1711 176, 177, 182, 
185, 192, 197, 199, 200, 204-5, 
208, 212, 2131 2141 217, 2181 
220-1, 224-30, 233, 235, 238-
41, 245, 246-51, 262-4, 267, 
268, 272-5, 277, 279-82, 288, 
294. 295. 296, 297. 299. 323·4, 
332, 347. 349. 357, 369. 370·3, 
377·9, 386, 389-93. 400, 401 
mechanism of the, xix-xxv, 6, 
35. 37. 54-6, 79. 94·5, 98-9, 
I I 2, 151·3, 165-71, 172·3, 1 76, 
1 77, 181, 182, 184, 185, 1901 
191, 1931 194, 2041 2051 208-
121 2 13-39, 244-62, 266, 268-
70, 272·4, 277, 278, 2So, 281 
290, 2941 297, 300·11 3 1 71 326· 
49o 353o 357o 358, 361, 366 

INDEX 
Intellect and action (Continued) 
367, 368, 37I-8, 382, 389-90, 
392-3, 394-6, 397' 399 
object of the, xix-xxv, Io, I I ,  I3, 
21, 24, 25, 35, 36, 40, 4I, 43, 
53-6, 59, 8o, 83, 94, 97-I03, 
104, I06, I I3, I I4, I$4, ISS, 
164, I68-83, I8$, I')l, 192-7, 
198, I991 2041 208, 2II-3I1 
233, 236-4I, 244, 245, 247, 
249-52, 255. 259. 260, 262, 
267, 272-4, 277, 278, 280-2, 
284, 288, 289, 294. 295. 297. 
298, 324-4I, 345-50, 354, 355, 
356, 357, 361-7, 372, 374-9, 
382, 383-8, 390-3, 395, 397, 
40I-2 
and perception, 6-7, I4, I5, I04-
5, I77-8, 185, I94-5, 206, 207, 
225, 227, 247-8, 249-50, 252, 
26o, 272-4, 297, 325-6, 327, 
390-1 
and rhythm, 325, 326-7, 332-3, 
358, 366, 3 76-7 
and science, I I-IS, 36, I03-4, 
I68, 169, 173-4, 175, 176-7, 
178-9, 185, 190-4, 205, 212-17, 
221, 223, 227-9. 234-6, 237, 
246-7, 249-50, 263, 274, 294, 
297, 323-4, 332, 349, 350, 358, 
362-3, 375, 376-8, 385, 387, 
388, 390--1, 394-5, 40I-2 
and space, I3-I4, 170, 172-3, 
176-8o, 192-3, 194-5, 207, 221-
3, 227-32, 235. 238, 243-4. 
266, 267, 273. 274, 280-I ' 392-
3 
and time, 6, u-12, 2I, 22, 24-6, 
42, 45, 52-3, 54, 58, 180, 326, 
327, 36o-1 1 364-6, 3 7 I 
possibility of transcending the, 
xxii, xxiii, 55, I68, I95-6, 212-
13, 21 7-I9, 225-6, 227-8, 290, 
Intellect and action (Continued) 
392-3-
See Philosophy, 
In­
telligence 
Intellectualism, 
hesitation 
of 
Descartes l.Jetween and in­
tuitionism, 375 
Intelligence and action, ISI-6, 165, 
I70-11 177, I78-9, I991 207, 
217, 332 
animal, 152, 205, 206, 232 
catel-{Ofil'S of, XX, 55, 214-I5 
of the child, r62-3 
and co:1sciousncss, 205 
culmination of, 144, 154-5, 192-3. 
See Superiority 
genesis of, r so, I 95-6, 398 
and the individual, 274 
and instinct, 12I, 149, 1$0, 1$6, 
157, 185-7, 190-5, I97, 204, 
2I6, 229, 260, 282, 291 
in Kant's philosophy, 388-9 
and laws, 250-I 
limitations of, I68 
and matter, I68, I75-6, I77-8, 
I93. I97. I99. 204, 207, 2I3-
I7, 251, 259, 273, 40I, 402 
mechanism of, I68, 169, x8x, 182 
and motion, I69, I 75-6, 298, 
329-34. 339. 340, 357 
object of, 160-72, 177, 178, 193, 
197. 273 
practical 
nature 
of, 
xix-xxv, 
ISI-4, 156, I66-7, 270-I, 331, 
332, 356-7 
and reality, xix-xxv, 177-9, 195, 
259. 274. 281, 293. 295. 333 
and science, I93, 194, 2I2, 213-14 
and signs, 173, I74, I75, I76 
and space, 224 
See 
Intellect, 
Understanding, 
Reason 
Intelligent, 
the, contrasted with 
the merely intelligible, 193 

430 
INDEX 
Intelligible reality in ancient phi­
losophy, 344 
world, I 76-7 
Intelligibles of Plotinus, 384 
Intension of knowledge, I64-5 
Intensity of consciousness varies 
with ratio of possible to real 
action, I s9-6o 
Intention 
as 
contrasted 
with 
mechanism, 255. See Auto­
matic order, Willed order 
of life the object of instinct, I94, 
255 
Interaction, universal, 206-7 
Interest as cause of variation, I45 
in representation of "nought," 
322, 323. See AJiection, role 
of, etc. 
Internal finality, 47 
Internality of instinct, I8S, I92-3, 
194-5 
of subject in object the concli­
tion of knowledge of reality, 
334, 344, Jilf)-90 
Interpenetration, I 78, I 79, r9I-3, 
1 95, 202 note, 206, 207, 220-2, 
2 26-8, 28o, 281, 294, 346-8, 
3 7 I ,  383 
Interruption, 
materiality an, of 
positivity, 239-40, 268-9, 27o­
r, 346-8. See Inverse relation, 
etc. 
Interval of time, I I-12, 26, 27 
between what is done and what 
might be done covered by 
consciousness, I 97 
Intuition, continuity between sen­
sible 
and 
ultra-intellectual, 
391-2 
dialectic 
and, 
in 
philosophy, 
26o. 
See Intellect as inver­
sion of intuition 
fringe of, around the nucleus of 
Intuition (Continued) 
intellect, xxiii, 
53, 
56, 
2II 
and instinct, 194-6, 200 
and 
intellect 
in 
theoretical 
knowledge, I<)4-6, 294-5 
Intuitional cosmology as reversed 
psychology, 227-8 
metaphysics contrasted with in­
tellectual or systematic, 209-
1 2, 292-5, 300-2 
method of philosophy, apparent 
vicious circle of, 2Io- 1 2, 2I3-
I6 
Intuitionism in Spinoza, 377 
and 
intellectualism 
in 
Des­
cartl's, 3 7 s-6 
Invention, consciousness as, and 
freedom, 288, 294-5 
creativeness of, rBr, 259, 369-
70, 371 
disproportion between, and its 
consequences, I99, 200-1 
duration as, I4 
evolution as, I I4, 278, 374 
fervor of, r81 
indivisibility of, 181 
inference a beginning of, 152 
mechanical, I 56-7, 213-r4 
of steam engine as epoch-mark-
ing, 1 53 
time as, 370-1 
unforeseeablcness of, r8o 
upspringing of, I81 
See New 
Inverse relation of the physical 
and psychical, 140-1 ,  158-9, 
r6o-1, 191-2, 195-6, 220, 221, 
225-6, 227-8, 229-30, 231-2, 
237. 238, 243, 244, 258, 262, 
268, 269, 270, 27 1-2, 2 79, 280, 
284, 288, 2S9, 294-5, 346-8 
Irreversibility of duration. 
See 
Repetition 

INDEX 
431 
Isolated systems of matter, 223 , 
2JJ, 2J8, 26J, 264, 371 ,  372 , 
377-8. See Bodies 
Janet, Paul, 69 1wtc 
Jennings, 41 1Wte 
Jourdain and the two kinds of 
order, 242 
Juxtaposition, 227-8, 367, 368-9, 
3 7 r. Cf. Succession 
Kaleidoscopic variation, 83 
Kant, antinomies of, 224-5, 226 
becoming in Kant's successors, 
393-4 
coincidence 
of 
matter 
with 
space in Kant's philosophy, 
225, 226-8, 266 
construction 
the 
method 
of 
Kant's successors, 394- 5 
his criticism 
of pure reason, 
223-4, 3 1 2  1tof<:, .387-rJ3, 396 
degrees of heing in Kant's suc­
cessors, 394-5 
duration in Kant's successors, 
393-4 
intelligence in Kant's philoso­
phy, 25 1-2, ,388-9 
ontological artŨumcnt in Kant's 
philosophy, 310 
space and time in Kant's phi­
losophy, 223-5 
and Spencer, 395 
See Mind and matter, Sensuous 
manifold, Thing-in-itself 
Kantianism, 389, 395 
Katagenesis, 40 
Kepler, 250, 360-4 
Knowledge and action, 165-6, 2II-
u, 215, 216, 226-7, 228 
criticism of, 2 1 1-12 
discontinuity of, 332 
extension of, r64 
K nowledge and action (Continued) 
form of, 164, 2 13-14, 389-93 
formal, 167-8 
genesis of, 208 
innate or natural, 16o-5 
instinct in, 158, 159, 183-7, 194-
5, 2 I I - TJ1 292 
intellect in, xix-xxv, 35-6, r64, 
178-81, 195, 196, 2II-I21 214-
16, 22.)-7' 228, 239, 259. 260-
1, 272-3, 294-5, 331, 332, 339, 
3-tO, 342, 344, 35 2-4, 36o-r, 
37 1, 372, 377-9, 3Q0-2, 393 
in tension of, 164-5 
of reality viewed as the inter­
nality of subject in object, 
333-4, 344-5. 389 
intuition and intellect in theo­
retical knowledge, 191-6, 26o1 
294-5, 372-4 
matter of, 212-13, 389-90, 391-3 
of matter, xxii, 55, 226-8, 390-3 
object of, xix-xxv, 4, ss-6, r62, 
163, 175-7, 18o, 214-16, 372, 
390-2 
fundamental problem of, 296-
300 
as relative to certain require­
ments of the mind, x68, 208-9, 
25 1 
scientific, 2 1 2-13, 215-r8, n6, 
227, 238-9 
theory of, xxiii, 195, 196, 216, 
224-5, 226-8, 250, 253 
unconscious, 156-61, 166, 182, 
183 
alleged unknowableness of the 
thing-in-itself, 224, 225 
Kunstlcr, 283 11otc 
Labbe, 283 1Wte 
Labor, division of, no, 122, 1311 
154, I 7J1 183, 283 

432 
INDEX 
Lalande, Andre, 269 note 
Lamarck, R5-6 
Lamarckism, Bs-6, 94-7 
Language, 6, r63, 1 73-7, 21l r ,  288-
9, ,p8-3o, 33 r, 339-41 ,  348 
La Place, 43 
Lapsed intellitࠅence, instinct as, 
186, 193 
Larvae, 22, 1 54, r61-83, 1 R9-90 
Latent ࠑ;eometrism of intellect, 
2 13, 231- 2 
Law of correlation, 74, 75 
and genera, 245-s2, 359 
heliocentric 
radius-vector 
in 
Kepler's laws, 363 
imprin t of relat ions and laws 
upon consciousn('ss in Spen­
cer's philosophy, 206 
anu intuitionnl ph ilosophy, HJ4-5 
physical, con tra:·, l l'<l with the 
laws of our codc:s, 238-40 
physicrrl, expression of the neg­
ative movement, 238 
physicrrl, mathematicrrl form of, 
2Jil, 239·40, 250- 2, 263-4 
relation as, 249, 2so-2 
Learning, instincli\'.:, 2 1 1, 2 1 2  
Le Dantcc, 21 nole 
Lcibniz, cause in, 301-2 
dogma( ism of, 3ࠄg 
extension in, .S J ,  ,;82 
God in, :;S r - 2, JS.J, :;87 
mechrrnism 
in, 
377-ě, 
381-2, 
3il6, 3H7 
his philosophy a 3ystcrnatization 
of physics, 377 
space in, 381-4 
teleology in, 45, 46 
time in, 3H3, .393-4 
Lepidoptera, 1 27 note, 148 
Le Roy, Ed., 2.39 note 
Liberation of consciousness, 201-
J, 288, 289 
Liberty. See Freedom 
Life as activity, 141-3, 268-9 
cause in the realm of, 105-6, 
180- 1 
complementarity of the powers 
of, XiX-XXV1 29-30, 3 1 -2, 58-631 
108- 1 7, 
1 22, 
1 25-6, 
1 29-3 2, 
139-4 1, 
145-50, 
155-8, 
194, 
195, 
20 1, 202, 
269, 
2 7 7-82, 
290, 2()4, 372, 373-4 
consciousness co-extensive with, 
2041 280- I, 294, 393 
mutual con tingency of the or­
ders of life and matter, 25 7-8 
continuity of, 3-14, .H, 35, 1 78, 
1 79, 280-1 
as creation, 65-6, 1 78, 244, 252, 
261!, 269-70, 275, 277 
symbolized by a curve, 35, roo, 
10[ 
embryonic, 182-3 
and Jinnlity, 50- 1, 99. 11li, 203, 
244 
. fluidity of, 169, 182, 2 10, 2 1 1 - 1 2  
as free, 143-4 
function of, 104-6, 1 1 7-22, 1 25 ,  
1 26-7, 1 29-30, 1]31 1,141 139-
4 1 ,  191-3, 269, 276-So 
ham10ny of the realm of, 57, 58, 
I I 5, 1 29, 130, 140 
imitation of the inert by, 252 
imitation of, by the inert, 38-42 
impulse of, prolongeu in our 
will, 261 
and individuation, 15-18, J0-1 1 
32, 88-90, 95, 97, 9S, qo-2, 
214-15, 252, 253, 272-3, 282, 
283-4, 
293, 
326-7, 
328-30. 
See Individuality 
indivisibility of, 246-7, 293-4 
and instinct, 150-6, 16o-x, 182-
7, 
188-901 
1911 192-6, 
204, 
2 10-16, 397-8 

INDEX 
433 
Life as artivily (Continued) 
and 
intellect, xix-xxv, 
37-41, 
50-7, 100, I I 2, 1 1 3- 14, 1 1 5-17, 
141, 
149-5 1 ,  
167-8, 
1 76-82, 
184-90, 191-2, 193-6, 199-200, 
2 10-2 I ,  225, 226, 233, 240-1, 
243-4, 24.5, 246-7, z8o-5, 290, 
294-5, 3 26-7, 372, 386, 390-3, 
397 •
.
 3()8 
and interpenetration, 294-5 
as inversion of the inert, 9-Io, 
I I , I94, 195, 204, 208, 209, 215, 
2 I6, 220, 22I, 226, 228, 2 29, 
232, 237, 23S, 243-4, 245-8, 
254, 257, 258, 259-6o, 26I-2, 
268-74. 
288-90, 359 
a limited force, I39, 14I, 156, 
164, I65, 277 
and memory, I84 
penetrating matter, 3 1 , 32, 59, 
197, I99, 201, z6o, 26I-2, 290, 
293-5 
as tendency to mobility, I4I-2, 
144-5, 146 
and physics and chemistry, 36, 
38, 40- 1 ,  42, 246-7 
in other planets, 279 
as potentiality, 281 
repetition in, and in the inert, 
245-6, 252-3 
sinuousness of, 7I, Io9, 1 10, I I3-
14, 
1 24, 
1 25, 
I 28, 
143-4, 
203 
social, 153, I $4, 1 73-4, 288-9 
in other solar systems, 279 
and evolution of species, 270-1, 
277, 293-4 
theory of, and theory of knowl­
edge, xxiii, I95-6, 2 IS-I6 
unforeseeableness of, 8, 9, I I-12, 
24, 32-3, 34. 43. 52-3, 54, ss, 
6o, 96, 167, 180, 181, 244-5, 
271, 369, 370-1 
Life as activity (Continued) 
unity of, 2 72-3, 292, 294-5 
as a wave flowing over matter, 
290 
See Impulse of, Organic sub­
stance, Organism, Organiza­
tion, Vital impetus, Vital or­
der, Vital principle, Vitalism, 
Willed order 
Limitations of instinct and of in­
telligence, 168 
Limitedness of the scope of Gall­
leo's physics, 388, 402 
of the vital impetus, 139, 141, 
1 56, 1 64, 165, 278 
Linden, Maria von, 127 note 
Lingulae 
illustrating 
failure 
to 
evolve, I 13 
Lizards, color variation in, 8r, 88 
Locomotion 
and 
('Onsciousness, 
1 22, 1 23-7, 284-5. See Mobil­
ity, Movement 
Logic and action, xix, so-1, 52, 178, 
197 
formal, 3 1 7  
genesis of, XX-XXi, xxiv, 56, II4, 
1 15-1 7, 
lSI, 
209- I I ,  
212, 
327, 391, 398 
and 
geometry, 
xix-xx, 
1 77, 
2,32 
impotent to grasp life, xx, 16, 
37-8, 40, .p, 53-7. 99. I I3, 107-
8, 1 78-S2, 2 1 2-20, 2 24, 225, 
233, 240, 241 , 242, 243, 244-5, 
280-4, 290, 294. 340, 391-2, 
397 
natural, 1 77, 2 13-14 
of numher, 228 
and physics, 346-8, 349 
and time, 6, 302 
See Intellect, Intelligence, Un­
derstanding, 
Order, 
mathe­
matical 

434 
INDEX 
Logical existence contrasted with 
psychical and physical, 300-r, 
324, 336-7, 393 
categories, xx, 55, 214, 215 
and physical contrasted, 300-1 
Logik, by Sigwart, .F 2 note 
M-yos, in Plotinus, 230 note 
Looking backward, the attitude 
of intellect, 52-3, 259 
Lumbriculus, r 7 
Machinery anrl intelliv,ence, rss-6 
Machines, natural and artificial, 
154. See Implement, Instru-
ment 
organisms, 
for 
action, 
27 5-6, 
277, 326-7 
Magnitude, certainly of induction 
approached 
as 
factors 
ap­
proach pure magnitudes, 233· 
7 
anri modern science, 302, 364 
Man in evolution, attention, 202-3 
brain, 201-2, 286-9 
consciousness, 
1 58-61 ,  
197-8, 
199. 200, 201-2, 20J, 205, 206-
7, 2Q9·101 2321 285-91 
goal, 148-9, 192-3, 203, 290, 291, 
293. 294 
habit and invention, 287-8 
intelligence, 149. 151·6, 157·8, 
16o, 191-2, 193, 205, 206-7, 
231·2, 290, 291 
language, 174 
Manaceine (de), 137 note 
Manufacture, the aim of intellect, 
1 52, 153-4, 160, 169-70, 1 75-
82, 199, 2I01 2111 2181 274, 
323·4 
and organization, 
102-3, 
104, 
140-1, 154-8, 166 
and repetition, sr, 52, 171-3 
See Construction, Solid, Utility 
Many and one, categories inap­
plicable to life, xx, 1 79-So, 
195-6, 281, 284, 2Q2 
in the idea of individuality, 281-
2 
See Multiplicity 
Martin, ]., I I4 note 
Marion, r 19 11ote 
Material knowledge, r68 
Materialists, 262-3 
Materiality the inversion of spirit­
uality, 232 
Mathematical order. 
See Inert 
matter, Order 
Matter. Sec Inert matter 
1\tatu ration as creative evolution, 
.)4, 252 
.Maupas, 4 r nrle 
l\1easurcmcnt a human conven­
tion, 239, 2(14 
of real time an illu$ion, :us-7o 
Mech,lllical acc<Hlllt of action after 
the fact, 53-4 
cause, xx-xxi, 39-40, 41, 46, 5o-r, 
IQ5, 256, 257 
procedure of intellect, rSr-2 
invention, 152-3, 155, 2IJ·I4 
necessity, 53-4, 235, 236-7, 23::!, 
257. 275, 289·90, 294. 355-6 
Mechanics of transformation, 37-8 
Mechanism, 
cerebral, 
27 s, 276, 
285-6, 287, 21!9, 397-8. 
See 
Cerebral activity and con­
sciousness 
of the eye, 98 
instinct as, I94·5 
of 
intellect. 
See 
Intellect, 
mechanism of 
and intention, 254-5. See Auto­
matic order, Willed order 
life more than, xx, xxv note, 88 
Mechanistic philosophy, xxii-xxiii, 
xxv, 20·1, 34. 35-6, 42·5· 8J, 

INDEX 
435 
Mechanistic 
philosophy 
(Con­
tinued) 
98-ro8, I I3, I I4, 214-1 5, 238-
40, 244. 288, 37.Į. 376, 377. 
378-9, 381-2, 385-6, 387, 393-4 
Medical philosophers of the eight­
eenth century, 387 
science, 181-2 
Medullary bulb in the develop­
ment of the nervous system, 
275 
and consciousness, r 22-3 
Memory, 7-8, 2o- r, 24, 25, r84, 
r85, 19R, 199, 220-1 
Menopause 
in 
illustration 
of 
crisis of evolution, 22-3 
Mental life, unity of, 292 
Metamorphoses of larvae, 154-5, 
161-2, 183 
Metaphysics and duration, 300-1 
and epistemology, 194-5, 196, 
203, 2 16, 227-8 
Galilee's influence on, 24, 249 
instinctive, 
2 ro, 
293, 
294-5, 
302·3 
and intellect, 207-8 
and matter, 2 1 2-13 
natural, 25, 354 
and science, 193-4, 212-14, 2 1 7, 
227-8, 374, 385, 400-2 
systematic, 209, 2 10, 213, 2 14-
xs, 26o, 21)3, 294, 377 
Metchnikoff, 22 note 
Method of philosophy, 209-10 
Microbes, illustrating divergence 
of tendency, 1 29-30 
Microbial colonies, 282 
Mind, individual, in philosophy, 
209 
and intellect, 55-6, 22$-6 
knowledge as relative to certain 
requirements of 
the 
mind, 
J68, 208-9, 251·2 
MinJ ( Contimted) 
anJ matter, 206-7, 220, 221, 222, 
224-6, 288, 294, 380-1 ,  396-
402. 
See 
Psychic, 
Psycho-physio­
logical parallelism, Psychologv 
and Philosophy, fuxij 
Minot, Sedgwick, 21 nole 
Mobility, tendency toward, char­
acterizes animals, 1 2 1 ,  1 22, 
12$-6, 142-6, 150, 197 
and consciousness, 1 22-3, 1 24-5, 
126-7, 284-5 
and intellect, 1 7o-1 ,  177-9, 18o, 
325-6, 354, 355, 366 
of intelligent signs, 1 74, 1 75 
life as tendency toward, 140-2, 
144-5, 146 
in plants, 123-5, 150 
See Motion 
Mobius, 68 note 
Model necessary to the construc­
tive work of intellect, 18o-1, 
183-4 
Modern 
astronomy 
compared 
with 
ancient 
science, 
363, 
364 
geometry compared with an­
cient science, 37, 1 77, 363 
iJc-alism, 253 
philosophy compared with an­
cient, 248-52, 355-6, 374, 375, 
379-84, 385, 387-9 
philosophy : parallelism of body 
and mind in, 
197-8, 380-1, 
385, 386 
science : cinematographical char. 
acter of, 357, 358, 365, 371, 
372, 376-7 
science compared with ancient, 
357-65, 372·5, 387-9 
science, Galilee's influence on, 
36J, J64 

I N D E X  
Modern astronomy compared with 
ancient science (Contin11ed) 
science, Kepler's influence on, 
363, 364 
science, magnitudes the object 
of, 362, 365 
science, 
time an independent 
variable in, 24, 365 
Molecules, 273 
Mollusks, illustrating animal tend­
ency to mobility, 143-5 
perception in, 207 
vision in, 68, 84-5, 1!6-7, 94, 
98 
Monads of Leilmiz, 3il1-5 
Monera, 139 
Monism, 386-7 
Moral sciences, weakness of de-
duction in, 232 
Morat, I37 
Morgan, L., 89 note 
Motion, abstract ,  330 
articulations of, 337-S 
an animal char:.tctcristic, 275 
and the cinematograph 33 I-2 
continuity of, 33 7 
in Descartes, 375-6 
evolutionary, 
extensive 
and 
qualitative, 328, 329-30, 33il, 
339 
in general (i.e. abstract), 330-I 
indivisibility of, 332-3, 337-il, 
365-6, 367-8 
and instinct, I 54-6, 359-6 r 
and intellect, 8o, I 7 I ,  I 72, 1 75-
7, 297, 298, 323-4, 344-5, 348-
9, 357, 360- I, 367, 373-5 
organization of, 337 
track laid by motion along its 
course, 335-8, 366, 367 
See Mobility, Movement 
Motive 
principle 
of 
evolution :  
consciousness, I98-2oo 
Motor mechanisms, cerebral, 274-
5, 276, 286-7, 288-9 
Moulin-Quignon, quarry of, 1 5 2  
Moussu, 9I 
Movement and animal life, 1 20, 
I44-5, 146 
ascending, 14, 1 1 2, 1 15, r r6, 
203, 228-9, 230-I, 4oi-2. See 
Vital impetus 
co:1sciousncss and, r 23-4, 13I-2, 
158-(JO, 227-8 
descending, 14-I5, 2 2 1-3, 227-30, 
23 2, 268, 275, 279, 295, 300, 
368, 392-3, 40I-2 
goal of, the object of the intel­
lect, 
I 7 I, 
325-6, 
328, 329-
30 
intellect unable to grasp, 339-
40 
mu tual 
inversion 
of 
cosmic 
movements, I40-I, 1 58, I$9, 
I 90-2, I94, I95, 2 29-30, 232, 
237, 238, 243-4. 258, 268-74, 
284-5, 288, 289, 296, 373 
life as, 182-3, 194-5 
and the nervous system, 1 2 2-3, 
q6, 147, I97, 285-7 
of plants, I 2r, rso 
See Mol)ility, Motion, Locomo­
tion, 
Current, 
Tendency, 
Impetus, 
Impulse, 
Impul­
sion 
Movements, antagonistic cosmic, 
142-3, I49, 
199, 203, 25I·2, 
282. See Movement, Mutual 
inversion of cosmic 
Multiplicity, abstract, 28o- r, 282 
distinct, 22I, 2 28-30, 280. See 
Interpenetration 
docs not apply to life, xx, 178-9, 
I94-S, 280-I, 284, 293-4 
Mutability, exhaustion of, of the 
universe, 266, 267 

I N D E X  
437 
Mutations, sudden, 33, 70- r, 72-7 
theory of, 95-6 
Natural geometry, 214-15, 231-2 
instrument, 156, 16o, 166-7 
or innate knowledge, 162-3, 166-
7 
logic, 177, 213-14 
metaphysic, 354 
selection, 61-2, 64, 67-8, 69-73, 
n, 106, 186-7 
Nature, Aristotelian 
theory 
of, 
149. 192 
discord in, 140, 278, 290 
facts and relations in, 400 
incoherence in, 1 16 
as inert matter, 178, 238-9, 240, 
249-51, 2(n, 288, 293-4, 329, 
388, 390-2, 399 
as life, 1 1 1, 152, 153-4, 155-6, 
157-8, 159-6o, 165-6, r 69-7o, 
1 71-2, 248, 263, 284, 29J, 294. 
327-8 
order of, 246-7 
as ordered diversity, 252, 254-5 
unity of, 1 16, 208, 209, 213-14, 
2 1 5-18, 349, 383-8, 389 
Nebula, cosmic, 272, 28o 
Necessity for creation, vital im­
petus as, 275, 284-5 
and death of individuals, 269 
note 
and freedom, 238, 258, 294 
in Greek philosophy, 353-6 
in induction, 235, 236-7 
and matter, 276, 288 
Negation, 299-300, 309-24. 
See 
Nought 
Negative cause of mathematical 
order, 237. 
See Inverse re­
latioo, etc. 
cosmic principle, 140-1, 158, 159, 
191, 194-5, 228-9, 232, 238, 
Negative cause of mat hematical 
order (Conli111ted) 
244·5, 258, 268-74, 284-5. 288-
9. 295, 373· See Inert matter, 
Opposition of the two ulti­
mate cosmic movements, etc. 
Neo-Darwinism, 63, 64, 95, 96, 
186-7 
Nco-Lamarckism, 48-9 note 
Nervous system a center of ac­
tion, 121, 143-5, 146, 148-9, 
197. 275. 285-7 
of the plant , r 26 
primacy of, 133-4, 139-40, 274-5 
Neurone and indetermination, 139 
New, freedom ami the, 14, 18o-r, 
182, 2 19, 238, 252, 2(>1, 271, 
294-5. 369-72 
Newcomen, 202 
Newton, 364 
Nitrogen and the function of or­
ganisms, 
120, 
1 26, 
129-30, 
278 
•o>iuEws •o'lu•s of Aristotle, 387 
Non-existence. See Nought 
Nothing. See Nought 
Nought, conception of the, 297-
304, 305-8, 314-16, 318-24, 
343-4, 355-6. 
See Negation, 
l'seudo-ideas, etc. 
•ovs n-o<'IT<Kos of Aristotle, 350 
Novelty. See New 
Nucleus intelligence as the lumi­
nous, enveloped by instinct, 
183-4 
in microbial colonies, 282 
intelligence as the solid, bathed 
by a mist of instinct, 2 1 1-12 
of Stentor, 284 
Number 
illustrating degrees of 
reality, 351-3, 356 
logic of, 228 
Nuptial flight, 162 

I N DE X  
Nutritive clements, fixation 
of, 
I I8-22, 128, 129, 268-<), 276 
Nymph (Zool.), 154, r6r 
Object of this book, xix-xxv 
of instinct, r6r-7, 182-3, 192-5 
of intellect, r6r-7, 171-82, 192-
3, 197, 208-9, 218-19, 259, 273, 
2 75, 294, 297, 324-30, 333-4, 
339, 385, 390 
internality of subject in, the 
condition of knowledge of re­
ality, 333-4, 344-6, 390 
of knowledge, r(J2-3, 164-5, 175-7 
idea of, contrasted with that 
of universal interaction, I4- IS, 
206-7, 227 
of 
philosophy 
as 
contrasted 
with Ouject Of science, 212-14, 
240-3, 246-7, 248, 260- 1, 274, 
293, 297, 322-4, 33 1-3, 377 
of science, 357-8, 36o-2, 364-5 
Obliteration 
of outlines in the 
real, 14-15, 206, 207, 227-8 
Oenothera Lamarckiana, 71, 95-6 
Old, growing. See Age 
the, is the object of the intel­
lect, 1 79-80, 181, 219, 294-5 
One and many in the idea of in­
dividuality, xx, 281 .  See Unity 
Ontological argument in Kant, 310 
Opposition of the two ultimate 
cosmic 
movements, 
I41-3, 
192-4, 197, 204, 220, 222, 26o, 
271, 277, 282, 284, 291. See 
Inverse relation of the physi­
cal and psychical 
Orchids, instincts of, 187 
Order and action, 247-8 
complementarity of the two or­
ders, r6o-2, IQ0-2, 242-3. See 
Order, Mutual inversion of 
the two orders 
Order and action (Continued) 
mutual contingency of the two 
orders, 253, 257 
and disorder, 46-7, I I5-16, 24Q-
3, 246-7' 252-8, 298 
mutual inversion of the two 
orders, 204, 220, 221, 225-8, 
23 1, 2J2, 237-9, 240-1, 244-
5, 246-7, 251-2, 257, 258, 259, 
262, 267-70, 279, 
280, 281, 
288, 29·l· 298, 340, 357 
mathematical, 
r68-9, 
229-31, 
237-40, 
244-7, 
251-5, 
258, 
268, 273. 294, 358-9 
of nature, 246·7, 252, 254-5 
as satisfaction, 243, 244, 298 
vital, ros-6, 180-1, 243-8, 252, 
257, 258, 259. 359 
willed, 245, 261 
Organ and function, 98-102, 104-5, 
ro6-7, 146-7, 154·5, 156, 173-
4, 1 78-9 
Organic destruction and physico­
chemistry, 247 
substance, 144, 155, 156-7, 1 78-
9, 214-15, 264 note, 
278-9, 
291 
world, cleft between, and the 
inorganic, 2o8, 209, 215, 216-
17 
world, harmony of, 57-8, 115, 
r r6, I 29, 130, 140 
world, instinct the procedure of, 
182 
Organism and action, 136-7, 138, 
191, 276, 277, 326-7 
ambiguity 
of primitive, 
110, 
125, 1 26, 129, 143, 144 
association of organisms, 283 
change and the, 327, 328-9 
complementarity of intelligence 
and instinct in the, 156-7, 166, 
199, 202, 203 

I N D E X  
431) 
Organism and action (Continued) 
complexity of the, I79, 273, 275, 
276, 283 
consciousness and the, I 23, I6o, 
197, I98, 286, 294 
contingency of the actual chem­
ical nature of the, 278, 28o 
differentiation of parts in, 275, 
283. See Organism, complex­
ity of 
extension of, by artificial in­
struments, I56, I77 
freedom the property of every, 
143, 144, 145 
function of, 31, 32, 88, 89, 95, 
97, 98, I04·5, 1 18-22, I25, 126, 
IJ01 IJ31 134, 140-I, I421 I501 
190·3, 251, 252, 269, 270, 273, 
277, 278, 279, 28I, 294 
function and structure, 63, 69, 
70, n, 83, 84, 8s-6, 96, 98-
Io2, I04·S, 106, I07-8, I3 I-21 
I46, IS4, I55, I73·4, 177-80, 
273, 27S, 279 
generality typified by similar­
ity among organisms, 244, 
245, 249-SO, 25 I 
hive as, r83 
and individuation, xx, IS, I6, 18, 
271 30-2, 49, I64, 2 I4-IS, 246-
71 249·SO, 282, 284, 28S, 294 
mutual interpenetration of or-
ganisms, 19s-6 
mechanism of the, 36, ro3-4, IoS 
philosophy and the, 214-15 
unity of the, 194-6 
Organization of action, I57, I6o, 
162-3, 165, 199, 202, 203 
of duration, 7-8, 19, 30, 31 
explosive character of, 103 
and instinct, 28, 152-61, r6s, 
r82-4, r88-9, 190, 194, 21 1-12, 
2131 :t88 
. 
Organization of action (Continued) 
and intellect, I78-9 
and manufacture, I03, 104, IOS· 
6, 107, I40-2 
is the modus vivendi between 
the antagonistic cosmic cur. 
rents, 199, 273, 277 
of motion, 337 
and perception, 247-8 
Originality of the willed order, 245 
Orthogenesis, 78, 96-7 
Oscillation 
between 
association 
and individuation, 282, 284. 
See Societies 
of ether, 327-8 
of instinct and intelligence about 
a mean position, rso 
of pendulum, illustrating space 
and time in ancient philoso­
phy, 346-7, 348 
between representation of inner 
and outer reality, J04-S 
of sensible reality in ancient 
philosophy about being, 343-S 
Outlines of perception the plan of 
action, 7, 14, IS, 104, 206, 207, 
223·41 225-6, 248-9, 2SO-I1 
2s2, 273, 32s-6, 332 
Oxygen, 126, 277, 278 
Paleontology, 28-9, I43, IS3 
Paleozoic era, I I3 
Parallelism, psycho-physiological, 
I98, 380, J8I, 386, J87 
Paralyzing instinct in hymenop­
tera, IS4·S1 16r, I89, 19I-2 
Parasites, uS, 120, 121, 123-s, 
148-9 
Parasitism, 146 
Passivity, 243-5 
Past, subsistence of, in present, 
6, 24·7, J0-2, 120, 218-21 
Peckham, 190 note 

440 
I N D EX 
Pecten, illustrating identical struc­
tures in divergent lines of 
evolution, 70, 7 1 ,  84 
Pedagogical and social nature of 
negation, 3 1 2-23 
Pedagogy and the function of the 
intellect, 181 
Penetration , reciprocal, 178-9. See 
Interpenetration 
Perception and action, o-8, 14, 15, 
I04, 206, 207, 2 25, 247-8, 24()­
so, 326-7, .332-3 
and becoming, I()J-5, 329-33 
cin..:matographical character of, 
2 26-7, 272, 274, 360-1 
distinctness of, 247-8, 273 
and geometry, 226, 252 
in mollusks, 207 
and organization, 247-8 
prolonged in intellect, I 78-9, 297 
reaction in, 288 
and recollection, 198, 199 
refracts reality, 224, 260, 391-2 
rhythm of, 325-6, 327 
and science, 185 
Permanence an illusion, 325-7 
Peron, 90 
Perrier, Ed., 283 note 
Personality, absolute reality of, 293 
concentration of, 220, 2 2 1  
and matter, 293, 294 
the object of intuition, 292 
tension of, 2 I8, 2 19, 2 20 
Perthes, Boucher de, I 5 I 
Phaedrus, I 7 2 note 
Phagocytes and external finality, 
48 
Phagocytosis and growing old, 2 2  
Phantom ideas and problems, I94, 
30I, 308, 32I 
"Philosophical 
explanation 
con­
trasted with scientific expla­
nation, ISS 
Philosophy and art, 193-5 
and biology, 49-5 1 ,  2 13-15 
and experience, 216-17 
function of, 34-5, 94-5, 104-5, 
ISS, I()0-2, 2 13-IG, 2 1 7, 292, 
29J, 401-2 
history of, 200 
incompletely conscious of itseU, 
22 7-S, 229 
individual mind in, 209 
arul intellect, xix-xxv 
intellect ami intuition in, 200 
of intuition, 194-5, 209- 13, 2 I 5, 
2 10, .l02 
method of, 209-10, 213, 214, 261 
object of, 261 
and tire organism, 214- 1 5  
and physics, 2 1 2, 2 2 7  
and psychology, 2 1 2, 21 5  
and science, 193, 2 1 5- r6, 2 28, 
375, 402 
See Ancient philosophy, Cos­
mology, Finalism, Mechanis­
tic philosophy, Metaphysics, 
Modern 
philosophy, 
Post­
Kanlian philosophy 
Phonograph illustrating "unwind­
ing" cause, 82 
l'hosphorcsccncc, 
consciousness 
compared to, 285 
Photograph, illustrating the na­
ture of the intellectual view 
of reality, 36, 330-1 
Photography, instantaneous, il­
lustrating the mechanism of 
the in tcllect, 360- I, 362 
Physical existence, as contrasted 
with logical, 300, 323-4, 356, 
392 
laws, their precise form artifi­
cial, 238, 239, 250, 262-3 
laws and the negative cosmic 
movement, 239 

I N D E X  
441 
Physical existence (Continued) 
operations the object of int!:lli­
gence, 193, 273 
order, imitation of, by the vital, 
252 
science, 194-5 
Physico-chemistry 
and 
orƏanic 
destruction, 247 
and biology, 29-30, 34-5, 39, 40, 
41, 42, 62, 6s, 1o9, 212 
Physics, ancient, "logic spoiled," 
347, 349-50 
of ancient philosophy, 342, 347, 
349-50, 386 
of Aristotle, 249 note, 352 note, 
359, 360 
and deduction, 233 
of Galileo, :JilR, 401-2 
and individuality of bodies, 2oli, 
227 
as inverted psychics, 221 
and logic, 346-8, 349 
and metaphysics, 2 13, 227 
and mutability, 267 
success of, 239, 240 
Pigment-spot and adaptation, 68, 
69, 8o-2, 86-7 
and heredity, 93, 94 
Pinguicula, certain animal char­
acteristics of, I 19 
Plan, 
motionless, 
of action 
the 
object of intellect, 17 1, 324-5, 
327, 328, 329 
Planets, life in other, 2 79 
Plants and animals in evolution, 
I I7-54, 1 57-8, 1 59, 1 00-1 1 162, 
z8s, 186-7, 199, 2oo, 201-2, 
203, 277, 291 
complementarity of, to animals, 
201·2, 203, 291 
consciousness of, 1 2 1 ,  1 23, 1 25, 
133, 142-50, 157-8, 1 59, 199, 
2001 317. See Torpor, Sleep 
Plan t s  and animals in evolution 
(Continued) 
function of, 1 19-21, 1 25, 1 26, 
1 271 I301 268, 270, 277, 279 
function and structure in, 7 5, 
86-7, 88 
indiviJuation in, IS 
instinct in, 187, I88 
ami mobility, 120, 12 1 , 1 23-4, 
I3 1-2, I43-4, I49-$0 
parallcli m 
of evolution 
with 
animals, 67-8, I 1 8-2o, I29 
supporters of all life, 295 
variation of, 95, 96 
Plasma, 
('ontinuity of gcrmina· 
tivc, Jo-I, 48, 88-93 
Pl.tslic substances, 278 
!'Jato, S(', I 72, 209, 230 note, 343 , 
3·15, 347, 348, 349, 355. 359 
377. 379 
Platonic iJcas, 56, 342-3, 349, 350, 
355, 359, 383 
Plotinus, 230 note, 341-2, 351, 352 
note, 377, 383, 384 
Plurality, confused, of life, 280. 
See In terpenetralion 
Poem, sounds of, distinct to per­
ception ;  the sense indivisible 
to intuition, 228 
illustrating creation of matter, 
262, 347-8 
'ITO<TJT<Kos, vovs, of Aristotle, 350 
Polymorphism of ants, bees, and 
wasps, 155 
of insects societies, I 7 3 
Polyzoism, 283 
Positive reality, 
228, 
232. 
See 
Reality 
Positivity, materiality an inver­
sion or interruption of, 240, 
268, 269-70, 346-8 
Possible activity as a factor in 
consciousness, 
14, 
IS· 
107, 

442 
I N D E X  
Possible activity as a factor in 
consciousnc5s (Continued) 
159, 16o, 161-2, 1 74-5, 1 82, 
197. 198, 199, 207, 288, 400 
existence, 315, 321 
Post-Kantian philosophy, 394, 395 
Potential activity. 
See Possible 
activity 
genera, 248 
knowledge, 157-62, 165, 1 83 
!'otentiality, life as an immense, 
281, 294 
zone of, surrounding acts, HJ7, 
198, 199, 288. 
See Possible 
activity 
Powers of life, complementarity 
of, xxii, xxiii, 30, 32, 58-63, 
109-17, 
1 221 
1251 
129-3 11 
1321 139-41, 145-51, 155-8, 
194. 195. 201, 202, 269, 277, 
278, 280, 290, 294. 373. 375 
Practical nature of perception and 
its prolongation in intellect 
and science, 151-6, 165, 212-
131 215, 216, 225, 226-8, 238, 
270-1, 2931 306, 331, 332-3, 
356, 357 
Preestablished harmony, 224-5, 226 
Present, creation of, by past, 7, 
24-7, 30-2, 184, 218-21 
Prevision. See Foreseeing 
Primacy of nervous system, 133-
40, 275 
Primary instinct, 152-4, 185 
Primitive organisms, ambiguous 
forms of, uo, 124, 1 25, 129, 
143. 144 
"Procession" in Alexandrian phi­
losophy, 351 
Progress, adaptation and, I I3 II. 
evolutionary, 57, 147, 148, 152, 
rs6-7, 1QO-I, 192, 203, 288-g, 
2QO 
Prose and verse, illustrating the 
two kinds of orders, 242, 254 
Protophytes, colonizing of, 283 
Protoplasm, circulation of, 37-8, 
120 
and senescence, 22, 23 
imitation of, 37-8, 40 
primitive, and the nervous sys­
tem, 138, 139-41 
of primitive organisms, I 10, 1 20, 
121 
and the vital principle, 48-9 
Protozoa, association of, 282-5 
ageing of, 20 
of ambiguous form, 1 24 
and individuation, 1 7, 282-5 
mechanical 
explanation 
of 
movements of, 38 
and nervous system, 139 
reproduction of, 1 7 
Pseudo-ideas and problems, 195, 
302, J08, 321 
Pseudoneuroptera, division of la­
bor among, 155 
!fvd of Aristotle, 380 
of Plotinus, 230 note 
Psychic activity, two-fold nature 
of, 150, 155-6, 157-8 
life, continuity of, 3-14, 34-5 
Psychical 
existence 
contrasted 
with logical, 300, 3 23-4, 355-
6, 392 
nature of life, 28o 
Psychics inverted physics, 220, 
221. See Inverse relation of 
the physical and psychical 
Psychology and deduction, 232-3 
and the genesis of intellect, 205, 
2121 213-15, 216 
intuitional 
cosmology 
as 
re­
versed, 228-9 
Psycho-physiological 
parallelism, 
1g8, J8o, J8I, J86, J87 

I N DEX 
443 
Puberty, 
illustrating 
crises 
in 
evolution, 23, 348-9 
Qualitative, evolutionary and ex­
tensive becoming, 340 
motion, 328-9, 330, 338 
Qualities, acts, fom1s, the classes 
of represen tation, 329, 341 
bodies as bundles of, 326-7 
coincidence of, 336 
and movements, 325-6 
and natural geometry, 230 
superimposition of, in induc-
tion, 236 
Quality is change, 325-6 
in Eleatic philosophy, 341-2 
and qu01.ntity in ancient phi­
losophy, 351-2 
and quantity in modern phi­
losophy, 380 
and rhythm, 32ri-8 
Quaternary substances, 134 
Quinton, Rene, 148 note 
Radius-vector, 
heliocentric, 
in 
Kepler's laws, 363 
Rank, 
evolutionary, 
57, 
147-9, 
190- 1 ,  289 
Reaction, role of, in perception, 
24 7-8 
Rea•ly-made COJ.tc;;orics, xx, xxv, 
55, 259, Ě73, 2 74, 297, 338, 
349, 357, 385, 390 
Real acti\·ity as distinguished from 
possible, 160 
common-sense is continuous ex­
perience of the, 2.33 
continuity of the, 3 28, 357 
dichotomy of the, in modern 
philosophy, 380 
imitation 
of 
the, 
by 
intelli­
gence, 101, 223, 281, 294, 333, 
386 
Real activity as distinņuishcd from 
possible (Continued) 
obliteration of outlines in the, 
14- 1 5, 2o6, 207, 2 27-8 
n·prescntation of the, by science, 
223-4 
Realism, ancient 252-3 
Realists and idealists alike assume 
possibility of absence of order, 
241, 252-3 
Reality, absolute, 2 1 7, 249-50, 251, 
293, 390- 1 ,  392 
as action, 54, 
2 IO-I I ,  2 13-14, 
272 
degrees of, 351, 355 
in <logmOJ.tic metaphysics, 2 1 5  
douhlc form of, 197-8, 236, 251-
2, 258 
as dura tion, 14- 15, 237, 296 
as nux, 182, 273. 274. 3 19, 366, 
367, 372 
and the frames of the intellect, 
39-l-6, 397· Sec Frames of the 
understanding 
as freedom, 270 
of genera in ancient philosophy, 
247-8 
is growth, 26r 
imitation of, by the intellect, 
100- r, .W7 
and the intellect, Go, 100-r, 169, 
209, 2 1 0, ,l p-2, 386-7 
in tdlip;ible, in ancient philoso-
phy, J44 
knowledge of, 333-5, 344, 389-g.; 
and mechanism, 381, 385-6 
as mov.:ment, 101, 1 77, 327-8 
.B9 
and no t-being, 300, 304, 310 
of the person, 29,3 
rcfr.tction of, through the formǧ 
of 
perception, 
224, 
26o­
J<JO· I 

444 
I N D EX 
Reality (Continued) 
and science, 212, 2 1 5, 217, 218, 
2 22-J, 226-8, 385, ,388 
sensible, in ancient philosophy, 
341 , 344. 349, 355, 356, 383 
symbol of, xxi, 35-6, So, 91\-9, 
104-5, 214- 15, 2 16, 229, 262, 
372, 392-3, 401 
undefinable conceptually, r6, 56 
unknowable in Kant, 224 
unknowable in Spencer, xxi 
views of, 35-6, 8o, 94, 98, 218, 
220, 2?.5-7, 246-7, 272, 28 1, 
297, 3 26-,3_3, 338, 341, 360-1 ,  
3 72, 382, 383 
Reason aml life, 10, I I ,  55, 1 78 
cannot transcend itself, 2 1 2-13 
Reasoning and actinɲ-:, 2 I I-12 
and experience, 222-3 
and matter, 2 23-4, 2 2/l-9 
on mat ter and life, ro, 1 1  
Recollection, dependence of, on 
special 
circumstances, 
184, 
H)8 
in the dream, 22r, 227-8 
and perception, 198, 199 
Recommencing, continual, of the 
present in the state of relax­
ation, 220 
Recomposinɳ-:, decomposing and, 
the characteristic powers of 
intellect, 1 73, 274 
Record, 
false 
comparison 
of 
memory with, 7 
Reflection, r 74- 5 
Rcllcx activity, 122 
compound, rgo-r ,  192-3 
Refraction of the idea through 
matter or non-being, 343-5 
of reality through forms of per­
ception, 223, 26o, 390-2 
Regeneration 
and 
individuality, 
17, 18 
Register of time, 20, 24, 43 
Reinke, 48 11<1te 
Relation, imprint of relations and 
laws upon consciousness, 207 
as law, 25 1, 252-3 
and t hinɴ-:, 162-8, 1 72-J, 1 76, r n, 
205, 221, 383, 388 
Rel.ttivism, epistemological, 215, 
2!6, zsr 
Relativity of immobility, 171 
of the intellect, xxii, ss-6, r68, 
169, 205, 2 14-15, 2 16-17, 218, 
240, 297. 332-3, 391-2 
of knowledge, 168, 209, 251 
of perception, 247-8, 249, 326-7 
Relaxation in the dream state, 
220, 229-30 
and extension, 220, 227-8, 229, 
230, 232, 238, 244, 267 
and intellect, 2 19, 227-8, 229, 
232, 238 
logic a, of virtual geometry, 232 
matter a, of unextended into 
extended, 238 
memory vanishes in complete, 
219 
necessity as, of freedom, 238 
present 
continually 
recom-
mences in the state of relaxa­
tion, 219 
will vanishes in complete, 219, 
227-8 
See Tension 
Releasing cause, 83, 127, 13 1-2, 133 
Repetition 
and 
generalization, 
252-J, 254 
and fabrication, 5 1-2, 53, 1 71-4 
and intellect, 1 72-3, 218, 234-6 
of states, 7-8, 9-10, 33-4, 35, 41, 
52-3, 54 
in the vital and in the mathe­
matical order, 246, 247, 252, 
Ȗ53 

I N D E X  
445 
Representation and action, 158-9, 
16o, 198 
classes of: qualities, forms, acts, 
328-9, 341 
and consciousness, r 58-9 
of motion, 1 75-6, 329-30, 33 1, 
332-3, 334. 340, 342, 374-5 
of the Nought, 297-304, 306-9, 
3 1 4·45. 355 
Represented or int(,rnalized ac­
tion distinguished from ex­
ternalized 
action, 
I 59-(•o, 
1 74-5. J/!2 
Reproduction and individuation, 
r6, 1 7  
Res('mblance. Sec Similarity 
Reservoir, organism a, of energy, 
1 27, 1 21-\, l _l!J-40, 261-\, 269, 2 7 7  
Rest and motion i n  Zeno, 335-9 
Retrogression in evolution, 
147, 
14/l 
Retrospecl ion the function of in­
tellect, 54-5, 259 
Reversed psychology: intuitional 
cosmology, 228 
Rhizoccphala and animal mobil­
ity, 1 23 
Rhumhler, 39 note 
Rhytlun of duration, 1 4- 1 5, 141-2, 
,325·0, 3 75-7 
intelligence adopts the, of ac-
t ion, JJI-2 
of perception, 325-fl, 3l7 
and quality, 327 
scanning the, of the universe 
the function of science, 3 76-7 
of science must coincide with 
that of action, 34 7 
of the universe untranslatable 
into scientific formulae, 366 
Rings of arthropods, 146-7 
Ripening, creative evolution as, 
54· s, 369-70 
Romanes, 154 
Roule, 32 note 
Roy (Le), Ed., 239 note 
Salmnandm maculat<l, vision in, 85 
Salensky, ils note 
Same, function of intellect con­
nect ing same with same, 218-
19, 255. 295 
Samter and Ileymons, 8r note 
Saporta (De), 124 note 
Sav1tge's sense of distance and 
direction, 231 
SKepticism 
or 
dogm;tl ism 
the 
dilemma of any systematiÿ 
metaphysics, 2 14- 15, 216, 252-
3 
Schisms in the primitive impul­
Āion of life, 27 7-ll, 2ilo. See 
Divergent lines of evolution 
Scholasticism, 402 
Science and action, 104, 2 14, 2 1 7, 
356-7 
ancient, and modern, 357-66, 
37 2·5, 388 
astronomy, ancient and modern, 
363-4, 365 
Cartesian geometry and ancient 
geometry, 362-3 
cinematographical character of 
modern, 358, 359, 365-6, 370· 
I, 372, 376-7 
conventionality of a certain as-
pect of, 226-7 
and deduction, 23 2-3 
and discontinuity, 177-8 
function of, 103, 184-5, 190-I, 
194-5, 
2 1 2-13, 2 14-15, 
2 1 7· 
r8, 356-7, 376-7 
Galileo's influence on modern, 
362-3, 364 
and instinct, 
186, 187, 190-11 
1 92, 21 2-14 

I N D EX 
Science and action (Co1rlinucd) 
and intelli1Ǯence, 193, 194, 2 1 2-
1 5  
Kepler's influence on modern, 
363 
and matter, 2 13-14, 225-6, 227 
modern. See Modern science 
object of, 2 14-15, 241, 242, 274, 
294-5, 297, 322-4, 332-3, 356-
7, 361-2, 364-5, 377-8 
and perception, r85 
and philosophy, 193-4, 2 15-16, 
228-9, 374, 402 
physical. See Physics 
and reality. 
See Reality and 
science 
and time, u-17, 24, 364-7 
unity of, 2 14- 15, 2 16, 249-50, 
251, 349-50, 351 , 374-5, 377-8, 
379, 385, 386-7, 390-1 ,  393-
4 
Scientific concepts, 367-9 
explanation 
and philosophical 
explanation, 185 
formulae, 366 
geometry, 1 77, 230 
knowledge, 2 1 2-13, 2 1 5-16, 2 1 7, 
218, 226, 228, 238 
Sclerosis and aging, 23 
Scolia, paralyzing instinct in, 189 
Scope of action inclclinitrly ex-
tended by intelligent instru­
ments, 156 
of Galileo's physics, 388, 402 
Scott, 7 r note 
Sea-urchin and individuality, 1 7  
Seailles, 3 4  note 
Secondary instincts, 154, 185 
Sectioning of becoming in the phi-
losophy of Ideas, 344-5 
of matter by perception, 226-7, 
272, 274 
Sedǯick, 283 note 
Seeing and willing, coincidence of, 
in intuition, 259 
Selection, natural, 61, 63-5, 67-8, 
69-70, 7 1,  72, 77, 106-7, 186-7 
Self, coincidence of, with, 218 
existence of, means change, 1 3  ff. 
knowledge of, 3 li. 
Senescence, 19-27, 3 1-2, 48-9 
Sensation and space, 221 
Sense-perception. See Perception 
Sensible flux, 343-4, 345, 349, 350, 
355, 373. 375 
intuition and ultra-intellectual, 
391-2 
object, apogee of, 372-3, 374-5, 
379 
reality, 341, 344, 346, 355, 356, 
383 
Sensibility, forms of, 392 
Sensitive plant, in illustration of 
mobility in plants, 1 2 1  
Sensory-motor system. 
See Ner­
vous system 
Sensuous manifold, 224, 242, 254, 
257, 258 
Sentiment, poetic, in illustration 
of individuation, 281, 282 
Scrkov5ki, 282 note 
Serpula, in illustration of identi­
cal 
evolution in divergent 
lines, 107 
Sexual cells, 18, 3 1 ,  32, 88-91 
Sexuality parallel in plants and 
animals, Go-8, 132-4 
Shaler, N. S., 147 note, 202 note 
Sheath, calcareous, in illustration 
of animal tendency to mo-
bility, 144-5 
Signs, function of, 1 74, 1 75, 1 76 
the instrument of science, 357-8 
Sigwart, 3 1 2  note 
Silurian epoch, failure of certain 
species to evolve since, 1 1 3  

I N DEX 
447 
Similarity among individuals of 
same species the type of gen­
erality, 245-6, 249-50, 2$I-3 
and mechanical causality, SI, 52 
Simultaneity, to measure time is 
merely to count simultanei­
ties, I2, 365, 366, 37I 
Sinuousness of evolution, So, 109, 
Il31 232-3 
Sitaris, 
unconscious 
knowledge 
of, I6r, I62 
Situation and magnitude, prob­
lems of, 2JI 
Sketching movemer,ts, function of 
consciousness, 227-8 
Sleep, I42-5, ISO, 199 
Snapshot, in illustration of intel­
lectual representation of mo­
tion, 3JI, 332, 340, 342, 374· 
See View of reality, Cincma­
tographical character, etc. 
form defined as a, of transition, 
327-8, 344. 345. 34()-$0, 375 
Social instinct, I 12, 155. 174, 188-9 
life, 153. ISS, 174. 289 
and pedagogical charnctcr of 
negation, 312-23 
Societies, I I 2, 145-6, 174, 188-9, 
282 
Society and the individual. 284, 
289 
Solar energy stored by plants, re­
leased by animals, 26il, 277 
systems, 263-7, 269 note, 119, 
294 
systems, life in other, 279 
Solid, concepts analogous to solids, 
xix 
intellect as a solid nucleus, 2ll, 
2 1 3  
the 
material 
o f  construction 
and the object of the intel­
lect, 169, 170, I77, q8, 274 
Solidarity 
between 
brain 
and 
consciousness, 198, 285 
of the parts of matter, 222, 227-
8, 263, 295 
Solidification operated by the un­
derstanding, 272 
rtwp.a in Aristotle, 380 
Somnambulism 
and 
conscious­
ness, 159, I6o, 175 
Soul and body, 380 
and cell, 293 
creation of, 294 
Space anti action, 222 
in ancient philosophy, 345, 346 
and concepts, 177-8, 179, I9r-2, 
193·4, 206-7, 280-3 
geometrical, 222 
homogeneity of, r 72, 232 
and induction, 236 
in Kant's philosophy, 224, 225, 
226, 266 
in Leibniz's philosophy, 382 
and matter, 207, 221-33, 266, 
280, 2ilg, 392-4, 400 
and time in Kant's philosophy, 
224-5 
unity and multiplicity determi­
nations of, 388-90 
See Extension 
Spatiality atmosphere of, bathing 
intelligence, 225 
degradation of the extra-spatial, 
227 
and distinctness, 223, 227, 266, 
273. 280-2 
and geometrical space, 222, 231, 
2JJ, 238 
and mathematical order, 228, 229 
Special 
instincts 
and 
environ­
ment, 152, 185, 210-12, 2 13 
and recollections, 184, 185, 198 
as variations on a theme, 184, 
189, 288 

I N DEX 
'pecies, articulate, 148 
evolution of, 270, 278, 293 
and external finality, 142-3, 144-
s, 146, 2<)0 
fossil, 1 13 
human, as goal of evolution, 290, 
291 
human, styled homo faber, r 53 
and instinct, 154, r84, 187-9, 288 
and life, I 84 
similarity within, 244-7, 249-50, 
251-2 
Speculation, dead-locks in, xxii, 
1 7 1 ,  1 72, 339, 340-1 
object of philosophy, so, r67, 
2 1S, 2 1 7, 2 19, 24 1, 246-7, 248, 
274, 294-5, 297, 3 23-4, 332-3, 
344, 377-8 
Spencer, Herbert, x:ti, xxiv, 88-9, 
169, 206, 207, 208, 395, 396 
Spencer's 
evolutionism, 
corre­
spondence between mind ami 
matter in, 400 
cosmogony in, 2o6 
imprint of relations and laws 
upon consciousness in, 206 
matter in, 397, 399 
mind in, 397, 399 
Spheres, concentric, in Aristotle's 
philosophy, 356 
Sphex, paralyzing instinct in, 189-
92 
Spiders and paralyzing hymenop­
tera, 189 
Spinal cord, I 22 
Spinoza, the adequate and the ill-
adequate, 384 
cause, 302 
dogmatism, 387, 388 
eternity, 384 
extension, 381 
God, 382, 388 
intuitionism, 377 
Spinoza (Continued) 
mechanism, 378, 383, 386, 387 
time, 394 
Spirit, 274, 293, 294 
Spiritunlity and materiality, 142, 
3, 220-2, 225-6, 227-9, 230-1-
232-3, 237. 
238, 
239. 
243-4, 
259, 200, 267, 270-1, 272, 274, 
2 7 7 ,  2 i9. 28o, 282, 283, 284, 
29 1 , 21) -5, 296, 300, 373 
Spon taneity of life, 96, 2S9· See 
Frecrlom 
anri mechanism, 46 
in vegetables, 1 2 1  
ant! the willed order, 245 
Sport (bioi.), 7 1  
Starch, i n  the function of vege­
table kin!:dom, I 26 
States of becoming, 3, r6, I So, 27o­
r, 325, 326, 333 
Static charncter of the intellect, 
I 7 1-2, 180, 298, 324 
views of becoming, 297 
Stchasny, 137 note 
Steam-cn,;inc and bronze, parallel 
a.ƞ epoch -marking, 1 53-4 
Stentor and individuality, 284 
StoiJs, .H3 
Storing of solar energy by plants, 
268, 276-9 
Str.1in of bow and indivisibility of 
motion, 335 
Stream, Juration as a, 4S, 368 
Structure and function. See Func­
tion and structure 
iclcntica.l, in divergent lines of 
evolution, 62, 68, 69-70, 7 1 ,  
78, 82-3, 84, ss-6, 93, 96, 97, 
131-2 
Subject and attribute, 162-3 
Substance, albuminoid, 133-4 
continuity of living, 1 78 
organic, 134, 145, I SS, 157, 164, 

I N DEX 
449 
Substance (Continued) 
I 79-8o, 214-16, 278, 291 
in Spinoza's philosophy, 381 
ternary substances, 134 
Substantives, 
adjectives, 
verbs, 
correspond to the three clas­
ses of representation, 328-30 
Substitution 
essential 
to 
repre­
sentation of the Nought, 306, 
308-9, 
3 14-1 5, 
3 16, 
319, 
321 
Success of physics, 239, 240-1 
and superiority, 147, 288-9 
Succession in time, 13, 369, 370, 
371, 375· cr. 
Juxtaposition 
Successors of Kant, 393, 394 
Sudden mutations, 33, 70-1 ,  72-3, 
77-8 
Sun, 1 28, 263, 351 
Superaddition of existence upon 
nothingness, 300 
of order upon disorder, 258, 299 
Superimposition. 
See 
Measure­
ment of qualities, in induc­
tion, 236 
Superiority, evolutionary, 
147-9, 
1901 191-2 
Superman, 291 
Supraconsciousness, 284 
Survival of the fit, 186. See Nat­
ural selection 
Swim, learning to, as instinctive 
learning, 212, 213 
Symbol, the concept is a, 1 77, 229, 
3 7 1-2 
of reality, xxi, 35-6, So, 98-9, 
104, 214-15, 230, 262, 372, 
391-2, 401-2 
Symbolic knowledge of life, 2 18, 
372, 392 
Symbolism, 193, 198, 392 
Sympathetic or intuitive knowl­
edge, 2 29, 230, 3 7 2 
Sympathy, instinct is, 181, 185, 
189-96, 372-3. See Divination, 
Feeling, Inspiration 
Systematic metaphysics, dilemma 
of, 2 14, 215, 251-2 
contrasted 
with 
intuitional, 
210- 1 1 1  2 1 2-IJ, 26o, 293, 294, 
3011 376-'8 
postulate of, 209, 214 
Systematization of physics, Leib­
niz's philosophy, 377 
Systems, isolated, 1 2-16, 222, 234, 
235, 263, 264, 372, 377-9 
Tangent and curve, analogy with 
deduction 
and 
thǨ 
moral 
sphere, 234 
analogy with physico-chemistry 
and life, 36 
Tarakevitch, 137 note 
Teleology. See Finalism 
Tendency, antagonistic tendencies 
of life, 16, 109, I I5, 1 25, 149, 
I65 
antagonistic tendencies in de­
velopment of nervous system, 
137-8 
complementary 
tendencies 
of 
life, 58, 1 1 5, 149. 165, rSs, 269 
to ub;sociation, 283 
divergent tendencies of life, 62, 
991 I IO, 1 1 21 1 19-20, 1 21-21 
124, 
129-3 1, 148, 149, 165, 
199. 26:l, 277-82 
to individuation, 16 
lire a tendency to act on inert 
matter, 107 
toward mobility in animals, 1 2 1 ,  
1 22, 1 25, 141-2, 143-7. 149. 
199. 200 
the past exists in present tend­
ency, 8 
to reproduce, 16 

450 
IN DEX 
Tendency (Contin11ed) 
of species to change, 95-6 
mathematical symbols of tend-
encies, 26, 27 
toward systems, in matter, I3 
transmission of, 89-9I 
a vital property is a, I6 
Tension and extension, 258, 267 
and freedom, 2 I9-21, 227-8, 244, 
259. 26I ' 326-8 
matter the inversion of vital, 26I 
of personality, 2 1 8-I9, 220, 227-
8, 259, 26r, 326 
Ternary substances, IJ4 
Theology 
consequent 
upon 
the 
philosophy of Ideas, 343 
Theoretic fallacies, 287, 288 
knowledge and 
instinct, 
195, 
292 
knowledge and intellect, 
1 7 1 ,  
I95, I97, 26o, 294, 372, 373 
Theorizing not the original func­
tion of the intellect, I 70-r 
Theory of knowledge, xxiii, 195, 
I98, 202-3, 2 16, 223, 227-8, 
2 29, 249-so, 2 53 
of life, xxiii, I9S, I98, 216 
Thermodynamics, 263-5. See Con­
servation of energy, Degrada­
tion of ener:,'Y 
Thesis and antithesis, 225 
Thing as distinguished from mo­
tion, 205, 
22I, 270-I, 272, 
325-6 
as distinguished from relation, 
162, 
I6J, 
I6S, 
I68, 
I 74-5, 
I 75-6, 
I 77, 
205, 2 2I1 
J8J, 
387-8 
and mind, 2 24 
as 
solidification 
operated 
by 
understanding, 27I 
Thing-in-itself, 
2 24, 225, 251-2, 
339 
Timaeus, 345 note 
Time and the a!Jsolute, 262, 263, 
J2J-4, J69, 3 73-4 
abstract, 25, 26, 43, 45 
articulations of real, 300-2 
as force, 20, 52-J, 54, S8, 1 I5, ̶69 
homogeneous, 
21, 22, I 79-8o, 
J60-2 
as 
independent variable, 
24, 
J64-6 
interval of, I 2, 26, 27 
as invention, J7I-2 
in Leihniz's philosophy, 
382, 
383, 394 
and logic, 6, 301 
and simultaneity, I 2, 365, 366, 
J7I 
in modern science, 349-66, J 7I-S 
and space in Kant, 228 
and space in ancient philosophy, 
3+5, 346. See Duration 
Tools and intellect, 152-6, r66-7. 
See Implement 
Torpor, in evolution, I 2 I, 1 23, 1 25, 
I 27 note, 133, 142-9, 199, J I 7  
Tort<>ise, Achilles and the, i n  Zeno, 
337 
Touch, science expresses all per­
ception as touch, 185 
is to vision as intelligence to in­
stinct, r86 
Track laid by motion along its 
course, 335-9, 366 
Transcendental Aesthetic, 2 23 
Trans[ormation, 38, 81, 82, 145, 
252, 287 
Transformism, 27-30 
Transition, form a snapshot view 
of, 327-8, 343-4, 345, 
349, 
374-5 
Transmissibility of acquired char­
acters, 84-94, 97, 185, 186, 
189-90, 246-7, 252-3 

I N D E X  
451 
Transmission of the vital impe­
tus, 3 I ,  32, 89, 95, 97, 98, ro4-
5, I 22, I40·I, 1 42, 2.')2, 2.')3, 
268, 278, 279, 280, 294 
Trigger-action of motor mechan­
isms, 296 
Triton, regeneration in, 84 
Tropism and psychical activity, 
4I note 
Truth seized in intuition, 345-8 
Unconscious eiTort, 187 
instinct, 1 57-8, 159, 160-I, I62, 
183 
knowledge, I6o-3, I65-7 
Unconsciousness, 
two kinds of, 
1 59 
Undefinable, reality, 16, 55 
Understanding, 
absoluteness 
of, 
169-70, 208-9, 216- 1 7, 2 18, 2I9 
and action, xix, xxi, 197 
genesis of the, xix-xxv, s6, 207, 
227-8, 280-2, 390, 392-4 
and geometry, xix, xxi! 
and 
innateness 
of cate"ories, 
162, I 63-4 
and intuition, S,ǩ-4 
and life, xix-xxv, I 7 ,  37-8, 53-7, 
98-9, II 21 I62-31 164, I68, I 78-
821 190-1 1  I94-5, 196, 2I<,-201 
233. 
241 ,  243·4, 
245, 
2,17, 
280-2, 284, 290, 294, 295. 340, 
392-4, 397 
and inert matter, 183, 185, I97, 
213-141 2 171 224-5, 226, 2401 
386 
and the ready-made, xxru, 55, 
259. 273. 274. 297. 338, 349 , 
356-7, 385, 389 
and the solid, xi.x 
unlimited scope of the, 164, 165, 
168 
Sࠃ Intelect, Intelligence, Con-
Understanding (Continued) 
cept, Categories, Frames of 
the understanding, Logic 
Undone, automatic and determi­
nate evolution ,is action being, 
27I 
Unfolding cause, 82, 83 
UnforcsePableness of action, 54 
of duration, 9, 181, 369-72 
of evolution , 54, 55, 59, 96, 245 
of invention, 181 
of life, I 8I, 202 
and the willed order, 245, 3 72-3 
See Foreseeing 
Unification as the function of the 
intellect, 168, I 70, 388-90 
Uniqueness of phases of duration, 
18o 
Unity of extension, 1 70 
of knowledge, 214-15 
of life, r r8-I91 273, 292, 295 
of mental life, 292 
and multiplicity as determina­
tions of space, 382-4 
of nature, n6-r7, 207-9, 210, 
2 14- 1 5, 
2J6, 2 18, 350 
of the organism, 194-5 
of science, 214-15, 2 16, 249-50, 
25 1, 349. 350, 374·5, 377. 390-
I, 394-5 
Universal interaction, 206, 207 
life, 
consciousness coextensive 
with, 204, 28o, 294 
Universe, continuity of, 376 
Descartes's, 3 76 
physical, and the idea of dis-
order, 255, 299 
duration of, 13, 14, 263 
evolution of, 263, 269 note 
growth of, 372-3, 374 
movement of, in Aristotle, 323 
mutability of, 266, 267 
as organism, 36, 263 

452 
I N DEX 
Universe (Continued) 
as realization of plan, 46 
rhythm of, 366, 368, 376-7 
states of, considered by science, 
365, 366 
as unification of physics, 378-9, 
388 
Unknowable, the, of evolutionism, 
xxi 
the, in Kant, 223, 224, 225 
Unmaking, the nature of the pro­
cess of materiality, 267, 271, 
272, 274. 296, 372-J 
Unorganized bodies, 
xo-u, 
17, 
24, 25, 204. See Inert matter 
instruments, 151-4, 155-6, 166-7 
matter, cleft between, and the 
organized, 208, 209, 215, 216-
1 7  
matter, imitation of the organ­
ized by, 39-40, 41, 42 
mattet and science, 213-15 
matter. See Inert matter 
Unwinding cause, 82 
of immutability in Greek phi­
losophy, 353, 383 
Upspringing of invention, 181 
Utility, 6-7, 166, 168, 17o-1, 174-5, 
176, 205, 214- 151 270-11 J23-41 
356-7, 359 
Y a ness a 
Ievana 
and 
Y anessa 
prorsa, transformation of, 81 
Variable, time as an independent, 
24, 365 
Variation, accidental, 63, 71-2, 77, 
95, 185-6 
of color, in lizards, 81, 83 
by deviation, 92-3, 94 
of evolutionary type, 28-9, 81 
note, 145-6, 152-3, 184, r86, 
r88-9, 288 
insensible, 7 I, 77 
Variation (Continued) 
interest as cause of, 145-6 
in plants, 95-6 
Vegetable kingdom. See Plants 
Verb, relation expressed by, 163 
Verbs, substantives and adjec· 
tives, 330 
Verse and prose, in illustration of 
the two kinds of order, 242, 
254 
Vertebrate, xix, 139, 144, 145-8, 
156 
Vibrations, matter analyzed into 
elementary, 220 
Vicious circle, apparent, of in­
tuitionism, 21o-12, 215-16 
of intellectualism, 213, 216, 346-
7, 348 
View, intellectual, of becoming, 
6, 101-2, 2971 324-5, 330, 33 1 1  
337. 354-5 
intellectual, of matter, 222, 262, 
273. 277' 278 
of reality, 225 
Vignon, P., 41 note 
Virtual actions, 15. See Possible 
action 
geometry, 232 
Vise, 
consciousness compressed 
in a, 197 
Vision of God, in Alexandrian 
philosophy, 350 
in mollusks. See Eye of mol­
lusks, etc. 
in Salamandra maculala, 85 
Vital activity, 148-5o, 154, 155, 
183-6, 26c}, 270-1 
current, 31, 32, 6o-3, 89, 95, 
97, 98, 
107-1 71 
1J1·21 
1JJ1 
252-3, 254, 261, 28o, 290, 294 
impetus, 57-8, 6o-3, 95, 97, 98, 
109-17, 
1J 1-21 
139-40, 
141, 
145-61 156-7, 163-41 165, 238, 

I N D EX 
453 
Vital activity (Continued) 
25 2-3, 254, 270-1, 273, 275, 
27]-8, 285 
order, cause in, 40, 41, 105-6, 
r8o 
order, finality and, 244-6, 247 
order, generalization in the, and 
in 
the 
mathematical 
order 
contrasted, 246-7, 252-3 
order, and the geometrical or-
der, 243-4, 246, 247, 251, 252, 
257, 258, 359-6o 
order, imitation of physical or­
der by vital, 252 
principle, 48, 49, 246, 247 
order, repetition in the vital and 
the mathematical orders con­
trasted, 245, 24.6, 252, 253 
process, 183-4 
Vitalism, 48, 49 
Void, representation of, 297, 298, 
299, 302-J, 306, J08-9, 3 14-
I$1 3 16, 3 1 7, 3 19, 322, 324 
Voisin, 90 
Volition and cerebral mechanism, 
276-7 
Voluntary activity, 1 22, 275 
Vries (De), 28, 71 1Wtc, 95 
Wasps, instinct in, rss, 189 
Weapons and intellect, 152 
Weismann, 31, 88, 90-r 
Will and caprice, 54 
and cerebral mechanism, 275 
current of, penetrating matter, 
259 
Will and caprice (Continutd) 
insertion of, into reality, 331-2, 
333 
and relaxation, 220, 227-8 
and mechanism in disorder, 255 
tension of, 218, 220, 227-8 
Willed order, mutual contingency 
of willed order and mathe­
matical order, 253-5 
unforeseeahility 
in 
the, 
245, 
372-3 
Willing, coincidence of seeing and, 
in intuition, 259 
Wilson, E. B., 41 
WolfT, 84 note 
Words and states, 6, 328-9 
three classes of, corresponding 
to three classes of representa­
tion, 328-9, 340-r 
World, intelligible, r 78-8o 
principle : 
consciousness, 
259, 
284 
Worms, 
in 
illustration 
of 
am­
biguity of primitive organ­
isms, 144 
Yellow-winged sphcx, paralyzing 
instinct in, 189 
Zeno on motion, 335-40 
Zone of potentialities surround­
ing acts, 197-8, 199, 288 
Zoology, 142-3 
Zoospores of algae, in illustration 
of mobility in plants, 1 24 

