THE MEANING 
OF 
THE WAR 
LIFE 
& 
MATTER IN 
CONFLICT 
BY HENRI BERGSON 
WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY 
H. WILDON CARR 
NEW YORK 
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 

Printed in Gt'tlll Britain 

CONTENTS 
PAGB 
INTRODUCTION 
7 
LIFE AND MATTER AT WAR 
15 
THE FORCE WHICH WASTES AND 
THAT WHICH DOES NOT WASTE 
41 


INTRODUCTION 


INTRODUCTION 
THIS little volume contains the discourse 
delivered by M. Bɑrgson as President of the 
A cademt"e des Sdences Morales et Po!itiques 
at its annual public meeting on December I 2, 
I9I4· 
It is the address which preceded the 
announcement of the prizes and awards be­
stowed by the Academy. 
It is now issued in 
book form with the consent of the author, and 
his full appreciation of the object, to give it 
the widest circulation. Although it is brief, 
it is a message addressed directly to the heart 
of our people in the crisis of war. To it. is 
added a short article on the same theme, 
contributed to the Bu!!et£n des A rmees de Ia 
Repub!£que, November 4, I 9 I 4· 
9 
B 

10 
THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
It has been said that war, with all its terrible 
evils, is the occasion of at least one good which 
humanity values as above price: it inspires 
great poetry. 
On the other hand, it seems 
to crush philosophy. Many may think that in 
this message it is poetry to which M. Bergson 
is giving expression. It is, however, from the 
depth of his philosophy that the inspiration is 
drawn. 
The full significance of the doctrines 
he has been teaching, and their whole moral 
and political bearing, are brought into clear 
light, focussed, as it were, on the actual 
present struggle. Yet is there no word that 
breathes hatred to any person or to any 
race. 
It is by the triumph of a spiritual 
principle that philosophy may hope to free 
humanity from the oppression of a materialist 
doctrine. 
The opposing principle has had, and still 
has, philosophers to defend it, and they 
belong to no particular nation or race. One 

THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
1 1 
of its most brilliant and influential exponents 
was a Frenchman, the diplomatist, Comte 
Joseph Arthur de Gobineau (1816-1882). A 
brief word on this remarkable man may help 
the reader to understand the mention of 
his name on page .30. His 
Essai 
szw 
l't"nega!t"te des races hztmaines (1855) was the 
first of a series of writings to affirm, on 
ethnological grounds, the superiority of the 
Afyan race, and its right and destiny by 
reason of that superiority to rule all other 
races as bondsmen. 
He was the friend 
of Wagner, and also of Nietzsche. 
Madame 
Forster-Nietzsche in her biography of her 
brother has spoken of the almost reverent 
regard which he entertained for Gobineau, 
and it may be that from' him Nietzsche 
derived the idea which he developed into his 
doctrine of the non-morality of the super-
man. 
Were the discourse of M. Bergson no more 

12 
THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
than the utterance .of a philosopher stirred by 
deep patriotic feeling to uphold his country's 
cause and denounce his country's foes, then, 
however eloquent its appeal, it would have no 
significance or value beyond its present power 
to inspire courage in the hearts of his com­
rades. 
And it would .not differ from equally 
earnest appeals which other philosophers have 
addressed to the world on behalf of their 
fellow-countrymen. 
It has a much deeper 
meamng. 
It is no mere indictment of modern 
Germany's rulers or people. 
It goes to the 
very heart of the problem of the future of 
humanity. Shall the splendid material pro· 
gress.which has marked the scientific achieve­
ment of the last century be the forging of a 
sword to destroy the freedom which life has 
won with it from matter? 
As these words are written the .conflict is 
raging, and the decision seems still far off. 
Deaɍh is striking d.own the young in _all ,the 

THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
13 
nations, and among them many on whom our 
highest hopes were founded. 
" But whatever 
be the price of victory," so writes M. Bergson 
to me, "it will not have been too dearly 
bought if humanity is finally delivered from 
the nightmare which weighs on it." 
H. WILDON CARR 
LoNDON, May 1915 


LIFE AND MATTER 
AT WAR 


LIFE AND MATTER 
AT WAR 
"CoMPRENDRE et ne pas s'indigner": this has 
been said to be the last word of philosophy. 
I believe none of it ; and, had I to choose, 
I should much prefer, when in presence of 
crime, to give my indignation rein and not 
to understand. Happily, the choice has not 
to be made. On the contrary, there are 
forms of anger which, by a thorough com­
prehension of their objects, derive the force 
to sustain and renew their vigour. Our 
anger is of that kind. We have only to 
detach the inner meaning of this war, and 
our horror for those who made it will be in­
creased. 
Moreover, nothing is easier. 
A 
little history, and a little philosophy, will 
suffice. · 
c 

r8 
THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
For a long period Germany devoted her­
self to poetry, to art, to metaphysic. She 
was made, so she said, for thought and 
imagination; " she had no feeling for the 
reality of things." It is true that her ad­
ministration 
had defects, that she 
was 
divided into rival states, that anarchy at 
certain times seemed beyond remedy. Never­
theless, an attentive study would have re­
vealed, beneath this disorder, the normal 
process of life, which is always too rank at 
the first and later on prunes away its excess, 
makes its choice and adopts a lasting form. 
From her municipal activity there would have 
issued at length a good administration which 
would haye assured order without suppress­
ing liberty. 
From thɎ closer union of the 
confederated states that unity in diversity, 
which is the distinguishing mark of organized 
beings, would have arisen. 
But time was 
needed for that, as it always is needed by life, 
in order that its possibilities may be realized. 
Now, while Germany was thus working 

THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
19 
out the task of her organic self-development 
there was within her, or rather by her side, 
a people with whom every process tended to 
take a mechanical form. Artificiality marked 
the creation of Prussia ; for she was formed 
by clumsily sewing together, edge to edge, 
provinces either acquired or conquered. 
Her administration was mechanical; it did 
its work with the regularity of a well­
appointe machine. .Not less mechanical­
extreme both in precision and in power-was 
the army, on which the attention of the 
Hohenzollerns was concentrated. 
Whether 
it was that the people had been drilled for 
centuries to mechanical obedience; or that 
an elemental instinct for conquest and plunder, 
absorbing to itself the life of the nation, had 
simplified its aims and reduced them to 
materialism ; or that the Prussian character 
was originally so made-it is certain that the 
idea of Prussia always evoked a vision of 
rudeness, of rigidity, of automatism, as if 
everything within her went by clockwork, 

zo 
THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
from the gesture of her kings to the step of 
her soldiers. 
A day came when Germany had to choose 
between a rigid and ready-made system of 
unification, mechanically superposed 
from 
without, and the unity which comes from 
within by a natural effort of life. At the 
same time the choice was offered her between 
an administrative mechanism, into which 
she would merely have to fit herself-a 
complete order, 
doubtless, 
but poverty­
stricken, like everything else that is arti­
ficial-and that richer and more flexible 
order which the wills of men, when freely 
associated, evolve of themselves. How would 
she choose? 
There was a man on the spot in whom the 
methods of Prussia were incarnate-a genius, 
I admit, but an evil genius; for he was devoid 
of scruple, devoid of faith, devoid of pity, and 
devoid of soul. He had just removed the 
only obstacle which could spoil his plan; he 
had got rid of Austria. 
He said to himself: 

THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
z 1 
"We are going to make Germany take over, 
along with Prussian centralization and dis­
cipline, all our ambitions and all our appetites. 
If she hesitates, if the confederate peoples do 
n·ot arrive of their own accord at this common 
resolution, I know how to compel them; I 
will cause a breath of hatred to pass over 
them, all alike. 
I will launch them against 
a common enemy, an enemy we have hood­
winked and waylaid, and whom we shall 
try to catch unarmed. Then when the hour 
of triumph shall sound, I will rise up; from 
Germany, in her intoxication, I will snatch 
a covenant, which, like that of Faust with 
Mephistopheles, she has signed with her 
blood, and by which she also, like Faust, 
has traded her soul away for the good things 
of earth., 
He did as he had said. The covenant was 
made. 
But, to ensure that it would never be 
broken, Germany must be made to feel, for 
ever and ever, the necessity of the armour in 
which she was imprisoned. 
Bismarck took 

2 2 
THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
his measures accordingly. Among the con­
fidences which fell from his lips and were 
gathered up by his intimates is this revealing 
word: "We took nothing from Austria after 
Sadowa because we wanted to be able one 
day to be reconciled with her." So, then, in 
taking Alsace and a part of Lorraine, his idea 
was that no reconciliation with the French 
would be possible. 
He intended that the 
German people should believe itself in per­
manent danger of war, that the new Empire 
should remain armed to the teeth, and that 
Germany, instead of dissolving Prussian 
militarism into her own life, should reinforce 
it by militarizing herself. 
She reinforced it; and day by day the 
machine grew in complexity and power. 
But 
in the process it yielded automatically a 
result very different from that which its 
constructors had foreseen. 
It is the story 
of the witch who, by a magic incantation, 
had won the consent of her broomstick to 
go to the river and fill her buckets ; having 

THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
23 
no formula ready to check the work, she 
watched her cave fill with water until she 
was drowned. 
The Prussian army had been organized, 
brought to perfection, tended with love by the 
Kings of Prussia, in order that it might serve 
their lust of conquest. To take possession of 
neighbours' territory was then the sole aim; 
territory was almost the whole of the national 
wealth. But with the nineteenth century there 
was a new departure. The idea peculiar to 
that century of diverting science to the satis­
faction of men's material wants evoked a 
development of industry, and consequently of 
commerce, so extraordinary that the old con­
ception of wealth was completely overthrown. 
Not more than fifty years were needed to bring 
about this transformation. On the morrow of 
the war of 1870 a nation expressly made for 
appropriating the good things of this world 
had no alternative but to become industrial 
and commercial. 
Not on that account, 
however, would she change the essential 

:t4 
THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
principle of her action. 
On the contrary, she 
had but to utilize her habits of discipline, 
method, tenacity, minute care, precise in­
formation-and, we may add, of imperti­
nence and spying-to which she owed the 
growth of her military power. 
She would 
thus equip herself with industry and com­
merce not less formidable than her army, and 
able to march, on their part also, in military 
order. 
From that time onwards these two were seen 
going forward together, advancing at an even 
pace and reciprocally supporting each other­
industry, which had answered the appeal of 
the spirit of conquest, on one side; on the 
other, the army, in which that spirit was 
incarnate, with the navy, which had just been 
added to the forces of the army. 
Industry 
was free to develop in all directions; but, 
from the first, war was the end in view. In 
enormous factories, such as the world had 
never seen, tens of thousands of workmen 
toiled in casting great guns, while by their 

THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
2 5 
side, in workshops and laboratories, every 
invention which the disinterested genius of 
neighbouring peoples had been able to achieve 
was immediately captured, bent from its in­
tended use, and converted into an engine of 
war. 
Reciprocally, the army and navy which 
owed their growth to the increasing wealth of 
the nation, repaid the debt by placing their 
services at the disposal of this wealth : they 
undertook to open roads for commerce and 
outlets for industry. 
But through this very 
combination the movement imposed on Prussia 
by her kings, and on Germany by Prussia, 
was bound to swerve from its course, whilst 
gathering speed and flinging itself forward. 
Sooner or later it was bound to escape from 
all control and become a plunge into the 
abyss. 
For, even though the spirit of conquest 
knows no limit in itself, it must limit its 
ambitions as long as the question is simply 
that of seizing a neighbour's territory. To 
constitute their kingdom, kings of Prussia 

26 
THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
had been obliged to undertake a long series 
of wars. Whether the name of the spoiler be 
Frederick. or William, not more than one or 
two provinces can be. annexed at a time : to 
take more is to weaken oneself. 
But suppose 
that the same insatiable thirst for conquest 
enters into the new form of wealth-what 
follows? 
Boundless ambition, which till then 
had spread out the coming of its gains over 
indefinite time, since each one of them would 
be worth only a definite portion of space, will 
now leap all at once to an object boundless as 
itself. Rights will be set up on every point 
of the globe where raw material for industry, 
refitting stations for ships, concessions for 
capitalists, or outlets for production are seen 
to exist. In fact, the policy which had served 
Prussia so well passed at a bound from the 
most calculating prudence to the wildest 
temerity. 
Bismarck, whose common-sense 
put some restraint on the logic of his prin­
ciples, was still a verse to colonial enterprises; 
he said that all the affairs of the East were 

THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
27 
not worth the bones of one Pomeranian 
grenadier. But Germany, retaining Bismarck's 
former impulse, went straight on and rushed 
forward along the lines of least resistaɋce to 
east and west : on the one side lay the route 
to the Orient, on the other the empire of the 
sea. 
But in so doing she virtually declared 
war on the nations which Bismarck had 
managed to keep allied or friendly. 
Her 
ambition looked forward to the domination 
of the world. 
Moreover, there was no moral restraint 
which could keep this ambition under control. 
Intoxicated by victory, by the prestige which 
victory had given her, and of which her 
commerce, her industry, her science even, had 
reaped the benefit, Germany plunged into 
a material prosperity such as she had never 
known, such as she would never have dared 
to dream of. 
She told herself that if force 
had wrought this miracle, if force had given 
her riches and honour, it was because force 
had within it a hidden virtue, mysterious-

28 
THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
nay, divine. Yes, brute force with its train 
of trickery and lies, when it comes with 
powers of attack sufficient for the conquest 
of the world, must needs be in direct line 
from heaven and a revelation of the will of 
God on earth. The people to whom this 
power of attack had come were the elect, a 
chosen race by whose side the others are races 
of bondmen. To such a race nothing is for­
bidden that may help in establishing its 
dominion. Let none speak to it of inviolable 
right I 
Right is what is written in a treaty; 
a treaty is what registers the will of a 
conqueror-that is, the direction of his force 
for the time being: force, then, and right are 
the same thing ; and if force is pleased to 
take a new direction, the old right becomes 
ancient history and the treaty, which backed 
it with a solemn undertaking, no more than a 
scrap of paper. Thus Germany, struck with 
wonder in presence of her victories, of the 
brute force which had been their means, of 
the material prosperity which was the out-

THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
29 
come, translated her amazement. into an idea. 
And see how, at the call of this idea, a 
thousand thoughts, as if awaked from slumber, 
and shaking off the dust of libraries, came 
rushing in from every side-thoughts which 
Germany had suffered to sleep among her 
poets and philosophers, every one which could 
lend a seductive or striking foɏm to a con­
viction already made I 
Henceforth German 
imperialism had a theory of its own. Taught 
in schools and universities, it easily moulded 
to itself a nation already broken-in to passive 
obedience and having no loftier ideal where­
with to oppose the official doctrine. 
Many 
persons have explained the aberrations of 
German policy as due to that theory. 
For 
my part, I see in it nothing more than a philo­
sophy doomed to translate into ideas what 
was, in its essence, insatiablɐ ambition and 
will perverted by pride. 
The doctrine is an 
effect rather than a cause; and should the day 
come when Germany, conscious of her moral 
humiliation, shall say, to excuse herself, that 

30 
THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
she had trusted herself too much to certain 
theories, that an error of Ndgment is not a 
crime, it will then be necessary to remind her 
that her philosophy was simply a translation 
into intellectual terms of her brutality, her 
appetites, and her vices. 
So, too, in most 
cases, doctrines are the means by which 
nations and individuals seek to explain what 
they are and what they do. Germany, having 
finaiiy become a predatory nation, invokes 
Hegel as 
witness; just as a Germany 
enamoured of moral beauty would have 
declared herself faithful to Kant, just as a 
sentimental Germany would have found her 
tutelary genius in Jacobi or SɌhopenhauer. 
Had she leaned in any other direction and 
been unable to find at home the philosophy 
she needed, she would have procured it from 
abroad. Thus when she wished to· convince 
herself that predestined races exist, she took 
from France, that she might hoist him into 
celebrity, a writer whom we have not read­
Gobineau. 

THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
31 
None the less is it true that perverse 
), 
ambition, once erected into theory, feels 
more at ease in working itself out to the 
end ; a part of the responsibility will then 
be thrown upon logic. 
If the German race 
is the elect, it will be the only race which 
has an unconditional right to live; the 
others will be tolerated races, and this 
toleration will be precisely what is called 
" the state of peace." Let war come; the 
annihilation of the enemy will be the end 
Germany has to pursue. 
She will not 
strike at combatants only ; she will mas­
sacre women, children, old men; she will 
pillage arid burn; the ideal will be to destroy 
towns, villages, the whole population. Such 
is the conclusion of the theory. 
Now we 
come to its aim and true principle. 
As long as war was no more than a means 
to the settlement of a dispute between two 
nations, the conflict was localized to' the two 
armies involved. 
More and more of useless 
violence was eliminated; innocent popula-

32 
THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
tions were kept outside the quarrel. 
Thus 
little by little a code of war was drawn up. 
From the first, however, the Prussian army, 
organized as it was for conquest, did not take 
kindly to this law. 
But from the time when 
Prussian militarism, now turned into German 
militarism, had become one with industrialism, 
it was the enemy's industry, his commerce, 
the sources of his wealth, his wealth itself, as 
well as his military power, which war must 
now make the end in view. 
His factories 
must be destroyed that his competition may 
be suppressed. 
Moreover, that he may be 
impoverished once and for all and the 
aggressor enriched, his towns must be put to 
ransom, pillaged, and burned. 
Above all 
must the war be short, not only in order that 
the economic life of Germany might not suffer 
too much, but further, and chiefly, because 
her military power lacked that consciousness 
of a right superior to force by which she 
could sustain and recuperate her energies. 
Her moral force, being only the pride which 

THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
33 
comes from material force, would be exposed 
to the same vicissitudes as this latter: in 
proportion as the one was being expended the 
other would be used up. 
Time for moral 
force to become used up must not be given. 
The machine must deliver its blow all at once. 
And this it could do by terrorizing the popu­
lation, and so paralysing the nation. 
To 
achieve that end, no scruple must be suffered 
to embarrass the play of its wheels. 
Hence a 
system of atrocities prepared in advance-a 
system as sagaciously put together as the 
machine itself. 
Such is the explanation of the spectacle 
before us. 
"Scientific barbarism," "sys­
tematic barbarism," are phrases we have 
heard. 
Yes, barbarism reinforced by the 
capture of civilization. 
Throughout the 
course of the history we have been follow­
ing there is, as it were, the continuous 
clang of militarism and industrialism, of 
machinery and mechanism, of debased moral 
materialism. 

34 
THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
Many years hence, when the reaction of the 
past shall have left only the grand outline in 
view, this perhaps is how a philosopher will 
speak of it.. He will say that the idea, peculiar 
to the nineteenth century, of employing science 
in the satisfaction of our material wants had 
given a wholly unforeseen extension to the 
mechanical arts and had equipped man in less 
than fifty years with more tools than he had 
made during the thousands of years he had 
lived on the earth. 
Each new machine being 
for man a new organ-an artificial organ 
which merely prolongs the natural organs­
his body became suddenly and prodigiously 
increased in size, without his soul being able 
at the same time to dilate to the dimensions 
of his new body. 
From this disproportion 
there issued the problems, moral, social, inter­
national, which most of the nations endea­
voured to solve by filling up the soulless void 
in the body politic by creating more liberty, 
more fraternity, more justice than the world 
had ever seen. Now, while mankind laboured 

THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
35 
at this task of spiritualization, inferior powers 
-I was going to say infernal powers-plotted 
an inverse experience for mankind. 
What 
would happen if the mechanical forces, which 
science had brought to a state of readiness 
for the service of man, should themselves take 
possession of man in order to make his nature 
material as their own ? What kind of a world 
would it be if this mechanism should seize 
the human race entire, and if the peoples, 
instead of raising themselves to a richer and 
more harmonious diversity, as persons may 
do, were to fall into the uniformity of things? 
What kind of a society would that be which 
should mechanically obey a word of command 
mechanically transmitted ; which should rule 
its science and its conscience in accordance 
therewith; and which should lose, along with 
the sense of justice, the power to discern 
between truth and falsehood ? What would 
mankind be when brute force should hold the 
place of moral force ? What new barbarism, 
this time final, would arise from these con-

36 
THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
ditions to stifle feeling, ideas, and the whole 
civilization of which the old barbarism con­
tained the germ ? What would happen, in 
short, if the moral effort of humanity should 
turn in its tracks at the moment of attaining 
its goal, and if some diabolical contrivance 
should cause it to produce the mechanization 
of spirit instead of the spiritualization of 
matter ? There was a people predestined to 
try the experiment. Prussia had been mili­
tarized by her kings ; Germany had been 
militarized by Prussia; a powerful nation 
was on the spot marching forward in mecha­
nical order. 
Administration and military 
mechanism were only waiting to make alliance 
with industrial mechanism. The combination 
once made, a formidable machine would come 
into existence. A touch upon the starting­
gear and the other nations would be dragged 
in the wake of Germany, subjects to the same 
movement, prisoners of the same mechanism. 
Such would be the meaning of the war on the 

THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
37 
day when Germany should decide upon its 
declaration. 
She decided, he will continue, but the result 
was very different from what had been pre­
dicted. 
For the moral forces;, which were to 
submit to the forces of matter by their side, 
suddenly revealed themselves as creators of 
material force. 
A simple idea, the heroic 
conception which a small people had formed 
of its honour, enabled it to make head against 
a powerful empire. 
At the cry of outraged 
justice we saw, moreover, in a nation which 
till then had trusted in its fleet, one million, 
two millions of soldiers suddenly rise from 
the earth. A yet greater miracle: in a nation 
thought to be mortally divided against itself 
all became brothers in the space of a day. 
From that moment the issue of the conflict 
was not open to doubt. 
On the one side, 
there was force spread out on the surface ; 
on the other, there was force in the depths. 
On one side, mechanism, the manufactured 

38 
THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
article which· cannot repair its own injuries ; 
on the other, life, the power of creation 
which makes and remakes itself at every 
instant. 
On one side, that which uses itself 
up ; on the other, that which does not use 
itself up. 
Indeed, our philosopher will conclude, the 
machine did use itself up. For a long time 
it resisted; then it bent; then it broke. 
Alas I it had crushed under it a multitude of 
our children; and over the fate of this young 
life, which was so naturally and purely heroic, 
our tears will continue to fall. An implacable 
law decrees that spirit must encounter the 
resistance of matter, that life cannot advance 
without bruising that which lives, and that 
great moral results are purchased by much 
blood and by many tears. 
But this time the 
sacrifice was to be rich in fruit as it had been 
rich in beauty. That the powers of death 
might be matched against life in one supreme 
combat, destiny had gathered them all at a 
single point. 
And behold how death was 

THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
39 
conquered; how humanity was saved by 
material suffering from the moral downfall 
which would have been its end ; while the 
peoples, joyful in their desolation, raised on 
high the song of deliverance from the depths 
of ruin and of grief I 


THE FORCE WHICH WASTES 
AND THAT WHICH DOES 
NOT \\TASTE 


THE FORCE WHICH WASTES 
AND THAT WHICH DOES 
NOT WASTE 
THE issue of the struggle is not doubtful. 
Germany will succumb. 
Material force and 
moral force, all which is sustaining her, will 
end by failing her, because she is living on 
provision she has accumulated, is spending 
it, and has no way of renewing it. 
Of her material resources all is known. 
She has money, but her credit is falling, and 
one does not see where she is to borrow. 
She needs nitrates for her explosives, fuel for 
her motors, bread for her sixty-five million 
inhabitants, for all of which she has made 
provision; but the day will come when her 
-43 

44 
THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
granaries will be empty and her tanks dry. 
How will she refill them? 
War, as she 
practises it, makes frightful havoc of her 
warriors. Yet here again replenishment is 
impossible, no aid will come from without, 
because an enterprise launched with the object 
of imposing German rule, German "culture," 
German products, only interests and ever will 
only interest what is already German. Such 
is the situation of Germany confronted by a 
France who is keeping her credit intact and 
her ports open, who is procuring herself 
victual and munitions as she pleases, who 
reinforces her armies with all that her allies 
bring to her support, and who can count on 
the ever more active sympathy of the civilized 
world because her cause is that of humanity 
itself. 
Still this is only material force, the force 
which is seen. 
What can we say of moral 
force, the force which is not seen, which 
yet matters most since it can in a certain 
degrP.e make good what is lacking of the 

THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
45 
other, and without which the other is worth­
less? 
The moral energy of nations, as of in­
dividuals, is only sustained by an ideal 
higher than themselves, and stronger than 
themselves, to which they cling firmly when 
they feel their courage waver. Where is the 
ideal of the Germany of to-day? The time 
when her philosophers proclaimed the in­
violability of right, the eminent dignity of 
the person, the duty of mutual respect among 
nations, is no more. Germany, militarized by 
Prussia, has cast aside those noble ideas, ideas 
she received for the most part from the France 
of the eighteenth century and of the Revo­
lution. She has made for herself a new soul, 
or rather she has meekly accepted the soul 
Bismarck has given her. To him has been 
attributed the famous maxim "Might is 
right." But in truth Bismarck never pro­
nounced it, for he had well guarded himself 
against a distinction of right from might. 
Right was simply in his view what is willed 

46 
THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
by the strongest, what is consigned by the con­
queror in the law he imposes on the conquered. 
In that is summed· up his whole morality. 
Germany to-day knows no other. She, too, 
worships brute force. And because she be­
lieves herself the strongest, she is altogether 
absorbed in self-adoration. Her energy comes 
from her pride. 
Her moral force is only the 
confidence which her material force inspires 
in her. 
And this means that in this respect 
she is living on reserves without means of 
replenishment. 
Even before England had 
commenced to blockade her coasts she had 
blockaded herself morally, in isolating herself 
from every ideal capable of giving her new 
life. 
So she will see her forces waste and her 
courage at the same time. 
But the energy of 
our soldiers is drawn from something which 
does not waste, from an ideal of justice and 
freedom. Time has no hold on us. 
To the 
force which feeds only on its own brutality 
we are opposing that which seeks outside 

THE MEANING OF THE WAR 
4 7 
and above itself a principle of life and 
renovation. 
Whilst the one is gradually 
spending itself, the other is continually 
remaking itself. The one is already waver­
ing, the other abides unshaken. 
Have no 
fear, our force will slay theirs. 
PRINTED AT 
THE BALLANTYNE PRESS 
LONDON &-
EDINBURGH 

